GLOBAL HEALTH 2012
The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges
ISBN: 978-1-61208-243-1
October 21-26, 2012
Venice, Italy
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 Editors
Gary Kreps, George Mason University, USA
Petre Dini, Concordia University - Montreal, Canada / China Space Agency Center -
Beijing, China

GLOBAL HEALTH 2012
Foreword
The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges [GLOBAL HEALTH 2012],
held between October 21-26, 2012 in Venice, Italy, took a global perspective on population
health, from national to cross-country approaches, multiplatform technologies, from drug
design to medicine accessibility, everything under mobile, ubiquitous, and personalized
characteristics of new age population.
Recent advances in technology and computational science influenced a large spectrum
of branches in approaching population health. Despite significant progresses, many challenges
exist, including health informatics, cross-country platforms interoperability, system and laws
harmonization, protection of health data, practical solutions, accessibility to health services,
and many others. Along with technological progress, personalized medicine, ambient assistance
and pervasive health complement patient needs. A combination of classical and information-
driven approach is developing now, where diagnosis systems, data protection mechanisms,
remote assistance and hospital-processes are converging.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the GLOBAL HEALTH
2012 Technical Program Committee, as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a
high quality conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We
also kindly thank all the authors who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012. We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the final conference
program consisted of top quality contributions.
Also, this event could not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the GLOBAL HEALTH 2012
organizing committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this
professional meeting a success.
We hope that GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 was a successful international forum for the
exchange of ideas and results between academia and industry and for the promotion of
progress in the field of global health.
We are convinced that the participants found the event useful and communications very
open. We also hope the attendees enjoyed the charm of Venice, Italy.
GLOBAL HEALTH Chairs:
Petre Dini, Concordia University - Montreal, Canada / China Space Agency Center - Beijing,
China
Pascal Lorenz, University of Haute Alsace, France

GLOBAL HEALTH 2012
Committee
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 Technical Program Committee
Charlie Abela, University of Malta - Msida, Malta
Dana Al Kukhun, University of Toulouse III, France
Giner Alor Hernández, Instituto Tecnológico de Orizaba - Veracruz, México
Jean Bacon, University of Cambridge, UK
Hrvoje Belani, Croatian Institute for Health Insurance - Zagreb, Croatia
Mounir Bousbia-Salah, Badji Mokhtar University - Annaba, Algeria
Pamela Briggs, School of Life Sciences / Northumbria University, UK
Sabin-Corneliu Buraga, "A. I. Cuza" University, Romania
Dechang Chen, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences - Bethesda, USA
Michel Cotsaftis, LACSC/ECE - Paris, France
Shirley Coyle, Centre for Sensor Web Technologies / Dublin City University, Ireland
Kevin Daimi, University of Detroit Mercy, USA
Stefan J. Darmoni, Rouen University Hospital, France
M. Jamal Deen, McMaster University - Hamilton, Canada
Wolfgang Deiters, Fraunhofer-Institute for Software und Systems -Dortmund, Germany
Gayo Diallo, University of Bordeaux 2, France
Elton Domnori, Epoka University - Tirana, Albania
Julie Doyle, Dundalk Institute of Technology - Dundalk, Ireland
Marwan Dwairy, Cross-Cultural Researcher - Nazerat Ellit, Israel
Zakaria Elberrichi, Djillali Liabes University, Algeria
Frank Emmert-Streib, Queen's University Belfast, UK
Paul Fergus, Liverpool John Moores University, UK
Amy Fielden, Northumbria University, UK
Aleksandra Fucic, Institute for Medical Research and Occupational Health - Zagreb, Croatia
Matjas Gams, Jozef Stefan Institute - Ljubljana, Slovenia
Xiaohing Gao, Middlesex University, UK
Nuno M. Garcia, Lusophone University of Humanities and Technologies - Lisbon, Portugal
Yi-Ke Guo, Imperial College London, UK
Martha Harrell, Institute of Mathematical Physics (IMP) - Williamsburg, USA
Vasant Honavar, Iowa State University - Ames, USA
Jun (Luke) Huan, The university of Kansas, USA
Hamidah Ibrahim, Universiti Putra, Malaysia
Ravi Janardan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, USA
Aravind Kailas, University of North Carolina - Charlotte, USA
Mehmed Kantardzic, University of Louisville, USA
Ayten Karataş, Istanbul Technical University, Turkey
Anastasia N. Kastania, Athens University of Economics and Business, Greece
Okba Kazar, Biskra University, Algeria
Frank Klawonn, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research - Braunschweig, Germany

Antonio Lanatà, University of Pisa, Italy
Tao Li, Florida International University, USA
Yaohang Li, Old Dominion University, USA
Zhiyuan Luo, Royal, Royal Holloway University of London, UK
Malika Mahoui, IUPUI - Indianapolis, USA
Radha Nagarajan, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, USA
Kazumi Nakamatsu, University of Hyogo, Japan
Brendan O’Flynn, Tyndall National Institute, Ireland
Michael Ochs, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, USA
Carlos Oberdan Rolim, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Brazil
Danilo Pani, University of Cagliari, Italy
Julien Penders, imec / Holst Centre, The Netherlands
George Perry, The University of Texas at San Antonio, USA
François Portet, Univeroisty of Grenoble - Saint Martin d’Hères, France
David Riaño, Universitat Rovira i Virgili - Tarragona, Spain
Carsten Röcker, Human Technology Centre (HumTec)/RWTH Aachen University, Germany
Alejandro Rodríguez González, University Carlos III of Madrid, Spain
Saqib Saeed, Bahria University Islamabad, Pakistan
Abdel-Badeeh M. Salem, Ain Shams University - Cairo, Egypt
Majid Sarrafzadeh, UCLA, USA
Miki Sirola, Aalto University, Finland
Bin Song, Oracle, Inc., USA
Daniel Steffen, German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) GmbH - Kaiserslautern,
Germany
Maria Taboada, University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain
Adel Taweel, King's College London, UK
Chrisa Tsinaraki, Technical University of Crete, Greece
Hayato Uchida, University of Hyogo, Japan
Nico Van de Weghe, Ghent University, Belgium
Egon L. van den Broek, TNO Technical Sciences - Delft | University of Twente - Enschede | Radboud
University Medical Center Nijmegen - Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Jari Veijalainen, University of Jyvaskyla, Finland
Brijesh Verma, Central Queensland University, Australia
Fei Wang, IBM Almaden Research Center - San Jose, USA
Liangjiang Wang, Clemson University - Greenwood, USA
Hua Xu, Vanderbilt University/School of Medicine, The Netherlands
Mingjing Yang, University of Ulster, UK
Juan Ye, University of St Andrews, UK
Yanbin Yin, University of Georgia, USA
Wang Yu-Ping, Tulane University - New Orleans, USA
Constantin-Bala Zamfirescu, "Lucian Blaga" Univ. of Sibiu, Romania
Erliang Zeng, University of Notre Dame, USA
Zhongming Zhao, Vanderbilt University / Medical Center, USA
Wei Zhong, University of South Carolina Upstate - Spartanburg, USA
Bin Zhou, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, USA


Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Mimo: A Non-Pharmacological Comforting Solution for Preterm Neonates
Frank Versteegh, Daniel Tetteroo, Thelxi Mamagkaki, Mariana Serras Pereira, Wei Chen, and Sidarto Bambang
Oetomo
1
Designing the Parents-to-Infant Bonding Experience in the NICU
Sibrecht Bouwstra, Wei Chen, Loe M. G. Feijs, Sidarto Bambang Oetomo, Willeke M. J. H. van der Linden, and
Wijnand A. IJsselstein
7
A Case Study of a Practical Use of "MusiCuddle" that is a Music Therapy System for Patients with Dementia
Chika Oshima, Naoki Itou, Kazushi Nishimoto, Kiyoshi Yasuda, Naohito Hosoi, Hiromi Yamashita, Koichi
Nakayama, and Etsuo Horikawa
14
Olfactory Stimulation in Premature Neonates: the Relevance of Early Experience
Misha Croes, Wei Chen, Loe Feijs, and Sidarto Bambang Oetomo
21
Application of Structural Equation Modeling for Inferring Toxicity-Dependent Regulation in Human Embryonic
Stem Cells
Sachiyo Aburatani and Wataru Fujibuchi
27
Mobile Data Modeling in Human Body Network "Bell's Palsy Case Study"
Hanen Bouali and Jalel Akaichi
33
Personal and Social Communication Services for Health and Lifestyle Monitoring
Jean Bacon, Jatinder Singh, Dirk Trossen, Dana Pavel, Andreas Bontozoglou, Nikolaos Vastardis, Kun Yang,
Sarah Pennington, Sarah Clake, and Glyn Jones
41
Development of an e-Healthcare System for University Students
Yoshiro Imai, Eiichi Miyazaki, Hiroshi Kamano, Tomomi Mori, Hironari Kohno, Kayo Ikeshita, Mitsunori
Sugihara, and Yuhko Ogata
49
Chronic Disease Management System Based on eHealth Concept in China
Xufeng Zhang, Bin Li, Zhihong Yao, Hao Chen, and Lei Liu
55
Enhanced Home-Based Care Services Through Mobile Technology
Hassan Khachfe, Walid Hassan, Hassan Bazzi, Ayman Dayekh, Bassam Hussein, and Denise Kerbaj
60
Heath Kiosks as an Equal Opportunity Resource for Better Health: A Systematic Review
Ashish Joshi and Kate Trout
66
Multi-functional Wireless Body Sensor
Roman Trobec, Aleksandra Rashkovska, and Viktor Avbelj
71

Security Factors for Healthcare Data
Young-Sil Lee, Esko Alasaarela, Hoon-Jae Lee, and Risto Myllyla
75
"Concept Car" Design Method in Medicine: Redesigning an Incubator’s Mattress
Misha Croes, Zhihui Zhang, Sidarto Bambang Oetomo, Wei Chen, and Loe Feijs
82
Unobtrusive Physiological and Gesture Wearable Acquisition System: A Preliminary Study on Behavioral and
Emotional Correlations
Nicola Carbonaro, Alberto Greco, Gaetano Anania, Gabriele Dalle Mura, Alessandro Tognetti, Enzo Pasquale
Scilingo, Danilo De Rossi, and Antonio Lanata
88
Improving of Medical Imaging by the Use of Noninvasive Optical Technologies
Anna Cysewska-Sobusiak and Grzegorz Wiczynski
93
Introducing the Global Advocacy Leadership Academy (GALA): Training Health Advocates Around the World to
Champion the Needs of Health Care Consumers
Gary Kreps, Paula Kim, Lisa Sparks, Linda Neuhauser, Carol Daugherty, Mollie Rose Canzona, Wonsun Kim,
and Jungmi Jun
97
Detecting Depression Using a Multidimensional Model of Emotional States
Imen Tayari Meftah, Nhan Le Thanh, and Chokri Ben Amar
101
Time and Frequency Domain Measures of Heart Rate Variability in Schizophrenia
Saime Akdemir Akar, Sadik Kara, Fatma Latifoglu, and Vedat Bilgic
108
Accurate and Reliable Recommender System for Chronic Disease Diagnosis
Asmaa S. Hussein, Wail Omer, Xue Li, and Modafar Ati
113
Extending the US Health Information National Trends Survey to China and Beyond: Promoting Global Access to
Consumer Health Information Needs and Practices
Gary Kreps, Guoming Yu, Xiaoquan Zhao, Wen-Ying Chou, Xu Zihao, Meijie Song, Bradford Hesse, Richard
Moser, and Paula Kim
119
Development of New Interface System for Elderly People in Daily Life
Shunji Shimizu and Hiroaki Inoue
123
Fundamental Study to New Evaluation Method Based on Physical and Psychological Load in Care
Shunji Shimizu, Hiroaki Inoue, Noboru Takahashi, Hiroyuki Nara, Takeshi Tsuruga, Fumikazu Miwakeichi,
Nobuhide Hirai, Senichiro Kikuchi, Eiju Watanabe, and Satoshi Kato
129
Online Patient Experiences: Exploring Differences Between Health Groups
Claire Hardy, Elizabeth Sillence, Pamela Briggs, and Peter Harris
135
Feasibility of Electronic Health Kiosks to Assess Chronic Disease Status in Remote Areas of Developing
141

Countries
Ashish Joshi, Pinaki Panigrahi, Douglas Puricelli Perin, Radhanath Satpathya, and Mohit Arora
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Mimo: A Non-pharmacological Comforting
Solution for Preterm Neonates
Frank Versteegh, Daniel Tetteroo, Thelxi Mamagkaki,
Mariana Serras Pereira, Wei Chen
Department of Industrial Design
Eindhoven University of Technology
Den Dolech 2, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, Netherlands
Email: {f.versteegh,d.tetteroo,t.mamagkaki,mveira,w.chen}@tue.nl
Sidarto Bambang Oetomo
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
M´axima Medical Center
De Run 4600, 5500 MB Veldhoven, Netherlands
Email: s.bambangoetomo@mmc.nl
Abstract—Preterm neonates often suffer from pain, distress
and discomfort during the ﬁrst weeks of their lives. While
residing in special Neonatal Intensive Care Units (NICUs) that
are designed for optimal care, they are subject to numerous
interventions ranging from a simple diaper change to surgery.
Although pharmacological pain treatment often is available, it
cannot always be applied to relieve a neonate from pain or
discomfort. Therefore, new non-pharmacological solutions are
required to reduce the discomfort experienced by these babies
during the ﬁrst weeks of their lives. This paper describes a novel
solution, called Mimo, that provides comfort through mediation
of a parent’s physiological features to the distressed neonate. We
discuss the design and the implementation and pilot-evaluation
of a ﬁrst prototype. Results show that the concept is promising
enough to pursue a full-scale clinical trial.
Index Terms—preterm neonates; comforting solution; bonding;
heartbeat; pillow; user-centered design;
I. INTRODUCTION
Premature infants, born after a gestational age of less than
32 weeks are admitted to a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
(NICU), where they are nursed in an incubator and receive
medical treatments. The last decades many new therapies have
been introduced, resulting in a substantial improvement of
survival. However, the stay of a preterm infant in the incubator
is negatively inﬂuenced by stress (excessive light and noise)
and painful procedures [1]. Gradually, the insight is growing
that these factors are partly responsible for developmental
impairments [2]. The Eindhoven University of Technology
(TU/e) in the Netherlands has started collaboration on research
with the Maxima Medical Centre in Veldhoven, the Nether-
lands. The goal of this project is to improve well being for the
pregnant woman and her child before, during and after delivery
[3]. Research results that have been reported from this project
area, for example, a smart jacket for neonates integrated with
textile sensors [4], a power supply based on contactless energy
transfer [5], blood oxygen saturation monitoring for neonates
using a reﬂectance pulse oximeter [6], neonatal temperature
monitoring [7], data transmission [8], and a device to support
cardiopulmonary resuscitation of neonates [9], [10]. Within
this project, this paper presents the pilot-study of a novel, non-
pharmacological comforting solution for preterm neonates.
A. Pain and discomfort
Premature neonates residing at Neonatal Intensive Care
Units (NICUs) experience much pain and discomfort due to
necessary medical interventions. These interventions include,
but are not limited to: heel punctures, venepunctures and in-
or detubations [11]. The attachment and removal of sensors
required for measuring physiological body signals can also be
unpleasant, stressful and painful [12]. Although pain treatment
is given in some of these cases, a large proportion (50%) [11],
[13] of the interventions are performed without any form of
pain treatment.
Simple procedures and environmental factors are also pos-
sible sources of pain and discomfort to preterm neonates.
Nociception is the term used to refer to the neural processes of
encoding and processing painful stimuli. In preterm neonates
this nociceptional system is not yet fully developed. A possible
consequence of this not-fully developed nociceptional system
is that stimuli such as sound and light, which are normally
not considered painful to a human being, may be perceived
as painful by the preterm neonate [14]. Injuries, but also
clinical procedures, will result in more widespread sensitivity
to pain [15]. The consequences of untreated procedural pain
in neonates can be both severe and long term. It is believed
that exposing preterm neonates to pain negatively affects their
ability to cope with pain and stress in later childhood [15],
[16].
B. Signs of discomfort
Neonates show many different responses to pain and stress.
These responses can be of both physiological and behavioural
nature, and can be used to detect discomfort of a neonate.
Physiological responses include an increased heart and res-
piratory rate, increased or decreased blood pressure, de-
creased oxygen saturation, vagal tone and skin temperature.
Behavioural responses are even more varied. Examples include
vocalizations like crying and whimpering, facial expressions
like grimacing with eyes squeezed shut or a stretched open
mouth, and body movements like ﬁnger and toe splaying and
trunk arching [15], [17]. It is worth noting that a change in
any of these responses does not always imply that the neonate
is experiencing stress or discomfort. Several pain-scoring
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

systems (such as PIPP [18] and Comfort-NEO [19]) have
been developed to aggregate the behavioural signs, providing
a reliable and structured tool for pain measurement.
C. Comforting techniques
The past two decades have seen an increase in interest in
neonatal pain treatment [16]. Pharmacological solutions re-
main popular and are the most used method for pain treatment.
Non-pharmacological methods of providing comfort and pain
relief do exist and some have proven to be effective. The most
popular techniques include: non-nutritive sucking, offering a
sweet solution, facilitated tucking and skin-to-skin care.
Non-nutritive
sucking
was
one
of
the
ﬁrst
non-
pharmacological
comforting
techniques
to
be
studied
and refers to offering a paciﬁer for the neonate to suck on
[20]. A sucrose solution can be provided as an extra means
of comfort during more painful procedures. A syringe is used
to gently squeeze some sucrose on the inside of the neonate’s
cheek. A paciﬁer is offered after the delivery of the sucrose,
distracting the infant with something sweet to suck on [21].
During facilitated tucking, the caregiver holds one hand on
the baby’s head and another one on the feet or body, depending
on what is feasible at that moment [22]. Similar techniques
are containment and swaddling [23]. The aim of all these
techniques is to restrict the movement space for the neonate
and to maintain it in a position similar to in-utero.
One of the most successful comforting techniques is skin-
to-skin care (SSC), otherwise known as kangaroo care [24].
During SSC the mother and infant are wrapped in cloth
together, with the infant held to the bare chest of the mother.
One downside of this comforting technique is that the neonate
needs to be taken out of the incubator, which can be stressful
to the child. Some neonates are unable to receive this particular
kind of care, because their medical condition does not allow
them to be taken out of the incubator.
Other comforting techniques include presenting the neonate
with an audible heartbeat [25] or music [26] and aromatherapy
[27]. If possible, breastfeeding can also be used as a non-
pharmacological comforting technique, although its effect was
demonstrated on term neonates [28].
The majority of these comforting techniques have in com-
mon that a parent or nurse needs to be present to provide the
desired care. Although the sole presence of its parents might
be comforting to a neonate, most parents are unable to be with
their child continuously. The same holds for nurses, as they
often have multiple neonates to care for. A comforting solution
that does not require the continued presence of a parent or
nurse is thus a design path worth exploring.
This paper presents a new concept for comforting preterm
neonates. This concept aims at comforting preterm neonates by
mimicking selected features of the baby’s mother or father and
making them available to the baby when the parents cannot be
present themselves. The following sections will describe the
concept in more detail, and discuss the implementation and
evaluation of a prototype based on this concept. Finally, the
implications of the proposed concept are discussed and future
directions are outlined.
II. CONCEPT
The concept for the proposed comforting solution was not
based on ﬁndings from literature alone. To understand the ﬁeld
better user studies were performed, the NICU environment
was observed and current comforting techiques were further
investigated. The results of these observations are described
below, followed by an explanation of the concept proposed.
A. User studies
An essential ﬁrst step in the development of a new, non-
pharmacological pain treatment is the recognition and evalu-
ation of the status-quo. In User Centered Design (UCD) the
end-user is constantly involved in the design process. This
becomes problematic when designing solutions for neonates,
simply because it is impossible to communicate with these
‘users’. In this case, medical staff and parents can be valuable
sources of information, in effect becoming the voice of the
neonates. Interviews with medical staff and observations at
a NICU facility have been performed in order to gain better
insight on the conditions and treatments given at a NICU.
The following paragraphs discuss these ﬁndings and their
implications for the concept that is explained in detail in the
last paragraph of this section.
B. NICU environment
NICU wards commonly house several incubators which are
often shielded from light entering. These incubators provide a
controlled environment, where amongst others temperature and
moisture levels are kept at an appropriate level. The neonates
constantly have their physiological signs monitored and are
therefore attached to many sensors. Small bean-bag pillows
are used to provide both comfort and support to neonates, and
can be used by nurses to stabilize the neonates in a position
that allows treatment. Small plush toys are also often present
in the incubator, allowing parents to share something more
personal with their child. The fact that some objects (such
as the bean-bag and plush toys) are already present within
an incubator gives rise to the opportunity to design a new
comforting solution that can be integrated with these objects.
C. Comforting neonates
Neonates can be comforted in two ways: by providing
an active comforting treatment, or by taking away sources
of discomfort. Some hospitals (e.g., the Maternity District
Hospital “Helena Venizelou” (GR)) have a very strict policy
that focuses on the latter. The fragile neonates are taken
out of the incubator only for medical treatments. The care
policy focuses on limiting external stimuli to the neonates
as much as possible. Noise and light levels are reduced to
absolute minimum and parents can visit their babies during
ﬁxed visiting hours.
Other hospitals (e.g., MMC in Veldhoven (NL) and the
Maastricht University Medical Centre (NL)) are less strict and
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

emphasize on the value of parent-child bonding as a source
of active comfort, therefore they allow parents to visit their
baby in the NICU at any given time. These hospitals also
encourage the parents to take part in their child’s care, by
changing diapers or bottle feeding. This kind of involvement
also helps the parents who often feel that they cannot help
their fragile baby during the stay at the NICU. These hospitals
encourage kangaroo care as a means of comfort and bonding.
Nurses and parents from these hospitals stated that infants are
the most relaxed during kangaroo care.
Although it is clear that parents can play an important role
in the comfort of their child, they cannot be present at all
times to provide this comfort. In all hospitals, some more
than others, there are situations in which alternative means of
comforting are required. Therefore, it seems appropriate that a
new comforting solution would focus on providing a neonate
with the same feeling of comfort that parents would provide,
even when the parents cannot be physically present.
D. Concept
Based on the literature review, the aforementioned user
studies and a brainstorm with the design team, several concepts
for a novel solution for comforting preterm neonates were
proposed. After a few elimination rounds, one concept was
selected. This concept, called Mimo, is a comforting solution
that provides neonates with an experience similar to being held
by their parents.
As already noted, neonates show less stress signs when
they are in contact with their parents and held to their chest.
This seems to be one of the most pleasant experiences for a
preterm neonate. However, neonates cannot receive this kind
of comforting at all times; parents cannot always be present at
the NICU and in many occasions neonates are in a condition
that does not allow them to be taken out of the incubator.
Mimo, aims at providing a comforting solution with quali-
ties similar to those of being held to a parent’s chest, available
especially when the parent cannot provide the comfort him-
or herself. This concept might not only increase the general
comfort level, but it can also contribute to the bonding
between parent and infant. Mimo gives parents the chance
to record their personal features such as heartbeat, smell and
temperature, which can be mediated to the child when it is in
need of comfort. When the concept is fully realized, the child
might experience a feeling as the parents were close to them,
even when the parents are not there in a physical sense.
One of Mimo’s basic characteristics is its ease of use, which
enables parents to record their physiological features without
guidance or in a special environment.
III. PROTOTYPE
The original concept for Mimo includes mediation of several
physiological features, such as smell, heartbeat and respiration.
However, building a prototype that would mediate all these
features would make it more difﬁcult to identify the most
beneﬁcial attributes of the concept. Therefore, the initial
prototype of Mimo was designed to only mediate the parent’s
heartbeat by means of vibrations, much like a pulse.
One of the basic characteristics of the concept is that Mimo
should be easy to set up and use, so that parents could record
their physiological data on their own, without the guidance of
a nurse for example. Then, the nurse needs only to switch on
and activate Mimo when comforting is needed. Moreover, the
Mimo prototype features a pillow-like device to convey the
heartbeat, which can replace the regular pillows that are used
in incubators, thus sustaining the neonate’s environment and
avoiding extra special equipment that would load the incubator.
This prototype was designed to be comfortable and ergonomic
for a premature neonate, but also washable and clinically safe
to meet hospital standards.
Fig. 1.
Prototype with the Mimo Recorder on the left and the Mimo Pillow
on the right.
The Mimo prototype (see Figure 1) consists of two distinct
parts:
1) A recording unit (Mimo Recorder), for registration of
the parent’s heartbeat
2) A pillow-like object (Mimo Pillow), for transmitting the
parent’s heartbeat to the neonate
A. Mimo Recorder
The Mimo Recorder is a white, cubical box that allows
parents of preterm neonates to make a recording of their
heartbeat. A heartbeat sensor (photoplethysmograph), as well
as a connection cable are attached to the side of the box. The
front of the box features a number of LEDs displaying the
status of the recording process and a button to initiate the
recording process.
1) Sensor: The heartbeat sensor that is used in the proto-
type is a photoplethysmograph, which is an optical sensor that
measures a person’s pulse. An infra-red LED on one side of the
sensor shines through the ﬁnger onto a photosensitive sensor
at the other side of the ﬁnger. The amount of blood that ﬂows
through the ﬁnger inﬂuences the amount of light that reaches
the sensor, hence providing information about the person’s
pulse. Although there are other ways to record a heartbeat
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

(such as electrocardiogram sensors), the photoplethysmograph
provides a quick and easy way to record a heartbeat. The ease
of use of this method outweighs the slightly lower accuracy
compared to other methods.
Fig. 2.
Circuit diagram of the electronics in the Mimo Recorder.
2) Electronics: An overview of the circuitry inside the
Mimo Recorder can be found in Figure 2. The heart of
the Mimo Recorder is an Arduino Uno [29] microcomputer,
powered by a 9V battery. The Arduino handles almost the
complete recording process, ranging from sensing and storage
to transmission of the heartbeat to the Mimo Pillow. A ﬁlter
module ensures the quality of the heartbeat signal that the Ar-
duino records. It was deliberately chosen to use a battery rather
than a ﬁxed power supply, to provide maximum ﬂexibility to
parents in their choice of a recording location.
3) User Interface: The user interface of the Mimo Recorder
was designed to be as simple as possible, such that parents
could perform the complete recording process themselves.
Four LEDs provide feedback to the parents about the status of
the heartbeat recording. One light shows whether the device
is switched on, another light indicates whether the sensor
is properly attached and the two remaining lights indicate
whether the recording has not started yet (lights off), is
currently in progress (lights blinking) or has ﬁnished (lights
on). In order to record their heartbeat, parents ﬁrst need to
attach the sensor to their ﬁnger or earlobe. Once the sensor
indicator conﬁrms that the sensor has been properly attached,
the parent can press the recording button and wait for the status
lights to light steady. Then, the Mimo Pillow can be connected
to the recording unit and the heartbeat will be transferred to
the pillow.
B. Mimo Pillow
The Mimo Pillow is the part of the prototype that stays with
the neonate. It is a boomerang-shaped pillow that is ﬁlled with
polymer beads and contains a pouch that accommodates the
electronics. The polymer beads that are used for the ﬁlling
ensure both softness for the neonate, and stability that allows
the pillow to be shaped around the neonate’s body and act as
support.
Fig. 3.
Circuit diagram of the electronics in the Mimo Pillow.
1) Electronics: Much like the Mimo Recorder, the Mimo
Pillow is controlled by an Arduino Mini microcomputer. This
Arduino version is much smaller and ﬂatter than the one used
in the Mimo Recorder, such that it is hardly felt on the outside
of the pillow. Other efforts to ensure that electronics are not
felt by the neonate have been made by using a specialized ﬂat
model racing battery as power supply, a tiny vibration motor
to mediate the heartbeat vibrations, and by using a tiny control
to switch on or off the electronics. A detailed overview of the
electronic circuit is provided in Figure 3.
2) User Interface:
The heartbeat data that has been
recorded with the Mimo Recorder can be transferred to the
Mimo Pillow by connecting the connection cables of both
devices. Once the heartbeat data has been transferred to the
pillow, it is immediately ready for use. The recorded heartbeat
data is stored in the microcomputer in the Mimo Pillow and
is played back continuously, as long as the device is switched
on.
IV. PILOT STUDY
To test the viability of the concept, a pilot study was
performed with the Mimo prototype. While a pilot-study is
not directly suitable for generating results on the effectiveness
of the prototype, it is a good starting point to test the initial
response of the neonates, nursing staff and parents to the
device proposed. The study was conducted with four preterm
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

neonates; three of them residing at the Medium Care Unit
and the other one at the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit of the
M´axima Medical Center in Veldhoven (NL).
A. Method
First, the heartbeats of the neonates’ mothers were recorded
with the Mimo Recorder. Then the pillow was presented to
the neonates directly after uncomfortable procedures such
as diaper changing or bathing. The pillow was presented
both in a switched-on state, as well as a switched-off state.
The neonates were observed before, during and after the
uncomfortable procedures. Since this was a pilot study it was
impossible to change the routines of the nurses present during
the evaluation. This in turn caused that sometimes additional
care was provided to the neonates next to the Mimo Pillow.
For example, the preterm neonate who was tested in the NICU
was also offered a sucrose solution in combination with the
Mimo Pillow.
B. Results
1) Neonates: None of the neonates showed signs of in-
creased stress due to the pillow’s presence. In addition, some
neonates showed positive responses to the pillow’s presence.
For example, one neonate was in severe distress after he had
been bathed and was crying continuously. The crying baby
was put back in the bed and the switched-on pillow was
put next to him. Immediately after putting the pillow next
to him, he stopped crying and showed no further signs of
distress. However, when the pillow was taken away from him
after a short while, he immediately started crying again. Other
neonates fell asleep while lying against a pulsating Mimo
pillow, further indicating that it may have a comforting effect.
2) Parents & hospital staff: Although it had not been the
primary intention of the concept, it turned out that the proto-
type had a positive effect on the neonates’ parents. During the
pilot study parents made many spontaneous, positive remarks
on Mimo and enjoyed the interaction with it. Hospital staff
were also interested in Mimo and positive about its potential
comforting effects on preterm neonates. Some of them also
suggested that a full-scale study on the effectiveness of Mimo
should be performed, based on the results of the pilot study.
V. DISCUSSION
This paper presented the design, implementation and eval-
uation of a new, non-pharmacological comforting solution
for preterm neonates. The concept (named Mimo) aims at
comforting a neonate by providing it with a feeling similar
to that of being close to a parent. Most neonates seem to
experience a strong sense of comfort when being held by their
mother or father.
The Mimo concept consists of two parts: a recording unit
and a technologically enhanced pillow. The recording unit is
used to record physiological data (such as heartbeat, breathing
rhythm, parental smell and body temperature) from a parent.
This data can then be transferred to the pillow, which includes
technology that enables it to ‘replay’ the recorded data to
the neonate. A prototype for Mimo has been designed and
evaluated in a pilot study. The prototype is a limited imple-
mentation of the original concept, as it focuses only on the
recording and playback of a parent’s heartbeat. The pilot study
performed with this prototype has shown that Mimo has no
negative inﬂuence on the comfort of neonates. Furthermore,
there are strong indications that Mimo might have a positive
effect on the comfort of neonates.
As already mentioned before, because of the limitations that
apply to a pilot study, it is difﬁcult to make deﬁnite conclusions
based on the data gathered. More neonates would be required
for testing, all of whom would have to go through more trials.
Also, the trials would have to be even more structured and
controlled than in the current study. Due to the limitations of
performing a pilot study, these issues could currently not be
addressed.
Performing studies on preterm neonates is a difﬁcult process
in which it is hard to collect useful data and attribute that
data to the experience the neonate is having. Much thought
had gone into the evaluation plan during the design phase of
this study. Due to the imposed limitations, this evaluation was
stripped from many of its features. A full clinical study should
include a blind evaluation of close-up video recordings of
the neonates during procedures. Nurses who have experience
with the ComfortNeo scale could then view video excerpts
and provide scores on the comfort level of the neonate. In
a future study, the physiological data of the neonates could
also be logged for the purpose of statistical analysis. Such
data collection was not possible during this pilot study and
conclusions based on this data would also lack any statistical
signiﬁcance. Acquiring more accurate behavioral and physio-
logical data for analysis of more neonates in better controlled
conditions would be key to a future study.
In the current pilot study, most of the participating neonates
resided in the medium care ward. Babies in the medium care
ward are already much more stable than neonates staying in
the NICU. This also means that these babies are exposed to
less painful medical procedures, which also means they are
less exposed to comforting techniques than neonates in the
NICU.
Most of the trials in the current study occurred during
diaper changes. The neonates that participated in this study
were usually fed directly after a diaper change. It is not
unreasonable to assume that neonates that remained fussy after
a diaper change were actually expecting to be fed. In such a
situation, the Mimo would most likely not render the desired
effect.
In the current study, neonates received an artiﬁcial heartbeat
reconstructed from a physiological recording of their mothers
heartbeat. It can be argued that the neonate is not able to detect
the difference in heart beats of different persons. Although
untested, this argument is moot from the design point of view.
Not only should the Mimo provide care to the neonate, it
also contributes in empowering the parents during a stressful
time. A random heartbeat would take this empowerment away
from parents, and would not contribute to parent-child bonding
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

either.
VI. CONCLUSION
We designed a new non-pharmacological comforting so-
lution for premature newborn infants based on the transfer
of maternal heart beat into a pillow that is equipped with a
“pulsator”. In a small pilot study we found that the response of
the infant was positive. Finally, parents and hospital staff who
interacted with Mimo during the pilot study, regarded Mimo
as a very promising concept that would possibly not only
comfort premature neonates, but also help parents bond with
their infant. A full-scale clinical follow-up study is currently
being conducted to conﬁrm these indications.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are thankful for the help received from Misha Croes,
Sibrecht Bouwstra and Astrid Osagiator, as well as the parents
and neonates that participated in this study.
REFERENCES
[1] A. T. Bhutta and K. J. S. Anand, “Vulnerability of the developing
brain. neuronal mechanisms.” Clinics In Perinatology, vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 357–372, 2002. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12380463
[2] R. Grunau, M. Whitﬁeld, J. Petrie-Thomas, A. Synnes, I. Cepeda,
A. Keidar, M. Rogers, M. MacKay, P. Hubber-Richard, and D. Johan-
nesen, “Neonatal pain, parenting stress and interaction, in relation to
cognitive and motor development at 8 and 18 months in preterm infants,”
Pain, vol. 143, no. 1, pp. 138–146, 2009.
[3] W. Chen, S. Bambang Oetomo, and L. Feijs, “Neonatal monitoring:
Current practice and future trends,” in Handbook of Research on
Developments in e-Health and Telemedicine: Technological and Social
Perspectives.
IGI Global, 2010.
[4] S. Bouwstra, L. Feijs, W. Chen, and S. B. Oetomo, “Smart jacket design
for neonatal monitoring with wearable sensors,” in Sixth International
Workshop on Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks, 2009.
BSN 2009.
IEEE, Jun. 2009, pp. 162–167.
[5] W. Chen, C. Sonntag, F. Boesten, S. B. Oetomo, and L. Feijs, “A design
of power supply for neonatal monitoring with wearable sensors,” Journal
of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 185–
196, Jan. 2009.
[6] W. Chen, I. Ayoola, S. B. Oetomo, and L. Feijs, “Non-invasive blood
oxygen saturation monitoring for neonates using reﬂectance pulse
oximeter,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Design, Automation
and Test in Europe, ser. DATE ’10.
3001 Leuven, Belgium, Belgium:
European Design and Automation Association, 2010, p. 15301535.
[7] W. Chen, S. Dols, S. Bambang Oetomo, and L. M. G. Feijs, “Monitoring
body temperature of newborn infants at neonatal intensive care units
using wearable sensors,” in the Fifth International Conference on Body
Area Networks (BodyNets 2010), Corfu Island, Greece, 2010.
[8] W. Chen, S. T. Nguyen, R. Coops, S. B. Oetomo, and L. Feijs,
“Wireless transmission design for health monitoring at neonatal intensive
care units,” in 2nd International Symposium on Applied Sciences in
Biomedical and Communication Technologies, 2009. ISABEL 2009.
IEEE, Nov. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[9] S. Bambang Oetomo, L. M. G. Feijs, W. Chen, and P. Andriessen,
“Efﬁcacy of audio-promoted rate guidance for insufﬂation and chest
compressions and feed-back signalling for the pressure of chest compres-
sions during cardio-respiratory resuscitation (CPR) of newborn infants,”
in the annual meeting of the Society for Pediatric Research (SPR 2009),
Baltimore, US, 2009.
[10] W. Chen, S. B. Oetomo, L. Feijs, P. Andriessen, F. Kimman, M. Geraets,
and M. Thielen, “Rhythm of life aid (ROLA): an integrated sensor
system for supporting medical staff during cardiopulmonary resusci-
tation (CPR) of newborn infants,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1468–1474, Nov. 2010.
[11] R. Carbajal, “Nonpharmacological treatment of neonatal pain,” in
Neonatal Pain, G. Buonocore and C. V. Bellieni, Eds. Milano: Springer
Milan, 2008, pp. 83–97.
[12] D. P. Barker and N. Rutter, “Exposure to invasive procedures in neonatal
intensive care unit admissions.” Arch. Dis. Child-Fetal, vol. 72, no. 1,
pp. F47–F48, Jan. 1995.
[13] C. C. Johnston, F. Filion, M. Campbell-Yeo, C. Goulet, L. Bell, K. Mc-
Naughton, J. Byron, M. Aita, G. A. Finley, and C. Walker, “Kangaroo
mother care diminishes pain from heel lance in very preterm neonates:
A crossover trial,” BMC Pediatrics, vol. 8, pp. 13–13, 2008, PMID:
18435837 PMCID: 2383886.
[14] K. J. S. Anand and International Evidence-Based Group for Neonatal
Pain, “Consensus statement for the prevention and management of pain
in the newborn,” Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med, vol. 155, no. 2, pp. 173–
180, Feb. 2001.
[15] M. I. Levene, “Minimizing the discomfort of neonatal intensive care,”
Current Paediatrics, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 196–200, Jun. 2003.
[16] C. C. Johnston, A. M. Fernandes, and M. Campbell-Yeo, “Pain in
neonates is different,” Pain, vol. 152, no. 3 Suppl, pp. S65–73, Mar.
2011.
[17] D. Ballweg, “Neonatal and pediatric pain management: standards and
application,” Paediatrics and Child Health, vol. 18, pp. S61–S66, Sep.
2008.
[18] B. Stevens, C. Johnston, P. Petryshen, and A. Taddio, “Premature infant
pain proﬁle: development and initial validation,” Clin. J. Pain, vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 13–22, Mar. 1996.
[19] M. van Dijk, D. W. E. Roofthooft, K. J. S. Anand, F. Guldemond,
J. de Graaf, S. Simons, Y. de Jager, J. B. van Goudoever, and D. Tibboel,
“Taking up the challenge of measuring prolonged pain in (premature)
neonates: the COMFORTneo scale seems promising,” Clin. J. Pain,
vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 607–616, Sep. 2009.
[20] S. Y Shiao, Y. J Chang, H. Lannon, and H. Yarandi, “Meta-analysis
of the effects of nonnutritive sucking on heart rate and peripheral
oxygenation: research from the past 30 years.” Issues in Comprehensive
Pediatric Nursing, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 11–24, 1997.
[21] B. Stevens, J. Yamada, and A. Ohlsson, “Sucrose for analgesia in
newborn infants undergoing painful procedures.” Cochrane database of
systematic reviews Online, no. 1, p. CD001069, 2010.
[22] A. Axelin, S. Salanter¨a, and L. Lehtonen, “’Facilitated tucking by
parents’ in pain management of preterm infants-a randomized crossover
trial.” Early Human Development, vol. 82, no. 4, pp. 241–247, 2006.
[23] C.-M. Huang, W.-S. Tung, L.-L. Kuo, and C. Ying-Ju, “Comparison of
pain responses of premature infants to the heelstick between containment
and swaddling.” Department of Nursing, Chemei Medical Center., Tech.
Rep. 1, 2004.
[24] T. C. Castral, F. Warnock, A. M. Leite, V. J. Haas, and C. G. Scochi,
“The effects of skin-to-skin contact during acute pain in preterm
newborns,” Eur. J. Pain, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 464–471, May 2008.
[25] H. Kurihara, H. Chiba, Y. Shimizu, T. Yanaihara, M. Takeda,
K. Kawakami, and K. Takai-Kawakami, “Behavioral and adrenocortical
responses to stress in neonates and the stabilizing effects of maternal
heartbeat on them,” Early Human Development, vol. 46, no. 1-2, pp.
117–127, Sep. 1996.
[26] M. L. Butt and B. S. Kisilevsky, “Music modulates behaviour of pre-
mature infants following heel lance.” The Canadian journal of nursing
research Revue canadienne de recherche en sciences inﬁrmieres, vol. 31,
no. 4, pp. 17–39, 2000.
[27] R. M. Sullivan and P. Toubas, “Clinical usefulness of maternal odor in
newborns: soothing and feeding preparatory responses.” Biology of the
Neonate, vol. 74, no. 6, pp. 402–408, 1998.
[28] R. Carbajal, S. Veerapen, S. Couderc, M. Jugie, and Y. Ville, “Analgesic
effect of breast feeding in term neonates: randomised controlled trial,”
BMJ British Medical Journal, vol. 326, no. 7379, p. 13, 2003.
[29] Arduino. (2012, 06). [Online]. Available: www.arduino.cc
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Designing the Parents-to-Infant Bonding Experience in the NICU 
 
Sibrecht Bouwstra, Wei Chen,  
Loe Feijs 
Department of Industrial Design  
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
{s.bouwstra, w.chen, 
l.m.g.feijs}@tue.nl 
 
Sidarto Bambang Oetomo 
 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
Máxima Medical Center  
Veldhoven, the Netherlands 
s.bambangoetomo@mmc.nl  
 
 
Willeke van der Linden,  
Wijnand IJsselstein 
Industrial Engineering and Innovation Science 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
w.m.j.h.v.d.linden@student.tue.nl, 
w.a.ijsselsteijn@tue.nl
Abstract— This paper describes the research work on the 
search for design opportunities through explorative interviews 
within the case study ‘designing the parent-to-infant bonding 
experience’. In the complete case study we explore how to 
design for support of such a complex, flexible, individualized 
and difficult-to-measure process as bonding. Based on a prior 
literature review, a theoretical design framework was 
constructed, focusing on experience design as the most suitable 
design approach. In this paper we report on a set of in-depth 
interviews conducted to further elucidate parents' experience 
of bonding during their time at the Neonatal Intensive Care 
Unit (NICU). These experiences are structured in the form of 
experience flows and used in a creative clustering session to 
identify design opportunities and as design inspiration. The 
three resulting opportunities are: (I) specific monitor design 
for parents as a means to get to know their child, (II) 
supporting a meaningful and active contribution while sitting 
next 
to 
the 
incubator 
and 
(III) 
supporting 
the 
acknowledgement of the difference the baby knows between 
parents and medical staff. Furthermore, we share the lessons 
learnt applying the design method of experience design to the 
case of parent-to-infant bonding. 
 
Keywords-experience design; parent-to-infant bonding; case 
study; disruptive design process; experience flows. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Bonding between parents and babies admitted to the 
NICU is important for the well-being of both. In practice, 
the development of the bond is however hampered by 
factors introduced in case of a premature birth: separation, 
the baby’s fragile health and parents having to rely on 
medical professionals to take care of their premature infant. 
In the collaboration between the department of Industrial 
Design at the Eindhoven University of Technology and the 
NICU at the Máxima Medical Center Veldhoven, one of the 
goals is to shift from a medical focus in the NICU, to 
patterns where the experiences from the user’s perspective 
become central. The topics of bonding and comfort are of 
particular interest. Designing for an improved bonding 
experience between parents and prematurely born babies, is 
a typical design case involving a ‘disruptive design process’ 
[1]. The design process is disruptive due to the fact that we 
are designing for a goal that is ill-defined, in this case 
‘bonding’, and the designed product/service’s impact cannot 
be measured in a straightforward manner yet. Additionally, 
the user group and test environment require consideration to 
avoid extra stress while gathering data and introducing 
interventions. The NICU forms the Experiential Design 
Landscape for this case study [1]. In the complete case study, 
we explore how to design for parent-to-infant bonding and 
how to cope with the uncertainties in the disruptive design 
process: ‘Which design strategies can overcome the 
challenges in the disruptive design process involved when 
designing for improved social connectedness?’. Compared 
to existing designs which support parent-infant bonding in 
the NICU in varying ways [2-5], this case study offers the 
opportunity to design a product/service specifically to 
impact bonding, starting the design process with this goal in 
mind. In this paper, we describe the search for the design 
opportunities and inspiration: how do parent experience 
bonding in the NICU and what kind of design intervention(s) 
could effectively support this?  
 
 
Figure 1.  Theoretical Design Framework for Bonding [2]. 
The first step in the case study was a literature review [2] 
resulting in a design framework for bonding including a 
definition, a list of existing measurement tools for bonding, 
the selection of a design approach and a confined design 
space. In Figure 1 the design framework, which combines 
findings from a variety of sources [6-11] and conversations 
with parents in the NICU, is shown. The circular Section (a) 
illustrates that bonding is a ‘feeling state’, partially 
expressed in behavior, which evolves influenced by pre-
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

conditions (such as responsiveness, privacy, stress, distance 
to hospital, interaction with medical staff). The timeline in 
Section (b) shows the time span of experiences involved. In 
Section (c), the two directions of bonding are shown and the 
physical and psychological elements involved. Summarized, 
bonding is defined as a feeling state of ‘love’ which “grows 
with repeated (initially physically close) reciprocal 
pleasurable experiences” [2]. Although the process of 
bonding is complex, flexible and highly individualized, the 
determinants essential for the bonding experience described 
in the definition above, appear to apply to all parent-infant 
dyads. Likely, some pre-conditions (such as comfort, 
atmosphere in the room and approachability of the baby 
with 
technology 
around) 
indirectly 
impact 
these 
determinants required for the experience, others more 
directly. We assume the following: pre-conditions -> 
experience -> bonding -> development infant. 
Previously, we proposed to design for the ‘experience’ 
[12, 13] because it is not one single determinant that 
guarantees bonding, but it is a highly complex multi-modal 
combination of pre-conditions impacting the feeling over 
time. The pre-conditions that set the stage for the bonding 
experience are the things we can change and design for. 
Considering that bonding is affected by experiences over a 
life-time, we limited the design space to the period of 
hospital admission. The bonding experience within a 
defined time span and location can be more easily measured, 
compared to the actual level of bonding. We chose to design 
for the experience as perceived by the parents, which is 
measurable through self-report and behavioral studies. 
For the design process, we previously proposed the 
‘Experience Design Method’ as published by Philips [14, 15] 
suitable for application in the medical field. This process 
guides the gathering of design input and design for, or 
measure of the complete experience, widening the scope 
beyond one usability aspect, resulting in rich information. 
This approach can help in finding under which pre-
condition the experience of bonding flourishes. The 
experience includes the patient’s personal view, the effect of 
the environment, the encounters with medical staff and the 
flow of experiences before and after use of the 
product/service. The core of experience design is the 
inquiring of user experience and the creation of persona/ 
experience flow-charts. 
Based on the design framework and selected approach 
resulting from the first step, the second step is gathering the 
user’s experiences, creating experience flows and analyzing 
the data. In this paper, we gather the bonding experiences 
and distill the design opportunities, which could be expected 
to have a large impact on the experience of bonding. 
Practical outcomes, such as design guidelines are shared, as 
well as reflection on this phase of the design process. 
II. 
DESIGN APPROACH 
The design process (Figure 1) for the complete case study 
is fairly traditional (literature search, gathering user design  
 
Figure 2.  Schematic overview of design approach 
input, design phase 1, gathering stakeholder’s feedback, 
design phase 2 and a validation). The choice in method for 
collecting user data depends on what is suitable a specific 
case study. As part of this case study, we chose to conduct 
interviews with parents about their experiences and feelings 
towards their infant related to the environment, while the 
experience is fresh in their mind. Interviews were 
transcribed and coded, forming the basis for the experience 
flows. Initially, personas based on the interviews would be 
created in order to design for a type of parent. However, as 
explained in the discussion, a creative clustering session was 
found to be more suitable. 
A. Interview design 
Five mothers (together with the fathers) were interviewed 
about their bonding experiences during the time their child 
was admitted. Three of the interviews have been held by a 
designer and two by a social scientist. The interviews were 
semi-structured, in order to give the parents room to freely 
introduce themes relating to bonding, and on the other hand 
to have topics on hand to maintain the interview flowing. In 
all interviews the parents were asked to describe their 
experience of bonding along the journey through the 
hospital; from giving birth, to being in the NICU/High Care 
for several weeks. The questions asked were about how the 
parents felt about the atmosphere, the interaction with the 
medical staff, first impressions, what they did, and how it 
influenced the way they felt towards their child. We asked 
what supported and what held them back in different stages 
and places. Examples of questions asked: “How would you 
describe the bond with [name]?”, “What has strengthened 
the feeling of the bond?”, “Was there something holding 
you back from entering the NICU?”, “What was a good 
experience you had in the NICU?” and “Did you perform 
care tasks? If so, which care tasks?”. The interviews lasted 
from 45 minutes to 1.5 hour and took place in the family 
room in the Máxima Medical Center, Veldhoven, in the 
Netherlands. The interviews were audio recorded, literally 
transcribed and names and places were replaced. 
B. Participants 
The parents included in the study had one or more 
babies admitted to the NICU or High Care department. The 
criteria for selecting the participants were that the baby was 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

in stable health at the time of the interview and the parents 
had spend a few weeks in the NICU to be acquainted to the 
rhythm. In order to gain a broad picture, the parents differed 
in whether they were first time parents, were a single parent, 
stayed in the Ronald McDonalds house or their child had 
temporarily been transferred to a specialized hospital. The 
experiences of both mothers and fathers were included 
because the study is of an explorative, inspirational nature 
with a low number of participants. Four participants were 
native Dutch speaking and one participant was non-native 
English speaking. The quotes have been analyzed in their 
original spoken language. 
C. Experience flows 
In the experience flows, the interviews are presented with 
the goal of providing an overview of how the parents’ 
feelings towards their child developed throughout the 
medical journey. In order to create the experience flows, 
distillation of factual data about places and procedures, and 
quotes about bonding experiences, from the transcript was 
necessarily. The transcripts were color coded, as in Figure 3. 
Factual data was marked yellow (regular black text). Literal 
experience quotes were marked blue (bold black text). 
 
Figure 3.  Coding transcripts anonymous sample. 
 
Figure 4.  Experience flow anonymous sample 
Parents repeated certain ideas within an interview, 
therefore in order to maintain the manageability of the data, 
the most representative quote was selected and the repetition 
marked in gray (regular white text). This ensured the entire 
transcript was considered. Since the questions were open, 
parts about the interviews about non-related topics were left 
unmarked, such as medical details about the baby or the 
delivery. In Figure 4 the elements for the experience flows 
drawn in CorelDRAW are shown. It contains the institutes, 
departments and rooms, with the journey as a yellow line 
running through. Along the journey the selected experience   
quotes are positioned in text balloons. 
D. Creative clustering session 
An open coding clustering session was held to start the 
discussion about how parents experience bonding, what the 
design implications are and point out design opportunities. 
The session was held with another designer and a computer 
engineer, both new to the topic of bonding, in order to gain 
a fresh view and stimulate creativity. In a span of a few 
hours the designers created clusters on post-its until all the 
quotes could be placed. The discussions were documented. 
Afterwards, the clusters were organized in more detailed 
clusters of which the conclusions are drawn. The five 
experience flows together contained too many quotes for 
clustering, namely 253. Therefore, the quotes most relevant 
to bonding feelings or activities were selected, which 
brought the number down to 144. The quotes were given a 
color specific for the interview, in order to be able to 
differentiate the original interviews when they were mixed 
in clustering.  
III. 
RESULTS 
The coding of the interviews resulted in five experience 
flows, with a variation of medical journeys including 
contextual facts, activities and feelings related to bonding. 
The clustering exercise resulted in an extensive report 
containing conclusions for each cluster of quotes. Here the 
summary is presented in themes, each conclusion 
accompanied with one representative quote. 
Separation after birth - Several mothers felt empty 
seeing the baby only shortly directly after birth. They wish 
to be with their child as soon as possible, but realize that 
medical care for themselves and the baby is required which 
they don’t want to disturb. “At the time it was just important 
to deliver her and connect her as quickly as possible to all 
contraptions”, “So the period directly afterwards was a 
little strange. Perhaps also a little bit empty”.  
NICU environment - Parents’ are overwhelmed during 
the first impression of the NICU. They are attracted by a 
homely design, however feel it is not appropriate for a 
medical environment. “It all went so fast and I actually 
can’t remember it all too well”, ”The moment I entered I 
definitely noticed it is only for premature babies”, “You 
know that he requires a lot of support and that just does not 
go well with a blue crib with a bell on it”.  
Baby’s fragile health - Parents report that in the 
beginning they struggle with the fear of becoming attached 
to the child that they might lose. For the interviewed parents 
this fear diminished over time as the baby’s health stabilized. 
In time they could participate more and the baby became 
more responsive. “I went through a lot of emotions, not 
wanting to get too attached to the child, certainly during the 
first week, weeks, I think. Because, well, you don’t know 
how long he will be around”, “…earlier he was connected 
to the CPAP [continuous positive airway pressure], and then 
you do require some help with all these tubes. Now he is 
only connected to the lowflow and we can do it ourselves”, 
“She is getting stronger and stronger. You develop a 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

stronger connection. We can do more with her, and she 
responds more and more.”. In case of a premature birth it 
can be too overwhelming being confronted with the baby’s 
fragile health. Instead of being on top of everything, parents 
sometimes ‘chose’ trust in the care provided. Or, sometimes, 
parents observe or participate as much as possible, thereby 
obtaining a sense of control. Parents react differently to live-
stream of information. There is a large difference between 
whether the news is positive and whether the parents are in a 
position to act on it or not. “I am almost more at ease while 
I am there, observing what is happening. Opposed to while 
being away and having to maintain faith”, [About 
witnessing the fragile moments] “it makes you feel insecure 
and wonder ‘Oh, will he pull through?”, “You record the 
good times on film”, “therefore the videos that you have are 
fun to watch”, “That you can see her [on a live-stream], 
that is much more intense. It makes me realize I can’t be 
with her 24 hours a day”, [about a NICU webcam] “So let’s 
say maybe if I was at home, and I could see she is awake, I 
could rush here and maybe we could play together”, [about 
monitor alarms] “You can only review the past hour or so”, 
“but it does give you the feeling that you are updated on 
what happened during your absence”.  
Participation in care - Mothers expressed their wish to 
participate in care. It strengthens their parental role. Yet 
with the fragile health of the baby they feel insecure, 
especially in the beginning. If the staff can do a nonmedical 
task such as changing diapers faster or better, they rather 
give it out of hand. “then you actually have the feeling that 
there is something that you can do. [When she is excluded, 
she feels] “Less like a mother”, “it is not that you can just 
go ahead and pick her up, and hold her to your chest. No, 
there is always a preceding action. You have to notify them 
how it is going, or ask if we can do this?”. A premature 
baby requires much rest, which often leaves the parent 
sitting next to the incubator. Parents want to actively 
contribute, have a reason to be there. They talk and observe, 
bring personal items such as a scent cloth or toy, read 
something, write in a journal or take a nap. “The fact that 
you may not touch him, that was a bitter pill to swallow”, 
“’Well enjoy’, ‘Oh’, I contemplated, ‘Enjoy what?’, I am 
lying here staring at a box”, “Of course there isn’t all that 
much you can do next to the incubator. And yet there is. 
Having the feeling, of yes, I do love you, I am there for you. 
That. And I think that applies the other way around as well”, 
“then I just look at her for a moment and continue reading. 
Then I do get the feeling of being there”, “You really want 
to take the pain away from the little guy”, “You feel so 
helpless, powerless”. 
Getting to know each other - Parents learn along the 
way to interpret the signs of the baby, which differ from a 
full term baby. They use the monitoring data to get to know 
their child. They compare the monitoring data to their 
observations for confirmation. “You can see whether he is 
comfortable or not. However, the first days you are not so 
aware of all these things. It comes naturally with Kangaroo 
care and caring for him. Then you just start to notice 
things”, ”Sometimes you mix it in your head”, “And you do 
look at her, but look for confirmation in the monitor as 
well”, “Am I right? Or do I know that already? Or am I not 
seeing it correctly now”. Parents are insecure about whether 
their child responds differently to them than to the medical 
staff. Three mothers mentioned that the baby recognizes 
them, but others strongly doubt it. Explanation about how 
the baby interacts and behaves supports parents. They notice 
that the child looks for them when hearing their voice. It 
motivates parents when they notice that they can calm their 
child. “are you responding to me, or do you also do that 
when a random nurse opens the door?”, “It is purely his 
eyes, the fact that he opens them when I am speaking to him. 
And I can see he does not do that with everyone. You do 
notice that”, “I don’t feel that she, when I am sitting next to 
her, is thinking ‘Oh, that’s my mother again’, “It is very 
strange that you… although you don’t know him at all. I am 
here twice a day, I have never had him with me for 8 hours, 
but these nurses, they are in his presence the entire day”, 
“That give me something to hold onto, ‘Oh, so when she 
does this, she may actually recognize me’”, “when she does 
this with her eyes and they are quite capable of making a 
connection”, “Kangaroo Care is important. If you notice 
that he is calming down, his breathing improves et cetera,  
then that feels very good. Then you really want to pull him 
close. It has a positive effect”. Kangaroo care physical 
contact is experienced as very positive. It has however 
limitations, such as not seeing the baby’s face, not being 
able to smell or give a kiss. “It is a special feeling. However 
you do miss lifting your child, or holding her pleasantly 
against your shoulder. Or… yes you hold her, but that is 
all”, “I had him on my arm”, “and thought ‘wow’”, “’Oh, 
my baby!!. Then I was studying him so intently, when I had 
him really right in front of me”.  
Monitor system - All parents look at the monitor, but 
with different intensity. It is not sure whether parents always 
interpret the data correctly. The monitoring requires 
professional interpretation and does not predict the future. 
The sensors of the monitoring system are in first instance 
restraining parents from interacting, however with support 
of the medical staff this is overcome. The fragile health of 
the baby has the main impact. “At some point, you are just 
sitting there [pretending to watch the monitor] even though 
your child is lying over there”, “I would for example see his 
saturation drop, and would think: ‘Oh, there he goes. How 
often would he do that a day, and how harmful would that 
be and…”, “I think that I am a bit clumsy, but that is also 
caused by maneuvering your hands through these holes”, 
“And in addition there are all these wires, which tend to 
intimidate you a bit.”, “Very small. Really. Very small. So 
sometimes and I must be frank, when I come here and I look 
at my baby and then I begin to cry”.  
Spending time in the NICU - Parents spend different 
amounts of time next to the incubator. If the parents can 
participate in care or perform Kangaroo care they tend to 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

stay longer. Also when they arrive at the right moment. 
Planning (with the medical staff) is important. “I reckon 
that I sit there each day for 6 hours watching her”, “Then 
you just lie on your bed and you can look at him. That’s all 
fine, but after fifteen minutes or half an hour, you have seen 
enough”, “And you are aware that he mostly benefits from 
rest, rest and more rest”, “Now it easily happens that you 
are applying Kangaroo-care for one and a half hours. And 
then there is care before and after. At first you were only 
sitting in front of the incubator, and as a result your stay is 
shorter”, “sometimes, lucky, I try to be in time”, “Maybe 
she is then awake”, “Here you arrive at a convenient time 
and often his diaper has been changed already. Or 
sometimes you are in luck that you arrive on time and can 
do it together”. For the parents days are filled with being at 
the NICU, traveling back and forth, pumping breast milk 
every 3 hours, caring for the children, house, eating, 
working and sleeping. A parent that spends much time at the 
NICU might benefit from more relaxation. Especially the 
days after birth, the mother needs to focus on her own 
recovery. Parents that spend little time, might benefit from 
being supported to stay longer. Some parents go home with 
a good feeling and are able to rest. Other parents worry and 
call in often. [single mom] “I am with another child, really I 
try to manage the time to come here also”, “You are 
recovering from a caesarian and everyone tells you: ‘Make 
sure you get some rest as well. Because once you have your 
child at home, you will also want to be a mother that can 
care”, “I am not going home with the idea of all the things 
that might happen. I mean, I do trust everything here”, 
[recommended by a nurse] “It is so pleasant. Just being at 
home with your child and husband…. I don’t have to go to 
my child, because I know he is in the right place”, “If you 
call, you are again afraid of what they might say. You would 
almost consider not to call. But then you cannot sleep, so 
that does not work either”, “It was also not pleasant when I 
was not around, when I was at home. I felt guilty and 
wanted to be there”, “I think of her every day, every minute, 
every hour” 
Trust in care provided - Staying updated is of main 
concern to the parents. Parents notice the difference in 
communication styles between hospitals when they are 
(temporarily) 
transferred. 
If 
the 
communication 
is 
inadequate, parents can start to worry at home. Relying on 
the care provided is sometimes difficult. Most parents put 
their faith into it or say they simply have to and meanwhile 
keep a close eye on things. “I should know what is going on 
with my daughter”, “Every time that you’re there, they 
would approach you and tell you about things that have 
happened and how he was doing”, “You would spot a note 
and then you would think: ‘Hey, this says something about 
morphine’. That was not exactly shared with me, so in turn 
you would ask ‘Did he receive morphine’, and only then 
they would explain”, “Yes, and when I would lay in bed at 
night I would think ‘Yes it went well today’, but yes, did it 
really go as well as they said it did?”, “Would they be 
doing something with him?”, [about a nurse of which the 
mother feels she does not know her child well enough] “If I 
wouldn’t be here now, you would consider this as normal”, 
“Here they are the experience experts really, here are the 
people who know about what could happen to your child”.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The interviews showed the complexity of how the feeling 
of bonding develops over time, and the highly intertwined 
processes affecting parents in an individualized way. 
Parents expressed contrasting thoughts about needs, e.g., 
that some parents would want to see their child live via a 
webcam at home, and others would find it confronting to be 
faced with the fact that they are away from the child at that 
moment. These contractions, also within individuals, result 
in a fine line to walk when designing an intervention. The 
interviews also show that pre-conditions affect each other: 
when e.g. the mother has comfort, the baby relaxes in turn, 
resulting in higher responsiveness when the baby is in an 
alert awake state. The design opportunities are therefore tied 
closely together; as soon as a concept emerges, it is easy to 
imagine how another opportunity is affected as well. It is 
unpredictable which pre-conditions will have the largest 
impact on the experience of bonding, because it is such a 
complex individualized process. The proposed opportunities 
therefore are not a guarantee, and user tests with prototypes 
are required in order to gain insight into the actual effect of 
the intervention. 
A. Design oppertunities 
We identified the following design opportunities: 
1.  Health info is being used to get to know the baby: do 
parents interpret correctly? 
2.  Parents sitting next to the incubator wanting to 
contribute while the baby needs to rest. 
3.  During Kangaroo care not being able to really see or 
interact as parents would ‘normally’ do. 
4.  Helping parents to feeling more secure about the baby’s 
ability to distinguish between parent and medical staff. 
5.  Health info; the balance between wanting to know 
everything all the time, and resting with peace of mind. 
6.  Planning and being ‘in luck’ of arriving at the right 
moment for care tasks or interaction. 
7.  Care info: wanting to know everything that was done 
with baby. Trust in care while away. 
8.  Recording the good moments to re-live at home. 
9.  Wanting to see and be with the baby right after birth.  
 
The three design directions selected as the most 
promising to proceed the design phase 1 with are (I) 
‘specific monitor design for parents as a means to get to 
know their child’, (II) ‘supporting a meaningful and active 
contribution while sitting next to the incubator’ and (III) 
‘supporting the acknowledgement of the difference the baby 
knows between parents and medical’. These three 
opportunities are well represented in the interviews and are 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

likely to affect the experience early on, right from hospital 
admission. Furthermore, they aim for ‘co-located’ bonding, 
which has not been addressed much previously.  
B. Design guidelines for bonding experience 
Based on the literature research, the experience flows 
and clustering sessions, the following design guidelines 
were formulized: 
1.  The intervention must positively affect the experience of 
bonding under which the bond between parents and 
infants grows: “Repeated (initially physically close) 
reciprocal pleasurable experiences”. 
2.  The intervention may not obtrusive; parents must have 
the option to use (certain functions within) the 
intervention. (a) The amount of information the parents 
receive about their child’s health status must be 
adjustable according to their personal needs. (b) The 
privacy settings must be adjustable to the parent’ 
personal needs with privacy ensured in all settings. 
3.  The intervention may not restrict the parent’ autonomy, 
but rather support a higher level of autonomy. 
4.  The intervention must be safe.  
5.  The intervention may not introduce opportunities that 
negatively affect bonding, such as stimulating the 
parents spending less time at the NICU with their child. 
6.  The intervention may not relay on intensive instruction 
or support by the medical staff, unless it is saving time 
by optimizing time consuming in another tasks. 
7.  The intervention may not cause any discomfort for the 
baby, which conflicts with the goal of improving the 
developmental outcome by reducing stress. 
8.  The intervention may not stimulate the parents to wake 
the baby or provide stress when he or she needs to rest. 
9.  It is preferable that the parent’ focus is pointed towards 
the baby than away. 
10. It is preferable that the intervention stimulates natural 
interaction between parent and child. 
C. Benefits and challenges of experience design 
Conducting interviews while the parents are in the 
middle of the experience, resulted in spontaneous reactions. 
We noticed that the topic of bonding had not been 
considered extensively yet by the parents, because health 
had been of their main concern. The downside introducing 
the heavy topic is that it resulted in emotionally intensive 
interviews. It faced parents with the undesired situation. 
Nurses reported that it lingered with parents, even days after. 
Asking the parents in a later stage likely causes less stress, 
however probably provides more socially desired answers.  
At first the goal was to create personas in order to design 
for a certain ‘type’ of parent. However, five interviews were 
too few in order to build stereotypes. Although in the 
clustering session indeed certain ideas were repeated, ‘sets’ 
of these responses did not repeat in the five interviews. 
The ordering of the data in the form of experience flows 
in this case study did not result in additional insights. 
Perhaps the scope was too large. We do expect that the rich 
experience flows will be useful later on for concept 
scenarios. Once the concepts are there, it is interesting to 
imagine how the intervention would impact the experience 
flows and in which stage. Would these parents use the 
proposed concepts in different ways? The experience flows 
contain the complete story with personal insights in an 
organized way, opposed to the generalized clustered data. 
 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The bonding process between parents and prematurely 
born babies is important for the well-being of both, however 
in practice the process is hampered due to separation, fragile 
health of the baby and parents having to rely on the care by 
medical professionals. Designing for the support of bonding 
experience, raises questions about the definition of bonding, 
how bonding can be effectively supported through design 
and how to measure the impact of such an intervention. In 
the complete case study ‘designing for the parent-to-infant 
bonding experience’ we explore how to design for such a 
complex, flexible, individualized process. In this paper we 
describe the search for inspiring design opportunities that 
are expected to impact the bonding experience, through 
conducting in-depth interviews about bonding experiences 
of parents with a premature baby admitted to the NICU. 
Five interviews resulted in five experience flows and 
thematic conclusions derived from a creative clustering 
session. The interviews illustrate the complexity of how the 
feeling of bonding develops over time, and the highly 
intertwined processes affecting parents in an individualized 
way. We identify three design opportunities and a set of 
design guidelines, which form the inspiration and focus for 
the design process. We conclude that user experience tests 
with prototypes are required in order to gain insight into the 
actual effect of the intervention(s).  
The design case is continued with the development of 
concepts and prototypes. The goal is to create one functional 
prototype of which the effect of the intervention on the 
bonding experience can be measured.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the 
Innovation-Oriented Research Programme ‘Integral Product 
Creation and Realization (IOP IPCR)’ of the Netherlands 
Ministry of Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation.  
We thank the medical staff at the MMC for all their 
support and the parents for sharing their stories with us. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  S. H. van Gent, C. J. P. G. Megens, M. M. R. Peeters, C. C. M. 
Hummels. Y. Lu and A. C. Brombacher, "Experiential design 
landscapes as a design tool for market research of disruptive 
intelligent systems," Proc. CADMC 2011, Cambridge, UK, 
Sept. 2011. 
[2] S. Bouwstra, W. Chen, L. M. G. Feijs and S. Bambang Oetomo, 
"A theoretical framework for parent-to-infant bonding design 
at the NICU," Proc. the 25th annual Gravens Conference on 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the Physical and Developmental Environment of the High Risk 
Infant, Clearwater Beach, 2012. 
[3]  M. Croes, S. Bambang Oetomo and L. M. G. Feijs. "Designing 
remote connectedness between parents and their premature 
newly born: a design proposal", in Neonatal Monitoring 
Technologies: Design for Integrated Solutions, W. Chen, S. 
Bambang Oetomo, L. M. G. Feijs, Eds., IGI Global, pp. 386-
413, 2012.  
[4]  H. Willemsen. http://www.babybloom.nl/, 14-09-2012. 
[5]  J. Panagiotidis and A. Lahav, "Simulation of prenatal maternal 
sounds in NICU incubators: a pilot safety and feasibility 
study," Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine, vol. 
23, pp. 106- 109, 2010. 
[6]  M. H. Klaus, J. H. Kennel and P. H. Klaus, Bonding, building 
the foundations of Secure Attachment and Independence, 1 ed.: 
Da Capo Press, 1996. 
[7]  K. S. Robson and H. A. Moss, "Patterns and determinants of 
maternal attachment," Journal of pediatrics, vol. 77, pp. 976-
985, 1970. 
[8]  J. Bowlby, "Attachment and loss," Attachment, Basic Books 
New York, vol. 1, 1969. 
[9]  K. Uvnäs-Moberg and M. Petersson, "Oxytocin, a mediator of 
anti stress, well-being, social interaction, growth and healing," 
Z Psychosom Med Psychother, vol. 51, pp. 57-80, 2005. 
[10] M. D. S. Ainsworth, "Object relations, dependency and 
attachment: a theoretical review of the infant-mother 
relationship," Child development, vol. 40, pp. 969-1025, 1969. 
[11] M. M. A. Bialoskurski, C. L. Cox and J. A. Hayes, "The 
nature of attachment in a neonatal intensive care unit," Journal 
of Perinatal & Neonatal Nursing, vol. 13, p 66-77, 1999. 
[12] M. Hassenzahl, Experience Design: technology for all the 
right reasons: Morgan & Claypool, 2010. 
[13] I. McClelland, "'User experience' design a new form of design 
practice takes shape," presented at the CHI '05 extended 
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, Portland, 
OR, USA, 2005. 
[14] S. Kozlov, L. Rameckers and P. Schots, "People research for 
experience design, Generating great stories - new product 
development," Royal Philips Electronics, 2007. 
[15] L. Parameswaran and J. Raijmakers, "People-focused 
innovation in healthcare, How Philips Design supports 
development of solutions for the ever-changing healthcare 
landscape," Royal Philips Electronics 2010. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

A Case Study of a Practical Use of “MusiCuddle” that is a Music Therapy System
for Patients with Dementia
Chika Oshima∗†, Naoki Itou‡, Kazushi Nishimoto§, Kiyoshi Yasuda¶∥, Naohito Hosoi∗∗,
Hiromi Yamashita††, Koichi Nakayama‡‡, and Etsuo Horikawa†
∗Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
†Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, Nabeshima 5-1-1, Saga-city, Saga pref. 849-8501, Japan.
Email: chika-o@ip.is.saga-u.ac.jp
‡Intermedia Planning, Inc., Unryu FLEX Nishi-kan 8F, Shin-sakae 2-1-9, Naka-ku, Nagoya city, Aichi pref. 460-0007 Japan.
Email: n itou@ipi.co.jp
§Research Center for Innovative Lifestyle Design, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
Asahidai 1-1, Nomi city, Ishikawa pref. 923-1292 Japan.
Email: knishi@jaist.ac.jp
¶Holistic Prosthetics Research Center, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Email: fwkk5911@mb.infoweb.ne.jp
∥Chiba Rosai Hospital
∗∗Satsuki Sodegaura of a Medical Corporation
††Graduate School of Medical Science, Saga University
‡‡Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saga University, Email: knakayama@is.saga-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we conducted an experiment that
an operator presented tunes using the “MusiCuddle” system to
a patient with dementia who repeats utterances. MusiCuddle
converted the patients’ utterances into pitches (F0) at a
predetermined interval. In response to an operator’s simple
key entry, the system automatically played tunes based on those
pitches. This function may contribute to resonating with the
patient’s emotions on the basis of iso-principle that is one of
principle of music therapy. In an experiment, we segmented
a patient’s utterances into sentences and compared her utter-
ances when music was presented and was not presented. The
results of the analysis showed that the sentences were uttered
with music tended to include the word of the immediately
previous sentence, as if she stutter out them. We thought that
if a patient’s attention could be captured by tunes, MusiCuddle
could contribute to alleviating their symptoms.
Keywords-Music; Convert utterances into pitch.
I. INTRODUCTION
Dementia is the deterioration of cognitive ability and skills
due to an organic disorder (such as Alzheimer’s disease,
dementia with Lewy bodies, cerebral vascular dementia, and
frontotemporal dementia, and so on.).
As one of the symptoms of dementia, some patients repeat
stereotypical behaviors and utterances. When we recorded
the utterances of patients with mental instability for one
month, regardless of whether a result of a test of cognitive
function is good or bad, many patients repeated stereotypical
utterances [1]. One of them repeated, “Did you do it?” in a
falsetto, another cried, “I want to go to the restroom!” even
after she had been to the restroom. Another locked herself
in a restroom and repeated the same words in a loud voice
all day. However, when a caregiver said something to her,
she could greet clearly.
In most cases, we could not understand what the patients
were saying. Although doctors, nurses, and caregivers talked
to the patients and attempted to distract them into another
action, it was not easy to calm the patients down. Therefore,
music that resonates with the patients’ emotions and calm
their symptoms can be expected to help the caregivers in
caring for these patients.
Music therapy is one of the methods known to alleviate
symptoms of dementia. Park and Pringle Specht [2] con-
ducted an experiment in which individuals with dementia
listened to their preferred music. The result showed that
mean agitation levels were signiﬁcantly lower while listening
to music than before listening to the music. Svansdottir and
Snaedal [3] showed a signiﬁcant reduction in activity dis-
turbances, aggressiveness, and anxiety in the group assigned
music therapy. The study of Nair, Heim, Krishnan, D’Este,
Marley, and Attia [4] did not ﬁnd that ambient Baroque
music had any calming effect. However, they showed that
in order to achieve the desired behavioral effect, music may
need to be tailored rather than generalized.
The iso-principle [5], which is one of the principles of
music therapy, suggests that a music therapist ﬁrst perform
music that matches the current mood of a patient. This
type of therapy is also effective for symptoms of mental
instability in which patients repeat stereotypical behaviors
and utterances, such as in some dementia patients.
Therefore, we [1] present a music therapy system, “Mu-
siCuddle,” which accompanies patients’ agitated repetitive
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

stereotypical utterances with music that resonates with
his/her mood. This system converts the patients’ utterances
into pitches (F0) at a predetermined interval. Then, the
system presents a music phrase (tune). The ﬁrst note of it
is same as the pitch converted from the patient’s utterances.
Moreover, one type of tune is cadence that begin on a chord
that resonates with the patient’s current emotions and ﬁnish
on a terminative chord that calms his symptoms.
In this paper, we prepare more tunes in the database of
MusiCuddle. Then, we conduct an experiment that one of
authors presents tunes using MusiCuddle to a patient with
dementia who repeats utterances.
II. RESONATE WITH THE PATIENTS’ EMOTIONS
The iso-principle is well known to music therapists trained
in the United States [6]. “Iso” simply means “equal”; that
is, that the mood or the tempo of the music in the beginning
must be in “iso” relation with the mood or tempo of the men-
tal patient. The principle extends to volume and rhythm [5].
The actual use of music in a particular therapeutic situation
depends upon the particular needs of the individual, such as
a need for therapy to change behaviors on an immediate
basis to relieve troubling conditions [7]. For example, if
the client is distressed or agitated, then the quality of the
music initially should match his or her mood and energy.
By adopting the iso-principle, the ﬁrst choice of music may
be familiar and energetic [8]. In improvised music with the
client’s music, “match” means that the therapist’s music is
not identical to the client’s music, but is the same in style
and quality [9]. Likewise, in “validation,” one of the methods
used for communication between clients and therapists, a
therapist will observe the mood of a client and will emit
the same tone with his voice to indicate that he sympathizes
with the patient [10].
In our ongoing research, we are constructing a music
therapy system that performs music semi-automatically. It
is difﬁcult for the system to play improvised music that
resonates with the patient’s emotion in the same way as
a music therapist. However, we have tried to construct the
system using an advantage point of a computer. In the ﬁrst
step of our research, we allowed the system to convert
a patient’s utterances into pitches (F0) continuously. In
response to an operator’s key entry, the system selects a
short phrase in a database. The ﬁrst note of the phrase is
same as the pitch converted from the patient’s utterances. We
expect that this function may contribute to resonating with
the patient’s emotions on the iso-principle. Moreover, we
prepared cadences that begin on a chord that resonates with
the patint’s agitated mood in the database of MusiCuddle.
III. SET UP SYSTEM
MusiCuddle is a music therapy system that performs
music when an operator (e.g., a caregiver) pushes any of the
keys of the electronic keyboard or a button on the display
of the system [1]. The system also continuously converts
the patient’s utterances into pitches (F0). In response to
the operator’s key entry, the system determines a pitch at
a predetermined interval. The system selects a tune, a short
phrase, in the database on the basis of that converted pitch.
The top note of the tune is the same as the pitch converted
from the patient’s utterances. To convert the patient’s utter-
ances into pitches, we employ a pitch extractor to convert
the utterance into one pitch (i.e., Do, Re, Mi). This is based
on the technique for conversion of sounds that have unstable
pitches and unclear periods, such as natural ambient sounds
and the human voice, into musical notes [11].
In the original system shown by [11], if the operator gave
a start trigger, the system would initiate the processing to
obtain the F0 (fundamental frequency) time series from the
acoustical signals (i.e., a singing voice), which were being
recorded via the microphone. The short-term F0 estimation
by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and Inverse Fast Fourier
Transform (IFFT) for the power spectral is repeated until
the system catches an end trigger from the operator (i.e.,
the caregiver). The system then calculates a histogram of
pitches with the F0 time series between the start and end
triggers. Finally, only the most frequent pitch is selected
and is output as the pitch of the period.
For our research, some processing designs were modiﬁed.
Figure 1 shows the processing of the system. Considering the
attitude of the operator, we would assume that the triggers
would be input after the operator catches the utterance of the
patient. Therefore, we omitted the start trigger. The system
starts a short-term F0 estimation just after invocation of
the system and continues it thereafter. When the operator
inputs a trigger that is regarded as an end trigger, the
system calculates a representative pitch for a predetermined
period just before the trigger based on the above-mentioned
method. Then the system plays a prepared MIDI (Musical
Instrument Digital Interface) sequence that corresponds to
the representative pitch. These modiﬁcations of our system
improve usability by reducing the time lag between the input
of the trigger and the output of phrase.
To extract the F0 against the mixed acoustical signal of the
patient’s utterance and the cadence output from the speaker,
our system needed two of the same microphone (the better
solution is one stereo microphone) and one speaker. The
microphones are set in front of the speaker to record the
speaker’s sound at the same level from both microphones.
On the other hand, both microphones are displaced against
the patient to record the levels of the patient’s utterance that
are clearly different. The system calculates the differential
signals from the signals of both microphones to cancel the
sounds of the MIDI sequence where they are localized in
the center position. The F0 estimation is then determined
with these differential signals.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 1.
Convert into a pitch.
IV. DATABASE OF TUNES
Tentatively, we prepared four types of phrases in the
database. Table I shows some details of the phrases. The
patients who repeat utterances in many cases are experienc-
ing irritable moods and high anxiety. Generally, dissonance
chords indicate tension and consonance chords indicate re-
laxation. Clinically, a combination of these chords can elicit
tension and relaxation within the human body. Therefore,
we prepared dissonance chords and consonance chords.
Moreover, we prepared cadences that begin with dissonance
chords and ﬁnish with consonance, as well as terminative
chord.
“Four chords” means that the same four chords are
presented in one phrase (see Fig. 2). The chord is composed
of two notes. Thirty-seven MIDI ﬁles, of which the top notes
of the chords are C3∼C6, were prepared per one type chord
(see Fig. 3). Accordingly, the system can select a MIDI
ﬁle of which the top note of the chord is the same as the
pitch converted from a patient’s utterances. There are 888
MIDI ﬁles (phrase ﬁles) for a four-chord type phrase. In the
“Rhythm” column of Table I, “Quarter note” means each
of the four chords is presented in the rhythm at the rate
of 60 times per minute. “Random” is unregulated rhythm
[12]. The “Interval” column shows intervals between two
notes composed of each chord. In the “Change of volume”
column, “No change” means four chords are presented in
the same volume. “Crescendo” means that the volume of
notes gradually increases one by one, while “Decrescendo”
means that the volume of notes gradually decreases.
In the type of “Cadence,” we prepared 96 kinds of
cadences that begin with dissonance chords and ﬁnish with
consonance, as well as terminative chord. These cadences
were picked out from two piano suites; “Das Wohltem-
perierte Klavier Band 1, BWV846-869,” composed by J.
S. Bach in 1722, and “24 Preludes and Fugues, Op.87,”
composed by D. D. Shostakovich in 1952. Both suites
consist of 24 pieces (24 tonalities), and one piece consists of
a prelude and fugue. We could prepare at least 96 cadences,
if two cadences were chosen from one piece, the prelude,
and the fugue. The top note of the ﬁrst chord in each cadence
is applied as any of 12 tones, Do, Do sharp, Re, Re sharp,
and so on. Moreover, each piece is translated to go up/down
one to three octaves to cover all possible tones converted
from the patient’s utterance. The plural cadences correspond
to each of 12 tones converted from the patient’s utterance.
In the other direction, we prepared phrases from Japanese
school songs. Ashida reported that reminiscence-focused
music therapy might reduce depressive symptoms in elderly
people with dementia [13]. Therefore, we picked out short
phrases from some familiar songs for elderly people. We
created a simple accompaniment for each phrase. Each
phrase was arranged into 37 MIDI ﬁles, the ﬁrst notes of
which were C3∼C6.
Fig. 4 shows two kinds of phrase. These are the same
tune, “Akaikutsu.” The top of them begins with C4 as well
as the bottom of them begins with G#4. The difference in
the pitch of the ﬁrst notes affects and changes the entire
mood of the music.
The last type phrases were created from the patient’s
utterance. All segments of her utterance could be converted
into some notes. Fig. 5 shows an example. Previously,
her utterance, “i-ma-se-n-de-su-yo [I am not here],” was
converted into a phrase “re-re-re-si-ra-ra-si.” This phrase was
also arranged into 37 MIDI ﬁles, the ﬁrst notes of which
were C3∼C6.
Figure 2.
Same four chords are presented in one phrase.
Figure 3.
The top notes of the chords are C3-C6.
V. EXPERIMENT
A. Ethical Considerations
This experiment was approved by the Research Ethics
Board of Saga University. The participant of the experiment,
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Table I
TUNES
Types
Details
Four chords
Rhythm
Quarter note, Eighth note, Sixteenth note, Random
Interval
Perfect prime, Perfect ﬁfth, Major seventh
Change of volume
No change, Crescendo, Decrescendo
Cadence
Bach
Das Wohltemperierte Klavier Band 1, BWV846-869
Shostakovich
24 Preludes and Fugues, Op.87
Japanese school song
“Yuki,” “Akaikutsu,” “Hana,” “Tsukinosabaku,” etc
Stereotypical utterance
Ex. Utterance, “i-ma-se-n-de-su-yo” is converted into a phrase “re-re-re-si-ra-ra-si.”
Figure 4.
The difference of the ﬁrst note changes the entire mood of
music.
Figure 5.
The segment of patient’s utterance is converted into some notes.
who is a patient with dementia, her husband, and the hospital
director were informed about intention of the experiment and
the treatment of personal information. Moreover, they were
informed that they could withdraw from the experiment at
any time. Then, we obtained written consents from them.
B. Participant
The participant is a patient with frontotemporal dementia
(FTD) staying in a hospital. She is 72 years old. The score
of Revised Hasegawa’s dementia scale (HDS-R[14]) was 17
two years ago. She repeats the same words for many hours
a day. When she is agitated, she locks herself in a restroom.
However, she is lucid enough to remember the nurse’s name
and greet her clearly.
C. Preliminary experiment
When the participant was agitated and repeated the same
sentences, one of the authors repeated sentences in accord
with the participant’s repetition in the same melody and
rhythm. Fig. 6 shows these sentences in music score. Sen-
tence A means the participant’s sentence. First, the author
tried to repeat the same sentence as the participant’s together.
Namely, both of them repeated Sentence A, “i-ma-se-n-yo.”
Second, the author tried to repeat a different sentence using
the same melody and rhythm pattern as the participant’s
together. Namely, the author repeated Sentence B, “go-han-
de-su-yo” although the participant was repeating Sentence
A.
In the ﬁrst trial, the participant turned around to pay
attention to the author. However, she kept repeating the
same sentence harmonised with the author’s repeating. In
the second trial, the participant changed the sentence A to
the author’s sentence, “go-han-de-su-yo” in the same melody
and rhythm.
Figure 6.
Author repeated sentences in accord with the participant’s
repetition.
D. Method
When the participant is agitated and repeats the same
words, an operator (one of authors) presents tunes using
the system MusiCuddle. The tune is presented through a
wireless cuboidal speaker, 123×36×35mm, and the patient’s
utterances are recorded through a wireless columnar micro-
phone, about 75mm in height and 24mm in diameter. These
devices are set in the restroom.
E. Analysis method
In this paper, we analyze the participant’s utterances
in three records: 16, 8, and 3 minutes. The participant’s
utterances are segmented into small sentences based on the
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

way of repeating. Then, we analyze ways to change the
sentences.
First, we determine whether each sentence was uttered
“with music” or “without music.” If a tune was presented
in the middle of a sentence, the sentence was considered
to be uttered without music. In this case, the sentence was
started to utter before presenting the tune. So, we consider
that the sentence was untouched by music. In the following
example, “hirugohandeha” is recognized as no music:
P: imasendesu hirugohandeha imasendesu
[
(Start a tune)
In the following example, “ima” as well as “gohanden” are
recognized as they were uttered with music:
P: imasendesu ... imasen ima gohanden
[
]
(Stop a tune)
The sentence, “ima” was started to utter with music. So,
this sentence was affected by the tune. Moreover, we con-
sider that “gohanden” was affected by the tune because this
sentence was started to utter immediately after presenting
the tune.
Second, we determine whether each sentence includes the
words that are part of the immediately previous sentence. In
the following example, “imasendesu” includes the immedi-
ately previous sentence “ima:”
P: ima imasendesu
F. Results
1) Presented tunes: In the ﬁrst and second record, we
presented the tunes arbitrarily by giving triggers to Mu-
siCuddle. In the third record, we did not present the tune
at all. Recording time is 27 minutes. The total time of
presenting tunes was 6 minutes and 54 seconds, which is
one-fourth of all recording time.
Table II shows kinds of tunes, times of the tune, and
total time of the tunes at the ﬁrst and second-record. First,
we presented six four chords. In this record, we use one
type of four chords: Major seventh, Quarter note, and No
volume change. This chord can show unsteady images
to the participant. Next, we presented a Japanese school
song, “Yuki,” four times. The patient sang only the last
phrase, “zun zun tsumoru [accumulate rapidly]” along with
the melody the ﬁrst time. Continuously, “Akaikutsu” was
presented ﬁve times. Next, ﬁve cadences were presented.
The kind of cadences were decided by the pitch converted
from her utterances. After that, we again presented “Yuki.”
She sang again. The last tune of the ﬁrst record was a
Japanese school song, “Hana.” In the second record, ﬁrst,
we presented a Japanese school song, “Tsukinosabaku,”
four times. Continuously, “Yuki” was presented nine times.
However, she did not song along with them. Next, we
presented the phrase created from her utterance “i-ma-sen-
de-su-yo” ﬁve times. At the end of the record, we presented
“Hana” two times.
2) Classify utterances: The participant uttered all times
of the experiment. Most of utterances were rhythmical and
ﬁt into same meter, although she uttered many kinds of
sentences. Fig. 7 describes some examples of her sentences.
One of the authors took rhythm dectation of these sentences.
These example shows even if the sentences are different,
they ﬁt into four-four time.
Figure 7.
Sentences ﬁt into four-four time.
Table III shows the kinds of sentences. The segmented
sentences are 680 (84 kinds) in 27 minutes. There were many
cases in which the contents of the sentences are almost the
same even if the words among the sentences vary slightly.
Table IV shows the comparison between “with music” and
“without music.” The number of changing sentences is 114
with music and 179 without music. The tune-presented time
is one-fourth of all recording time. Therefore, the change
of sentences with music occurs with greater frequency than
that without music. However, with music, the rate that the
sentence includes the word of the immediately previous
sentence is higher than that without music. The rate with
music is 82.5%, whereas that without music is 41.3%.
Table IV
THE NUMBER OF CHANGING SENTENCES.
with music
without music
changing sentence
(ALL)
114
179
include the words of
the immediately previous sentence.
94
74
rate (%)
82.5
41.3
VI. DISCUSSION
Patients with dementia who continually repeat utterances
tend to repeat the same or similar content. Moreover, the
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Table II
PRESENTED TUNES IN THE EXPERIMENT.
Types
Tunes
Time(sec.)
Number of times
Beginning note
Total time(sec.)
Major seventh &
Four chords
Quarter note &
3
6
D3(2),D#3,F3,A3,C4
18
No volume change
Cadence
No.22 Fugue (B)
8
1
C4
8
No.1 Fugue (B)
8
1
F3
8
No.15 Fugue (B)
11
1
F#3
11
No.22 Prelude (S)
15
1
D4
15
No.3 Fugue (S)
25
1
F#3
25
Japanese school song
“Yuki”
9
21
D#3, E3(3),F3(7),G3(2),G#3,A3(3),A#3,B3,C4,D4
189
“Akaikutsu”
10
5
D3,F3,F#3,G#3,A#3
50
“Hana”
8
4
D3,G#3,A#3,G#4
32
“Tsukinosabaku”
11
4
F#3,F3, C4,C3
44
Stereotypical utterance
i-ma-se-n-de-su-yo
3
5
G3,G#3,A3(2),A#3
15
Sum
–
–
50
–
414
In the “Tunes” column, “(B)” means the tune is a part of a piece composed by Bach, and “(S)” means the tune is a part of a piece composed by Shostakovich.
In the “Beginning note” column, C, D, E∼A, and B show Do, Re, Mi∼Ra, and Si. A4 is about 440Hz. Values in parentheses shows the time of each beginning note.
participant in our experiment uttered in the same meter, four-
four time (see Fig. 7). Once patients fall into the pattern
of repeating utterances, it is difﬁcult for them end the
cycle independently. Generally, their caregivers address the
patients directly by calling out to them in attempt to shift
their attention, but it is not easy.
MusiCuddle might resonate with his or her mood in
accordance with the iso-principle. The ﬁrst notes of the tunes
that were presented in the experiment were also varied and
wide-ranging because the pitches (F0) converted from the
participant’s utterances were varied and wide-ranging. The
difference in the pitch of the ﬁrst notes affects and changes
the entire mood of the music (see Fig. 4). Tonality and pitch
(high or low) are essential determinants of musical mood.
The results of our case study suggest that tunes pre-
sented by MusiCuddle may give patients an opportunity
to stop repeating utterances. The participant in our case
study stuttered when each tune was presented. Each tune
presented by MusiCuddle began with a note in the same
pitch as that of the participant’s utterances. However, each
melody presented by MusiCuddle was different from the
pattern of the participant’s utterances. On the other hand,
in the preliminary experiment, when one of the authors
repeated the same sentence as the participant’s sentence
using the same melody and rhythm pattern, the participant
kept repeating the same sentence although she was paying
attention to the author (see Sec. V-C).
These results suggest that the sounds that are presented to
patients should neither be identical to nor entirely different
from their utterances. The patients might attend to the
tunes according to their similarity in pitch, and deﬂect
attention away from repeating utterances if the melody is
too strikingly different from their utterances.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we used a support system called “Mu-
siCuddle” to present short music phrases to a patient with
dementia. In our experiment, MusiCuddle presented a tune
that began in the same note as a converted note from the
participant’s utterances. We then analyzed the changes in
her utterances. When the tune was presented, she stuttered
and tended to begin saying a new sentence that only con-
tained a part of the immediately previous sentence. These
results suggest that MusiCuddle may give the patients the
opportunity to escape the pattern of repeating utterances.
We did a case study on only one participant to examine the
effectiveness of MusiCuddle. Although we simply say “de-
mentia” when referring to individuals who have deteriorating
cognitive abilities, individual expression and progression of
symptoms can very signiﬁcantly from person to person. We
have to consider the condition of participants and the advice
of their primary doctors when we examine the participants.
Thus, we will accumulate case studies of several participants
step by step.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc
Research (23-40168).
REFERENCES
[1] C. Oshima, N. Itou, K. Nishimoto, N. Hosoi, K. Yasuda,
and K. Nakayama, “An Accompaniment System for Healing
Emotions of Patients with Dementia Who Repeat Stereotypical
Utterances,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science, B. Abdul-
razak et al. (Eds.), Springer, Vol. 6719, pp. 65–71, 2011 [Proc.
ICOST 2011].
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Table III
SENTENCES SEGMENTED FROM THE PARTICIPANT’S UTTERANCES IN THE EXPERIMENT.
Estimated meaning
Sentences
I am (not) here.
imasu (1), imasendesu (201), imasen (48), imasende (43), ima (5), deimasendesu (1), sokoniimasen (1), imasenyo (1),
uruchiimasendesu (1), ryugaimasende(1)
It is (not) luch time.
mazugohandesu (78), mazugohan (14), mazugohande (6), hirugohannarimasendesu (5)
gohandesu (4), hirugohandashimasendesu (2), hirugohannarimasende (2), gohandashimasendesu (2)
haisugugohandashimasendesu (2), mazugohandesuyo (2), gohan (2), gohanden (1), gohannarimasendesu (1)
gohannaidesuyo (1), hirugohande (1), gohandashimasende (1), gohanninarimasu (1)
gokaimenogohandashimasendesu (1), mawarinogohangoyamoyashisendesu (1)
First,
mazu (34), mazuyasumi (33), mazudesu (32), ma (6), mazuya (3), mazudesu (2), mazude (1), mazugo (1), mazuyasu (1)
Not do
masende (10), masendesu (6), masendesuyo (2)
Bath time, Break
ofurohaittadesuyo (2), ofuro (1), ofurojaimasende (1), hitoyasumi (1)
(Not) Birth day
tanjobijanaidesu (3), tanjokainaidesuyo (3), tanjobijanaidesu (1), tanjobijaimasendesuyo (1)
tanjobijaarimasendesu (1), tanjobijaarimasendesuyo (1)
Time
1ji40fundesuyo (13), yoruninarimasendesu (9), 1jihandesuyo (8), 3jihanninarimasendesu (8), yoruninarimasendesuyo (5)
handesuyo (4), 3jihandesuyo (4), 1jihande (3), 2jihandesuyo (2), 3jininarimasendesuyo (2), 1jihandesune (1)
1ji10fundesune (1), 1ji (1), 1jihandesuyo (1), 3jihanni (1), 3jihanninarimasendesuyo (1), mou3jininarimasendesu (1)
Snack time
oyatudesuyo (1), oyatujaimasendesu (1), keikihanaidesuyo (1), keikihanaidemasendesu (1), keikihanaitodesu (1)
Soon
suguha (1), suguhanaidesu (1)
“Yuki”
zunzuntumoru (2)
Question
imashitaka (1)
Greeting
konnichiha (1)
Others
dojoninarimasende (1), ugoninarimasende (1), sonouchimasende (1), mashi (1), bokujaarigatoarigato (1), basyohanaidesuyo (1)
Values in parentheses shows the time of each sentence.
[2] H. Park and J. K. Pringle Specht, “Effect of individualized
music on agitation in individuals with dementia who live at
home,” J Gerontol Nurs. Vol. 35(8), 2009, pp. 47–55.
[3] H. B. Svansdottir and J. Snaedal, “Music therapy in moderate
and severe dementia of Alzheimer’s type: a case-control study,
International Psychogeriatrics,” Int Psychogeriatr. vol. 18(4),
Dec. 2006, pp. 613-621.
[4] B. K. Nair, C. Heim, C. Krishnan, C. D’Este, J. Marley,
and J. Attia, “The effect of Baroque music on behavioural
disturbances in patients with dementia,” Australasian Journal
on Ageing, vol. 30(1), 2011, pp. 11–15.
[5] I. M. Altshuler, “The past, present and future of musical ther-
apy,” Music therapy, Podolsky, E. Eds. Philosophical Library,
1954, pp. 24–35.
[6] B. Koen, J. Lloyd, G. Barz, and K. B. Smith, The Oxford
Handbook of Medical Ethnomusicology, Oxford University
Press, 2008.
[7] D. E. Michel and J. Pinson, Music Therapy In Principle And
Practice, Charles C Thomas Publisher, 2005.
[8] D. Grocke, and T. Wigram, Receptive Methods in Music
Therapy: Techniques and Clinical Applications for Music
Therapy Clinicians, Educators and Students, Jessica Kingsley
Publishers, 2007.
[9] T. Wigram, Improvisation: Methods and Techniques for Music
Therapy Clinicians, Educators and Students Jessica Kingsley
Publishers, 2004.
[10] V. de Klerk-Rubin, Validation Techniques for Dementia Care:
The Family Caregiver’s Guide to Improving Communication,
Health Professions Press, Baltimore, 2007.
[11] N. Itou and K. Nishimoto, “A Voice-to-MIDI System for
Singing Melodies with Lyrics,” Proc. of ACM International
Conference on Advances in Computer Enter-tainment Technol-
ogy (ACE 2007), ACM New York, NY, USA, 2007, pp.183–
189, doi:10.1145/1255047.1255085.
[12] Y. Wakao and K. Okazaki, A handbook of impromptu for
music therapy, Ongaku-no-tomosya, 1996.
[13] S. Ashida, “The effect of reminiscence music therapy ses-
sions on changes in depressive symptoms in elderly persons
with dementia,” Journal of Music Therapy, American Music
Therapy Association, vol. 37(3), 2000, pp. 170–182.
[14] Y. Imai and K. Hasegawa, “The Revised Hasegawa’s Demen-
tia Scale (HDS-R) -evaluation of its usefulness as a screening
test for dementia,” Journal Hong Kong Coll Psychiatr, vol. 4,
1994, pp. 20–24.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Olfactory Stimulation in Premature Neonates: The Relevance of Early Experience  
Misha Croes, Wei Chen, Loe Feijs 
Department of Industrial Design 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Den Dolech 2, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
E-mail: {m.j.g.croes, w.chen, l.m.g.feijs}@tue.nl 
Sidarto Bambang Oetomo 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
Maxima Medical Center 
De Run 4600, 5500 MB Veldhoven, the Netherlands 
E-mail: s.bambangoetomo@mmc.nl
 
 
Abstract – While in the womb, a fetus experiences olfactory 
stimulation by means of the surrounding amniotic fluid. This 
prepares the fetus’s olfactory system to its postnatal life. If a 
child is born prematurely, it is deprived of this preparation 
because it is hospitalized in an incubator in the Neonatal 
Intensive Care Unit. This sudden transformation from the 
womb to an overly stimulating hospital environment imposes 
increased stress to the vulnerable neonates. This paper 
discusses various studies that show the importance of early 
olfactory stimulation, an approach to improving olfactory 
stimulation and protection, and suggests examples of 
implementing these improvements in future research and 
design. 
Keywords –NICU; early experience; odors; stress; olfaction.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Of the total amount of childbirths about 11% (USA) is 
born premature [1]. Recent advancements in neonatal care 
have ensured that these prematurely born infants have an 
ever 
rising 
survivability 
rate 
[2]. 
Despite 
these 
advancements, prematurely born infants are prone to 
develop long term problems due to exposure to stressful 
environmental stimuli (light, noise, smells, etc.) [3].  
Most 
of 
these 
prematurely 
born 
infants 
will, 
immediately after childbirth, be placed in an incubator at 
hospital’s Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). Over the 
years extensive research about the impact of premature 
childbirth has shown that these children, and their parents, 
go through quite a stressful period [4][5]. Because of the 
premature exposure to a postnatal environment, external 
stimuli are perceived as extra stressful and painful by 
prematurely born babies compared to their full term 
counterparts [6]. 
In order to support during their stay in the NICU various 
innovations have been devised. Among these innovations 
are for instance a sound system for the NICU [7], the 
Babybloom incubator [8], the sound awareness system 
SoundEar [9], the Smart Jacket [10], and the remote 
cuddling FamilyArizing system [11] are all developed with 
the intention to improve the NICU experience for parents 
and their children. 
We concluded, however, that none of these interventions 
consider the olfactory development and environmental 
impact on prematurely born infants.  
Through this paper, we provide not only a review of 
relevant literature, but we also draw attention to the 
importance of early exposure to odors in prematurely born 
infants. We want to highlight the importance of both 
protecting neonates from stressful environmental odors as 
well as providing them with comforting parental odors in 
the NICU. Finally, we formulate various challenges future 
research might face. 
II. 
OLFACTORY DEVELOPMENT 
During fetal growth the first nasal tissue can be observed 
during week 7 or 8 of pregnancy [12]. The swallowing 
reflex is detectible from week 12 onwards and around 18 
weeks gestational age nonnutritive sucking begins. Around 
the same time (week 17) the fetus is capable of tasting.  
Smelling however only starts in around gestational week 24 
[13].  Coordinated sucking and swallowing are perceivable 
from gestational week 35 to 40 [13], the end of the final 
trimester. This means that the sense of smell is fully 
functional in prematurely born neonates in the NICU (24> 
weeks of gestational age).  
In humans, the receptors for the olfactory system are 
located high in the nasal chambers in the epithelium in the 
nasopharynx or nasal cavity. These receptors are not only 
stimulated during inhalation (orthonasal route), but also 
when infants suck or when children and adults swallow 
(retronasal route) [13]. 
 
Figure 1.  Nasal cavity [12]. 
From the nasal cavity olfactory neurons go through the 
cribriform plate to the olfactory bulb. Positioned directly 
underneath the prefrontal cortex, the olfactory bulb 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

transmits its signals to the olfactory cortex, which is located 
in the brain’s limbic system [12]. The pathways that go 
through the thalamus back to the orbitofrontal cortex are 
thought to be responsible for the perception and 
discrimination of odors [12]. Furthermore, olfactory 
information is communicated from the amygdala to the 
hypothalamus and to the hippocampus. These are thought to 
mediate the emotional and motivational elements of odor 
and many of the physiologic and behavior effects of scents 
[12].  
 
III. 
STRENGTH OF MATERNAL ODOURS 
Already in the womb neonates are fully capable of 
detecting and discriminating odors/flavors through their 
olfactory system starting at 24 weeks gestational age [13]. 
During the third trimester the child’s olfactory system is 
preparing for the future world it will live in by tasting parts 
of its mother’s diet through the amniotic fluid [14]. 
Extremely prematurely born neonates are deprived of this 
experience and are instead presented with new unfamiliar 
environmental odors inside the NICU. Various researches 
have shown, however, that prematurely born infants prefer 
maternal odors over these new environmental odors. 
In their study, Schaal et al. [15] showed, for instance, 
that prematurely born infants are capable of distinguishing 
their mother’s body and breast milk odor from other 
mother’s odor samples. A test by Russel et al. [16] showed 
that mothers show similar capabilities of recognizing their 
own baby. Furthermore research concludes that babies show 
positive head turning and appetitive mouthing if presented 
with flavors which were part of their mother’s diet during 
pregnancy [17][18]. This shows that during pregnancy the 
fetus already tastes and smells their mother’s diet, providing 
them an initial preference immediately after birth [19]. 
Similar tests show that babies calm down faster after 
smelling maternal breast milk [20]. 
Furthermore it has been shown show that neonates have 
less apnea without bradycardia and less apnea with severe 
bradycardia if presented with a pleasant odor [21]. In 
addition it is demonstrated that neonates cry less during 
separation from their parents if presented with amniotic 
fluid odor [14].  
Concerning non-maternal odors in the use of pain relief, 
Goubet et al. [22] introduced vanillin to premature neonates. 
They have shown that infants showed less crying if 
presented with this familiar odor. Some aromas seem to 
distract infants from slightly painful stimuli. However, they 
are not distracting enough for more painful procedures [23].  
During our literature study, we were surprised to find no 
literature concerning design or procedural interventions for 
communicating paternal odors to prematurely born infants. 
Although the effects in literature are quite promising, as far 
as we know, nobody has tried to specifically develop 
systems or products that provide the possibility of 
communicating paternal odors to the child. Nowadays, the 
only practice that enables odor communication in the NICU 
is the use of odor cloths. Worn by mothers, these pieces of 
fabric are left next to the child in the incubator to provide a 
more comfortable incubator experience. However, these 
cloths need to be washed often and don’t provide any 
indication if they still contain maternal odors or not. 
Due to the observation of this gap in research and 
development within the NICU, we identify a new research 
niche. In this paper, we present our vision of how to 
approach the development and implementation of paternal 
odor communication in the NICU.  
IV. 
APPROACH 
Traditionally the means of relieving stress and pain in 
neonatal patients was to provide them with anesthetics 
and/or sedatives. In recent years, research has shown that 
there are other means of providing pain and stress relief in 
prematurely born neonates. In this section, we would like to 
take the opportunity to propose an overview of the overall 
approach in neonatal environmental stress relief. 
The main approach in the NICU, in order to reduce 
environmental 
stress 
relief, 
is 
the 
reduction 
of 
environmental stimuli. We like to refer to this as “phase 1”  
in the overall process. In order to achieve this we observed 
redesigns of the NICU architecture (e.g., single patient 
rooms), its apparatuses (e.g., incubator), providing the 
neonate with protection (e.g., goggles for neonate) and 
educating both medical practitioners and parents (e.g., the 
NIDCAP program). 
The main goal of these interventions is to ensure that 
stressful environmental stimuli are reduced to, what we like 
to call, the “no-stress-line” (see Figure 2). This no-stress-
line depicts the pivot point where all stressful environmental 
stimuli no longer have a stressful effect on the neonate.  
 
Figure 2.  Approach diagram. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

From the no-stress-line onward we come to what we like 
to call “phase 2”. This area depicts environmental stimuli 
that provide the neonate with comforting environmental 
stimuli. Although the child might not experience stress, the 
addition of comforting environmental stimuli in phase 2 
ensures a rise in the quality of the NICU experience for 
neonates.  
Overall, we see in presented studies that such 
interventions have a favorable influence on neonates in the 
NICU.  
For 
instance, 
the 
sound 
system 
developed 
by 
Panagiotidis and Lahav [7] is specifically designed for the 
NICU to communicate maternal sounds inside the incubator. 
Resulting tests with the system have shown that the 
presentation of maternal heartbeat and voice produce short 
term improvements on the physiological stability of preterm 
babies [24] . Furthermore, Doheny et al. [25] showed a 
reduced frequency in apnea and bradycardia in premature 
neonates through the presentation of the same maternal 
sounds in the NICU.  
Concerning the implementation of comforting stimuli 
into the NICU, we like to place phase 1 chronologically 
prior to phase 2. If stressful environmental stimuli are not 
removed, there is no need for implementing comforting 
stimuli in phase 2. This is because, usually, the comforting 
stimuli have to be presented in such quantities that they 
themselves become stressful environmental stimuli.  
In the following sections of this paper, we present how 
we envision the implementation of the here mentioned 
approach on the early olfactory experience of neonates. 
V. 
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS 
We are convinced that a number of measures could be 
taken to improve the early olfactory experience of 
premature infants. The first step would have to be to identify 
stressful environmental olfactory stimulants in the vicinity 
of premature neonates. Although no conclusive study has 
been found, detergent and adhesive remover are proposed as 
unpleasant odors to premature neonates [26]. In order to 
provide a more concrete answer on which environmental 
odors are stressful for neonates, we believe more dedicated 
research is needed. 
First, research should determine which of the odors in 
the vicinity of neonates are classified as stressful for the 
neonate. Secondly it should be investigated how frequent a 
neonate is, in general, exposed to these odors. The logical 
next step would be to eliminate the exposure of these 
stressful odors to the child. This can be done by means of 
providing the child with protection to the odors or looking 
for ways to remove or replace odorous chemicals.  
In phase 2, the child should be presented with 
comforting environmental (paternal) odors, odors that have 
shown their favorable influence on premature neonates. 
Here, we like to propose various suggestions about what 
we believe are viable implementations in order to improve 
early olfactory experience for prematurely born infants in 
the NICU. 
VI. 
PHASE 1 
First, we would like to highlight opportunities that are 
expected to provide less frequent experience of stress.  
A. Identification of Stressful Odours 
Before the protection of prematurely born infants to 
stressful environmental odors can start, the odors should 
first be identified. A survey of 99 neonatal units in France 
resulted in nine groups of products with a total of 76 distinct 
commercial preparations [27]. 
Overall, depending on their respiratory support, preterm 
neonates were on average exposed 1320-1800 times to 
chemical unpleasant odors during their first month of life of 
neonatal care [27].  
Bartocci et al. [26] described a method of measuring the 
impact of odors on prematurely born neonates by means of 
near-infrared spectroscopy. In their study, they describe that 
the presentation of a pleasant odor (vanillin) ensures an 
increase in blood flow in the orbitofrontal cortex, while the 
presentation of a unpleasant odor (detergent and adhesive 
remover) ensures a decrease of blood flow in the 
orbitofrontal cortex [26]. 
B. Removal of /protection against stressful odours 
The moment when odors are classified as stressful to 
premature neonates, it is time to consider means of 
removing them or providing protection against them. 
First of all, it should be considered if odorous materials 
and chemicals could be replaced with less obtrusive 
alternatives.  
Another means to reduce the exposure of stressful 
environmental odors to neonates could be changing staff 
behavior. For instance, it has been shown that by means of 
using ethanol-based hand disinfection, medical practitioners 
can ensure a high variable concentration of ethanol vapors 
in incubators [28]. Although one might search for non-
ethanol based disinfectant, it is also plausible to ensure that 
medical practitioners ensure a longer evaporation time 
between the application of disinfectant and manipulations in 
the incubators [28].  
By reconsidering behaviors of both parents and medical 
practitioners, the exposure to stressful odors might be 
diminished as well. 
VII. PHASE 2 
Sequential to Phase 1, it is important to proceed into 
Phase 2; during this phase comfortable stimuli are made 
available to the child in the NICU. 
A. Support Kangaroo Care 
Kangaroo Care (KC) is a well implemented method in 
the NICU [29][30]. During KC, the neonate is placed onto 
one of the parent’s naked chest in a supine position. During 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

KC the parent’s body provides the child with warmth, 
protection and familiar odors. Especially when the child is 
on the mother’s chest, the child is able to smell familiar 
odors from the mother’s chest and nipples. 
This early presentation of familiar odors is expected to 
be an important factor in the child-parent bonding [31].  
B. Introduce maternal odors in the NICU  
Earlier in this article, we showed the importance of 
maternal odor presentation to prematurely born infants in 
the incubator. Until the current time however no specifically 
designed apparatus could be found that is capable of 
providing maternal odors to prematurely born infants. We 
believe it would be highly beneficial to develop such a scent 
dispenser for the NICU in order to provide neonates with 
maternal odors. 
C.  Early food experience 
In their 2011 article Lipchock et al. [13] describe the 
importance of early exposure to food related odors and 
tastes for the quality of food learning in neonates. As a fetus 
the child would be exposed to elements of the maternal diet 
through swallowing the amniotic fluid. As a premature 
neonate, this experience is mostly lost. 
It has been established that the cultural appreciation of 
food starts well before consuming solid foods [13]. This 
corresponds with research performed by Marlier et al. [19], 
who show that a fetus already learns to appreciate tastes of 
their amniotic fluid in the womb as a preparation for foods 
outside the womb. Since prematurely born infants are 
usually tube fed, the taste of their food (usually maternal 
breast milk) is taken away from them.  
Besides learning, a child might have of early food 
experiences, smelling and tasting food in itself also provides 
pleasure [12].   
VIII. CHALLENGES IN ODOR RESEARCH IN THE NICU 
During our process of thinking about and working on 
odor designs for the NICU, we came across various 
obstacles that we believe should be taken into account for 
future designs and development.  
A. Odor library 
First of all, there is the point where one odor is not the 
same for everybody. Since the olfactory bulb is closely 
positioned to the prefrontal cortex it is known that memories 
and odors are strongly connected [32]. 
As adults, we already have an extended “library of 
odors” at our disposal. We already have an immense amount 
of experiences with various odors. This helps us to interpret 
new odors better and ensures that odors are already linked to 
certain experiences. For prematurely born babies, this 
library is virtually empty.  
Research both by Schleidt and Genzel [33] and 
Delaunay-El Allam et al. [34], for instance, showed that 
newly born babies are able to learn new scents and couple 
them to the positive experience of being close to their 
mother. This means that there might also be a risk of 
connecting new odors to negative experiences. This risk that 
should be taken seriously. 
B. Human body odours 
The second major obstacle that researchers are likely to 
face while developing new odor communication designs for 
the NICU is the fact that you likely have to work with 
human odors. Human odors are as unique as a person’s 
fingerprint and are, therefore, close to impossible to 
replicate artificially [35]. Furthermore, people go through 
cycles during which the content of their odors [36] and their 
perception of odors changes [32]. For instance, the 
menstrual cycle of a woman determines the odor strength 
and type of a woman [37]. This together with our diets [38] 
ensures that our personal odor varies over time. This all 
makes it quite difficult pinpoint which variables impact the 
experience of people if presented with human body odors.  
C. Anxiety odours 
Finally, there is the point where even maternal odors 
could ensure stress in neonates. Various researches show 
that human sweat is capable of communicating anxiety 
among humans [39][40][41][42]. Because the NICU is quite 
a stressful environment for parents as well, researchers run 
the risk of capturing and communicating anxiety related 
odors from the parents to the child. Unfortunately, no 
research could be found that further supports this hypothesis 
specifically in the NICU. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
While in the womb, a fetus experiences a specific 
olfactory 
and 
gustatory 
stimulation. 
However, 
if 
prematurely born, infants are deprived of this experience 
and are exposed to a highly stimulating environment of, 
among others, lights, sounds and odors. Therefore, the long 
hospitalization of prematurely born infants in the NICU is 
likely to have adverse effects on the long term development 
of these neonates. An extensive bundle of research suggests 
that the presentation of maternal/paternal odors to 
prematurely born infants has a positive effect on both the 
stress reduction as well as comforting of babies in the 
NICU. However, both in literature and in practice, hardly 
any interventions can be found which implement these 
insights on olfactory stimulation. We believe that as a first 
step for implementation, emphasis should be put on the 
removal of stressful odors (Phase 1) and sequentially 
implementation of comforting odors (Phase 2) in the NICU. 
The implementation of these comforting will probably 
encounter various obstacles. Since the child has a virtually 
empty “odor library”, researchers run the risk of teaching 
babies new scents and coupling them to negative 
experiences. Furthermore, since we are talking mainly about 
human body odors, there is still a large portion of research 
need on the capturing and preservation of these odors. We 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

believe that it is possible to design and develop systems that 
will overcome these obstacles and provide better care to 
neonates and their parents in the NICU.  
X. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the 
Point One National R&D grant “Embedded Neonatal 
Monitoring” (E-Nemo) Project of SenterNovem in the 
Netherlands. 
XI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Goldenberg and D. Rouse, “Prevention of premature 
birth,” New England Journal of Medicine, 1998. 
[2] D. Wilson-Costello, “Is there evidence that long-term 
outcomes have improved with intensive care?,” Seminars in 
fetal & neonatal medicine, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 344-354, Oct. 
2007. 
[3] S. Blackburn, “Environmental impact of the NICU on 
developmental outcomes,” Journal of Pediatric Nursing, vol. 
13, no. 5, pp. 279–289, Oct. 1998. 
[4] Y. M. Ahn and N. H. Kim, “Parental Perception of Neonates, 
Parental Stress and Education for NICU Parents,” Asian 
Nursing Research, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 199–210, 2007. 
[5] E. Cignacco et al.., “The efficacy of non-pharmacological 
interventions in the management of procedural pain in 
preterm and term neonates. A systematic literature review.,” 
European journal of pain (London, England), vol. 11, no. 2, 
pp. 139-152, Feb. 2007. 
[6] R. E. Grunau, L. Holsti, and J. W. B. Peters, “Long-term 
consequences of pain in human neonates.,” Seminars in fetal 
& neonatal medicine, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 268-275, Aug. 2006. 
[7] J. Panagiotidis and A. Lahav, “Simulation of prenatal 
maternal sounds in NICU incubators: a pilot safety and 
feasibility study.,” The journal of maternal-fetal & neonatal 
medicine : the official journal of the European Association of 
Perinatal Medicine, the Federation of Asia and Oceania 
Perinatal Societies, the International Society of Perinatal 
Obstetricians, vol. 23 Suppl 3, pp. 106-109, Oct. 2010. 
[8] www.babybloomhealthcare.com, 14-09-2012 
[9] http://soundear.com/, 14-09-2012 
[10] S. Bouwstra, W. Chen, L. Feijs, and SB, “Smart jacket design 
for neonatal monitoring with wearable sensors,” 2009 Body 
Sensor, 2009. 
[11] M. Croes, S. Bambang Oetomo, L. Feijs, Eds., “Designing 
remote connectedness between parents and their premature 
newly born – a design proposal”, Neonatal Monitoring 
Technologies: Design for Integrated Solutions. Eindhoven: 
IGI 
Global, 
2012. 
1-536. 
Web. 
14 
Sep. 
2012. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0975-4 
[12] J. V. Browne, “Chemosensory Development in the Fetus and 
Newborn,” Newborn and Infant Nursing Reviews, vol. 8, no. 
4, pp. 180-186, Dec. 2008. 
[13] S. V. Lipchock, D. R. Reed, and J. a Mennella, “The 
gustatory and olfactory systems during infancy: implications 
for development of feeding behaviors in the high-risk 
neonate.,” Clinics in perinatology, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 627-641, 
Dec. 2011. 
[14] H. Varendi, K. Christensson, R. H. Porter, and J. Winberg, 
“Soothing effect of amniotic fluid smell in newborn infants.,” 
Early human development, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 47-55, Apr. 
1998. 
[15] B. Schaal, R. Soussignan, and L. Marlier, “Olfactory 
cognition at the start of life: The perinatal shaping of selective 
odor responsiveness.,” Processing, pp. 421-440, 2002. 
[16] M. Russell, T. Mendelson, and H. Peeke, “Mother’s 
identification of their infant's odors1,” Ethology and 
Sociobiology, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 29-31, 1983. 
[17] R. Schaal, B., Marlier, L., Soussignan, “Human Foetuses 
Learn Odours from their Pregnant Mother’s Diet,” Chemical 
Senses, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 729-737, Dec. 2000. 
[18] J. A. Mennella, C. P. Jagnow, and G. K. Beauchamp, 
“Prenatal and postnatal flavor learning by human infants,” 
Pediatrics, vol. 107, no. 6, p. e88, 2001. 
[19] L. Marlier, B. Schaal, and R. Soussignan, “Neonatal 
responsiveness to the odor of amniotic and lacteal fluids: a 
test 
of 
perinatal 
chemosensory 
continuity.,” 
Child 
development, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 611-623, Jun. 1998. 
[20] S. Nishitani et al.., “The calming effect of a maternal breast 
milk odor on the human newborn infant.,” Neuroscience 
research, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 66-71, Jan. 2009. 
[21] L. Marlier, C. Gaugler, and J. Messer, “Olfactory stimulation 
prevents apnea in premature newborns,” Pediatrics, 2005. 
[22] N. Goubet, C. Rattaz, V. Pierrat, A. Bullinger, and P. 
Lequien, “Olfactory experience mediates response to pain in 
preterm newborns.,” Developmental psychobiology, vol. 42, 
no. 2, pp. 171-180, Mar. 2003. 
[23] B. Golianu, E. Krane, J. Seybold, C. Almgren, and K. J. S. 
Anand, 
“Non-pharmacological 
techniques 
for 
pain 
management in neonates.,” Seminars in perinatology, vol. 31, 
no. 5, pp. 318-322, Oct. 2007. 
[24] L. Doheny, S. Hurwitz, R. Insoft, S. Ringer, and A. Lahav, 
“Exposure 
to 
biological 
maternal 
sounds 
improves 
cardiorespiratory regulation in extremely preterm infants.,” 
The journal of maternal-fetal & neonatal medicine
 : the 
official journal of the European Association of Perinatal 
Medicine, the Federation of Asia and Oceania Perinatal 
Societies, the International Society of Perinatal Obstetricians, 
no. November 2011, pp. 1-4, Feb. 2012. 
[25] L. Doheny, J. A. Morey, S. A. Ringer, and A. Lahav, 
“Reduced frequency of apnea and bradycardia episodes 
caused by exposure to biological maternal sounds.,” 
Pediatrics international : official journal of the Japan 
Pediatric Society, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. e1-3, Apr. 2012. 
[26] M. Bartocci, J. A. N. Winberg, G. Papendieck, T. Mustica, G. 
Serra, and H. Lagercrantz, “Cerebral Hemodynamic Response 
to Unpleasant Odors in the Preterm Newborn Measured by 
Near-Infrared Spectroscopy,” vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 324-330, 
2001. 
[27] P. Kuhn, D. Astruc, J. Messer, and L. Marlier, “Exploring the 
olfactory environment of premature newborns
 : a French 
survey of health care and cleaning products used in neonatal 
units,” no. January 2008, pp. 334-339, 2011. 
[28] C. Paccaud, D. Vernez, M. Berode, and N. Charri, “Hand-
disinfectant alcoholic vapors in incubators,” vol. 4, pp. 15-19, 
2011. 
[29] N. Charpak et al.., “Kangaroo Mother Care: 25 years after.,” 
Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway : 1992) , vol. 94, no. 5, pp. 
514-522, May 2005. 
[30] [S. Ferber and I. Makhoul, “The effect of skin-to-skin contact 
(kangaroo care) shortly after birth on the neurobehavioral 
responses of the term newborn: a randomized, controlled 
trial,” Pediatrics, 2004. 
[31] R. H. Porter and J. Winberg, “Unique salience of maternal 
breast odors for newborn infants.,” Neuroscience and 
biobehavioral reviews, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 439-449, Jan. 1999. 
[32] R. S. Herz and T. Engen, “Odor memory: Review and 
analysis,” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 
300-313, Sep. 1996. 
[33] M. Schleidt and C. Genzel, “The significance of mother’s 
perfume for infants in the first weeks of their life,” Ethology 
and Sociobiology, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 145-154, May 1990. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[34] M. Delaunay-El Allam, L. Marlier, and B. Schaal, “Learning 
at the breast: preference formation for an artificial scent and 
its attraction against the odor of maternal milk.,” Infant 
behavior & development, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 308-321, Jul. 
2006. 
[35] D. J. Penn et al.., “Individual and gender fingerprints in 
human body odour.,” Journal of the Royal Society, Interface / 
the Royal Society, vol. 4, no. 13, pp. 331-340, Apr. 2007. 
[36] C. J. Wysocki and G. Preti, “Facts, fallacies, fears, and 
frustrations with human pheromones.,” The anatomical 
record. Part A, Discoveries in molecular, cellular, and 
evolutionary biology, vol. 281, no. 1, pp. 1201-1211, Nov. 
2004. 
[37] A. Rikowski and K. Grammer, “Human body odour, 
symmetry and attractiveness.,” Proceedings. Biological 
sciences / The Royal Society, vol. 266, no. 1422, pp. 869-874, 
May 1999. 
[38] J. N. Lundström and M. J. Olsson, “Functional neuronal 
processing of human body odors.,” Vitamins and hormones, 
vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1-23, Jan. 2010. 
[39] K. Haegler et al.., “No fear no risk! Human risk behavior is 
affected 
by 
chemosensory 
anxiety 
signals.,” 
Neuropsychologia, vol. 48, no. 13, pp. 3901-3908, Nov. 2010. 
[40] A. Prehn-Kristensen et al.., “Induction of empathy by the 
smell of anxiety.,” PloS one, vol. 4, no. 6, p. e5987, Jan. 
2009. 
[41] D. Rubin, Y. Botanov, G. Hajcak, and L. R. Mujica-Parodi, 
“Second-hand stress: inhalation of stress sweat enhances 
neural response to neutral faces.,” Social cognitive and 
affective neuroscience, Jan. 2011. 
[42] W. Zhou, P. Hou, Y. Zhou, and D. Chen, “Reduced 
recruitment of orbitofrontal cortex to human social 
chemosensory cues in social anxiety.,” NeuroImage, vol. 55, 
no. 3, pp. 1401-1406, Apr. 2011. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Application of Structural Equation Modeling for Inferring Toxicity-Dependent 
Regulation in Human Embryonic Stem Cells  
 
Sachiyo Aburatani,  
Computational Biology Research Center 
National Institute of AIST 
Tokyo, Japan 
s.aburatani@aist.go.jp 
Wataru Fujibuchi 
Center for iPS Research and Application 
Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan 
w.fujibuchi@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—Chemical toxicity threat our daily health, especially 
for embryos. Reveling toxicity-dependant regulation in human 
embryo is one of the effective approaches to prevent some 
chemical effects. In previous study, we developed a network 
inference approach, based on Structural Equation Modeling 
(SEM). In this study, we improved the SEM approach and 
applied this enhanced approach to expression profiles in 
human embryonic stem cells exposed to various chemicals. The 
inferred gene regulatory models among neurodevelopment 
related genes clarify the differences between chemicals, and the 
network shapes reflected the features of chemical toxicities. 
The effects of Acrylamide toxicity finally aggregated to a 
neuronal cell-related gene, even though Diethylnitrosamine 
disturbed 
normal 
cell 
differentiation-related 
genes. 
Furthermore, gene regulatory network with Thalidomide was 
complicated, but embryonic development-related genes were 
estimated as the finally effected genes by Thalidomide toxicity. 
Keywords-Structural Equation Modeling; Embryonic Stem 
Cell; Gene Regulatory Network; Chemical Toxicity. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
We are exposed to many chemicals in our daily life, and 
chemical toxicity is known to exert harmful effects on 
human health. Actually, some diseases are caused by 
exposure to environmental pollution [1][2], including 
chemicals such as methylmercury [3][4], and so on. 
Furthermore, some chemical toxins are threatening, since 
they can cause abnormal cell differentiation in embryos 
[5][6][7]. Clarifying the details of the toxic stress response in 
embryonic cells is crucial for the prevention of harmful 
chemical effects [8][9].  
To gain a better understanding of the role of the toxic 
stress response, a gene regulatory network is useful. With the 
gene expression information, the regulatory networks among 
the genes can be inferred. Various algorithms, including 
Boolean and Bayesian networks, have been developed to 
infer complex functional gene networks [10][11]. In our 
former investigation, we developed an approach based on 
graphical Gaussian modeling (GGM). The GGM approach is 
combined with hierarchical clustering for calculations with 
massive amounts of gene expression data, and we can infer 
the huge network among all of the genes by this approach 
[12][13]. However, GGM infers only the undirected graph, 
whereas the Boolean and Bayesian models infer the directed 
graph, which shows causality.  
Recently, we developed a new statistical approach, based 
on Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) in combination with 
factor analysis and a four-step procedure [14]. This approach 
allowed us to reconstruct a model of transcriptional 
regulation that involves protein-DNA interactions, from only 
the gene expression data. Furthermore, SEM approach 
allows us to strictly evaluate the inferred model by using 
fitting scores. The SEM approach is available for the 
detection of causality among selected genes, as the linear 
relationships between genes are assumed to minimize the 
difference between the fitted model covariance matrix and 
the calculated sample covariance matrix [15][16][17]. 
Here, we applied the SEM approach to the limited 
expression data of neurodevelopment related genes in human 
embryonic stem cells exposed to various chemicals. The 
chemicals were considered to be toxic and to adversely affect 
the neurodevelopment related genes. Thus, inferring the gene 
regulatory network among neurodevelopment related genes 
will help to elucidate the toxic stress response in the human 
embryo. Since the regulatory interactions among the genes 
were unclear, a new approach for assuming an initial model 
should be developed for the application of SEM. In this 
study, we used an improved SEM approach that includes a 
new method for constructing a preliminary initial model, in 
the absence of known regulatory interactions. The resulting 
gene expression data clarified the chemical-specific 
interactions among the neurodevelopment related genes. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS  
A. Expression data  
We were provided the expression data which were 
measured in previous investigation [6], and the details of 
data are follows. The nine genes considered to be affected by 
chemicals were measured in the human embryonic stem 
cells: GATA2, Lmx1A, MAP2, Nanog, Nestin, Nodal, 
Oct3/4, Pax6 and Tuj1 [6][18]. As an internal control, the 
expression of beta-actin was also measured. The expression 
data were obtained from human embryonic stem cells 
exposed to 15 chemicals [6][18]. The toxicity of each 
chemical was classified into one of three types: Neurotoxic, 
Carcinogenic and others. The human embryonic cells were 
exposed to each chemical for several time periods: 24 hours, 
27
Copyright (c) The Government of National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

48 hours, 72 hours and 96 hours. Each chemical was also 
tested at 5 concentrations: very low, low, middle, high and 
very high. The expression of the selected genes was 
measured twice under each condition by RT-PCR, and thus 
300 expression patterns per gene were measured [18]. 
The measured expression level of each gene was 
normalized as follows: 
 
 
 
∑
=






=
N
i
i
bActin
i
g
g
e
e
N
E
1
log2
1
                            (1) 
 
Here, N is the number of repeated experiments, 
i
ge  is the 
measured expression level of gene g under one set of 
conditions, and 
i
ebActin
 is the beta-actin expression level 
measured under the same conditions. The expression level of 
each gene was divided by that of beta-actin, for intracellular 
normalization. To minimize the experimental error, the 
logarithms of the normalized expression data were obtained 
and averaged. 
B. Extraction of causalities from expression data 
For the iteration of model fitting in SEM, an initial model 
should be assumed from known information. To construct 
the initial model among the 9 neurodevelopment genes from 
the time series expressions, we applied cross correlation to 
the expression profiles measured for each chemical and each 
concentration. 
Cross correlation is utilized as a measure of similarity 
between two waves in signal processing by a time-lag 
application, and it is also applicable to pattern recognition 
[19]. The cross correlation values range between -1 and +1. 
In a time series analysis, the cross correlation between two 
time series describes the normalized cross covariance 
function. Let
{
}
{
N }
t
N
t
y
y
Y
x
x
X
,
,
  ,
,
,
1
1
L
L
=
=
 represent two 
time series data including N time points, and then the cross 
correlation is given by 
 
{
}{
}
{
}
{
}
∑
∑
∑
=
+
=
+
=
−
−
−
−
=
N
t
d
t
N
t
t
d
t
N
t
t
xy
y
y
x
x
y
x y
x
r
1
2
1
2
1
    (2) 
 
where d is the time-lag between variables X and Y. In this 
case, the expression profiles were measured at 4 time points, 
and thus three cross correlations of each gene pair were 
calculated with 
1 ,0 ,1
d = −
. 
C. Construction of the initial model 
In this study, we focused on the chemical-specific 
regulatory network, and thus the differences between times 
and concentrations could be merged for the construction of 
the initial model. Figure 1 shows the new method developed 
for constructing an initial model of each chemical, with the 
merging of several conditions. The time difference was 
summarized by the cross correlations among genes. The time 
lag, which was defined for the calculation of the cross 
correlation, was used for the extraction of causality between 
all gene pairs. According to the time lags, three cross 
correlations were calculated between each gene pair, and we 
compared them with the absolute values of the cross 
correlations. The value d, with the highest cross correlation, 
was selected as the causal information between the gene 
pairs, and a matrix composed of the selected ds was 
constructed as the time lag matrix of each chemical at one 
concentration. Thus, five time lag matrices were constructed 
for each chemical (Fig. 1a). 
To obtain the chemical-specific interactions among genes, 
we extracted the binomial relationships between gene pairs 
from the five constructed time lag matrices for each chemical 
(Fig. 1b). From the binomial relationships, we constructed a 
frequency matrix for each chemical, composed of the 
frequencies of all gene pairs (Fig. 1c). In this step, the 
difference in the concentration is merged as the frequency in 
the matrix. We extracted the gene pairs with frequency 
matrix values greater than or equal to two, as the chemical-
specific regulation (Fig. 1d). From the extracted relationships 
between the genes, we reconstructed an initial model for 
each chemical (Fig. 1e). These initial models included the 
time series information as the directions of edges, and the 
different concentrations of each chemical were summarized 
as the existence of edges in the model.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Developed procedure for initial model construction. 
The procedure for constructing an initial model from the time-lag 
information of the cross correlation coefficients. (a) Time-lag matrices for 
each chemical. In this study, three time-lags were selected for the 
calculation of the cross correlation coefficients. Thus, three cross 
correlation coefficient values were obtained between all gene pairs. The 
time-lag value with the highest absolute value among the cross 
correlation coefficients was selected. Time-lag matrices were constructed 
for each concentration, so five time-lag matrices were obtained for each 
chemical. (b) Binomial relationships. These relationships were extracted 
from the five time-lag matrices. If the same relationships exist in several 
concentration matrices, then the extracted binomial relationships are 
duplicated in this step. (c) Frequency matrix of causal relationships 
between all gene pairs. From the binomial relationship, we can count the 
frequency of relationships between gene pairs. (d) Selection of possible 
causal relationships from the frequency matrix. The possible relationships 
between genes are considered to persist at several chemical 
concentrations. Thus, we selected the relationships with two or more 
values in the frequency matrix. (e) Construction of an initial model with 
selected causal relationships. By this approach, an initial model can 
include cyclic structures. 
28
Copyright (c) The Government of National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

D. Structural Equation Modeling without Latent Variables 
(SEM without LV) 
In general, SEM is a comprehensive statistical model that 
includes two types of variables: observed and latent. These 
variables constitute the structural models that consider the 
relationships 
between 
the 
latent 
variables 
and 
the 
measurement models that consider the relationships between 
the observed variables and the latent variables. These 
relationships can be presented both algebraically, as a system 
of equations, and graphically, as path diagrams. 
In this study, the selected genes (GATA2, Lmx1A, 
MAP2, Nanog, Nestin, Nodal, Oct3/4, Pax6 and Tuj1), 
which are related to neurogenesis, were defined as the 
observed variables. Meanwhile, none were defined as latent 
variables. All observed variables were categorized into one 
of two types of variables, exogenous and endogenous, 
according to their interactions with other variables. 
Exogenous variables are those that are not regulated by the 
other variables, and endogenous variables are regulated by 
the others. In the initial model, the starting genes are defined 
as exogenous variables, while all other genes are defined as 
endogenous 
variables. 
Regulatory 
relationships 
exist 
between the observed variables in the network models. The 
model is defined as follows: 
 
= Λ +ε
y
y
                                       (3) 
 
Here, y is a vector of p observed variables (measured gene 
expression patterns), and Λ  is a 
p× p
matrix representing 
the regulatory relationships between the observed variables. 
Errors that affect the observed endogenous variables are 
denoted by ε . The SEM software package SPSS AMOS 
17.0 (IBM, USA) was used to fit the model to the data. 
E. Parameter Estimation 
Parameter estimation was performed by comparing the 
actual covariance matrix, calculated from the measured data, 
and the estimated covariance matrices of the constructed 
model. Maximum likelihood is commonly used as a fitting 
function to estimate SEM parameters: 
 
(
)
p
S
tr
S
FML S
−
Σ
+
−
Σ
=
Σ
−
)
( ( )
log
log ( )
( )
,
1
θ
θ
θ
      (4) 
 
Here, 
Σ(θ)
is the estimated covariance matrix, S is the 
sample covariance matrix, Σ  is the determinant of matrix 
Σ , 
tr(Σ)
is the trace of matrix Σ , and p is the number of 
observed variables. The principal objective of SEM is to 
minimize 
( , ( ))
FML S Σ θ
, which is the objective function 
and is used to obtain the maximum likelihood. Generally, 
( , ( ))
FML S Σ θ
 is a nonlinear function. Therefore, iterative 
optimization is required to minimize 
( , ( ))
FML S Σ θ
 and to 
find the solutions [20].  
 
F. Iteration for Optimal Model  
The regulatory network analysis by SEM consists of two 
parts: parameter fitting and structure fitting. After the 
parameters of the constructed model are estimated by 
maximum likelihood, the network structures are evaluated 
according to the goodness of fit between the constructed 
model and the measured data. Through acceptance or 
rejection of the models, the optimal model that describes 
measured data can be selected.  
In the network model, the covariance matrix between 
variables is calculated by the estimated parameters. The 
similarity between a constructed model and the actual 
relationships is predicted by comparing the matrix calculated 
from the network model to the matrix calculated from the 
actual data. To detect quantitative similarity between a 
constructed model and an actual relationship, fitting scores 
were developed. In this study, the quality of the fit was 
predicted by four different fitting scores: GFI, AGFI, CFI 
and RMSEA. Values of GFI, AGFI and CFI above 0.90 are 
required for a good model fit. RMSEA is one of the most 
popular parsimony indexes displayed in the table, and 
RMSEA values below 0.05 represent a good model fit [21]. 
Furthermore, RMSEA values of 0.10 or more are considered 
to indicate that the constructed model is far from the actual 
data. 
To optimize the model, an iteration algorithm was 
developed, as follows:  
Step1: Deletion of a non-significant edge from the model. 
Use 0.05 as the significance level for the determination of 
the chemical-specific interactions among genes. The output 
of SEM programs includes the probability of each edge, and 
thus we deleted the edge with the highest probability.  
Step2: Reconstruction of the network model. The 
structure of the network model without the non-significant 
edge is different from the former network model. Thus, all 
parameters should be re-calculated from the reconstructed 
model, and the similarity of the network structure is also re-
calculated.  
Step3: Iteration of Steps 1 and 2 until all edges become 
significant. Since the probabilities of all of the edges in the 
reconstructed models have also changed, the deletion of the 
non-significant edges is executed step-by-step. 
Step4: Addition of a possible causal edge to the 
reconstructed model. According to the Modification Index 
(MI), we add a new causal edge between the observed 
variables. The MI value indicates the possibility of new 
causality between the variables, and thus we add a new edge 
according to the highest MI score. 
Step5: Iteration from Steps 1 to 3. By the addition of a 
new edge to a constructed model, the structure of network 
model is changed again. In other words, all parameters, 
including the probabilities of all edges, have also changed 
again. Thus, we execute the iteration from Step 1 to Step 3 
again. 
Step6: Determination of significant relationships among 
error terms. After all of the edges are significant and all of 
the MI scores are lower than 10.0 in the constructed model, 
significant relationships between error terms are estimated 
29
Copyright (c) The Government of National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

by the MI scores. The relationships among the error terms 
have no direction, and thus they are a correlation between 
error terms. These relationships were used for the 
calculations, but were not incorporated into the network. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. The chemical concentrations have no effect 
In this study, gene expression was measured in the 
presence of various chemicals, with several exposure times 
and at different concentrations. To reveal the most effective 
factor for gene expression, ANOVA and Tukey's HSD test 
were applied to the measured data. In statistics, ANOVA is 
utilized to detect differences between groups in terms of 
some variables. Since the chance of committing a type I error 
will be increased by performing multiple two-sample t-tests, 
a statistical test is needed to determine whether or not the 
means of more than two groups should be applied. The use 
of Tukey's HSD test clarified which means are significantly 
different from one another. Interestingly, the groups that 
were classified by the concentration of chemicals showed no 
significant difference in their gene expressions. Thus, the 
concentration of chemicals had no effect on the expression of 
the tested genes in the ES cells. 
The numbers of significantly expressed genes between 
each chemical pair are shown in Table 1. From this table, the 
differences in the gene expression were not significant 
among the same type of toxic chemicals. Furthermore, the 
toxicity difference between neurotoxic and carcinogenic did 
not cause an expression difference for almost all of the genes. 
However, the exposure to 'other' chemicals, such as 
Thalidomide, bisphenol A and Permethrin, caused significant 
expression changes in many genes. To reveal the differences 
in gene expression due to the type of chemical toxicity, we 
selected one chemical, which was the most different from 
those of the other toxicity types, as the representative 
chemical for each toxicity type. 
TABLE I.  NUMBER OF GENES WITH SINIFICANTLY DIFFERENT EXPRESSION  
 
 
 
 
Expression profiles were compared between all chemical pairs for each gene by Turkey's HSD test, 
and the genes that were estimated as exhibiting significantly different expression dependent on 
chemicals were counted. 
The toxicities of the 15 chemicals were divided into 3 
categories, Neural, Carcinogenic and others. Thus, three 
chemicals, Acrylamide, Diethylnitrosamine and Thalidomide, 
were selected as the representative toxic chemicals for neural, 
carcinogenic and others, respectively. 
B. Genes are hierarchically controlled by chemical 
toxicity 
We utilized the new method to construct the initial gene 
regulatory network models under the conditions with the 
three chemicals. Even though the new method can detect the 
cyclic interactions among genes, such as feed-back 
regulation, the structures of the constructed initial models 
indicated the hierarchical regulations among the genes. 
Figure 2 shows the constructed initial network models. The 
initial models of Acrylamide, Diethylnitrosamine and 
Thalidomide were composed of 9 genes with 19 
relationships, 8 genes with 14 relationships, and 8 genes with 
10 relationships, respectively. 
There are some obvious features in the hierarchical 
diagram of each initial model. The numbers of exogenous 
and endogenous genes are different from each other. The 
initial Acrylamide model was composed of 4 genes as 
exogenous genes, but only Oct3/4 was the last endogenous 
gene. Thus, the expression profiles of Acrylamide indicated 
the quick responses of many genes after the chemical 
exposure, and only one gene was affected later. In contrast, 
Thalidomide exposure induced the expression of only one 
gene. These differences between the initial chemical models 
summarized the distinctive gene expression profiles for each 
chemical. 
All of the initial models included some duplicated gene 
interactions, such as a direct interaction between two genes 
and an indirect interaction between them. To simplify these 
duplicated interactions, we only retained the longest path 
between two genes, since the regulation displayed by a direct 
path could be replaced by indirect paths in the model. In the 
initial model, the edges do not represent the direct regulation, 
but the preceding information. Thus, the difference between 
direct interaction and indirect interaction in the initial model 
is not very important. By retaining the longest paths, all of 
the preceding information was included, as the simplest 
diagram. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Initial network models. 
The initial models which include summarized time-series information 
and concentration information. (a) Initial model of Acrylamide. (b) Initial 
model of Diethylnitrosamine. (c) Initial model of Thalidomide.  
Methylmercury   
-
2-Nitropropane   1
-
Acrylamide   0
4
-
p-Nitroaniline   1
2
1
-
4-hydoroxy PCB107   2
4
0
0
-
Benzo[a] pyrene   4
5
1
2
0
-
Diethylnitrosamine   4
3
5
4
5
5
-
Diethylaminofluorene   3
3
4
5
5
7
0
-
Phenobarbital   3
2
4
0
1
2
6
6
-
Tamoxifen   3
4
3
1
0
0
6
6
0
-
Diethylbestrol   3
5
2
0
1
0
5
6
0
0
-
TCDD   3
2
1
0
0
1
5
6
0
0
0
-
Thalidomide   5
7
5
5
5
4
7
7
4
4
4
5
-
Bisphenol-A   5
6
5
5
3
4
6
7
6
3
3
3
0
-
 Permethrin   4
6
4
5
4
4
7
7
3
4
4
4
0
0
-
Methylmercury
2-Nitropropane
Acrylamide
p-Nitroaniline
4-hydoroxy PCB107
Benzo[a] pyrene
Diethylnitrosamine
Diethylaminofluorene
Phenobarbital
Tamoxifen
Diethylbestrol
TCDD
Thalidomide
Bisphenol-A
 Permethrin
Neurotoxicity
Carcinogenic
others
Neurotoxicity
Carcinogenic
others
30
Copyright (c) The Government of National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

C. Inferred Network by SEM  
The final inferred networks for each chemical and the 
estimated regression weights of the edges are depicted in 
Figure 3. The inferred networks of chemicals revealed 
distinct structures. In the inferred network of Acrylamide, 
many genes were arranged as exogenous objects, and only 
one gene was arranged as the final result of all regulation in 
the network. On the other hand, two serial regulations 
interacted with each other in the Diethylnitrosamine network 
model. One serial regulation was from Lmx1A to Pax6, and 
the other was from Tuj1 to Nestin. The signal input genes in 
the Diethylnitrosamine network were also different from 
those in the Acrylamide network. Even though Tuj1 was 
arranged as an output object in the Acrylamide network, 
Tuj1 was arranged as input in the Diethylnitrosamine 
network. The inferred network of Thalidomide was also 
different from both the Acrylamide and Diethylnitrosamine 
networks. In the Thalidomide network, only two genes were 
arranged as input objects, but four genes were arranged as 
output objects. This means that only a few genes will be 
directly affected by Thalidomide, but finally many genes 
were affected throughout the gene regulatory network. 
According to our inferred network, the differences 
between the gene regulation by chemicals were clarified, and 
the network shapes reflected the features of chemical 
toxicities. In the inferred network, the effects of Acrylamide 
toxicity finally aggregated to Tuj1, which is known to 
contribute to microtubule stability in neuronal cells [22]. 
Acrylamide is neurotoxic, and thus it is reasonable that the 
effect of Acrylamide finally aggregated to a neuronal cell-
related gene. 
 
 As compared with the Acrylamide network, the cell 
differentiation genes were arranged at downstream steps in 
the Diethylnitrosamine network. From the carcinogenic 
features of Diethylnitrosamine [23][24][25], normal cell 
differentiation in the embryonic stem cell may be disturbed. 
The most complicated structure was the Thalidomide 
network. In the Thalidomide network, several type of genes 
are finally affected by its chemical toxicity. Particularly, two 
cell differentiation-related genes, Nodal and Nanog, are 
important for normal early embryonic development. Nodal is 
related to the development of the left-right axial structure 
[26][27], and its signaling pathway is known to be important 
very early in development for cell fate determination and 
many other developmental processes [27]. Nanog is known 
as a key factor for maintaining pluripotency in embryonic 
stem cells [28][29]. Thus, the unusual expressions of these 
genes, which occurred due to Thalidomide toxicity, may 
have caused its harmful side effects. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We applied an improved SEM approach to reconstruct a 
gene regulatory model from gene expression data in human 
embryonic stem cells, and we have shown that SEM is a 
powerful approach to estimate the gene regulation caused by 
chemical toxicity. The inferred networks clarified the 
differences between the gene regulation by chemicals, and 
the features of chemical toxicities were well reflected in the 
network structures. Thus, the network construction by SEM 
is one of the useful approaches for inferring the regulatory 
relationships among genes. Furthermore, the inferred  
 
  
 
Figure 3.  Inferred network by SEM. 
 The optimal model for each chemical, obtained by the developed SEM iteration procedure. A positive relationship between genes is displayed with a 
solid arrow. A negative relationship between genes is displayed with a dashed arrow. Gene names with blue characters indicate "neurodevelopment 
related genes", genes with red characters indicate "cell differentiation-related genes" and genes with black characters indicate "related to transcription of 
insulin". (a) Acrylamide model, (b) Diethylnitrosamine model and (c) Thalidomide model. (d) The estimated regression weights of all edges in the 
optimal models.
31
Copyright (c) The Government of National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

network among genes can be utilized for the estimation of a 
chemical’s effect, from experimentally obtained expression 
profiles. The ability to identify expression profiles and the 
corresponding biological functions is expected to provide 
further possibilities for SEM in the inference of regulatory 
mechanisms by chemical toxicity. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to express our gratitude to Dr. Yamane 
(Kyoto University) and Dr. Ohsako (University of Tokyo) 
for providing us the expression profiles in human embryonic 
stem cells exposed to 15 chemicals. Their supports were 
invaluable for this investigation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Baccarelli and V. Bollati, "Epigenetics and environmental 
chemicals," Curr. Opin. Pediatr. vol.21(2), pp. 243-251, Apr. 
2009. 
[2] L. Hou, X. Zhang, D. Wang, and A. Baccarelli, 
"Environmental chemical exposures and human epigenetics," 
Int. J. Epidemiol., vol. 41(1), pp. 79-105, Feb. 2012. 
doi:10.1093/ije/dyr154. 
[3] Y. Yuan, "Methylmercury: a potential environmental risk 
factor contributing to epileptogenesis," Neurotoxicology, vol. 
33(1), pp. 119-126, Jan. 2012. 
[4] N. Tatsuta, et al., "Prenatal exposures to environmental 
chemicals and birth order as risk factors for child behavior 
problems," Environ. Res., vol.114, pp. 47-52, Apr. 2012. 
[5] D. A. Rappolee, Y. Xie, J.A. Slater, S. Zhou, and E. E. 
Puscheck, "Toxic stress prioritizes and imbalances stem cell 
differentiation: implications for new biomarkers and in vitro 
toxicology tests," Syst. Biol. Reprod. Med., vol.58(1), pp. 33-
40, Feb. 2012. 
[6] X. He, et al., "Effects of methylmercury exposure on neuronal 
differentiation of mouse and human embryonic stem cells,". 
Toxicol. Lett., vol.212(1), pp. 1-10, Apr. 2012. 
[7] J. A. Harrill, B. L. Robinette, and W. R. Mundy, "Use of high 
content image analysis to detect chemical-induced changes in 
synaptogenesis in vitro," Toxicol. In. Vitro., vol.25(1), pp. 
368-387, Feb. 2011. 
[8] U. Gündel, D. Benndorf, M. von Bergen, R. Altenburger, and 
E. Küster, "Vitellogenin cleavage products as indicators for 
toxic stress in zebra fish embryos: A proteomic approach," 
Proteomics, vol.7(24), pp. 4541-4554, Dec. 2007. 
[9] J. Thompson and J.Bannigan, "Cadmium: toxic effects on the 
reproductive system and the embryo," Reprod. Toxicol., 
vol.25(3), pp. 304-315, Apr. 2008. 
[10] T. Akutsu, S. Miyano, and S. Kuhara, "Algorithms for 
identifying Boolean networks and related biological networks 
based on matrix multiplication and fingerprint function," J. 
Comput. Biol., vol.7, pp. 331-343, 2000. 
[11] N. Friedman, M. Linial, I. Nachman, and D. Pe’er, "Using 
Bayesian networks to analyze expression data," J. Comput. 
Biol., vol.7, pp. 601-620, 2000. 
[12] S. Aburatani, S. Kuhara, H. Toh, and K. Horimoto, 
"Deduction of a gene regulatory relationship framework from 
gene expression data by the application of graphical Gaussian 
modeling," Signal Processing, vol.83, pp. 777-788, Apr. 2003. 
[13] S. Aburatani and K. Horimoto, "Elucidation of the 
Relationships between LexA-Regulated Genes in the SOS 
response," Genome Informatics, vol.16(1), pp. 95-105, Aug. 
2005. 
[14] S. Aburatani, "Application of structure equation modeling for 
inferring a serial transcriptional regulation in yeast," Gene. 
Regul. Syst. Bio., vol.5, pp. 75-88, Nov. 2011. 
[15] K. A. Bollen, Structural Equations with Latent Variables, 
New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1989. 
[16] O. D. Duncan, Introduction to Structural Equation Models, 
New York: Academic Press, 1975. 
[17] J. Pearl, Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference, 2nd ed., 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
[18] W. Fujibuchi, et al., "Prediction of Chemical Toxicity by 
Network-based SVM on ES-cell Validation System," The 
Proc. of the 2011 Joint Conference of CBI-Society and JSBi, 
Nov. 2011. 
[19] L. Li and G. E. Caldwell, "Coefﬁcient of cross correlation and 
the time domain correspondence," J. of Electromyography 
and Kinesiology, vol.9, pp. 385–389, Dec. 1999. 
[20] K. G. Joreskog and D. Sorbom, LISREL-VI: Analysis of 
Linear Structural Relationships By the Method of Maximum 
Likelihood, Redondo Beach: Doss-Haus Books, 1984. 
[21] P. Spirtes, C. Glymour, and R. Scheines, Causation, 
Prediction, and Search, 2nd ed., Cambridge: The MIT Press, 
2001. 
[22] J. M. Rosenstein, N. Mani, A. Khaibullina, and J. M. Krum, 
"Neurotrophic effects of vascular endothelial growth factor on 
organotypic cortical explants and primary cortical neurons,". J. 
Neurosci., vol.23(35), pp. 11036-11044, Dec. 2003. 
[23] N. Ito, et al., "Pathological markers for non-genotoxic agent-
associated carcinogenesis,". Toxicol. Lett., Vol. 64-65, pp. 
613-620, Dec. 1992. 
[24] R. Puatanachokcha, et al., "Lack of promoting effects of 
phenobarbital at low dose on diethylnitrosamine-induced 
hepatocarcinogenesis in TGF-alpha transgenic mice," Asian 
Pac. J. Cancer Prev., vol.7(2), pp. 274-278, Apr-Jun 2006. 
[25] M. J. Iatropoulos, C. X. Wang, K. E. von Keutz, and G. M. 
Williams, 
"Assessment 
of 
chronic 
toxicity 
and 
carcinogenicity in an accelerated cancer bioassay in rats of 
Nifurtimox, an antitrypanosomiasis drug," Exp. Toxicol. 
Pathol., vol.57(5-6), pp. 397-404, Jul. 2006. 
[26] H. Hamada, C. Meno, D. Watanabe, and Y. Saijoh, 
"Establishment of vertebrate left-right asymmetry," Nat. Rev. 
Genet., vol.3(2), pp. 103-113, Feb. 2002. 
[27] C. Grande1 and N. H. Patel, "Nodal signaling is involved in 
left-right asymmetry in snails," Nature, vol.457(7232), pp. 
1007–1011, Feb. 2009. 
[28] K. Mitsui, "The homeoprotein Nanog is required for 
maintenance of pluripotency in mouse epiblast and ES cells," 
Cell, vol.113(5), pp. 631-642, May 2003. 
[29] I. Chambers, et al., "Functional expression cloning of Nanog, 
a pluripotency sustaining factor in embryonic stem cells," Cell, 
vol.113(5), pp. 643-655, May 2003. 
32
Copyright (c) The Government of National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Mobile Data Modeling in Human Body “Network” 
Bell’s Palsy Case Study 
 
Hanen Bouali 
Department of Computer Science 
ISG-University of Tunis, Tunisia 
41, Rue de la Liberté, Cité Bouchoucha Le Bardo 2000 
Tunis- Tunisia 
Hanene.bouali@gmail.com 
Jalel Akaichi 
Department of Computer Science 
ISG-University of Tunis, Tunisia 
41, Rue de la Liberté, Cité Bouchoucha Le Bardo 2000 
Tunis- Tunisia 
J.akaichi@gmail.com
 
Abstract —The mysterious Path physiology of Bell's palsy 
sometimes prevents doctors to understand this disease. A fine 
diagnostic and an enhanced recovery surveillance are crucial 
for physicians to deeply be aware of the disease mechanisms. 
Moreover, the analyses of the patients' states may lead to the 
proposition of new strategies to cure the illness. This paper 
attempts to supervise the patients’ state evolution through the 
modeling of the facial nerve stream as a moving object 
circulating into the facial nerve “network”. Its progression 
through this latter, gives indication about patients’ recovery 
advancement and the disease behavior. We also propose, in 
this work, an algorithm based on graph matching concepts and 
a visualization algorithm able to show the recovery process in 
time. As a result, we obtain a graph, tracking the facial nerve 
stream. Then, physicians can observe the recovery progress. 
Hence, identifing the occurrence of conduction problem 
preventing it. 
 
Keywords-Bell’s palsy recovery; Matching Algorithm; Moving 
Object; Visualization 
 
I.    INTRODUCTION 
The body's networks allow sub-systems (i.e., digestive, 
brain, pulmonary) to run independently passing key 
information when needed. Once this information is blocked 
somewhere, it implies a dysfunction of the sub systems, 
which is diseases’ reason. In addition to that, the human 
body is a complex system succeptible to rapidly change; 
such instability may also give rise to severe disease. 
Among these sub-systems, the facial nerve the failure of 
which causes facial paralysis that, despite the techniques 
that are used to accelerate recovery, effective treatment is 
not yet well defined. The treatment of Bell's palsy is 
variable 
[8] 
ranging 
from 
observation 
to 
surgical 
decompression. Among these treatments we opts for 
electromyography (EMG). The advantages of EMG [9] 
include that it is relatively inexpensive and is performed by 
a machine. It yields a lot of data that is continuous and 
scalar, increasing its apparent credibility. It can detect more 
subtle muscular activity than visual measurement, and is the 
only useful approach when movement is not visible. At each 
patient’s visit, doctors apply EMG until patients’ are 
completely recovering. This code is comprehensible by 
specialists and physicians but most of times patient doesn’t 
understand 
specialized 
language 
concerned 
with 
medicines which is characterized by pretentious syntax, 
vocabulary, meaning or graphics. We aim in this research to 
simplify the codification of the facial nerve and ensure its 
comprehension by patients.  
To make our solution evolutionary, the Bell’s palsy 
patient recovery surveillance, we want to help physicians 
and care givers to ameliorate their treatment methodology; 
we adopted from a first an algorithm that produces a 
modeling for the facial nerve: a colored tree indicating 
segments in which the stream nerve is operational. In a 
second, for Bell’s palsy recovery process, we adjust the 
matching theory to graphs generated by facial nerve 
modeling to detect graphs commonalities and differences: 
this is ensured thanks to a matching algorithm. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In 
Section 2, we present a literature review organized in two 
parts: on the first side, we present facial nerve modeling and 
on the one second side we discuss some matching 
algorithms and make a comparison between them. In 
Section 3, once facial nerve anatomy is well understood, we 
propose a Facial Nerve Modelisation in the aim to adjust 
graph matching to these graphs. Then, in Section 4, based 
on this model, a visualization algorithm was proposed. And 
finally, in Section 5, we summarize the work and propose 
new perspectives to be done in the future. 
 
II.   RELATED WORK 
A. Bell’s Palsy Modeling 
Understanding the facial nerve anatomy was essential to 
reach our objective. Akaichi et al. [1] aim at supervising the 
states evolution of patients affected by facial paralysis 
leading to recovery. Modeling facial nerve stream trajectory 
data seems to be an essential step leading to perform our 
purpose. Moreover, visualizing the facial stream nerve 
trajectories may help physicians to understand deeply the 
disease through comparisons performed on patient state in 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

time, or between different patient states. Among facial nerve 
components, they treated the bronchial motors (the 
muscles). First, a modeling of muscles using UML [1] class 
diagram gives rise to a graphic modeling of muscles. This 
muscles model will serve later to follow the evolution of the 
bell’s palsy patient’s state. This is the result of the Facial 
Nerve (FAN) algorithm [1], which takes as input the graph G 
representing the facial nerve graph and the muscles 
responses recoded in a table, and produces a colored graph 
ColoredG indicating the trajectories of the facial nerve 
stream. A trajectory in the Bell’s palsy case is starting from 
the End_node linked to the considered muscle until the graph 
starting node I0. Green trajectories demonstrating that the 
facial nerve stream crosses this trajectory and a normal 
function of the muscle. Unlike to a red trajectory indicating a 
dysfunction of the muscle, hence the cut of the stream 
somewhere. This algorithm has a spatial and temporal 
exponential complexity. This is due to the storage of graphs 
at each medical examination and the pass through the graph 
when coloring trajectories. In this paper, we adopt the 
muscles modeling and extent it to add the visceral motor 
components (Glands) modeling and in a second we minimize 
the FAN algorithm complexity to a linear one. This will be 
discussed in details in Section 4. 
B. Matching Algorithm 
Homomorphism [10] is proven helpful in many areas; to 
apply it between graphs several algorithms have been 
proposed. Before proposing the algorithm appropriate to the 
Bell’s palsy case, we present in the following some 
algorithm proposed in the literature. Among the basic 
algorithms, 
we 
quote 
the 
Hopcroft-Karp 
Algorithm 
originally was invented by John Hopcroft and Richard Karp 
in 1973 and has ever since been vital for computer science. 
The Hopcroft–Karp algorithm [2] is an algorithm that takes 
as input a bipartite graph and produces as output a maximum 
cardinality matching. 
It runs in O (√|V|*|E|) time in the worst case with E is the 
number of edges in the graph, and V is the number of 
vertices of the graph. Hopcroft-Karp is one of the fastest 
algorithms that find the maximum cardinality matching on a 
bipartite graph. The algorithm uses the augmenting path 
technique as well. However, in order to speed up the working 
time instead of searching for paths one by one it looks for 
many paths in the same time. The way the algorithm works is 
that it continually increases the size of a partial matching by 
discovering and utilizing augment paths. The main idea is to 
guarantee that the length of the path grows in each step.  
Afterwards, Haloui and Wang [3] propose a new graph 
matching algorithm for computing the similarity between 
graphs which proposes a novel approach to the search for the 
best matching between two graphs. The search process is 
decomposed into K phases. The promising mappings in each 
phase are extracted and their matching errors are computed. 
Given two graphs, the goal is to find the best matching 
between their nodes that leads to the smallest matching error. 
This matching error is computed by the dissimilarity between 
each pair of matching nodes added to the dissimilarity 
between corresponding edges. An E*V matrix (P) is 
introduced such E is number of edges and V is the number of 
vertex. A Pij element in P denotes the dissimilarity between i 
and j in two graphs.  
Recall that graph matching can be applied to several 
fields. Later on, Remco et al. [4] focus on the application of 
graph matching algorithms to this similarity search problem. 
Answering a similarity search query involves determining 
the degree of similarity between the search model and each 
model in the repository. Similarity in this case can be defined 
from several perspectives, including the following: 
 Text similarity: based on a comparison of the labels 
that appear in the process models (task labels, event 
labels, etc.), using either syntactic or semantic 
similarity metrics, or a combination of both. 
 Structural similarity: based on the topology of the 
process models seen as graphs, possibly taking into 
account text similarity as well. 
 Behavioral similarity: based on the execution 
semantics of process models. 
The graph matching algorithms studied in this paper attempt 
to establish 1-to-1 correspondences between nodes in the 
compared process models. 
The problem of measuring object similarity can turns into 
a problem of measuring object similarity turns into the 
problem of computing the similarity of graphs, which is also 
known as graph matching. In this paper, application of graph 
matching will be demonstrated giving examples from the 
fields of pattern recognition and computer vision. 
The run time of this algorithm is O (        ), where V 
is the number of vertexes in the input graph and    is a 
threshold that defines the maximum number of admissible 
edit operations. Therefore, this approach is limited to (very) 
small graphs. The graph matching algorithms reviewed in 
this paper are very general. In fact, there are no problem 
dependent assumptions included. The nodes and edges of a 
graph may represent anything, and there are no restrictions 
on the node and edge labels. 
The graph matching is also applied to the field of image 
comparison and recognitions. Vertices in graphs represent 
regions of images, and the division in regions is the result of 
a segmentation procedure. Hence, automatic segmentation 
and graph construction techniques are applied to create the 
graphs that are to be matched. In order to consider a 
homomorphism as valid, all the vertices in the model graph 
will have at least a vertex in the data graph that has been 
matched to it. The complexity of the algorithm depends on 
the number of phases K. For a given K, to find the best 
matching we need O (    ) steps, where V is the number of 
nodes in the smaller graph.  
A comparative study between four algorithm presented 
above is detailed in Table 1: 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE 1.  COMPARATIVE STUDY BETWEEN GRAPH MATCHING 
ALGORITHMS 
Algorithm 
Input 
output 
Complexity 
Techniques 
used 
Hopcroft–
Karp 
a bipartite 
graph 
a maximum 
cardinality 
matching 
O(√nm) 
The 
augmenting 
path 
Hlaoui and 
Wang 
A( E*V) 
matrix  
Similarity 
between 
graphs 
O (    ) 
Similarity 
matrix 
Remco and 
al. 
two 
business 
process 
graphs 
Map set 
between the 
graphs 
 
Greedy 
algorithm 
and pruning 
Horst 
Bunke 
A graph 
and a 
threshold  
 
O (        ) 
 
III.  FACIAL NERVE MODELING 
A. Fcial Nerve Components Modeling 
Understanding the facial nerve anatomy [1] is essential to 
reach the main objective of our work. Indeed, facial nerve 
can be subdivided into two main components: motor 
components and sensory components. Essential motor 
components are the bronchial motor that efferent supplies the 
muscles of facial expression [6], and visceral motor that 
vehicles the parasympathetic innervations to all glands of 
head. 
In this paper, we adopt the visceral motor. We subdivide 
the facial glands into two classes: the superior half glands 
and the lower half glands. The superior half glands are the 
eye glands which is the Lachrymal Gland (LG). 
The lower half glands are ear glands, nose glands and the 
salivary glands. The ear glands are called ceremonious gland 
(CG). Nose glands are Nasal Glands (NG) and salivary 
glands which are composed by cheek glands and mouth 
glands. Cheek glands are the Parotid Glands (PG) and mouth 
glands subdivided into Sub maxillary Glands (SmG) and 
Sublingual Glands (SlG). Figure 1 describes visceral motor 
components details using UML modeling. 
 
Figure 1. Visceral Motor Component Class Diagram 
Understanding facial nerve anatomy permits us to better 
understand the Bell’s palsy disease. Once facial nerve 
structure is established and facial nerve structure is analyzed. 
We note that to better understand this disease a graphical 
modeling of the structure can be the efficient way. A useful 
way of representing the knowledge is by using graphs. They 
have been proved as an effective way of representing objects 
[7]. For the visceral motor components, nodes represent 
intersection glands and arcs represent the connections 
between them. 
The start node of the graph describes the beginning of the 
facial nerve of one side (the left side or the right side) of the 
face, the end-nodes represent facial glands, and arcs describe 
connections between nodes (Fig. 2). 
 
Figure 2. Facial Nerve Glands Graph 
To better understand this graph, a mathematical 
formulation will be more suitable: 
A graph G can be defined by a couple G (V, E) in which: 
 V(G) is a set of nodes or vertexes: 
 Vertex (the root): the facial nerve beginning with a 
degree superior to 1 which the degree of a vertex is 
the number of edges that connect to it. 
 Internal nodes: facial nerve bifurcation with a degree 
superior to 1. 
 External nodes (or leaf): facial muscles or facial 
glands with a degree equal to 1 except the WM 
muscle. 
 E(G) is a set of edges such that each edge eij=vi.vj 
connects nodes vi and vj where is a set of element pairs 
V. The edges here represent facial nerve portions which 
is the connection between nodes in wherein facial nerve 
stream circulates. The facial nerve stream circulates in 
one direction (a directed graph), this why we have an 
ordered pair. 
The graph G can also be characterized by: 
 A path: a unique sequence of nodes and is an alternating 
sequence of vertices and edges, beginning and ending 
with a vertex which in our case represent the trajectory of 
facial nerve stream from the facial nerve beginning until 
reaching a muscle or a gland. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 The distance (D) of a path from vi to vn is measured by 
the length of the unique set of edges implicitly defined by 
the path. The length of a path here is the number of facial 
nerve portions composing the trajectory. D = V–1, where 
V is the number of vertexes visited (a vertex is counted 
each time it is visited). In our case is the number of facial 
nerve bifurcation. 
 
B. MFGS Algorithm  For Bell’s Palsy State Evolution 
Recall that the objective of this modeling is to supervise 
the patients’ state evolution and see the recovery at each 
medical examination. The recovery is determined after a 
comparison between muscles and glands intensities 
computed using EMG and ENoG respectively of both sides: 
paralyzed and healthy. For two consecutive medical 
examinations, the evaluation of the disease is due to the 
comparison process between paralyzed graph obtained at the 
last medical examination and the current one of the paralyzed 
side. 
Hence, the problem of supervising the patient’s evolution 
turns into the problem of computing the similarity of graphs 
between the healthy side and paralyzed side, which is also 
known as graph matching.  
Analogously to Bell’s palsy, physicians need to match 
the muscle of the paralyzed side to those in healthy side to 
assess patients’ disease recovery. This matching is based on 
the field intensity of each node more especially each leaf. 
Given two node-labeled graphs G1 = (V1, E1) and G2 = (V2, 
E2), the problem of graph homomorphism is to find a 
mapping from V1 to V2 such that each node in V1 is mapped 
to a node in V2 with the same label, and each edge in E1 is 
mapped to an edge in E2 from a model graph to a data graph. 
The sense of matching depends on the healthy side and 
paralyzed side.  
If there is a homomorphism from a graph G1 to a graph 
G2 we say that G1 maps to G2 and we write simply Φ: G1 
 G2 which maps vertices to vertices and edges to edges.  
In Bell’s palsy application, matching a vertex to other one 
means automatically matching the whole trajectory or path 
from the leaf until the vertex. The matching is determined 
after a comparison of intensities. If we map a vertex in the 
model graph to other one on the data graph, this means that 
the muscle or gland has a normal function and the facial 
nerve stream crosses the entire path. Hence, all the edges 
belonging to the muscle path are matched automatically. 
To connect two nodes, the following condition must be 
satisfied: the intensity of the leaf which refers in this case to 
a facial muscle or gland on the paralyzed side must be 
greater than or equal to that on the healthy side with an error 
margin.  
The graph homomorphism is used to detect some metrics. 
Among them, we cite the measure graph similarity.  
By analogy to Bell’s palsy, graph homomorphism can be 
used to detect the disease progression. At each visit, EMG is 
applied to facial muscle for both sides. Thanks to a 
comparison of intensity for the same muscle at each side, we 
conclude the recovery or not for the muscle. Mixing EMG 
and homomorphism, physicians can detect the Bell’s palsy 
recovery:  
 The total recovery implies a complete matching from the 
healthy side’s graph to the paralyzed side’s graph  
 The partial recovery implies a partial matching of two 
sides. 
The number of nodes matched measure the graphs similarity. 
This metrics is based on the maximum of nodes matched; a 
completely matching or a homomorphism implies all the 
nodes in the paralyzed graph (data graph) are matched to 
nodes on the healthy graph (model graph) and finally as a 
conclusion we have a total recovery.  
For finding matching with the maximum cardinality or 
the maximum graph similarity, we propose this algorithm: 
 
MFGS Algorithm 
Input: Two labeled graphs for healthy (Gh) and 
paralyzed (Gp) side 
Output: Matching between nodes in Gh and Gp from the 
data graph to the model graph For each leaf in the 
paralyzed graph 
1. Begin 
2. HealthyLeaf=BFS(Paralyzed_graph.Leaf, 
Healthy_graph) 
3. If (Compare (Paralyzed_graph.Leaf. Intensity, 
Healthy_graph.Leaf.Intensity))// a valid mapping 
Match (ParalyzedLeaf, HealthyLeaf) 
Match(ParalyzedLeaf.trajectory, 
HealthyLeaf.trajectory) 
Increment C 
4. If (Total matching) 
Total recovery 
5. Else  
Display Sub Graph matched 
Partial recovery 
6. Return C 
7. End 
 
The BFS function (Breadth First Search) is a strategy for 
searching in a graph when search is limited to essentially two 
operations: (a) visit and inspect a node of a graph; (b) gain 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

access to visit the nodes that neighbor the currently visited 
node [5]. 
The BFS algorithm is as follows: 
 
BFS Algorithm 
1. Enqueue the root node 
2. Dequeue a node and examine it  
 If the element sought is found in this node, quit 
the search and return a result. 
 Otherwise enqueue any successors (the direct 
child nodes) that have not yet been discovered. 
3. If the queue is empty, every node on the graph has 
been examined – quit the search and return "not 
found". 
4. If the queue is not empty, repeat from Step 2. 
 
Matching 
algorithms 
are 
used 
to 
determine 
commonalities and differences between two structures. 
Differences can be due to the inequality of intensity of 
muscle for both sides. 
Hence, the evaluation of commonalities gives raise of the 
structural similarity and the Bell’s palsy’s recovery. The 
oriented graph or the tree can be presented as an XML 
document. Hence, patient’s arborescence is saved in the form 
of a XML document. The above figure represents a part of an 
XML document for a patient at a visit: 
 
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<Patient> 
  <Name>Jabali Mariem</Name> 
  <BirthDate>09-09-2005</BirthDate> 
  <Gender>Female</Gender> 
  <MaritalStatus>Single</MaritalStatus> 
  <Location>Borj cedria</Location> 
  <ParalyzedSide>Right</ParalyzedSide> 
  <ParalyzesCause> dropped from a height of 3 m 
</ParalyzesCause> 
  <MedicalHistory>allergic to nothing</MedicalHistory> 
  <Muscle classe="P2"> 
    <name>HED</name> 
    <Side>Right</Side> 
    <type>frontal muscle</type> 
    <intensity>45</intensity> 
  </Muscle> 
</Patient> 
 
The matching algorithm is exploited for the detection of 
the similarity of XML document. Evaluating these 
similarities is relevant for detecting the patient evolution and 
the degree of reaching of disease. Then, the similarities 
measured can be exploited for grouping together patient 
having the same characteristic. In order to obtain the best 
match between the two structures, common data contents 
must be maximal. Whereas, common data contents refer to 
same intensity if same muscle or glands for both sides: 
healthy or paralyzed. Then, we want to obtain a numeric 
value that quantifies the similarity between both sides. The 
evaluation similarity function is R. This function computes 
the ratio between the evaluations of common data contents C 
between the two structures (number of element having same 
intensity considering the error margin) and the evaluation of 
all elements A in the two structures (total number of muscles 
or glands). The obtained similarity value is a real number in 
the range [0, 1]. 
R=
 
  
R=0   if there’s no similarity between two structures then 
minimal matching then totally paralyzed. 
R=1  if there’s a perfect similarity between two structures 
then maximal matching then totally recovered. 
A set of node pairs (x, y), M is called a matching from Gp to 
Gh iff: 
 (x, y) ϵ M, x ϵ Gp, y ϵ Gh, signature (x)= signature (y) 
 Qqs (x1, y1) ϵ M and (x2, y2) ϵ M; x1=x2 iff y1=y2 
then one to one matching 
 Qqs (x, y) ϵ M suppose x1 is the parent of x 
Y1 is the parent of y 
Then x1, y1) ϵ M  M preserves ancestor relationships 
 Suppose (x1, y1) ϵ M     x1 is an ancestor of x2 iff 
            (x2, y2) ϵ M     y1 is an ancestor of y2 
There are several steps in the algorithm: 
1. Determining the signature of each nodes for both 
XML structures 
2. Determining the matching set M 
3. Generating the evaluation similarity function 
Let us present the three phases in details. 
Determining the signature of each node consists on browsing 
the XML document and for each element (muscle or gland) 
extracts the value of the attribute name and the value of the 
intensity, then concatenates them. This function returns a set 
of signature (string). 
 
Extraction Algorithm 
Input: an XML document 
Output: a set of signature 
1. Begin 
2.     For each line in the XML document 
3.     Extract element labels: name and value 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

4.     Concat two lables 
5.     Save the signature// save the signature in S 
6.     Return S 
7. End 
 
Once all signatures are obtained, the matching function is 
applied. 
 
MFGSI Algorithm 
Input: two labeled graph and two sets of signature S 
Output: a set of matching M 
1. Begin 
2. M1= {all leaf nodes in Gh} 
3. M2= {all leaf nodes in Gp} 
4. Do { 
5. For every node x in M1 
6. For every node y in M2 
 If (signature (x)= signature (y)) 
 Save matching (x,y) // save the matching in M 
7. Set M1=( parents node for previous nodes in M1} 
8. Set M2=( parents node for previous nodes in M2} 
9. }while both MA and M2 are not empty 
10. Return M 
11. End. 
 
In the case of partial matching, which refers to partial 
recovery, the algorithm may return the homomorphism sub 
graphs. By definition, given two graphs G and H as input, the 
sub graph homomorphism which are structurally and text 
similar. Analogously to Bell’s palsy, the sub graphs 
homomorphism refers to facial part which is not affected by 
the disease. Later on, these sub graphs can be used for patient 
classifications. 
C. Example 
In the following, we present an execution example for a 
patient at each medical examination. So we can see the 
patient’s state evolution through the graphs matching: 
At the first visit, doctors detect a Bell’s palsy in the left side. 
Hence, EMG is applied to both sides. As the left is affected, 
physicians use intensity computed in the right side as a 
threshold. 
Applying the algorithm we obtain this matching, matched 
nodes implies the matching of the whole trajectory from the 
root until the leaf (Muscle or glands). In this example we 
focus on the muscles. 
During the first examination, physicians detect with some 
exercises the incapability of smiling and an asymmetrical 
smile, light sensitivity, the difficulty of blinking, and 
difficulties when speaking. These muscles weakness are 
proved later using EMG. Once EMG is applied, two labeled 
graphs are created, one for each side containing muscles 
characteristics which are: name and intensity. The goal is to 
find the matching set M and evaluating similarity.  
The first step is to store the muscle intensities in an XML 
file: 
 
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?> 
<Patient> 
<Name>Jabali Mariem</Name> 
<BirthDate>09-09-2005</BirthDate> 
<Gender>Female</Gender> 
<MaritalStatus>Single</MaritalStatus> 
<Location>Borj cedria</Location> 
<ParalyzedSide>Right</ParalyzedSide> 
<ParalyzesCause> dropped from a height of 3 m 
</ParalyzesCause> 
<MedicalHistory>allergic to nothing</MedicalHistory> 
<Muscle Date="January 25, 2007"> 
<name>HED</name> 
<Side>Right</Side> 
<type>ChM</type> 
<intensity>75</intensity> 
<type>EM</type> 
<intensity>50</intensity> 
<type>EyM</type> 
<intensity>35</intensity> 
<type>FM</type> 
<intensity>30</intensity> 
</Muscle> 
</Patient> 
 
Then, we compare the muscles intensities. To do this, 
signature of each muscle has to be created on which then the 
comparison is based. 
The sets of signature: 
 S1={ChM75, EM50, EyM35, FM30, HAM76, LLD98, 
LLM81, MAD87, MZM95, NeM54, NoM90, NsM91, 
PoAM110, PrAM135, RM78, TM70, ULM53, SZM76, 
WM100} 
S2={ChM88, EM101, EyM90, FM94, HAM76, LLD120, 
LLM121, MAD86, MZM93, NeM92, NoM87, NsM88, 
PoAM105, PrAM132, RM76, TM78, ULM88, SZM101, 
WM96} 
These two sets M1 and M2 are the input of the matching 
algorithm added to the two labeled graphs. When the 
algorithm is over, we obtain as output a set of matching: 
M={{ChM75,ChM88};{HAM76,HAM76}; 
{MAD87,MAD86};{MzM95,MzM93};{NoM90,NoM87}; 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

{NsM91,NsM88};{PoAM110,PoAM}; 
{PrAM135,PrAM132};{RM78,RM78};{WM100, WM96}} 
Then 
the 
ratio 
of 
similarity 
is 
computed: 
  
                               
                       
= 
  
  = 0.52 
This ratio determine the gravity of Bell’s palsy, in this case 
the patient have a paralysis with 0.52 gravity. 
In addition to the sets of matching, we can display the 
matching using graphs as shown in Figure 3: 
 
Figure 3. Matching between healthy and paralyzed side 
This algorithm is applied at every medical examination. 
At the second one, we keep the same sets of matching by 
adding some couples recovered after treatments. 
M= M U {{FM94, FM94}; {EyM90, EyM90}; {EM50, 
EM50}; {ULM89, ULM88}; {SzM101, SzM101}} 
R= 
  
   = 0.78 
Finally, at final medical examination, which corresponds 
to a totally recovered patients we have all nodes matched and 
a ratio equal to 1. 
Collecting ratios computed at each medical examination, 
it can show the disease gravity evolution through the time. 
This is explained by a designed using Matlab in Figure 4: 
 
Figure 4. Disease Gravity Evolution 
IV. FANI ALGORITHM VS. FAN ALGORITHM 
For FAN Algorithm [1], for each execution, it has as 
input a graph G refers to the facial nerve structure and a table 
containing muscles or glands intensities and their thresholds. 
As output we display and store a colored graph indicating the 
recovery process. In terms of spatial and temporal 
complexity this can costs a lot. The temporal and spatial 
complexity when dealing with trees depends on the number 
of nodes. Suppose V nodes’ number; the complexity is   , 
hence this complexity is exponential. We aim in this part to 
optimize the complexity of the previously proposed 
algorithm.  
The storage of patients’ trees is expensive in terms of 
spatial complexity due to the data structure used and a high 
time complexity when following the entire route of the trees 
at each medical examination. Knowing that all patients have 
the same facial nerve structure so same tree structure, the 
differences on the trees are localized at the last layer. This 
layer consists of trees’ leaves: muscle or glands and their 
characteristics. Among the characteristics, the most 
important one are muscles or glands name and intensities. 
For coping to the complexity issue and based on structure 
commonalities and differences, the solution is to store one 
and only one generic tree without her last layer, which means 
without leaves which refers to muscles or glands. For 
muscles or glands, storage is done in forms of table 
containing muscle name and intensities.  
For each patient and at each medical examination, an 
intensities table is stored containing muscle or glands 
intensity and the examination date, and then comparison is 
between two tables of two different consecutive medical 
examinations. Hence, once the visualization process is 
triggered, the tree is created by combining two parts: the 
common part that is saved to the generic structure and the 
table containing the intensities representing the leaves of this 
tree. Thanks to this storage, the complexity of intensities 
complexity has decreased from an exponential to a linear 
complexity: from O (   ) to O (V) with v is nodes’ number. 
Following these changes, the FAN algorithm has 
evolved. It takes as input two intensities table: T1 and T2; T1 
contains the intensities of the paralyzed side and T2 contains 
the intensities of the healthy side called the threshold. Than 
the comparison is based on those two tables. Once, the user 
wants to see the patient’s state, the generic graph is 
concatenated with muscles stored in table 1 and based on the 
comparison the colored graph is displayed; so the backup is 
only for tables containing intensities and threshold. 
The algorithm is as follows: 
 
Algorithm FANI  
Input: Table1, Table2 
Output: a colored graph 
1. Begin 
2. Compare ( Table1, Table2) 
3. Concat ( GenericGraph, Table 1) 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

4. For each leaf in graph 
5. Color_trajectory( leaf, root, red) 
6. Color_trajectory( leaf, root, green) 
7. End. 
 
For each patient and for each medical examination an 
intensities table is stored: 
Algorithm Storage 
1. Begin 
2. For each medical examination 
3. Compute intensities 
4. Save in Table1 
5. Compute muscle threshold 
6. Save in Table2 
7. Return Table1, Table2 
8. End. 
 
EXAMPLE: 
We took the same case presented above in the matching 
theory.  
The intensities computed are stored under this format: the 
intensities are ordered in an alphabetical order of muscles: 
ChM 
EM 
EyM 
FM 
HAM 
LLD 
LLM 
MAD 
MZM 
NeM 
 
NoM 
NsM 
PoAM 
PrAM 
RM 
TM 
ULM 
SZM 
WM 
 
Once the EMG technique is applied to all facial muscles; 
we obtain these values stored in two different tables. Each 
one for a special sides: paralyzed that will serve for 
comparison and healthy which will serve as threshold. 
 
75 
50 
35 
30 
76 
98 
81 
87 
95 
54 
 
90 
91 
110 
135 
78 
70 
53 
76 
100 
 
 
88 
101 
90 
94 
76 
120 
121 
86 
93 
92 
 
87 
88 
105 
132 
76 
78 
88 
101 
96 
 
To supervise the patients’ state, the colored graphs can be 
displayed in order of medical examinations. 
 
  
 
25 January 2007 
25 February 2007 
24 March 2007 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Bell’s palsy disease is the origin of a physical suffering, 
and has an emotional and psychological impact on patients. 
To contribute in the improvements of treatments and analysis 
automation, we proposed clear and concise modeling, we 
also represent it using a graph leading to track facial nerve 
dream and to determine by the way patients’ recovery 
progress and eventual conduction problems to be solved 
thanks to observation. This is ensured thanks to an algorithm 
based on matching theory which produces as output 
similarities between graphs and the disease gravity. 
Future work will focus on integrating manipulated data 
resulting from treatments performed on various patients by a 
range of physicians in a various health care institutions. This, 
obviously, will enhance analysis and large-scale exploitation 
of these data which is difficult and complex. 
REFERENCES  
 [1] J. Akaichi, H. Bouali, and Z. Dhouioui, “Facial nerve stream trajectory 
data modelling and visualization,” Worldcomp Conference, Las Vegas 
Nevada USA, pp.101-105, July 2011. 
[2] S. KHuller, “Hopcroft–Karp matching algorithm,” Lecture 6 in CMSC 
Advanced Algorithms, February 2002. 
[3] A. Haloui and S.Wang, “A new algorithm for graph matching with 
application to content based on image retrieval,” International 
Workshop on Structural, Syntactic, and Statistical Pattern Recognition, 
Canada, pp.291-300, 2002. 
[4] D. Remco, D. Marlon, and G. Luciano, “Graph matching algorithm for 
business process model similarity search,” BPM '09 Proceedings of the 
7th International Conference on Business Process Management, 
Germany, pp.58-63, 2009. 
[5] K. Mehlhorn and U. Meyer, “External-Memory Breadth-First Search 
with Sublinear I/O,” ALGORITHMS — ESA, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Rome, Italy, vol. 2461/2002, pp.21-26, 2002 
[6] M.V. Ramasamy, “Ram’s Textbook of Human Anatomy for dental 
students,” Jitendar P Jaypee Brothers Medical Publisher, 2009 
[7] M. A. Eshera and K.S. Fu,” An Image Understanding System Using 
Attributed Symbolic Representation and Inexact Graph-Matching,” 
IEEE Computer Science, Poland, vol. 8 no. 5 pp. 604-618, 1986. 
[8] D. Kelly, J. Sweeney, T. Jeffrey, and K. Vrabec, “Facial Nerve 
Paralysis,” Department of Otolaryngology, UTMB, Grand Rounds, 
1996 
[9] J. Hager, “Face and gesture DAQ for Computer Scientists,” Lecture for 
the IWAFGR, France, vol. 905, pp.444,-448, 1995. 
[10] G. Hahn and G. Sabudissi, “Graph Symmetry,”  Lecture Note in 
Klewer Academic Publishers, pp.107-166, 1997. 
 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Personal and Social Communication Services for Health and Lifestyle Monitoring 
 
Jean Bacon1, Jatinder Singh1, Dirk Trossen1, Dana Pavel2, Andreas Bontozoglou2, Nikolaos Vastardis2, Kun Yang2, 
Sarah Pennington3, Sarah Clarke3, Glyn Jones3 
1Computer Lab 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
{jean.bacon, jatinder.singh, dirk.trossen}@cl.cam.ac.uk 
2School for Computer Science and Electronic Engineering,  
University of Essex, Colchester, UK 
{dmpave, abodoz, nvasta, kunyang}@essex.ac.uk 
3Thales UK Research and Technology 
Reading, UK 
{sarah.pennington, sarah.clarke, glyn.jones}@uk.thalesgroup.com 
 
Abstract—The focus of the PAL project is to study how future 
requirements for healthcare services impact current and future 
communication infrastructures. Current assisted living scenarios 
work only in restricted environments and are unable to provide 
continuous user support. Systems in this space tend to be closed, 
providing only particular functionality and/or operating on 
specific infrastructure. Our aim is to deploy appropriate 
interface and interaction paradigms, regardless of the underlying 
networking and software technologies, to enable users to achieve 
self-monitoring and self-management of their lifestyle and health. 
We also consider the integration of social and professional 
support networks, while ensuring appropriate access controls. 
This paper details a layered architecture for supporting a diverse 
range of care services. We provide an integration framework to 
demonstrate the practicality of our approach, and present results 
highlighting design considerations for user-centric care systems. 
Keywords-self-monitoring; 
lifestyle; 
healthcare; 
privacy; 
security; communications; networks; middleware 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The number of people living with long-term health 
conditions is growing as people’s lifespans increase, placing a 
heavy burden on healthcare systems and support networks. 
Data from the World Health Organization shows 75% of the 
total population with one chronic condition and 50% with two 
or more conditions [1]. The risk factors for chronic diseases are 
often related to lifestyle choices like smoking, alcohol intake, 
physical inactivity, or poor diet. Lifestyle choices have such an 
influence on health that prevention of disease through self- 
monitoring is becoming increasingly important.  
Self-monitoring systems give people additional knowledge 
to understand the effect that their actions have on their well-
being and support them in making better lifestyle choices. 
Prevention can make a real difference for the low risk category 
of patients, around 70-80% in the UK [1]; with suitable support 
and engagement they can learn how to manage their conditions 
and prevent further deterioration. 
Monitoring 
and 
communications 
technology 
have 
developed to the extent that they are potentially exploitable in 
large-scale, widespread healthcare. At the same time, people 
are becoming increasingly familiar with and accepting of a 
wide range of technologies. The time is right to consider 
technology-assisted lifestyle monitoring to help in detecting 
and preventing chronic diseases.  
Despite technological improvements, we are in danger of 
fragmentation in healthcare provisioning if the current 
approach of developing vertically separated applications 
continues. In other words, solutions tend to operate in “vertical 
silos”. As a consequence, they are typically restricted to a 
single domain, for example, working on a single device or 
within a managed network. Instead, solutions are required that 
operate across domains, be they organisational, networking, or 
even device specific. Open systems solutions must adapt to a 
variety of applications and services, through communication 
and networking layers that operate across domains. Within our 
project, entitled PAL (Personal Assisted Living), we envisage a 
multi-domain system comprising patients at home and outside, 
primary care practices, hospitals, and outsourced services (such 
as X-rays and emergency response teams), where components 
are used and reused to meet the functional requirements across 
the range of care-related applications and services. 
To make such a vision manageable we have started from a 
number of use cases that highlight the requirements motivated 
by the above: (1) Prevention of disease onset or deterioration 
through lifestyle and health monitoring; (2) Integration of 
social and professional networks; (3) Mechanisms for 
information governance; (4) Dynamic coordination of system 
components to realise functional goals; (5) Operation across 
organisational and communication domains. Section II presents 
a lead scenario to exemplify these issues, outlining the main 
challenges for developing a holistic systems solution for 
healthcare provisioning.  
We address these challenges through providing an 
integration framework, so that a range of applications can be 
deployed above a middleware layer under which a variety of 
communications technologies can operate, while supporting 
diverse device technologies. From the perspective of 
information management, our framework supports data 
recording, analysis, retention, usage and audit across the 
boundaries at the application, network and device level. From 
the (patient) users’ perspective, their data is sensitive and 
private and we support the specification and enforcement of 
security policies. Moreover, we envisage the involvement of 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

social and professional networks of carers, particularly as users 
become less able to cope alone. Controlling data access 
becomes more subtle as more users (roles) become involved.  
All of these aspects are realised in the PAL architecture 
presented in Section IV. It is this architecture and the 
presentation of its on-going realisation that is the core 
contribution of this paper. We recognise that the envisioned 
system and its early prototyping in a lifestyle management 
setting is only a first step towards an integrating framework for 
the healthcare application industry. We believe, however, that 
our work can provide useful insights in the relevant areas of 
development. In addition to our integration approach, we also 
outline experiences with certain aspects of a working system 
that we built based on our approach. We outline important 
aspects regarding the system components that we implemented 
and present first results from user experiments. 
We begin with a scenario to highlight the challenges in 
provisioning healthcare systems, and follow with related work. 
Section IV details our architecture, and in Section V we 
describe the realisation of our framework and present results 
illustrating design considerations for user-centric systems.  
II. 
LEAD SCENARIO AND CHALLENGES 
Let us first present our lead scenario in the area of lifestyle 
management. We will use this scenario to highlight the various 
challenges that exist for realising a system-wide solution for 
healthcare provisioning. 
A. Lead scenario 
Oscar is a patient-user who has chronic heart disease and 
needs to pay attention to his wellbeing. His related blood 
pressure issues make him susceptible to fainting. Since he was 
diagnosed, Oscar started using the PAL system to collect 
information about his daily activities, and physiological data 
relevant to his condition. PAL provides Oscar with support 
within a preventative mode as well as a reactive mode. In the 
preventative mode, the system allows Oscar to track his 
wellbeing by interpreting and visualising collected data in 
personalised ways. It also allows Oscar to share certain 
information with his support network (e.g., family, friends or 
healthcare specialists).  In the reactive mode, the system can 
provide emergency support, e.g., during an fainting episode. 
B. Main system challenges 
Self-monitoring is all about information pertaining to an 
individual. We therefore divide the system challenges into the 
dimensions of gathering and providing information throughout 
the system, processing and using the information, as well as 
governing the information according to defined policies.   
When gathering and providing information throughout any 
self-monitoring system, it is important to recognise that 
assisted living data may be collected from a wide variety of 
sources. Multiple types of data may originate from various user 
devices, such as mobile phones, laptops, PCs, body sensors and 
environmental sensors. The information used may include 
location, movement, ECG, heart rate, environmental context 
(e.g., noise levels, temperature, weather, pollen levels, etc.), 
social context, messages, calendar events, and many more. In 
addition, available knowledgebase sources, such as NHS Direct 
[3], could be integrated into the processing step, i.e., gathered 
information is aggregated and interpreted through wider 
community knowledge. Each data source may play a role in 
meeting a number of functional goals, across a range of 
applications; for instance, an ECG sensor may provide 
information relevant to applications for a patient-user when 
exercising, their GP for analysis/diagnostic purposes, and for 
paramedics in dealing with an emergency. The relevance of 
information to applications will vary, depending on the 
circumstances. As described in our lead scenario, we consider 
two usage modes: preventative and reactive. Due to the 
different requirements, the preventative mode focuses more on 
storage, high-level processing, visualisation, and policies for 
sharing and remote access. Given the plethora of information 
being gathered in the preventative usage mode, understanding 
the information is particularly challenging for system users. 
Hence, any visualisation needs to go beyond traditional graph-
based approaches to achieve the awareness that our users need.   
 The reactive mode is mainly concerned with reconfiguring 
data streams at runtime, respecting the various control policies 
as well as the heterogeneity of the underlying infrastructure. 
For the latter aspect, it is particularly important to avoid 
restricting any solution to single domains but rather to work 
over a variety of available communication technologies as they 
happen to be available. This requires that the supporting 
communication infrastructure facilitates information exchange 
between a wide range of data sources and sinks in a dynamic, 
context-aware, and multi-domain manner. For that, knowledge 
of network capabilities, such as availability, link failures, etc., 
is crucial. While this information is not used directly by end 
users, it is important for the provisioning of seamless services, 
for example when users move from indoors to outside or when 
patients move between areas with variable connectivity. 
Clearly, heterogeneity places a heavy burden on any 
application that is directly exposed to these issues. Hence, 
abstracting the communication specifics through a common 
interface is important, aiding the re-use of functional 
components across use cases. The level of abstraction that a 
healthcare application shall be built upon is that of information 
flows that can be controlled in terms of gathering, processing 
and usage, all under a common policy framework that defines 
the security properties of the information flow. Such a policy 
governance framework is important, given the personal nature 
of the information considered in our scenarios. While 
encryption of information is important, governance extends to 
context-aware policies defining access to flows of information 
(even if encrypted), forming appropriate communication 
relations (e.g., between doctors and care personnel), and the 
ability to override standard policy (e.g., in cases of emergency).   
We now present a brief overview of related work before 
outlining our architecture, focusing on information gathering, 
provisioning, processing, presentation and governance.   
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Self-monitoring solutions of different kinds have been well 
studied in academia and corporate research during the past 
years, with areas such as health and telemetry [9][10] being 
well represented within the commercial space. Some examples 
are movement and fall detection systems, such as WristCare 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[11], SenseWear BMS [12], Philips LifeLine [13] and the 
Wellcore Emergency Response System [14], or heart 
monitoring solutions such as t+ blood pressure [15], 
HealthBuddy [16], and CardioNet [17]. For most of the 
existing solutions, data is stored on a remote/central server and 
analysed by professionals; in some cases patients might be able 
to add certain notes, symptoms, and so on, and receive 
feedback from medical staff. Mostly, the systems are integrated 
into a purpose-built device, while mobile phones are merely 
used as an interface device, to input data or to receive alerts.  
With the availability of sensors such as the Alive Heart and 
Activity Monitor [18] that can be connected via Bluetooth to 
recording devices, such as mobiles or laptops, mobile devices 
can also be used for providing self-monitoring solutions. For 
example, MobiHealth provides a suite of physiological data 
recording through mobile phones [19], where various sensors 
can connect to the phone and use it to transmit data to a server. 
As smartphones become increasingly popular, and already 
include sensors such as GPS and accelerometer, fitness and 
assistance applications are appearing (e.g., iFall for Android 
[20], Sports Tracker for Symbian [21], or Endomondo [22]). 
Common to all these related approaches is the purpose-built 
nature of their solutions. What is lacking is a system approach 
that addresses our identified challenges from Section II through 
a coherent and holistic design. The following Section IV 
outlines our contribution to providing such a system solution.  
IV. 
PAL SYSTEM 
A. System Architecture 
The PAL core architecture follows a traditional layered 
structure where the middleware masks details of the underlying 
communications by presenting a communication interface to 
components that run above it. Although such a middleware can 
support applications directly, we have developed an additional 
lifestyle assistant layer capable of providing a higher-level 
interface 
to 
support 
users 
during 
self-monitoring 
in 
preventative mode. Other applications can coexist with the 
lifestyle manager by working directly above the middleware 
layer, so the infrastructure is generally suitable for supporting 
pervasive healthcare environments. For example, during 
reactive mode, external components are coordinated to respond 
to an emergency situation, as later described. 
 
Figure 1. High-level component view of the system. 
 
Figure 1 presents a high-level view of our system. In 
addition to the traditional layered components—the application 
(the lifestyle assistant), middleware and communication 
layers—we highlight the integration of information, its 
structures and its governing policies across all levels, from the 
user level right down to the communication and routing levels. 
Based on this integration framework, we provide in Section V 
an example of a working system that we realised alongside our 
lead scenario of lifestyle management. In addition to the 
realisation of our framework, we also outline first experiences 
that end users had with this system.  
B. Information gathering and provisioning 
In our system, much data is provided by sensors—physical 
(e.g., body or environmental sensors), or virtual (e.g., activity 
information derived from calendars, social interactions, 
application usage)—within a heterogeneous environment (see 
[2][7][7] for more information on gathering capabilities).  
To assist in managing the diversity of sensor-produced 
data, PAL uses a gateway-based design, in which sensing 
gateways encapsulate the specifics of the particular data to be 
integrated, such as the implementation of a wireless sensing 
protocol, and/or access to a particular database or converting 
low-level sensor data into a format that can be understood by 
other components in the system. A gateway is therefore 
responsible for a first level of filtering and abstraction of 
information. In practice, the scope of each gateway will depend 
on the particular sensors involved: some gateways might 
operate to manage, aggregate and transmit the data of a number 
of different sensors and/or sensor networks, while others may 
be comparatively lightweight, e.g., tied to a particular sensor, 
such that it appears as though the sensor directly interacts with 
other components in the system. Once data has been gathered 
from various sources, information is provisioned for processing 
and presentation. Data must flow to a range of different 
applications and components in order to achieve particular 
functional goals. Since healthcare is a highly data-driven 
environment, we provision information as events that are 
relevant to other components. An event can encapsulate health-
related information, including observations such as sensor 
readings, doctors' notes or a perceived emergency; as well as 
actions, such as the press of a panic button. Clearly, events will 
be relevant to a range of different applications/components, as 
appropriate to the particular circumstances.  
Middleware provides a layer of indirection between 
applications/services and the underlying infrastructure. The 
role of the middleware is to facilitate interoperability, to 
provide a reliable mechanism for the exchange of information 
between system components and services. In PAL, we extend 
StreamBUS (SBUS) [4], which is a middleware for managing 
the exchange of messages (encapsulating events/data) between 
system components. SBUS was specifically designed for 
managing streams, enabling dynamic system reconfiguration 
(connections/disconnections and altering privileges), and 
providing 
content-based 
publish/subscribe 
semantics. 
However, it aims to be all-encompassing, by also supporting 
more 
traditional 
client-server 
(RPC)-based 
interaction 
paradigms (see Figure 2). This is important, as communications 
middleware supporting pervasive healthcare environments 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

must provide for a number of interaction types, to enable a 
wide range of application-level functionality. 
Each application/service in the system becomes an SBUS 
component, 
leaving 
the 
middleware 
to 
manage 
the 
communication concerns on its behalf. Data is encapsulated in 
typed messages (representing events), which are transmitted to 
other components in the system. The middleware ensures type-
safe communication, and enables content-based filters to be 
imposed on communication channels. From an architectural 
perspective, much of the provisioning is implemented in the 
middleware using a publish/subscribe semantic, meaning that 
communication encapsulates the events themselves. 
 
Figure 2. SBUS Interaction Paradigms. 
 
Middleware is a natural point for policy management and 
enforcement, as it is independent of specific application and 
network concerns. From the middleware perspective, policy 
concerns dynamic reconfiguration in response to particular 
changes in circumstance: specifically, initiating/terminating 
data flows and/or changing privileges. In environments, such as 
assisted living, that consist of many data sources, forcing each 
application to initiate and manage its interactions quickly 
becomes infeasible (hence the application-specific silos of 
today). It follows that management increasingly concerns 
coordination: 
where 
particular 
circumstances 
(events) 
determine the interactions between applications. Policy 
operates to dictate how/when particular system components 
should (or should not) interact to meet the functional goals of a 
range of applications. In our infrastructure, we have developed 
a policy engine to manage these concerns. We implement a 
policy engine within database infrastructure (PostgreSQL), 
where policy is encapsulated in a set of rules (triggers). A rule 
is (automatically) executed on a particular change in context, 
which can operate to: a) raise an alert; b) effect a middleware 
reconfiguration (e.g. alter a privilege or connection); and/or c) 
change the active rule set (e.g. to enable a different set of 
governance policies to apply in an emergency situation). 
As illustrated in Figure 1, immediately below the 
middleware layer is the PAL communication infrastructure. It 
is composed of two key functional sub-systems: session 
management and inter-networking. Session management 
ensures that an assisted living application session (e.g., an ECG 
stream) is kept running continuously when the application 
device switches from one wireless network to another (e.g., 
from an indoor WiFi to an outdoor 3G base station) due to user 
mobility and changes in network availability. The ultimate goal 
is to provide always-on connectivity to mobile clients, if/when 
required. For this, we consider an environment where different 
types of wireless networks co-exist. Typically, when the point 
of attachment changes, the device’s address will also change, 
and as a result the application session is dropped. To solve this 
problem, a medium-independent gateway (MIG) has been 
designed to switch between different types of networks while 
ensuring session continuity. The essence of the MIG is a 
tunneling technology which hides any network interface 
(Layers 1, 2) and IP (Layer 3) changes from the upper layers, 
thus providing a virtual always-on available gateway. Such a 
tunnel enables the mobile device to physically join networks 
that belong to different administration domains without 
interrupting any on-going connections/flows. This method 
effectively simulates the behaviour of Mobile IP (MIP) [5] 
where a Home Agent (HA) is used instead of a tunnel end-
point. An algorithm is implemented that carries out network 
selection based on an individual network’s status such as signal 
strength, bandwidth, energy consumption, cost, etc.  
While the MIG is more concerned about heterogeneous 
wireless 
access 
networks, 
the 
PAL 
communication 
infrastructure also addresses wired core networks. In particular, 
a clean-slate approach to internetworking called Information 
Centric Networking (ICN) [6] is adopted as an IP alternative. 
Its key task is to conduct route calculation and packet 
forwarding that directly operates on information items rather 
than endpoint addresses. The ICN software used is called 
Blackadder [23], which was developed in the context of the EU 
project PURSUIT [6]. Blackadder has been slightly tailored in 
terms of network interfaces and integration with the MIG to 
accommodate the PAL requirements. Specifically, we 
developed a link-aware topology manager (TM) that makes use 
of network link status information to assist route calculation. 
The calculated routing paths connect the sources of the 
information (publishers) with the destinations (subscribers) 
utilizing the underling publish-subscribe semantic of ICN. The 
key 
contribution 
here 
lies 
in 
enabling 
differentiated 
dissemination of information; a requirement that we see as 
important in future healthcare environments. For instance, in 
cases where certain information, such as heart rate, is deemed 
more critical than others, an information-centric approach to 
infrastructure 
allows 
for 
differentiating 
this 
specific 
information compared from other, less important, without 
resorting to cost-intensive solutions such as deep packet 
inspection (DPI). In addition, the focus on information 
dissemination in contrast to endpoint connectivity (as in the 
current IP-based Internet) allows for realising scenarios where 
applications are primarily concerned with receiving particular 
information rather than connecting to a specific source for this 
information. For instance, an application can simply request 
heart rate data rather than discovering the particular sources 
(and the specifics that are concerned with contacting these 
sources) that might potentially provide heart rate data. Hence, 
we believe that such an information-centric infrastructure 
approach greatly enhances the capabilities of application 
developers through providing an information-centric interface 
for information-rich use cases. 
C. Information processing and presentation 
In pervasive care environments, information will be 
relevant to a number of different applications and system 
components, that use data in a variety of ways, e.g. for 
processing, aggregation, storage, presentation, etc. Sometimes 
information can be provisioned in its original form (as 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

produced by the information source), but often it requires 
further processing in order to fit its intended purpose.  
In our preventative scenario, further processing of the 
information collected is vital so that Oscar can more easily 
understand what happens during each day based on data 
collected. A different kind of processing is required when 
certain information is shared with other parties within his 
support network. For the PAL lifestyle assistant application, we 
use context type-based information processing, which groups 
the various sensors into several main categories: emotional, 
social, availability, mental (interest), activity, physical/spatial 
and temporal. Within each context dimension, we use a rule-
based system that can convert recorded data into high-level 
information based on various expert or individual experience-
based knowledge bases. Additionally, the patient-users can 
provide their own interpretations either during the recording 
(i.e., through phone widgets) or later, at the time of 
visualisation. 
Collected data forms the basis for various visualisations 
created to help users understand causal relations between their 
actions and their wellbeing. Such visualisations present 
information at various levels: detailed (e.g., timeline graphs), 
summarised (e.g., word clouds for text-based data), and 
correlated abstractions. The last type is a novel type of 
visualisation we have developed inspired by human storytelling 
[7]. For that, we process information along a story line by 
bringing all available (and processed) information together in 
order to create a summarised (and more engaging) view of the 
important events during a day. Figure 3 shows an example of 
an event within a daily story.  
 
Figure 3. Example of an event within a story. 
 
By providing multiple levels of detail within visualisations, 
we created a system that can support various types of user 
interactions and purposes. For example, while a story can show 
the main events during a day, the user (either as patient or 
healthcare specialist) can use detailed visualisations to focus on 
specific aspects, such as heart rate variations over time, social 
interactions over time and in certain locations, and so on. 
 Within the reactive scenarios, the coordination of 
applications and services underpins information processing and 
presentation. In PAL, we use the dynamic capabilities of SBUS 
to connect system components as appropriate to achieve 
particular functional goals. For instance, should a carer wish to 
visualise a patient’s live heart rate data, their (presentation) 
application must be able to find and connect to the relevant 
ECG stream. Sensor streams might also need to be directed to 
an inference engine to detect a change in state and raise alerts; 
e.g. when Oscar has fainted and not moved.  Some connections 
might be triggered by policy, e.g., automatically connecting an 
emergency service to a patient’s data streams (e.g. location, 
vital-signs) in situations of a perceived emergency. 
D. Information governance 
Personal information is inherently sensitive. Therefore, we 
must protect data at all system levels. The patient must be able 
to describe the circumstances in which particular information is 
disclosed to particular parties. Such policy is context-sensitive, 
as restrictions will often vary according to circumstance.  
For the scenarios of both modes to work, subsets of Oscar’s 
records need to be available to a number of different groups. 
These may include families, friends and neighbours, local GP 
practices, hospitals, paramedics and ambulance crews. 
Members of each group should have access only to the 
appropriate parts of the records and only for the appropriate 
length of time. Health and welfare records may include many 
different items in many formats, e.g. emails, photos, sensor 
readings. To deal with this, PAL applies protection directly to 
the items of sensitive data. These protected items can then be 
safely stored and transported on any medium as the data 
remains safe wherever it is, such as on servers, wired or 
wireless connections or stored on a disk or USB devices. 
Access to the data is controlled according to policies defined 
by Oscar and enforced using policy based authorisation.  This 
allows them to share his records while maintaining control over 
who can see them and under what circumstances.  
 
Figure 4. Token-based security mechanism 
 
PAL users are identified within the system by using a token 
asserting the user’s identity and attributes (e.g., a role). Tokens 
are issued by the Security Token Server (see Figure 4) once the 
user has been authenticated.  When a user has a token they can 
obtain Oscar’s data by connecting to a (live) data stream or by 
searching a Secure Data Server for archived data.  The data is 
protected by encryption and the decryption key must be 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

retrieved from the Authorisation Server.  The Authorisation 
Server will check the credentials contained in the user’s token 
and the information about the data object against the set of 
security policies.  Access to the data will only be granted if the 
policy conditions are satisfied. A decryption key will then be 
returned to the user and they can decrypt the object and access 
the data. Since many parties are producing and consuming data 
within PAL, the system has been designed to operate within 
more than one administrative domain. Each domain can 
contain an instance of the components described above. 
In addition to encryption, policy operates at runtime to 
govern information exchange. Each component maintains 
access control policy dictating the components with which it 
may interact. The SBUS middleware enables these privileges 
to be dynamically changed, which allows, for example, the 
relaxation restrictions in an emergency. Further, dynamically 
enforced policy enables granular, context-based control. For 
instance, policy might dictate that a homecare nurse is 
automatically disconnected from a patient’s data streams when 
she physically leaves the patient’s home. Both of these features 
are implemented by a dedicated, patient-centric policy engine 
that operates to trigger SBUS reconfigurations in response to 
changes in circumstance. 
Patients undoubtedly have specific concerns, e.g., that their 
location should be hidden in normal circumstances, or that a 
GP cannot access their data unless explicitly authorised. 
However, it is unrealistic, if not dangerous, to expect a 
patient/user to define all situations in which disclosure is 
appropriate. This is because the typical patient will neither 
have the knowledge nor expertise to precisely determine the 
information relevant to each party. In practice, we expect that 
disclosure policy will be influenced by care providers, possibly 
through the use of policy templates that describe particular 
interactions. Any involved party is implicitly responsible for 
protecting health information, and thus must adhere to any 
specific patient preferences. 
V. 
BRINGING THE PIECES TOGETHER 
So far, within our project, we have focused on designing, 
developing and testing the main system components and 
functionality needed to realise the two main scenario modes 
(preventative and reactive) as well as the security and privacy 
framework described above. Our current work is to bring such 
pieces together within a combined prototype, following the 
integration framework. Here, we present details of our existing 
working system components and certain relevant results 
collected through our user-based experiments. 
A. The Lifestyle Management System 
Following the preventative part of our lead scenario, we 
developed a lifestyle management system that collects, 
processes and visualises various types of user information. For 
realising the system, we use various input sources for obtaining 
valuable information about a user’s lifestyle. The recording 
scenarios had to reflect real lives as much as possible; therefore 
we considered a mixture of mobile and stationary sources, such 
as mobile phone, desktop, laptop, wearable physiological 
sensors and content servers. Through such sources, we are able 
to collect a large variety of information, as shown in Figure 5. 
It is important to note that the types of information 
considered within a specific scenario highly depend on user 
preferences and constraints, the available sources within certain 
scenarios as well as on the relevance of information to such 
scenarios. A large amount of information is collected through 
the AIRS (Android Remote Sensing) platform [7], which 
benefited from our user-based experiments to extend towards 
incorporating more sensors as well as user-based annotations 
for mood and important events. 
 
Figure 5. Information and sources. 
 
The gathered data is secured and stored in a user-controlled 
database. Given that our solution is currently not embedded 
into a particular healthcare environment, the security token 
framework described in Section IV.D was not integrated. 
Our system processes the gathered information along the 
context dimensions mentioned in Section IV.C for determining, 
for instance, activity, location, or environment information. 
This processing directly supports the visualisations towards the 
end user, both at detailed and abstract level. For this, the story-
based approach presented in Section IV.C is realised (with 
Figure 3 showing an example story fragment). In addition, we 
allow end users to view detailed information at various levels, 
such as ambient noise level over time, crowdedness as 
determined by Bluetooth-enabled devices around and so on. 
The end users can have access to their data (either recorded or 
obtained on-demand) through a blog-based interface. This 
‘diary’ style of visualisation lends itself to a natural form of 
end user interaction, allowing for the selection of particular 
days, archiving by month or amending gathered information 
with personal entries. 
In addition to the preventative part of our lead use case, we 
also realised certain aspects of the reactive side, such as the 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

information routing at middleware and infrastructure level (see 
Section IV.B). Hence, we utilise the information routing 
approaches, either through the SBUS middleware over an IP 
infrastructure or through directly routing on information within 
an information-centric networking test bed. We furthermore 
use our communication component of Section IV.B to ensure 
continuous connectivity in cases where individual networks 
become unavailable. This is important in particular for mobile 
scenarios. We also integrated this solution with the endpoint-
oriented security component as shown in Section IV.D. With 
this, we can demonstrate the secure streaming of, say ECG 
data, from a patient to an emergency response center without 
connectivity disruption (if alternative connectivity is available, 
of course). 
B. Insights from User Experiments 
In order to better understand how to design and build 
systems such as proposed in this paper, we have performed 
various user-based experiments aimed at giving us more insight 
into: (1) what information is considered useful; (2) how 
information should be shown; (3) what interactions should be 
used. The experiments were both survey-based (online 
questionnaire) and hands-on. The online survey tested relations 
between people that reflect on causes for certain important 
aspects of their wellbeing, such as stress, and their attitude 
towards systems as described here. The participants were 
invited through various means (university staff and student 
mailing lists, Facebook and LinkedIn contacts, PAL project, 
etc.). As background, we consider participants’ experience with 
self-monitoring systems and their attitude towards self-
reflection more important than technological abilities or age.  
The results included here are based on 38 participants, 7 
with previous experience with self-monitoring, 29 without and 
2 that did not specify. The participants were introduced to the 
preventative part of our demonstrator system from the 
beginning, through a stress-related usage scenario and a high-
level system description.  They were asked if they would find 
such a system useful for self-reflection. Encouragingly, 63% of 
all participants answered positively. We were particularly 
interested in how people we considered more self-reflective 
(i.e., people that think back often and think why something 
happened) feel about the system and 76% said they would find 
such system useful. Out of the people that answered positively, 
74% had no previous experience with self-monitoring systems. 
Next, we asked if they would like a story-based representation 
created by the system based on their recorded data (we used a 
concept movie containing a day story built from events similar 
to Figure 3). 83.3% of the people that said they would find the 
system useful said they would like such interface. We also 
asked if they would like to customise their story. 95% of the 
ones that like both the system and the story answered 
positively, with most people wanting to customise characters, 
places, emotional states, and activities. 
  We further conducted a series of dedicated experiments 
with 6 unpaid volunteers (ages between 20 and 80) that aimed 
at finding out what people consider interesting in their daily 
activities For that, the users were asked to use digital 
annotation means we provided (a binary event button on the 
Alive heart monitor and, later, AIRS-provided phone widgets: 
small interface elements that allow interaction with an 
application without brining it to the foreground) in order to 
mark when something they considered interesting enough to be 
reflected within their lifestyle management system happened or 
was about to happen. 
Essential in understanding how systems like ours should be 
created is that every user stated that they expect their interest in 
certain types of information to change within the various 
situations experienced during the day as well as over time and 
with increased system usage. Hence, it is expected that the 
system would provide end users with means to customise their 
stories over time, both in terms of what they include and in 
terms of how they look. This would allow them to better 
understand what could be of interest for them in ways that they 
have not thought of before. Part of this aspect of configurability 
also includes that each user wants to be in control of what is 
recorded.  Also, being able to change their preferences over 
time allows a change of focus.  
As a result of our experiments we have already added 
several new features to our system, such as the phone-based 
widgets used for annotating an event with user’s own meaning 
and another widget that allows users to set their current mood. 
We consider such features essential for a system like ours, as 
the automatic inference processes would probably not be able 
to (always) capture the meaning of why an event was 
interesting (e.g., is it because the user is in a certain place, or in 
a certain situation, such as meeting). It is worth noting that 
users still highlighted the need for faster annotation through 
dedicated hardware in some scenarios.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Pervasive 
healthcare 
systems 
face 
many 
real-life 
deployment challenges that are rarely or poorly addressed. This 
often leads to disruptions in end user experiences or imposing 
system constraints, leading to single device or single network 
solutions. We believe that providing solutions only for bespoke 
use cases will prevent the wide adoption of healthcare solutions 
in the future. It is here where our main contribution lies, 
namely to outline system-wide challenges for healthcare 
provisioning systems that are addressed through an open, 
systemic and holistic approach. The resulting PAL system 
operates over a variety of communication infrastructure 
solutions. It abstracts the specifics of the infrastructure through 
a unifying middleware, and is able to support the functional 
requirements of a wide-range of applications.  
At the application-level, we have shown how the lifestyle 
assistant enables the users of the system to better understand 
the plethora of available data, by employing novel visualisation 
approaches that extend detailed graph-based information 
through story-telling approaches that are engaging and 
summarising. All of this is achieved within a framework for 
information governance that takes into account the private and 
sensitive nature of the information involved. Although our 
intention is not to build specific diagnostic tools, the lifestyle 
assistant supports patients in reflecting on their activity history 
and also assists more formal care processes; thus providing 
insights for healthcare systems in general.   
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

In our future work, we will investigate the possibilities for 
conducting detailed studies relating to different aspects of the 
system, such as visualisation or the security framework. We 
will also continue to work with funding agencies to incorporate 
the lessons learned into future system requirements.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
PAL is funded by the TSB and EPSRC under grant 
numbers TP/AN072C, TS/H000062/1 and TS/H000186/1. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
UK Department of Health, “Improving Chronic Disease Management,” 
Report, 2004. 
[2] 
D. Trossen and D. Pavel, “NORS: An Open Source Platform to 
Facilitate Participatory Sensing with Mobile Phones,” International 
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking and 
Services (MOBIQUITOUS 2007), pp. 1-8, August 2007. 
[3] 
NHS Direct, http://www.nhsdirect.nhs.uk, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[4] 
D. Ingram, “Reconfigurable Middleware for High Availability Sensor 
Systems”,  Proc. ACM Distributed Event-Based Systems DEBS09,  
Nashville, TN, USA, pp. 20:1-20:11, July  2009. 
[5] 
C. E. Perkins, “IP Mobility Support for IPv4, Revised,” Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF), 2010. 
[6] 
EU FP7 Project PURSUIT,  http://www.fp7-pursuit.eu, [retrieved: Sept, 
2012]. 
[7] 
D. Pavel, V. Callaghan and A. K. Dey, “From self-monitoring to self-
understanding: Going beyond physiological sensing for supporting 
wellbeing”. International Workshop on Pervasive Computing Paradigms 
for Mental Health (MindCare 2011), Pervasive Health 2011, Dublin, pp. 
312 -315, May 2011. 
[8] 
AIRS: 
An 
Android-based 
Sensing 
Platform: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.airs, [retrieved: Sept, 
2012]. 
[9] 
D. Trossen, D. Pavel, J. Singh, J. Bacon and K. M. Guild, “Information-
centric Pervasive Healthcare Platforms”, Proceedings of 4th International 
Conference on Pervasive Health, Munich, pp. 1-4, March 2010. 
[10] IBM, “MQ Telemetry Transport (MQTT)”,  http://mqtt.org/, [retrieved: 
Sept, 2012]. 
[11] WristCare: http://www.istsec.fi/eng/Emikakoti.htm, [retrieved: Sept, 
2012]. 
[12] SenseWear,  http://sensewear.bodymedia.com/, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[13] Philips Lifeline Solutions, http://www.lifelinesys.com/content/home, 
[retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[14] Wellcore 
Emergency 
Response 
System 
solutions, 
at 
http://www.wellcore.com/, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[15] OBS, at http://www.obsmedical.com/products, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[16] Bosch Healthbuddy, http://www.bosch-
telehealth.com/en/us/products/health_buddy/health_buddy.html, 
[retrieved: Sept, 2012] 
[17] CardioNet 
Solutions, 
 
http://www.cardionet.com/patients_01.htm, 
[retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[18] Alive 
Technologies, 
“Alive 
Heart 
and 
Activity 
Monitor”, 
http://www.alivetec.com/products.htm, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[19] MobiHealth, http://www.mobihealth.com, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[20] iFall, http://www.imedicalapps.com/2010/04/ifall-android-medical-app/, 
[retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[21] Sportstracker, http://www.sports-tracker.com/, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[22] Endomondo, http://www.endomondo.com, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[23] D. Trossen and G. Parisis, “Designing and Realizing an Information-
Centric Internet,” IEEE Communications  Μagazine, Special Issue on 
Information-centric Networking, pp. 60-67, July 2012. 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Development of an e-Healthcare System for
University Students
Yoshiro Imai
Graduate School of Engineering
Kagawa University
2217-20 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
e-mail: imai@eng.kagawa-u.ac.jp
Eiichi Miyazaki
Faculty of Education
Kagawa University
1-1 Saiwai-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
miya@ed.kagawa-u.ac.jp
Hiroshi Kamano, Tomomi Mori
Health Center
Kagawa University
2-1 Saiwai-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
{kamano@cc, mori@ao}.kagawa-u.ac.jp
Hironari Kohno, Kayo Ikeshita, Mitsunori Sugihara
Plan and Design Section of Medical IT LAboratory incorp.
2217-15 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
e-mail: {kohno,ikeshita.kayo,sugihara }@mitla.co.jp
Yuhko Ogata
President of Medical IT LAboratory incorp.
2217-15 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
yhuko@mitla.co.jp
Abstract—An e-Healthcare system with IC card authentication,
automatic health screening subsystem and Web-based health
information monitoring, has been designed and implemented
for university health education. It is a prototype of private
Cloud service of e-Healthcare for university students which can
obtain their health records from physical measuring devices with
their IC card-based authentication, manage their health data
in suitable database, investigate such data from viewpoint of
doctors/nurses and provide such information for self-healthcare
controlling through Web-Database service. This paper presents
an organization of the above e-Healthcare system, demonstrates
its real usages in university health education and describes its
brief evaluation and expanding plan through practical applica-
tions.
Keywords- e-Healthcare; IC card authentication; health screening;
health information monitoring; university health education.
I. INTRODUCTION
People of the world have own natural rights to live their
healthy lives. They have been interesting in their situations of
health and nowadays almost all of them are longing for their
healthy environment more strongly than ever before. Doctors
always point out that people need to keep their healthy lives
if they do not want to be ill and sick. It is very important for
everyone to maintain his/her living environment at the healthy
level. In other words, everyone wants to have some facilities
to monitor his/her healthy level and needs some visualizing
tools to recognize whether his/her healthy level becomes good
or not.
In every higher education and/or university, even in Japan,
of course, its staffs and administration must provide health
education and equip health managing environment for its
students. Because it is important for current students to study
in good condition during their university lives and for external
society including their family to welcome the relevant students
as its up-and-coming persons. Strictly speaking, however,
universities have faced to some problems to be resolved in
order to provide efﬁcient health education and they are/have
been suffering from the lack of staffs and facilities to manage
health keeping environment for their students.
An approach of e-Healthcare seems to be one of the most
effective and efﬁcient solutions to improve such environment
of health education with the above lack of staffs and facilities
in universities as well as in general societies. This approach
may be able to provide a powerful strategy to equip so-called
“Ubiquitous Healthcare Service” where users can always con-
nect to the information server, monitor their health information
in it and obtain suitable advises and instructions for their health
management(s).
This paper describes our e-Healthcare system for univer-
sity students with IC(integrated circuit) card authentication,
automatic health screening subsystem and Web-based health
information monitoring. First of all, the next (second) section
introduces some related works for the sake of comparison and
coordination of our study with the state-of-the-art in the same
domain. The third section shows conﬁguration of a newly-
developed e-Healthcare system and illustrates some details of
the system and its facilities. The fourth section demonstrates
its real application in our university, explains some brief eval-
uation of our e-Healthcare system and reports our challenge
to expand our system to overground in the future market.
Finally, the last (ﬁfth) section concludes our summaries for
the perspective study and shows acknowledgements and some
useful references.
II. RELATED WORKS
This section introduces some typical related works (papers)
in order to compare and coordinate our study with the below
the currently and/or previously published papers in the same
domain.
A. e-Healthcare related works
B.W. Trevor Rohm of Brigham Young University and his
son in [1] described “ Abstract A vision of the e-healthcare
era is developed using scenarios from today and for the
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

future. The future of e-healthcare is based on empowering
individual patients with current information about diagnosis
and treatment for personal decision-making about their health
without ever visiting a healthcare facility. Empowering the
patients is made possible with a futuristic personal medical
device (PMD).” And they added “The PMD is a ‘black box’,
which works in conjunction with the internet and locally stores
expert system programs. The PMD has various accessories
available to help with diagnosis besides voice and image
capabilities.”
Patrick C. K. Hung from University of Ontario Institute of
Technology (UOIT) described in [2] “ Information privacy is
usually concerned with the conﬁdentiality of personal identiﬁ-
able information (PII) and protected health information (PHI)
such as electronic medical records. Thus, the information
access control mechanism for e-Healthcare services must be
embedded with privacy-enhancing technologies.”
A. Mukherjee and J. McGinnis from Montclair State Univer-
sity categorized and explained ‘e-Healthcare’ in paper article
[3]. And they presented the state-of-the-art to identify key
themes in research on e-healthcare. They pointed out “ E-
healthcare is contributing to the explosive growth within
this industry by utilizing the internet and all its capabilities
to support its stakeholders with information searches and
communication processes. A review of the literature in the
marketing and management of e-healthcare was conducted to
determine the major themes pertinent to e-healthcare research
as well as the commonalities and differences within these
themes. Based on the literature review, the ﬁve major themes
of e-healthcare research identiﬁed are: cost savings; virtual
networking; electronic medical records; source credibility
and privacy concerns; and physician-patient relationships.
E-healthcare systems enable ﬁrms to improve efﬁciency, to
reduce costs, and to facilitate the coordination of care across
multiple facilities.”
B. Ubiquitous Services of e-Healthcare in other related works
Nowadays, e-Healthcare has been tightly connected with
ubiquitous computing services. Especially, mobile computing
is a key technology to realize e-Healthcare system effectively
and efﬁciently. The below papers are discussing about relations
and connections between mobile computing and know-how of
construction of e-Healthcare system.
Zhuoqun Li and his supervisors of University of Plymouth
described at the relevant conference on Computational In-
telligence in Medicine and Healthcare [4] “ The growing
availability of networked mobile devices has created a vast
collective potential of unexploited resources. Grid computing
with its model of coordinated resource sharing may provide
a way to utilize such resources that are normally distributed
throughout a mobile ad-hoc network.” They also discussed
the general challenges in implementing Grid functionalities
(e.g. service discovery, job scheduling and Quality of Service
(QoS) provisioning) in the mobile environment and the speciﬁc
issues had arisen from realistic application scenarios, i.e. the
e-healthcare emergency.
Min Chen and his co-researchers of Seoul National Univer-
sity described in [5] “ Radio frequency identiﬁcation technol-
ogy has received an increasing amount of attention in the past
few years as an important emerging technology. To address
this challenging issue, we propose an evolution to second-
generation RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation) systems
characterized by the introduction of encoded rules that are
dynamically stored in RFID tags. This novel approach facili-
tates the systems’ operation to perform actions on demand for
different objects in different situations, and enables improved
scalability. Based on 2G-RFID-Sys, we propose a novel e-
healthcare management system, and explain how it can be
employed to leverage the effectiveness of existing ones. It is
foreseeable that the ﬂexibility and scalability of 2G-RFID-Sys
will support more automatic and intelligent applications in the
future.”
C. Design Concept based on Previous Related Works
We have designed our new e-Healthcare system based on
not only facing problems to be resolved in our university but
also the above previously announced in the public journals
and conference papers described in the above subsections. Our
design concepts are summarized as follows, the former are our
original design concepts introduced from existing problems at
the routine physical examination for students in our university.
Namely,
• Reduction of time-consuming tasks and frequently oc-
curred human-errors.
• Avoidance of paper-oriented information exchanging and
sharing.
• Applicability of newly designed system to Health Educa-
tion in our university.
• Usage of IC card-based Student Identiﬁcation for user
authentication.
And the latter ones are added through investigation of previous
related works in the public papers. Namely,
• Utilization of Mobile Computing technologies including
Wireless Local Area Network, 3G/GSM (Global System
for Mobile communication) telephone communication
and others for position-independent services.
• Employment of suitable “Electronic Medical Records”
and/or “Personal Health(care) Records” for seamless
healthcare services.
• Capability of newly designed system as so-called Ubiq-
uitous Services or Cloud Services in order to provide
effective healthcare environment.
III. CONFIGURATION OF E-HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
This section shows conﬁguration of our e-Healthcare system
which is already annunciated in the paper [6] and illustrates
some details of the system’s characteristics and its typical
facilities.
A. Conﬁguration of e-Healthcare System
Figure 1 shows a conceptual conﬁguration of our e-
Healthcare System in order to resolve existing problems at the
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Fig. 1.
Conceptual Conﬁguration of an e-Healthcare System (previously annunciated in [6]).
routine physical examination for students in our university. Its
characteristics are summarized as follows;
• User(Examinee) authentication with IC card-based stu-
dent ID for simpliﬁcation of Examinee checking.
• Automatic data obtaining of physical measuring de-
vices into personal computers in order to reduce time-
consuming tasks of paper-based data recording.
• Temporary data storage with IC card for the routine
physical examination in not-networked environment.
• Equipment of database for individual healthcare record
and health monitoring through campus network.
• Professional health education by university doctors and/or
nurses through analysis of medical records from the
routine physical examination.
• Information retrieval of medical records from Web-based
monitoring with user authentication.
Kart et al. [7] from University of California, Santa Bar-
bara described “Large-scale distributed systems, such as e-
healthcare systems, are difﬁcult to develop due to their com-
plex and decentralized nature. With open standards, such
as XML [8], SOAP [9], WSDL [10] and UDDI [11], the
service oriented architecture supports interoperability between
services operating on different platforms and between ap-
plications implemented in different programming languages.
The service oriented architecture facilitates the development
of such systems by supporting modular design, application
integration and interoperation, and software reuse.” They men-
tioned in other article [12] of IT Professional (March-April
2008) “Medical monitoring devices worn by the patient, and
frequent electronic communication between the patient and
a nurse, can ensure that the prescribed treatment is being
followed and that the patient is making good progress. The e-
healthcare system can be readily extended to other healthcare
professionals, including medical technicians who perform and
report tests and analyses requested by physicians.”
Their studies and results have provided some good ideas and
comprehensive strategy for us to develop and improve our e-
Healthcare system and simultaneously taught us how to select
several kinds of technologies for implementation of effective
e-Healthcare system for our demand of university. We do not
employ such open standards described in the above papers,
but we recognize that it is very important to design our system
with modular system architecture / programming and utilize
standards of protocols and data formats. So our system can
have expandability not only to connect with other systems but
also to adapt for several kinds of users with interoperability.
B. Sub-systems and facilities of our e-Healthcare System
For example, at ﬁrst, we introduce a dedicated sub-system
including physical measuring devices, IC card reader/ writer
and personal computer (PC) for controlling. Figure 2 shows a
typical dedicated sub-system with a blood pressure monitoring
device and vision analyzer as physical measuring device.
Controlling PC in Figure 2 has connectivity with the above
devices and IC card reader/writer so that user authentication
and data acquisition can be realized in the following steps;
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Fig. 2.
Dedicated Sub-system of Physical Measuring Device, IC card
Reader/Writer and Personal Computer.
1) Placing IC card of Examinee on the IC card reader
connected to PC.
2) Authenticating ID of Examinee from IC card and ob-
taining his/her relevant information.
3) Acquiring data from physical measuring device con-
nected to PC.
4) Combining measured data and regarding information of
Examinee into the formatted record with time-stamping.
5) Storing the above time-stamped record in IC card if
the PC for physical examination is not connected with
network environment.
6) Database server can collect such records of PC or IC
card into its storage through network environment.
We have already developed a mechanism to build dedicated
sub-systems in order to interface several measuring devices
such as a blood pressure monitoring device, vision analyzer
and other devices to take height and weight [13]. So we
will be able to expand the above samples into other types
of dedicated sub-system relatively easily for other kinds of
physical measuring devices.
Secondly, we explain another facility of our e-Healthcare
system to realize health monitoring for database server through
campus network in university. Figure 3 shows a scheme of
health monitoring or health information retrieval for database
by university doctor through campus network.
The dedicated sub-system of our e-Healthcare system de-
scribed above can accumulate the formatted record combined
with measured data and regarding information of Examinee
with time-stamping. So every student (i.e. Examinee) has
his/her health records in database with when-where infor-
mation about the routine physical examination or periodical
health checking. Not only the relevant students themselves
but also university doctors/nurses can investigate or trace the
history/changes of health information in time series.
The relevant facility of our system can generate some
kinds of graph based on time-series analysis in order to
illustrate the history/changes of health information. Of course,
university doctors/nurses can relatively easily perform their
professional medical suggestions and/or judgments for some
speciﬁed students by means of the above facility. Moreover,
students will be able to retrieve their health information from
database and understand the according history/changes of such
information even by themselves.
One of the merits of employing a graphical interface for
retrieval of health information is to ﬁnd out an speciﬁc change
of health information with irregularity efﬁciently even at
glance. Students can recognize such a case very easily through
our e-Healthcare system by themselves and then consult their
university doctors and/or nurses with their evidences from our
system. Doctors and/or nurses in university also can perform
periodical monitoring for graphical retrieving results. They
will send some e-mail and other communication to the relevant
student about his/her health situation.
With our e-Healthcare system, the above Health Education
of university will be introduced and managed effectively
and efﬁciently. The next section will demonstrate its real
application in our university, explains some brief evaluation of
Fig. 3.
Health monitoring for Database through campus network.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

our e-Healthcare system and reports our challenge to expand
our system to overground in the future market.
IV. APPLICATION OF E-HEALTHCARE SYSTEM, ITS BRIEF
EVALUATION AND ITS EXPANDING PLAN
This section demonstrates real application of our e-
Healthcare system at the routine physical examination in our
university at ﬁrst. And then it explains brief evaluation of the
system and mentions our new challenge to expand our system
for potential market near future.
A. Real Application of e-Healthcare system in the routine
physical examination
We have already applied dedicated sub-system of our e-
Healthcare system described in the previous section to the real
routine physical examination since 2011. In the case of Figure
4 , we could not prepare any networked environment for the
Fig. 4.
Photos of the Routine Physical Examination in 2011 with a prototype
of our e-Healthcare system.
routine physical examination so that all the dedicated sub-
systems of our e-Healthcare system had never connected to
the campus local area network and the Database information
server. Under such condition, our dedicated sub-systems must
choose the following procedures; namely combining informa-
tion about IC card of examinee and measured data acquired
from the according physical measuring devices and storing
such information into the relevant IC card for each examinee
during the routine physical examination.
We call dedicated sub-system of our e-Healthcare system
“Automatic Health Screening System” for student Health
Education in Kagawa University [13]. Figure 5 shows a photo
of dedicated sub-system of our e-Healthcare system used in
the real routine physical examination in 2011. It is conﬁgured
with Note PC, Physical measuring device (this case shows
“blood pressure monitoring device”) and IC card reader/writer.
They were connected one another, and measured data had
been saved temporally in Note PC as well as each examinee’s
IC card. Finally, we had transferred all the data into the
information server.
Fig. 5.
Photo of a Blood Pressure Monitoring Device as physical measuring
device, IC card Reader/Writer and Personal Computer in the routine physical
examination.
B. Brief Evaluation and Expanding Plan of e-Healthcare
System
From the viewpoint of applying our e-Healthcare system to
the real task, the system can provide time-saving operations
and precise computation of measuring students’ health infor-
mation. With our system, our university has enjoyed the above
results because the system can reduce total time to perform the
routine physical examination and avoid frequently-occurred
human errors during physical examination. Our university
can also obtain some effects of introducing our e-Healthcare
system into practical situation within university tasks which
include the routine physical examination and useful Health
Education.
Now, we are going to apply for some external budgets
in order to bring our e-Healthcare system to the mainstream
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

of university-outside. An alliance between university project
team and brighter venture company has begun to challenge for
national funds for the sake of making our system overground.
We must brush up our system into more applicable and more
tightly secure one. The former is very important because the
system has expandability, while the latter must be unavoidable
in the health and medical domains where there are the most
values in privacy, security and personal customization. We
hope that our e-Healthcare system can be smoothly changed
and improved for the above requests from the rising market
near future, because it has modularity and expandability in-
troduced in the paper.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper describes our e-Healthcare system for Student
Health Education in Kagawa University. With our system,
not only students can receive efﬁcient Health Education but
also doctors/nurses can provide fruitful medical suggestion
and/or judgment through health monitoring. The routine phys-
ical examination can be improved into reduction of time-
consuming tasks as well as avoidance of frequently-occurred
human errors.
Characteristics of our e-Healthcare system are summarized
as follows;
• Employment of modular system architecture for easy
maintenance, effective interoperability and system ex-
pandability:
Our e-Healthcare system includes a dedicated sub-system
with some kinds of physical measuring devices, IC card
reader/writer and controlling PC(s), a Database infor-
mation server and some facilities for user-side health
monitoring and retrieving. Each dedicated sub-system can
be relatively easily tailored for other kinds of physical
measuring devices. An additional facility can be built into
the system for the sake of system expansion.
• Utilization of student IC card for user identiﬁcation:
It is a good idea to employ student IC card for user(i.e. ex-
aminee) identiﬁcation during physical examination. With
such IC card-based identiﬁcation, our e-healthcare system
can reduce and shorten total mount of time to register and
authenticate examinees for physical screening test.
• Realization of mechanism to interface between measuring
devices and computers:
In order to build some kinds of interfaces between
physical measuring devices and controlling PC in ded-
icated sub-system, it must be done to connect device into
computer’s Input-Output ports such as USB(Universal
Serial Bus interface), write speciﬁc software for interrupts
just like drivers and manipulate such devices by the
controlling PC. With automatic control of measuring
devices by such PC, our e-Healthcare system can avoid
probabilistically happened human errors as well as writ-
ing mistake of measured data.
• Visualization of history/changes of health information in
time series:
The speciﬁc facility of our system can generate graphic
information based on time-series analysis in order to
illustrate the history/changes of health information. Doc-
tors/nurses of university can relatively easily perform
their professional medical suggestions and/or judgments
by means of such a facility. Students can also recognize
graphical history/changes of their health information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Seigo Nagao, the
President of Kagawa University, for his great leadership and
very important suggestions from his doctor’s viewpoint. They
are willing to express sincere thank to Dr. Kazuhiro Hara,
Professor Emeritus of Kagawa University and the Funding
Leader of K-MIX (Kagawa Medical Internet eXchange), for
his powerful and continuous supervisions to this study. They
are also grateful to Dr. Yukio Hori, Assistant professor of
Kagawa University and Mr. Daisuke Yamakata, previous As-
sistant professor of Kagawa University for their valuable
contributions to our research achievements. This research is
partly supported by Kagawa University Specially Promoted
Research Fund 2012.
REFERENCES
[1] B.W.T. Rohm and C.E.T. Rohm Jr., A vision of the e-healthcare era,
International Journal of Healthcare Technology and Management, Vol. 4,
No. 1-2, pp. 87–92, February 2002.
[2] P.C.K. Hung, Towards a Privacy Access Control Model for e-Healthcare
Services,
Third Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust
(PST2005), 4 pages, October 2005.
[3] A. Mukherjee and J. McGinnis, E-healthcare: an analysis of key themes
in research,
International Journal of Pharmaceutical and Healthcare
Marketing, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 349–363, 2007.
[4] Z. Li, L. Sun, E.C. Ifeachor, Challenges of Mobile ad-hoc Grids and
their Applications in e-Healthcare,
Second International Conference on
Computational Intelligence in Medicine and Healthcare (CIMED2005), 8
pages, July 2005.
[5] Min Chen, S. Gonzalez, V. Leung, Qian Zhang, Ming Li, A 2G-RFID-
based e-healthcare system,
IEEE Wireless Communications, Vol. 17,
No. 1, pp. 37–43, February 2010.
[6] Y. Imai, Y. Hori, H. Kamano, T. Mori, E. Miyazaki, and T. Takai,
A Trial Design of e-Healthcare Management Scheme with IC-Based
Student ID Card, Automatic Health Examination System and Campus
Information Network, H. Cheriﬁ, J. M.Zain, and E. El-Qawasmeh(Eds.):
Proceedings of the International Conference on Digital Information and
Communication Technology and its Applications (DICTAP 2011), Part I,
CCIS 166, pp. 728-740, June 2011.
[7] F. Kart, Gengxin Miao, L.E. Moser, P.M. Melliar-Smith, A Distributed
e-Healthcare System Based on the Service Oriented Architecture,
IEEE
International Conference on Services Computing (SCC 2007), pp. 652–
659, July 2007.
[8] eXtensible Markup Language (XML).
see “http://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/”
[9] SOAP: In previous versions of this speciﬁcation the SOAP name was an
acronym of “Simple Object Access Protocol”. This is no longer the case.
see “http://www.w3.org/TR/soap12-part1/”
[10] Web Services Description Language(WSDL).
see “http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl/”
[11] Universal Description, Discovery and Integration(UDDI).
see “http://uddi.xml.org/uddi-org/”
[12] F. Kart, L.E. Moser, P.M. Melliar-Smith, Building a Distributed E-
Healthcare System Using SOA,
IT Professional, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp.
24–30, March-April 2008.
[13] E. Miyazaki, H. Kamano, D. Yamakata, Y. Imai, Y. Hori, Development
of an Automatic Health Screening System for Student Health Education
of University,
W.V. Siricharoen, M. Toahchoodee, and H. Cheriﬁ(Eds.):
Proceedings of DICTAP 2012, pp. 421-427, May 2012.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Chronic Disease Management System Based on 
eHealth Concept in China 
 
Xufeng Zhang, Bin Li, Zhihong Yao, Lei Liu 
Biomedical Informatics Group 
Shanghai Center for Bio-information Technology 
Shanghai, P.R.C. 
xfzhang@scbit.org, libin@scbit.org, 
yaozhihong@sibs.ac.cn, liulei@scbit.org 
Hao Chen 
School of Public Health 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
Shanghai, P.R.C. 
121chenhao@sjtu.edu.cn 
 
Abstract—Chronic diseases have posed great threats for the 
health of the residents in China. The treatments for chronic 
diseases usually endure a long time. Therefore, a lot of medical 
resources are occupied. In this article, we introduce the chronic 
diseases management system (CDMS) based on eHealth concept. 
Patients can detect the index relevant to the chronic diseases by 
themselves and get some instructive guides about health-care 
from this system. The application of this management system will 
enhance the patients' awareness of diseases and thereby lower the 
expenses of the treatments for chronic diseases. 
Keywords-chronic disease; PHR; eHealth. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The incidences of chronic diseases are increasing with the 
improving of living standard and the changing of eating habit. 
Chronic diseases occur in young age gradually. In China, 
chronic diseases have been the main causes of death. As the 
statistics of the year 2000 showed that 80.9% of mortality was 
attributed to chronic diseases [1]. Furthermore, chronic 
diseases will greatly affect the life quality of the aged. Take 
Shanghai, for example, 73.76% residents developed chronic 
diseases among the aged in 2008. 
Chronic disease, usually, has a long course and is hard to be 
cured. The interventions and treatments for the patients are 
important. The Internet of Things (IoT) is a concept that 
describes how the Internet is being used to link consumer 
devices and physical assets so that these new endpoints can 
create and receive a data stream. The method based on IoT will 
realize the purpose of remote monitoring for the susceptible 
population and patients. 
  In this paper, we introduce a chronic disease management 
system (CDMS) based on eHealth. This system can not only 
monitor the vital signs of the patients through long distance for 
the benefit of telemedicine, but also help to arouse the 
awareness of the health statues for the patients. Compared to 
the traditional telemedicine systems, the CDMS is more 
focused on attracting the patients to participate in self-health 
management. Due to the use of a service component 
architecture technology, components of the system can run 
independently to provide web services. The components do not 
interference each other which makes it convenient for function 
expansion. 
In Section II, we give a brief architecture overview of the 
CDMS. More details of the CDMS’s components are described 
in Section III to Section VII. Two main features, Front-end 
Data Cleaning and User-friendly System, are introduced in 
Section VIII. An example of using the CDMS is given in 
Section IX. Finally, we drew a conclusion in Section X. 
II. 
CDMS’S ARCHITECTURE 
There are always new chronic diseases will be found, and 
chronic diseases prevention and control methods may change 
over time. We cannot design a common mode to manage all of 
the chronic diseases. In order to overcome the uncertainty, the 
chronic diseases management system (CDMS) should be 
flexible enough to change the chronic diseases prevention and 
control methods and scalable enough to manage the new 
chronic diseases. 
The CDMS took SOA (Service-Oriented Architecture) as 
the main architecture to ensure the system's flexibility and 
scalability. A Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) [2] is a set 
of principles and methodologies for designing and developing 
software in the form of interoperable services, and the services 
are unassociated, loosely coupled units of functionality. By 
SOA, the CDMS can easily add new services to manage new 
chronic diseases and replace old services to change chronic 
diseases prevention and control methods. 
The system architecture is shown in Figure 1. All 
components in the system communicate with each other by 
web service (WS), so each component can evolve respectively 
according to the different needs and will not affect each other. 
The components on the upper part of the picture are system-
specific components and need to be developed. The others on 
the lower half are common components, which have the 
corresponding software implementations. 
The 
system-specific 
components 
include 
the 
five 
components of Personal Health Records (PHR), Drug Database, 
Evidence-based Medicine, Chronic Disease Management 
Service, Vital Signs Integration Service; we will introduce 
them in later sections, respectively. Chronic Disease 
Management Portal is the portal of the CDMS and users can 
access all components through it. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Chronic Disease 
Management 
Service
Hypertension
...
SCA
Drug 
Datase
PHR
W
S
W
S
ESB
CDMS Portal
W
S
W
S
Vital Signs 
Integration 
Service
ESP
BPM
Diabetes screening 
process
PHR entry Process
...
EDM
Diagnosis of diabetes 
Rules
...
Diagnosis of hypertension 
Rules
W
S
W
S
W
S
Audit 
Service
Legacy System
EDB Servie Adaptor
W
S
Evidence-
based 
Medicine
W
S
W
S
Security 
Service
Diabetes
Glucose
...
Blood Pressure
 
Figure 1.  CDMS’s architecture 
The common components include Enterprise Service Bus 
(ESB), Event Stream Processing (ESP), Service Component 
Architecture (SCA), Business Process Management (BPM), 
Enterprise Decision Management (EDM), and each of the five 
components has corresponding open source implementations. 
The CDMS just selects and integrates the implementations by 
SOA. 
ESB, ESP and SCA are the basis of the CDMS. ESB can be 
used to integrate legacy services or applications (such as HIS, 
PACS, etc.). By using ESB, the CDMS does not need to repeat 
patient data entry, which had existed in the legacy systems. 
ESP enables the CDMS to monitor multiple streams of event 
data, and analyze them. Normally, ESB is used to audit the 
accounts in the CDMS. Services are core to SOA. Using SCA, 
you can build units of functionality, or components, supporting 
a variety of languages, and then expose them as services over 
protocols. Moreover, these components can be wired together 
internally to form higher-level services, or composites. And the 
services can run in a distributed fashion and be managed as a 
virtual cloud. By SCA, the CDMS can add more services to 
manage new chronic diseases easily. 
BPM and EDM are used to design visually chronic disease 
management processes and medical decision-making that can 
be used to the CDMS immediately. Because visual designers 
are provided by BPM and EDM, doctors can also design the 
processes and decision-makings easily. In this way, the CDMS 
can attract the doctors to participate the design of the system. 
III. 
PERSONAL HEALTH RECORDS (PHR) 
Chronic diseases are diseases of long duration and 
generally slow progression. The prevention and treatment of 
chronic diseases relies mainly on the patients' own efforts, 
including developing good living and eating habits, taking 
medicine on time, etc. In order to store all of the patient-
centered data, the CDMS use PHR as the underlying data 
model.  
A personal health record is a collection of health-related 
information that is documented and maintained by the 
individual it pertains to. By using PHR, the CDMS allows 
patients to participate in their own healthcare management by 
viewing, editing, or discussing their own medical data.  
Internationally, several institutions and organizations are 
concerned with standardization of EHR (Electronic Health 
Records) [3][4], and some of the standards such as openEHR 
[5], HL7 CDA [6], CEN 13606 can be used to build the PHR. 
Compared with other standards, the openEHR is more generic, 
particularly due to being archetype-driven, and can satisfies 
many requirements outside the original concept of the “clinical 
EHR”. After our research, we believe that openEHR is best 
suited to build the PHR model in the CDMS. 
But, openEHR only given the definition of the basic 
structure of PHR, and you need to define the PHR items on 
your own. In 2009, Ministry of Health of the People’s Republic 
of China published the basic framework and data standard of 
the health records (China HR) [7]. The standard has defined the 
minimum collection of health record data items. Therefore， 
by combining the standard with openEHR, we can define the 
PHR which is applicable to China. 
The openEHR EHR is structured according to a relatively 
simple model. A central HER object identified by an EHR id 
specifies references to a number of types of structured, 
versioned information [5]. According to the definition of the 
EHR object, compositions are the containers of all clinical and 
administrative content of the record. In one HER there are two 
general categories of compositions: event compositions, and 
longitudinal, or persistent compositions. To add China HR data 
items into the compositions, we should divide the items into 
instantaneous information (corresponding to the EVENT 
composition) and long-term information (corresponding to the 
PERSITION composition). The items about basic personal 
information are different from others and are separated as a 
special component.  
 
Figure 2.  PHR basic structure 
The basic structure of the PHR in the CDMS is shown in 
Figure 2.  The PHR object is the root object, which contains all 
health information of a patient. The BasicPersonalInfo object 
records the patient’s basic information, for example, name, age, 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

gender etc. The TransientInfo object is used to record 
instantaneous 
information 
like 
clinical 
testing. 
The 
LongTermInfo is used to record long-term information like 
medication records. 
IV. 
DRUG DATABASE 
Drug database plays an important role in chronic disease 
management. All the precise information of a drug is included 
in this database. The application of this database is to give 
patients some advices on rational drug use according to their 
drug use history.  
The Drug database component is more general than the 
other components of the CDMS. In addition to information of 
drugs for chronic, the component also includes other drugs’ 
information. In the future, the component will be extracted as 
an independent service application. 
  We selected more than 2000 drugs and structuralized their 
information. As the displaying mode is based on web service, 
we can add more information (such as drug target, drug 
interaction) into the database later on. We aim to serve for the 
personalized medicine. 
V. 
VITAL SIGNS INTEGRATION SERVICE (VSIS) 
In the CDMS, timely access to the signs information of 
high-risk groups or patients is of great help for chronic disease 
prevention and control. 
With the development of the Internet of Things technology, 
through wireless transmission technology, to achieve real-time 
remote vital signs collection, has become possible and 
inexpensive. 
 The schematic diagram of the vital signs integration in the 
CDMS shows in Figure 3. 
RFID
RFID
blood	  pressure	  monitor
glucose	  meter
Mobile	  phone	  
Application
VSIS
XML
 
Figure 3.  Vital signs integration schematic 
All sensors (such as blood pressure monitors, glucose 
meters) in the figure contain RFID reader devices and wireless 
transmission module. RFID reader devices are used to identify 
users. The wireless transmission module is used for data 
transmission, including two ways of transmission: one way 
transmits data via Bluetooth to mobile phone, then transmits 
data to a back-end server; the other way transmits data directly 
to the servers via GPRS. 
The mobile phone application is the core of the entire 
integration module for signs sensor, it can pre-process the data 
transmitted by the sensor, also allow users to view the data. At 
the same time, when the server side have done further analysis 
of the data, the application can be used to receive the analysis 
results.  
The VSIS provides RESTful WS (the Web Service by 
Representational State Transfer) to collect data from mobile 
phones. The transmission between it and the cell phone uses 
XML as a data interchange format. It does not compel to limit 
the sensor must be output in XML data format because of the 
diversity of sensors. If the data generated by the sensors is not 
XML format, it will be converted through the Enterprise 
Service Bus configured on a particular service adapter, and 
then transmitted to the VSIS. 
VI. 
EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE 
Evidence-based medicine (EBM) aims to apply the best 
available evidence gained from the scientific method to clinical 
decision making. It seeks to assess the strength of the evidence 
of risks and benefits of treatments (including lack of treatment) 
and diagnostic tests. This helps clinicians understand whether 
or not a treatment will do more good than harm. 
  Some useful and helpful evidence-based medicine 
databases (such as Cochrane, MD Consult) have been widely 
used through the world. We utilize this idea in our database 
designing.  
Take Hypertension, for instance. We collected some strong 
evidences from massive publications and integrated them into 
our system. When a patient refers to the suggestion about 
“eating habit”, the system will come up with the latest 
evidences on “how to eat healthily as a hypertension patient”. 
We help the patients to manage their health condition and 
educate themselves about the knowledge of disease. 
VII. CHRONIC DISEASE MANAGEMENT SERVICE 
Chronic disease management service component is used to 
manage all chronic diseases. Because every chronic disease 
haves different day-to-day management process, it is need to 
develop different sub component. Although different chronic 
disease needs to develop different sub component, other 
components of the CDMS that all chronic disease management 
service’s sub components need to call are the same. The 
disease-related vital signs are provided by the VSIS component, 
the data used for clinics analysis is provided by the PHR 
component, the recommended or warning information about 
patients taking medicines is from the drug database component 
and some of the latest chronic disease educational information 
is provided by the evidence-based medicine component. 
     In order to ensure the flexibility of the system, the 
management processes in chronic disease management service 
are provided by the BPM component. Its advantage is that, if 
you need to make changes to certain chronic disease 
management process, you can just change the related 
management processes in the BPM component. And the 
chronic disease management service component uses rules of 
the EDM component to diagnose and treat chronic diseases. 
The EDM component allows doctors to design the rules by 
themselves. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

VIII. SYSTEM FEATURES 
The CDMS is designed to help the patients with chronic 
diseases to participate in self-health management, and improve 
their health status while reducing hospitalization.   
To achieve this goal, the CDMS should encourage patients 
to detect vital signs themselves. However, this will lead to 
more erroneous data are submitted into the CDMS. To 
overcome the problem, a data-cleaning framework named 
Front-end Data Cleaning is introduced.  
Meanwhile, in order to attract patients to use the system, 
The CDMS should be user-friendly, which means that the 
system should be easy to access, the contents provided by the 
system should be easy to understand.  
The two main features will be introduced in this chapter. 
A. Front-end Data Cleaning 
The VSIS module is normally used to collect patients’ own 
detected vital signs. The biggest problem in the module is to 
ensure the accuracy of the data submitted by patients.  To solve 
the problem, a simple framework for data cleaning is designed. 
The framework includes two parts. The first part is a filter to 
check abnormal data outside the confidence interval and alert 
the user. If the user confirms the accuracy of the data, the data 
can be stored in the system and be used to amend the 
confidence interval. The second part is a calculation module 
that calculates the confidence interval by the patient's historical 
data (including the data submitted by the filter).  The filter 
locates in the mobile phone or the sensor, and the calculation 
module is embedded in the VSIS.  
Using the framework, the CDMS can filter a lot of 
erroneous data in front-end devices. Of course, different vital 
signs require different algorithms to calculate confidence 
intervals.  
B. User-friendly System 
The CDMS Portal lets users to access the CDMS through 
web browsers. Meanwhile users can also access the CDMS by 
mobile phone. The VSIS module uses a mobile phone 
application to collect patients’ vital signs. In fact, the 
application also allows users to access the CDMS. The 
application can synchronize data with the CDMS while it is 
online and analysis data offline. In this way users can access 
the CDMS anywhere anytime. 
To let users more easily understood expertise of chronic 
diseases, the CDMS should promptly adjust the contents in the 
CDMS by users’ feedback. This means the CDMS should be 
easier to be modified and extended than other traditional 
medical information systems. Thanks to the SOA technology, 
the CDSM can meet this demand easily. 
IX. 
EXAMPLE-- MANAGEMENT OF HYPERTENSION 
So far, a hypertension management module has been 
implemented in the CDMS. In this chapter, we will look at how 
users use the CDMS to manage their hypertension. 
When a patient gets a blood pressure monitor and registers 
for an account, he can use the CDMS. First of all, he should 
enter his basic information, such as age, gender, blood pressure 
value, medication information, etc.  
Now, he can get the system’s help to manage his 
hypertension. Usually the system will remind him to measure 
blood pressure and take medicines regularly. When the system 
detects the abnormal blood pressure values, it will alert him. If 
this situation continues for several days, the system will notify 
the doctor to contact him.  
X. 
CONCLUSION 
This article describes the design of SOA-based architecture 
chronic disease management system, the infrastructure of the 
system using existing SOA technology, and on this basis, 
develops a service component in the management of chronic 
disease. Various components interact through web service, 
evolve independently and will not affect each other. The VSIS 
component makes full use of existing Internet of Things 
technology, having the function of remote collection of the 
user's vital signs, allowing users to keep abreast of their own 
health, also providing support for the remote diagnosis and 
treatment from doctors. In order to allow users to get the latest 
medical research, we developed the component of evidence-
based medicine to provide intelligible results of the latest 
evidence-based 
medicine. 
And 
other 
components 
are 
developed on the purpose of providing effective services to the 
patients having chronic disease.  
However, the current chronic disease management system 
still has many aspects to be perfected. In PHR component, data 
structure has not yet fully established, the next work will 
further improve in this area. In EDM component, we are still 
unable to provide a language that doctors can directly use to 
design diagnosis and treatment rules. In the future, we will 
combine the expertise of medical personnel to create a 
language in related field, facilitating the use of medical 
workers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by National High-tech R&D 
Program (863 Program), project No: 2012AA02A602, 
2012AA02A604.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, “chronic diseases 
report in China”, 2006-5. Retrieved: September, 2012, from 
http://wenku.baidu.com/view/9113c5aedd3383c4bb4cd274.html  
[2] 
R Perrey and M Lycett. “Service-oriented architecture,” 2003 
Symposium on Applications and the Internet Workshops, Orlando, 
Florida, USA, pp. 116-119, 2003. 
[3] 
Oliver Johannes Bott. “The Electronic Health Record: Standardization 
and Implementation,”  2nd OpenECG Workshop 2004, Berlin, Germany, 
pp. 57-60, 2004. 
[4] 
Kristiina Häyrinen, Kaija Saranto and Prikko Nykänen. “Definition, 
Structure, content, use and impacts of electronic health records: A 
review of the research literature,” International Journal of Medical 
Informatics. 77(5): 291-304, 2009. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[5] 
T Beale and S Heard. “openEHR Architecture, Architecture Overview, 
Revision 
l.0.2 
”, 
2008. 
Retrieved: 
September, 
2012, 
from 
http://www.openehr.org/releases/1.0.2/ architecture/overview.pdf   
[6] 
Robert H. Dolin, Liora Alschuler, Sandy Boyer, Calvin Beebe, Fred M. 
Behlen, et al. “HL7 Clinical Document Architecture, Release 2,” Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 13, pp. 30-38, 
2006. 
[7] 
Ministry of Health, P.R.C., “the basic framework and data standard of 
the health records”, 2009-05-19. Retrieved: September, 2012, from 
http://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2009-05/19/content_1319085.htm 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Enhanced Home-Based Medical Care Services Through Mobile Technology 
Walid Hassan1, Ayman Dayekh2, Hasan Bazzi3 
1 Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
2 Dept. of Information Technology 
3Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
Lebanese International University, Beirut, Lebanon 
 
walid.hassan@liu.edu.lb; ayman.dayekh@liu.edu.lb; 
hasan.bazzi@liu.edu.lb 
Bassam Hussein3, Denise Kerbaj4, Hassan M. 
Khachfe1,5, 
4 QualiZone, s.a.r.l., Beirut Lebanon 
5 Program in Biomedical Physics, Faculty of Sciences  
Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon 
 
denise.kerbaj@qualizone-lb.com 
hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb
 
 
Abstract — One of the fastest emerging services in healthcare is 
the development of home-based or home-based healthcare 
services. This trend has been growing in Europe, North 
America and Australia, especially in the last five years. 
However, the major challenge is the monitoring and control of 
the quality of the service.  In this paper, we propose a set of 
procedures for the quality control and monitoring of the 
service delivered, with the workflow being streamlined using 
mobile technology. The proposed model was simulated on 
different service management models and proved an assured 
tendency for an accurate tracking of the practice. Simulations 
revealed that upon the application of these procedures up to 70 
% (i.e. if 70 % of recommendations are applied), 90% of 
common medical errors could be avoided. In the proposed 
model, patients (under well defined mental conditions) are 
evoked and encouraged to constitute a part of the control 
procedure. The awareness of the patient reduces the estimated 
error measurement largely. The model takes care also of the 
quality control of certain medical devices (portable diagnostic 
devices) that are usually used in such practices. 
Keywords-quality 
control; 
home-based 
care; 
mobile 
technology; total quality management; healthcare management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many years ago, people used to have medical care 
provided at their places, where “physicians” used to diagnose 
and treat patients at their homes. This constituted an 
important opportunity for the physician to take a live look at 
the patient’s living conditions, given that these conditions 
were considered by that time as the most possible causes for 
diseases.   
 
With the development of medical equipment and tools 
for both diagnosis and therapy, there was a need to gather all 
these equipment in a place (Hospital) where patients could 
come to have medical services administered. This constituted 
an important step in the control of diseases especially 
contagious ones. With such a measure, people living with the 
patient were no longer endangered or subjected to the 
disease.  
 
As hospitals widely spread all over the world, an 
important issue unfolded: infection and its control. Most of 
the hospitals worldwide are general hospitals, which render 
them as places gathering a huge number of patients having 
different diseases, mostly infections. This leads to anticipate 
that a hospital is a place where we can –with a high 
probability– contract an infection (nosocomial infection). In 
order to minimize the aforementioned risk, many procedures 
and techniques were developed [1, 2]. One of the most 
common measures is to minimize the period of stay of the 
patient at the hospital [3]. Usually, patients having surgery 
procedures who are not in need for concentrated or intensive 
care can stay for a number of days at the hospital for the 
ordinary nursing tasks. During his/her stay, the patient is 
subjected to a non-negligible risk of infection. In cases where 
ordinary tasks could be performed at home, it would be 
better if the patient receives such a service at his/her own 
place. This will decrease the infection risk, liberate more 
space at the hospital, and in most of cases decrease the cost 
of treatment [4].  
 
The development of home-based care services is widely 
spreading in Europe and in the United States. The services 
mostly ensure medical and logistic help for seniors, children 
with special needs, persons suffering from chronic diseases.  
Late studies have revealed that even some cancer cases can 
be followed home-based [5, 6, 7].  
  
However, many problems are ensuing with the growth of 
this trend [8], the major amongst which is the lack of control 
of the nurse or staff delivering the service, when there is no 
direct supervision, as is the case in a hospital setting! In the 
latter case, the medical personnel are usually supervised at 
two levels (nurse / staff nurse and staff nurse / physician).  
Sometimes, a floor or ward supervisor can be added to the 
chain, just prior to the physician level.  In this work, we will 
be focusing on the issues related to quality control and the 
quality assurance of the service. In hospitals, the staff 
follows well-defined and well-practiced procedures to 
perform daily tasks. In addition, the presence of a staff nurse 
or any other well-experienced staff who can ensure that 
technical support is available when needed decreases the risk 
of errors. This is not the case when it comes to home-based 
care services.  Entities delivering these services are mostly 
private and they are governed by budgetary and human 
resources limitations. Thus, in most cases, they tend to 
minimize the personnel servicing one person at the time 
(depending of the case). The human resources limitations 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

may sometimes lead to employ some staff without enough 
experience. At this stage, a weakness point is identified 
which can be restated as follows: Lack of control on – and 
support (technical) for – the staff performing the medical 
task [9].  
 
In 2006, Koch [10] summarized the state of research on 
home-based healthcare from an international perspective. In 
their study, they reviewed all scientific literature concerned 
with telehealth services between 1990 and 2003.  They 
observed a trend towards tools and services, not only for 
professionals, but also for patients and citizens. It could be 
noticed that it was difficult to determine the quality of care in 
the presented solutions. They stated mainly the lack of 
standards for the compatibility of information systems, as 
well as the lack of evaluation frameworks considering legal, 
ethical, organizational, clinical, usability and technical 
aspects. Added to that comes the lack of proper guidelines 
for practical implementation of home-based healthcare 
solutions. [10] 
 
Recently, Kuo et al. [11] developed an information 
technology (IT)-mediated home-based healthcare model 
designed to improve the effectiveness of caring for stroke 
patients who require chronic home care.  The developed 
model showed an important success; however, their system 
depended on a measurement device capable of monitoring 
certain physiologic parameters and sending them to a control 
room.  Such dependence posed as a major limitation to the 
model. 
 
Margolis and co-workers presented a design and rationale 
for 
home 
blood 
pressure 
telemonitoring 
and 
case 
management to control hypertension with a cluster 
randomized trial [12].  The system communicates the 
measurements of blood pressure to a control space, without 
taking into account the quality of measurement.  
 
In this paper, we propose a general control model that 
can be used to evaluate the quality of home-based care 
services.  The model responds to the weakness points 
identified above; thus, the basic idea behind it is to ensure 
proper control and support for the staff, and to involve the 
patient in such a process.  It conforms to the basics of total 
quality management – in general – and quality healthcare 
management in particular.  The pillar in the proposed 
monitoring system is mobile technology, where the patient, 
the nurse, the physician, and the hospital information system 
are all linked in real-time. 
 
After this introduction, the problem is detailed and laid 
down.  The solution is then featured and characterized.  
Finally, future perspectives and possible ameliorations of the 
system are pointed out. 
 
II. 
SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS 
Controlling the quality of a service involves many 
parameters that should be evaluated and reported by the 
person delivering the service. Thus, it is tightly linked to the 
auto diagnosis methodology of the person and the system 
together. The identification of the problem causes reveals 
important aspects, as depicted in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1 shows the possible causes of error according to 
a deep literature research on common errors in similar cases. 
The query included reported cases, patient surveys, and 
literature works. A simulation was performed in order to 
define an interval for each type of error according to the 
other parameters.  
 
The lack of experience was used as a testing parameter. 
This parameter is studied in two cases under conditions with 
and without control from a superior. A representation of the 
total error in both cases is presented in Figure 2. 
 
The above demonstration shows the importance of the 
control for many reasons. Thus, a primary parameter is 
identified that leads to have an oversight on the staff on a 
permanent manner. Here, we should mention that the 
presence of a control mechanism or a “permanent 
assistance” as we will call it later not only provides the 
control but also ensures a live support in case of need for 
information or in any emergency situation.  
Figure 1. Roots of error. 
Figure 2. Total error in both cases with and without control. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

One important issue can be revealed which is the 
importance of having a mechanism for archiving and 
analysis for all events that occur through the treatment 
process. Home-based care services are new enough that it is 
too difficult to find databases containing statistics or 
archives for incidents taking place. The presence of such 
databases minimizes the probability of mistake occurrence. 
Thus, the lack of supportive data is identified as an 
additional weakness point.  
 
The two points identified show the contribution of the 
staff to dealing with errors; however, an important factor is 
added which is the interaction of the patient himself/herself. 
For example, a hospitalized patient who is prevented from 
smoking for dangerous consequences will not be able to 
smoke in a hospital, but this is not the case for those patients 
receiving care at home. The interaction and responsiveness 
of patients receiving home-based care services constitute a 
difficult challenge in the treatment process. This point will 
be considered as a constraint in the solution process.    
  
Another constraint is the living environment of the 
patient and the respect of healthy living conditions at home. 
A sick person is more susceptible for infections than a 
normal one, which imposes giving high attention to hygiene 
control and to the quality of ambient air and temperature in 
the living place of the patient. This in turn reflects another 
challenge for treatment process because it depends relatively 
on the financial conditions of the patient.   
 
Figure 3 summarizes the different weaknesses and 
constraints of the treatment process and the cause-effect 
relationship between each of the contributors.  As presented 
in the figure, there are many parameters that influence the 
treatment process and are considered as limiting aspects. 
Besides, the quality control of the medical equipment used 
should eventually be addressed in some cases. For instance, a 
non-stable blood pressure measurement device can provoke a 
lot of disturbance for a non-experienced staff who may not 
doubt the measured value and further investigate it. Troubles 
and panic evoked by non-controlled or non-maintained 
devices can lead to dangerous decisions in certain cases 
ultimately increasing risk. Such a probability of errors in 
portable medical equipment may be higher because such 
devices are usually kept either with the staff or at the 
patient’s place. In a hospital, medical devices are usually 
maintained almost on a daily basis and the availability of a 
biomedical engineer or a technician on site decreases the 
risk. The biomedical department in a hospital performs 
periodic checks on the functioning conditions of devices 
(humidity, temperature, electricity and grounding, electric 
safety, etc.). In home-based care, neither the staff nor the 
patient are trained or qualified to perform such a task. 
III. 
MODEL AND MANAGEMENT OF THE SOLUTION 
A. Controls and Support  
The proposed management model for the service 
contains steps and procedures in order to minimize the risk 
and errors provoked by each of the above-mentioned issues. 
The model is based on the use of information and 
communication technology facilities in order to maintain 
acceptable working conditions, thus improving the quality 
of the service delivered.  
 
Nowadays, portable touchpads and smart devices can 
establish a bidirectional communication process where data 
is transferred rapidly and processed in a very short time. The 
design involves pre-defined mobile devices that connect 
through a secure application to a central system/database 
hosted at the hospital or at the company offering the service.  
 
The mobile application, installed on a mobile smart 
device (Touchpads, tablet PCs, smart phones, etc.) will have 
two different versions; one for the patient, and another for 
the physician. The mobile application can be modified or 
adapted depending on the case requirements that are defined 
through a well-traced procedure. 
The goal of the application will be: 
 
Physician’s version: 
1- Send instructions to the control room. 
2- Establish communication between the physician and 
the patient at home. 
3- Show critical medical information of patients 
(patient’s file, medical measurements, etc…) 
4- Show needed reports/trends about patients 
5- Receive emergency reports/alarms from the system 
 
Patient’s version: 
1- Send medical readings/measurements to the control 
room (example: blood pressure measurements). 
2- Establish communication between physician and 
patient. 
3- Receive instructions/alarms from control room. 
Figure 3. Cause-effect relationship influencing the treatment process in 
home-based healthcare. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

In the control room, the system will be managed by the 
experienced staff member(s) to control and manage the 
communication processes between the control room, 
patients, and physicians; as well as follow the treatment 
processes between the staff and the treating physician who 
may be situated inside or outside the hospital.  
 
The system itself will: 
1- Collect medical readings from patients. 
2- Collect instructions from physicians. 
3- Host maintenance information about mobile medical 
equipment. 
4- Ensure on-time connectivity to mobile devices. 
5- Analyze data based on intelligence. 
6- Trigger alarms 
 
A sample diagram of the system is illustrated in Figure 4. 
 
The created mobile application contains multiple steps 
where at the end of each routine to be performed by the 
staff, an outcome is required. The outcome will be presented 
as a value to be entered by the staff/patient. The value 
entered is transferred directly and shown on the server’s 
screen in the ‘Central Control Room”. The transfer of data 
to the control room enables online verification by the 
control room officer. The importance of this step comes 
from the fact that the control room officer, who in turn 
ensures the technical support and the control for the staff, 
can verify any procedure. A screenshot of what is displayed 
to the staff is shown in Figure 5. 
The software enables to create a visible history of any 
parameter of the patient. This history can be connected with 
the control room directly. This can even be done through 
videoconferencing, where the control room officer can in 
turn talk to the patient.   
 
Transferring the information all the time to the control 
room permits to create huge databases where all events are 
added using neural archiving methodologies. This data can 
ensure an important support for the staff and builds an expert 
system that will always be available in case it is needed.  A 
key bonus of this feature is traceability, where all events are 
recorded along with respective timestamps. 
 
B. Patient Responsiveness and Awareness 
Improving patient responsiveness and awareness has 
been shown to increase when patients are involved in the 
treatment process. A developed version of the model and the 
application proposes that two touch devices be used, where 
one of them will be kept with the patient. On the patient’s 
device, a patient application is installed permitting the 
interaction and the communication with the control room 
and with the staff concerned if available. In her/his 
dedicated application, the patient will be asked to enter all 
the parameters measured by the staff as the latter does on 
his/her own application. The staff will be asked to approve 
the data entered by the patient through the mobile 
application. Some alerts are programmed so that when a 
measured value approaches the safety limits or thresholds, a 
sign attracting the patient's attention is launched. However, 
this should be applied in a limited number of cases, 
depending on the patient’s alertness and/or – probably – 
their psychological aptitude.  Such a dual system is 
exemplified in Figure 6.  
 
Besides alerting the patient and involving her/him in the 
process, another purpose of having the data entered by the 
patient is to have a second reading of the parameter to be 
measured. This minimizes the risk of the human error and 
allows the staff to have a second look at the measured value.  
 
Certain features for the entertainment of patients might be 
incorporated in the application thus improving the healing 
process.  A psychic follow up can be also ensured through 
this application. 
 
C. Patient Living Conditions  
In the proposed model, a primary step is added to the 
patient incorporation procedure. This step is to perform an 
evaluation for the patient’s living place at the very 
beginning of the treatment process. If the patient’s living 
conditions are not adequate, the service might not be offered 
and the patient will be kept at the hospital. Eventually, some 
modifications might be required so that the living place 
stays in conformity with the defined norms. This can lead to 
Figure 5. Screenshots of the mobile application.  An example of the initial 
pad navigation screen (left) showing two potential patients.  A summary of 
a measurement (blood pressure in this case) is shown to the right. 
Figure 4. Home-based care system sample diagram. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the identification of some parameters that will be added to 
the mobile application and measured on an hourly, daily, or 
weekly basis depending on the parameter.  
D. Devices Maintenance  
In the dedicated program, a tab is designated for the 
device history. For any measured parameter, the application 
will ask the staff to enter the tag number of the device used. 
The tag number is an identification code that permits the 
system to check in the database for the device history. In the 
device history, all device maintenance records and control 
data are archived. The staff will be alerted if the device was 
not maintained or checked on time. In addition, when an 
abnormal value is measured, the system will directly check 
the maintenance date, and it might ask the staff to perform 
the test once or more, as shown in Figure 7.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
As home-based medical services are becoming a reality 
in today’s society, innovative solutions are needed to help 
offer such services safely and efficiently.  Technology plays 
an important role in ensuring this and in guaranteeing the 
quality of offered service. This is all the more so when the 
services are rendered in a country that markets itself as a 
destination for health tourism [13].  The proposed model 
enhances the home-based care service in a rapid and non-
expensive manner taking into account key quality 
considerations.  The preliminary implementation of the 
system – in cooperation with a Lebanese private hospital and 
a one-day-surgery polyclinic – involved the collection of 
data comprising vital signs (body temperature, blood 
pressure, pulse rate), blood glucose, general appearance, and 
– in limited cases – urination frequency and volume.  The 
collected data produced seed information that was further 
used to extrapolate into more quasi-real settings.  Current 
raw data (not shown) is in complete accord with the 
proposed model based on the simulation data shown above. 
  
The use of information and mobile communication 
technology permits the instantaneous control and support of 
the medical services rendered at home. Future advanced 
versions of the application may contain more features 
designed for people with special needs so that a permanent 
assistance is ensured. Other features may include tracking of 
the staff and patients, probably through the usage of global 
positioning system (GPS) capabilities in the device and an 
active subscription-based service to broadcast geographical 
locations. Both technical and geographical tracking can be 
performed at the same time through this software-based 
model. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Y. J. F. Hutin, S. T. Goldstein, J. K. Varma, J. B. O’Dair, E. E. Mast, 
C. N. Shapiro, and  M. J. Alter, “An Outbreak of Hospital Acquired 
Hepatitis B Virus Infection Among Patients Receiving Chronic 
Hemodialysis,” Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology, Vol. 
20, No. 11, Nov. 1999, pp. 731-735. 
[2] 
N. Graves, “Economics and Preventing Hospital-acquired Infection,” 
Emerging Infectious diseases, vol.10, No: 4, April 2004, pp. 561-566, 
doi:  10.3201/eid1004.020754. 
[3] 
E. E. Bodle, J. A. Cunningham, P. Della-Latta, N. W. Schluger, and 
L. Saiman, “Epidemiology of Nontuberculous Mycobacteria in 
Patients without HIV Infection, New York City,” Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, vol. 14, No. 3, March 2008, pp. 390-396, 
doi:  10.3201/eid1403.061143. 
[4] 
É. Dubost, “La nuit dans un service d’hospitalisation a domicile,” 
Gérontologie et société, vol. 116, 2006, pp : 239-252, doi : 
10.3917/gs.116.0239.  
[5] 
N. Montjaux-Régis, F. Raynal, V. Chourré, V. Jasinskij, R.-H. 
Narcisse, I. Glorieux, C. Alberge, and C. Casper, “Hospitalisation à 
domicile pour les nouveau-nés,” Archives de Pédiatrie, vol. 16, June 
2009, pp. 713-714, doi : 10.1016/S0929-693X(09)74123-5  
[6] 
B. P. Ncama, “Models of Community/Home-Based Care for People 
Living With HIV/AIDS in Southern Africa,” Journal of the 
Association of Nurses in AIDS care, vol. 16, No. 3, May-June 2005, 
pp. 33-40.  
[7] 
C. Delaney, B. Apostolidis, L. Lachapelle, and R. Fortinsky, “Home 
care nurses’ knowledge of evidence-based education topics for 
management of heart failure,” Journal of Heart and Lung,  vol. 40, 
July-August 2011, pp. 285-292.   
[8] 
R. J. Webster, K. W. Carter, N. M. Warrington, A. M. Loh, and S. 
Zaloumis, “Hospitalisation with Infection, Asthma and Allergy in 
Kawasaki Disease Patients and Their Families: Genealogical Analysis 
Figure 6. Communication scheme between the various key players. 
Figure 7. Equipment maintenance tracking system. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Using Linked Population Data,” PLoS ONE 6(11), Nov. 2011, 
e28004. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028004 (Open Access). 
[9] 
W. Hassan, H. Bazzi, D. Kerbaj, and H. M. Khachfe, “Quality control 
and monitoring of in-home cares services,” Proc. 16th International 
Conference on ISO and TQM (ICIT), July 2012, pp. 263-270. 
[10] S. Koch, “Home telehealth – current state and future trends,” 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 75, August 2006, 
pp. 565—576. 
[11] Y. H. Kuo, Y. K. Chien, W. R. Wang, C. H. Chen, L. S. Chen, and C. 
K. Liu, “Development of a home-based telehealthcare model for 
improving the effectiveness of the chronic care of stroke patients,” 
Kaohsiung Journal of Medical Sciences, vol. 28, Issue 1, Jan 2012, 
pp. 38-43 .  
[12] K. L. Margolis, T. J. Kerby, S. E. Asche, A. R. Bergdall , M. V. 
Maciosek, P. J. O'Connor, and J. M. Sperl-Hillen, “Design and 
rationale for Home Blood Pressure Telemonitoring and Case 
Management to Control Hypertension (HyperLink): A cluster 
randomized trial,” Contemporary Clinical Trials, vol. 33, Issue 4, July 
2012, pp.794–803. 
[13] H. M. Khachfe, W. Hassan, H. Bazzi, and D. Kerbaj, “Impact of 
Medical Tourism on the qulaity of medical services: the case of 
Lebanon,” 
Proc. 
8th 
Competition 
and 
Cooperation 
(C&C) 
International Conference, July 2012, pp. 321-331. 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Heath Kiosks as an Equal Opportunity Resource for Better Health:  A 
Systematic Review 
 
 
Ashish Joshi  
Center for Global Health and Development  
College of Public Health, UNMC 
Omaha, NE 68198- USA 
Email: ashish.joshi@unmc.edu 
 
Kate Trout  
Center for Global Health and Development  
College of Public Health, UNMC 
Omaha, NE 68198- USA 
Email: kate.trout@unmc.edu
 
 
Abstract— Computerized health kiosk systems could be the key 
to improving public health among diverse populations around 
the world. The objective of our study is to examine the current 
utilization of health kiosks in various diverse settings. Further, 
the study aims to describe the various characteristics of the 
individuals using these health kiosks. A search was performed 
using a scientific database, Pubmed, to identify articles 
published during the period of January 2005 to January 2012 
using the following keywords: “public health kiosk”, “public 
health kiosk rural”, and “public health kiosk urban”. A 
secondary search was also performed to include the articles 
that met the inclusion criteria. Results of our review show 
variations in the geographic patterns of users’ accessibility of 
kiosk locations. Health kiosk acceptance was high among Black 
Hispanics, people born outside of the United States, and users 
with no formal education past high school. High satisfaction 
was observed among low literacy users, individuals with no 
formal education, and low-income families. Older populations 
accessed kiosks at churches and health fairs.  Users with no 
insurance most commonly accessed the kiosk at public 
libraries, followed by neighborhood health centers and 
Laundromats. The health kiosks have shown to be a useful 
medium of reducing health disparities by bridging the gap 
among users with varied characteristics. However, there is a 
need for further research to determine long-term impacts of 
health kiosks on the health outcomes of the populations in 
various settings. 
Keywords- Health kiosks; users; technology; acceptance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Computerized kiosk systems could be the key to 
improving public health around the world among diverse 
populations.  Public health kiosks have proved to be 
successful 
in 
disseminating 
health 
education 
and 
interventions.  Kiosks are free standing units containing a 
computer that delivers services, as well as informational and 
instrumental support.  Many of the kiosk computers have 
touch-screen interfaces and vary in the level of interactivity.  
Public kiosks have been used in the distribution of a variety 
of services, such as gift registries, bank Automatic Teller 
Machines (ATMs), movie theater tickets, movie rentals, and 
grocery store checkout lanes.  The current utilization of 
kiosk systems has made the use of health kiosks accepted 
and familiar in public settings.  Conventional ways of 
delivering health interventions to participants would be time 
and labor extensive to provide tailor health information for 
each participant of the health intervention.  The health kiosk 
improves the quality of information appropriate to the user 
across a larger, more diverse audience.  Therefore, health 
kiosks are time efficient, accessible, and have the capability 
of adapting to diversity [1]-[3]. 
Culture, socioeconomic status, and language are three 
components that affect the gap of health disparities.  Health 
care delivery should be culturally competent for at least six 
reasons: (1) respond to demographic changes, (2) improve 
quality of services and health outcomes, (3) meet legislative, 
regulatory 
and 
accreditation 
mandates, 
(4) 
gain 
a 
competitive edge in the market place, (5) decrease liability 
and malpractice claims, and (6) eliminate health disparities 
of diverse cultural, ethnic, and racial backgrounds [3].  
Programs have been designed through conducting surveys 
within communities enabling them to present consistent 
culturally relevant information that has been approved by 
individuals in the community [5].  Furthermore, providing 
relevant information itself can help reduce disparities within 
populations, and help close the gap of low health literacy.  
Cultural tailoring and theoretical framework needs to be 
incorporated in the delivery of health information, and can 
be easily managed into the design of kiosk programs.  
Kiosks have the ability to provide multiple language options 
in the delivery health information, and maintain consistent 
culturally relevant information.   
Public health promotion efforts would be more 
successful if they were targeted at specific geographic areas.  
The national public health objective calls for an increased 
use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to make 
interventions more cost effective [6].  The use of GIS can 
improve health promotion and disease prevention efforts in 
at least seven ways: (1) helping visualize patterns of disease 
and disparity, (2) help identify risk factors, (3) fostering 
local collaboration and data-sharing, (4) interpreting 
geographically 
specific 
intervention 
outcomes, 
(5) 
identifying the medically underserved populations, (6) 
planning of interventions for maximum reach and 
effectiveness, and (7) selecting the most appropriate setting 
for prevention efforts [7]-[11].  
Public health kiosks can potentially be utilized to enhance 
self-management of chronic diseases, reduce health 
disparities, better outreach of healthcare services, and can be 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

a cost effective way to improve delivery of healthcare 
services. However, several variables such as digital divide, 
health 
literacy, 
lack 
of 
culturally 
adaptive 
health 
information, and limited availability of tailored health 
material are some of the existing barriers to greater adoption 
of health technologies and their impact in the improvement 
of health outcomes. To our best knowledge, there has not 
been a systematic review to analyze relationships among 
location, user characteristics, study outcomes, and user 
perceptions to the technology.  Heath kiosks disseminate 
education and help build skills for better health that reach 
the medically underserved communities, and approach 
challenges faced in the field of public health.   
The objective of our study is to examine the current 
utilization of health kiosks in various diverse settings. 
Further, 
the 
study 
aims 
to 
describe 
the 
various 
characteristics of the individuals using these health kiosks.  
This paper contains five sections.  You have just read the 
Introduction in Section I.  Section II describes the methods, 
and comprised of keyword search, inclusion criteria, 
exclusion criteria, variable extraction, and statistical 
analysis.  The results of the study are described in section III 
with the kiosk locations and user characteristics, technology 
outcomes, components/functions/features of the kiosks, and 
correlations of user characteristics with technology 
outcomes.  Section IV concludes our paper, and followed by 
section V explaining future research. 
II. 
METHODS 
A.    Keyword Search 
A search was conducted on Medline via Pubmed 
electronic database [12] to identify the up to date literature 
about the use of the kiosk in public health settings. The 
search period was during January 14-January 20 2012 with 
keywords searched included “public health kiosk”, “public 
health kiosk rural”, and “public health kiosk urban” and 
included articles published during the period of January 
2005 to January 2012. A manual review of the literature 
provided by the electronic database search was conducted to 
identify relevant articles to include in our analysis. A 
secondary search was also performed to include the articles 
that met the inclusion criteria. 
B.    Inclusion criteria 
Those studies that had studied health kiosks in both 
clinical and non-clinical settings, were in English, and were 
conducted both within and outside United States were 
included in our final analysis.  
C.    Exclusion Criteria 
Electronic search entries were excluded if they were not 
full text peer-reviewed papers, such as abstract submissions 
or news report articles. Other studies that were excluded 
included those that focused on the use of kiosks educating 
individuals on topics not related to health, home based 
health kiosks, and kiosks that vend/distribute products. 
Computerized kiosks that were used solely to answer a 
survey or to collect data for patient check in at a private 
practice were also excluded. 
 
D.    Variable Extraction 
The following variable information was extracted from the 
final analyzable articles: 
• 
Targeted audience: It was aimed to gather 
information about the different age groups 
race/ethnicity and gender for which previous 
studies have been conducted. This will help us in 
developing better understanding about the usage 
and acceptance of health kiosks for various socio-
demographics. 
• 
Study location: The aim here was to develop a 
better understanding about the research that 
currently exists about the implementation and 
adoption of health kiosks in various developing and 
developed countries.  
• 
Study setting: This information will help us 
identify the disparities in the implementation of 
health kiosks in rural and urban settings. 
Additionally, “setting location” defines location 
specificity 
of 
kiosks 
within 
communities, 
businesses, and events. 
E.    Statistical Analysis 
Descriptive analysis was performed to report means and 
standard deviations for the continuous variables and 
frequency analysis for the categorical variables. All analysis 
was performed using SPSS version 20 [13]. 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Kiosk Location and User Characteristics 
The majority of the studies were performed only on 
adults (56%; n=18), followed by children and adults (38%; 
n=12), adolescents (3%; n=1), and only children (3%; n=1). 
The majority of the studies were focused both on males and 
females (84%; n=27) while only limited number of studies 
included only females (16%; n=5). Additional variables that 
might be important to determine use of the health kiosk 
among various users may include educational status, 
income, and prior familiarity with use of computers. 
However, there were few studies that reported this 
information in the studies included in our final analysis.  
Among health care settings, half of the studies placed 
kiosks in medical clinics (50%; n=16), followed by 28% 
(n=9) at emergency departments, and 19% (n=6) at 
community health centers.  The other locations utilized by 
studies were social service agencies (16%; n=5), public 
libraries (13%; n=4), churches (13%; n=4), health fairs (9%; 
n=3), beauty salons (9%; n=3), Laundromats (9%; n=3), 
pharmacies (6%; n=2), and restaurants (6%; n=2). Only one 
out of 32 studies placed kiosks at a senor apartment (3%; 
n=1), community center (3%; n=1), grocery store (3%; 
n=1), Department Motor Vehicles office (3%; n=1), and 
school (3%; n=1). Of all the 32 studies analyzed, only 5  
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF STUDIES DETERMINING THE LOCATION HAVING THE HIGHEST REACH TO PEOPLE ON MEDICARE, MEDIAID, AND NOT INSURED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
studies reported the most preferred locations where the 
health kiosks can be placed. Majority of the studies (60%; 
n=3/5) reported neighborhood health centers as the most 
preferred location for the health kiosk.  This was followed 
by public library and social service agencies.   
An additional analysis was conducted to determine the 
preferred kiosk location to reach patients receiving 
Medicaid, Medicare, and people with no insurance.  Of all 
the 32 studies analyzed, only 4 studies reported the reach of 
Medicaid users at each location where the health kiosks can 
be 
placed. 
The 
majority 
of 
the 
studies 
reported 
neighborhood health centers (75%; n=3/4) as the most 
accessed by users on Medicaid.  Other highly accessed 
locations were social service agencies, medical centers, and 
Laundromats. Only three studies (9%) reported the reach of 
Medicare users that accessed the kiosk at each location. All 
three of the studies reported churches (100%; n=3/3) as the 
most preferred by users on Medicare, followed by public 
libraries, Laundromats, and beauty salons.  One limitation to 
the preferred Medicare locations is that beauty salons were 
third, sixth, and seventh order in the three different studies.  
More analysis is needed to determine the preference of 
beauty salons among Medicare patients.  Only three studies 
(9%) reported the reach of users with no insurance that 
accessed the kiosk at each location. The location with the 
most access among users with no insurance was public 
libraries (66%; n=2/3).  Other highly access locations were 
neighborhood health centers and Laundromats (Table 1). 
Three studies (9%; n=3/32) reported the mean age across 
different kiosk locations, and consistently show that older 
populations access health kiosks at churches and health fairs 
with a mean range of 47.8 to 42.9 years of age. Younger 
populations access kiosks at beauty salon, social service 
agencies, library, Laundromats, and neighborhood health 
centers with a mean range of 33.1 to 36 years of age.  
Although, the mean age can be shifted from the kiosk health  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topic presented, the results were consistent across the three 
studies using the same kiosk at each location. 
B. Technology Outcomes 
The ease of use of the technology (34%; n=11) 
evaluated the ability of users to operate the kiosk without 
issues. The kiosk usage (28%; n=9) was evaluated in respect 
to the users’ utilization of the kiosk and its features accessed 
during use. The usability (19%; n=6) was studied to define 
the users’ ability to navigate and operate the technology, 
and the presentation of materials by the technology with 
clear, concise actions provided to the user. Two studies 
assessed logistical issues (6%; n=2), such as kiosk generated 
data, and concerns of kiosk. The acceptance (9%; n=3) was 
evaluated with consumers’ approval of the new technology. 
One study (3%) evaluated the use of the kiosk placed across 
different locations to differentiate the reach of the kiosk per 
location (Table 2).  
C. Components/Functions/Features of the 
Kiosk                                            
The 
majority 
of 
studies 
used 
a 
touch 
screen 
computerized kiosk (78%; n=25), and about half of the 
kiosks provided printed information (53%; n=17). Four 
(13%) kiosk systems were able to store personalized health 
records. Tailored information personalized to the user 
characteristics was delivered by 75% (n=24) of the studies. 
Only two studies provided information about the local 
resources available. Only 5 (16%) studies had kiosks that 
were Internet enabled, one had (3%) fax capabilities, and six 
(19%) had a designated personal attendant to guide users. 
There were limited studies that had reported the use of 
telephone handsets (9%; n=3), video camera (3%; n=1), 
microphone (3%; n=1), headphones (3%; n=1) with the 
health kiosks. 
Order of Kiosk 
Location 
Preference 
Type of Medical Coverage 
Medicaid 
Medicare 
Those with No 
Insurance 
1 
Neighborhood Health 
Center 
Church 
Public Library 
2 
Social Service Agency 
Public Library 
Neighborhood Health 
Center 
3 
Medical Center 
Laundromat and Beauty 
Salon 
Laundromats 
4 
Laundromats 
Neighborhood Health 
Center 
Social Service 
Agencies 
5 
Public Library and 
Emergency Department 
Social Service Agency 
Beauty Salon 
6 
Beauty Salon 
Health Fair 
Church 
7 
Church 
 
Health Fair 
8 
Health Fair 
 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF STUDIES THAT DETERMINE EASE OF USE, 
TECHNOLOGY ACCEPTANCE,  AND SATISFACTION OF HEALTH KIOSKS  
 
D. Correlations of User Characteristics with Technology 
Outcomes  
Outcomes were analyzed to determine groups with 
specific characteristics that are significantly correlated with 
the outcome.  The acceptance of the kiosk was analyzed in 
three studies (9%) and satisfaction in six studies (19%), 
among studies both were found to be significantly higher 
among black Hispanics, people born outside of the United 
States, and individuals with no formal education past high 
school. Among studies that analyzed usage (28%; n=9), two 
studies (6%) identified significant results of low literacy 
users, no formal education past high school, and low-
income families of 5000 US dollars or less having the 
highest usage of the kiosk. The ease of use of the 
technology (34%; n=11/32), and usability (19%; n=6/32) 
were readily reported among studies.  High literacy, no 
formal education past high school, and users of the age 36 
years or less was positively correlated with ease of use 
regarding the technology.  Usability of the kiosk was 
correlated with high literacy users, and spending more time 
at kiosk (Table 3).  Additionally, two studies (6%) identified 
health kiosks were easy to use and accepted among children; 
with more time spend at the kiosk among younger children. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Computerized kiosk systems could be the key to 
improving public health around the world among diverse 
populations.  Through our review, we identified high usage 
among low literacy users, no formal education past high 
school, and low-income families of 5000 US dollars or less.  
There was high acceptance and satisfaction among black 
Hispanics, people born outside of the United States, and 
users with no formal education past high school.  Although 
theoretical framework was not often provided to determine 
the correlations of specific framework, we can in fact 
conclude that the technology has the capability of reaching 
health disparity groups and potentially narrow disparity 
gaps through the analysis of the perception of the users.  
Furthermore, our findings suggest that there are 
geographic patterns of user accessibility of kiosk locations.  
Older populations access kiosks at churches and health fairs.  
The location with the most access among users with no  
TABLE III.  
NUMBER OF STUDIES CORREATING USER CHARACTERISTIC 
AND TECHOLOGY OUTCOME 
 
insurance was public libraries, followed by neighborhood 
health centers and Laundromats.  Unanimously, churches 
were identified the most accessed by users on Medicare.  
The majority of the studies reported neighborhood health 
centers and social service agencies as the most accessed by 
users on Medicaid.  Better understanding the patterns would 
help target appropriate interventions, and in return be more 
cost effective.  
This review indicates a sustainable and accessible health 
kiosk would have a positive impact on the prevention and 
management of a variety of health topics, as well as chronic 
diseases in communities.  The evidence of positive study 
outcomes across a wide spread of processes suggests a 
positive impact on communities’ health, although there is a 
need for further research to determine long-term impacts on 
populations. There can be a sense of community 
empowerment 
by 
providing 
a 
resource 
enabling 
communities to take their health into their own hands.  
Studies have shown high rates of kiosk usage among people 
who are uninsured or underinsured interested in preventative 
health.  Men who are over weight and self-reported being 
depressed were most interested in kiosk information on 
weight control.  Women who smoke and self-reported being 
depressed was most interested in kiosk information about 
smoking cessation [1].  This suggests that individuals are 
seeking out help, and access education modules provided by 
the kiosk that are most relevant to improving their own 
health.  Engaging a community in their public’s health and 
providing them with the resources to make a difference, 
could empower the community to have healthier habits as a 
social group.  An economic analysis, indeed suggests that 
the role of health kiosks will impact persons who may not 
otherwise be reached, along with low-income populations 
and a resource that will becomes extremely cost effective 
over time [14].  
There are several limitations of our study. First, the 
search included only those studies that were indexed in Pub 
med.  Therefore, we may have excluded studies that might 
not have been part of it. Second, the search was limited to 
Variable 
Assessed 
N 
Outcome results 
Positive 
Impact 
Negative 
Impact 
Usability 
6 
5 
1 
Ease of use 
11 
10 
1 
Technology 
satisfaction 
6 
6 
 
Technology 
acceptance 
3 
2 
1 
Kiosk usage 
9 
6 
 
 
User 
Characteristics 
Variables Assessed 
Acceptance 
Ease 
of 
Use 
Usage 
Satisfaction 
Usability 
Low literacy 
 
 
2 
 
 
High literacy 
 
1 
 
 
1 
Black Hispanics 
1 
 
 
1 
 
Born outside of 
the US 
1 
 
 
1 
 
No formal 
education past 
high school 
1 
1 
1 
1 
 
Age of 36 years 
or less 
 
1 
 
 
 
Low income 
 
 
1 
 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

certain combination of key words that might have resulted 
in missing of the other reference articles that might have 
been applicable to our study. However, every effort was 
made to include additional articles after reviewing and 
including the references of the primary articles in the final 
analysis after they met the inclusion criteria.  
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
There is a need to compare and contrast the use of the 
health kiosks among different countries, as several factors 
might impact the overall health kiosk usage in these 
countries. These factors might include social, political, 
cultural, organizational and logistical variations, and 
challenges among populations and other stakeholders. 
Further research is needed to examine health kiosk usage 
patterns stratified by age, gender, occupation, income, 
educational status, and prior computer skills of the 
individuals.  
An understanding of usage patterns can help us better 
assess the impact of health kiosks in improving overall 
health outcomes among diverse user groups. Additionally, 
there is the need for more comparative studies among kiosk 
locations within communities to identify optimal settings for 
kiosk placement, and among a wider variety of settings.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Pendleton B.F., Labuda Schrop S., Ritter C., Kinion E.S., McCord G., 
Cray J.J., Costa A.J. Underserved patients' choice of kiosk-based 
preventive health information.  Fam. Med. 2010 Jul-Aug;42(7):488-
95. 
[2] 
Green M. J., Peterson S.K., Baker M.W. et al. Effect of a computer 
based decision aid on knowledge, perceptions and intentions about 
genetic testing for breast cancer susceptibility: a randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;292:442-452. 
[3] 
Leung S.F., French P., Chui C., Arthur D. Computerized mental 
health assessment in integrative health clinics: a cross-sectional study 
using structured interview. Int. J. Ment. Health Nurs. 2007 
Dec;16(6):441-6. 
[4] 
National 
Center 
For 
Cultural 
Competency. 
Conceptual 
frameworks/models, guiding values and principles. Whitehaven St. 
NW: Georgetown University Center for Child and Human 
Development. 
Available: 
http://www11.georgetown.edu/research/gucchd/nccc/foundations/fra
meworks.html [accessed 27 May 2012].  
[5] 
Andersen 
S., 
Andersen 
P., 
Youngblood 
N.E. 
Multimedia 
computerized 
smoking 
awareness 
education 
for 
low-literacy 
Hispanics. Comput. Inform. Nurs. 2011 Feb; 29(2):107-14. 
[6] 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Understanding and 
improving health. In: Healthy People 2010. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: 
US Government Printing Office, 2000. 
[7] 
Alcaraz K.I., Kreuter M.W., Bryan R.P. Use of GIS to identify 
optimal settings for cancer prevention and control in African 
American communities. Prev. Med. 2009 Aug;49(1):54-7. 
[8] 
Caley L.M. 2004. Using geographic information systems to design 
population based interventions. Public Health Nurs. 2004 Nov-Dec; 
21(6):547-554. 
[9] 
McLafferty S.L. GIS and health care. Annu Rev Public Health 2003 
May; 24:25-42. 
[10] Renger R., Cimetta A., Pettygrove S., Rogan S. Geographic 
information systems as an evaluation tool. Am. J. Eval. 2002 Dec; 
23(4):469-479. 
[11] Richards T.B., Croner C.M., Rushton G., Brown C.K., Fowler L. 
Geographic information systems and public health: Mapping the 
future. Public Health Rep. 1999; 114(4):359-373. 
[12] U.S. National Library of Medicine.  MEDLINE®/PubMed®. 
Accessed at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed. 
[13] IBM Corp. Released 2011. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, 
Version 20.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp. 
[14] Gould S.M., Anderson J. Economic analysis of bilingual interactive 
multimedia nutrician education. J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 2002 Sep-Oct; 
34:273-278. 
 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Multi-functional Wireless Body Sensor 
 
Roman Trobec, Aleksandra Rashkovska, and Viktor Avbelj 
Department of Communication Systems 
Jožef Stefan Institute 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
Roman.Trobec@ijs.si, Aleksandra.Rashkovska@ijs.si, Viktor.Avbelj@ijs.si 
 
 
Abstract—A 
wireless 
multi-functional 
body 
sensor 
for 
monitoring vital bio-signals is proposed. The sensor uses 
modern, 
moderately 
priced, 
user-friendly 
and 
robust 
technology solutions. It supports advanced algorithms for local 
analysis of data and communication infrastructure to widely 
available personal terminals for visualization of measurements, 
and further transfer of critical data, either to medical experts 
or to a personal database. We pay a special attention to the 
fusion of different sensing functions in a single multi-functional 
sensor. To improve the reliability and robustness of the system, 
the measured signals, e.g., ECG, light, voice, acceleration, etc., 
can be combined in order to prevent the rising of false alarms. 
The proposed multi-functional body sensor contributes in 
significantly elevated quality, unobtrusiveness and robustness 
of the health care and patient safety.  
Keywords - multi-functional body sensor; wireless; mobile; 
healthcare; monitoring 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
introduction 
of 
modern 
information 
and 
communication technologies (ICT), as support to medical 
activities, is one of the possibilities to increase the efficacy of 
the health care system and to decrease its costs. This basic 
premise is included in all strategic plans of the EU and the 
rest of the world. Numerous studies have confirmed the 
benefit of the development of Telemedicine/Telecare 
systems [1, 2]. We are proposing a multi-functional wireless 
body sensor (MWBS) that uses modern, moderately priced 
and user-friendly technology solutions. It is appropriate as a 
building block in systems for continuous monitoring of 
hospitalized patients, post-hospital care, or diagnostic long-
term monitoring. It measures vital functions, e.g., heart beat 
rate, blood pressure, body temperature, etc. Classically, these 
measurements are performed by nurses several times a day 
and then manually entered in the patient’s charts. In addition 
to the issue of intermittent monitoring of vital functions in 
non-intensive wards, there are other weaknesses in the 
current health care system. The interpretation of the patient’s 
condition and the consequent measures taken depend on the 
personnel, who could be, in certain conditions, overwhelmed 
with work or busy with other patients. The measured 
indicators can also be inaccurate - sometimes being biased 
by the presence or the inexperience of the medical personnel 
and therefore unreliable.  
In proposed systems for remote monitoring of vital 
functions [3, 4], patients or monitored subjects are fitted with 
several body sensors for vital functions, which communicate 
with personal terminals (size of a mobile phone) via wireless 
connections. The measurements are stored in the personal 
terminal for monitoring and processing with automated 
procedures based on comparison with threshold values, 
predetermined rules and automatic learning. The data are 
sent, either periodically or because of unusual events, to a 
computer server that maintains a database and is responsible 
for presentation, alerts and necessary actions.  
Taking into account that unobtrusiveness and robustness 
might be decisive factors for the success of the future bio-
monitoring systems, we concentrate on these two issues. We 
investigate options for the development of the MWBS and 
integrations in final monitoring systems that can fulfill both 
requirements. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, the 
architecture of the proposed system for remote monitoring of 
vital functions is presented. Next, the implementation of the 
system is described, elaborating the role of the wireless 
multi-functional body sensor, the concept for improved 
alarms using environmental sensors, and the platforms for 
transmission, representation and collection of data from the 
sensors. The paper concludes with a summary of our 
findings and potential future extensions of the proposed 
multi-purpose body-sensor approach. 
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The architecture of the proposed system for remote 
monitoring of vital functions is shown in Fig. 1. The design 
of the system takes into account the existing technical 
standards, allowing easy connection of various body sensors 
and their immediate replacement, if an improved version 
becomes available. The system allows connection of new 
sensors, which could help in the improvement of the 
monitoring of the patient's condition, for example, sensors 
for remote monitoring of respiratory acoustic phenomena 
(cough, obstruction), simple video sensors, etc. Some of the 
measurements are feasible with our custom sensors [5]; for 
others, like blood pressure measurements, new unobtrusive 
and non-invasive body sensors are to be developed. 
The transmission of the measurements to remote places is 
done by existing infrastructure (Ethernet, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, 
etc.) and the Internet, which offers an inexpensive 
implementation, 
as 
well 
as 
wide 
availability. 
The 
information is available on site and controlled/monitored by 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the staff on call, which enables immediate detection of 
deterioration in the patient's state and prompt actions.  
Based on the simultaneous evaluation of multiple 
variables, the system will provide the threat level and its 
trend [6]. The analysis of vital functions in a longer time 
period allows for the implementation of cognitive methods; 
for example, analysis of a cardiogram over longer time 
period contributes to personalized patient’s threat level [7, 
8].  
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION CONCEPTS 
The implementation of the proposed system significantly 
increases the research potential of medical institutions. The 
system provides documented measurements and events 
obtained in an objective manner during different stages of 
the well being of patients or other users (elderly, athletes, 
etc.). The system could be upgraded with new medical 
research methods. Following are related research activities 
and findings that contribute in the system implementation. 
A. Development of multi-functional body sensors 
Body sensors should be non-disruptive to users; 
therefore, we consider small and multi-functional wireless 
sensors. We have already prototyped a differential wireless 
bio-electrode (WBE) for measuring ECG [5] and EEG. 
Within the WBE, other sensors can be incorporated towards 
the final version of the MWBS. We have currently identified 
the following options: 
bio-sensors 
 
heart beat rate, 
 
blood pressure, 
 
respiration, 
 
temperature, 
 
oxygen saturation, 
environmental sensors 
 
acceleration, 
 
position, 
 
audio recording, 
 
video detection. 
 
The wireless technology considered for transmission of 
measured data from the sensors to personal terminals is the 
newest version of Bluetooth technology – low energy 
Bluetooth 4.0 (BT4). It enables direct communication 
between the MWBS and newest Smart phones and devices 
with incorporated Bluetooth Smart technology. 
Bluetooth low energy protocol is low-cost wireless 
solution designed to meet special requirements for long-term 
operation in devices with limited energy capacity (e.g. coin-
cell battery). Its ultra-low peak, average and idle mode 
power consumption and enhanced working range enables the 
MWBS to operate on a single coin-cell battery for several 
days while transmitting live stream of raw ECG data. Based 
on our preliminary measurements, we conclude that the BT4 
enables 4 days of external power supply independency for a 
MWBS with a small coin battery. The maximal bit-rate of 
the data payload is 1 Mb/s, which is sufficient also for high-
resolution short-term measurements. 
Other features can be also added to the MWBS: vascular 
pressure, oxygen saturation, skin resistance and respiratory 
rate 
measurements. 
Furthermore, 
microphones, 
accelerometers and video sensors could offer additional 
environmental data that contribute to a better estimate of the 
status of the monitored patient. An example of the prototype 
multisensory electrode is shown in Fig. 2a. It is equipped 
with a BT4 radio and sensors for ECG, respiration 
acceleration and light. On the measured raw ECG signal 
(Fig. 2b), a respiration signal as an envelope of the R-peaks 
is clearly visible. 
The 
ECG-Derived 
Respiration 
(EDR) 
techniques 
relevant to our work are based on the observation that the 
positions of the ECG electrodes on the chest surface move 
relative to the heart. We confirm, with the analysis of clinical 
multichannel ECG measurements, which include also 
reference thermistor based respiration signals, that the 
proposed approach is a viable option for the monitoring of 
the respiration frequency and for the rough classification of 
the breathing types [9]. The obtained results are evaluated on 
a wireless prototype of respiration body sensor from Fig. 2. 
We indicate the best positions for the respiration body sensor 
and prove that a single sensor of body surface potentials 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture of the system for remote monitoring of vital 
functions. All sensors should be merged into a single multi-functional 
unit. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

difference on proximal skin electrodes can be used for 
combined measurements of respiratory and cardiac activities. 
A new prototyped muscle contraction (MC) sensor [10] 
is considered for integration into the system. The sensor is 
relatively small and light. It is based on a novel principle for 
measuring muscle tension during muscle contractions and 
provides important data about patient's muscular activities. 
Additionally, we consider the option to use the MC sensor 
for detection of the tactile pulse. The sensor could be also 
adopted for measurement of changes in the blood pressure. 
An example of the prototype MC sensor and a preliminary 
measurement of the tactile pulse are shown in Fig. 3a and 
Fig. 3b, respectively. 
In clinical medicine, the gold standard for diagnosis of 
pneumonia is the X-ray imaging; nevertheless, in a clinical 
examination, pneumonia is diagnosed only in a small 
proportion of ill children. Computer analysis of the sounds in 
adult patients with pneumonia has been proved to confirm 
the diagnosis [11]; however, the method uses sixteen 
microphones, which is not suitable for clinical use. The 
proposed system enables development of convenient and 
computerized systems, designed by a smaller number of 
microphones, which spare the patients from the X-ray 
radiation. 
One of the advantages of the proposed system is the 
ability for continuous monitoring of ECG. In a recently 
published study on children with RSV bronchitis, the 
presence of abnormal heart rhythm was also found [8]. 
Long-term monitoring of ECG is an important source of data 
for confirming the correlation of the two diseases, which is 
not known so far. We can aggregate different sensor data 
and, using rule-based algorithms, devise higher-level 
diagnostic conclusions on medical or rehabilitation status of 
users. 
In some rare cases, more body sensors are still needed. 
An example is the synthesized 12-lead electrocardiogram 
(ECG) [12], which is the gold standard in cardiology.  
B. Improved alarms with environmental sensors 
One of the most critical problems that influence a 
sustainable use of monitoring systems is issuing false alarms. 
The personnel that assists and manages a monitoring system 
cannot tolerate false alarms above some minimal limit. We 
pay special attention to overcome this problem with 
multilevel alarms based on data from more than a single 
sensor. To improve the quality of patients’ status 
interpretation, we introduce visual sensors consisting of 
simple and low cost video detectors [13]. Visual sensors will 
not allow interference with personal intimacy. The video 
detectors cover just a near area of the patient’s bed and, after 
a simple local video processing, detect and store patients’ 
motion, movement and position. Based on these additional 
data, an improved reliability of raised alarms can be 
obtained.  
C. Platforms for transmission, representation and 
collection of data 
The transmission of data from the sensors, and later its 
representation, are planned on two levels: to the patient itself 
and to the medical personal.  
First, we have wireless transmission of the measured data 
from the sensors to personal terminals, like Smartphones or 
other portable smart devices. Custom made applications 
provide the opportunity for suitable representation of the 
transmitted data and the possibility for the patient to monitor 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 2.  (a) A prototype of the MWBS with two self-adhesive 
disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio,  
and printed circuit board antenna. (b) An example of an ECG recorded 
wirelessly – raw signal. 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 3.  (a) A prototype of the muscle contraction (MC) sensor: (1) 
laminate, (2) incision, (3) tonguelet, (4) sensor tip, (5) strain gauge. 
 
(b) An example of measured tactile pulse. 
-0.2 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Time [s] 
ECG amplitude [mV] 
[mV] 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

its vital functions. We have already developed an application 
that provides a comfortable option for telemonitoring of the 
heart activity. We use the prototyped wireless bipolar body 
electrode to record ECG wirelessly, coupled with the 
advantages of existing portable smart devices to display the 
real-time data from the electrode [14]. Local processing of 
the measured data and alarm triggering can be done already 
on the sensor or on the portable device. For example, the 
respiration rate can be calculated on the sensor, while the 
reconstruction of the standard 12-lead ECG can be 
performed on the Smartphone for the visualization of the 
reconstructed signal.  
Second, a SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) client 
on the portable platform transfers relevant data (for example, 
ECG data when an alarm has been triggered) to a computer 
server. The transferred data on the server [15] is 
appropriately visualized to the medical personal for 
diagnostic purposes, and also is collected in a database for 
further analysis. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We have designed a system for continuous remote 
monitoring of patients at risk, which is based on multi-
functional wireless body sensors. We thus contribute to 
significantly 
elevated 
quality, 
unobtrusiveness 
and 
robustness of the health care and patient safety. Widespread, 
accessible, and tested ICT solutions from the field of 
measuring sensor systems, mobile communications and 
network services, are incorporated into the system. Medical 
expertise are also included through the software for analysis 
of multi measurements, as well as the triggering of alerts and 
alarms for urgent action. The responses of medical personnel 
to clinical deterioration in patients will be faster; therefore, 
the patients will experience fewer complications in case of 
sudden deterioration of their health. The work of medical 
personnel will be less stressful and more efficient. 
The applicability of the proposed system is not limited 
only to hospitals and health care centers, where the added 
benefit of the system will enable “doctor-to-doctor” and 
“patient-to-doctor” communication. The system can be also 
installed in nursing and patients’ homes, e.g. for early 
postoperative care. The patient-friendly approach will 
contribute to easier diagnostics and reduction of healthcare 
costs.  
We developed and evaluated a prototype of multi-
functional sensor that can record main features of ECG, 
respiration, and acceleration. Further sensing options, e.g., 
temperature and MC, are under development and laboratory 
testing. It is clear that the proposed approach is ideal for 
users from the comfort point-of-view; however, the main 
focus of our future work is in the evaluation study of long-
term functional performances, including data security and 
privacy, and added diagnostic value of the proposed system.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the 
state budget by the Slovenian Research Agency under Grant 
P2-0095. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A.G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, and S. Flottorp, “Effectiveness of 
telemedicine: A systematic review of reviews,” Int. J. Med. 
Inform., 
vol. 
79, 
Nov. 
2010, 
pp. 
736-771, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2010.08.006. 
[2] W. Chaboyer, L. Thalib, M. Foster, C. Ball, and B. Richards, 
“Predictors of Adverse Events in Patients After Discharge 
From the Intensive Care Unit,” Am. J. Crit. Care, vol. 17, 
May 2008, pp. 255-263. 
[3] F. Hu, S. Li, T. Xue, and G. Li, "Design and analysis of low-
power body area networks based on biomedical signals," 
International Journal of Electronics, vol. 99, May 2012, pp. 
811-822, doi:10.1080/00207217.2011.643502. 
[4] J.M.L.P. Caldeira, J.J.P.C. Rodrigues, and P. Lorenz, 
"Toward ubiquitous mobility solutions for body sensor 
networks on healthcare," IEEE Communications Magazine, 
vol. 
50, 
May 
2012, 
pp. 
108-115, 
doi: 
10.1109/MCOM.2012.6194390. 
[5] R. Trobec, M. Depolli, and V. Avbelj, "Wireless network of 
bipolar body electrodes," Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on Wireless On-demand Network Systems and 
Services, 
WONS, 
Feb. 
2010, 
pp. 
145–149, 
doi: 
10.1109/WONS.2010.5437118. 
[6] C.P. Subbe, M. Kruger, P. Rutherford, and L. Gemmel, 
“Validation of a modified Early Warning Score in medical 
admissions,” Q. J. Med., vol. 94, Oct. 2001, pp. 521-526, doi: 
10.1093/qjmed/94.10.521. 
[7] R.Miller, “Rise of the machines: Computers construct new, 
better biomarkers,” theheart.org [Clinical Conditions > 
Imaging > Imaging], October 5, 2011. Accessed at 
http://www.theheart. org/article/1290375.do on June  18, 
2012. 
[8] S. Esposito et al., “Altered cardiac rhythm in infants with 
bronchiolitis and respiratory syncytial virus infection,” BMC 
Infect. Dis., vol. 10, Oct. 2010, pp. 305, doi:  10.1186/1471-
2334-10-305. 
[9] R. Trobec, A. Rashkovska, and V. Avbelj, “Two proximal 
skin electrodes – a body sensor for respiration rate,“  Sensors, 
in review. 
[10] S. Đorđević, S. Stančin, A. Meglič, V. Milutinović, and S. 
Tomažič, “MC Sensor - A Novel Method for Measurement of 
Muscle Tension,” Sensors, vol. 11, Sep. 2011, pp. 9411-9425, 
doi:10.3390/s111009411. 
[11] R.L. Murphy, “Automated Lung Sound Analysis in Patients 
With Pneumonia,” Respir. Care, vol. 49, Dec. 2004, pp. 1490-
1497. 
[12] R. Trobec and I. Tomašić, “Synthesis of the 12-lead 
electrocardiogram from differential leads,” IEEE Trans. Inf. 
Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, July 2011, pp. 615-621, 
doi:10.1109/TITB.2011.2159236. 
[13] B. Murovec, J. Perš, V. Sulić, R. Mandeljc, and S. Kovačič, 
“Computer-Vision-Centric Design of a Visual Sensor 
Network Node,“ Proceedings of the 17th Computer Vision 
Winter Workshop, Mala Nedelja, Slovenia, Feb. 2012. 
[14] A. Rashkovska, I. Tomašić, and R. Trobec, “A telemedicine 
application: ECG data from wireless body sensors on a 
smartphone,” Proceedings of MEET & GVS on the 34th 
International Convention MIPRO 2011, Opatija, Croatia, May 
2011, pp. 293-296. 
[15] K. Peternel et al., "Touch to communicate using NGN open 
interfaces," Proceedings of the 9th Annual Communication 
Networks and Services Research Conference, May 2011, pp. 
130-136, doi: 10.1109/CNSR.2011.27. 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Security Factors for Healthcare Data 
Comparing the Security Threats of Online Banking and Healthcare Information Systems 
 
Young-Sil Lee and Hoon-Jae Lee 
Division of Computer and Information Engineering 
Dongseo University Graduate School 
Busan, Rep. of Korea 
e-mail: youngsil.lee0113@gmail.com 
Esko Alasaarela and Risto Myllylä 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: esko.alasaarela@ee.oulu.fi 
 
 
Abstract—The number of information security threats in 
healthcare information systems is increasing tremendously. 
There are various factors that contribute to these information 
security threats; most researchers are mainly focused on 
certain factors such as virus attacks and malware. Thus, 
certain important factors may have still remained unexplored. 
In addition, the lack of tools and technologies can also 
contribute to the limited number of threats recorded in the 
healthcare system. In this paper, we summarize the security 
threats in online banking and healthcare information systems 
(HIS) and analyze the relationship of risk factors through 
comparison. The findings will serve as recommendations for 
healthcare service organizations to fill the technology gap 
between the online banking and HIS security systems. 
Keywords - Online banking security; Healthcare security; 
Information security; HIS; Security threats. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 
Nowadays, computer and network-based systems are 
expanding in order to support more healthcare activities, 
especially in isolated regions (i.e., isolated rural areas in 
Greece, Scandinavia and Germany), where there is often no 
availability 
of 
central 
general 
hospitals. 
Networked 
healthcare information systems can fill this gap, by 
connecting local healthcare service providers with central 
regional or peripheral hospitals to make tele-consultation, 
tele-diagnosis and exchange of views possible between 
remote located doctors in certain patient treatment cases. 
Furthermore, medical data maintained in a health 
information system is directly related to the patients’ health 
and safety. According to the recommendation on the 
protection of medical data issued by the Council of Europe 
[1], appropriate technical and organizational measures must 
be taken to protect personal data against any accidental or 
illegal destruction, accidental loss, as well as against 
unauthorized access. These possible threats can severely 
damage a health information system’s reliability and 
discourage professional use in the future. Therefore, the 
execution of a risk analysis is a necessity in order to assure a 
health information system’s safety and Quality of Service 
(QoS) [2]. 
This study intends to analyze the security threats of 
health data. First, a review of the information security threats 
are included and discussed. Beside this, we also compare the 
existing security threats of online banking with the 
healthcare information system (HIS). In both cases, the 
security factors include hacking and blocking as well as 
accidental and deliberate cases, and also the possibility to 
change a sensor from one patient to another. 
Personal medical information is in various aspects similar 
to financial data. Accidents caused by incorrect medical 
information can lead to large-scale litigation, and also 
translate directly damage to a person’s life. According to the 
estimation of the IOM (Institute of Medicine) under the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, as many as 
98,000 patients per year are estimated to die due to wrong 
medical information [3]. This occupies eighth place in the 
United States on the list of the 10 leading causes of death; it 
is higher than the mortality due to traffic accidents, breast 
cancers and AIDS. 
As for financial institutions, in 2007, one million people 
in Japan lost their pension paid records. Due to government 
mismanagement, the data quality may be lost, which may 
lead to pay back in 25 years according to pension 
specifications. 
Through these incidents, we can see how huge the impact 
is to the society, both in case of healthcare and financial data, 
when an incident is about money loss or threat to human life. 
Currently, there is a clear need for efficient security models 
in banks or medical institutions, which offer their customers 
access into their system via Internet. 
Online banking started with Security First Network Bank 
(SFNB) in 1995 [4], and is now rapidly increasing with 
hundreds of millions of users’ across the globe. Many 
researchers have studied various security threats and its 
solutions for online banking. On the other hand, the security 
of personal health information is still not well in order. For 
this reason, even though it cannot prevent all kinds of 
security threats, the online banking system has a better 
security model. 
Since healthcare data is at least as important as financial 
data, the purpose of this paper is to comprehend the factors, 
which are important in healthcare through this study. We 
attempt to classify the security threats on each side and 
analyze the security threats of healthcare information 
through a comparison with the existing threats of online 
banking. Also, we describe some online banking security 
models that can be applied to HIS. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The next section describes the previous studies related to 
this research. Section III presents the comparison of online 
banking security and healthcare information system, and 
Section IV describes some Internet banking security models 
that can be applied to HIS. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
In this section, we describe the information security 
threats as well as summarize the existing security threats in 
online banking [5] and healthcare information systems [6]. 
A. Threats to information security 
Information security threats can be classified into three 
categories, as found below [7][8]. 
First, there are environmental threats, which include 
natural disasters and other environmental conditions. 
Earthquakes, fire, floods and storms are examples of natural 
disasters. The likelihood of a natural disaster affecting an 
organization is greatly dependent on its location, information 
processing facilities and stored data. For example, a 
computer facility near bush land will be more likely to be 
affected by bushfire than one that is located in the city area. 
The failure of a power supply is an example of an 
environmental conditions threat, when uninterruptible power 
supply equipment and back-up file systems are not available. 
Secondly, deliberate threats are those threats that involve 
the destruction or manipulation of data, software or hardware. 
These threats include denial of service, malicious code such 
as viruses and worms, theft and fraud. Various vulnerabilities 
are identified to be the cause of these threats such as 
inadequate network management (resilience of routing), lack 
of firewall, not using the latest version of the operating 
system and lack of physical security. 
Lastly, accidental threats are threats that are related to 
errors and omissions. Errors and omissions by employees or 
insiders are the main causes of information security problems 
[9]. 
A communication failure could be caused by accidental 
damage to network cabling, loss of network equipment such 
as routers or servers and software failure. Examples of 
vulnerability, which could lead to an incident, include lack of 
redundancy and back-ups, inadequate network management, 
lack of planning and implementation of communications 
cabling or inadequate incident handling. Due to the existence 
of so many variables that can possibly occur as threats to a 
computer system, it is useful to have an appropriate tool for 
threat analysis [10]. 
Since there are many variables that have no possibility to 
become threats to a computer system, it is very important to 
come out with an appropriate tool to perform threat analysis. 
Using an appropriate tool will enable the system to analyze 
threats accurately and come up with the best solution on how 
to overcome these security threats. 
B. Online banking security threats 
Due to its benefits, which allows internet users to access 
and manage their bank accounts from anywhere on the world 
at any time, online banking has now grown rapidly from a 
niche service to a major new way of banking. However, 
since the Internet is not originally designed for online 
banking, online banking is now facing a wide range of 
security risks for both the banks and the online banking users 
such as brute-force attacks, distributed attacks and social 
phishing. Therefore, the banks have to improve their online 
banking security systems constantly, which means the banks 
have to keep investing in security systems all the time. 
Online banking is a series of processes in which a bank 
client logs onto the website of the bank through a web-
browser installed on the PC and carries out various 
transactions such as account transfers. Online banking is 
carried out in four major stages, illustrated below in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Online Banking Transaction [5]. 
a. 
The user turns on the PC and boots the OS. 
b. After the web-browser is open, the end user accesses 
the online banking website of the bank and enters the 
ID or Personal Identifying Number (PIN) and the 
password by using the keyboard. 
c. 
The data input is encrypted by SSL (Secure Socket 
Layer) and transmitted to the bank’s server. 
d. The 
bank’s 
server 
decrypts 
the 
transmitted 
information and processes the user’s authentication, 
account inquiry, account transfer, etc. 
The ordinary PC environment is exposed to many types 
of threats because of insecure web surfing and use of a 
variety of unverified programs. If a user carries out an online 
banking transaction in an environment that is exposed to 
such kinds of threats, there is no way to guarantee the safety 
of that online banking transaction. 
Most of the recent hacking tools are circulated 
throughout the web and they can be inadvertently 
downloaded and executed in the user’s PC while the user is 
enjoying of web surfing or checking e-mail. 
Once these hacking tools are planted into a user’s 
computer, they will then capture the password, account 
number and personal data, which the user is typing. 
Furthermore, they are even capable of replacing the input 
screen that the user is watching with a counterfeit website of 
the bank, which the hacker had installed in advance. The 
user’s input data are not transmitted to the bank because 
these hacking tools redirect the user’s input data to the 
hacker’s server instead for illegal account transfers. Thus 
hackers and hacking tools can attack the system using many 
tricks in a number of different ways during the online 
banking process, as shown in Figure 2. 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 2.  Threat can pervade every stage of the transaction [5]. 
C. Healthcare information system security threats 
Today, the usage of information systems in the healthcare 
environment provides many potential benefits such as 
improving the quality of care, reducing medical errors and 
enhancing the readability, availability and accessibility of 
information. However, HIS security threats have increased 
significantly in recent years as well. Therefore, storing health 
information in electronic form has raised concerns about a 
patient’s health, privacy and safety. Basically, HIS is 
threatened by both accidental events and deliberate actions, 
which can severely damage the reliability of HIS and 
consequently discourage professionals to use it. 
Furthermore, the lack of adequate protection for 
sustaining confidentiality, integrity and availability aspects 
leads to the need to investigate potential threats, particularly 
in the HIS domain. In addition, weakly organized security 
management and unawareness of risk analysis practices, 
especially in the healthcare organizations, need particular 
attention. 
The International Standard for Health Informatics for 
Information Security Management in Health, using ISO/IEC 
27002 (ISO27799: 2008) [11], has defined HIS as a 
repository of information regarding the health of a subject of 
care in computer-processable form, stored and transmitted 
securely and accessible by multiple authorized users. There 
are various types of threat categories introduced in this 
standard. It classifies HIS threats into 25 types. 
Basically, the HIS threats have been classified into two 
main categories, namely, internal threats and external threats 
[12]. The internal threats include various types of employees’ 
behavior such as an employee’s ignorance, curiosity, 
recklessness, inadequate behavior, taking someone else’s 
password and giving a password to another employee. The 
external threats include viruses and spyware attacks, hackers 
and intruders on the premises. 
In addition, HIS threats can be categorized into 19 types 
based on case studies conducted using the selected risk 
analysis method [2]. One finding shows that the most critical 
threat to the HIS is a server power failure. Furthermore, a 
power failure in a workstation, a network software failure 
and a tele-monitoring software failure also present high-risk 
threats. Besides this, there are also a number of high-risk 
threats related to human factors, such as user errors in using 
the HIS and the masquerading of the user’s identity during 
system operation. 
Furthermore, another study has identified 25 types of 
patient monitoring system threats [13]. The most critical 
threat is a power failure of the server, while the power failure 
of a personal home computer is the second most critical 
failure for the system. Also, air-conditioning failures, system 
and network software failures, monitor support software 
failures and medical record software failures are also treated 
as the high-risk threats. However, this study also identified a 
number of high-risk threats related to human factors, such as 
user errors in using masquerading software. 
III. 
COMPARISON OF INTERNET BANKING AND 
HEALTHCARE INFORMATION SYSTEM 
In this section, we provide a classification of security 
threats based on existing research results and comparison 
between online banking and healthcare information systems 
based on important security comparison factors. 
A. Classification of threats 
Figure 3 presents the known threats, which affect each 
security method discussed in this paper. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Classification of threats. 
It does not present all the threats, which may exist in 
such a method, but it shows that those methods are currently 
vulnerable to several attacks. Basically, the threats were 
categorized based on relevant standards [11][14] and also 
based on a comparative study of previous works and 
publications in this research. 
We have classified the threats into three categories, 
which include technical threats, human threats and natural 
disasters. First, technical threats are caused by a technical 
problem, such as the technical failure of a network or system, 
a variety of malicious attacks through malicious code, etc. 
Human threats belong to information leakage by insiders or 
staff, and unauthorized user access, user’s negligence, etc. 
Finally, there are threats of natural disasters, caused by a 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

variety of adverse circumstances, such as water damage, fire 
and earthquake, etc. 
In Figure 4, the technical and human threats are classified 
in more details. 
 
Figure 4.  Classification of technical and human threats. 
B. Comparison factors 
Table I depicts 13 types of factors according to the major 
threat 
categories. 
We 
consider 
four 
categories 
for 
comparison, such as authenticity, confidentiality, integrity 
and availability, which are general factors in cryptography. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON FACTORS 
 
Factors 
Description 
Authenticity 
Password 
How many digits and what kind of 
combinations are used? 
Authentication 
How to provide authentication? 
Transfer protocol 
What kind of protocol to be used 
for data transfer? 
Unauthorized access 
How 
can 
the 
access 
of 
an 
unauthorized user be prevented? 
Confidentiality 
Communication 
interception 
How 
can 
interception 
by 
a 
malicious third party be prevented? 
Data encryption 
What kind of algorithm is used for 
data encryption? 
Non-repudiation 
How to achieve non-repudiation? 
Integrity 
Social 
engineering 
attacks 
Impersonation, persuasion, bribery, 
shoulder surfing and dumpster 
diving, etc. 
Malware attacks 
Malicious virus, worm, Trojan 
horses, spyware and adware, etc. 
Acts of human error 
or failure 
Entry of erroneous data by staff, 
accidental deletion or modification 
of data by staff 
Availability 
Power failure 
Server down due to power failure, 
Air-conditioning failure of the 
server, Interruption by service 
provider 
Hardware/software 
failures or errors 
Insufficient 
storage 
software, 
Hardware/Software 
maintenance 
error, Application software failure 
Natural disaster 
How can the failures from fire, 
water-damage etc. be prevented? 
 
At first glance, it might seem that authenticity is included 
in the concept of integrity. Integrity is more specifically 
about the content of the data itself. Authenticity involves the 
assurance that the data was created or sent by the source it 
appears to be from. 
Integrity, as a concept, means that there is resistance to 
alteration or substitution of data, and/or that such changes are 
detected and traceable. When data might be changed by 
accident or malice, preventing the change is of the first 
concern, and detecting it is the second. Integrity can be 
maintained on many levels, from hardware to application 
logic. 
Confidentiality means, at the core of the concept, that the 
data is hidden from those are not supposed to see it. We can 
accomplish confidentiality in a number of ways such as 
ensuring encryption of the data so that it cannot be 
intercepted or accessed during transmission or transport etc. 
While encrypting is a sure way of keeping the data 
confidential, it is not the only way. 
In any information system, the information must be 
available when it is needed. This means that, the security 
controls and the communication channels used to access it 
must be functioning correctly. High availability systems aim 
to remain available at all times. It attempts to prevent service 
disruptions due to power outages, hardware failure, and 
system upgrades. Ensuring availability also prevents denial-
of-service attacks. 
 
C. Results and analysis 
From Table II, we can see that the result of comparison 
between online banking and healthcare information systems 
applies various factors. We have analyzed the requirement 
per each item for providing sufficient security and also 
provided information on the currently used technologies. For 
the analysis we have investigated the most common 
technologies both in online banking and healthcare 
information systems.  
First, in online banking, a password is employed 
combining characters and numbers within 30 digits using a 
virtual keyboard to prevent a key logger. In addition, to 
authenticate the use of OTP (One-time password) and 
certificate, it uses the HTTPs, SSL/TLS protocols for secure 
communications. Some technologies are dependent on a 
system, such as a firewall, browser protection, backup 
system, etc. Also, to prevent communication interception, a 
pass-phrase, firewall, SMS and transaction monitoring are 
commonly used. The pass-phrase is a security model based 
on information held by the user. It is usually used as a 
second authentication method in a transaction that involves 
money transfers. 
Some cases of healthcare information Systems (HIS) are 
using a six-digit character password, depending on the 
system. The transport protocols are TCP/IP (Transmission 
Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) and FTP (File Transfer 
Protocol) for file transfers and data encryption formed using 
WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy) or WPA (Wi-Fi Protected 
Access), if using wireless communication; it also performs 
data encryption using PKI (Public Key Infrastructure).  
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE II.  
COMPARISON RESULTS 
 
Factors 
Requirement 
Online Banking 
HIS 
Authenticity 
Password 
Combination of numbers and 
characters of more than 8-digits or 
Bio-metrics 
Mixed numbers and characters 
within 6 to 30-digits, virtual 
keyboard 
6-characters (depending on the 
system) 
Authentication method 
Using high-grade security media 
Digital certificates, OTP, security 
card, etc. 
No fixed rules 
Transfer protocol 
Mutual and secure authentication 
protocol 
HTTPS, SSL/TLS 
TCP/IP, FTP 
Unauthorized access 
Strong password techniques 
One-way hash functions 
Use of personal characteristics 
Firewall, Access control 
technologies 
Firewall, Access control 
technologies (depending on 
the system) 
Confidentiality 
Communication 
interception 
Transaction monitoring secure 
Pass-phrase, Firewall, SMS, 
Transaction monitoring 
WEP/WAP 
Data encryption 
Cryptographic algorithm (i.e., AES-
128, SEED) 
128-bit SSL encryption 
256-bit SSL encryption (EV SSL) 
PKI (Public key infrastructure) 
Non-repudiation 
Digital signature 
Digital signature through 
certificates 
Digital signature 
Integrity 
Social engineering attacks 
defined consequences for violating the 
policies, education and training 
Positive identification 
Positive identification 
Malware attacks 
Firewall, anti-virus software, real-time 
monitoring  
Browser protection 
Browser protection 
Acts of human error or 
failure 
Regular security audits 
Limited access to system 
Regular security audits 
Limited access to system 
Depending on the company 
policy 
Availability 
Power failure 
Auxiliary power, Backup system, 
alarm, etc. 
Backup system  (depending on the 
system) 
Backup system (depending on 
the system) 
Hardware/software failure 
or errors 
Regular system maintenance 
Regular system update and 
maintenance 
Regular system update and 
maintenance 
Natural disaster 
environment monitoring (i.e., Fire 
detection sensor) 
Real-time environment 
monitoring in server room 
Real-time environment 
monitoring in server room 
 
On the other hand, to prevent availability breakdowns, 
through such incidents as power failure, system errors, 
system failure or natural disaster, both systems provides a 
backup system, regular system updates and maintenance, etc., 
but it depends on the system. In the case of integrity 
maintenance, the use of positive identification, browser 
protection software or the introduction of some policy such 
as regular security audits and limited access to system, were 
implemented. However, those also depend on the system. 
For reference, positive identification is a model where the 
user is required to input some secret information only known 
to him in order to identify himself. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this section, we describe some online banking security 
models that can be applied to HIS. Many different advanced 
fraud detection technologies are being applied for fraudulent 
detection and prevention of online banking transactions. 
Hence, if a system has better security control, the threats can 
be reduced.  
A basic knowledge of authentication is an important step 
towards security control. Authentication is any process by 
which you verify that you are who you claim to be and have 
been permitted to access to a system. In the online banking 
case, there are a variety of technologies and methodologies 
financial institutions can use to authenticate a customer. 
These methods include the use of customer passwords, 
personal identification numbers (PINs), digital certificates 
using a public key infrastructure (PKI), physical devices 
such as smart cards, one-time passwords (OTPs), USB plug-
ins or other types of “tokens”, transaction profile scripts, 
biometric identification, among others. The level of risk 
protection afforded by each of these techniques varies. Thus, 
online banking systems are used according to their 
combinations. The selection and use of authentication 
technologies and methods should depend upon the results of 
the financial institutions’ risk assessment process. If we can 
apply these various techniques to HIS, this can be a 
safeguard against unauthorized access and use. 
The following proposals are examples of security models 
that can be help to provide authentication. Hiltgen et al. [15] 
presents 
two 
challenge-response 
online 
banking 
authentication solutions – one based on short-time passwords 
and the other on certificates – and then describes how easily 
these solutions can be extended if sophisticated content-
manipulation attacks arose. The short-time password solution 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

use symmetric cryptography in combination with a hardware 
security module (smart card) and an offline (stand-alone) 
smart-card reader. This solution provides convenient 
mobility for people who want to bank online anytime 
anywhere, not just from their homes.  
In the certificate-based solution, a two-stage, PKI-based 
online banking authentication solution is used. It is 
characterized by open standards and a programmable, 
certified, secure, smart-card reader connected to a potentially 
exposed PC. This solution uses a dedicated FCR (FINREAD 
card reader) along with an appropriate financial transactional 
IC card reader (FINREAD) and financial card reader 
identification application (FCRIA), both of which are loaded 
onto the user’s FCR to secure the authentication process. 
Tiwari et al. [16] proposes an authentication system that 
is both secure and highly usable, based on a multi-factor 
authentication approach.  It uses a novel approach to create 
an authentication system based on TICs (Transaction 
Identification Code) and SMS to enforce an extra security 
level for the traditional login in a username/password context. 
TICs are user specific unique transaction identification codes, 
which are issued by banks or financial institutions for their 
users. This code is similar to the One-time Password (OTP) 
and the code is used only once. This paper also suggests an 
encryption/decryption technique that would be used to keep 
TICs as secret codes on cell phones/PDA. The user can 
easily pick up a TIC (from the stored list of TICs) to initiate 
a secure web transaction using her/his cell phone/PDA, 
instead of typing a complicated TIC code in each transaction. 
Dandash et al. [17] presents a security analysis of a 
proposed online banking model compared with current 
existing models used in detection and prevention of 
fraudulent Internet payments. Their proposed model 
facilitates online banking Fraud Detection and Prevention 
(FDP) by applying two new secure mechanisms, a Dynamic 
Key Generation (DKG) and a Group Key (GK). Such 
mechanisms satisfy all transaction security properties of 
payment systems as they enforce strong authentication and 
authorization methods. 
Hu et al. [18] proposes a secret key based security 
scheme for achieving secure online banking. Encryption 
equipment is adopted at certification servers and client 
terminals and a secure certification protocol is established by 
using secret key encryption, combined secret key and smart 
card techniques. In this paper, the encryption hardware and 
secret key encryption algorithm passed the security tests 
performed by an authorized department. Along with this, the 
use of authentication and digital signature certification 
guarantee double security. Also, a one-time secret key is 
generated automatically according to a generation algorithm 
and is unrepeatable. 
In addition to this, a mutual authentication, also called 
two-way authentication, is a process or technology in which 
both entries of a communications link authenticate each other. 
In a network environment, the client authenticates the server 
and vice-versa. In this way, network users can be assured 
that they are doing business exclusively with legitimate 
entities and servers can be certain that the users are 
attempting to gain access for legitimate purposes. Currently, 
mutual authentication is gaining acceptance as a tool that can 
minimize the risk of online fraud in e-commerce. If we can 
apply this to HIS, it can reduces the risk that an unsuspecting 
network user will inadvertently reveal security information 
to a malicious or insecure web site. 
Institutions should establish a firm policy to provide 
availability in case of power failure, hardware/software 
failure or error and human failure or error. The policy, such 
as regular security audits, system updates or limited access, 
could help to reduce security accidents.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper aims to investigate the current debate 
regarding the threats and vulnerability of healthcare data. It 
reviews some possible remedial actions to defend against 
these threats. The aim of this research was to critically 
analyze existing research and findings dedicated to 
healthcare security issues and its information security 
problems. 
We found that although the findings of the reviewed 
research are somewhat contradictory, the Internet is mostly 
seen as a security threat. Some technologies, such as anti-
virus software; spam guard; email filtering and encryption; 
firewalls and so on, are used successfully by the service 
provider organizations to protect the information. However, 
some areas are still vulnerable to security threats. 
The awareness of information security is now growing 
rapidly. In the long run, information security will be one of 
the most important issues for modern organizations. The 
inclusion of biometrics, encryption, digital signatures, 
intrusion detection systems, security education and training, 
virus control and compliance with data protection legislation 
and policy will be of primary importance. The findings of 
this study will serve as recommendations for healthcare 
service organizations when defining requirements for the 
security issues.  Simply speaking, it is a question of filling 
the technology gap between the security solutions in the 
online banking and healthcare information systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank the SIMSALA project, 
in the Optoelectronics and Measurement Techniques 
Laboratory of the University of Oulu, and its funders for the 
resources and environment to do this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Council of Europe, “Recommendation No. R (97) 5 on the 
Protection of Medical Data,” adopted by the Committee of 
Ministers on 13 of February 1997 at the 584th meeting of the 
Ministers’ Deputies. 
[2] I. Maglogiannis and E. Zafiropulos, “Modelling Risk in 
Distributed Healthcare Information Systems,” The 28th 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE on Engineering 
in Medical and Biology Society (EMBS), 2006, pp 5447-5450. 
[3] L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan, and M. S. Donaldson (editors), 
“To Err Is Human: Building a Safer System,” The National 
Academies Press, 2000.  
[4] B. B. Christopher, “Recent Developments Affecting 
Depository Institutions,” FDIC Banking Review, Vol. 8, No. 
3, 1996. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[5] AhnLab, "Online Banking: Threats and Countermeasures", 
White paper, 2010.  
URL  http://www.techrepublic.com/whitepapers/online-
banking-threats-and-countermeasures/2557803, last accessed 
13.10.2012. 
[6] G. N. Samy, R. Ahmad, and Z. Ismail, “Threats to Health 
Information Security,” Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Conference on Information Assurance and Security (IAS), 
Xi’an, China, 2009.  
[7] T. R. Peltier, “Information Security risk Analysis,” Auerbach 
Publications: Boca Raton, FL, 2005. 
[8] B. Jung, I. Han, and S. Lee, “Security threats to internet: a 
Korean 
multi-industry 
investigation,” 
Information 
& 
Management, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2001, pp. 487-498. 
[9] R. Power, “CS/FBI Computer Crime and Security Survey,” 
Computer Security Issues & Trends, Vol. 8, No. 1, Spring 
2002. 
[10] R. Ahmad, G. N. Samy, N. Khilwani, P. A. Bath, and Z. 
Ismail, “Threats Identification in Healthcare Information 
Systems using Genetic Algorithm and Cox Regression,” In 
Fifth International Conference on Information Assurance and 
Security (IAS), Xi’an, China, 2009. 
[11] British 
Standards 
Institution, 
“Health 
Informatics 
- 
Information Security Management in Health using ISO/IEC 
27002,” (ISO27799:2008), London, 2008. 
[12] E. Vaast, “Danger is in the eye of the beholders: social 
representations 
of 
information 
systems 
security 
in 
healthcare,” Journal of Strategic Information Systems, Vol. 
16, Issue 2, June, 2007, pp. 130-152. 
[13] I. Maglogiannis, E. Zafiropoulos, A. Platis, and C. 
Lambrinoudakis, “Risk analysis of a patient monitoring 
system using Bayesian Network modelling,” Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, Vol. 39, Issue 6, 2006, pp. 637-647. 
[14] British Standards Institution, “Information Technology - 
Security Techniques: Code of Practice for Information 
Security Management,” BS ISO/IEC 27002:2005 BS 7799-
1:2005, London, 2005. 
[15] A. Hiltgen, T. Kramp, and T. Weigold, “Secure Internet 
Banking Authentication,” IEEE Security & Privacy, Vol. 4, 
Issue 2, 2006, pp. 21-29. 
[16] A. Tiwari and S. Sanyal, A. Abraham, S. J. Knapskog, and S. 
Saynal, “A Multi-factor Security Protocol for Wireless 
Payment-Secure Web Authentication using Mobile Devices,” 
IADIS International Conference Applied Computing, pp. 160-
167, 2007 
[17] O. Dandash, P. D. Le, and B. Srinivasan, “Security Analysis 
for Internet Banking Models,” Eighth ACIS International 
Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, 
Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing, pp.1141-
1146, 2007. 
[18] X. Hu, G. Zhao, and G. Xu, “Security Scheme for Online 
Banking Based on Secret Key Encryption,” Second 
International Workshop on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining, pp.636-639, 2009. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

"Concept Car" Design Method in Medicine: Redesigning an Incubator’s Mattress 
Misha Croes, Zhihui Zhang, Sidarto Bambang Oetomo, Wei Chen, Loe Feijs 
Department of Industrial Design 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Den Dolech 2, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
E-mail: {m.j.g.croes, z.zhang, s.bambang.oetomo, w.chen, l.m.g.feijs}@tue.nl 
 
Abstract — When a child is born premature, he is usually 
placed inside an incubator in the hospital’s Neonatal Intensive 
Care Unit. With the goal to design a new mattress for within 
these 
incubators 
a 
multidisciplinary 
consortium 
was 
established. In order to broaden the creative space, and, thus 
inspire further innovation, the design team decided to develop 
a controversial, but plausible incubator bed prototype through 
a “concept car” approach. This paper describes the process of 
introducing the “concept car” method into a medical setting 
and its effect within a multidisciplinary consortium. Through 
an in depth discussion and presentation of the prototype, an 
evaluation of the design was achieved. Questions, discussions 
and criticism were elicited from the consortium partners, 
which would serve as inspiration material for future 
developments within the consortium. This way of realizing 
ideas into a 1:1 scale prototype proved to stimulate inter-
disciplinary thinking and opened doors to creativity on various 
levels.  
 
Keywords-neonate; incubator; innovation; concept car; 
multidisciplinary; design. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Within this paper, we describe the process and 
development of an incubator mattress design within a 
multidisciplinary 
consortium 
(MC) 
composed 
of 
neonatologists and nurses, designers, engineers and mattress 
developers. The method used for the development is called 
“concept car” design. The goal of using this design method 
was to broaden the creative space and thus inspire further 
innovation within the consortium. We describe the 
development of the mattress design, its effect on the creative 
mindscape of the MC and why we believe the design is 
unique in the field of neonatology. 
A. Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
If a child is born extremely premature, before the 
gestational age of 32 weeks, the child is small, fragile and 
most likely in a life threatening situation. In order to give 
the child the protection and (medical) care it needs, the child 
is placed inside an incubator in the hospital’s Neonatal 
Intensive Care Unit (NICU). 
Due to the, usually, unexpected child birth, sudden 
hospitalization of the child and stress over the uncertainty 
about their child’s future, parents tend to experience 
difficulty in their efforts to bond with their child [1].  
Luckily, however, in the past decades, the mortality 
among IC neonates has been substantially reduced by the 
introduction of new innovations in the fields of technology 
and medicine [2]. However, the long-term cognitive, 
neurological and behavioral developments of the neoanates 
are still undesirable compared to full term neonates [2].  
  
B. Incubator design history 
The first incubator for prematurely born infants was 
developed in the year 1880 by the French obstetrician 
Stéphane Tarnier [4]. Inspired by incubators for chicken 
eggs, the main purpose of the incubator was to keep 
prematurely born babies warm by means of a warm water 
reservoir [4]. 
Over the years, incubator technology has come a long 
way. By means of new technologies and innovations in the 
field of medicine, infants can survive ever younger 
premature birth and overcome otherwise lethal diseases. 
However, from an aesthetics point of view, current 
incubators have not changed all that much. It is still a 
transparent “box”, that, among others, keep the child warm 
and safe. 
The reason for the transparent casing is obvious. In order 
to properly treat these fragile patients, nurses and 
practitioners should be able to observe the child. Research 
has, however, shown that the stimuli these children 
experience during their hospitalization has potential large 
adverse effects on the child’s brain development [4][5]. Due 
to the large number of stressful and painful procedures, the 
brain of these small prematurely born babies is inhibited of 
proper development. Therefore, the MC has set the goal to 
design a new incubator mattress that will protect 
prematurely born babies from these adverse stimuli in the 
hope to ensure a more pleasant hospitalization experience 
by both parents and child.  
C. Approach 
In order to spice up the creativity within the MC, the 
decision was made to develop a design by using the 
“concept car” method. Although new in the medical 
environment, the “concept car” method is generally used in 
car industry. Through a 1:1 scale prototype, car designers 
show the company’s vision of the future in car design and 
inspire other designers with new ideas [6].  
Our design had similar goals in mind. The main goal 
was to ensure the future vision of the consortium’s incubator 
bed design would be translated and visualized into a 
prototype. Furthermore, the goal was to ensure that no 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

innovative ideas were lost or hindered in the process. Just 
like a concept car in car industry will never roll over our 
streets, our design was not meant to be inside an actual 
incubator.  
In order to realize our design by means of the “concept 
car” method, a basic, but effective design cycle of various 
phases (analyze, synthesize, simulate and evaluate) was 
initiated and was executed in 2 months.    
In the analysis phase, the problems and design 
opportunities expressed by the various partners in the 
consortium were gathered. These statements were to be used 
as input for the synthesis phase, within which various 
concept designs were realized. One concept design was then 
realized in the simulation phase and concluded with the 1:1 
scale prototype. 
In order to determine whether the “concept car” method 
would have the desired outcome, a presentation and 
discussion session with all partners was prepared.  
In this paper we describe the design process within 
which we apply the “concept car” method. We then describe 
the final design and the realization of the 1:1 scale 
prototype. Finally the evaluation of the design by the MC is 
presented and conclusions are drawn based upon the 
feedback.  
II. 
PROCESS 
A. Analysis phase 
In order to identify problems and possible design 
opportunities, interviews were conducted with all the 
partners within the consortium. By discussing their desires 
and opportunities on future development, vital information 
was gathered to function as a baseline for the design. By 
combining this input with the consortium’s original goal to 
develop a new incubator bed, the choice was made to focus 
on two main aspects within this design cycle: 
 
1. Parent-Child 
bonding: 
specifically, 
the 
“approachability” of the child inside the incubator 
by parents. 
2. Child comfort: the comfort of the sleeping 
environment for the child.  
 
It was concluded that most of the partners found the 
physical acrylic transparent casing of the incubator very 
disturbing (it should be mentioned that as part o f the 
consortium there are also medical practitioners and nurses 
of the NICU). This physical barrier between parents and 
child is perceived as obtrusive and interruptive to the 
physical contact between parents and child. 
Furthermore, the various partners expressed that it 
seemed unnatural to place a child that should be in a womb 
onto a flat mattress. Therefore, the second focus was put on 
the redesign of a more comfortable sleeping environment 
for the child. We chose specifically the sleep environment in 
order to provide a more open design space, relative to for 
instance emergency situations.  
 
B. Synthesis phase 
The second stage in the design process was the synthesis 
phase. In this phase, various ideas are generated and 
developed into the final concept.  Due to the diversity of 
design experience within the consortium, a basic technique 
was applied in this phase. By first developing a large 
number of ideas (100) in a short period of time, it was 
believed out-of-the-box ideas were pushed forward. From 
these 100 ideas, 10 different design directions were distilled 
by means of grouping. Every group would then be molded 
into a concept resulting into 10 different concepts. Finally, 
of the 10 concepts 3 concepts were chosen by means of 
ranking of which one final concept would be developed 
further.  
            
The final concept, called “womb environment” (Figure 
1), consists of replacing the mattress inside the incubator 
with an “artificial womb” in which the child would stay. 
Key elements within this concept are:  
• 
To keep the child’s movement restricted by 
presenting a flexible “womb”. 
• 
To keep the child in a warm, dark and sound 
limiting environment, mimicking the womb 
• 
To provide the child with a rounded bottom of the 
incubator in order to ensure a swinging movement 
of the whole womb. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Womb environment concept. 
 
Before this concept could be developed into a prototype, 
various small developmental cycles were introduced. During 
these cycles, the “womb” idea was further developed. Next 
we will discuss the final design as a result from these cycles. 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

III. 
FINAL DESIGN 
1) CRIB 
The final concept consists of two distinct products, an 
incubator bed and a mattress. The first product to be 
described is called the Child Rocking Incubator Bed or 
CRIB (Figure 2). This bed consists of two wooden shells 
that can rotate around each other by means of an elevated 
axis inside two side stands. This rotation allows the CRIB to 
be in two distinct positions.  
In the first position, the child will lie on a mattress, 
inside the CRIB with the top shell rotated downwards, 
called the open position. In this situation, parents are invited 
to observe and interact with their child. Due to the use of 
wood, normally not present in incubators, the design 
provides a more homelike feeling expected to pull parents 
their attention away from the acrylic cover and more 
towards the inside of the incubator. 
The final feature of the open position is the fact that 
parents can rock the bed inside the incubator, hence the 
name CRIB. The goal of this feature is to elicit a more 
natural, home-like interaction between parent and child. Just 
like a crib at home, parents can provide comfort to their 
child by means of rocking the bed. During this interaction 
parents can for instance decide to sing a lullaby to the child 
or talk to the child.  
 
 
 
The 
second 
position 
possibility 
of the CRIB comes 
as a redesign of a 
practice performed in 
current day NICU’s. 
In order to protect 
the 
child 
from 
external stimuli, such 
as light and sound, a 
blanket is nowadays 
placed 
over 
the 
incubator (Figure 3). 
During the design, we believed however that this blanket 
creates an even bigger barrier between the parents and the 
child, because the blanket completely restricts the 
observation possibility of the child inside the incubator.  
As a solution to this problem, the CRIB design can be 
closed in one single motion towards the, so called, closed 
position. This will ensure that both light and sound will be 
restricted to the child just like the blanket. In order to 
provide parents and nurses the opportunity to still observe 
the child, a section of self-polarizing glass is implemented 
in the outer shell. This glass darkens by itself when light is 
shone onto it (like a pair of sunglasses), therefore, protecting 
the child automatically from excess light, but still enabling 
parents and medical practitioners to observe the child. 
Finally, the inside of the CRIB is outfitted with soft foam. 
This will allow the infants to push against the CRIB, just 
like they would experience inside their mother’s the womb.  
 
2) Comfort Mattress 
In present day NICU’s, snuggles and blankets are used 
in order to provide boundaries and position support for 
unstable babies. Especially when babies lay on their side, 
the limited muscle strength limits babies to maintain this 
posture on their own.  
Based 
on 
the 
comfortable 
and 
movement restricting 
features of the womb, 
a Comfort Mattress 
design was proposed 
to be placed inside 
the CRIB (Figure 4). 
 
The 
Comfort 
Mattress is an oval shaped mattress filled with silicone 
beads. These beads allow the mattress’s shape to be flexibly 
molded. When the baby lies on the mattress, the silicone 
beads will shift and make sure the mattress adapts to the 
child’s body shape.  
Nurses are able to mold the mattress into boundaries and 
supports for the baby according to the baby’s desired 
sleeping posture.  
To approach the natural situation of skin-to-skin contact 
[7], the idea was proposed to make the surface of the 
mattress of a water proof, skin-like material (elastic, 
smooth, soft). This makes the cover easy to clean with 
alcohol, which saves the effort of washing the various 
sheets, blankets and cushions.  
Wrapped in by a “skin” in a dark and rather closed 
sleeping 
environment 
with 
unobtrusive 
vital 
sign 
monitoring, it is expected to supply a comfortable and safe 
environment for premature babies within the NICU. 
B. Simulation phase 
As a final step in the design phase, both the CRIB as 
well as the Comfort Mattress were brought together into a 
working physical 1:1 scale prototype (Figures 5 and 6). The 
prototypes contained all the materials proposed in the design 
Figure 2. Closed (left) and open (right) position of the CRIB 
 
Figure 4. Comfort mattress 
Figure 3. Blanket over incubator 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

apart from the self polarizing glass and the skin-like 
mattress cover. These two features were, however, clearly 
explained during the presentation of the design to the 
consortium partners during the evaluation phase. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Prototype CRIB and comfort mattress 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Prototype CRIB and comfort mattress 
 
C. Evaluation Phase 
In order to test the effect of the design, a presentation 
was set up for all consortium partners. The prototype was 
displayed in an NICU incubator together with a realistic and 
detailed picture presentation. By doing so, the NICU 
environment was recreated in order for everybody to 
transcend into the NICU atmosphere prior to presenting the 
details of the design itself.  
The design was then presented through interactions with 
the prototype and an illustrative PowerPoint presentation. 
After the presentation, participants were invited to interact 
with the prototype, and in the meanwhile discuss the design. 
Finally the individual discussions were brought together in a 
group discussion concerning the presented design. 
 
In order to test the effect of the design on the innovative 
and creative thinking of the participants, the different newly 
generated ideas and comments were documented and 
grouped together. The diversity of techniques used to 
generate new ideas were perceived as an indication to the 
effect of creativity generation among the partners. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Below the various techniques observed to generate new 
ideas and innovations generated during the discussion are 
categorized, accompanied by examples.  
 
A. CRIB discussion 
 
1) Taking a feature and place it in context 
The first category is based upon the fact that a feature 
was highlighted from the design and was developed further 
by placing it into context. An example is the self polarizing 
glass. The feature was not only perceived as useful, but the 
possibility was proposed to use it as an active indicator of 
environmental light conditions to parents and medical staff. 
The original idea behind the glass was only to protect the 
child from excess light in the NICU environment. However, 
as commented upon during the discussion, the glass could 
also be used to inform parents and or medical personnel 
there is simply too much light in the child’s environment. 
By doing so, they would become more aware of their 
environment and possibly undertake action to make it 
darker, hence more comfortable for the child.  It was noted 
that this would also involve parents more in the care of their 
baby, giving them a foothold for something they can 
actively do as a means of care for their baby.   
Furthermore, the function of the glass as an augmented 
information display was proposed. This display could 
indicate the health status of the baby while looking at the 
baby. The idea could potentially make the monitoring of the 
child more comprehensible for parents and more convenient 
for medical staff. 
 
2) Taking a feature and build upon it 
The second approach observed during the discussion is 
to take a feature of the design and further built upon it. An 
example of this can be related to the closed position of the 
top-shell of the CRIB design. Originally intended to 
passively protect the baby from external stimuli like sound 
and light, the idea was proposed to see what other functions 
could be added to the top-shell itself. “It might contain 
sensors to monitor the child” or “light therapy LED’s could 
be built into the shell”. This shows that interaction and 
shape can be an inspiration in itself to those who are 
unfamiliar to the prior design. 
 
3) Turning critique into creativity 
The third technique explains the moment where a point 
of concern was used as an inspiration for future innovation. 
One of the comments expressed by one of the medical 
practitioners was “that the design looked like an incubator 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

inside an incubator, possibly creating an even bigger barrier 
between parents and their child”. Although accepted by the 
design team this comment on itself provided inspiration for 
future development. Because what if the design would 
actually be an incubator inside an incubator? Due to its size 
this would mean that, if guaranteed to provide the required 
safety, the design could be used as a portable incubator. 
This would allow parents to walk around with their child 
inside the NICU ward, which would elicit whole new kinds 
of interactions between parents and their baby. It would for 
instance give parents much more freedom within the safety 
of the hospital. From a technological point of view, it would 
mean full wireless communication would be needed. 
Providing new opportunities and challenges for both 
designers and engineers. From this example, one can see 
that the physical presentation of a concept in the early stage 
of a design process can contribute greatly on the inspiration 
and development in future phases.  
 
4) Would this concept really work in the NICU setting? 
Apart from being nursed in the incubator, patients in the 
NICU may become ill and experience situations that the 
immediate access to the patient and institution of treatments 
(stimulation of breathing, resuscitation etc.) are indicated. In 
addition 
the 
performance 
of 
diagnostic 
procedures 
(Echocardiography, cranial ultrasound) in the incubator 
must be possible. In the next version of the CRIB mattress 
these considerations have to be taken into account. 
 
B. Comfort Mattress Discussion 
 
1) Where different disciplines meet – part 1  
A topic of inspiration provided by the Comfort Mattress 
was the fact that the designers dared to make design 
decisions early on in the project. For instance if we consider 
the Comfort Mattress, during the design process it showed 
innovation was hard to realize in something so common as a 
mattress. The “half-egg” shape of the mattress design 
challenges the widely accepted flat configuration of 
everyday mattresses.  
Although the idea behind the shape was welcomed and 
accepted by designers and engineers, concerns were 
expressed by medical practitioners. The question was put 
forward “whether the Comfort Mattress could cause 
asphyxia?” Since the autonomic motor ability of premature 
infants is not well developed, they are unable to push the 
supports away by themselves. This could make breathing 
difficult, especially when the child is in a lateral- or prone 
position.  
This subject, asphyxia, was pointed out as a concern 
from both the medical practitioner’s and mattress 
developer’s side and was not presented earlier within the 
project, and, therefore, not seen as a potential problem. 
However, due to the presentation of the design, the subject 
is on the table.  
2) Where different disciplines meet – part 2 
The second topic concerning the Comfort Mattress was 
its cover material. Nowadays, babies don’t lay immediately 
on the mattress, but on top of cotton sheets. The proposed 
cover has a skin-like feeling. From design and medical 
points of view, the child with frequent skin-to-skin contact 
has a more stable heartbeat and breathing rate [7][8][9]. 
However, it has to be investigated whether this skin-like 
material has similar beneficial effects to the baby.  
To prevent liquids from damaging vital sign sensors 
inside the mattress and be easily clean, the cover was 
required to be waterproof by technical and medical staff. 
However, medical practitioners and the mattress developer 
gave their concerns on this subject: can the material also be 
breathable?  
The answer to this question is considered beyond the 
scope of this paper. However, if we look at the large field of 
material innovation, the solution probably will not be so far 
in the future or even already existent.     
 
C. Summary 
To summarize, the overall impression of the various 
disciplines in the MC was quite positive. They agreed that 
the design contained most important elements that were 
gathered during the interviews. Furthermore, they believed 
the design is expected to elicit a better “approachability” of 
the child by the parents. Especially, the rocking of the bed 
was seen as a natural and intuitive approach of a small child.  
Finally, the idea of converting a flat mattress into a 3D 
moldable mattress that fits the child’s individual needs was 
seen as a great advantage. Since it has been shown that even 
these small patients need individualized care [10], this 
would 
further 
support 
in 
this 
hypothesis.  
From a design point of view the large amount of techniques 
used to draw inspiration from the design was perceived as 
successful. Since one of the original goals was to inspire 
future development within the MC.   
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Within a multidisciplinary consortium the decision was 
made to design and build an out-of-the-box, but plausible, 
incubator bed to be placed inside present day NICU 
incubators. The focus of this design was to enhance the 
sleeping comfort of NICU neonates and provide support to 
the bonding process between parents and their child.  
The final goal of the design cycle was to develop a 1:1 
scale “concept car” model of the final concept. This to 
ensure a visual and “experiencable” prototype could be 
presented to the full variety of partners in the consortium. 
This model was presented to the various partners in 
order to receive critique and develop new ideas that could 
be used in the future design process. 
During the discussion session, new interactions were 
developed, features inspired new ideas, lessons were learned 
from decisions that had been made, and teams learned from 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

each other’s expertise fields. Overall, this resulted in a 
thorough document of delight, appraisal and criticism 
greatly facilitating future design and development stages.  
In general, it can be said that the CRIB and the Comfort 
Mattress, as they are presented now, will never see the light 
of day in an actual NICU. This, however, was also never the 
intention of the design, just like concept cars in car industry 
never get to drive on our streets. The main goal of inspiring 
fellow partners by means of a physically build 1:1 scale 
“concept car” prototype in an integrated design solution has 
shown its positive impact and will hopefully be used more 
in the field of medical design. 
VI. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the 
Point One National R&D grant “Embedded Neonatal 
Monitoring” (E-Nemo) Project of SenterNovem in the 
Netherlands. 
 
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] A. Talmi and R. J. Harmon, (2003). Relationships between 
preterm 
infants 
and 
their 
parents: 
Disruption 
and 
development. Zero to Three, 24(2), 13–20 
[2] D. Wilson-Costello, “Is there evidence that long-term 
outcomes have improved with intensive care?,” Seminars in 
fetal & neonatal medicine, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 344-54, Oct. 
2007. 
[3] S. Blackburn, “Environmental impact of the NICU on 
developmental outcomes,” Journal of Pediatric Nursing, vol. 
13, no. 5, pp. 279–289, Oct. 1998. 
[4] J.P. Baker, (2000) The incubator and the medical discovery of 
the premature infant. J Perinatol 20: 321–328. 
[5] R. E. Grunau, L. Holsti and J. W. B. Peters, “Long-term 
consequences of pain in human neonates.,” Seminars in fetal 
& neonatal medicine, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 268-75, Aug. 2006. 
[6] M. Backma, S. Börjesson (2006) Vehicles for attention 
creation: the case of a concept car at Volvo Cars. European 
Journal of Innovation Management 9(2): 149– 160. 
[7] G.C. Anderson, E.R. Moore, J. Hepworth and N. Bergman  
Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy 
newborn infants (Cochrane review). In: The Cochrane 
Library, Issue 2. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 2003. 
[8] T.C. Castral, F. Warnock, A.M. Keite, V.J. Haas and C.G.S. 
Scochi The effects of skin-to-skin contact during acute pain in 
preterm newborns. European Journal of Pain, 2007, 
doi:10.1016/j.ejpain.2007.07.012. 
[9] R. Feldman, et al. Skin-to-Skin contact (Kangaroo care) 
promotes self-regulation in premature infants: sleep-wake 
cyclicity, arousal modulation, and sustained exploration. Dev 
Psychol 2002;38(2):194– 207. 
[10] H. Als, “Newborn Individualized Developmental Care and 
Assessment Program (NIDCAP): new frontier for neonatal 
and perinatal medicine,” Journal of Neonatal-Perinatal 
Medicine, vol. 2, pp. 135–147, 2009. 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Unobtrusive Physiological and Gesture Wearable
Acquisition System: A Preliminary Study on
Behavioral and Emotional Correlations
Nicola Carbonaro, Alberto Greco, Gaetano Anania, Gabriele Dalle Mura,
Alessandro Tognetti, Pasquale Scilingo, Danilo De Rossi and Antonio Lanat`a
Interdepartmental Research Centre ”E. Piaggio”, Faculty of Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
Email: nicola.carbonaro@centropiaggio.unipi.it, alberto.greco@centropiaggio.unipi.it, g.anania@ing.unipi.it,
gabrieledallemura@gmail.com, a.tognetti@centropiaggio.unipi.it, e.scilingo@centropiaggio.unipi.it, d.deross@centropiaggio.unipi.it,
a.lanata@centropiaggio.unipi.it
Abstract—This study proposes an integrated wireless wearable
system, that provides relevant information on gesture and elec-
trodermal responses for affective communication investigations.
The system is designed to be comfortable and unobtrusive to
be used in immersive virtual realities as well as in actual
scenarios in order to acquire implicit and explicit affective
information. The system is comprised of a glove where textile
electrodes, deformation sensors, and an inertial motion unit
are integrated. The glove simultaneously acquires electrodermal
activity and gesture, providing pre-elaborated signals that will be
used for feature extraction purpose in emotion recognition ﬁled.
Preliminary results are reliable and promising for the complete
integration of affective motion and physiological signal contents.
This prototype is useful to investigate how humans perceive and
produce affective interactions. Moreover, this prototype could be
used for designing novel emotional models based on high-level
and largely-comprehensive affective information.
Index Terms—Gesture; electrodermal activity; affective recog-
nition; textile-based systems; signal processing; features extrac-
tion; statistics;
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, research on emotions [1], [2] increased,
dramatically. In particular, the aspects related to how emotions
can be elicited, measured and recognized are still open issues
to be solved. One of the most interesting concepts under
study is how a person can communicate an emotion non-
verbally either alone or in a social scenario, where two or more
people are interacting. Indeed, the evaluation and interpretation
of physiological signals, facial expressions, body movements
and postures present a strong challenge because of the many
ambiguities related to affect deﬁnition, communication, and
interpretation. Classical methods for evaluating affects tend to
focus on questionnaires, in which the subjects are interviewed
for reporting what they felt during the experiment, sometimes
showing them a video of their performance, or asking them
to recall what they felt at each moment during the earlier
tasks [3]. Despite the promising results, in the majority of
cases physiological signals and body movements are studied,
separately. As matter of fact, previous studies showed that
human movement is a visual stimulus and that we have
experience of both perceiving and producing [4]. Concerning
physiological signal evaluation for emotions recognition, many
works have attempted to study physiological signals in order to
extract parameters able to identify patterns which are related to
speciﬁc emotions. Moreover, physiological reactions are one
of the most reliable signs of an implicit affective response
since they are controlled by the Autonomous Nervous System
(ANS). In the literature, many works have provided evidence
of the strong relationship between physiological reactions and
emotional/affective states of humans [2], [5], [6]. In particular,
the physiological signals used in the affect computing research
are Heart Rate Variability (HRV), Respiration (Resp) and Elec-
troDermal Activity (EDA). Previous works in physiological
signal-based emotion recognition are summarized in [7]. In
our study, we propose the ﬁrst integrated prototype for the
simultaneous acquisition of gesture and physiological signals
in the form of a textile glove that can acquire EDA, ﬁnger
movements and that can also determine forearm orientation.
Since EDA is the measurement of the sweat gland activity
and is directly controlled by Sympathetic Nerve Activity
(SNA), [8]–[10], it is considered an ideal way to monitor
the ANS. EDA can be acquired at the palmar and ﬁngers
surface, because they are suitable anatomical sites of sweat
eccrine glands. In the presented prototype, EDA is acquired
by using textile electrodes placed on the index and medium
ﬁngers. Finger movements are collected by using textile defor-
mation sensors placed on the glove metacarpophalangeal area
and forearm orientation is acquired by employing an Inertial
Measurement Unit (IMU) embedded in the glove electronics.
This works is split into two big sessions, as follows: the
ﬁrst one is named ”Materials and Methods” and the second
one is the ”Conclusion”. Material and Methods is structured as
follows: at the beginning, a description of the textile platform
is reported in detail, afterwards, the study exposes through
several sub sessions the principles and the methodologies of
analysis for both the hand gesture detection (e.i., the ﬁrst and
second sub sessions) and the EDA (e.i. the third and fourth
sub sessions). Afterwards, there are two sub sessions that
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

are dedicated of reporting the experimental results on textile
deformation sensors and wearable EDA tests. Finally, in the
Conclusion session, the study results and improvements are
underlined and a discussion is open on where and how these
data could be integrated and used to improve the knowledge on
the emotional communication system from a more high-level
approach.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
In this study, the ﬁrst prototype of a multi-parameter sensing
glove for the simultaneous acquisition of hand gestures and
EDA is presented. EDA is acquired through dedicated textile
electrodes integrated in the index and medium ﬁngertip areas
(see Fig. 1a). Finger movement is tracked by using ﬁve textile
deformation sensors integrated in the glove metacarpopha-
langeal area (see Fig. 1b). Both EDA and deformation signals
are acquired and elaborated on-line by using a dedicated wear-
able and wireless (i.e., ZigBee [11]) electronic unit. Moreover,
forearm orientation is measured by an Inertial Measurement
Unit (HMC6343 [12] by Honeywell) embedded in the glove
electronics and ﬁxed in the dorsal part of the forearm close to
the wrist.
(a) EDA electrodes
(b) Textile deformation sensors
Fig. 1: Multi-sensing glove prototype
A. Textile deformation sensors for hand gesture recognition
Textile deformation sensors and,more speciﬁcally conduc-
tive elastomer (CE) smeared sensors have been widely used
for movement and gesture detection in neurorehabilitation
[13]. Previous studies demonstrated the possibility of using
a CE-based sensing glove to measure hand joint angles by
using algorithms based on multivariate interpolation or neural
networks. The drawbacks of these techniques was the high
calibration effort, which limitated the use of such devices
in practical situations [13]. Despite promising performances,
CE-based prototypes showed several limitations such as non
negligible relaxation time, non linearities and hysteresis [14].
Here, the gestural interface consists of ﬁve textile deformation
sensors made of a particular conductive and elastic yarn. The
same sensors were previously used for respiration monitoring
in [15]. With respect to CE materials, this new sensor conﬁg-
uration was chosen for the better long term stability, the lower
hysteresis and the faster relaxation time. The sensors have
piezoresistive properties. Local fabric deformations due to user
hand movements modify the sensor electrical resistance, and
each sensor resistance is closely correlated with the single
ﬁnger degree of ﬂexion.
1) Processing methods: The sensor signal is characterized
by a slow baseline drift due to the intrinsic characteristics
of textile substrate (i.e., hysteresis and relaxation time are
improved but they still exist). For this reason, an ad hoc
algorithm for hand gesture recognition was conceived. The
algorithm follows in real time signal local maximum and
minimum levels through a peak detection routine that works
without empiric thresholds. This continuous update of signal
maximum/minimum allows for recognizing the condition of
single ﬁnger opening or closing independently from the base-
line variation (see Fig. 2). The combination of the described
procedure on the ﬁve ﬁngers enables a rapid recognition of the
current hand gesture. With respect to previous methodology,
no initial calibration is needed. This last point makes the
algorithm ﬂexible towards different hand physical conﬁgura-
tions and glove sizes. In Fig. 2, the results of the developed
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
a)
 
 
Thumb
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
b)
 
 
Index
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
c)
 
 
Middle
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
d)
 
 
Ring
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
e)
Time[s]
 
 
Pinkie
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Fig. 2: Raw signals (solid lines) and algorithm results (dotted
lines)
algorithm are shown. In each ﬁgure is represented the ﬁnger
sensor signal (solid line) and the algorithm result (dotted line).
In the case of high dotted line, the respective ﬁnger is ﬂexed
and vice versa. In this example, the user was asked to close
the hand (Phase I) and then to ﬂex one ﬁnger while the others
are extended (Phase II to VI).
B. Textile electrodes for EDA monitoring
EDA is acquired by integrated textile electrodes placed at
the ﬁngertips. The use of textile electrodes as opposed to
standard Ag/AgCl electrodes has already proven to be equiv-
alent, as we reported in our study [16], where we performed
the electrode characterization calculating the voltage-current
characteristics and the electric impedance and found that their
behaviors are comparable with standard electrodes. Moreover,
the use of a wearable textile system exhibits several advantages
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

in terms of portability and usability for long-term monitoring,
and gives minimal constraints. In this prototype, the EDA is
obtained as the ratio between an imposed continuous voltage
of 0.5V between the two ﬁngers and the passing current.
Hereinafter, we refer to this EDA measurement as Skin Con-
ductance (SC).
1) SC processing and features extraction: The SC signal
is characterized by a tonic (i.e., Skin Conductance Level,
SCL) and a phasic component (Skin Conductance Response,
SCR). SCL is the slowly varying baseline level of skin
conductance, while SCR arises within a predeﬁned response
window (1 − 5s after stimulus onset), and is directly related
to a given stimulus [17]. The signal division into its phasic
and tonic components can be complicated by an overlapping
of consecutive SCRs, in case of an inter-stimulus interval
shorter than the SCR recovery time. In order to overcome this
issue, we analyzed the SC by means of a modeling technique
based on the deconvolution process [18]. The SC signal is
the result of a convolution between the SNA and an Impulse
Response Function (IRF). The IRF is a biexponential function
the so-called Bateman function [19], which is the result of
a diffusional model of the dynamics of sweat concentration
in the corneum, assuming that it is governed by the laws of
diffusion [20]. The decomposition of the SC in its components
was performed by means of Ledalab 3.2.2. software package
for MATLAB [21]. The row SC signal is pre-ﬁltered by a
lowpass ﬁlter with a cut-off frequency of 2Hz. After this
phase, a deconvolution between the ﬁltered SC data and the
IRF is performed. The deconvoluted signal was analyzed by a
peak detection algorithm. A signiﬁcant peak was detected if a
local maximum had a difference greater than 0.2µS from its
preceding or following local minimum [18]. The points under
the threshold was considered part of the tonic driver signal.
The tonic driver was estimated over the experiment duration
time by an interpolation algorithm, and, consequentially, the
tonic SC activity was achieved by a convolution between
the tonic driver and the IRF. The phasic driver component
was obtained by subtracting the tonic driver signal from the
deconvoluted SC. In Fig. 3, an example of the original SC
signal and the two deconvoluted tonic and phasic driver signals
are shown. The extracted features from both phasic and tonic
driver signals were the Number of Peak (NP), the MEAN
value of the AMPlitude (MeanAmp), the MAXimum value
of the AMPlitude (MaxAmp) and the MEAN value of the
ﬁrst derivative AMPlitude (DMeanAmp). The features were
calculated within a window response of 5s.
C. Textile deformation sensors tests
A set of experiments were carried out in order to test the
performance of the sensor response and new algorithms of the
sensing glovSeven participants were asked to perform different
combinations of hand postures by performing ﬁnger ﬂexion-
extension movements while wearing the glove. Once a posture
position was recognized (e.g., close thumb and open other
ﬁngers), the system generated the results of the ﬁnger combi-
nation. This operation was replicated three times for each user.
Fig. 3: Example of decomposition analysis. In the upper ﬁgure
the row SC signal is shown. The lower ﬁgures report the
deconvoluted tonic and phasic driver signals during resting
and elicitation phase.
TABLE I: HAND POSTURE RECGNITION
Task
N Test
Recognized
No Recognized
Success
zero ﬁngers
21
21
0
100
one ﬁnger
105
102
3
97.14
two ﬁngers
210
199
11
94.76
three ﬁngers
210
195
15
92.8
four ﬁngers
105
97
8
92.38
ﬁve ﬁngers
21
21
0
100
The results of this test are shown in the Table I. In this table,
columnTask represents the different conﬁgurations performed
by the user, considering how many ﬁngers are closed in that
particular posture. Taking into account the ﬁrst row of the
table, zero ﬁngers means that the user was performing the ﬂat
hand posture. Positive and negative recognition is reported in
the third and fourth columns respectively. In the last column,
the percentages are presented that represent the algorithms’
capability of recognizing a particular posture.
D. Wearable EDA test
A preliminary test was carried out to evaluate the perfor-
mances of the glove for affective evaluation. Seven patients
were recruited and an affective stimulating protocol was ad-
ministered. Affective elicitation was performed by projecting a
set of images selected from the International Affective Picture
System (IAPS) database [22], which consists of hundreds of
pictures with an associated speciﬁc emotional rating in terms
of valence and arousal. The valence and arousal ratings are
based on several studies where subjects were requested to
rank these images using the Self Assessment Manikin [23].
The protocol was divided into two sessions: basal, lasting 20
seconds and arousal, lasting 50 seconds. The ﬁrst was a resting
state phase in order to record the baseline of the subjects; the
second session was characterized by a slideshow of images
with an arousal level between [5 − 6]. The features extracted
from the two sessions were compared by using statistical
analysis. The statistical inference analysis was performed by
means of a nonparametric test due to the non-gaussianity of the
sample set. In particular, the data of subjects derived from the
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE II: P-VALUE RESULTING OF A MANN WHITNEY
TEST BETWEEN THE NEUTRAL AND AROUSAL SES-
SION
NP
MeanAmp
MaxAmp
DMeanAmp
phasic
< 0.05
< 0.05
< 0.05
< 0.05
tonic
< 0.05
0.34
0.42
0.2
basal and the arousal session were compared by using Mann
Whitney test [24]. The results of the analysis are shown in the
Table II.
III. CONCLUSION
In this study, a preliminary test on the performance of
a ﬁrst integrated prototype for the simultaneous acquisition
of gesture and physiological signals is reported. The novelty
of the prototype lies on the use of a wearable textile glove
integrated with different technologies enrolled in monitoring
EDA and hand posture. Unlike previous textile-based sensing
gloves for posture recognition, this glove employs new strate-
gies using sensor integration into textile substrates. Moreover,
the new implemented algorithm was able to distinguish the
xconﬁguration of each ﬁnger without any calibration stage
or empiric threshold. Referring to EDA results, the textile
electrodes integrated in the glove showed optimal capacity
in detecting reliable signals (see Fig. 3). The results of the
statistical analysis applied to the features extracted from the
phasic SC component showed that calculated affective infor-
mation was statistically signiﬁcant for differentiating basal and
arousal session. On the contrary, most of the features of the
tonic signal did not show a statistical difference, which is most
likely due to the short duration of the experiment, not allowing
enough time for signiﬁcant changes to be made in the slowly
varying skin conductance level. These revelations create and
interesting basis and open up promising novel research ap-
plications. The integration of gestural and physiological data
could enable the use of EDA signal in real environments,
allowing for the possibility of implementing innovative algo-
rithms for the automatic ﬁltering of movement artifacts that
usually corrupt the electrodermal signals. Currently, it is well-
known that EDA signals can only be used in strongly con-
trolled conditions. Furthermore, the analysis of affective body
language jointly to physiological signal interpretation can offer
the possibility of both understanding how humans process
emotional stimuli, [25], and allowing the implementation of
innovative emotional models. It is worthwhile noting that, the
integration of information coming from non verbal emotional
expressions and physiological signals is widely advocated but
rarely implemented [2]. It is a matter of fact that physiological
and body language convey information about emotional states.
However, current literature lacks the exact informational val-
ues given from these channels as emotional indicators. Even
if oldest emotional expression research was focused on body
language and posture, state-of-the-art affect detection systems
have disregarded this information preferring facial expressions
and acoustic-proposed features. However, it is a common
experience that human body language is commonly used as
a emotional communicative channel, therefore, gesture and
posture together with direct sympathetic information, such as
EDR, can offer a kind of integrated information that is often
unavailable from the conventional nonverbal measures such
as the face and paralinguistic features of speech. Although
physiological signal interpretation is thoroughly studied in
this ﬁeld it is well know, that their emotional content is not
sufﬁcient enough in order to understand emotional commu-
nicative system. In this view, the recent advances in gestural
interfaces, as that presented in this study, present an oppor-
tunity to study how advocate emotions, e.g., expressions and
embodiments, activate physiological and behavioral responses
during an emotional episode. According to our results we
believe that new methodologies could hypothesize how these
information cold be represented in speciﬁc models arising
from the collaboration of affective and human-etology sciences
giving weighted importance to all variables that can be simul-
taneously monitored by the wearable platform.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been partially funded by the European
Commission through CEEDs (FP7 FET 258749) project.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Gallois and V. Callan, “Decoding emotional messages: Inﬂuence of
ethnicity, sex, message type, and channel.” Journal of personality and
social psychology, vol. 51, no. 4, p. 755, 1986.
[2] R. Calvo and S. D’Mello, “Affect detection: An interdisciplinary review
of models, methods, and their applications,” Affective Computing, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 18–37, 2010.
[3] H. Wallbott and K. Scherer, “Assessing emotion by questionnaire,” The
measurement of emotions.Emotion: Theory, research, and experience,
vol. 4, pp. 55–82, 1989.
[4] M. Shiffrar and J. Pinto, “The visual analysis of bodily motion,” Com-
mon mechanisms in perception and action: Attention and Performance,
vol. 19, pp. 381–399, 2002.
[5] C. Collet, E. Vernet-Maury, G. Delhomme, and A. Dittmar, “Autonomic
nervous system response patterns speciﬁcity to basic emotions,” Journal
of the autonomic nervous system, vol. 62, no. 1-2, pp. 45–57, 1997.
[6] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. Scilingo, “Oscillations of heart rate and
respiration synchronize during affective visual stimulation,” Information
Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 16, no. 4, pp.
683–690, 2012.
[7] J. Wagner, J. Kim, and E. Andr´e, “From physiological signals to
emotions: Implementing and comparing selected methods for feature
extraction and classiﬁcation,” in Multimedia and Expo, 2005. ICME
2005. IEEE International Conference on.
Ieee, 2005, pp. 940–943.
[8] D. Fowles, M. Christie, R. Edelberg, W. Grings, D. Lykken, and P. Ven-
ables, “Publication recommendations for electrodermal measurements,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 232–239, 1981.
[9] D. Fowles, “Mechanisms of electrodermal activity,” Methods in physio-
logical psychology, vol. 1, no. Part C, pp. 231–271, 1974.
[10] W. Boucsein, Electrodermal activity.
Springer Verlag, 2011.
[11] Z. Alliance, “Zigbee speciﬁcation,” ZigBee Document 053474r13, pp.
344–346, May 2012.
[12] Honey,
“http://www51.honeywell.com/.../hmc6343.pdf,”
www.magneticsensors.com, June 2012.
[13] A. Tognetti, F. Lorussi, R. Bartalesi, S. Quaglini, M. Tesconi, G. Zupone,
and D. De Rossi, “Wearable kinesthetic system for capturing and
classifying upper limb gesture in post-stroke rehabilitation,” Journal of
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 2, no. 8, 2005.
[14] F. Lorussi, A. Tognetti, N. Carbonaro, G. Anania, and D. De Rossi, “En-
hancing the performance of upper limb gesture reconstruction sensory
fusion,” in Proceedings of the Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2011.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[15] R. Paradiso and L. Caldani, “Electronic textile platforms for monitoring
in a natural environment,” Research Journal of Textile and Apparel,
vol. 4, 2010.
[16] A. Lanat`a, G. Valenza, and E. Scilingo, “A novel eda glove based
on textile-integrated electrodes for affective computing,” Medical and
Biological Engineering and Computing, pp. 1–10, 2012.
[17] D. Levinson and R. Edelberg, “Scoring criteria for response latency
and habituation in electrodermal research: a critique,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 417–426, 1985.
[18] M. Benedek and C. Kaernbach, “A continuous measure of phasic
electrodermal activity,” Journal of neuroscience methods, vol. 190, no. 1,
pp. 80–91, 2010.
[19] ——, “Decomposition of skin conductance data by means of nonneg-
ative deconvolution,” Psychophysiology, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 647–658,
2010.
[20] R. Schneider, “A mathematical model of human skin conductance,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 24, no. 5, p. 610, 1987.
[21] C. Karenbach, “Ledalab-a software package for the analysis of phasic
electrodermal activity,” Technical report, Allgemeine Psychologie, Insti-
tut f¨ur Psychologie, Tech. Rep., 2005.
[22] P. Lang, M. Bradley, and B. Cuthbert, “International affective picture
system (iaps): Technical manual and affective ratings,” 1999.
[23] P. Lang, “Behavioral treatment and bio-behavioral assessment: Computer
applications,” 1980.
[24] H. Mann and D. Whitney, “On a test of whether one of two random vari-
ables is stochastically larger than the other,” The annals of mathematical
statistics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 50–60, 1947.
[25] M. Giese, T. Poggio et al., “Neural mechanisms for the recognition of
biological movements,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 4, no. 3, pp.
179–192, 2003.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Improving of Medical Imaging by the Use of Noninvasive Optical Technologies 
Anna Cysewska-Sobusiak and Grzegorz Wiczyński 
Division of Metrology and Optoelectronics, Institute of Electrical Engineering and Electronics  
Poznan University of Technology 
Poznan, Poland 
e-mail: anna.cysewska@put.poznan.pl; grzegorz.wiczynski@put.poznan.pl 
 
 
Abstract— Among the applied methods of tissue parameters 
measurement, a tendency to develop imaging methods based 
on detection and analysis of natural and forced biooptical 
phenomena is significant. Transmission variant of light-tissue 
interaction is considered in the paper. The work on the 
performed 
optoelectronic 
systems 
for 
human 
tissue 
transillumination is in progress. The transillumination image 
enables to disclose information on the functional condition, 
unavailable in the traditional X-ray technique. Preliminary 
results which were obtained by the authors during the finger 
and hand transillumination tests are promising. Some of them 
are presented in the paper. They show that effective imaging is 
possible even in a simple system and indicate that the further 
development of the designed noninvasive systems seems to be 
advisable.  
Keywords-medical imaging; light-tissue interaction; optical 
technologies; noninvasive transillumination 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In 1895, Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen [20] made the first 
radiogram of a hand, starting the development of image 
diagnostics methods. Other imaging methods appeared after 
a few dozen of years only. Modern imaging technology 
includes among others X-ray imaging, videoendoscopy, 
ultrasonography 
(USG), 
computer 
tomography 
(CT), 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission 
tomography (PET) and thermography [1][2]. All these 
methods allow the detection of different properties of tissues 
through a variety of utilized phenomena. Particular 
techniques differ from the point of view of the advantages 
and disadvantages, a range of applications, degree of 
invasive or noninvasive interaction, patient ballast, and 
complication of procedures. For example, MRI has always 
been especially suited for vascular imaging.  
The associated application of various methods is 
presently developed, allowing obtaining a more complete set 
of information on the object, compared to the tests made in 
one diagnostic technique only. Thanks to the selective 
optical properties of tissue cells, optoelectronic noninvasive 
imaging methods can be used for determination of essential 
features of tissue sets, particularly useful in developing 
combined diagnostics [3].  
As far back as 1876, Karl van Vierordt [19] already 
observed changes in the solar spectrum transmitted by the 
finger tissues of his own hand. He discovered that after 
pressure causing inadequate blood supply, a change occurred 
in the spectrum composition obtained, which he related to 
the changing participation of oxygenated and reduced 
hemoglobins in the tissues. Information on the first attempts 
of transillumination with optical radiation appeared in 1929 
[4]. In 1977, a hundred years after van Vierodt’s 
observations, Minolta built the first oximeter based on the 
transillumination of the ear lobe. Fast development of such 
techniques, however, occurred in 1980’s [5].  
Due to strong scattering of the light, the practical 
implementation of optical transillumination for medical 
imaging is a difficult task [6−12]. This technology allows for 
supporting detection of pathological formations in some 
tissue sets, particularly those located on body perimeter. The 
subject of the presented work-in-progress is based on our 
own previous experience in an expanded use of the 
transmission photoplethysmography and pulse oximetry 
principles.  
In Section 2, optical properties of human tissues are 
briefly mentioned. In Section 3, specific attributes of optical 
imaging and the proposed transmitting-receiving systems are 
described. Preliminary results related to transillumination 
images which were collected by us for human fingers and 
whole hands seem to be very promising. In Section 4, we 
present some selected results of imaging. 
II. 
OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF HUMAN TISSUES  
There is a window in which optical radiation can 
penetrate into human tissue set and propagate through it. 
This window includes red light and the NIR (Near Infrared) 
wavelengths [13][14]. A particular tissue composition 
depends very much on blood and water content what results 
in differences between values of optical parameters if to 
determine them at several compositions of various kinds and 
size. The effects of radiation influence on the object may 
concern its area and volume and the type of interaction 
largely depends on the properties of the beam of radiation. 
One of the most useful properties of using red and NIR 
wavelengths 
is 
that 
oxygenated 
hemoglobin 
and 
deoxygenated hemoglobin both absorb light differently in 
this region.  
A given set of living tissues consists of many 
components which create the complex spatial configuration. 
When a biological object is exposed to selective 
illumination, we can receive the selective optical response to 
particular wavelengths. Depending on the locality and 
diameter of the light beam passing through the object the 
effects of light-tissue interaction can differ very much. The 
interactions occurring between the light and the tissues result 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

in scattering, absorption and fluorescence, providing 
information on the structure, physiology, biochemistry and 
molecular functions. Optical imaging may be used for 
description of surface and volume structures.   
III. 
ATTRIBUTES OF  OPTICAL IMAGING  
A. Powers and Limitations of Tissue Transillumination 
Combined application of various methods simultaneously 
is presently developed, allowing for obtaining a more 
complete set of information on the object, compared to the 
tests made with one diagnostic technique only. In such an 
approach, tendency to develop noninvasive methods based 
on detection and analysis of biooptical signals phenomena is 
perceptible. 
Transillumination is understood as the phenomenon of 
transmitting optical radiation with defined parameters by a 
given object, which becomes the carrier of information about 
the characteristics of this object. In case of biological objects, 
the optical properties of body fluids and other tissues are 
utilized. Photons in turbid media, such as most human 
tissues, are absorbed as well as scattered many times before 
being transmitted. Scattering and absorption can complicate 
the transillumination image. Due to the easiness of setting 
the location in relation to the measuring system and due to 
the variability of the optical properties, convenient objects in 
the transillumination tests are those located on body 
perimeter.  
Under 
the 
noninvasive 
“transillumination” 
and 
“illumination from underneath”, it is possible to diagnose 
and monitor the parameters of tissues and organs examined. 
It is related to achievements in optoelectronic devices and 
new capabilities of numerical processing. 
Optical radiation that is to play the role of an effective 
information carrier should be sufficiently coherent and, due 
to the high optical density of the object, should also have 
possibly high intensity. However, for higher power density 
quantities, some destructive photothermal effects may occur. 
Wavelength and power of radiation selected improperly may 
not only act ineffectively, but may cause damage or 
destruction of the object.  
B. Transmitting-Receiving Systems 
This paper includes a brief discussion of selected issues 
related to the biophysical and optical phenomena used and 
preliminary examples obtained by the authors with 
transillumination scanning applied to human hand and 
fingers. Our previous experience with measurements based 
on transmission pulse oximetry [15][16] has been utilized in 
an extended modified way.  The basic application difficulty 
in an effective transillumination of thick tissue layers is the 
low power of radiation to be detected. Therefore, it is 
necessary to force the optical power of the source and to 
apply sensitive photodetectors. Various variants of systems 
were considered, however, always the high-efficient light 
emitting diodes LEDs were used as light sources. Two 
variants of these systems which we currently use are shown 
in Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b. 
The experimental transillumination of hand and foot 
fingers is possible in a quite simple as well as efficient 
transmitting-receiving system presented in Fig. 1a. The 
mechanical structure of this system was constructed in the 
form of letter C [16][17]. The assembly is flexible and 
contains the motorization, brakes, motion transmission 
mechanisms, cable bundle, and pneumatic and electrical 
circuits. The optical part of the transmitting-receiving system 
consists of an illuminating LED diode placed opposite the 
sensitive receiving PIN photodiode (without the additional 
systems focusing the optical beam) which are fit at the 
structure ends in optical channels of 3 mm diameter and 
about 20 mm length. The object’s scanning is made in a 
rectangular x-y coordinates system. A hand examined is laid 
on a transparent plate stabilizing its position. The hand 
should remain immobilized in relation to the scanning 
system. The immobilization may not disturb the object’s 
function maintaining simultaneously the examined person’s 
comfort. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1.  Two variants of the performed measuring systems: (a) view of the scanning system where the input is the transverse motion of the system in 
relation to the hand fingers; (b) scheme of a system designed to study the transillumination  effects with a monochromatic camera. 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Scheme of another system variant is shown in Fig. 1b. 
The object transillumination is realized with a system 
consisting of hardware and program parts. The system makes 
it possible to study the transillumination effects in the optical 
range, including the visible and near infrared radiation (up to 
1000 nm). The single and multi-element illuminating 
electroluminescent sources of light were tested. A 
monochromatic camera CMOS has been used as a light 
detector. 
IV. 
EXAMPLES OF RESULTS 
The selected results obtained with the system shown in 
Fig. 1a are presented in Fig. 2. The transverse motion of the 
scanning system in relation to the fingers was input. Several 
wavelengths were used for the tests. The results presented 
herein have been obtained for an ELJ-880-228B emitting 
light at the wavelength λ = 880 nm [18]. This LED was 
driven with current impulses. The PIN BPW24R photodiode 
was used as the sensitive photodetector.  
Fig. 2a presents the standardized values of the converted 
output signal from the photodiode for several x values. 
Particular levels of output signals show differences in light 
attenuation for a given position. The results obtained as 
transillumination images are shown in Fig. 2b. The grayness 
intensity is represented by the output signal values of the 
fingers examined (F1, F2, F3, F4). The specific isolines 
illustrate transmission properties of fingers at the used 
wavelength. Despite the system simplicity, the imaging 
obtained was as anticipated before. For example, differences 
between the amplitude variability for fingers without and 
with joint degeneration were observed. 
Some examples of images observed with the system 
shown in Fig. 1b are presented in Fig. 3. It is possible to 
distinguish the structures of the object that occur sufficiently 
near the camera input surface. Thus, the observation of the 
internal structures is possible of such objects as hands, feet, 
etc.  
Results of measurements shown in Fig. 2 do not still 
allow to distinguish the difference between the diseased and 
healthy joint because imaging of higher resolution has to be 
performed. However, results obtained with the system 
presented in Fig. 1b indicate that there is a possibility of 
optical detecting the pathological changes of joints.
LEFT HAND
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
X
Y
x = 12mm
F2
F3
F4
x = 22mm
F2
F3
F4
x = 32mm
F2
F3
F4
x = 42mm
F2
F3
F4
F1
x =52mm
F2
F3
F4
F1
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2.  Examples of imaging results obtained by the use the system shown in Fig. 1a: (a) Specification of the output signals dependency on the y location 
for selected cross-sections with x coordinate; (b) Examples of transillumination images obtainef for hand fingers. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Comparison of results obtained by the use of the system shown in Fig. 1b for the left hand transilluminated from the palm side at three 
wavelenghts, respectively: 645 nm, 880 nm, and 940 nm. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Results presented in Fig. 3 show that transillumination of 
peripheral body sites is possible with red and near-infrared 
incident wavelengths. We may acquire not only the outlines 
of the object structure but also observe the blood vessels near 
the surface. Furthermore, there are visible bright components 
related to the finger joints. During studies, symptoms of 
rheumatic degeneration were observed. Strong light 
scattering by human tissues makes it hard to evaluate the 
structures occurring more deeply. The obtained images 
especially allowed the observation of the near-surface blood 
vessels and bone structures. The possibility of efficient 
transillumination greatly depends on the transmission 
properties of the object as well as the spectral characteristics 
of the LEDs and camera. The best effects were obtained for 
three wavelengths: 645 nm, 880 nm and 940 nm. All these 
wavelengths are included in the transillumination window 
where the hemoglobin species are the main light absorbers in 
arterial and venous blood [5]. Independently from the LED 
spectrum, the monochromatic camera allows obtaining of 
imaging in the gray scale. 
From the diagnostic point of view, the improving 
advantages of the proposed method, compared qualitatively 
with, e.g., traditional X-ray imaging include: 
• 
The lack of harmful influence of optical radiation of 
properly 
selected 
parameters 
on 
the 
human 
organism. 
• 
The 
possibility 
of 
noninvasive 
continuous 
monitoring of the chosen parts of the body.   
• 
The possibility of detecting the local concentration 
of the blood, e.g., hematoma. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The particular methods of medical imaging are not the 
alternative methods, but they can complement each other, 
according to the present tendencies to applying so-called 
combined imaging. The proposed optical imaging of such 
objects as the hand or foot has no the direct equivalent 
described in the accessible literature neither in the trade 
offer. It seems to be reasonable to test transillumination 
techniques not yet described in other reference data. The 
presented preliminary results of tests show that effective 
transillumination scanning is possible even in a simple 
system and indicate that the further development of the 
developed measuring system is appropriate and justified. The 
applied technique can be the useful tool in the process of 
diagnosing of, e.g., surface blood vessels and the rheumatoid 
inflammation of joints. From the combined imaging point of 
view, the optical imaging may provide information on the 
functional condition unavailable in other techniques. 
Transillumination imaging has the lower resolution in the 
comparison with, e.g., the RTG techniques, but they allow to 
detect changes invisible on the X-ray pictures. We have 
concentrated our current works on developing efficient 
transillumination of thick layers of tissues and building 
algorithms representing the anatomic and functional 
properties.   
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Enderle, S. Blanchard, and J. Bronzino, Introduction to 
Biomedical Engineering, San Diego: Academic Press, 2000.  
[2] T. Togawa, T. Tamura, and P. Å. Öberg, Biomedical Sensors 
and Instruments, 2nd ed., Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2011. 
[3] A. Cysewska-Sobusiak, G. Wiczyński, Z. Krawiecki, and A. 
Sowier, "Role of optical techniques in combined use of selected 
methods of medical imaging," Opto-Electronics Review, vol. 
16, pp. 136−146, 2008, doi:10.2478/s11772-008-0010-7. 
[4] M. Cutler, "Transillumination of the breast," Surg. Gynecol. 
Obstet., vol. 48, pp. 721−727, 1929.  
[5] J. G. Webster, Design of Pulse Oximeters, London: IPP 
Publishing Ltd, 1997. 
[6] B. W.  Pogue, T. O. McBride, U. L. Osterberg, and K. D.  
Paulsen, "Comparison of imaging geometries for diffuse 
optical tomography of tissue," Optics Express, vol. 4, pp. 
270–286, 1999. 
[7] A. K. Scheel et.al., "Assessment of proximal finger joint 
inflammation in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, using a 
novel 
laser-based 
imaging 
technique, 
"Arthrism 
& 
Rheumatism, " vol. 46,  pp. 1177–1184, 2002. 
[8] J. Beuthan et. al, "Light scattering study of rheumatoid 
arthritis," Quantum Electronics, vol. 32, pp. 945−952, 2002. 
[9] R. S. Jones et. al, "Near-infrared transillumination at 1310nm 
for the imaging of early dental decay,"Optics Express, vol. 11, 
2003. 
[10] U. Hampel, E. Schleicher, and R. Freyer, "Volume image 
reconstruction for diffuse optical tomography," Applied 
Optics, vol. 41, pp. 3816−3826, July 2002. 
[11] http://www.eatonhand.com/img/img00087.htm 
[retrieved: 
September, 2012]. 
[12] X. Wu and G. Faris, "Improved imaging through human 
tissue 
using 
compensated 
transillumination," 
Proc. 
Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO’98), doi: 
10.1109/CLEO.1998.676096.  
[13] F. A. Duck, Physical Properties of Tissue: a Comprehensive 
Reference Book, San Diego: Academia Press, 1990, pp. 
43−71. 
[14] V. V. Tuchin, "Light interaction with biological tissues 
(overview)," Proc. SPIE, vol. 1884, pp. 234−272, 1993. 
[15] A. Cysewska-Sobusiak, "One-dimensional representation of 
light-tissue interaction for application in noninvasive 
oximetry," Optical Engineering, vol. 36, pp. 1225−1233, 
April 1997. 
[16] A. Cysewska-Sobusiak, A. Hulewicz, Z. Krawiecki, and G. 
Wiczyński, Examples of the Application of Light-Tissue 
Interaction to Biomedical Engineering, in: WIT Transactions 
on the Built Environment, vol. 121, UK: WIT Press. 2011, pp. 
223−234. 
[17] ARM RX60B FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS, Staubli, 
2001. 
[18] Data sheet, ELJ-880-228B, Roithener Lasertechnik. 
[19] J. W. Severinghaus and P. A. Astrup, History of Blood Gas 
Analysis, Boston: Little, Brown and Company (Inc.), 1987. 
[20] J. F. Keithley, The Story of Electrical and Magnetic 
Measurements. From 500 BC to the 1940s, New York: IEEE 
Press, 1999. 
 
 
 
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Introducing the Global Advocacy Leadership Academy (GALA):                  
Training Health Advocates around the World to Champion the Needs of Health 
Care Consumers 
Gary L. Kreps 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
gkreps@gmu,.edu 
 
Paula Kim 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
pkim12@gmu,.edu 
 
Lisa Sparks 
Health and Strategic Communication Program 
Chapman University 
Orange, CA, USA 
sparks@chapman.edu 
 
Linda Neuhauser 
Health Research for Action Center 
University of California, Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA, USA 
linden@berkeley.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
Carol G. Daugherty 
Department of Global and Community Health 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
cdaughe2@gmu.edu 
 
Mollie Rose Canzona 
Department of Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
mcanzona@gmu.edu 
 
Wonsun Kim 
Department of Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
wkim10@gmu.edu 
 
Jungmi Jun 
Department of Communication Studies 
University of Northern Iowa 
Cedar Falls, Iowa, USA 
jungmi.jun@uni.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—Patient advocacy can make significant contributions 
to health research by ensuring that efforts are patient-focused 
and help promote cooperation between all relevant sectors of 
the health care community. Yet, the development of effective 
patient advocacy organizations demands strong leadership, 
establishment of active collaborations with key stakeholders, 
and careful management of fiscal and personnel resources to 
enhance health outcomes. This presentation describes the 
development and implementation of an innovative training 
academy 
to 
prepare 
cancer 
advocacy 
leaders, 
both 
domestically and internationally, by helping them carefully 
consider strategic health advocacy processes, roles, and 
responsibilities.  The Global Advocacy Leadership Academy 
(GALA) will provide participants with a comprehensive 
overview of the modern health care system, identifying critical 
constituents 
and 
stakeholders, 
and 
examining 
interrelationships between key individuals and organizations. 
Strategies 
for 
fostering 
meaningful 
communication, 
cooperation, and coordination between patient advocacy 
organizations and other stakeholders related to health, 
including consumers, other advocacy groups, clinicians, 
government officials, researchers, and private industry 
representatives, will also be explored. For example, patient 
advocacy organization leaders will learn about communication 
strategies for working effectively with researchers and 
clinicians to support prevention, detection, treatment, and 
survivorship efforts that will benefit patients. Patient advocacy 
organization leaders will also explore strategies for raising 
funds and increasing funding for health research. They will 
learn about clinical research, health regulatory systems, 
community organizing, as well as drug and technology 
development and approval processes from basic research to 
clinical practice. Exemplar models of successful patient 
advocacy organization leadership will be described and 
evaluated as GALA case studies that illustrate effective health 
advocacy. 
Keywords-patient advocacy organizations; leadership; media 
relations; corporate relatioms; health care systems; government 
agencies; 
stakeholders; 
personnel 
management; 
health 
promotion. 
 
I.     INTRODUCTION 
The Global Advocacy Leadership Academy (GALA) is a 
new public health educational initiative designed to facilitate 
needed training and support for leaders of health advocacy 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

organizations around the world.   Leadership of health 
advocacy organizations is a complex enterprise that demands 
a tremendous amount of specialized knowledge about the 
health care system and constituent groups, adaptability to 
evolving health care systems, and the ability to reach, 
influence, and collaborate with a wide range of individuals 
from different sectors of the health care system through 
strategic health communication.  The GALA program is 
introducing a unique international training and support 
model to prepare health advocacy leaders to meet the 
challenges of building and sustaining strong consumer 
advocacy organizations to champion the needs of patients 
and their caregivers within the modern health care system.   
 
Effective leadership of health advocacy organizations is a 
demanding and complicated enterprise.  While many 
aspiring advocacy organization leaders are passionate about 
helping to improve the modern health care system and to 
represent the needs of health care consumers, they may not 
be particularly well prepared to meet the demands of 
achieving these goals.  The development of the GALA 
program grew out of the work of its founders (Gary Kreps 
and Paula Kim) in advising new health advocacy leaders 
from around the globe to achieve their goals.  We recognized 
the many challenges that advocacy leaders face in 
influencing health research, health care practices, and health 
care policies and decided the best way to assist these leaders 
was to develop a formal system (GALA) for building 
advocacy organization leadership capacity.  Moreover, we 
realized that health advocacy organizations were situated 
within a global health care system, concerning many of the 
same health care problems that affect consumers around the 
world.  There was a tremendous need to link health advocacy 
organizations within a global advocacy network to promote 
international cooperation and collaboration for achieving 
shared goals of consumer empowerment and support within 
an interdependent, challenging, and evolving global health 
care system [1].  This paper outlines the goals and strategies 
of the GALA program for supporting the development of 
effective and influential health advocacy leaders and 
organizations. 
 
 
II.     MEETING HEALTH ADVOCACY CHALLENGES 
The GALA program is designed to help leaders 
understand the unique sociopolitical structure of the modern 
health care system, both on a broad societal level and also 
within the unique health issue communities that address the 
specific areas of direct interest to different health consumer 
groups (for example, communities interested in lung cancer, 
diabetes, Lupus, kidney transplantation, hemophilia, or other 
challenging health issues).  Strong and effective health 
advocacy organization leaders need to understand the lay of 
the land within the rapidly evolving health care system so 
they can help influence health care policies and practices to 
reflect the needs and goals of the health care consumers they 
represent.   
 
Health advocacy leaders also need to know which 
specific organizations and individuals exert influences in the 
delivery of care, development of health policies, conduct of 
health research, and translation of research into health 
practices within the health domains in which they want to 
support the needs of consumers.  Effective leaders must build 
collaborative 
relationships 
with 
key 
organizational 
representatives to exchange relevant information and 
cooperate on issues of importance to consumers.  There is a 
daunting amount of information to learn to prepare for 
effective advocacy group leadership and a vast number of 
relational connections to establish for new advocacy leaders.  
Often, new health advocacy leaders have serious information 
deficits and limited relational connections that limit their 
abilities to accomplish important consumer support goals. 
 
The GALA program is introducing new and relevant 
training, support, advising, and collaboration training 
programs to help health advocacy leaders build their 
knowledge base and learn how to work effectively with key 
representatives of different segments of the health care 
system.  GALA will help connect advocacy leaders to 
relevant health researchers, educators, government and 
regulatory agency officials, health care delivery system 
personnel, health product and services corporation leaders 
(pharmaceuticals, health equipment, medical devices, 
insurance companies, and health informatics firms), media, 
representatives, as well as leaders of other related advocacy 
and support organizations.  Not only is the GALA program 
designed to teach leaders about these different relevant 
segments of the health care system, but the GALA program 
will introduce health advocacy leaders to key representatives 
of these health sectors to initiate development of cooperative 
relationships for achieving advocacy goals.   
 
The GALA program is also designed to help educate 
advocacy leaders about the nature of health research, 
including how research is funded, who conducts health 
research, how research results are reported, how to make 
sense of health research findings, and how research is 
translated into relevant health care policies and practices.  
The GALA program will help advocacy leaders understand 
the intricacies of the modern health care system, including 
the design of health care delivery systems, the key roles 
performed by different professionals and support personnel 
working within the health care system, and the evolving 
policies governing health care delivery and reimbursement.  
The GALA program will also educate advocacy leaders 
about  the development of government legislation for health 
care policies, programs, and research, corporate influences 
on the health care system, and the unique roles performed 
within the health care system by professional associations, 
regulatory 
agencies, 
educational 
institutions, 
support 
organizations, foundations, and other assorted non-profit, 
for-profit, and government agencies. 
 
III.       HEALTH INFORMATION DEMANDS 
Access to and effective use of relevant, accurate, and 
timely health information is critically important for guiding 
the important health-related decisions that consumers and 
providers must make across the continuum of care to 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

promote health and well-being [2].  This includes decisions 
about the prevention of health risks, health promotion 
behaviors, the detection and diagnosis of health problems, 
health care treatment strategies, and best practices for living 
with health threats (successful survivorship) [3].  Yet, health 
information is complex, with many different kinds of health 
risks, each with different causes, stages, symptoms, detection 
processes, and treatment strategies.  Health care knowledge 
is rapidly evolving with advances in research and 
applications concerning etiology, prevention, detection, 
diagnosis, and treatment of health problems.   
 
Health advocacy organizations have the potential to help 
break through the complexity of health and health care by 
disseminating relevant, timely, accurate, and clear health 
information  to consumers to help guide informed health 
decision making.  However, there are significant barriers to 
the dissemination of health information, especially for at-risk 
populations, due to limited access to health information, 
health literacy challenges, limited education levels, and the 
complexity of health research and health care processes [4].  
The GALA program is designed to help health advocacy 
leaders develop a wide range of necessary knowledge and 
skills to enable them to achieve important consumer goals.  
For example, GALA can help health advocacy leaders learn 
how to support the information needs of the health care 
consumers they represent, providing these consumers with 
access to relevant, timely, and accurate health information.  
The GALA program is also designed to help advocacy 
organization leaders learn how to promote and advocate for 
increased funding for relevant health research needed to 
improve prevention, detection, treatment, and survivorship 
for the consumers they represent.   
 
The GALA program will help leaders learn how to run 
effective advocacy organizations to serve the needs of their 
constituents and influence health practices.  Strategies for 
recruiting, 
mobilizing, 
and 
serving 
the 
needs 
of 
organizational volunteers and personnel will be examined.  
Fund raising, investment, and fiscal management demands 
will be carefully examined.  Strategies for using funds wisely 
for disseminating information, influencing legislation and 
policies, and planning and implementing influential health 
campaigns will also be examined. 
 
The GALA program will help advocacy organization 
leaders learn how to disseminate relevant health information 
through a variety of media to raise awareness and educate 
health policy makers, health care administrators, providers, 
and consumers about the health issues of concern to their 
constituents.  The GALA program will help advocacy 
organization leaders learn how to lobby legislators, 
regulators, and health care administrators to improve health 
care policies and practices.  The health advocacy leaders will 
learn how to provide needed support and assistance to 
consumers confronting challenging health care problems, as 
well as to support the needs of their caregivers, family 
members, and loved ones.  Perhaps most importantly, the 
GALA program is designed to promote local and global 
cooperation within the health care system to support health 
promotion, prevention, early detection, the best treatments, 
and successful survivorship for the health issues of concern 
to their constituents. 
 
IV.     THE UNIQUE GALA DELIVERY MODEL 
The GALA program is designed to provide advocacy 
leaders with relevant information and strategies for working 
effectively with key internal and external groups.  For 
example, training programs will be conducted concerning 
development of effective relationships and collaborations 
with media representatives, government representatives, 
corporate leaders, researchers, and health care system 
representatives.  Moreover, the GALA program will provide 
advocacy leaders with ongoing information support, 
consultation, updates on new opportunities/constraints, and 
continuing education to meet changing needs and refine 
advocacy knowledge and skills.   
 
GALA programs will be delivered in several different 
complementary ways.  Advocacy leaders will be invited to 
attend training programs conducted at a centralized site 
(George Mason University), where they will also be 
introduced to relevant government, corporate, and health 
care system representatives, researchers and scientists, legal, 
fiscal, and administration advisers, campaign planners and 
fundraising experts, as well as experienced and successful 
health advocacy group leaders.  In addition to centralized 
training programs, GALA program educators will travel to 
advocacy organizations in different parts of the world to 
provide on-site training programs.  Arrangements will be 
made on demand to provide individual follow-up personal 
consultation with advocacy leaders to address specific 
emergent 
issues 
and 
concerns. 
 
Field 
experience 
opportunities will also guide advocates to participate in 
important meetings, conferences, and other relevant events, 
as well as to examine with GALA personnel the implications 
of these meetings.  GALA is also proposing to link advocacy 
leaders and their constituents with an online information 
system (a collaboratory) to provide continuous support, on-
line educational modules, repositories of health information 
documents, 
case 
studies, 
and 
media, 
as 
well 
as 
networking/collaboration opportunities for solving problems 
and developing new health advocacy initiatives.   
 
The GALA training programs will model effective health 
advocacy leadership strategies.  Leaders will learn how to 
establish and build effective advocacy organizations.  They 
will learn how to recruit volunteers, organization members, 
and support staff.  They will develop strategies for 
collaborating with other advocacy groups, locally, nationally, 
and internationally.  They will develop skills for establishing 
working relationship with government representatives, 
corporate leaders, media representatives, educators, and 
researchers.  They will also learn how to raise, manage, and 
invest funds for achieving advocacy goals. 
 
The global nature of the GALA program is designed to 
promote international cooperation and collaboration for 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

addressing 
advocacy 
issues, 
sharing 
resources, 
and 
implementing new policies and practices within the health 
care system. Advocacy leaders from different parts of the 
world who may be addressing similar issues will be linked to 
share information and resources for addressing these 
common issues.  These leaders will be encouraged to build 
international collaborations for influencing global health 
practices and policies.  The GALA program will combine 
support for leveraging research, theory, policies, and 
innovative applications to promote development of robust 
and adaptive advocacy programs to support the needs of 
health care consumers and their caregivers. 
 
V.     GALA DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES 
To promote the growth and development of the GALA 
program, new strategies are being examined for seeking 
government and corporate support for GALA training and 
outreach programs.  Survey data are being collected from 
key members of the advocacy, health care, government, and 
corporate communities to expand understanding about the 
unique training needs of advocacy organization leaders and 
the best strategies for meeting these training needs.  GALA 
team members are identifying leading experts to work with 
the program to serve as mentors and trainers for aspiring 
advocacy leaders.  New training modules, educational 
materials, and instructional guides are being designed and 
refined to use with the program.  The GALA online 
collaboratory system is being designed and information is 
being collected to include in the collaboratory’s online 
repository of documents, case studies, articles, research and 
funding opportunities, advocacy resources, and media 
programs.  Information about the GALA program is being 
disseminated to key individuals and organizations around the 
globe to increase awareness and support for the new and 
exciting GALA health advocacy leadership activities.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Strong support for this exciting new international health 
advocacy leadership training and support program is being 
provided by George Mason University’s Center for Health 
and Risk Communication and Translating Research Across 
Communities (TRAC), a global advisory consulting firm 
serving 
as 
trusted 
advisors 
to 
leading 
businesses, 
organizations, institutions, and governments.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Kim, A. Singhal, and G. Kreps.  (Eds.).  Handbook of 
global health communication strategies:  Theories and 
practices.  New York:  Peter Lang Publishers, in-press. 
[2] J. Johnson, and D. Case, Health information seeking.  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, in-press. 
[3] G. Kreps. The impact of communication on cancer risk, 
incidence, morbidity, mortality, and quality of life.  Health 
Communication, 15(2), 161-169, 2003. 
[4] G. Kreps.  Strategic use of communication to market cancer 
prevention and control to  vulnerable populations.  Health 
Marketing Quarterly, 25(1/2), 204-216, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Detecting depression using a multidimensional model of emotional states
Imen Tayari Meftah1,2 and Nhan Le Thanh1
1INRIA Sophia Antipolis
CNRS and University of Nice Sophia Antipolis
Sophia Antipolis, France
Email: tayari@i3s.unice.fr, nhan.le-thanh@unice.fr
Chokri Ben Amar2
2University of Sfax and ENIS
REGIM laboratory
Sfax, Tunisia
Email: chokri.benamar@enis.rnu.tn
Abstract—Depression is a major problem in our society. It
causes great pain and suffering for patients and their families.
The purpose of this study is to detect persistent negative
emotions for early detection of depression using physiological
sensors. Therefore, we develop an automatic depression pre-
vention tool using an algebraic model of emotional states. This
algebraic model provides to represent emotions and provides
powerful mathematical tools for the analysis and the processing
of these emotions. It consists of representing and detecting
negative emotions. Experiments show the efﬁciency of the
proposed method in detecting negative emotions by giving high
recognition rate.
Keywords-depression; algebraic representation ; negative emo-
tions; physiological signal.
I. INTRODUCTION
Negative emotions (anxiety, fear, anger, and grief) may
affect physical health and the quality of life. Indeed, people
with depression experience severe and prolonged feelings
of negative emotions like sadness, anger, disgust and fear.
Depression is a common yet serious illness. It is a common
problem that carries a high burden of suffering. In fact, the
inability to diagnose clinical depression early, can have a
serious impact on suffers, including the risk for suicidal
ideation. Thus, Gotlib and Hammen [1] and Chynoweth et
al. [2] demonstrate that most suicides are linked to depres-
sive disorders and symptomatology. Depressed individuals
experience prolonged periods of hopelessness, anger, guilt,
desperation and a tendency to suicidal thoughts. Studies
suggest that effective treatments for depression which may
be aided by the detection of the problems in its early stages.
In this context, and as part of GERHOME project [3],
we aim to develop an automatic health care system that
would assist mental health professionals by providing early
warning-signs indicating whether a patient is likely to be
depressed through their emotional states. The objective of
GERHOME project is to create a research infrastructure that
will enable experiments with technologies for improving the
quality of life for the elderly. In fact, older adults generally
want to be treated at home and with as little pain and
discomfort as possible. Therefore our tool can be integrated
in smart home (SH) in order to prevent depression and detect
the mood disorders. For this, we use physiological signals
to detect speciﬁc emotions and then to prevent depression.
More physiological parameters can be measured directly by
wearable sensors or can be derived from the analysis and
correlation of different signals. For example, we can use a
watch or a bracelet to capture the heart rate, an earring for
Blood Volume Pulse and a shoe for the skin conductivity [4].
Therefore, our system permits to improve the quality and
efﬁciency of health care at home by preventing depression.
It is based on an algebraic model of emotional states [5]
and it consists of representing and detecting of persistent
negative emotional states.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2, we deﬁnes depression and then we give an
overview of related works on human emotion research. In
Section 3, we describe our model to represent emotions. In
Section 4, we describe our method of detection of negative
emotion based on physiological signal and we conclude in
Section 5.
II. DEPRESSION AND DESCRIPTIVE SCHEMES FOR
EMOTIONS
In order to detect depression, our method is based on
detecting negative emotions. In this section we deﬁnes
depression and then we give an overview of related works
on human emotion research.
A. Depression
Depression and anxiety disorders are highly prevalent
worldwide. Statistics demonstrate that approximately 150
million people suffer from a major depressive disorder at any
moment, and almost a million commit suicide each year [1]
[6]. Depression is deﬁned in medical dictionaries as a phys-
iological and metaphorical lowering of emotional function.
Someone with depression experiences extreme sadness or
despair that lasts for at least two weeks or longer. Indeed one
of the features of major depression is not that people have
negative reactions to negative situations, it is that they cannot
pull themselves out of those negative emotional moods [7].
Our goal is to detect persistent negative emotions in order
to prevent depression.
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

B. Descriptive Schemes for Emotions
An emotion is the consequence of a feeling or the grasping
of a situation and generates behavioral and physiological
changes. Emotion is a complex concept. Darwin [8] said
that emotional behavior originally served both as an aid to
survival and as a method of communicating intentions. He
thought emotions to be innate, universal and communicative
qualities. Ekman [9], Izard [10], Plutchik [11], Tomkins
[12] and MacLean [13] have developed the theory that
there is a small set of basic emotions out of which all
others are compounded. The most famous of these basic
emotions are the Big Six, used in Paul Ekman’s research
on multi-cultural recognition of emotional expressions [14].
The Big Six emotions are happiness, sadness, fear, surprise,
anger and disgust. According to research in psychology, two
major approaches to affect modeling can be distinguished:
dimensional and categorical approach. The dimensional ap-
proach models emotional properties in terms of emotion
dimensions. It decomposes emotions over two orthogonal
dimensions, namely arousal (from calm to excitement) and
valence (from positive to negative) [15]. The second ap-
proach posits a ﬁnite set of basic emotions which are
experienced universally across cultures (e.g., Plutchik [11],
Tomkins [12], Ekman [9], etc) . In our study, we opted for
Plutchik approach as the basis of our model and will thus
describe it in details.
1) Plutchik model:
Robert Plutchik proposed a three-
dimensional ”circumplex model” which describes the re-
lationships between emotions. He proposed eight primary
emotion dimensions arranged as four pairs of opposites [11]:
(Joy-Sadness, Fear-Anger, Surprise-Anticipation, Disgust-
Trust). The vertical dimension represents intensity or level
of arousal, and the circle represents degrees of similarity
among the emotions. He suggested that non-basic emotions
are obtained through the addition of basic emotions (color
analogy, Plutchik, 1962) [16]. In his model, for instance,
remorse = sadness + disgust and contempt = disgust +
anger. Plutchik deﬁned rules for building complex emotions
out of basic ones. In practice, combination of emotions
follows the method ”dyads and triads” [17]. He deﬁned the
primary dyads emotions as the mixtures of two adjacent
basic emotions. Secondary dyad includes emotions that are
one step apart on the ”emotion wheel”, for instance Fear
+ Sadness = Despair. A tertiary emotion is generated from
a mix of emotions that are two steps apart on the wheel
(Surprise + Anger = Outrage).
III. THE PROPOSED EMOTIONAL MODEL
In this section, we present our approach of modeling
emotional states. Indeed, the proposed model is different
from traditional approaches like ontological representation.
It is based on an algebraic representation using multidi-
mensional vectors. We represent every emotion as a vector
in a space of 8 dimensions where every axis represents a
basic emotion. This multidimensional model provides the
representation of an inﬁnity of emotions and provides also
a powerful mathematical tools for the analysis and the
processing of these emotions. The proposed model is similar
to the RGB colors representation model which is based on
three basic colors (Red, Green, Blue) to build all the others
ones. For example, blue and yellow paints mix together to
create a green pigment. In order to develop this analogy,
it’s necessary to deﬁne the basic emotions. For this, we
will adopt the Plutchik deﬁnition of basic emotions which
is a very intuitive and easy model including the idea that
complex emotions are obtained by mixing primary ones.
This last property is very important on our model because
it allows us to deﬁne an inﬁnity of combinations using the
eight basics emotions deﬁned by Plutchik.
A. Deﬁnition
The proposed model consists on the representation of
emotions using multidimensional vectors. We represent ev-
ery emotion as a vector in a space of 8 dimensions where
each axis represents a basic emotion. First, we deﬁne our
Base by (B) = (joy, sadness, trust, disgust, fear, anger,
surprise, anticipation). So, every emotion (e) can be ex-
pressed as a ﬁnite sum (called linear combination) of the
basic elements.
(e) =
8
∑
i=1
⟨E, ui⟩ui
(1)
thus, (e)
=
α1Joy + α2sadness + α3trust + .. +
α7Surprise + α8anticipation
where αi are scalars and ui(i = 1..8) elements of the basis
(B). Typically, the coordinates are represented as elements
of a column vector E
E =






α1
α2
.
.
α8






B
where αi ∈ [0, 1] represents the intensity of the respective
basic emotion. More the value of αi get nearer to 1, more
the emotion is felt.
In linear algebra, a basis is a set of vectors that, in a
linear combination, can represent every vector in a given
vector space or free module, and such that no element of
the set can be represented as a linear combination of the
others. We have demonstrate that (B) satisﬁes the spanning
property and the linear independence property [5]. Thus, we
proved that (B) = (joy, sadness, trust, disgust, fear, anger,
surprise, anticipation) is a linearly independent spanning set.
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

B. Representation of basic emotions
A vector represents a basic emotion if it veriﬁes the
following property:
∀i ∈ [1..8], ∃αi with
αi
8∑
i=1
αj
= 1
(2)
A basic emotion is described by a vector which contains a
single non-zero coefﬁcient. The following vectors represent
some basic emotions:
Edisgust =












0
0
0
α4
0
0
0
0












B
Esadness =












0
α2
0
0
0
0
0
0












B
where α4, α6 ̸= 0
The proposed model takes into account the property of
the intensity of the emotion. Indeed, each emotion can
exist in varying degrees of intensity. The coefﬁcients αi
determine the emotion intensity. According to the value of
the coefﬁcients αi we can make the difference between
annoyance, anger and rage or pleasure. So, rage is the basic
emotion anger with high intensity. The multidimensional
model provides the representation of an inﬁnity of emotions
and provides also a powerful mathematical tools for the
analysis and the processing of these emotions. Indeed, we
can apply the usual basic algebraic operations on vectors like
the addition, the scalar multiplication, the projection and the
distance in an Euclidean space. We are going to detail only
the addition. For more details, you can see [5].
C. Vector addition
We have seen in the previous paragraphs that the mixture
of pairs of basic emotions resulted of complex emotion.
fear and sadness for example produce the complex emotion
”despair”. ”envy” is a mixture of sadness and anger. In this
part we deﬁne the combination between emotions as the
sum of two emotion vectors. This addition is deﬁned as
the maximum value of coefﬁcients (term by term). Let E1u
and E2u be two emotional vectors expressed in the basis
(B) respectively by (λ1, λ2, .., λ8) and (λ
′
1, λ
′
2, .., λ
′
8). The
addition of these two vectors is deﬁned as:
E
′ = E1u
⊕
E2u = max(λi, λ
′
i)for0 ≤ i ≤ 8
(3)
In this sense, the vector representing the emotion despair,
which is mixture of fear and sadness, is deﬁned as:
Edespair = Efear
⊕ Esadness
Figure 1.
Combination and opposites on the Plutchik’s model
Edespair =










0
0
0
0
α5
0
0
0










B
⊕










0
α2
0
0
0
0
0
0










B
=










0
α2
0
0
α5
0
0
0










B
where α2 ̸= 0 et α5 ̸= 0
In the same way, we can obtain the ”vector form” of the
other complex emotions states deﬁned by Plutchik. These
emotions combinations are shown on (Figure 1).
IV. METHOD OF DETECTION OF NEGATIVE EMOTIONS
In our study, we explore the use of physiological signals
for detecting persistent negative affects. We elaborate an
emotion recognition method from Physiological Data based
on signal processing algorithm. Our method permits to rec-
ognize emotion composed of several aspects like simulated
and masked emotions. The data used for this study comes
from the data collected in the MIT Media Lab: Affective
Computing Group [18]. MIT’s data set comprised four
physiological signals, obtained from the masseter muscle
(EMG), blood volume pressure (BVP), skin conductance
(GSR) and respiration rate (RESP) collected over a period of
20 days, concerning eight emotions: the neutral state, anger,
hate, grief, platonic love, romantic love, joy and reverence.
Our approach is composed of two modules: training
module and the recognition module. In the training module,
feature vectors are extracted from emotion training patterns.
In the recognition module, classiﬁcation has been performed
by using the K-Nearest Neighbor algorithm. The result is a
8 component vector representing the detected emotion. This
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 2.
An example of a session data collected from four sensors [18]
 
Figure 3.
Segmentation of the signal by emotion
vector is transformed to XML data thanks to the three layer
model [19]. Let us here present the two modules of the
proposed emotion recognition method.
A. Training module and features extraction
This session explains the proposed method to collect
training data. Our newly developed method is based on
feature extraction using signal processing techniques. The
data consist of 25 minutes of recording time per day over
a period of 20 days. Each day includes 4 signals showing
8 states in the order: the neutral state, anger, hate, grief,
platonic love, romantic love, joy and reverence (Figure 2).
Healey’s original data was sampled at a rate of 20 samples
per second, creating a digital version of the signal [18].
The signal processing for each sensor, include isolation
of each emotion, smoothing, peak detection and features
extraction (c.f. Figure 2). The global scheme of the features
extraction is given by Figure 4. Firstly, we segmented the
data, according to the emotions elicited at corresponding
time frames (for example, although the recording time was
25 minutes, we only used the data from the time frame
when the appropriate emotion (e.g., anger) happened). Let
A designates the samples taken from any one of the eight
emotions and any one of the four sensor (e.g., emotion
anger, sensor: EMG). We process each appropriate emotion
data separately to extract 30 representative vectors for this
emotion. This is done by applying 3 major steps. First,
Figure 4.
The global scheme of the features extraction module
we smooth the signal to reduce its variance and facilitate
the detection of its maxima and minima. That is why we
apply Hanning window (smooth curve) [20]. Secondly, we
compute the gradient of the signal and we apply the zero-
crossings method to detect the peaks. Thirdly, we extract fea-
tures for each emotion by computing typical statistical values
related to peak, such as mean value, standard deviation, the
amplitude and the width of peak. These data will be stored
in a vector (the emotion feature vector) which corresponds to
the appropriate emotion. Thus, we built an emotion training
data base composed by 240 vectors representing the eight
affective states.
B. Recognition module
The recognition module consists of two steps: (i) features
extraction to have test data set and (ii) classiﬁcation. Test
data set was done by using similar steps to the training
data, except that it does not have the emotion information.
However, we used the K-Nearest Neighbor algorithm (KNN)
[21] to classify an instance of a test data into an emotion
classe. Infact, K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classiﬁcation is a
powerful classiﬁcation method. The key idea behind KNN
classiﬁcation is that similar observations belong to similar
classes. Thus, one simply has to look for the class designa-
tors of a certain number of the nearest neighbors and sum up
their class numbers to assign a class number to the unknown.
In practice, given an instance of a test data x, KNN
gives the k neighbors nearest to the unlabeled data from
the training data based on the selected distance measure and
labels the new instance by looking at its nearest neighbors. In
our case, the Euclidean distance is used. The KNN algorithm
ﬁnds the k closest training instances to the test instance.
Now, let the k neighbors nearest to x be Nk(x) and c(z) be
the class label of z. The cardinality of Nk(x) is equal to k.
Then the subset of nearest neighbors within class (e) ∈ the
neutral state, anger, hate, grief, platonic love, romantic love,
joy and reverence is
N e
k(x) = {z ∈ Nk(x), c(z) = e}
(4)
We then normalize each N e
k(x) by k so as to represent
probabilities of belonging to each emotion class as a value
between 0 and 1. Let the lower case ne
k(x) represent the
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

normalized value. The classiﬁcation result is deﬁned as
linear combination of the emotional class.
e∗ =
∑
< ne
k(x), e > e
(5)
Thus,
e∗ = nnoemotion
k
(x) noemotion + nanger
k
(x) anger
+... + njoy
k
(x) joy + nreverence
k
(x) reverence.
(6)
Thus, we build a probability model for each emotion class
where ne
k(x) represents the probability of the respective
emotion class. For example, if k = 10 and 8 of the nearest
neighbors are from emotion class anger and the other 2
are grief, then emotion class anger has an intensity value
of 0.8 (nanger
10
(x) =0,8) and emotion class grief has an
intensity value of 0.2 (ngrief
10
(x)=0.2). The classiﬁcation
result is deﬁned as: (e∗) = 0.8anger + 0.2grief. Thus,
our recognition method builds a probability model for each
class and permits to recognize emotion composed of several
aspects. Therefore, we get all the information on the emo-
tion. This representation can be transformed, therefore, to
the generic computational model of emotional states deﬁned
on Section 2 by applying the transformation matrix. Thus,
we obtained eight emotional vector expressed in the basis
(B). Then, we applied Plutchik’s rules (c.f. Figure 2) to
generate a data base of emotion for use at a later time.
For example, grief is the basic emotion sadness with high
intensity. Therefore, we can generate the emotion vector
sadness. Either, we can generate the emotion vector ”guilt”
by combining joy and fear and the emotion vector”despair”
by combining fear and sadness.
V. DETECTION OF DEPRESSION AND RESULTS
A. Detection of depression
We have already generated our data base of emotion, as
explained before. It consisting of emotion vectors classiﬁed
into 2 categories: negative and positive emotions. Negative
emotions are, for example: grief, sadness, despair, hate,
anger etc. Positive emotions are, for example: joy, romantic
love, platonic love, reverence etc. Our method consists on
detecting and classifying all the emotions felt throughout
the day and give a global report. However, to analyze a
given vector and determine the nearest emotion from the
known ones we need a tool to calculate the similitude from
the vector and the known emotions. For this, we propose
to use the Euclidean distance (2-norm distance). Therefore,
we have to compute for a given vector V1 the Euclidean
distance between it and all the vectors of the data base.
Then, we keep the vector of the data base minimizing
the Euclidean distance. This vector represents the nearest
emotion of V1 and the computed distance gives an idea
of the precision of this interpretation. For example, we can
found that the nearest emotion for the vector V1 is ”despair”
with a distance equals to zeros. We can afﬁrm without doubts
that V1 represents the emotion ”despair”. More the distance
from the nearest vector is important, less the interpretation
is accurate. So, the proposed method, using the Euclidean
distance, permits to analyze automatically a given vector and
provides the best interpretation of this vector.
Algorithm 1 Detection of depression
1: int negative day = 0
2: while negative day¡14 do
3:
while True do
4:
Wait for new day();
5:
Ed= Emotion Detection(); //gives all the emo-
tions felt throughout the day
6:
boolean day is negative=positive or negative(Ed);
//gives true if the new day is a negative day
7:
if day is negative then
8:
negative day + +;
9:
else
10:
negative day = 0;
11:
end if
12:
end while
13: end while
14: send alert();.
As previously stated, to detect depression we focus mainly
on negative emotions. Therefore, we propose a method to
classify all the emotions felt throughout the day and give
a health check. For example, a day with more negative
than positives emotions felt is considered as a negative day.
In fact, according to [7] [22], a person who experiences
negatives emotions for longer than a two-week period,
may be diagnosed with major depressive disorder. Thus,
the proposed algorithm calculates the number of successive
negative days in order to prevent depression. If the number
of successive negative days is greater than 14 (two weeks),
our system conclude that the person could be suffering from
depression and sends an alert message to the doctor (see
algorithm 1).
B. Results
As shown in Figure 5.1, the analysis of the EMG signal
using the proposed method, gives high accuracy percentage
of detection of negative emotions. Indeed, we obtained for
example 92% for anger and 62% for hate and 58% for
grief. Figure 5.2 shows the results of accuracy obtained
using the respiration (RESP) signal. Our method recognized
anger with more than 73%, hate with 66.66% and grief
with 50.58%. As know, it is hard to recognize emotions
very accurately only with one modality. For this reason, we
plan, for the future work, to conduct studies on multimodal
recognition. Indeed, by applying two modalities, results
could be improved up to 82%. Figure 6 gives an example
of report generated after applying the algorithm of detecting
depression along a period of 25 days. In the ﬁrst scenario,
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 5.
The classiﬁcation rates of the proposed method using EMG and
RESPIRATION signal
Figure 6.
Depression detection
our algorithm calculate the number of successive negative
days and conclude that the person could be suffering from
depression and sends an alert message to the doctor. How-
ever, in the second scenario, our algorithm conclude that the
person have a normal mood state.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented a new approach for pre-
vention and early detection of depression using physiological
sensors. it consists of two main steps: the capture of phys-
iological features and analysis of emotional information.
The ﬁrst step permits to detect emotions felt throughout the
day. The second step consists on analyzing these emotional
information to prevent depression. For emotion detection, we
used signal processing algorithms to extract features and the
the K-Nearest Neighbor algorithm to classify the emotion.
Experiments show the efﬁciency of the proposed method in
detecting negative emotion by giving high recognition rate.
Finally, our system evaluate emotional information in order
to detect depression and send an alert to the doctor. For
the future work, we would extend our method to take into
account others information such as voice communications,
daily patterns of sleeping, eating, social interactions and
online behaviors to improve prevention of depression.
REFERENCES
[1] I.
Gotlib
and
C.
Hammen,
Handbook
of
De-
pression.
Guilford
Press,
2002.
[Online].
Available:
http://books.google.fr/books?id= ZS XP7d7ukC
[2] R. Chynoweth, J. I. Tonge, and J. Armstrong, “Suicide in
brisbane - a retrospective psychosocial study,” Australian and
New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, pp. 37–45, 1980.
[3] CSTB,
“Gerhome
project,”
http://gerhome.cstb.fr/en/home/introduction.html, September
2009.
[4] R. Picard and J. Healey, “Affective wearables,” in ISWC ’97
In Proceedings of the 1st IEEE International Symposium on
Wearable Computers (1997), 1997, pp. 231 –240.
[5] I. Tayari Meftah, N. L. Thanh, and C. Ben Amar, “Towards an
algebraic modeling of emotional states,” in Fifth International
Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
ICIW’10, May 2010, pp. 513 –518.
[6] E. Van’t Hof, P. Cuijpers, W. Waheed, and D. J. Stein, “Psy-
chological treatments for depression and anxiety disorders in
low- and middle- income countries: a meta-analysis.” African
Journal of Psychiatry, pp. 200–207, 2011.
[7] T. Johnstone, C. M. V. Reekum, H. L. Urry, N. H. Kalin,
and R. J. Davidson, “Failure to regulate: counterproductive
recruitment of top-down prefrontal-subcortical circuitry in
major
depression,”
Journal
of
Neuroscience,
vol.
27,
no. 33, pp. 8877–8884, August 2007. [Online]. Available:
http://centaur.reading.ac.uk/4367/
[8] C. Darwin, The expression of the Emotions in Man and
Animals, 3rd ed.
Oxford University Press Inc, 1872.
[9] P. Ekman, Emotion in the human face. Cambridge University
Press, New York, 1982.
[10] C. E. Izard, Human emotions, S. Verlag, Ed.
Plenum Press,
New York, 1977.
[11] R. Plutchik, Emotion, a psychoevolutionary synthesis. Harper
and Row, New York, 1980.
[12] S. Tomkins, “Affect as ampliﬁcation: some modiﬁcations in
theory,” Theories of emotions, vol. 1, New York, Academic
Press., pp. 141–165, 1980.
[13] P. D. Maclean, Cerebral evolution of emotion, handbook of
emotions ed.
Guilford Press, New-York, 1993.
[14] P. Ekman and R. J. Davidson, The nature of emotion :
Fundamental questions. Oxford University Press, New York,
1994.
[15] J. Russell, “A circumplex model of affect,” Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, no. 39, pp. 1161–1178, 1980.
[16] R. Plutchik, The Emotions: Facts, Theory and a New Model,
ser. Studies in psychology. Random House, New York, 1962.
[17] M. de Bonis, Connaitre les ´emotions humaines, Mardaga, Ed.
Psychologie et sciences humaines, 1996, vol. 212.
[18] J. Healey, “Wearable and automotive systems for the recog-
nition of affect from physiology,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology, 2000.
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[19] I. Tayari and N. Le Thanh, “Sharing Emotional Information
Using A Three Layer Model,” in The Sixth International
Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
(ICIW 2011), IARIA.
Maarten, Netherlands Antilles: Xpert
Publishing Services, 2011.
[20] B. Julio and D. R. I., “On the use of the hanning window
for harmonic analysis in the standard framework,” IEEE
transactions on power delivery, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 538– 539,
2006.
[21] P. Cunningham and S. J. Delany, “k-nearest neighbour clas-
siﬁers,” University College Dublin, Dublin Institute of Tech-
nology, Technical Report, 2007.
[22] “Mental health a report focusing on depression,” Common-
wealth Department of Health and Aged Care and Australian
Institute of Health and Welfare, National Health Priority
Areas Report, 1998.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Time and Frequency Domain Measures of Heart Rate Variability in Schizophrenia 
 
Saime A. Akar, Sadık Kara, 
Institute of Biomedical 
Engineering, 
Fatih University,  
İstanbul, Turkey 
e-mail: {saimeakar, 
skara}@fatih.edu.tr 
 
Fatma Latifoğlu  
Biomedical Engineering 
Department, 
Erciyes University,  
Kayseri, Turkey 
 flatifoglu@erciyes.edu.tr 
 
Vedat Bilgiç 
Bakırköy Mental and Nervous 
Diseases Training and Research 
Hospital,  
İstanbul, Turkey 
e-mail: vbilgic@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract — It has been reported that schizophrenia patients 
have altered cardiac autonomic regulation and changed heart 
rate variability. The goal of this study was to analyze whether 
schizophrenia patients may exhibit distinctive Heart rate 
variability time and frequency domain parameters for control 
subjects compared both at rest and during auditory 
stimulation periods. Photoplethysmographic signals of thirteen 
schizophrenic patients and thirteen healthy subjects were used 
in the analysis of heart rate variability. Results show that heart 
rate in patients was higher than that of control subjects 
indicating autonomic dysfunction throughout the entire 
experiment. In comparison with control subjects, patients with 
schizophrenia exhibited lower high frequency power and a 
greater low-frequency to high-frequency ratio. Moreover, 
while alerting stimulus decreased parasympathetic activity in 
healthy subjects, no significant changes in heart rate and 
frequency-domain HRV parameters were observed between 
the auditory stimulation and rest periods in schizophrenia 
patients.  
Keywords-schizophrenia; 
heart 
rate 
variability; 
photoplethysmography; time and frequency domain measures. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Schizophrenia is a mental disorder characterized by some 
positive symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions and 
negative symptoms such as loss of motivation, lack of 
interest, disturbances in cognitions and emotions [1, 2]. 
According to the theories about symptom development in 
schizophrenia, it is claimed that indication of psychosis is 
related to autonomic dysfunction [3]. Therefore, there have 
been numerous studies that analyze disturbances of 
autonomic activity in schizophrenia patients [4-6]. 
Heart rate variability (HRV), which describes the 
variation in heartbeat intervals, is an important measure for 
investigation of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) 
activity. HRV analysis has been widely used to assess ANS 
activity in myocardial infarction, diabetic neuropathy, 
cardiac transplantation, myocardial dysfunction, tetraplegia 
[7], diabetes mellitus and renal failure [8]. Moreover, HRV 
analysis has been widely used in schizophrenia patients due 
to the relationship between symptoms of the disorder and 
cardiac autonomic irregularities [3, 9-12]. Results for altered 
cardiac autonomic regulation and changed HRV in 
schizophrenia patients are reported. It has been found that 
they have higher rates of cardiac disease and morbidity due 
to the dysregulation of ANS activity. 
Most of these studies in schizophrenia patients are 
restricted to electrocardiogram (ECG) based HRV signal 
analysis. However, there are some of the problems of this 
technique such as drift, electromagnetic and biologic 
interference, the number of wires, and the complex 
morphology of the ECG [13]. On the other hand, 
photoplethysmogaphy (PPG) is reported as a simpler and 
easier process than analyzing HRV parameters from ECG 
data according to the results of a previous study [14]. In 
previous studies, HRV signal is usually analyzed in the time 
and frequency domain. While time domain measures of 
HRV have been used to evaluate the interbeat interval (IBI) 
variability, spectral analysis of sequences of IBIs can be used 
to assess the distribution of power across different frequency 
bands and reflects the sympathovagal balance between the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic activity.  
The aim of the present study is to identify the differences 
in PPG based HRV measures during alertive acoustic white 
noise (WN), sedative Classical Turkish Music (CTM), and 
restive (no stimulation) periods for schizophrenia patients 
and healthy control subjects. While Section II is related to 
data acquisition and analysis techniques, Section III, IV and 
V are about results, discussion and conclusion of the study, 
respectively.  
II. 
METHODS 
A. Subjects 
Thirteen schizophrenia patients diagnosed by the DSM-
IV (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fourth Edition) [15] 
and thirteen healthy subjects, approximately matched in age 
and gender, participated in the study. Table I lists the 
demographic and clinical data of the participants. None of 
the subjects had history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, 
respiratory 
diseases, 
cardiovascular 
diseases, 
hearing 
difficulties and co-morbidity in terms of psychiatric 
problems. Both the university and hospital ethics committee 
approved the protocol, and a written informed consent was 
obtained from all participants before the study was 
conducted.  
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE I.  
DEMOGRAPHIC AND CLıNıCAL DATA OF THE PARTıCıPANTS 
Participants 
 
Controls 
Patients 
Number 
13 
13 
Male/Female 
8/5 
7/6 
Age (years ± std. 
deviation) 
33.95 ± 8.33 
33.39 ± 6.86 
Age of onset in 
male/female 
- 
20.82 ± 5.21 / 20.08 ± 6.37 
Medication status 
(drug-naïve/drug-
free) 
- 
13/0 
 
B. Data Acquisition 
The study was carried out whilst participants seated in a 
quiet, temperature controlled and illuminated room without 
moving in Bakırköy Mental and Nervous Diseases Training 
and Research Hospital. The PPG data were recorded using 
Biopac MP150WSW data acquisition unit, PPG100C 
amplifier, TSD200 transducer and associated Acknowledge 
Software, which is an interactive program that measure, 
analyze and transform data.  
The transducer was strapped on to the middle finger of 
the non-dominant hand of the participant and connected to 
the amplifier. A baseline data recording was obtained prior to 
the experiment. Data were recorded for 2 min. resting state 
(resting 1, R1) before auditory stimuli exposure, then 
following 2 min. period of WN exposure, following 2 min. 
period of music exposure and a 2 min. post-exposure resting 
(resting 2, R2) period and were digitized at a sampling rate 
of 250 Hz. The subjects listened to stimuli binaurally through 
headphones with the intensity of 75 dB.  
WN is a kind of sound of rain on a river and was selected 
because of its uncomfortable, annoying evaluation from 
previous studies [16, 17]. On the other hand, CTM was 
selected as a sedative music period [18]. According to the 
Turkish philosopher Farabi, the effect of this kind of music 
induces serenity and ease [19]. 
C. Heart Rate Variability Analysis 
Matlab 7.6 software package was used for data 
analysis. The PPG data were first low-pass filtered using a 
Butterworth filter (8th order, cut-off 8 Hz). A detection 
algorithm, which finds min and max points of waveform, 
was implemented to detect peaks of the PPG signal and 
tachograms were plotted. Then, an interpolation with a 
sampling rate of 4 Hz was applied and data were detrended 
using 
a 
least-squares 
polynomial 
fitting 
detrending 
technique, which is explained in our previous study [18, 20].  
In the time domain analysis of HRV, the mean length of 
all PP intervals (PPint) and the heart rate (HR) in each 
measurement period (2 min.) were computed. In the 
frequency domain analysis, spectral analysis was performed 
using the Welch’s algorithm, which is an averaging modified 
periodogram to estimate the power spectrum [21]. The power 
spectrum of the HRV signal was divided into three bands: 
very low frequency-VLF (0-0.04 Hz), low frequency-LF 
(0.04-0.15 Hz) and high frequency-HF (0.15-0.5 Hz). The 
power spectral density of the LF and the HF band were 
computed by integration of the power spectrum over the 
related frequency range (square milliseconds-ms2) in each 
period. While the LF band reflects sympathetic activity, the 
HF band is related to parasympathetic activity. The ratio of 
LF to HF power (LF/HF) was calculated to assess the 
sympathovagal balance for indicating the function of the 
ANS activity.  
D. Statistical Analysis 
All statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS 
(version 20.0) statistical software package. Comparisons of 
HRV features between the patients and controls in each 
period were executed using an independent sample Student’s 
t-test. Under the null hypothesis, defined as “no difference in 
the HRV features of patients and controls”, the data follows 
a normal distribution. To compare the differences in HRV 
between sequential periods, paired sample Student’s t-tests 
were performed on both groups, separately. The student’s t-
test was chosen based on a finding from Levene’s test. Due 
to confidence level of 95 %, results were considered as 
significant at the level of p<0.05. 
III. 
RESULTS 
In this study, PPG signals were recorded during varying 
measurement periods, in which time and frequency domain 
measures of HRV were computed for the PPint of healthy 
control subjects and schizophrenia patients. In Table II, the 
differences 
in 
HRV 
measures 
observed 
between 
schizophrenia patients and control subjects are summarized.  
A. Comparisons of HRV measures between groups 
Time domain measures of HRV for patients and control 
subjects during measurement periods are shown in Fig. 1.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Box and Whisker plot comparison of HR and PPint between 
schizophrenia and control groups during different experimental periods. 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE II.  
TIME AND FREQUENCY DOMAIN HEART RATE VARIABILITY MEASURES. 
Controls 
Patients 
 
R1 
WN 
CTM 
R2 
R1 
WN 
CTM 
R2 
Mean HR 
 
151.6 
(11.7) 
156.5 
(10.8) 
153.3 
(10.3) 
151.3 
(10.1) 
 
181.8 
(34.0) 
187.7 
(36.7) 
185.7 
(32.6) 
183.2 
(30.7) 
Mean PP 
interval 
 
0.7978 
(0.053) 
0.7860 
(0.044) 
0.7879 
(0.074) 
0.7944 
(0.036) 
0.6799 
(0.123) 
0.6602 
(0.117) 
0.6636 
(0.112) 
0.6586 
(0.134) 
LF pow. 
(ms2) 
 
41.6 
(3.13) 
50.9 
(2.68) 
47.6 
(3.62) 
43.1 
(3.73) 
42.7 
(3.81) 
49.4 
(3.11) 
47.1 
(3.54) 
45.4 
(3.77) 
HF pow. 
(ms2) 
 
33.3 
(3.36) 
29.8 
(2.34) 
32.8 
(2.79) 
33.2 
(2.61) 
27.2 
(3.32) 
24.7 
(2.12) 
25.2 
(3.25) 
26.5 
(3.27) 
LF/HF 
1.26±0.14 
1.72±0.15 
1.46±0.18 
1.31±0.14 
1.58±0.16 
2.01±0.23 
1.90±0.31 
1.74±0.27 
 
The schizophrenia patients showed a significantly 
higher HR than control subjects during all periods of the 
procedure (p<0.05). However, healthy subjects exhibited a 
high degree of HRV, which is described by the variation in 
mean PPint (p<0.05).  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Spectral analysis of HRV in restive condition in a healthy subject and schizophrenia patient. Top: Interbeat interval tachogram of a schizophrenia 
patient (left) and a healthy individual (right). Bottom: Corresponding power spectrum obtained from the patient (left) and control subject (right) 
 
Tachogram of PPint of a schizophrenia 
patient  
Tachogram of PPint of a healthy individual 
Power specrum obtained from a 
schizophrenia patient 
Power spectrum obtained from a healthy 
individual 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 3.  Comparison of the changes in the LF/HF of HRV between 
patients with schizophrenia and healthy subjects 
The baseline tachograms (top panels) and their 
corresponding power spectra (bottom panels) of a patient 
in the schizophrenia group (left) and an individual in the 
control group (right) are shown in Fig. 2. From here, it 
may be seen that, the individual with schizophrenia 
exhibited a higher HR, shorter PPint, and decreased HRV 
during the restive baseline period as compared to the 
healthy subject. The PPint feature of the schizophrenia 
patients during the whole procedure was significantly 
lower than that of the control subjects (p<0.05). While the 
LF power in schizophrenia patients was not different from 
that in control subjects, the HF power was significantly 
reduced in the patients (p<0.05) during all periods of the 
procedure. Moreover, schizophrenia patients showed 
increased LF/HF ratio as compared to control subjects 
during both stimulation and restive periods (Fig. 3). 
B. Comparisons of HRV measures within groups 
Auditory stimulation caused an increase in HR in both 
groups as compared to that during restive periods. While 
the control group showed the greatest HR during the WN 
exposure, no significant HR change was reported during 
the WN period and CTM period in schizophrenia patients. 
Although HR decreased during CTM as compared to the 
WN period, this difference did not reach significant levels 
in either the control (p=0.1) subjects or schizophrenic 
patients (p=0.18). The decrease in HR continued in the R2 
period for both the control subject and patient groups. 
However, for both groups, no significant change was 
reported over the CTM and R2 periods. The results 
indicate that there was an insignificant decrease in PPint 
between restive periods (R1 and R2) and stimulation 
periods (WN and CTM) in both groups.  
Auditory stimulation evoked an increase of LF power 
and LF/HF ratio from the baseline and a decrease of HF 
power in the HRV in both groups (p<0.05). While the LF 
power increased more during WN than during CTM, the 
WN evoked a more deceleration of HF power from the 
baseline as compared to CTM in the control group. The 
LF/HF ratio of healthy subjects was higher during WN 
than during CTM. In contrast, there were no significant 
differences in terms of LF, HF, and LF/HF ratio when the 
different auditory stimuli were heard by the group of 
schizophrenia patients. The restive period (R2) after 
stimulation periods caused a significant decrease in LF 
power in healthy individuals, whereas LF power did not 
change significantly during the R2 period in the 
schizophrenia group.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
It has been reported that altered autonomic function is 
associated with higher rates of cardiac disease and 
morbidity in schizophrenia patients [22]. Therefore, HRV 
analysis has become a powerful and useful tool in clinical 
research to assess ANS activities in schizophrenia patients. 
By combining the knowledge about impairment in 
auditory stimuli discrimination with altered autonomic 
regulation of schizophrenia patients, we aimed to 
investigate the PPG based HRV parameters during 
different types of auditory stimuli in patients. It was found 
that schizophrenia patients had higher HR and shorter 
PPint than control subjects during all periods of the 
procedure. This may be observed as a result of disorder-
related 
autonomic 
nervous 
system 
changes 
[3]. 
Schizophrenia group also exhibited a similar LF power, a 
significant decrease in HF power and an increase in the 
LF/HF ratio as compared to healthy subjects during all the 
periods of the procedure. 
Although HR increased during auditory stimulation 
periods in both groups, changes between the two stimulus 
periods were not significant for schizophrenia patients. 
The LF power and the LF/HF ratio increased during 
stimulation periods as compared to restive periods in both 
schizophrenia and control groups. However, the LF power 
was higher during WN exposure than during sedative 
CTM exposure in the control group. On the other hand, HF 
power was higher during CTM than WN, but remained the 
same in both restive and CTM periods. Namely, while 
alerting stimulus increased sympathetic activity more, it 
caused a reduction in parasympathetic activity in healthy 
subjects. Therefore, the LF/HF ratio was highest during 
WN in the control group. This confirms the result of a past 
study that states the HF power, which is decreased by 
uncomfortable stimuli, may be sensitive to stress reduction 
in resting state [23]. In contrast, there were no significant 
differences in terms of LF, HF, and LF/HF ratio in 
schizophrenia patients during these two different auditory 
stimuli periods. This may be related to impairments of 
schizophrenia patients in auditory discrimination [24] or 
related to cardiac autonomic dysfunction in schizophrenia 
patients.  
A post hoc power analysis revealed that on the basis of 
the mean a limited statistical power because of the modest 
sample size. Therefore, it is suggested to increase the 
number of participants in each group for future studies.  
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

V. 
CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, the results obtained for HRV measures 
support that the variations in cardiac autonomic activity 
during the restive baseline and other stimulation periods 
are different between schizophrenia patients and healthy 
individuals. The reduced parasympathetic activity in 
schizophrenic patients can be considered as strongly 
relating the risk factor of cardiac morbidity. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the Scientific Research Fund 
of Fatih University under the project number P50060901. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. T. Mueser and S. R. McGurk “Schizophrenia” Lancet, 
vol. 363 (9426), pp. 2063-72, 2004. 
[2] R. 
Tandon, 
H. 
A. 
Nasrallah, 
Keshavan 
M. 
S., 
“Schizophrenia, “just the facts” 4. Clinical features and 
conceptualization” Schizophr Res, vol. 110 (1-3), pp. 1-23, 
2009. 
[3] K. J. Bar, A. Letzsch, Jochum T., Wagner G., Greiner W., 
Sauer H. “Loss of efferent vagal activity in acute 
schizophrenia” J Psychiatr Res, vol. 39 (5), pp. 519-527, 
2005. 
[4] E. Kraepelin Psychiatry: A Textbook for Students and 
Physicians. Canton: Watson Publishing International; pp. 
110–111; 2002. 
[5] L. H. Lindstrom, “Clinical and biological markers for 
outcome in schizophrenia: a review of a longitudinal 
follow-up study in Uppsala schizophrenia research project” 
Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 14, pp. 23–26, 1996. 
[6] S. Grossberg, “The imbalanced brain: from normal 
behavior to schizophrenia” Biol Psychiatry, vol. 48, pp. 81–
98, 2000. 
[7] Anonymous, 
“Heart 
rate 
variability. 
Standards 
of 
measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use. 
Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the 
North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology” 
Eur Heart J, vol. 17 (3), pp. 354-381, 1996. 
[8] F. Javed, P. M. Middleton, P. Malouf, G. S. Chan, A. V. 
Savkin, N. H. Lovell, E. Steel, J. Mackie, “Frequency 
spectrum 
analysis 
of 
finger 
photoplethysmographic 
waveform variability during haemodialysis” Physiol Meas, 
vol. 31 (9), pp. 1203-1216, 2010. 
[9] J. S. Chang, C. S. Yoo, S. H. Yi, K. H. Hong, H. S. Oh, J. 
Y. Hwang, S. G. Kim, Y. M. Ahn, Y. S. Kim, “Differential 
pattern of heart rate variability in patients with 
schizophrenia” 
Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol 
Biol 
Psychiatry, vol. 33 (6), pp. 991-995, 2009. 
[10] J. S. Chang, C. S. Yoo, S. H. Yi, K. H. Hong, Y. S. Lee, H. 
S. Oh, D. C. Jung, Y. S. Kim, Y. M. Ahn, “Changes in 
heart rate dynamics of patients with schizophrenia treated 
with risperidone” Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol 
Psychiatry, vol. 34 (6), pp. 924-929, 2010. 
[11] B. L. Henry, A. Minassian, M. P. Paulus, M. A. Geyer, W. 
Perry, “Heart rate variability in bipolar mania and 
schizophrenia” J Psychiatr Res, vol. 44 (3), pp. 168-176, 
2009. 
[12] M. N. Castro, D. E. Vigo, E. M. Chu, R. D. Fahrer, D. 
deAchaval, E. Y. Costanzo, R. C. Leiguarda, M. Nogues, 
D. P. Cardinali, S. M. Guinjoan, “Heart rate variability 
response to mental arithmetic stress in patients with 
schizophrenia: 
autonomic 
response 
to 
stress 
in 
schizophrenia” Schizophr Res, vol. 99 (1-3), pp. 294-303, 
2008. 
[13] M. Bolanos, H. Nazeran, E. Haltiwanger, “Comparison of 
heart rate variability signal features derived from 
electrocardiography and photoplethysmography in healthy 
individuals” Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, 2006, pp. 
4289-4294. 
[14] N. Selvaraj, A. Jaryal, J. Santhosh, K. K. Deepak, S. 
Anand, “Assessment of heart rate variability derived from 
finger-tip 
photoplethysmography 
as 
compared 
to 
electrocardiography” J Med Eng Technol, vol. 32 (6), pp. 
479-484, 2008. 
[15] E. Falkum, G. Pedersen, S. Karterud “Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, 
paranoid personality disorder diagnosis: a unitary or a two-
dimensional construct?” Compr Psychiatry, vol. 50 (6), pp. 
533-541, 2009. 
[16] J. H. Sohn, E. Sokhadze, S. Choi, and K. H. Lee, 
“Autonomic, respiratory and subjective effects of long-term 
exposure to aversive loud noise,” Korean Journal of 
Science of Emotion and Sensibility, vol. 3, pp. 37–42, 
2000.  
[17] E. Sokhadze, K. H. Lee, Y. K. Kim, M. K. Park, J. H. 
Sohn, “Effects of long-term exposure to loud noise on tonic 
autonomic responses,” Proceedings of the 5th International 
Congress on Physiological Anthropology, Korea, 2000.  
[18] S. A. Akar, S. Kara, and V. Bilgiç, “Respiratory variability 
during 
different 
auditory 
stimulation 
periods 
in 
schizophrenia patients” Methods of Information in 
Medicine, pp. 29-38, doi: 10.3414/ME10-01-0087. 
[19] R. Kalender, “Türk Musikisinde Kullanılan Makamların 
Tesirleri” Ankara Üniversitesi Dergisi, vol. 29, pp. 361-
375.Turkish, 1987. 
[20] S. A. Akar, S. Kara, F. Latifoğlu, and V. Bilgiç, “Spectral 
Analysis 
of 
Photoplethysmographic 
Signals: 
The 
Importance 
of 
Preprocessing” 
Biomedical 
Signal 
Processing and Control, doi:10.1016/j.bspc.2012.04.002, in 
press. 
[21] P. D. Welch, “The use of fast fourier transform for the 
estimation of power spectra: A method based on time 
averaging over short, modified periodograms” IEEE 
Transactions on Audio and Electroacoustics, vol. 15 (2), 
pp. 70-73, 1967. 
[22] C. H. Hennekens, A. R. Hennekens, D. Hollar, D. E. Casey, 
“Schizophrenia and increased risks of cardiovascular 
disease” Am Heart J, vol. 150 (6), pp. 1115-1121, 2005. 
[23] M. Iwanaga, A. Kobayashi, C. Kawasaki, “Heart rate 
variability with repetitive exposure to music” Biol Psychol, 
vol. 70 (1), pp. 61-66, 2005. 
[24] C. S. Li, M. C. Chen, Y. Y. Yang, M. C. Chen, P. K. Tsay, 
“Altered performance of schizophrenia patients in an 
auditory detection and discrimination task: exploring the 
'self-monitoring' model of hallucination” Schizophr Res, 
vol. 55 (1-2), pp. 115-128, 2002. 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
Accurate and Reliable Recommender System for Chronic Disease Diagnosis 
 
Asmaa S. Hussein, Wail M. Omar, Xue Li 
School of IT and Electrical Engineering 
The University of Queensland 
Queensland, Australia 
asmaa.hussein@uqconnect.edu.au, w.omar@bnr-
education.ca, xueli@itee.uq.edu.au 
 
Modafar Ati 
College of Engineering and Computer Science 
Abu Dhabi University 
Al Ain, United Arab Emirates 
modafar.ati@adu.ac.ae 
 
 
Abstract-With the rapid growth of chronic disease cases around 
the world, healthcare support systems like recommender 
systems play a major role in controlling the disease, through 
providing accurate and trustworthy disease risk diagnosis 
prediction and acknowledgement of disease risk status, that 
assists healthcare providers to have 24/7 remote patient 
monitoring system and assist patients to have 24 hour access to 
the 
medical 
care. 
Providing 
an 
accurate 
real-time 
recommendation for medical data is a challenge according to 
its complexity represented by unbalance, large, noisy and/or 
missing 
data. 
The 
Chronic 
Disease 
Diagnosis 
(CDD) 
recommender system expectation is to give a high accuracy 
and reliable disease risk prediction. This paper presents a 
CDD recommender system model using multiple decision tree 
classification algorithms.  Decision tree algorithms are applied 
to achieve high accuracy disease risk predictive model. 
Historical patients’ medical data from the Middle East is used 
to train the model. Determining the relevant features through 
Attribute Selection method is used to reduce data generation 
and improve the predictive model performance. Merging 
patients’ lab and home test readings is considered to leverage 
the diagnosis fidelity. Diabetes diagnosis case study is designed 
through this research as experiment to show the feasibility of 
our model.  
Keyword-E-Health; Remote Chronic Disease Diagnosis 
prediction; Diabetes healthcare management system; Decision 
Tree; Random Forest. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, a pattern of chronic diseases has started 
to emerge in the Middle East similar to the rest of the world 
[1]. These diseases appear in the form of increases in obesity, 
heart diseases, and diabetes (both types 1 and 2). This growth 
in chronic illnesses along with the increase of inactive 
lifestyle in the Middle East has imposed great pressure on 
healthcare providers, especially when trying to ensure a 
structured patient follow-up to be achieved after each 
therapeutic change.  
The 
rapid 
increase 
in 
ICT 
(Information 
and 
Communications Technology) development has opened a 
new era for researchers to develop a number of E-Health 
applications that are starting to play a major role in 
improving healthcare services. Recommender systems [2] 
have been emerged and being increasingly used by many 
applications, like E-Commerce and E-Health [3] according 
to their feasibility in automatically extracting useful 
information and predicting and recommending appropriate 
results to consumers. Therefore, this research applies a 
recommender system to manage the chronic disease, which 
minimizes both the risk of such a disease as well as the cost 
that is associated with it.  
The most popular technique of recommender systems is 
collaborative filtering, which utilizes users' experiences or 
histories to generate predictions of the unknown preferences 
[4]. For example, in a system recommending books there 
usually are two sets, a set of users U (e.g., the readers) and a 
set of items I (e.g., the books), and a utility function r 
between the two sets (e.g., the books rating by users). In its 
most common formulation, the recommendation problem is 
reduced to the problem of estimating ratings for the items 
that have not been seen by a user, selecting for each user u ; 
U, the item i ; I that maximizes the defined user’s utility.   
In our case the set of users, U represents patients, while 
the set of items I is the patients’ medical record attributes 
represented by disease risk factors and diagnosis. The 
relationship between the two sets, instead of being a user 
preference rating, is the risk factors readings and an ordinal 
set of rating the disease risk diagnosis (represented by 0-10 
scale). This rating is determined by physicians based on 
various factors such as patient’s vital signs and lab tests.  
The hypothesis is that, if a patient’s chronic disease risk 
is predicted with high accuracy, we will expect the 
improvement of patients’ health conditions, lifestyle 
adjustments along with reducing the healthcare services 
costs.  
A. The Research Problem  
Accuracy is the essential factor of recommender systems 
[5]. 
In 
our 
research, 
accuracy 
reflects 
how 
the 
recommendation is valuable and correspondent with the 
patient’s physiologic state and complexity of disease in order 
to be valuable to the users who are looking for trusty 
recommendation. To achieve that, recommender systems 
should minimize false positive and false negative errors. For 
example, a specific disease risk diagnosis is not useful for a 
patient (false), which is recommended by the system 
(positive). While a specific diagnosis is useful for a patient 
(false), but it is not recommended (negative).  
Our purpose of developing the recommender system for 
CDD is to provide efficient recommendations benefit users 
remotely. To improve the accuracy of recommendations for 
CDD; we consider: the nature and complexity of medical 
data such as different types of data, large number of 
parameter, and missing and noisy data.  
For this consideration, as known, the patients’ states of 
health and disease risk are monitored through symptoms, 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
vital signs, laboratory test results, etc. Those results and 
readings are generated by different sources like different data 
entry-medical workers, medical home sensors, etc., which 
are not corresponding in structure or quality. Thus, medical 
data can have features of different types and may contain 
various types of errors (missing data and noisy data) that 
occur for a variety of reasons for example: erroneous 
attribute values during the insertion process, values cannot 
be recorded when the data is collected, a doctor may not 
order all applicable tests while diagnosing a patient [6],  and 
some personal data is ignored by users because of privacy 
concerns. Dealing with such data is a challenge to get 
accurate and reliable recommendations as it can have a 
significant effect on the recommendations quality and 
accuracy.  
Our contribution is to provide more accuracy and reliable 
recommendations in order to assist patients controlling their 
chronic disease and assist healthcare providers to have 24/7 
remote patient monitoring system. 
B. Decision Tree Classification Approach 
In this work, the decision tree classification approach [7] 
has been adopted within a recommender system to improve 
the prediction accuracy. Decision tree is a very popular data 
mining method for classification and regression, where 
decision tree Collaborative Filtering models act as classifier 
to classify tasks  [8]. 
Different decision tree classification models such as 
J48[9], Decision Stump[10], REP Tree[11] and Random 
Forest [12] have been constructed to predict the chronic 
disease risk. RF model has proven its feasibility in providing 
accurate predictions over the medical data, while the other 
decision tree classification models have been used for 
prediction performance comparisons.   
C. Random Forest  
RF algorithm [13, 14] was developed by Brieman in 
2001. RF is an ensemble classifier that consists of many 
decision trees created by using bootstrap samples of the 
training data and random feature selection at each node to 
grow each tree; it outputs the class that is the mode of the 
class's output by individual trees. In this way, an RF 
ensemble classifier performs better than a single tree from 
classification performance point of view [12]. And as each 
node is split using the best among a subset of predictors 
randomly chosen at that node, RF performs very well 
compared with many other classiﬁers and is robust against 
over-ﬁtting. Furthermore, RF can be used to estimate 
missing values [15]. Generally, RF is a powerful statistical 
classifier that has some advantages compared to other 
statistical classifiers; see [16] for RF advantages.  
The remaining of the paper is structured as related work 
in section two. CDD recommender system is in section three, 
followed by CDD scenario and methodology. Diabetes 
diagnosis 
experiments, 
outcomes, 
and 
results 
are 
demonstrated and discussed in section five. Conclusion and 
future work are presented in section six. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section demonstrates the current researches in the 
area of recommender system and its uses with healthcare 
applications, and the RF method used in disease diagnosis 
field. Recommender systems have been used by many 
researchers in different areas such as: movies, healthcare, E-
commerce, etc. [17]. With focus on healthcare applications, 
Davis et al. [18] proposed a Collaborative Assessment and 
Recommendation Engine (CARE), which relies on patient’s 
medical history using only ICD-9-CM codes without 
considering other information such as lab tests, etc. CARE 
predicted each patient’s future disease risks based on their 
own medical history and that of similar patients using ICD-
9-CM codes. The experimental results demonstrated that 
CARE performed well at capturing the future diseases and 
facilitating discussion about early testing and prevention. 
Sapon et al. [19] used supervised learning algorithms of 
Artificial Neural Network for diabetes prediction. The 
network was trained using the data of 250 diabetes patients. 
Scaled Conjugate Gradient algorithm with value of 
R=0.88026, produced the best performance in the prediction 
of diabetes compared to the other algorithms.  
Accuracy of the recommender system is vital in many 
applications. Therefore, different Collaborative Filtering 
(CF) recommendation approaches have been used to improve 
the 
reliability, 
performance 
and 
accuracy 
of 
the 
recommender system. Noh et al. [20] used multiple 
imputation-based CF approach for recommendation system 
to improve the accuracy in prediction performance by 
solving the incomplete data problem of CF algorithm. The 
approach replaces each missing value with m>1 acceptable 
values from their predictive distribution and converts an 
incomplete dataset into m complete dataset and each dataset 
is used for analysis. Overall estimate is then obtained by 
combing these m estimates. The prediction power was 
improved by adopting CF algorithm on the complete dataset 
after imputation is made.   
The RF is one of the decision tree classification methods 
that prove its feasibility to be used with healthcare 
applications. Özçift [12] presented a resampling strategy 
based RF ensemble classifier to improve diagnosis of cardiac 
arrhythmia. The resultant accuracy of the classifier was 
found to be 90.0%, and the results of experiments 
demonstrated the efficiency of random sampling strategy in 
training RF ensemble classification algorithm. Ko et al. [21] 
used RF to demonstrating an efficient white blood cell 
(WBC) image classification method. WBC was classified 
into five different categories that are necessary for accurate 
disease diagnosis.  The experimental results showed that 
using the random forest with dynamic features could indeed 
improve the classification performance. 
As demonstrated by the above surveys, recommender 
systems 
prove 
their 
usability 
in 
predicting 
and 
recommending the appropriate results to consumers. In this 
paper, our challenges are to provide a real-time and quality 
recommendation for a large, missing and lab tests merged 
with home tests medical data. 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
As such, because of the power and efficiency of the RF 
classification technique [16], it has been implemented in the 
development of a recommendation system for CDD. Such a 
system is presented as a case study for the model developed 
in this work. 
III. 
CHRONIC DISEASE DIAGNOSIS RECOMMENDER SYSTEM  
CDD recommender system is represented by prediction 
and recommendation. It depends on a set of patients’ health 
history to train and build a model that is able to predict and 
recommend disease risk and disease risk status for the future 
cases. Those predictions and recommendations are approved 
by physicians. As shown in Fig. 1, the CDD recommender 
system 
requires 
input 
information 
to 
produce 
recommendation and predicted items. In this work, diabetes 
is used as a case study. 
The input information that is needed to build up the 
predictive model of CDD for diabetes and make prediction 
for undiagnosed patients is categorized into: 
Training data: a bulk of historical medical records of 
previous diabetic patients (935 records) has been collected 
from hospitals in Oman. The collected data records are 
represented by a number of attributes, values and doctors’ 
assessment (diagnosis) for each case. Oman Health 
Authority based on international standards defines these 
factors. All of these records have been tested and diagnosed 
by doctors in Oman hospitals. A scale from 1 to 10 has been 
used for the diagnosis to give more opportunities for better 
classification. The doctor diagnosis scale is based on: 1–2 
represents excellent, 3–4 good, 5–6 fair but needs control, 
7–8 bad with bad control, and 9–10 represents a critical 
condition. Fig. 2 demonstrates a sample of the collected 
data. 
Demographic data of active patient: refers to the user’s 
profile such as: name, age, level of education, type of end 
user device and type of connectivity.  
Medical dataset of active patient: formed by two types of 
data. The first type is known as home-tests such as blood 
sugar level, blood pressure, and weight. The other type 
involves results obtained in the laboratory, which is usually 
carried out over a long time interval, depending on the 
condition of the patient. Fig. 3 shows sample of the diabetes 
medical dataset of an undiagnosed patient case.  
The output of the system is:  
Prediction and recommendation: prediction is expressed as 
a numerical value that represents the disease risk diagnosis 
of an active patient and to the future cases. This prediction 
value should be within the same scale as the diagnosis 
values provided in the training dataset. Recommendation is 
expressed as disease risk status acknowledgment, which the 
active patient is seeking for. 
IV. 
CDD RECOMMENDER SYSTEM  SCENARIO  
The scenario consists of number of major activities, 
which starts by building the predictive model of 
recommender system, as shown in Fig. 4 and illustrated in 
the following sections. Multiple decision tree algorithms are 
adopted to achieve a high accurate predictive model.  
A. Building the Predictive Model 
The predictive model is built as follows: 
1) Data Preprocessing 
Filtering the data might be necessarily accomplished to 
avoid the creation of ambiguous or inappropriate models and 
improve the learning model performance [22]. In our system, 
the diabetes dataset is filtered by determining the relevant 
features through InfoGainAttributeEval Attribute Selection 
method, furthermore, the data is also transformed to a form 
appropriate the classification. InfoGainAttributeEval has 
ranked the relevant and significance features sequentially as 
follows: LDLC, Cholesterol, Triglyceride, FBS, HBA1C, 
BMI, HDLC, DBP, Age, SBP and Sex. As seen, the result 
shows that LDLC attribute, Low Density Lipoprotein 
Cholesterol, has a significant and highest effect on the 
diabetes diagnosis. The scale of diagnose is increased in 
conjunction with the increase of LDLC level. The patients 
with worse condition of diabetes (class diagnose 10) exhibit 
the highest readings of LDLC and vice versa. 
2) RF Algorithm 
The RF algorithm is utilized to analyze and segment the 
patients’ records in training data into distinguished and 
related groups of classes based on the seen diagnosis scales. 
These classes are used to generate a predictive model that is 
able to predict the class of diagnosis of an active patient.  
The workflow of RF algorithm starts by classifying the 
training datasets that is provided by the healthcare provider. 
Kth tree is constructed by sampling with replacement. At 
each node, mth variables are selected at random out of the 
total number of variables M, and the split is the best split on 
these mth variables. About one-third of the cases are left out 
of the bootstrap sample and not used in the construction of 
the kth tree. The out-of-bag data (oob) or bagging [23] is 
used to get an unbiased estimate of the classification error as 
trees are added to the forest. 
It is also used to enhance accuracy through using random 
features and to get estimates of variable importance [14]. 
After each tree is built, each case left out in the construction 
of the kth tree is put down the kth tree to get a classification. 
In this way, a test set classification is obtained for each case 
in about one-third of the trees. At the end of the run, take j to 
be the class that received the most votes every time case n 
 
 
 
Figure 1: CDD Recommender System
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
 
Figure 2: “10” sample records of total “935” diabetes training dataset 
 
Figure 3: Sample dataset of an undiagnosed active patient
was out of bag. In this case, the class of diagnosis is 
predicted by aggregating the predictions of the kth trees (the 
majority votes). 
B. New Data of Active Patient  
As shown in Fig. 4, the healthcare provider initiates a 
request to the request repository for collecting the home 
medical tests readings of an active patient. The request is 
sent to the patient-home medical sensor to collect those 
readings of the patient such as: blood sugar level, blood 
pressure, weight, etc. At the same time of sending the 
request, the healthcare provider provides the laboratory tests 
readings of the same patient (patient medical record). Those 
lab readings are merged with the home readings as a 
complete dataset in the profile of active patient (as shown in 
Fig. 3). This complete dataset has the same attributes of the 
training dataset, but the class diagnosis variable has no value 
and it is unknown.  
C. Prediction  
The complete dataset of an active patient is uploaded to 
the generated RF predictive model to predict the class of 
diagnosis and disease condition of patient. The dataset is 
analyzed and run over the tree model to finding the 
similarities between the current patient’s dataset and the 
training dataset from other patients [24].  
D. Alert Message  
Once the diagnosis scale is produced, it is sent to 
healthcare providers. Healthcare providers would examine 
the accuracy of the prediction and approve/correct them.  
The patient profile is then updated by adding the approved 
diagnosis to the medical record of patient. Finally, an 
assessment and acknowledgement alert message of the 
predicted disease diagnosis and recommended disease risk 
status is sent to the patient, and the updated patient’s medical 
record is stored in the training dataset repository. The latter 
action is performed in order to add an extra element of data 
to the training dataset, which as a result, would help in 
improving the performance of CDD recommendations for 
future cases. 
 
Figure 4: CDD Recommender System Scenario 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
V. 
OUTCOMES 
In this section, we present experimental results of the 
proposed predictive model and compare the prediction 
performance to other decision tree models like: J48, Decision 
Stump and REP Tree. The dataset used for this experiment is 
diabetes data set collected from hospitals in Oman. The 
collected data represented by 935 patients’ records, “13” 
attributes including the doctors’ diagnosis scale, and values 
of attributes for each case.  
A. Metrics 
 
Metrics such as MAE [7], Precision and Recall [15] are 
used to evaluate and compare the prediction performance of 
algorithms used. The accuracy of the system is high as the 
MAE of the prediction system is low. Precision and Recall 
should be maximized for well-performed prediction system. 
The MAE is given by: 
  
 	
  
 




  




 
where MAE is an average of the absolute errors ei = fi − yi, 
fi is the predicted class (diagnosis) and yi is the actual class.  
Precision =

 ! 
Recall =
"#$%&'(
"
)%
"#$%&'(
"
)%*+,(%%-%"
)%                           (3) 
B. Experimental results 
Our experimental in building the predictive model for 
CDD recommender system using decision tree algorithms, 
has shown the following: 
• 
RF has been built of 10 trees. Out of bag estimated 
error is 0.2877.  
• 
RF has demonstrated 99.7% of correctly classified 
cases.  
• 
Since we do not have a large dataset, we conducted a 
10-fold cross validation [25]. Cross validation has 
been used with: J48, Decision Stump, and REP Tree 
algorithms. However, RF does not need cross 
validation method [14] because the test set error is 
estimated internally during the run. 
• 
RF improves the accuracy by handling the missing 
data internally through the training and testing phase. 
In our case study, the dataset is complete. However, 
we randomly put missing values along the training 
data, and re-build the model with the aforementioned 
algorithms. The results show that our RF model still 
outperformed all other models. 
The comparison results of predictions performance for 
different models show:  
The model built using RF has less MAE and high 
Precision and Recall results compared with the other models 
results (as shown in Fig. 5). That shows the high quality and 
performance of our recommendation system for CDD built 
based on RF. 
C. Evaluation and Results 
To test our system, evaluate the performance and 
determine the efficiency of the algorithm used, 20 random 
samples of real patients’ medical records have been tested 
and applied on the RF learning model and the other trees 
models. The results show that the RF model outperformed all 
other models (as seen in Fig. 6).  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented an effective and reliable 
recommender system approach for CDD using data mining 
technique. The main contributions of this study are 
summarized as follows:  
• 
The utilized method is expected to generate effective 
disease risk prediction for chronic disease patients.  
• 
An ensemble trees classification algorithm is 
adopted. It handles the shortcomings of the medical 
data and generates a robust learning model that is 
able to provide more accurate predictions for online 
users. 
• 
An Attribute Selection method, that determines the 
relevant features of medical data, is applied.  
• 
The laboratory and daily-home test data of chronic 
disease are merged to accomplish more accurate 
results.  
• 
Reliable prediction and recommendation results 
approved by physicians are sent to patients as alert 
messages.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: MAE values of four tree classification models tested on “20” 
samples of patients medical records 
 
 
Figure 5: Metrics results of evaluating the prediction performance of 
J48, Decision Stump, REP Tree and RF 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
Further study on testing different predication and 
recommendation methodologies will be considered to 
improve the system accuracy. In addition, more chronic 
disease case studies will be tested with the generated model. 
Moreover, the prediction result will be considered as one of 
the patient external features during our future work of 
extending the CDD recommender system. The extended 
work aims to provide medical advices and treatments 
recommendation along with the disease risk status.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J.A. Al-Lawatia and J. Tuomilehto, "Diabetes risk score in Oman: A 
tool to identify prevalent type 2 diabetes among Arabs of the Middle 
East," Journal of Diabetes and Clinical Practice, vol. 77, pp. 438-444, 
2007. 
[2] 
L. Duan, W. N. Street, and E. Xu, "Healthcare information systems: 
data mining methods in the creation of a clinical recommender 
system," Enterprise Information Systems, vol. 5, pp. 169-181, 
2011/05/01 2011. 
[3] 
B. M. Sarwar, G. Karypis , J. Konstan , and J. Riedl, "Recommender 
Systems for Large-Scale E-Commerce: Scalable Neighborhood 
Formation Using Clustering," presented at the The Fifth International 
Conference on Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT 2002), 
2002. 
[4] 
D. Sun, Z. Luo, and F. Zhang, "A novel approach for collaborative 
filtering to alleviate the new item cold-start problem," presented at the 
Communications and Information Technologies (ISCIT), 2011 11th 
International Symposium on, Hangzhou, 2011. 
[5] 
G. Pitsilis and L. Marshall, "Trust as a Key to Improving 
Recommendation Systems 
 
Trust Management." vol. 3477, P. Herrmann, et al., Eds., ed: Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 421-432. 
[6] 
B. M. Marlin, "Missing Data Problems in Machine Learning," Doctor 
of Philosophy, Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2008. 
[7] 
N. S. N. Gayatri, A. V. Reddy, and R. Chitra, "Performance Analysis 
of Datamining Algorithms for Software Quality Prediction," 
presented at the Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on 
Advances in Recent Technologies in Communication and Computing, 
2009. 
[8] 
X. Su and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, "A Survey of Collaborative Filtering 
Techniques," Advances in Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2009, 2009. 
[9] 
H. Kaur and G. P. S. Raghava, "A neural-network based method for 
prediction of γ-turns in proteins from multiple sequence alignment," 
Protein Science, vol. 12, pp. 923-929, 2003. 
[10] T. Kudo and Y. Matsumoto, "A Boosting Algorithm for 
Classification of Semi-Structured Text," in Proceedings of EMNLP 
2004, 2004, pp. 301-308. 
[11] J. Park, H. R. Tyan, and C. C. J. Kuo, "Internet Traffic Classification 
for Scalable QOS Provision," in Multimedia and Expo, 2006 IEEE 
International Conference on, 2006, pp. 1221-1224. 
[12] A. Özçift, "Random forests ensemble classifier trained with data 
resampling strategy to improve cardiac arrhythmia diagnosis," 
Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 41, pp. 265-271, 2011. 
[13] L. Breiman, "Random Forests," Machine Learning, vol. 45, pp. 5-32, 
2001. 
[14] L. 
Breiman, 
and 
A. 
Cutler. 
Random 
Forests. 
Available: 
http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~breiman/RandomForests/cc_home.htm
#workings. Accessed on August 2012. 
[15] Y. Qi , J. Klein-seetharaman , and Z. Bar-joseph, "Random Forest 
Similarity for Protein-Protein Interaction Prediction," Pac Symp 
Biocomput, vol. 2005, pp. 531--542, 2005. 
[16] D. R. Cutler, T. C. Edwards, K. H. Beard, A. Cutler, K. T. Hess, J. C. 
Gibson, and J. J. Lawler, "Random Forest For Classification In 
Ecology " Ecology, vol. 88, p. 10, 2007 2007. 
[17] P. Pattaraintakorn, G. Zaverucha, and N. Cercone, "Web Based 
Health Recommender System Using Rough Sets, Survival Analysis 
and Rule-Based Expert Systems Rough Sets, Fuzzy Sets, Data 
Mining and Granular Computing." vol. 4482, A. An, et al., Eds., ed: 
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 491-499. 
[18] D. A. Davis, N. V. Chawla, N. A. Christakis, and A.-L. Barabási, 
"Time to CARE: a collaborative engine for practical disease 
prediction," Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 20, pp. 388-
415, 2010. 
[19] M. Sapon, K. Ismail, S. Zainudin, and C. Ping, "Diabetes Prediction 
with Supervised Learning Algorithms of Artificial Neural Network," 
presented at the International Conference on Software and Computer 
Applications, Kathmandu, Nepal, 2011. 
[20] Noh, H.-ju, Kwak, M.-jung, Han, and I. goo, "Handling Incomplete 
Data Problem in Collaborative Filtering System," Journal of 
intelligent information systems, vol. 9, pp. 51-63, 2003. 
[21] B. C. Ko, et al., "Cell image classification based on ensemble features 
and random forest," Electronics Letters, vol. 47, pp. 638-639, 2011. 
[22] S. B.Patil, and Y.S.Kumaraswamy, "Intelligent and Effective Heart 
Attack Prediction System Using Data Mining and Artificial Neural 
Network," European Journal of Scientific Research, vol. 31, pp. 642-
656, 2009. 
[23] L. Breiman, "Bagging Predictors," Machine Learning, vol. 24, pp. 
123-140, 1996. 
[24] Y. Chen, E. K. Garcia, M. R. Gupta, A. Rahimi, and L. Cazzanti, 
"Similarity-based Classification: Concepts and Algorithms," Machine 
Learning Research, vol. 10, pp. 747-776, 2009. 
[25] M. Saeedmanesh, T. Izadi, and E. Ahva, "HDM: A Hybrid Data 
Mining Technique for Stock Exchange Prediction," presented at the 
Proceedings of the International MultiConference of Engineers and 
Computer Scientists 2010, Hong Kong, 2010. 
 
 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Extending the US Health Information National Trends Survey to China and 
Beyond:   Promoting Global Access to Consumer Health Information Needs and 
Practices 
Gary L. Kreps 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
gkreps@gmu,.edu 
 
Guoming Yu 
Public Opinion Research Institute 
Renmin University of China 
Beijing, China 
yuguoming@126.com 
 
Xiaoquan Zhao 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
xzhao3@gmu.edu 
 
Wen-Ying Chou 
Health Communication & Informatics Research Branch 
National Cancer Institute 
Bethesda, MD, USA 
chouws@mail.nih.gov 
 
Xu Zihao 
Public Opinion Research Institute 
Renmin University of China 
 
 
 
Beijing, China 
xuzihao10@126.com 
 
Meijie Song 
Public Opinion Research Institute 
Renmin University of China 
Beijing, China 
songmeijie2005@163.com 
 
Bradford W. Hesse 
Health Communication & Informatics Research Branch 
National Cancer Institute 
Bethesda, MD, USA 
hesseb@mail.nih.gov 
 
Richard Moser 
Health Communication & Informatics Research Branch 
National Cancer Institute 
Bethesda, MD, USA 
moserr@mail.nih.gov 
 
Paula Kim 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
Pkim12@gmu.edu 
 
 
Abstract—The US-based Health Information National Trends 
Survey (HINTS) conducted every other year since 2003 by the 
National Cancer Institute (NCI) has become a major source for 
relevant data about the public's access to and use of relevant 
health information for cancer prevention and control.  These 
data have been used to guide the development of evidence-
based health communication intervention programs to reduce 
health information gaps and promote informed health decision 
making in the US. An innovative collaboration has been 
established between the NCI, George Mason University's 
Center for Health and Risk Communication, and Renmin 
University of China's Public Opinion Research Institute to 
conduct a biennial representative national HINTS survey in 
China, under the auspices of the Chinese Ministry of Health.  
Pilot data are currently be collected in two major Chinese 
cities, with full national administration of the first biennial 
HINTS-China research program to be conducted in 2013.  
Data gathered from the HINTS-China surveys will be used to 
guide evidence-based health promotion interventions across 
China to promote public health.  This exciting international 
research program opens the door to expanding the HINTS 
research program to many other countries around the world to 
help promote global health. 
Keywords-health information; HINTS; National Cancer 
Institute; China; health communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Access to and effective use of relevant, accurate, and 
timely health information is critically important for guiding 
the important health-related decisions that consumers and 
providers must make across the continuum of care to 
promote health and well-being [1].  This includes decisions 
about the prevention of health risks, health promotion 
behaviors, the detection and diagnosis of health problems, 
the treatment of health problems, and strategies for living 
with health threats (survivorship) [2].  The National Cancer 
Institute (NCI) introduced the Health Information National 
Trends Survey (HINTS) research program in 2003 to track 
the American public’s access to and use of relevant health 
information, as well as their preferred ways to receive  
needed health information [3]. Data from the HINTS 
research program has helped health promotion leaders to 
identify serious public health information gaps and to guide 
targeted health education intervention programs to reduce 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

these gaps for enhancing informed health decision making, 
especially concerning cancer prevention and control [4].  The 
HINTS survey has been conducted roughly every other year 
since 2003 by the NCI and has become a major source for 
relevant data about past, current, and evolving public access 
to and use of relevant health information [4, 5, 6].   The 
HINTS research program provides health promotion experts 
with critical information about both the most glaring public 
health information deficits that need to be addressed and the 
best ways to communicate needed health information to key 
audiences. 
 
The lessons learned from the HINTS research program 
about access to health information in the US can be 
profitably extended to other nations and regions of the world 
to promote global health. Global health experts have learned 
that while there are often major differences in the ways 
health problems and solutions are expressed in different parts 
of the world, there are also many similarities in health threats 
and there is strong demand for cooperation in addressing 
these threats [7].  There have been calls to expand the 
HINTS research program to other parts of the globe [8].  In 
response to these calls, HINTS-China will be the first major 
expansion of the HINTS research program beyond the US 
(and its territories).  HINTS-China is an active and 
innovative international collaboration between the NCI (in 
the US), the Chinese Ministry of Health, George Mason 
University’s Center for Health and Risk Communication, 
and Renmin University of China’s Public Opinion Research 
Institute.  We are currently gathering pilot data in two major 
cities in China (Beijing and Hefei) during 2012 and early 
2013 to refine Chinese language HINTS questions and 
delivery strategies, in preparation to be begin national 
administration of the first biennial HINTS survey in China in 
late 2013.     
 
II. 
THE NEED FOR HINTS RESEARCH  IN CHINA 
This exciting new research program is especially relevant 
in China, where there are serious public health concerns 
about cancer prevention and control.  Cancers are now the 
leading cause of death in urban China and the second leading 
cause of death in rural China [9, 10].  Current evidence 
suggests there is a serious and growing cancer burden in 
China, with increasing levels of cancer incidence, morbidity, 
and mortality [10, 11].   To reduce the cancer burden in 
China there is a concerted need to encourage cancer 
screening and early detection to promote timely cancer 
treatments, as well as to facilitate increased focus on cancer 
prevention activities [9, 12, 13].  Achieving these cancer 
prevention and control goals in China, as in other parts of the 
world, depends to a large extent on disseminating relevant 
and strategic health information about cancer prevention and 
control to key audiences to inform and motivate health 
decision making by health care consumers, providers, and 
policy makers [14].   The HINTS-China research program 
has the potential to establish the evidence-base for guiding 
strategic health communication programs for promoting 
cancer prevention and control in China. 
The HINTS-China research program builds upon the 
NCI’s well-established US national HINTS research 
program [3, 4, 5, 6].  The HINTS-China research program is 
adapting the latest HINTS questionnaire items, using similar 
core questions, adapted to the unique health issues and 
communication characteristics of the Chinese public.  The 
focus of the HINTS-China survey will be on access to and 
use of cancer information.   
 
III. 
FOCUS OF THE HINTS-CHINA RESEARCH PROGRAM 
 
The 
HINTS-China 
survey 
will 
recruit 
a 
large 
representative national sample in China across both urban 
and rural areas representing all of the major regions of the 
country.  Special sections of the HINTS-China questionnaire 
will focus on relevant Chinese health issues, such as the link 
between smoking and lung cancer (the leading cause of death 
from cancer in China), immunization for hepatitis B, and 
screening for colorectal, breast, and cervical cancers [9].  We 
plan to adapt the NCI’s comprehensive HINTS data 
dissemination program for providing information from the 
HINTS-China research program to health care researchers, 
consumers, providers, and policy makers.   
 
Several of the unique features in the HINTS-China 
research program include the translation of the latest HINTS 
questionnaire into Chinese languages and adjusting the 
wording of the questions to adapt to unique Chinese 
respondent cultural issues.  HINTS-China data will be 
collected through standardized personal interviews to ensure 
a good response rate and full collection of data.  Sampling 
strategies will be employed to ensure a representative 
national sample of the Chinese public across all regions of 
the country, as well as both urban and rural areas of China.  
HINTS-China questions will examine the public’s health 
information seeking practices, current levels of health 
information 
(including 
information 
deficits 
and 
misinformation), utilization and preference for different 
channels of communication, uses of health information 
acquired, and the source preferences of different segments of 
the Chinese public.   
 
Current HINTS-China research activities include the 
translation and adaptation of the HINTS questionnaire for 
effective use with Chinese respondents.  We are asking 
Chinese health professionals and policy makers to help us 
evaluate and refine the HINTS-China questions to make sure 
they are appropriate, understandable, and relevant for the 
Chinese public.  We are pilot testing early versions of the 
HINTS-China questionnaire with diverse samples of 
respondents in Beijing and Hefei.  Based upon these 
formative research activities we plan to carefully evaluate the 
HINTS-China pilot data, refine the HINTS-China research 
instruments, refine our administrative plan for collecting 
national HINTS-China data, develop plans for HINTS-China 
data analysis, data reports, results dissemination, and 
applications of the data for promoting public health, as well 
as 
to 
plan 
future 
biennial 
HINTS-China 
survey 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

administrations.  We will also be comparing the pilot data we 
collect with other surveys and research findings from studies 
conducted in the US, China, and other parts of the world.  
We expect the HINTS-China research program to build upon 
an expanding body of communication research being 
conducted in China and elsewhere about public access and 
use of health information. 
IV. 
APPICATIONS OF THE HINTS-CHINA DATA 
The HINTS-China research program will help provide 
the first comprehensive description of the current state of 
cancer-related health knowledge among different segments 
of the public across China.  The research will identify 
important information needs and gap, as well as areas where 
the Chinese public is seriously misinformed about important 
health issues.  The research will provide a general 
assessment about levels of public health and biological 
literacy in China, which will be critically important for 
guiding the development of public health education 
programs and media [15].  Data from the HINTS-China 
research program will help identify what the Chinese public 
knows about relevant health issues and what they need to 
know to promote cancer prevention and control. 
 
Findings from the HINTS-China research program will 
help Chinese public health officials evaluate the influences 
and effectiveness of current health information and education 
programs in China, identifying what is working and where 
more work is needed for communicating relevant health 
information to key public audiences.  The data will let these 
public health officials know what topics need to be included 
in future health education programs, what channels of 
communication are likely to reach different segments of the 
Chinese population, what messages strategies are likely to 
resonate with different public audiences, and which 
information sources are most preferred by different 
audiences for providing them with relevant health 
information.  Data from the HINTS-China research program 
will be essential for guiding the development of targeted 
evidence-based health promotion intervention programs in 
China. 
 
The HINTS-China research program will also provide 
relevant data for comparison with the US HINTS research 
program to identify similarities and differences in the ways 
that Chinese and American publics’ access and use relevant 
health information.  There are likely to be important lessons 
learned about which health communication programs have 
worked well and which programs have not worked so well in 
these countries.  This information will be used to identify the 
best health promotion programs to be emulated and the least 
effective health communication practices that should be 
improved.  These data will provide a basis for international 
collaboration between the US and China for conjoint health 
promotion efforts, activities, and policies, as well as provide 
a basis for encouraging global collaborations between many 
different countries concerning public health promotion [7, 
13] 
 
The longitudinal, repeated administration design of the 
HINTS-China research program will provide an important 
source of new data about the changing information and 
health environments in China.  This is particularly important 
as the rate of change, technological innovation, and 
international exchanges expand in China.  The successive 
administrations of the HINTS-China questionnaire will help 
track changes in public access to information, use of 
communication channels, increases in public knowledge 
about health issues, as well as identify emergent new health 
trends and issues that need to be addressed.   The survey 
will also provide baseline data and biennial update 
comparisons to evaluate health promotion progress in China 
for promoting cancer prevention and control.  Finally, this 
exciting international research collaboration opens the door 
to expanding the HINTS research program to many other 
countries around the world to help promote global health. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Strong support for this exciting new international 
research program has been provided by the Chinese Ministry 
of Health, the National Cancer Institute in the US, George 
Mason 
University’s 
Center 
for 
Health 
and 
Risk 
Communication, and Renmin University of China’s Public 
Opinion Research Institute.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Johnson, and D. Case, Health information seeking.  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, in-press. 
[2] G. Kreps. The impact of communication on cancer risk, 
incidence, morbidity, mortality, and quality of life.  Health 
Communication, 15(2), 161-169, 2003. 
[3] D. Nelson, G. Kreps, B. Hesse, R. Croyle, G. Willis, N. 
Arora, B. Rimer, K. Viswanath, N. Weinstein, and S. Alden. 
The Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS):  
Development, design, and dissemination.  Journal of Health 
Communication, 9(5), 1-18, 2004. 
[4] L. Finney Rutten, B.  Hesse, R. Moser, and G.L. Kreps.  
(Eds.). 
 
Building 
the 
Evidence 
Base 
in 
Cancer 
Communication.  Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, 2011. 
[5] B. Hesse, D. Nelson, G. Kreps, R. Croyle, N. Arora, B. 
Rimer, and K. Viswanath.  Trust and sources of health 
information.  The impact of the Internet and its implications 
for health care providers:  Findings from the first Health 
Information National Trends Survey.  Archives of Internal 
Medicine, 165(22), 2618-2624, 2005. 
[6] B. Hesse, R. Moser, L. Rutten, & G. Kreps.  The Health 
Information National Trends Survey:  Research from the 
baseline.  Journal of Health Communication, 11 (S 1), vii-xvi, 
2006. 
[7] D. Kim, A. Singhal, and G. Kreps.  (Eds.).  Handbook of 
global health communication strategies:  Theories and 
practices.  New York:  Peter Lang Publishers, in-press. 
[8] G. Kreps, and L. Finney Rutten.  Building the evidence base 
in cancer communication:  Next steps.  In L. Finney Rutten, 
B. Hesse, R. Moser, & G.L. Kreps, (Eds.), Building the 
evidence base in cancer communication (pp. 315-322).  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, 2011. 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[9] P. Zhao, M. Dai, W. Chen, and N. Li.  Cancer trends in China.  
Japanese Journal of Clinical Oncology, 40(4), 281-285, 2010. 
[10] Ministry of Health, the People's Republic of China. Report on 
the Third National Sampling Survey of Causes of Death. 
Beijing: The People's Health Press; 2008.  
[11] J. Ferlay, H-R. Shin, F. Bray, D. Forman, C. Mathers, and D. 
Maxwell Parkin.  Estimates of worldwide burden of cancer in 
2008:  GLOBOCAN 2008.  International Journal of Cancer, 
127(12), 2893-2917, 2010. 
[12] S. Dey, and A. Soliman.  Cancer in the global health era:  
Opportunities for the Middle East and Asia.  Asia-Pacific 
Journal of Public Health, 22(3), 75S-82S, 2010. 
[13] National Research Council.  Fulfilling the Potential for 
Cancer Prevention and Early Detection. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press, 2003.  
[14] G. Kreps.  Strategic use of communication to market cancer 
prevention and control to  vulnerable populations.  Health 
Marketing Quarterly, 25(1/2), 204-216, 2008. 
[15] J. Miller, and G. Kreps.  Biological literacy:  A key to cancer 
prevention and control in the 21st century.  In L. Finney 
Rutten, B. Hesse, R. Moser, & G.L. Kreps, (Eds.), Building 
the evidence base in cancer communication (pp. 225-247).  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Development of a New Interface System
for Elderly People in Daily Life
Shunji Shimizu
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa
Chino-city, Japan
shun@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Inoue Hiroaki
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa
Chino-city, Japan
jgh12701@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Abstract— This report proposes a new support system that allows
elderly people to live with a sense of security without the help of
other people. In this system, it is possible to watch closely the
condition of elderly people from a distant public institution by
using sensors. Furthermore, this system presents the relevant
information in order to maintain the physical condition of the
elderly. By performing an experiment using this system, this paper
proves that the proposed system would be useful for the support of
elderly people.
Keywords- Elderly; Elderly support system; Welfare technology;
Remote sensing; Unwearable sensing; Human motion
I.
INTRODUCTION
The number of elderly people is rapidly increasing in both
developing and developed countries. It is necessary to establish
methods for taking care of many elderly people through a social
system. There are many reports about characteristics of human
motions in daily life [1-3]. However, there are only a few reports
on measurement of elderly people’s behavior in daily life
situations [4-9]. To establish more adaptable care systems for
elderly people, it is important to attempt measuring and
analyzing human behaviors and motions in daily life.
In our laboratory, we study the development of support
systems for the elderly people. This paper proposes a new
support system that analyzes human behaviors and motions and
detects a change in the physical condition of an elderly human in
the house. It is thought that it is important to research elderly
people’s behavior in daily life and investigate it thoroughly for
developing and establishing a support system.
II.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND QUESTIONNAIRES
The new support system is a Living Situation Monitoring
System. The concept diagram of this system is illustrated in
Figure 1. The system is fundamentally composed of sensor units,
a controller unit and a supervisor unit. Several sensor units and a
controller unit with two antennas were placed in the house of
solitary elderly people.
Also, this support system has a communication tool. This tool
was used when the Health Management Center sent the
information of a local community event to elderly people. Figure
2 shows the operation screen of the Health Management Center
when they send the information. Figure 3 shows the operation
screen on the side of elderly people.
Figure 1. Concept of the monitoring system of living situation.
Figure 2. Operation screen on the side of Health Management
Center.
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 3. Operation screen on the side of elderly people’s house.
The sensor units consisted of four types of sensors: a
pyroelectric infrared sensor, a magnetic door sensor, an electric
current sensor and a light sensor. For example, a pyroelectric
infrared sensor was able to perceive any human motion by
detecting the IR emission from a human body. Also, using an
electric current sensor, it was possible to record some actions in
human life such as turning on/off the switch of a television, an
electric heater, and so on. Using these sensor units, human
behavior could be detected. These data were transmitted to the
controller unit using a wireless telecommunication method. In
the controller unit, these data were analyzed in order to check
the physical condition of an elderly human in the house. Several
sensors detected human motions in real time, and the detection
results were stored in a controller unit. Furthermore, all data in
the controller unit were sent to the supervisor unit. In the
supervisor unit, the data were classified into each subject’s
database and were accumulated. A characteristic pattern for each
person, including time series variation of detected values, was
extracted from each person’s data using only the pyroelectric
infrared sensor.
As the new system was developed, preliminary experiments
were performed to examine detection accuracy. The subjects
were eight elderly people who lived in solitude away from their
family.
In addition, questionnaires were developed to understand the
elderly people’s life style and validated. In the first questionnaire,
there were about 70 questions about their daily life everyday for a
month: wake-up time, bedtime, eating time, times of going out,
and so on. In the second questionnaire, subjects were told to list
every night what they actually had done on that particular day.
III.
RESULTS AND VERIFICATION EXPERIMENTSD
3.1 System architecture and questionnaries
Figure 4 shows the detection results by pyroelectric infrared
sensor with the characteristic pattern which was transmitted back
to the controller unit. It was possible that, by comparing the
measured data using the sensor units, the physical condition of
the elderly people could be estimated continuously. As a result,
it was possible that the sensors detected human motions like
moving from one room to another, and actions like turning
on/off the switch of a television.
Figure 5 shows the diurnal detection results by pyroelectric
infrared sensor. This result shows exercise tendency of elderly
people on several weeks.
Figure 6 shows the number of diurnal use of resting room
during daylight, late-evening and first light. It was possible to
understand the bcondition of elderly people.
Figure 7 shows the result which was time of gong out
everyday.
Figure 4. Number of detects in one day.
Figure 5. Amount of diurnal exercise.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 6. Number of diurnal use of resting room.
Figure 7. Diurnal behavioral record (time of outing).
From the results of questionnaires, there was evidence that
the characteristic pattern was influenced by a change of the
elderly people’s individual life environment. It was necessary
that the system could extract and keep in memory in the
supervisor unit several characteristic patterns as the environment
around the research subjects changed. Also, it was thought that
the characteristic pattern was influenced by the change of an
elderly individual’s weekly life style. Most of the elderly had
habits that given behaviors should be carried out on a certain day
of the week. For example, elderly people periodically went to
the bath of a public institution on particular day of the week.
In the experiments, several sensor units and a controller unit
with two antennas were set up in the houses of solitary elderly
people. The subjects were eight elderly people and the number
of sensor units was about 15 in each subject’s house. Figure 8
shows an illustration of the location of sensor units in an elderly
person’s house. The number of sensors increases or decreases
depending on the number of rooms and the layout of the house.
The experiment was carried out in two areas. The center of
Takaoka City and Oyama Town were chosen, in order to
examine whether the environment around the house was
significant or not. In each area, there were four subjects and one
supervisor unit. A supervisor unit was located at a public
institution within 1 km of the subjects’ houses in each area.
In addition to detected results, analysis was carried out with
the measured data using sensor units and the results of the
questionnaire. Then, using one result of the analysis, we
constructed a mathematical model using the neural networks
(NN). We investigated other result but one for constructing NN,
and realized that the system conjectures one elderly individual’s
behavior
of
a
day.
The
analyses
using
NN
software
(NEUROSIM: Fujitsu Co., Ltd) were used to conjecture whether
subjects were out or at home and were awake or in bed. In
analysis of subjects’ going out, we used Hierarchical Neural
Network including input layer, hidden layer, and output layer.
Thirty-five input signals were composed of detection results
from five pyroelectric infrared sensors at given times and around
30 minutes by 10 minutes. Output signal was the probability that
subjects went out. In analysis of going to bed, we constructed
hierarchical NN including input, output and two hidden layers.
Sixty-six input signals were composed of detection results from
five pyroelectric infrared sensors at given times, around
60 minutes by 10 minutes and clock time. Output signal was the
probability that subjects were at rest.
Figure 8. Disposition of sensor units.
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 9. The example of neural network model.
Figure 10. The probability that a subject has gotten up in one day.
Figure 11. The probability that a subject has gone out in one day.
Figure 12. Good condition data from March 14 to April 29 in 2000.
Figure 13. Bad condition data from May 1 to May 26 in 2000
3.2 Results of verified experiments
Figure 9 is the example neural network model to analyze for
the probability of human behavior based on detections. The
neural network was constructed by three layer model. The first
layer contained 24 inputs. The second layer contained 24 nods.
The third layer contained 2 nods. The neural network model was
learned by data for two month for each subject.
Figure 10 shows a result for the probability that a subject
has gotten up in one day. Upper Figure 10(a) shows the
probability form only questionnaire. Lower Figure 10(b) shows
the probability form a neural network model similar to Figure 9.
In the questionnaire of the same day, the subject got up at
7:10AM and went to bed at 10:00PM. The probabilities were
about 0.003 at 7:00AM, 1.000 at 7:10AM, 9.999 at 10:00PM,
and 0.009 at 10:10PM. But the probability at 10:20PM was
0.289. Figure 11 shows one that a subject has gone out in one
day.
Figure 12 shows a summation of detection when a subject’s
condition was good in one day using the new support system. In
this result, the subject starts daily exercise at about 7:00 AM
every day. Especially, the behavior pattern was detected after
7:00 AM using the new support system. For another subject,
behavior pattern was detected each subject using the system.
These behavior pattern varied, but the behavior pattern was
unified by each subject like in Figure 11. Also, it seems that the
various related not environments but subjects. On the other hand,
Figure 13 shows a summation of detection when the same
subject’s condition above result was bad, because this results
were recorded just before this subject was hospitalized. In this
Main area
Entrance
Dunning
Living
Number of detection
Main area
Entrance
Dunning
Living
Main area
Entrance
Dunning
Living
Main area
Entrance
Dunning
Living
Main area
Entrance
Dunning
Living
Main area
Entrance
Dunning
Living
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0:01 1:01 2:01 3:01 4:01 5:01 6:01 7:01 8:01 9:0110:0111:0112:0113:0114:0115:0116:0117:0118:0119:0120:0121:0122:0123:01
大山町Ａさん活動量 Ｈ１２．３／１４－４／２９（時間）
大山町 Aさん活動量 Ｈ１３．５／１－５／２５（時間）
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0:01
1:01
2:01
3:01
4:01
5:01
6:01
7:01
8:01
9:01
10:01
11:01
12:01
13:01
14:01
15:01
16:01
17:01
18:01
19:01
20:01
21:01
22:01
23:01
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

result, it is not sure when the subject starts daily exercise and
shows that the count of detection is lower level than the result of
Figure 12; but another behavior pattern was detected using the
new support system. For other subjects, behavior patterns were
detected each subject using the system. In Figure 13, the
behavior pattern is not the same to the behavior pattern in Figure
12 about the same subject. So, we ensure that a difference
between a behavior pattern for good health condition and a
behavior pattern for a bad health condition was detected using
this system. So, it is considered that it is possible to make a
judgment about elderly people’s health condition.
IV.
DISCUSSION
Using the new support system, it was possible to detect
elderly motions in life. The most important thing in this system
was to detect elderly ones with non-wearable sensors. In
addition, play-out and uplink of detected data were performed by
wireless connection between both sensor units and controller
unit, and between controller unit and supervisor unit. After
experiments, we constructed the neural network, and conjectured
elderly motion and individuals’ particular patterns. Results from
neural network analysis were correlated to detected motions and
questionnaire responses.
Recently, many companies have become interested in
remote sensing for elderly people’s healthcare and conducted
remote sensing with wearable sensors [10,11]. But, in this case,
there was physical limitation, and the elderly went about their
daily life with inconvenience and uncomfortable feeling. It was
an important advantage in this system that remote sensing was
performed by non-wearable sensors. In addition, we challenged
experiments with novelty, and measured many data at the same
time. Hence, this system was put to practical use, and we
obtained a patent for this system.
However, it has been pointed out that this result in sensing
humans was still not adequate. It is necessary to measure motions
more precisely, because what were detected in this experiment
were just motions. In terms of detecting going out, waking up,
and going to bed, it was thought to achieve a certain level of
result. However, it is requisite to measure subjects’ behaviors and
movements to observe heir daily life in the real sense of the term.
At the same time, human motion was not always considered as
measuring changes in their physical condition. In addition, this
system was developed with the aim of long-term health
management, which is detecting before deterioration of health.
This system appears very useful for daily checking based on this
standpoint. Additionally, it is thought to detect troubles in about
ten minutes by comparing usual patterns which was stored in the
controller
unit.
Furthermore,
a
system
corresponding
to
emergencies, for example falling, is still being developed. It is
absolutely imperative to upgrade this system for detecting the
physical condition.
In
our
laboratory,
we
are
continuing
research
and
development on the system to detect biological signals, for
example, heart rate, sphygmus, and body temperature by remote
sensing. By translating this system into practical applications,
there is a possibility that it would appear that early symptoms in
disorders can be detected by remote sensing. Thus, system
managers and the elderly themselves can prescribe measures.
Currently, we are working practical trial into operation, and lead
to the final step in this trial.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
For the purpose of practically applying our new system for
elderly people, questionnaires and two experiments were carried
out. From the results of the questionnaires, we realized that the
characteristic pattern was influenced by a change of the elderly’
individual life environment. Therefore, it was necessary that
several characteristic patterns be extracted and kept in the
memory of the supervisor unit in case the environmental
changed. In addition, from the experimental results, it was
ascertained that this support system could measure and analyze
elderly people’s behaviors. According to these results, it was
possible to watch closely the condition of the elderly people
from a distant public institution. These results indicated that the
system was useful for an elderly support.
Now, some functions of this system are used in at least
20,000 houses of the elderly people in Japan, and is playing
significant part in their life. Meanwhile, research on detecting
elderly’s physical condition by this system continues in our
laboratory [11].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Shunji Matsuoka, Kazuo Yoshida, and Kaoru Iketani at
Tateyama System Co., Ltd are deeply acknowledged. Hideto
Taya and Hajime Ogi at Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology and
Kazuo
Nakamura,
professor
at
Nagaoka
University of technology also gratefully acknowledged for their
useful advise to this study. The study was supported by a grant
from New Energy and Industrial Technology Development
Organization.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. C. Smith, A. L. Evans and W. Gilchrist, “Novel instrument for
measuring the walking speed of elderly patients,” Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.,
28: 605-607, 1990.
[2]
G. Kochersberger, E. McConnell, M. N. Kuchibhatla and C. Pieper, “The
reliability, validity, and stability of a measure of physical activity in the
elderly,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., 77: 793-795, 1996.
[3]
S. Shimizu, M. Shimojo, S. Sato, Y. Seki, A. Takahashi, Y. Inukai and M.
Yoshioka, “The relation between human grip types and distribution pattern
in
grasping,”
Proc.
IEEE
Int.
Workshop
on
Robot
and
Human
Communication, 5: 286-291, 1996.
[4]
N. Noury and D. P. Pilichowski, “A telematic system tool for home health
care,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 14: 1175-1177, 1992.
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[5]
M. J. Rodriguez, M. T. Arredondo, F. del Pozo, E. J. Gomez, A. Martinez
and A. Dopico, “A home telecare management system,” Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 16: 1015-1016, 1994.
[6]
B. G. Celler, T. Hesketh, W. Earnshaw, E. Ilsar, “An instrumentation
system for the remote monitoring of changes in functional health status of
the elderly at home,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 16: 908-
909, 1994.
[7]
A. Kawarada, K. Sasaki, M. Ishijima, T. Tamura, T. Toga and K.
Yamakoshi, “Non-conscious and automatic physiological monitoring for
health care at the pilot house,” Proc. Int. Conf. New Front. Biomech. Eng.,
383-384, 1997.
[8]
S. Shimizu and H. Taya, “A proposal of a new support system for elderly
people in the house,” Asian Fuzzy System Symp., 4: 80-83, 2000.
[9]
S. Shimizu and H. Taya, “A fundamental study to develop a new interface
system for elderly people in home,” Proc. Int. Conf. Advanced Robotics,
10: 463-465, 2001.
[10] T. Tanaka, S. Yamashita, K. Aiki, H. Kuriyama and K. Yano, “Life
microscope: continuous daily-activity recording system with tiny wireless
sensor,” Proc. Int. Conf. Networked Sensing Systems, 5: 126-165, 2008.
[11] M. Kasai, K. Ota, Y. Hirata, H. Matsue and S. Yamashita, “Performance of
life recording and management system using ZigBee wireless network,”
IEICE Tech. Rep., 109: 101-106, 2009.
[12] S. Shimizu, “Development of a new support system for independence of
the elderly,” Proc. Taiwan-Japan Symp. Innovative Health Technology-
Medical and Assistive Devices, 1: 37-39, 2009.
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Fundamental Study to New Evaluation Method Based
on Physical and Psychological Load in Care
Hiroaki Inoue
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa
Chino-city, Japan
jgh12701@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Noboru Takahashi
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa
Chino-city, Japan
srl@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Takeshi Tsuruga
Hokkaido Institute of Technology
Sapporo-city, Japan
tsuruga@hit.ac.jp
Nobuhide Hirai
Jichi Medical University
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan
nobu@nobu.com
Eiju Watanabe
Jichi Medical University
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan
eiju-ind@umin.ac.jp
Shunji Shimizu
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa
Chino-city, Japan
shun@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Hiroyuki Nara
Hokkaido University
Sapporo-city, Japan
nara@ssc.ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp
Fumikazu Miwakeichi
The Institute of Statical Mathematics
Tachikawa-city, Japan
miwake1@ism.ac.jp
Senichiro Kikuchi
Jichi Medical University
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan
skikuchi@jichi.ac.jp
Satoshi Kato
Jichi Medical University
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan
psykato@jichi.ac.jp
Abstract—Recently, the aging population has increased in Japan
and world-wide countries. As a consequence, a wide variety of
welfare devices and systems have been developed. However, the
evaluation of welfare systems and devices is limited only to stability,
intensity and partial operability. The evaluation of usefulness is
insufficient. Therefore, we will attempt to establish a standard to
evaluate usefulness objectively and quantitatively on the basis of
including non-verbal cognition. In this paper, we measure the load
of
sitting
and
standing
movements
by
using
EMG
(Electoromyogram) and 3D Motion Capture and set a goal to
establish
an
objective
evaluation
method.
We
think
that
establishing an objective evaluation method is necessity to develop
useful welfare devices. We examine the possibility of assessing load
and fatigue from measuring brain activity by using NIRS (Near
Infra-Red
Spectroscopy).
The
idea
of
universal
design
is
widespread in welfare devices and systems. Measuring requires the
verification of all generations. However, our study measured
younger subjects as a first step because they had enough physical
function.
Considering
younger
subjects
as
a
benchmark
is
appropriate for creating an evaluation method.
Keywords- Evaluation; Movement; Exercise; 3D Motion Capture;
NIRS; EMG; Care; Welfare Technology; Usefulwelfare device
evaluation; Evaluation method.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As aging population is increasing in Japan and world-wide
countries, welfare systems and devices are rapidly developing,
and various devices are manufactured because of this increased
popularity. Also, the market of welfare devices and systems is
expanding. However, the evaluation method is limited to
stability, strength and a part of operability for individual systems
or devices. This means that an evaluation methodology for the
usefulness of these devices and systems was not established.
Therefore, we will attempt to establish a standard to evaluate
usefulness objectively and quantitatively on the basis of
cognition such as physical load, reduction of fatigue and postural
stability. In particular, in considering universality, it is necessary
to measure human movement in daily life. Movement was not
measured using a particular device, but by routinely-performed
movement in daily life.
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

We examined the possibility of evaluation by measuring
physical load due to activities of daily living using 3D Motion
Analysis System and EMG. Also, we looked into the possibility
of quantitative evaluation of tiredness and load on the basis of
brain activity using NIRS. We considered that physical and
psychological load are linked to cognition, including non-verbal
cognition. In this paper, the purpose of the experiments are to
evaluate motion focusing on sitting and standing movements,
which are usually done in our life, by using 3D Motion Analysis
System, EMG, NIRS. We consider that humans feel physical
and psychological load during life motion. We tried to measure
the physical load by using 3D Motion Analysis System, EMG.
Additionally, we tried to measure non-verbal cognition about
psychological load by using NIRS.
Subjects were healthy males in their twenties, because
elderly people with various types of disease are inept in
quantitative evaluation.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
A.
Evaluation by using 3D Motion Analysis and EMG
We simultaneously measured the 3D position and muscle
potential of subjects during tasks by using 3D Motion Analysis
System
(nac
IMAGE
TECHNOLOGY
Inc.
products-
MAC3DSYSTEM [1]) and EMG (KISSEI COMTEC Inc.
products-MQ16 [2]).
Regarding measuring the 3D position, 8 Infrared cameras
were placed around each subject, and 27 makers of the body
surface were set on the basis of Helen-Hayes Hospital Marker set
(Figure 1). In measuring muscle potential, measurement regions
were tibialis anterior muscle, gastrocnemius muscle, quadriceps
femoris muscle, hamstring, flexor carpi ulnaris muscle, extensoe
carpiulnaris muscle, triceps branchii, latissimus dorsi muscle of
the right side of the body
because these muscle were deeply
associated with standing and sitting movement. Also, wireless
measurements were used so that the subject was constrained as
little as possible. As sampling frequency, 3D Motion Analysis
System was 100Hz, and EMG was 1kHz.
The subjects were three males in their twenties. They were
asked to read and sign an informed consent regarding the
experiment.
In this experiment, each subject repeated one series of
movements, which was to transfer from the chair to seat face of
the welfare device
(IDEA LIFE CARE Co. Ltd products-
NORISUKEsan [3]) and opposite one with alternating between
standing and sitting, five times per one measurement. Seating
face of welfare device, which was designed to assist transfer
movement, was manipulated by a simple method and appeared
on the top of chair.
Figure 1. Experimental View of 3D motion Analysis and EMG
Subjects heard a buzzer every second and kept a constant speed
of motion to satisfy certain measuring conditions. Also, they
transferred from seat face to chair or conversely every 8 seconds
with consideration for movement of elderly persons. The
operation of the welfare device was performed by an operator
other than the subject.
B.
Evaluation by using NIRS
We measured brain activity during motion with the purpose
of establishing an evaluation method based on generality (Figure
2).
The subjects were six males in their twenties. They were
asked to read and sign an informed consent regarding the
experiment.
The
measurement
apparatus
was
NIRS
(SHIMADZU
CO.
Ltd
products-FOIRE3000
[4]).
The
measurement region was at right and left prefrontal cortex.
1)
Measuring brain activity during transfer with standing
position (task1)
For this measurement, the subjects used a welfare device to
perform transferring to a standing position. For this measurement,
each subject sat on seating face of the welfare device appeared on
the top of chair after raising the hip until kneeling position. Also,
each subject performed the inverse motion of transferring from
seating face to the chair. The time design was rest (5 seconds),
task (10 seconds), and rest (5 seconds). This time design was
repeated 30 times. The rest time was used to stabilize the brain
activity.
2)
Measuring brain activity during transfer with half-
crouching position (task2)
For this measurement, the subjects used a welfare device to
perform
transferring
to
a
half-crouch
position.
For
this
measurement, the subjects sat on seating face of welfare device
appeared on the top of chair after raising hip until kneeling
position. Also, the subject performed inverse transfer from
seating face to chair.Time design was rest (5 seconds), task (10
seconds) and rest (5 seconds). This time design was repeated 30
times.
In the experiments of task1 and task2, the operation of the
welfare device was performed by an operator other than the
subject. Before these measurements, the subjects adjusted to
transferring using the welfare device.
3)
Measuring brain activity during keeping a half-crouch
position (task3).
The subjects performed two tasks in this measurement.
During task3-1, each subject sat on the seating face of the welfare
device with eyes open. During task3-2, they kept a half-crouch
position.
Figure 2. Experimental View of NIRS
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The subjects alternated task3-1 and task3-2. Also, the subjects
took resting time between the two types of motion with their eyes
closed. The time design was: rest (5 seconds), task3-1 (10
seconds), rest (5 seconds), task3-2 (10 seconds) and rest (5
seconds). This time design was repeated 15 times.
III.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A.
Evaluation by using 3D Motion Analysis and EMG
Figure 3 shows the result of transferring which was measured
by 3D motion analysis and EMG. In Figure 3, the middle
trochanter is the height of the midpoint between right and left
trochanter from the floor. The trunk angle is the forward slope of
the trunk. Also, following terms are rectifying voltage wave for
each
eight
muscles,
which
are
Tibialis
anterior
muscle,
Astrocnemius muscle, Quadriceps femoris muscle, Hamstring,
Triceps brachii muscle, Etensor carpi ulnaris muscle, Flexor carpi
ulnaris muscle and Latissimus dorsi muscle.
Next, analysis was performed by extracting the muscle
potential during standing and sitting movements from the
measured result with reference to middle trochanter and trunk
angle and calculating the value of integral during movement.
Table 1 shows the ratio of the value integral with the welfare
device to the one without the device. Also, we compared the
moving distance of median point between using the welfare
device and not. Table 2 shows the comparison results in a manner
similar to Table 1.
B.
Evaluation by using NIRS
As a common result for all subjects, oxy-Hb tended to
increase during the task and to decrease in resting state.
Therefore, it was thought that a change of hemoglobin density
due to task was measured. Figure 6 shows the trend of the
channel in which a significant difference was shown. Analysis
was performed via one-sample t-test [5,6,7,8,9] by a method
similar to previous researches [5,6,7,8,9]. In this analysis, it was
necessary to remove other than change of blood flow due to
fatigue. So, our method was mainly focused on resting state to
compare with the 1st trial and other trials of brain activity. In
task1 1 and 2, each of sample data for analysis was 4 seconds
after the task (Figure 4). In task 3, the sample data was 4 seconds
during task (Figure 5).
Figure 3. Result of 3D Motion Analysis and EMG
Figure 4. T-test of sample data of task1 and 2
Figure 5. T-test of sample data of task3
TABLE I.
COMPARISON OF INTEGRAL EMG
muscle
region
Subject1
Subject2
Subject3
Standing
Tibialis anterior
muscle
0.37
0.49
0.64
Astrocnemius
muscle
0.83
0.78
0.97
Quadriceps
femoris muscle
0.66
0.36
0.81
Hamstring
1.90
0.50
1.07
Triceps brachii
muscle
1.07
3.34
1.01
Etensor carpi
ulnaris muscle
1.08
1.31
0.96
Flexor carpi
ulnaris muscle
1.07
0.89
0.85
Lattissimus
dorsi muscle
0.98
0.87
1.20
Sitting
Tibialis anterior
muscle
0.50
0.59
0.80
Astrocnemius
muscle
1.01
0.92
0.94
Quadriceps
femoris muscle
0.49
0.57
0.85
Hamstring
2.16
1.60
0.96
Triceps brachii
muscle
0.89
0.96
1.07
Etensor carpi
ulnaris muscle
0.79
0.89
0.86
Flexor carpi
ulnaris muscle
0.79
0.86
0.95
Lattissimus
dorsi muscle
1.16
1.18
0.93
TABLE II.
COMPARISON OF CHANGE IN MEDIAL POINT
Subject1
Subject2
Subject3
Sitting
0.89
1.03
0.90
Standing
1.00
0.84
1.08
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

In the t-test of the same task, we performed t-test with first
time trial and other trial which was from second times to thirty
times, and examined relationship of the number of trials and
significant differences.
In task 1, a significant difference could be found from the
about 10th trials. Figure 9 shows the region confirmed significant
difference. In task 2, significant difference could be found from
the about 10th trials too. Figure 10 shows the region confirmed
significant difference.
Next, we performed t-test with the case of standing position
(task 1) and half-crouch position (task 2). In this analysis, a
significant difference could be found at prefrontal area (14ch,
17ch, 28ch and 32ch). Figure 11 shows a region confirmed
significantly different.
Also, two types of motions which were sitting and keeping a
half-crouching position were repeated alternatively in task 3. At
first, we performed t-test using 4 seconds during the first trial and
4 seconds during other trials, which were from second to fifteenth
in same position. Regarding the result analysis using sample data
during sitting position and half-crouching position, there were
significant differences at prefrontal area. Figure 12 confirms the
significant difference.
Figure 6. Measuring Result of Task1
Figure 7. Measuring Result of Task2
Figure 8. Measuring Result of Task3
Figure 9. Significant Difference of task1
Figure 10. Significant difference of task2
Figure 11. Significant Difference of task 1 and 2
Figure 12. Significant Difference in sitting position
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

IV.
DISCUSSION
1)
Evaluation by using 3D Motion Analysis and EMG
From the analysis of the result, it was shown that the value of
the integral decreased by using assistive apparatus for transfer.
Especially, there was a remarkable decrease in the value of the
integral at tibialis anterior muscle, quadriceps femoris muscle. On
the other hand, we have shown a minor decrease in one at upper
limb and muscles of the back. Also, the moving distance of
barycentric position was decreased by the use of the welfare
device.
This result was thought to be due to the difference in height
between chair and seating face of welfare device. Therefore, it
was thought that the use of assistive apparatus is useful to lighten
the burden on lower limbs. Thus, it's contemplated that muscle
load during standing and sitting movements was decreased and
reduced centroid fluctuation to lower the possibility of turnover.
Even if the subjects performed daily movements of standing
and sitting with the use of the assistive equipment, we have
shown that the integral of muscle potential and distance of
centroid change was decreased. Therefore, we proved that there
is the possibility of evaluation of daily performance except for
movement with the welfare device.
2)
Evaluation by using NIRS
In this experiment, we tried to measure quantitatively the
physical and psychological strain on the basis of brain activity.
Also, we think that brain activity discloses human cognitive
including non-verbal. As a result, it was shown that there were
differences in brain activity due to the number of trials and
postural. At this time, analysis was performed via one-sample t-
test using sample of brain activity in resting state, during task, or
after task. Hence, the analysis method was to remove disturbance
such as body motion and angular variation of neck to the best
extent possible although there was the possibility to measure skin
blood flow. Therefore, the strain due to tasks was quantitatively
measured by recognizing the significant differences.
Also, in previous research, a decrease in the brain activity
was reported around #10, 11 [10], as the result of measuring
brain activity during Advanced Trial Making Test using PET [11].
Therefore, this result came out in support of previous research.
Of course, it is necessary to increasethe number of subjects at
the present stage. In addition, there are problems associated with
the experiment, the number of subjects, the method and the
measured region. However, in terms of being recognized
significant differences at brain activity due to movement, it was
thought to show useful result in evaluating quantitatively daily
movements.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this experiment, our purpose was to quantitatively evaluate
the physical load with focus on standing and sitting movements
which are part of usual daily movements, using 3D motion
analysis system and EMG.
As the result, it was shown that the integral of lower-limb
muscle, such as tibialis anterior muscle and gastrocremius
muscle, significantly decreased with the use of the welfare
device.
Also, it was reported that there is a positive correlation
between anteversion angle of body trunk and movement duration
in previous research [12]. But, our experiment method was to
estimate the possibility of falling in rising from a sitting position
by calculating moving distance of median point. It was confirmed
that the possibility of falling was decreased by using the device.
Next, we tried to measure physical and psychological load
quantitatively on the basis of brain activity. There were
significant differences due to the number of trials, holding
position. In this experiment, the analysis method was to remove
disturbance such as body motion and angular variation of neck to
the extent possible by using the measurement result in resting
state as sample. This has been useful in evaluating quantitatively
the load due to movement task by being recognized difference in
brain activity caused by number of trials, substance of task and
holding position.
The main purpose in this study was to evaluate physical load
and fatigue quantitatively. We tried to evaluate the change of
muscle load due to the difference of motion by simultaneously
measuring
with
3D
motion
analysis
System
and
EMG
quantitatively.
However, the evaluation of psychological load was necessary,
too. In terms of using the welfare device, prolonged use must be
taken into account. In this case, it is important to consider not
only physical load but also psychological load due to prolonged
use from the standpoint of developing the welfare device and
keeping up surviving bodily function.
Also, in previous research, separation between physical and
psychological loads has been performed. But, our view is that
there is a correlation between physical and psychological loads.
For this reason, we tried to measure psychological load including
physical one based on brain activity to quantitatively evaluate
both loads.
For the future, our aim is to establish a method of discussing
the usefulness of welfare devices by evaluating the load involved
in other daily movements with increasing number of subjects.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported as follows.There dimensional
motion analysis and commodious room were provided by nac
Image Techonogy Inc. EMG and analysis software were
provided from KISSEI COMTEC. NIRS was provided by
SHIMADZU COPPORATION. Developing welfare device was
provided by IDEA SYSTEM CO., LTD. We are deeply grateful
to them.
This study contributes to become the basis for one of theme
of s-innovation program in Japan Science and Technology
Agency which was named “Development Fatigue-reduction
Technology for Social Contribution of Aged
Person and
Establishment System for Evaluation.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Shinoda, “Considertion of feature extraction based on center of
gravity for Nihon Buyo dancer using motion capture system,”
SICE Annual Confference 2011, Tokyo Japan, pp. 1874-1878.
[2]
Y. Yamaguchi, A. Ishikawa, and Y.Ito, “Development of Biosignal
Integration Analysis System for Human Brain Function and
Behavior,” Organization for Human Brain Mapping 2012, China.
[3]
H.Inoue, S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H.Nara, and T. Tsuruga
“Fundamental Study for Evaluation of the Effect due to Exercise
Load” , Assistive Technology, Bio Medical Engineering and Life
Support 2011, Japan.
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[4]
E. Watanabe, Y. Yamashita, Y. Ito, and H. Koizumi, ”Non-
invasive functional mapping with multi-channel near infra-red
spectroscopic topography in humans,” Heurosci Lett 1996, Feb 16,
205(1), 41-4.
[5]
N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu, Y. Hirata, H. Nara, F. Miwakeichi, N.
Hirai, S. Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato, “Fundamental Study
for a New Assistive System during Car Driving,” Proc. of
International Conferrence on Robotics and Biomimetics, DVD-
ROM, 2010, Tenjin, China.
[6]
N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu, Y. Hirata, H. Nara, H. Inoue, N. Hirai, S.
Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato, “Basic study of Analysis of
Human
Brain
Activities
during
Car
Driving,”
the
14th
International Conferrence on Human-Computer Interaction, 2011,
USA.
[7]
S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Nara, H. Inoue, and Y. Hirata,
“Fundamental Study for Human Brain Activity Based on the
Spatial Cognitive Task,” the 2011 Internatinal Conference on
Brain Informatics-BI 2011, China.
[8]
S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Nara, H. Inoue, and Y. Hirata,
“Basic Study for Human Brain Activity Based on the Spatial
Cognitive Task,” The Third International Conference on Advanced
Cognitive Techonologies and Applications, 2011, Italy.
[9]
S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Inoue, H. Nara, F. Miwakeichi, N.
Hirai, S. Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato, “Basic Study for a
New Assitive System Based on Brain Activity associated with
Spatial Perception Task during Car driving,” Proc. International
Conferrence on Robotics and Biomimetics, 2011, Thailand.
[10] Y. Watanabe,“Molecular/neural mechanisms of fatigue, and the
way to overcome fatigue,” Folia Pharmacological Japonica, vol.
129, pp. 94-98, 2007.
[11] H. Kuratsune, K. Yamaguti, G. Lindh, B. Evengard, G. Hagberg,
K.Matsumura, M. Iwase, H. Onoe, M. Takahashi, T. Machii,
Y.Kanakura, T. Kitani, B. Langstrom, and Y. Watanage,“Brain
Regions Involved in Fatigue Sensation: Reduced Acetylcarnitine
Uptake in to the Brain,” Neuroimage, vol. 17, pp. 1256-1265,
November 2001.
[12] K. Maruta,“The influence of Seat Angle on Forward Trunk
Inclination During Sit-to-Stand,” Jounal of Japanese Physical
Therapy Association, vol. 31, No.1, pp. 21-28, 2004.
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Engaging With Online Patient Experiences: Exploring Differences Between Health 
Groups 
Claire Hardy, Elizabeth Sillence, Pamela Briggs  
Department of Psychology, Northumbria University 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK 
e-mail: claire2.hardy@northumbria.ac.uk, 
elizabeth.sillence@northumbria.ac.uk, 
p.briggs@northumbria.ac.uk 
Peter Harris 
Department of Psychology 
University of Sheffield 
Sheffield, UK 
e-mail: p.harris@sheffield.ac.uk
 
Abstract— In this paper, data from qualitative investigations 
with three discrete health groups were pooled in order to 
identify factors that affect engagement with online material. A 
total sample of 74 participants (29 asthma sufferers, 25 
smokers considering quitting, and 20 personal carers of people 
with multiple sclerosis (MS)) took part in a study in which they 
examined and commented on e-health information, including 
shared patient experiences available online. The findings 
suggest that engagement is influenced by the availability of off-
line information, the ability to cure or control the health 
condition, and the daily impact the of health condition.  Some 
health conditions (e.g., individuals with MS and their carers) 
may be more likely than others to engage with websites 
containing patient experiences, therefore targeting such groups 
with e-health initiatives could be advantageous. 
Keywords-online 
patient 
experiences; 
engagement; 
secondary analysis; asthma; smoking cessation; multiple 
sclerosis carers 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
It is widely acknowledged that the Internet is a 
commonly used resource for health information. In the UK, a 
survey by Ellins and Coulter [1] found that second to the 
doctor, the Internet is a key resource for those seeking health 
information. Using the Internet as a health information 
resource has been steadily increasing over the past decade, 
and is often used as an initial information source before 
turning to other methods [2]. One form of health information 
that is sought is other patients’ experiences.  
Preece [3] noted that “Physicians can provide the facts, 
but other patients can tell you what it really feels like and 
what to expect next, in a way that only someone with 
personal experience can” (p. 63). Other patient experiences 
of a disease, condition, or treatment can provide information 
otherwise inaccessible from other sources of health 
information. From the 2011 Pew Internet Survey, 34% of the 
Internet users had read someone else’s experience or 
commentary about health or medical issues [4]. Such shared 
online patient experiences can come from forums, blogs, 
case studies and testimonials, which can be viewed as text, 
audio, and video. A recent review of such peer-to-peer online 
patient experiences suggests their impact can be potentially 
positive and negative, including providing information, 
improving health service use, affecting real world 
relationships, and changing behavior [5]. Empirical studies 
in this area have focused on a variety of health conditions, 
but particularly on those considered relatively rare, life 
threatening, or chronic (e.g., breast cancer [6]; HIV/AIDS 
[7], arthritis and fibromyalgia [8]). Such investigations have 
typically focused on a single health condition, and/or 
multiple conditions considered similar (e.g., degenerative 
neurological diseases, [9], [10]). Whilst such research is 
important and insightful, the narrowed focus limits the 
degree to which comparisons can be made across different 
types of health conditions.  
A large National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) 
program is currently seeking to explore the role of online 
patient experience for health decision making in three 
different kinds of health groups: asthma sufferers, smokers 
wanting to quit, and carers of someone with multiple 
sclerosis (MS). These three patient groups were chosen to 
reflect different types of health conditions (i.e., patients with 
a chronic health condition, individuals looking for a health 
behavior change, and individuals who are responsible for 
someone with a serious life threatening health condition). 
Whilst collecting data from the groups in three studies, the 
researchers noticed engagement disparity with the online 
health information and patient experiences. This was 
observed in terms of reaction and interest in the materials 
shown during the study, participant’s engagement with 
similar material before and after the study, and whether they 
thought online patient experiences were useful. Of the three 
groups, the MS carers were the most engaged, with the 
asthma group and then the smokers showing the least 
engagement.  
Although not primary research questions of the program, 
it became evident to the researchers during their analyses 
that recurring themes were present across the data, which 
may contribute to understanding the observed variations. 
Therefore, the aim of the present paper is to present 
evidence for three potential factors: 1) availability of off-
line information; 2) control over or cure for the health 
condition; and 3) the daily impact of the health condition. 
The remainder of the paper is structured in the following 
way. Firstly, the method(s) and analysis strategy are briefly 
outlined, before going on to present the findings of the study. 
The results are presented in three sections reflecting the three 
proposed factors that may influence online patient 
experience engagement. These results are then discussed in 
relation to other relevant research, before highlighting 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

implications and limitations of the study. The paper 
concludes with some lessons learnt, and suggestions for 
future research in light of the paper’s findings.  
II. 
METHOD 
This paper is based on secondary analysis of data from 
three studies conducted in the UK between 2011 and 2012 
by the authors. The studies employed multiple methods and 
involved asking participants to look at and comment on 
websites containing health information, and shared patient 
experiences. For this study, qualitative data from focus 
groups and interviews (including follow-up telephone 
interview in studies two and three) were used. In total, the 
pooled-sample comprised of 74 participants, including 29 
asthma sufferers, 25 smokers considering quitting, and 20 
personal carers of people with MS. The analysis was carried 
out using a similar approach to those adopted by other 
secondary analyses published within the field (e.g., [9]; 
[10]), largely derived from guidelines suggested by Heaton 
[11], and West and Oldfather [12]. Selected data was pooled 
from the verbatim transcripts to provide relevant material on 
the selected themes, which had been identified in previously 
analyses but not relevant to the primary research questions. 
This process of ‘data sorting’ [11] was carried out by the 
primary researcher (CH), who contained a bank of 
knowledge and ‘participatory knowing’ [13] of the data, 
allowing a deeper contextual understanding of the sampled 
data [12]. The data and themes across the health groups was 
explored and discussed with the second author (ES, whom 
was also very familiar with the full transcripts) to ensure 
interpretations were shared and agreed. Final interpretations 
were then presented to the remaining two authors (PB, PH), 
who considered the interpretations of based on their own 
familiarity with the data. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Each theme from the analysis will be presented in turn, 
including separate sub-sections for each health group to 
illustrate variations. These findings are illustrated with 
quotations, using St1, St2, or St3 to indicate the study 
quotes were derived, and FG (focus group), INT (interview), 
or FINT (follow-up interview) to indicate which method.  
A. Availability of Off-line Information 
The present data suggests that if information is widely 
available off-line or already known by the individual (either 
through previous information search enquires or general 
public exposure), then using the Internet and the experiences 
shared online as a health and decision-making resource may 
not be utilized or valued. 
1) Asthma 
For the asthma sufferers, information about the condition 
was unanimously provided by the individual’s physician. 
Participants felt very confident their physician had given 
them all the information they needed and in turn, understood 
the condition well enough. 
“I got given an information pack from the doctor that was 
from the NHS, but have not really looked online. Because 
they just gave me the pack, so I thought that would have all 
of the information that I needed” (St3, INT, Participant 7) 
Some participants also commented on the input from their 
family. The condition’s heritability meant they were 
exposed to it from other sufferers and could speak to them 
off-line for any help or advice. 
“I suppose what most information that I got was from my 
dad…[…]…people in that family who suffer from asthma, 
and they can offer you some advice”(St2, FG, Participant 3)  
Some Internet searches had been carried out by some of 
the asthma sufferers. However, participants commented that 
the information they retrieved then, and what they saw 
during the Internet sessions in the study was generally what 
they already knew and/or what an off-line source (e.g., 
physician or nurse) had provided.  
“I’d say that I probably have initially in the past when I was 
kind of first diagnosed and particularly times when I’ve 
been ill, more ill with it than I have over times I’ve maybe 
looked to see if there’s anything I can kind of do but I’ve 
never found anything more so I’d say what the asthma 
nurses told me” (St2, FG, Participant 2) 
2) Smokers 
From the discussion with smokers, there was a consensus 
that health information about smoking and quitting can be 
found from various sources without the need to go looking 
online. 
Participant 3: “I don’t think you need to look for on the 
Internet. It’s on buses. It’s on the TV. You don’t need to go 
looking for it they tell you every time stop smoking it’s bad 
for you…” 
Participant 4: “It’s kind of told to you. A lot of people just 
tell it to you.” 
Participant 5: “You just know it. You don’t have to look for 
it.” 
Participant 3: “It’s everywhere like at the doctors on buses 
metros it’s in bus stops. It’s just everywhere.” 
Participant 4: “Everything you find on the Internet you know 
already.” (St1, FG) 
Health information on this topic is even available when 
the smoker is not looking for it. Smokers wanting to find out 
information about quitting have gone to their physician, 
pharmacists, or spoken to friends. They have access to many 
off-line resources and feel that the information they receive 
online is typically what they already know or can obtain 
easily from these other off-line resources.  
“Yeah first I found some facts I didn’t know about which is 
good, but then they started to get repetitive, for all the 
websites I looked at, but yeah, I did found out something I 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

didn’t know so it was kind of helpful and in terms of the 
advice page I looked at, didn’t really help. Well, you see 
them on TV all the time and you know, I don’t know, just 
kind of I knew already.” (St1, FG, Participant 9) 
3) MS Carers 
The perceived amount of information provided by off-line 
sources, such as physicians, was markedly inferior in this 
group relative to the other health groups studied.  
“Yes, I’ve used the Internet when he, when we first had the 
diagnosis, we looked on some of the MS sites to find out 
some information because we’d had very little information 
from the hospital…[…]…The only other help we’ve had is 
actually once a year contact with the [hospital name] but 
that dropped out because it wasn’t any use.” (St3, INT, 
Participant 3) 
Information had been obtained from charities and support 
groups, through magazines and meetings, but was still felt to 
be limited. Participants acknowledged that this was in part 
due to the unknowns surrounding the condition itself.  
“No, not the doctor, he was as much use as a chocolate fire 
guard…[…]… There we are ‘ I took various Sativex 
documents to my GP for her to read and decide if I was a 
good candidate for the drug.  When I handed them over she 
said ‘is this this cannabis spray’ In other words she didn’t 
know, in other words the GP didn’t know. ‘I said yes, what 
do you think’ before I could finish that short question, she 
put her hands up in front of her and backed up quickly, 
banging into the table. Anyone watching would have 
thought I was handing her an envelope with anthrax’.  And 
that’s the sort of attitude we’ve got but by people putting 
this sort of thing up and say look I know this is what the 
doctors think but this is available to us. And you ought to 
read up.  And we used to get two copies of MS Matters, 
which is the in house magazine from the MS Society… And 
so I used to send one down to the doctors surgery and it has 
improved her appreciation of the illness.  But that was the 
case pretty much.” (St3, INT, Participant 7) 
Due to professional off-line help seemingly limited 
across this health group, these participants often felt like 
information from the Internet was useful (or potentially 
useful) and the first port of call for finding out about 
symptoms of the conditions and other people’s experiences.  
“Yeah, yeah I think nowadays it [the Internet] tends to be 
kinda a first port of call.  I think we kind of resolved that we, 
the experience we get at the yearly consultants appointment. 
Usually a 10-15minute conversation with the consultant 
where she basically tells them what their symptoms have 
been so far and give it another year. We don’t get any more 
information” (St3, FINT, Participant 1) 
B. Control Over or Cure for the Condition 
Each group talked about the level of control they felt 
they had over their or their loved one’s health condition, or 
whether or not it was curable. In this respect, the three 
health groups varied and this in turn influenced whether 
they were interested in, or saw value in, the experiences of 
other patients posted online.  
1) Asthma 
For the majority of these participants, they perceived 
their asthma to be well controlled. Many had lived with it 
for a long time and knew the triggers that could worsen their 
condition. 
“Well I’ve had it since I was about thirteen so I would say 
twenty year ago erm ... erm ... I’ve never really had a ... had 
it really bad. Only in the winter when I get a cold or 
something like that. That’s the only time it’s really bad. But 
apart from that it’s really well controlled.” (St3, INT, 
Participant 6) 
When participants had experienced something in relation 
to their asthma (such as an asthma attack) then they had 
engaged with the Internet and were more receptive to some 
of the experiences shared on the websites they examined 
during the Internet session. 
“Just kind of like, like symptoms, whether they’re normal or 
if there’s anything like, I used to have a lot of difficulties 
sleeping so if there’s any techniques or anything I could do 
on a night to make me sleep better, just things like that.” 
(St2, FG, Participant 6) 
However, participants had regular check-ups with their 
physician and generally felt that unless they had a problem, 
they did not feel the need to look online or act on any 
information or advice given online. They and their physician 
or other health professional were able to help control their 
condition. 
2) Smokers 
For these smokers, participants believed that quitting was 
down to them. Participants were aware that whilst smoking 
is bad for their health and there are quitting aids available, it 
is entirely their own personal drive that could accomplish 
cessation.  
“I think if you want to quit smoking it’s mostly about will 
power rather than reading about what could happen to you. 
Everyone knows the facts everyone knows what will 
happen” (St1, FG, Participant 2)  
Participants were not typically engaged with online 
information of experiences because no one else could do it 
for them; they themselves have full control of this health 
issue. 
“I think as well you kind of know in your head if you want to 
quit, so if you want to quit, the chances are like you’ll go 
around yourself, I don’t think you need other people’s 
advice, you really want to quit you gonna do it… I think” 
(St1, FG, Participant 14) 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Participants sometimes liked hearing that others found 
quitting difficult and welcomed any novel tips or advice. 
However, ultimately, they felt their health condition was 
entirely under their control and knowing that others could do 
it may be helpful in terms of inspiration but not a strong 
reason to return to patient experiences online.  
3) MS Carers 
Resoundingly, carers commented on the fact that there 
was yet to be a cure for MS. Research was being carried out, 
but nothing concretely acknowledged as a drug or therapy 
had been produced for use within the NHS.  
“He [PARTNER] won’t admit he got it. He thinks he’s 
gonna get better. Even now he thinks he’s gonna get 
better…[…]… you really realise that you’re clutching at 
straws. There isn’t anything out there to help” (St2, FU, 
Participant 7) 
Carers experienced frustration toward the disease 
because of its variability across different people, which 
contribute to the difficulty of treating and controlling the 
condition. The one certainty participants acknowledged was 
that the condition would get worse and this was beyond their 
control. 
“You know things aren’t going to get any better. They’re 
only just going to go downhill.” (St2, FINT, Participant 8) 
Due to this variability and lack of knowledge of the 
condition, carers felt that using the Internet to share 
experiences and learn from one another had significant 
potential benefits for people living with a health condition.  
“I think I think particularly for MS because it’s one of those 
things which’s such a broad spectrum…[…]...that a lot time 
it is that kind of personal information that does make a big 
difference” (St2, FG, Participant 2) 
C. Daily Impact 
The daily impact of the condition was another observed 
theme across the three health groups. Responses highlight a 
positive relationship between level of daily impact and 
engagement with online information and experiences. 
1) Asthma 
For most of the asthma sufferers, this health condition 
was not regarded as something that had a huge impact on 
their life and to some, was not even considered a health 
problem.  
“With asthma I don’t even think of it as an illness or 
anything like that it’s you know a bit of an irritation that I 
totally forget once I’ve taken my inhaler I don’t think about 
it really so I don’t search the Internet for anything.” (St3, 
INT, Participant 1) 
Asthma was regarded as something these individuals 
were aware of and took the necessary precautions to ensure 
it was managed (i.e., take their inhalers). However, once 
they had done that, the condition could on the whole be 
forgotten about as it did not impact on their daily life. Some 
sufferers did think that perhaps they would be more 
interested in online information and experiences if their 
asthma was more severe, but otherwise it was something 
easily controllable with the help of their physician and 
medication, which in turn means little significant impact on 
their daily life.  
“I mean if I felt kind of more, in a house bound of asthma 
really affect me I would seek other people’s experiences or 
opinions online but since it didn’t seem to be very part of my 
life I certainly wouldn’t use the forums, it work different 
maybe, more appealing.” (ST2, FG, Participant 3) 
2) Smokers 
The only highlighted daily impact of stopping smoking 
was attempting to deal with craving. The Internet and 
reading others experiences online was suggested by one 
participant as having the potential to be beneficial in this 
respect.  
“I think actually if you just got craving, like I think if you 
did have a craving for the day, these websites, just maybe 
kind of distract yourself going onto the website, I think it 
can help you get pass that initial craving and you go for the 
next jerk, like half hour to an hour before you start thinking 
about it, yeah.”(St2, FG, Participant 6) 
However, largely participants did not see smoking 
cessation as something that had a daily impact, at least not 
in a negative way. Therefore, there was little need to engage 
with online resources. 
3) MS Carers 
The daily impact of caring for someone with MS was 
pronounced in this group.  
“From my end obviously I’ve not suffered with the illness 
but I still, there’s an impact on me, there’s an impact on the 
relationship.” (St2, FINT, P2) 
During the later stages of MS, carers often have to give 
up employment because the impact of the condition 
increases to the point where the patient needs full time care. 
“Yes, 96, my husband was diagnosed.  Erm actually became 
a non employed carer after 2000. I gave up work 
then…[…]…and it’s just increased the workload, has 
increased from erm assistance around the house, assistance 
with getting dressed to erm full 24/7, just about covering 
every physical need.” (St3, INT, Participant 3) 
Carers saw the value of using the Internet for 
information and seeing other people’s experiences as it 
could help them understand their own position as a carer 
and how they can cope with the progressive impact of the 
condition on their own daily life. 
Interviewer: “Do you think websites with personal 
experiences on them are useful?” 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Participant 2: “Yes. I do. Say I think particularly in the early 
stages. Just as an ongoing basis...I think that’s what’s 
missing sometimes a lot of the more clinical stuff on the 
websites, there’s a limit to the amount of information you 
can be told about MS. There’s a limit to what’s known. But 
there’s a lot underneath that. I mean a lot of the questions 
people ask are ‘how’s this gonna impact me? Is it gonna 
break up my life? How am I gonna cope with 
it?...[…]…This kind of thing. Most of the time the only 
people who can tell you that are the people who suffer form 
MS themselves. Em, so yeah I think there is a lot of value in 
that.” (St2, FINT) 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The increasing use of the Internet for health information, 
and in particular, the experiences of others with a specific 
health condition has spurred researchers from various 
disciplines to explore this phenomenon. However, evidence 
from the present research indicates that people with certain 
health conditions or problems may be more likely to engage 
with online patient experiences than others. This paper 
suggests that individuals living with a health condition 
where: a) little off-line information about the condition is 
available (e.g., from their physician; b) is non-curable or 
non-controllable; and/or c) has a high impact of the 
individual’s daily life, are more likely to seek out and 
engage with shared online patient experiences. 
These findings are consistent with other findings that 
individuals with chronic or debilitating conditions (or their 
carers) are likely to seek information online [4; 14]. Other 
research has also shown that the Internet is a preferred 
resource for health information when patients felt 
dissatisfied 
with 
the 
patient-physician 
interaction, 
particularly when needs (e.g., the provision of information) 
have not been met [15]. Research has revealed that 
households would often use the Internet to find out 
information for their needs regarding health issues that were 
affecting everyday routines [16]. The present study’s 
proposed factors could explain these higher levels of online 
engagement in terms of unsatisfactory off-line information 
(e.g., from a physician) and having a health problem with a 
daily impact, which is not under the individual’s.  
In other research, however, Tian and Robinson [17] 
found that adult cancer patients who visited their doctors 
more frequently were more likely to pay attention to health 
information from other mediums (e.g., magazines and on the 
Internet), even after controlling for condition severity. The 
researchers proposed that these findings supported the 
complimentary theory of media use (i.e., use of one media 
increases the likelihood of using another). More recently, 
other research has also shown that online support group 
members, who believed they had high control over their 
illness, were also more likely to use online resources [18]. 
These studies seem to contradict the present study’s 
findings.  
However, interestingly, in another study on breast cancer 
patients Sandaunet [20] found that online support group 
members withdrew from online participation when they no 
longer felt ‘ill enough’ or when they were at a particular 
phase of the illness which felt manageable. It may therefore 
be the case that these cancer patients felt in control of their 
condition, and that the daily impact on their lives was 
insufficient to warrant continued engagement with an online 
support group. Therefore, it could be that complementary 
use of media resources are more likely to result when low 
levels of control and/or daily impact is high, which may 
vary over time. In addition, utilizing the additional resource 
of online support groups may contribute to perceived 
control over the health condition. 
These research findings, together with the present paper, 
suggest that understanding engagement with online health 
resources is a complex phenomenon, and further research is 
needed. Of course, even within health conditions there may 
be individual or dispositional variations in the likelihood to 
engage with the Internet and seek other online patient 
experiences (e.g., [20]). However, the present research 
suggests it may be possible to predict why some health 
groups may be more likely than others to use the Internet 
and look for others who are experiencing similar health 
issues. These findings could have important implications for 
policy makers, investors, and health providers in terms of 
future ehealth initiatives. For example, it is often advocated 
that physicians have a list of recommended websites for 
referring patients to so they can seek out such information in 
relation to their condition. However, the present study 
suggests that it may not be necessary for physicians to do 
this for every patient they see. Not all patients with health 
conditions may be equally interested in websites related to 
their condition. It may only be useful for certain conditions 
where physicians know there is a limited amount of 
information or help they can provide to the patient, and/or 
where they know the impact on the patient’s daily life will 
be high.  
For policy makers and investors, these results also 
suggest where a society or population may already know or 
be exposed to a lot about a health condition, individuals 
may feel saturated or de-sensitized to attempts to change 
their behaviors or decisions in relation to their health 
condition. Therefore, ehealth policies and strategies aimed 
at such conditions may provide a smaller return on 
investment than less well known conditions, conditions that 
cannot be cured/controlled, and/or may have a significant 
impact on the individual’s daily lives. This is a particularly 
significant implication when there are limited time and 
resources available for such ehealth initiatives. 
Despite such useful insights from the present study, it is 
not without its limitations. The data collected represents a 
UK sample. Other countries have different health care 
services and provisions, and cultural variations may affect 
engagement factors. Whilst representing a variety of types 
of health user, it may be that the health conditions examined 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

do not cover all the possible levels of engagement with 
patient experiences. It is also important to note that for 
practical and ethical reasons, our sample did not contain any 
very severe health cases. These limitations impose some 
restrictions on the generalizability of the results. However, 
they give rise to important suggestions for future research 
and collaborations on this topic.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
From this study, we have learnt that different health 
conditions may vary in terms of the levels of engagement 
with online health information and shared patient 
experiences. In particular, engagement appears to be 
influenced by the level of off-line information, the ability to 
cure or control the health issue, and the daily impact the 
condition. 
These 
lessons 
provide 
some 
important 
implications for policy makers, investors, and service 
providers on ehealth initiatives, as well as highlighting the 
potential value that this line of research. Continuing this 
research across a broader range of health topics would 
therefore be worthwhile. Future research could also examine 
the degree of influence of each factor, and whether higher 
levels in just one factor (e.g., daily impact) would still result 
in engagement when there are lower perceived levels in the 
other factors (e.g., off-line information and control/cure of 
health condition). Longitudinal research would also allow 
researchers to see how and if engagement varies over time 
in relation to the proposed factors. Finally, the paper 
highlights the potential of using innovative methods of 
recycling existing data. We therefore encourage future 
pooled case comparisons of existing data to help explore 
online patient experience engagement, ehealth, and health in 
general. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This 
publication 
presents 
independent 
research 
commissioned by the National Institute for Health Research 
(NIHR) under its Programme Grants for Applied Research 
programme (RP-PG-0608-10147). The views expressed in 
this publication are those of the author(s) and not 
necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department 
of Health.  
REFERENCES 
[1]  J. Ellins and A. Coulter. “How engaged are people in 
their health care? Findings of a nationaltelephone 
survey”. 
Retrieved 
June 
2012 
from 
http://www.collaborationhealthcare.com/7-11-
11Patient-Activation-Survey.pdf , 2005.  
[2]  W. H. Dutton and G. Blank, “Next generation users: the 
Internet in Britain”, Oxford Internet Survey 2011 
Report, Oxford Internet Institute, Univeristy of Oxford.  
[3] J. Preece, “Online communities: designing usability, 
supporting sociability”, Chichester, UK: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2000.  
[4]   S. Fox, “The social life of health information”, 
Retrieved June 2012. Retrieved from 
http://pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/2011/PIP
_Social_Life_of_Health_Info.pdf, 2011.  
[5]    S. Ziebland and S. Wyke, “Health and illness in a 
connected world: How might sharing experiences on 
the Internet affect people’s health?”, Millbank 
Quarterly, 90(2), 2012, pp. 219-249. 
[6]    B. Sharf, “Communicating breast cancer on-line: 
support and empowerment on the Internet”, Women 
and Health, 26(1), 1997, pp. 65-84.  
[7]    P. K. H. Mo and N. S. Coulson, “Living with 
HIV/AIDS and use of online support groups”, Journal 
of Health Psychology, 15(3), 2010, pp. 339-350.  
[8]   C. F. van Uden-Kraan, C. H. C., Drossaert, E. Taal, B. 
R. Shaw, E. R. Seydel, and M. A. F. J. van de Laar, 
“Empowering processes and outcomes of participation 
in online support groups for patients with breast 
cancer, arthritis, or fibromyalgia”, Qualitative Health 
Research, 18(3), 2008, pp. 405-417.  
[9]  L. Locock and J. B. Brown, “All in the same boat’? 
Patient and carer attitudes to peer support and social 
comparison in motor neurone disease (MND)”, Social 
Science & Medicine, 71(8), 2010, pp. 1498-1505.  
[10] F. Mazanderani, L. Locock, and J. Powell, “Being 
differently the same: The mediation of identity 
tensions in the sharing of illness experiences”, Social 
Science & Medicine, 74, 2012, pp. 546-553.  
[11] J. Heaton, “Secondary analysis of qualitative data: A 
review of the literature”, York: Social Policy Research 
Unit (SPRU), University of York, 2000.  
[12] J. West and P. Oldfather, “Pooled case comparison: an 
innovation for cross-case study”, Qualitative Inquiry, 
1, 1995, pp. 452-464.  
[13] L. Heshusius, “Freeing ourselves from objectivity: 
managing subjectivity or turning toward a participatory 
mode of consciousness?” Educational Researcher, 
23(3), Apr., 1994, pp. 15-22.  
[14] D. P. Lorence, H. Park, and S. Fox, “Assessing health 
consumerism on the Web: a demographic profile of 
information-seeking behaviors”, J Med Syst 30, 2006, 
pp. 251–258.  
[15] N. Tustin, “The role of patient satisfaction in online 
health information seeking”, Journal of Health 
Communication: International Perspectives, 15(1), 
2010, pp. 3-17.  
[16] J. Kivits, “Everyday health and the Internet: a mediated 
health perspective on health information seeking”, 
Sociol Health Illn., Jul;31(5), 2009, pp. 673-87.  
[17] Y. Tian and J. Robinson, “Media use and health 
information 
seeking: 
an 
empirical 
test 
of 
complementarity theory”, Health Communication, 
22(2), 2008, pp. 184-190.  
[18] X. Hu, R. A. Bell, R. L. Kravitz, and S. Orrange, “The 
prepared patient: information seeking of online support 
group members before their medical appointments”, 
Journal of Health Communication: International 
Perspectives, 2012, pp. 960-978.  
[19] A. G. Sandaunet, “The challenge of fitting in: non-
participation and withdrawal from an online self-help 
group for breast cancer patients”, Sociology of Health 
& Illness, 30, 2008, pp. 131–144.  
[20] M. J. Dutta, and H. Feng, “Health orientation and 
disease state as predictors of online health support 
group use”, Health Communication, 22 (2), 2007, pp. 
181-189. 
 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Feasibility of Electronic Health Kiosks to Assess Chronic Disease Status in Remote 
Areas of Developing Countries 
 
 
 
Mohit Arora 
Foundation of Healthcare 
Technologies Society 
New Delhi, India 
amohit@gmail.com 
 
Ashish Joshi, Pinaki Panigrahi, Douglas Marcel 
Puricelli Perin 
Center for Global Health and Development 
College of Public Health, UNMC 
Omaha, USA 
ashish.joshi@unmc.edu; ppanigrahi@unmc.edu; 
d.puricelliperin@unmc.edu 
 
 
 
Radhanath Satpathy 
Asian Institute of Public Health 
Orissa, India 
drsatpathy@rediffmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract— Developing countries lack the infrastructure 
for effective health care delivery, especially in remote 
areas. To prevent and manage the rising burden of 
chronic diseases in developing countries, health care 
services must reach even the most remote areas. The 
study presents the electronic health kiosk (EHK) as an 
effective and feasible solution to assess chronic disease 
status in remote areas of developing countries, having 
India as an example. Cross-sectional data was collected 
on a convenient sample of 429 subjects, 18 years and 
over, in urban, slum and tribal settings. Results show 
high prevalence of overweight subjects in urban settings 
(31.5%; n=70), a high prevalence of pre-hypertension 
overall (41.5%; n=178) and hypertension in tribal 
settings (26.1%; n=28), and high glucose prevalence in 
27% (n=116) of subjects overall, and (17.8%; n=19). 
EHKs can be used to assess these health outcomes in 
areas that normally are not covered due to lack of 
infrastructure or health personnel. These health kiosks 
can be a medium to deliver evidence-based, contextual 
and tailored multimedia health education modules 
improving the overall quality of health care among these 
populations. They can also help to raise awareness about 
health issues and create meaningful information for 
public health decision-making. 
Keywords-health kiosk; public health informatics; global 
health; chronic disease. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Chronic disease is a global burden responsible for over 
50% of worldwide mortality [1]. It is estimated that, in 
2020, chronic diseases will be the cause of 50 million deaths 
globally [2]. Their prevalence is increasing especially in 
developing countries, where diabetes alone is predicted to 
afflict about 298 million people in 2030 [3]. It has been 
estimated by the World Bank that controlling cardiovascular 
diseases would lead to improved life expectancy more 
effectively than trying to achieve WHO’s Millennium 
Development Goals related to selected infectious diseases 
and maternal and child health [4]. 
Prevention, 
however, 
is 
still 
scarcely 
supported 
financially and politically through public health programs, 
even though the potential damage on population health and 
economies worldwide is evident. In addition to it, many 
developing countries lack the infrastructure for effective 
health care delivery, especially in remote areas. Lack of 
qualified personnel is also a challenge to provide 
meaningful service, as low wages, insufficient living, and 
working conditions, are obstacles that prevent the trained 
workforce to establish themselves in these areas of extreme 
need [5]. In India, for example, where a shortage of health 
care professionals normally exists, remote areas are even 
more underserved. Urban areas in average have 3 times the 
number of health care providers compared to rural areas [6]. 
Another example, Brazil has its health resources also 
concentrated in urban settings, leaving a young and 
inexperienced workforce to deliver care in more remote 
municipalities [7]. To contain the spread of chronic diseases 
in developing countries, it is paramount to find ways to 
bring quality health care even to the most remote regions. 
The aim of this paper is to present the electronic health 
kiosk (EHK) as an effective and feasible solution to assess 
chronic disease status in remote areas of developing 
countries, having India as an example. The paper will be 
divided in 6 sections. Section I is the introduction. Section II 
will briefly explore the current state of health technologies 
and propose the EHK as a solution for delivering health care 
in remote areas. Section III will describe in detail the EHK 
used in this study. Section IV will present the methods and 
instruments used to conduct this research. Section V will 
identify the most relevant results. Section VI will be the 
conclusion and recommendations for future research.  
II. 
CURRENT STATE OF HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES 
Communication and information technologies have 
helped to change health care delivery to a model of 
management centered on the patient instead of the provider. 
Health care services are now able to reach beyond the 
traditional clinical settings, arriving to the point of care even 
in more isolated communities where these services are 
extremely needed.  
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Educating patients through computer technology use has 
been recognized as an effective measure to develop patient 
skills and knowledge, and improving chances of appropriate 
behavior. The necessity of offering better services at lower 
costs makes the use of computer technology essential to 
support health education [8]. Health promotion, and chronic 
disease prevention and surveillance, can be achieved through 
telehealth technology, which acquires, disseminates and 
stores health-related information electronically [9]. This 
technology can be presented and accessed in different 
formats such as web-based applications, mobile phone and 
alert systems, and telephone and video conferencing with 
patients [10,11].  
EHKs relieve the health care providers from the burden 
of providing preventive and continuous health education. 
Instead, they can then concentrate on the quality of their 
care, especially in circumstances that require immediate 
attention. EHKs can deliver interactive health information 
programs that are tailored to the specific needs of the 
community or the individual [12]. The ability to 
continuously tailor the EHK information based on patient’s 
input could be the inexpensive bridge to addressing his need 
for adequate information, customized to his ever-changing 
health status.  
The advantages of accessibility and a user-friendly 
interface can make kiosks a powerful tool for promoting 
health education in communities in both urban and rural 
settings. They are usually built as free-standing units, which 
facilitates their transportation and increases the possibility of 
providing access. They can be placed in health care settings 
or in any kind of public space [12, 13]. The EHK possesses a 
simplified interface and can be used by individuals from 
various backgrounds regardless of class or education level 
[12]. It also varies in many different levels, such as 
interactivity and feedback [12]. Kiosks can be an effective 
way to deliver high quality health care to remote areas in 
developing countries. 
III. 
THE ELECTRONIC HEALTH KIOSK  
The EHK used in this study is a multilingual standalone, 
internet and cell-phone based system. The kiosk has several 
calibrated metric physiological sensors that can capture a 
diversity of medical parameters, including blood pressure, 
blood sugar and weight. These measured parameters are 
communicated automatically to the software embedded in 
the touchscreen EHK. These sensors make EHK a useful and 
efficient approach to collect data electronically and help 
assess the actual state of the individual’s health. The kiosk 
can be utilized on its own without any assistance as it is user-
friendly, with minimal number of buttons and icons, and the 
program is very easy to operate and navigate through. 
For each individual, the EHK system generates a unique 
ID to which all gathered data is assigned. Individuals can 
then create their own username and password, allowing them 
to log into the system and access their health information at 
any time and from anywhere. The self-report information 
gathered can include socio-demographics (such as age, 
gender, and educational status), health behavior variables 
(including body mass index, smoking, drug and alcohol 
consumption), and clinical variables (including current state 
of diabetes, hypertension and cholesterol, history of 
medications, and lifestyle) (Figure 1). 
The quantitative and qualitative data measured and 
collected result in a unique health card that provides a 
snapshot of the individual’s multiple risk factors. Further, 
health information is provided to help address and manage 
these various risk factors, tailored according to the data 
collected in the EHK for the specific ID.   
IV. 
METHODS 
The study was conducted in a community setting in the 
city of Rourkela, state of Orissa, in India. Between the 
months of March and May 2010, a convenient sample of 
individuals was enrolled from three diverse geographical 
locations including urban, rural and tribal areas, to explore 
the utilization of a portable electronic health information 
kiosk for the assessment of chronic disease health risks, and 
compare the differences among them. The targeted 
population included adults older than 18 years, both male 
and female. Participation in the study was voluntary, and 
willing subjects were provided with a one-page summary 
where the study was explained. The study was approved by 
the University of Maryland Baltimore County Institutional 
Review Board. 
Subjects were asked to use the EHK described previously, 
which gathered subjective and objective data to understand 
the distribution of chronic diseases and associated risk in the 
diverse community settings.  
The subjective data gathered included responses to a 
series of multiple choice questions. These questions assessed 
location of residence (urban/slum/tribal); age (years); gender 
(male/female); highest level of education attained (less than 
high 
school/some 
college/graduate 
and 
above/none); 
smoking and alcohol history (presently/in the past/ never); 
height (feet, inches); ever told by a doctor about high blood 
sugar (yes/no/I don’t know) and if yes, are you currently 
being treated for your high blood sugar (yes/no/I don’t 
know); ever told by a doctor about high blood pressure 
(yes/no/I don’t know) and if yes, are you currently being 
treated for your high blood pressure (yes/no/I don’t know).  
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshot of EHK. 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Objective data was gathered using the multiple calibrated 
physiological sensors which measured weight (kilograms), 
blood sugar and blood pressure. The readings were 
automatically transmitted to the touchscreen EHK. 
Descriptive analysis was performed using univariate 
statistics with results for the continuous variables being 
reported as means and standard deviations while results for 
the categorical variables were reported as frequency statistics 
as appropriate. Analysis of variance was performed to 
determine if there were any significant differences in the 
continuous variables across the different geographic settings 
including urban, slum and rural. Similarly chi-square 
analysis was performed to determine if there were significant 
differences in the proportion of the categorical variables and 
the geographic settings in which individuals were living. All 
analysis was performed using SAS V 9.1 and the results have 
been reported as p-values. 
V. 
RESULTS 
Cross-sectional data was collected on a convenient 
sample of 429 subjects, 18 years and over, in urban, slum 
and tribal settings. Fifty-two percent (n=222) of the subjects 
were from urban settings, followed by 23% (n=100) living in 
slum, and 25% (n=107) living in tribal settings. The average 
age was 41.98, and the majority of the population was male 
(61.3%; n=263). Subjects enrolled from slum settings, 
however, were predominantly females (69%; n=69). 
Although the majority of the subjects reported some college 
to post-graduate level of education (54.6%; n =234), most 
subjects in the slum and tribal settings had no formal 
education (40% and 36.4%, respectively) or at most high 
school level (44% and 37.4%, respectively). In the tribal 
setting, 36.4% (n=39) of subjects were current smokers, and 
29.9% (n=32) consume alcohol. 
Results showed a high prevalence of overweight subjects 
in urban settings (31.5%; n=70) (Table 2). Albeit in smaller 
numbers, overweight subjects were also identified in the 
tribal (12.1%; n=13) and slum settings (10%; n=10). A high 
prevalence of pre-hypertension among subjects was also 
detected (41.5%; n=178). It is important to note that in tribal 
settings, 26.1% (n=28) of the subjects were diagnosed with 
stage 1 or stage 2 hypertension. Abnormal blood sugar levels 
were detected in 27% (n=116) of subjects overall, while in 
the tribal setting 17.8% (n=19) had high glucose. Results 
also have shown that 79.4% of subjects (n=85) in tribal 
setting reported that they don’t know if they were ever told to 
have diabetes by a doctor (Figure 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS  
Variables 
Total 
N=429 
Urban 
N=222 
Slum 
N=100 
Tribal 
N=107 
 
 
 
 
 
Age  
41.98 
 
45.72 
 
41.13 
 
35.02 
 
Female 
38.7% 
21.2% 
69.0% 
46.7% 
 
Education level 
 
 
 
 
   High School 
27.0% 
14.4% 
44% 
37.4% 
   Some college /Graduate 
47.6% 
72.1% 
16% 
26.2% 
   Post graduate/Professional 
7.0% 
13.5% 
- 
- 
   None 
18.4% 
- 
40% 
36.4% 
 
Smoking History 
 
 
 
 
   Presently 
18.6% 
13.5% 
11.0% 
36.4% 
   In the past 
13.3% 
18.9% 
9.0% 
5.6% 
   Never 
68.1% 
67.6% 
80.0% 
57.9% 
 
Alcohol History 
 
 
 
 
   Presently 
20.5% 
16.7% 
19.0% 
29.9% 
   In the past 
13.1% 
14.9% 
11.0% 
11.2% 
   Never 
66.4% 
68.5% 
70.0% 
58.9% 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Percentage of answers for information on diabetes status by a 
health professional in tribal population. 
These findings reflect an urgent need to utilize 
novel accessible and cost-effective technologies that can 
gather evidence-based data at the grassroots level so that 
timely interventions can be done to minimize the rising 
burden of chronic diseases in the rural and remote areas of 
developing countries.  
VI. 
CONLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The study results have shown that the prevalence of 
chronic diseases in tribal and slum communities is 
considerably high. 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE II.  
BODY MASS INDEX, HYPERTENSION AND BLOOD SUGAR 
CHARACTERISTICS OF INDIVIDUALS IN DIVERSE SETTINGS 
Variables  
Total 
N=429 
Urban 
N=222 
Slum 
N=100 
Tribal 
N=107 
Statistics 
Body Mass 
Index  
 
 
 
 
Chi 
Square 
=50.175; 
p<0.001 
Underweight 
(<18.5) 
17.2% 
8.1% 
21.0% 
32.7% 
 
Normal (18.5-
24.99) 
56.6% 
56.3% 
62.0% 
52.3% 
 
Overweight 
(25.0-29.99) 
21.7% 
31.5% 
10.0% 
12.1% 
 
Obese (30 or 
greater) 
4.5% 
4.1% 
7.0% 
2.9% 
 
 Blood 
Pressure 
 
 
 
 
Chi 
Square 
=16.365; 
p=0.012 
Normal (<120 
and <80)  
28.9% 
20.7% 
36.0% 
39.3% 
 
Pre 
Hypertensive 
(120-139 or 
80-89) 
41.5% 
45.5% 
40.0% 
34.6% 
 
 
Stage 1 
Hypertension 
(140-159 or 
90-99) 
18.2% 
21.2% 
13.0% 
16.8% 
 
 
Stage 2 
Hypertension 
(>160  or 
>100) 
 
11.4% 
 
12.6% 
 
11.0% 
 
9.3% 
 
 
Blood Sugar 
 
 
 
 
 
Chi 
Square 
=8.157; 
p=0.017 
Normal 
(<140) 
73.0% 
67.6% 
75.0% 
82.2% 
 
Abnormal 
((≥140) 
27.0% 
32.4% 
25.0% 
17.8% 
 
 
Results suggest that 1 in 3 subjects in urban settings are 
overweight, similar to what has been presented in a recent 
study where rates as high as 40% were measured in some 
urban areas [14]. Another important finding of the study was 
the high prevalence individuals in the tribal population with 
of pre-hypertensive status (34.6%; n=37) and hypertensive 
status (26.1%; n=28). High glucose levels were also detected 
in 17.8% (n=19) of subjects in the tribal setting. A very 
recent study in India, has presented similar prevalence with 
variations according to different Indian states [15].  
The state of Orissa, India, where Rourkela is located, has 
a population of over 40 million people. According to the 
2001 census, 85% lived in rural regions and 22% were tribal 
populations [16]. Of the Indian tribal population, however, 
25% doesn’t have access to health services [17]. This is a 
serious limitation for public health surveillance in India, as 
risk factors and harmful health conditions are not being 
assessed in a regular basis. Studies have been consistently 
detecting a high number of individuals with undiagnosed 
chronic diseases, such as diabetes and hypertension, among 
populations in different areas of the country [15,18].  
EHK can be a feasible technology to assess burden of 
risk of chronic diseases at the grassroots level and even in 
resource poor environments. These assessments can provide 
us true representation of the risk burden and the evidence 
based data to make informed decisions and timely 
interventions for improving the overall well-being of the 
individuals, the communities and the environment they live 
in. However, due consideration should be given to design 
and develop accessible and tailored technologies that take 
into account health literacy of the individuals and utilize 
targeted mode of delivery of health promotion messages for 
better adoption of these technologies. Further research is 
warranted to determine the role of utilizing EHK as a 
medium to bridge the gap among individuals with different 
risk factors in various settings. 
Limitations of the study include the use of a convenient 
sample, although similitudes in measured characteristics with 
recent studies may attest to the representativeness of the data 
[14, 15, 18]. Results showed less percentage of females 
participating in the urban setting as compared to the slum or 
tribal settings. This difference might be due to more number 
of females being employed in the urban setting as compared 
to the others.  In addition, cultural variations in the diverse 
settings might also account for these differences in 
participation. Another limitation was the lack of cost-
effectiveness assessments for the use of EHK in these 
settings and the long-term impact on population outcomes. 
These assessments are currently being evaluated in the 
ongoing studies.  
The EHK can be the multifaceted solution to the difficult 
obstacles faced by public health in developing countries. 
There are current plans to implement EHK by engaging 
community health extension workers in the diverse Indian 
settings including urban, rural, slum and tribal. Further, the 
development of a randomized controlled clinical trial is in 
course. The aim is to test the EHK efficacy as an interactive, 
personalized, culturally adaptive, contextually relevant, 
accessible and cost-effective platform. Another goal will be 
to help improve health outcomes among populations in 
resource-poor environments.  
EHK can be used to assess chronic disease status in areas 
that normally are not covered by a developing country public 
health system due to lack of infrastructure or health 
personnel. EHK can be a medium to deliver evidence-based, 
contextual and tailored multimedia health education 
modules, and could improve the overall quality of health care 
among these populations as further research is needed to 
determine this.  
For governments and institutions to act, enacting policies 
that can improve health outcomes in disadvantaged areas, 
first they need the data and the evidence to support it. EHK 
can be an instrument to raise awareness about health issues 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

and create meaningful information for public health 
decision-making.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Yach, S. R. Leeder, J. Bell, and B. Kistnasamy, “Global 
chronic diseases,” Science, vol. 307, Jan. 2005, p. 317, 
doi:10.1126/science.1108656. 
[2] C. J. Murray and A. D. Lopez, The Global Burden of Disease: 
a comprehensive assessment of mortality and disability from 
diseases, injuries and risk factors in 1990 and Projected to 
2020, Cambridge, MA: Harvard School of Public Health, 
1996. 
[3] S. Wild, G. Roglic, A. Green, R. Sicree, and H. King, “Global 
prevalence of diabetes: estimates for 2000 and projections for 
2030”, Diabetes Care, vol. 27, May 2004, pp. 1047-1053, 
doi:10.2337/diacare.27.5.1047. 
[4] World Bank, Millennium Development Goals for Health in 
Europe and Central Asia: relevance and policy implications, 
Washington, DC: World Bank, 2004. 
[5] U. Lehmann, M. Dieleman, and T. Martineau, “Staffing 
remote rural areas in middle- and low-income countries: a 
literature review of attraction and retention,” BMC Health 
Serv Res, vol. 8, Jan. 2008, p. 19(1-10), doi:10.1186/1472-
6963-8-19. 
[6] M. Rao, K. D. Rao, A. K. Kumar, M. Chatterjee, and T. 
Sundararaman, “Human resources for health in India,” 
Lancet, vol. 377, Feb. 2011, pp. 587-598, doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(10)61888-0. 
[7] M. B. Alkmim, R. M. Figueira, M. S. Marcolino, C. S. 
Cardoso, M. Pena de Abreu, L. R. Cunha, et al., “Improving 
patient access to specialized health care: the Telehealth 
Network of Minas Gerais, Brazil,” Bull World Health Organ, 
vol. 90, May 2012, pp. 373-378, doi:10.2471/BLT.11.099408. 
[8] D. Lewis, “Computer-based approaches to patient education: 
a review of the literature,” J Am Med Inform Assoc, vol. 6, 
Jul.-Aug. 1999, pp.  272-282. 
[9] K. A. Stroetmann, L. K. S. Robinson, K. C. Stroetmann, and 
D. McDaid, How can telehealth help in the provision of 
integrated care?, WHO Policy Brief 2010, Copenhagen, 
Denmark: WHO, 2010. 
[10] R. G. Lee, K. C. Chen , C. C. Hsiao, and C. L. Tseng CL, “A 
mobile care system with alert mechanism,” IEEE Trans Inf 
Technol Biomed, vol. 11, Sep. 2007, pp. 507-517. 
[11] M. N. Boulos, S. Wheeler, C. Tavares, R. Jones, “How 
smartphones are changing the face of mobile and participatory 
healthcare: an overview, with example from eCAALYX,” 
Biomed 
Eng 
Online, 
vol. 10, 
Apr. 
2011, p. 24, 
doi:10.1186/1475-925X-10-24. 
[12] M. W. Kreuter, W. J. Black, L. Friend, A. C. Booker, P. 
Klump, S. Bobra et al., “Use of computer kiosks for breast 
cancer education in five community settings,” Health Educ 
Behav, 
vol. 
33, 
Oct. 
2006, 
pp. 
625-642, 
doi:10.1177/1090198106290795. 
[13] B. F. Pendleton, S. Labuda Schrop, C. Ritter, E. S. Kinion, G. 
McCord, J. J. Cray JJ et al., “Underserved patients' choice of 
kiosk-based preventive health information,” Fam Med, vol. 
42, Jul.-Aug. 2010, pp. 488-495. 
[14] Wang Y., Chen H.J., Shaikh S., Mathur P. Is obesity 
becoming a public health problem in India? Examine the shift 
from under- to overnutrition problems over time. Obes Rev, 
vol. 10, Jul. 2009, pp. 456-474. Epub Mar. 2009. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-789X.2009.00568.x 
[15] Joshi S. R., Saboo B., Vadivale M., Dani S. I., Mithal A., 
Kaul U., et al. Prevalence of Diagnosed and Undiagnosed 
Diabetes and Hypertension in India: results from the 
Screening India's Twin Epidemic (SITE) Study. Diabetes 
Technology & Therapeutics, vol. 14, Jan. 2012, pp. 8-15, 
doi:10.1089/dia.2011.0243. 
[16] Directorate of Census Operations, Orissa, Census of India 
2011: provisional population totals – Orissa. Bhubaneswar, 
India, Ministry of Home Affairs, 2011. 
[17] S. M. Bala, D. Thiruselvakumar, “Overcoming problems in 
the practice of public health among tribals of India,” Indian J 
Community Med, vol. 34, Oct. 2009, pp. 283-287, 
doi:10.4103/0970-0218.58383. 
[18] Misra R., Misra A., Kamalamma N., Vikram N.K., Gupta S., 
Sharma S., et al. Difference in prevalence of diabetes, obesity, 
metabolic syndrome and associated cardiovascular risk factors 
in a rural area of Tamil Nadu and an urban area of Delhi. 
International Journal of Diabetes in Developing Countries, 
vol. 31, 2011, pp. 1-9, doi: 10.1007/s13410-011-0017-3. 
 
 
 
 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

