MODERN SYSTEMS 2022
International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions
ISBN: 978-1-68558-021-6
July 24th – 28th, 2022
Nice, France
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 Editors
Alan Martin Redmond, CSTB, France

MODERN SYSTEMS 2022
Forward
The International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions (MODERN SYSTEMS
2022) inaugurates a series of events focusing on systems development considering the variety of
combination between requirements, technologies, and the application domains. The conference was
held in Nice, France, July 24 - 28, 2022.
We are witnessing a paradigm shift in systems engineering approaches caused by several facets
of society and technology evolution. On one side, the mobility, the increase in processing power and the
large storage capacity created the capacity needed to deliver services to everybody, everywhere,
anytime. On the other side, new computation approaches, data gathering, and storage combined with
advances in intelligence-based learning and decision-making, allowed a new perspective for systems
engineering.
The advanced pace of technological achievements is supported by Cloud/Edge/Fog-based
computing, High Performance Computing (HPC), Internet of Things (IoT), Big Data, Deep Learning,
Machine Learning, along with 5G/6G communications (integration of terrestrial/special systems) and
mobility. As such, deployment, operation and technologies, integration, maintenance became a
cornerstone for developing systems complying with functional and non-functional requirements.
We take this opportunity to thank all the members of the MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 Technical
Program Committee as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a broad and high-quality
conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also kindly thank all
the authors who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to the MODERN SYSTEMS 2022.
We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program consists of top quality
contributions.
This event could also not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 organizing
committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this professional meeting a
success.
We hope the MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 was a successful international forum for the exchange of
ideas and results between academia and industry and to promote further progress with respect to
modern systems. We also hope that Nice provided a pleasant environment during the conference and
everyone saved some time for exploring this beautiful city
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 Chairs
MODERN SYSTEMS Steering Committee
Alan Martin Redmond, Sophia Antipolis (CSTB), France
Mo Mansouri, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
Phillip Durst, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Engineer Research and Development Center, USA
Hany Moustapha, École de Technologie Supérieure, Canada
Sylvain Cadic, AXONE – Paris, France
Adriana Alexandru, National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics - ICI Bucharest,

Romania
Chunguo Li, Southeast University, China
Oliver Michler, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 Liaison for Certification on Systems
Paul Martin, SE – Scholar, USA

MODERN SYSTEMS 2022
COMMITTEE
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 Steering Committee
Alan Martin Redmond, Sophia Antipolis (CSTB), France
Mo Mansouri, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
Phillip Durst, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Engineer Research and Development Center, USA
Hany Moustapha, École de Technologie Supérieure, Canada
Sylvain Cadic, AXONE – Paris, France
Adriana Alexandru, National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics - ICI Bucharest,
Romania
Chunguo Li, Southeast University, China
Oliver Michler, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 Liaison for Certification on Systems
Paul Martin, SE – Scholar, USA
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 Technical Program Committee
Mohd Helmy Abd Wahab, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn, Malaysia
George H. Abdou, New Jersey Institute of Technology, USA
Mohd Ashraf Ahmad, Universiti Malaysia Pahang, Malaysia
Abdel Ghani Aissaoui, University of Tahri Mohamed of Bechar, Algeria
Adriana Alexandru, National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics - ICI Bucharest,
Romania
Hamid Ali Abed AL-Asadi,Iraq University College, Iraq
Abdullah Al-Mamun, University of Nevada, Reno, USA
Siddeeq Yousif Ameen, Duhok Polytechnic University, Iraq
Aliasghar Arab, Nokia Bell Labs, USA
Sofiane Bououden, University Abbes Laghrour Khenchela, Algeria
Sylvain Cadic, AXONE - Paris, France
Xiaoqiang Cai, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
Luigi Maxmilian Caligiuri, Foundation of Physics Research Center (FoPRC), Italy
Lelio Campanile, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Italy
Pasquale Cantiello, Osservatorio Vesuviano - Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, Italy
Stefano Cirillo, University of Salerno, Italy
Luigi Costanzo, Università degli studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Italy
Nan Ding, Berkeley Lab, USA
Ghania Droua-Hamdani, C.R.S.T.D.L.A., Algeria
Phillip Durst, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers - Engineer Research and Development Center, USA
Ramadan Elaiess, University of Benghazi, Libya
Ahmad Fakharian, Islamic Azad University, Qazvin, Iran
Przemyslaw Falkowski-Gilski, Gdansk University of Technology, Poland
Shoeib Faraj, Technical and Vocational University of Urmia, Tehran, Iran
Dário Ferreira, University of Beira Interior, Portugal
João P. Ferreira, Coimbra Institute of Engineering - Portugal Institute of Systems and Robotics of

Coimbra, Portugal
Dinesh R. Gawade, Tyndall National Institute, Cork, Ireland
Alexandru Georgescu, ICI, Romania
Tsvetanka Georgieva-Trifonova, "St. Cyril and St. Methodius" University of Veliko Tarnovo, Bulgaria
Balazs Gerofi, RIKEN Center for Computational Science, Japan
Fadratul Hafinaz Hassan, School of Computer Sciences - Universiti Sains Malaysia, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia
Tzung-Pei Hong, National University of Kaohsiung, Taiwan
Qinghao Hu, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Dariusz Jacek Jakobczak, Koszalin University of Technology, Poland
Dipak Kumar Jana, Haldia Institute of Technology, India
Oulaid Kamach, Abdelmalek ESSADIUniversity | ENSA of Tangier, Morocco
Rahul Krishnamurthy, Virginia Tech, USA
M. Zakaria Kurdi, University of Lynchburg, USA
Chunguo Li, Southeast University, China
Jinfeng Li, Imperial College London, UK
Ganapathy Mani, Qualcomm Inc., USA
Mo Mansouri, Stevens Institute of Technology, USA
Paul Martin, SE - Scholar, USA
Jose Miguel Martínez Valle, University of Córdoba, Spain
Michele Mastroianni, University of Salerno, Italy
Jean-Marc Menaud, IMT Atlantique - Stack Team - LS2N, France
Oliver Michler, Technical University Dresden, Germany
Hany Moustapha, École de Technologie Supérieure, Canada
Rana Mukherji, The ICFAI University, Jaipur, India
Nacer K. M'Sirdi, Aix-Marseille University, France
Christian Neureiter, Josef Ressel Center of Dependable System-of-Systems Engineering | Salzburg
University of Applied Sciences, Austria
Loc Nguyen, Independent Scholar, Vietnam
Klimis Ntalianis, University of West Attica, Athens, Greece
P.K. Paul, Raiganj University, India
Anil Patel, Technische Universität Kaiserslautern, Germany
Rodrigo Perez Fernandez, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
Van-Toan Pham, National Taipei University of Technology, Taiwan
Jui-Sheng Rayson Chou, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology (TAIWAN TECH), Taiwan
Carlos Reaño González Universitat de València, Spain
Alan Martin Redmond, Sophia Antipolis (CSTB), France
Yilun Shang, Northumbria University, UK
Alaa Sheta, Southern Connecticut State University, USA
Hamed Taherdoost, University Canada West, Vancouver, Canada
Yutian Tang, ShanghaiTech University, China
Liyun Tong, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Carlos M. Travieso-González, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
Adriano Valenzano, CNR-IEIIT, Italy
Vinod Kumar Verma, Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering & Technology, India
Constantin Volosencu, University "Politehnica" Timisoara, Romania
Haibo Wang, University of Florida, USA
Hongjian Wang, Twitter Inc., USA
Huaming Wu, Tianjin University, China

Zhonghao Wu, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Rui Xu, East China Normal University, China
Enrico Zero, University of Genova, Italy
Qing Zheng, Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA
Han Zhou, Synopsys Inc., USA
Francesco Zirilli, Sapienza Universita Roma, Italy

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Investigating the Conditions of Emerging Requirements of Advanced Technologies for BIM-SPEED Platform
Alan Martin Redmond, Sonia Alvarez-Diaz, and Nicolas Pastorelly
1
Developing European Defense Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure Network
Alan Martin Redmond and Alexandru Georgescu
8
Ensure a Stable Power Grid when using Renewable Energy
Aleksander Kulseng and Mo Mansouri
15
Applying Systems Thinking for Early Validation of a Case Study Definition: An Automated Parking System
Haytham B. Ali, Mo Mansouri, and Gerrit Muller
21
Applying Conceptual Modeling and Failure Data Analysis for "Actual Need" Exploration: Case Study for an
Automated Parking System
Haytham B. Ali, Gerrit Muller, and Fahim A. Salim
27
Preventing E-Government Tragedy Of The Clouds Using System Thinking Methods
Geoffrey Lichtenheim and Mo Mansouri
35
User-centered Data Driven Approach to Enhance Information Exploration, Communication and Traceability in a
Complex Systems Engineering Environment
Fahim Salim, Haytham Ali, Gerrit Muller, and Kristin Falk
39
State of Affair in terms of Big Data Utilization in Complex System Engineering Organizations
Fahim Salim, Haytham Ali, Tommy Langen, Andreas Wettre, Gerrit Muller, and Kristin Falk
45
AutoDrone - Use of Autonomously Operated Drone Technology in Forest Inventory
Robert Richter, Christopher Dunkel, and Oliver Michler
50
Implementation of the RAM Analyses into a Discrete Event Simulation of a Process in Early Stages of its
Development
Martin Kubic and Maurice Pendola
56
VR-SysML: SysML Model Visualization and Immersion in Virtual Reality
Roy Oberhauser
61
A Systematic Mapping of Natural Gas Transportation Systems' Reliability and Risks Analysis
Yefeng Liang and Mo Mansouri
67
Multi-Protocol Interoperability Between Distributed Cyber-Physical Systems Towards Industry 4.0 Collaborative
Optimization
73

Md Sabbir Bin Azad and Christophe Danjou
Achieving City Intelligence - A Systems Engineering Approach
Yaw Adom-Mensah and Mo Mansouri
80
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Investigating the Conditions of Emerging Requirements of Advanced Technologies 
for BIM-SPEED Platform 
Alan Martin Redmond
Information Technologies Directorate (DTI),  
Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment  
Sophia Antipolis, France 
email: alan.redmond@cstb.fr 
Sonia Álvarez-Díaz
Energy Division,  
CARTIF Technology Centre  
Boecillo, Valladolid, Spain 
email: sonalv@cartif.es 
Nicolas Pastorelly
Information Technologies Directorate (DTI),  
Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment  
Sophia Antipolis, France 
email: nicolas.pastorelly@cstb.fr 
Abstract—As society is becoming more and more aware of the 
negative environmental impact of our living environments 
there is a need for interoperability of a full range of Building 
Information Modelling (BIM) tools for renovation that will be 
accommodated on an innovative BIM cloud platform. The use 
of BIM will be the catalyst for a more intelligent and efficient 
method of deep renovation for the residential building sector. 
This paper is based on the deliverable report ‘Strategies for 
user acceptance, collaboration support, and BIM data 
maintenance’ of the BIM-SPEED project, an H2020 research 
project. This report aimed to investigate and define the 
conditions for improving the use of the BIM-SPEED platform 
and fostering its adoption by the largest community of 
stakeholders. The methodology is based on two complementary 
aspects: i) feedback provided by the first end-users of the 
BIM-SPEED cloud platform, the necessary functionalities 
required to be implemented in the future versions of the 
platform to support renovation projects that have been 
collected and synthesized; and ii) by using end-user 
expectations regarding BIM content and update during 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of buildings. The result of 
this paper provides general recommendations for improving 
such an Integrated BIM Platform to guarantee its usability 
over time by advancing future versions, such as the services 
offered, user needs (user friendliness, user interface and ease of 
use), performances, flexibility, and availability. 
Keywords-BIM; 
Renovation; 
Agile 
Development; 
Collaboration; Platforms; Usability Testing, O&M. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
The current trend in the use of digitalization of built 
assets to support in the deep renovation of buildings has led 
to the development of many tools based on Building 
Information 
Modelling 
(BIM), 
both 
desktop 
and 
cloud-based. This paper aims to investigate and define the 
conditions for improving the use of the BIM-SPEED 
platform and fostering its adoption by the largest community 
of stakeholders. This platform is part of the Horizon 2020 
project BIM-SPEED (harmonized Building Information 
Speedway for Energy-Efficient Renovation) [1], which aims 
to improve the performance of building stock by developing 
a combination of techniques and tools with one central 
information source at its core: the use of BIM.  
The BIM-SPEED platform is part of an ambitious work 
package ‘Implementing BIM cloud platform and data 
management’ whose objective is to develop and deploy an 
operational cloud platform for collaboration and exchange of 
BIM data and other project documentation between all 
stakeholders in the whole cycle of European Environmental 
Bureau renovation projects [2]. For this purpose, there are 
several points that were analyzed: 

The functionalities or services offered by the 
platform and how they meet the needs of different 
end-users’ profiles to support renovation projects. 

The user-friendliness of the platform, in particular 
the user interface and ease of use. 

The robustness, reliability, performance (e.g., 
response time for certain actions), security of data 
(e.g., in case of system failure). 

The flexibility and evolution of the platform (its 
capacity to adapt to the real needs of the end-users). 

The availability of a user support service. 

And finally, the data maintenance and update in the 
long term during the building operation. 
In order to investigate the conditions of emerging 
requirements of advanced technologies needed to improve 
the BIM-SPEED platform, a study was conducted to select 
the most viable components and what and how to update in 
practice, explained in Section II of this paper. In Section III 
is explained the first part of the methodology followed, and 
the second part focused on the development of an agile 
platform is explained in Section IV. Some BIM 
recommendations are included in Section V, and the 
conclusions and future exploitation of the BIM-SPEED 
platform are explained in Section VI. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

II.
EASE OF USE
The following section addresses the selecting of the 
components for advancement and the use of a desktop 
study. 
A.
Selecting the Components for Advancement 
The first aspect was developed through an online survey 
by the end-users of the 13 demonstration sites of the 
BIM-SPEED project, complemented with some face-to-face 
interviews. The main result of the survey was that the BIM-
SPEED platform, in its current version (i.e., the launch 
version with mainly collaborative features had a limited set 
of BIM-based renovation-oriented services) was mainly used 
as a file repository and document sharing service. In this 
initial version in which it was at the time of the first survey, 
the platform did not show significant innovative features 
compared to many other products available on the market, 
according to user’s answers. However, very valuable 
information on the expected developments had been 
collected during the survey, amongst which the most 
demanded ones were predefined folder structure specific to 
renovation projects, workflow management, online Industry 
Foundation Classes (IFC) viewer, and integration of BIM 
services for renovation (scan to BIM, energy simulation, 
checklist of BIM object properties at different stages of the 
renovation process, connection with BIM objects libraries, 
etc.). Specific feedback was provided on the level of 
information needed for some BIM objects (e.g., Heating, 
Ventilation, 
and 
Air 
Conditioning 
(HVAC) 
system 
components) during the building operation phase, which 
allowed to make the link with the second part of this study. 
B.
The Integrity of the Desk Review 
This second part of the study was about the update of 
BIM during building operation and maintenance, and the 
central role that BIM is called upon to play during the 
operation of a building, in relation to traditional O&M tools 
and emerging initiatives like Digital Building Logbooks or 
BIM Passports. The study was informed by a desk review 
combined with the contributors' own experience. It resulted 
in a set of recommendations for updating BIM during 
renovation operations, even for smaller changes. 
III.
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH (PHASE I) 
The methodology followed relied on a two-step approach 
(Figure 1”). In a first step (1), conduct a survey among the 
users of the platform to better know how they use the 
platform in practice, and what are their expectations in terms 
of 
data 
organization, 
work 
progress 
monitoring, 
functionalities, and required BIM content for renovation 
projects. The results of this survey were used, on the one 
hand, to inform future developments of the platform, and on 
the other hand, as input to the second step.  
The 
second 
step 
(2) 
consists 
in 
setting 
up 
recommendations for the BIM update and maintenance. This 
work relied on a desk review of relevant techniques, 
standards, and initiatives such as the building Logbook, the 
BIM 
Passport, 
IFC 
annotation 
mechanisms, 
on-site 
information acquisition, etc. 
Figure 1. Methodology followed
A.
User Survey 
An online questionnaire was set up in April 2020 (as the 
project originally started in November of 2018 with a 
duration of 48 months). The questionnaire was re-launched 
in March 2021 for additional answers. The objectives were: 

To collect data on how end-users practically use the 
BIM-SPEED cloud platform. 

To get some qualitative information on their level of 
satisfaction. 

To identify current strengths and weaknesses. 

And to collect their expectations for future versions 
of the platform. 
Two main target groups were identified for the survey: 
a) the BIM-SPEED partners who are the contacts for the 13 
demo projects and b) the registered users of the platform 
outside the BIM-SPEED consortium. In all, this represented 
a sample of 41 people. This online questionnaire consisted 
of some 30 questions organized in several sections such as: 
identity (Table I), background in BIM, and expectations 
(Table II). 
B.
Results 
Only a small part of the 41 identified end-users (between 
7 and 12, pending the question) of the project had provided 
fully exploitable answers to the online survey. This is 
mainly because at the time of the survey, some of the pilots 
had only just started, so end-users did not have enough 
insight into the use of the platform to provide informed 
responses. 
C.
Main characteristics of the BIM-SPEED pilot project 
and background in BIM 
Including the 2021 re-launch, the respondents represent 
12 (9 from the first questionnaire, 3 from the second) from 
the 13 BIM-SPEED pilot projects in Italy, Romania (x2), 
Poland (x2), The Netherlands, Bulgaria, Spain, Germany 
(x2) and France (x2). All these projects included a 
residential part (sometimes beside other activities like hotel 
or commerce). These are mostly private projects, of very 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

different sizes (from less than 1,000 m2 up to 20,000 m2). 
Half of them have a renovation budget lower than 100,000 € 
but one project has a budget higher than 10,000,000 €. 
Three-quarters of respondents had already good experience 
with BIM (through several projects), the others having 
participated once to a BIM project. Except in one case, all 
respondents’ organizations have plans to develop the use of 
BIM internally.  
TABLE I. 
YOUR IDENTITY
Structure 
Profile 
Type 
 Company: 66,7% 
 Research and Technology Organization: 25% 
 Public Community: 8,3% 
Size of 
Organization 
 <10 (VSE): 8,3% 
 11<250 (SME): 41,7% 
 250><5,000: 25% 
 >5,000: 25% 
Business Area 
 Promoter: 8,3% 
 Building owner: 16,7% 
 Project manager: 33,3% 
 Architect: 25% 
 Engineering Office: 33,3% 
 Main contractor (builder): 8,3% 
 Subcontractor (crafts): 8,3% 
 Consultant (crafts): 8,3% 
 Surveyor: 0% 
 Real estate information manager: 8,3% 
Using another 
platform 
 Yes: 66;7% (Dalux Box, BauApp, C&C, Bim 
Server Center, BIM 360) 
 No: 33,3% 
TABLE II. 
BACKGROUND IN BIM 
Structure 
Results 
Participation in projects 
using BIM 
 Never: 16;7% 
 Only once: 25% 
 Several times: 58,3% 
Organization BIM 
expertise/experience 
 No experience: 8,3% 
 <1 year: 0% 
 1<2 years: 33,3% 
 2<5 yeas: 25% 
 >5 years: 33,3% 
Training sessions to BIM 
tools 
 No yet: 25% 
 Yes, on need base: 41,7% 
 Yes periodically: 25%% 
 Yes, and every post has a BIM 
training roadmap: 8,3% 
Have you used the BIM-
SPEED platform yet? 
 Yes: 75% 
 No: 25% 
D.
Appreciation of the BIM-SPEED Platform 
The BIM-SPEED platform questionnaire implemented 
in this Phase I, used multiple methods or data sources to 
develop a comprehensive understanding of the stakeholders 
needs. The questionnaire, interviews and observation of the 
usability testing sites provided the inductive reasoning 
results, shown in TABLE III. Whereas Phase II outlined the 
deductive reasoning ‘the act of backing up the BIM-SPEED 
platform applications with specific scenarios – observations 
learnt from existing case studies and analysis from inductive 
reasoning, leading the product progression to BETA stage.’ 
The BIM-SPEED platform server was in an ALPHA 
development stage, and in this phase no functionalities of 
the software are tested, it is a previous stage of a BETA 
version, something of which respondents were unaware. For 
that reason, the stakeholder’s requirements were still 
unclear. The survey and interviews were apart incremental 
and iterative methods to represent a practical and useful 
approach to promote initial capabilities that will be followed 
by successive deliveries to reach the product development 
phase.  
TABLE III. 
BIM APPRECIATION
Structure 
Results 
BIM-SPEED 
Satisfaction 
 Satisfied: 11,1% 
 Partially satisfied: 55,6% 
 Not satisfied: 11,1% 
BIM-SPEED Platform 
meet your expectations? 
 Yes: 22,2% 
 No: 77,8% 
Main teamwork features 
used 
 Document sharing: 100% 
 Task scheduling: 33,3% 
 Calendar: 33,3% 
 Meeting scheduling: 33,3% 
 Chat: 11,1% 
 Videoconferencing: 0% 
Use the invitation 
function to invite a 
partner 
 Yes: 55,6% 
 No: 44,4% 
Using of Basic Services 
 File naming convention: 80% 
 Model checking: 60% 
Using EveBim Viewer 
 Yes: 22,2% 
 No: 7,8% 
Time using the BIM-
SPEED Platform 
 Every day: 0% 
 1 to times a week: 22,2% 
 3 to 5 times a week: 0% 
 Once a month: 66,7% 
 Once a certain period: 0% 
BIM-SPEED Platform 
Advice 
 It speeds up the renovation process: 60% 
 It reduces the renovation costs: 20% 
 It improves the quality of the renovation: 
80% 
In summary, the following results provided in TABLE 
IV. represent comments that contributed constructively to 
identifying future requirements and deductive comments 
that enabled the desired features and capabilities to be the 
target focus of future development 
TABLE IV. 
SUMMARY OF RESULTS
Summary of future requirements 
Summary of key deductive 
comments 
No predefined folder structure 
specific to renovations projects. 
In response to what features 
does the platform lack the 
most: “energy calculations, 
management of the document, 
checklist, issue tracking, cost 
analysis, time analysis, in fact 
soon every employer’s 
information requirement 
specification will demand 
Common Data Environment 
platform”. 
No tool to manage the BIM 
workflow. 
Limited size of files that can be 
uploaded (e.g., large cloud points). 
Lack of business functions and 
support tools integrated into the 
platform (the platform is mainly 
used as a file repository). 
No online BIM viewer – eveBIM 
is integrated into the platform but 
it is a desktop application. 
In response to what are the 
main types of tool/services to 
be integrated into the BIM-
SPEED platform: BIM 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Summary of future requirements 
Summary of key deductive 
comments 
passport, model checker, 
energy analysis/ simulation/ 
calculation was all mentioned 
extensively in the survey. 
And “file naming, scan to BIM 
tools – that creates LOD 100-
200 model (also referred to as 
a schematic design stage), and 
renovation scenarios results.” 
The overall endgame (‘the final stage’) is to present a 
platform that provides a streamlined process that overrides 
existing challenges, faster exchanges, easier sharing of files 
and managing of data. However, in order to reach this stage, 
the summary of the results shown in TABLE IV. must be 
taken into consideration to identify current obstacles. 
IV.
AGILE PLATFORM DEVELOPMENT (PHASE II) 
The generalized comparison of commercial versus 
contract/task development domain is that the former requires 
the anticipation, innovation, developing and applying new or 
emerging technologies to create new products in a fast-paced 
time to market environment before the competition seizes on 
the opportunity spaces [3]. Whereas European H2020 
projects recognize the importance of the commercial market 
while heavily leaning towards contract/task development 
domain (‘the latter’) which focuses on the dependency of the 
customer (project officer) satisfaction concerning results of 
performance-based outcomes (Key Performance Indicators - 
KPIs, 
Measurement 
of 
Effectiveness 
(MOE), 
and 
Measurement of Suitability (MOS)). 
The Agile Platform Development Method had been 
adapted from the traditional contract/task schedule that is 
illustrated in a step sequence of events in Figure 2”. During 
this stage of the development, the BIM-SPEED project had 
been involved in the ALPHA design stage of the platform 
which had partially incorporated the end-user anticipated 
needs. However, to further evolve the platform step 2 User 
defined needs required step 3 User Cases, to achieve step 4, 
identify features & capabilities. In reference to this paper, 
these stages are acknowledged by the questionnaire, and 
face-to-face meetings that were organized with professionals 
involved in some real-time usability testing (on specific user 
sites). These meetings were conducted by the BIM-SPEED 
partners defined as contact points for the user sites in 
Germany, Italy, and Spain. 
In  Figure 2”, the importance of step 3 User Cases has 
been defined by a two-way directional arrow. This indicates 
that BIM-SPEED development process incorporated an 
agile platform development method at this stage (shown by 
the number 3 User tested sites on the right-hand side of the 
diagram). The reason for implementing this technique was 
to allow the platform developers to perform two incremental 
tests. The first evaluation at step 3 and the second evaluation 
at step 6. The results of the first evaluation helped to 
advance the development of the architecture (requirements
& functional) referring to step 5 as outlined in Section IV. 
Step 6 Rapid prototyping will be conducted after the project 
partners accumulate the results provided from each of the 
site tests and incorporates them into an updated version of 
the BIM-SPEED Platform.
Figure 2. Agile Platform Development Method 
The identified incomplete requirements and constructive 
comments will be revisited and tested on the existing sites 
via performing rapid prototyping & Demos. The outcome of 
these incremental (step by step process that loops back to 
refine the platform - iteration) and incursion (where the 
outputs at one level become the inputs for the next 
successive level), will lead to step 7 ‘decision gate’. At this 
stage the consortium will decide whether the platform has 
advanced to BETA testing. The agile technique enables 
short testing cycles rather than trying to implement one final 
test. It allows the platform to grow/evolve in a heuristic 
manner after two cycles. The process also assists in 
achieving the technical measures; MOE – the acquirer’s key 
indicators and the process of MOS – the most suitable 
applications to be provided for the BIM-SPEED platform 
A.
Real-Time Usability Testing 
In most cases usability testing requires four key areas to 
be examined: i) what features need to be improved; ii) what 
are the biggest obstacles to using the prototype; iii) what 
goals do you require when you come to the platform; iv) 
what did you learn from the usability test. However, as 
previously identified, the platform was a part of an agile 
development process, meaning that at this stage of the first 
incremental test, learning material was created to 
demonstrate the features available at that time, such as 
naming conventions. The survey results had highlighted this 
feature as necessary component of the platform and CSTB 
had responded (Figure 2”). According to [4], specifying the 
electronic data file format for information deliverables is 
critical.  
If the data models of the export/import applications 
don’t match, some modification of exported BIM data may 
be needed before it can be imported into the Computerized 
Maintenance Management System (CMMS)/ Integrated 
Workplace 
Management 
System 
(IWMS) 
software. 
Analyzing and addressing these data format compatibility 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

issues before creating any data in the BIM model can 
greatly minimize these issues. If both applications support 
Construction Operations Building Information Exchange 
(COBie) format, as a non-proprietary data format, you can 
specify that data from the BIM can be delivered in a COBie-
compliant format.”  
B.
Summary of Sprint Iteration 
A compilation of the three individual sprints (usability 
testing) are listed below. These results are based on the 
analysis of the problems and opportunities arising from the 
usability test. The following step 5 of Figure 2, Develop 
Architecture,” incorporates the patterns (systems thinking) 
identified to advance the architecture of the BIM-SPEED 
platform. The three user sites results are composed into two 
sections: usability study experience summary and summary 
of views on future changes/improvements. The results are 
displayed in a manner to find the patterns and traceability 
between the different tests user requirements and future 
design requirements.  Usability Study Experience Summary: 
a)  
Germany: the layout of the platform offers useful 
extensions through the versioning and chat 
function; very beneficial to publish data (models, 
reports, versions) which therefore can represent 
official, trustworthy documents; and the platform is 
only effectively usable for data storage so far. 
b) 
Italy: the platform was mainly used as a platform 
for file sharing; tools used and from different data 
formats were also placed on the platform: 
AutoCAD (Autodesk), Revit (Autodesk), Thermus 
(ACCA Software), Primus (ACCA Software). 
c) 
Spain: the main use of the platform has mostly 
been like a repository to exchange information; 
 BIM model viewer has been implemented which 
turned out to be helpful. 
Evidently the user experience in all three sites 
recognized at this stage the platform is an efficient 
repository for exchanging files. The use of additional 
extensions such as versioning and chat function for 
communication is beneficial. The BIM model viewer option 
and the semantic checker for elements etc., were also 
recognized as positive applications. Integrating different 
tools with different data formats streamlined the usability 
experience. Again, the naming convention was highly 
recommended. 
C.
Summary of Views on Future Changes/Improvements 
The process of validating files, changing names, and 
modifying several files simultaneously, structuring files into 
folders and file checking for clearer workflows was 
highlighted in both Germany and Italy usability tests as 
areas for improvement. The SemChecker had been 
previously acknowledged as a positive contribution, 
however for future changes it was suggested that more 
information be provided. Likewise, the model viewers were 
viewed as positive contributor, however in the future an 
online viewer is deemed essential. The site usability test in 
Spain produced some constructive comments such as: 
missing a functionality to follow the site, like a logbook 
which allows to register all the issues during the site through 
the 3D model; linked annotations inside the model to 
different parts of it; and missing the possibility to link 
different documents like pdf or jpeg with different elements 
of the model. Both Spain and Italy recommended higher 
level of detail for objects. Next Steps: The information 
obtained from the survey and usability testing formed the 
basis of the key focus areas to advance the BIM-SPEED 
platform. The following suggestions address the main future 
services. 
V.
BIM RECOMMENDATIONS
The Level of Development (LOD) had been defined as a 
crucial process to initialize and update all information 
during renovation operations. Indeed, a process that would 
be too complicated can make this data structure unusable. 
On another hand, when smaller changes have been made to 
the building, they are often not integrated into the model. 
This issue can be linked to the development and 
management of the building Logbook which must list all 
operations made on the building. In this context, the use of 
BIM is often seen as a data sink for initializing CMMS 
software. However, one also must think of the opposite way, 
it means, how to update BIM following operations directly 
managed in the CMMS software. Indeed, if we can use BIM 
as an operational support of the Digital Building Logbook 
(DBL) (two ways communication between BIM and 
dedicated tools for maintenance), this will ensure the 
transmission of information about building operation 
including when the operator changes (using possibly 
different asset management tools). 
Alternatively, we also looked at how BIM can be used to 
provide information to DBL or maintenance management 
systems, or conversely, how BIM can be updated from 
them. The challenges are to keep the BIM up to date during 
maintenance/renovation operations, even for small changes, 
and to ensure the transmission of information on building 
operations, even when the building operator changes and 
uses a different asset management tool. 
A.
Digital Building Logbook 
The ‘Digital Building Logbook’ is defined as a digital 
traceable container for all the data of a building, including 
all the documents and information regarding design, 
structure calculation, system implementation, materiality, 
costs, maintenance, energy efficiency (including possible 
certifications), Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), urban 
conditions, property, etc. The DBL belongs to the building 
owner and can be shared with public entities (e.g., 
municipalities), AECOM professionals, energy certifiers, 
etc., to facilitate processes of review and management of the 
building, as well as to carry out future renovations on it.  In 
more advanced scenarios it is also possible to use the DBL 
as a container for energy measurement data from the 
building, so that results that differ from the numbers in the 
digital twin's energy analysis can be a symptom of a 
breakdown in the air conditioning systems or a problem in 
the thermal envelope. Due to the relevance of this topic, 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

some European initiatives related with the Building 
Logbook are already being developed in Germany 
(Gëbaudepass), 
Portugal 
(CASA+), 
France 
(Carnet 
numérique du logement) or Belgium (Woningpas), with the 
aim of bringing building owners and stakeholders together. 
The DBL is already starting to be implemented in countries 
such as France, Germany, or Belgium, as detailed in the 
European study BUILDING RENOVATION: Customized 
roadmaps toward deep renovation and better homes [5]. 
B.
BIM Passport 
The automated evaluation of information contained in 
the DBL holds great potential in supporting (future) 
building owners and operators to assess the quality and 
completeness of the given information to implement certain 
use cases related to deep building renovation. There are 
several (research) projects developing BIM-based Material 
Passports (MP) to increase the efficiency and sustainability 
in the construction sector, promoting circular solutions for 
building design and operation, as proposed by the 
HOUSEFUL project [6], which is supported by the 
MADASTER platform, a cloud platform that allows the 
generation of Material Passports for buildings [7]. 
The concept of the BIM Passport would be applicable to 
any type of construction project, however, in BIM-SPEED 
the focus lies on enabling (future) building owners and 
service providers to make informed decisions based on the 
information 
contained 
in 
the 
DBL 
regarding 
the 
implementation of certain use cases presented (Baseline and 
Use Cases for BIM-Based renovation projects and KPIs for 
EEB renovation) [8].  
C.
BIM Collaboration Format (BCF – IFC Annotations) 
BIM Collaboration Format (BCF) is a buildingSMART 
International openBIM standard to communicate about the 
‘issues’ of a BIM model during its live cycle. The 
development of BCF started in 2009 and was originally 
conceived by two members of the buildingSMART 
International Implementation Support Group (ISG), Solibri 
and Tekla, along with the Institute for Applied Building 
Informatics at the Munich (Germany) University of Applied 
Sciences. Their desire to leverage open communication 
technology for IFC-based workflows led to prototyping and 
eventually fully developing BCF with other ISG members 
[9].  
BCF 
allows 
software 
to 
activate 
interoperable 
information workflows. The exchange of information in 
construction projects already benefits from the ISO 29481 
IDM (Information Delivery Manual) standard. BCF's 
assessment of compliance with this ISO standard will help 
to further expand its use when quality management involves 
full adoption of ISO standards. Discussions within the 
buildingSMART association are underway to define BCF as 
a standard compliant with ISO 29481. 
BCF 
was 
introduced 
to 
allow 
an 
intelligent 
communication workflow between BIM tools and a 
workflow communication capability connected to IFC 
formats, where the purpose was to separate the virtual 
communication from the model into a BCF format based on 
XML schemas. BCF process focuses on the support to 
comments and status of issues across platforms instead of 
focusing on a single discipline and its own product. 
VI.
CONCLUSION
The survey conducted as part of the BIM-SPEED project, 
whose methodology has been explained in this paper, 
showed that construction stakeholders have a strong 
expectation for user-friendly BIM platforms, where project 
information can be collected and structured in a logical way 
that corresponds to professional practices and project 
progress. In these platforms, the ability to trace the history 
of different changes with their various contributors can be 
included. In addition, a set of basic services (e.g., to track 
and control workflow, or check the completeness of the 
BIM model at each stage of the process) can also be offered, 
as well as business services dedicated to renovation projects. 
At the time this survey was conducted, within the 
BIM-SPEED project, the BIM platform made available to 
the pilot sites was the launch version, mainly offering a 
generic Common Data Environment (CDE) with still few 
renovation-oriented BIM services (except for a model 
checker). It is therefore not surprising that the survey 
showed that early users of the platform used it mainly as a 
file repository and document sharing tool. However, the 
expectations gathered through this survey had been very 
useful and helped guide future developments such as a 
weather data service, a service to link IoT data with BIM, a 
GIS data collector, a ‘Material’ service (to enrich IFC4 files 
with material properties), and a LoDlifter service (to enrich 
IFC files with object properties and values).  
As a final recommendation, the integration into the BIM 
of all the necessary information to be able to undertake a 
renovation operation in a well-informed way (the so-called 
BIM PASSPORT, which differs depending on the intended 
use, for example an energy or structural renovation 
operation), is essential. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research work has been funded under the research 
project BIM-SPEED. This project has received funding from 
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
programme under grant agreement No. 820553. This 
research work reflects only the author’s view, and the 
Commission is not responsible for any use that may be made 
of the information it contains. 
The authors would like to say thank you to the 
BIM-SPEED Project Partners (CSTB, TUB, CARTIF, 
CYPE, PB40, STRESS, VISESA) involve in deliverable 6.3: 
Strategies for user acceptance, collaboration support, and 
BIM data maintenance [10]. 
REFERENCES
[1]
BIM-SPEED 
Project 
Partners, 
“Harmonised 
Building 
Information Speedway for Energy-Efficient Renovation 
(BIM-SPEED 
Project),” 
2018. 
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/820553 (accessed June. 20, 
2022). 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

[2]
European Environmental Bureau, “EEB website”, 2022, 
https://eeb.org/ (accessed June. 20, 2022). 
[3]
C. S. Wasson, ‘System Engineering; Analysis, Design, and 
Development, 2nd, Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2016. 
[4]
M. Tardif, “Establish Uniform Naming Conventions to Best 
Use BIM for FM” Second part of a three-part Green Building 
Report., 
2021. 
https://www.facilitiesnet.com/facilitiesmanagement/article/Est
ablish-Uniform-Naming-Conventions-to-Best-Use-BIM-for-
FM--17072 (accessed June. 20, 2022) 
[5]
M. Fabbri, M. De Groote, and O. Rapf, “Building Renovation 
Passports”, Customised Roadmaps Towards Deep Renovation 
and Better Homes, Published in October 2016 by the 
Buildings Performance Institute Europe (BPIE), Second 
Edition (November 2016), ISBN: 9789491143175, pp. 10-20 
[6]
HOUSEFUL project, “Material Passports based on advanced 
3D Model”, https://houseful.eu/solutions/material-passports-
based-on-advanced-3d-model/ (accessed June. 20, 2022) 
[7]
Madaster Training, “Material Passports Training the Arc”, 
Published 
by 
Sander 
Beeks, 
11/12/2020 
https://madaster.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Material-
Passport-The-Arc-EN.pdf (accessed June. 20, 2022) 
[8]
BIM-SPEED Project Partners, “BIMSPEED results, D4.1: 
Baseline and Use Cases for BIM-based renovation projects 
and KPIs for EEB renovation”, 2019, https://www.bim-
speed.eu/en/Project%20Results%20%20Documents/Delivera
bles/D4.1.pdf  (accessed June. 20, 2022) 
[9]
buildingSMART International, “BIM Collaboration Format 
(BCF) 
- 
An 
Introduction”, 
https://technical.buildingsmart.org/standards/bcf 
(accessed 
June. 20, 2022) 
[10] BIM-SPEED Project Partners, “BIM-SPEED results: D6.3: 
Strategies for user acceptance, collaboration support, and 
BIM 
data 
maintenance,” 
2022. 
https://www.bim-
speed.eu/en/Project%20Results%20%20Documents/Delivera
bles/D6.3.pdf (accessed June. 20, 2022). 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Developing European Defense Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience 
Infrastructure Network  
Alan Martin Redmond,  
Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment, Sophia Antipolis, France 
email: alan.redmond@cstb.fr
Alexandru Georgescu,  
The National Institute for Research and Development in Informatics ICI Bucharest, Romania 
email: alexandru.georgescu@ici.ro
Abstract—As part of the Design Process Model that 
includes systematic 
methods for the 'Developing 
European 
Defence 
Strategy 
for 
Electromagnetic 
Resilience Infrastructure Network' this paper focuses on 
the analytical phase. In essence, the paper presents 
inductive reasoning (develop a theory), while also 
examining deductive reasoning (proposed solution) to 
promote the need and resources of the creative phase 
(development of such a strategy). The paper focuses on 
Spectrum capabilities in defense and acknowledges that 
the development of European Defense strategy for 
Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure is necessary. 
Issues such as interoperability, and ability to keep pace 
with technological advances by potential adversaries will 
require Europe to emulate recent developments by DoD 
to advance the USA superiority in EM warfare. The 
result of this paper will identify opportunities, risk and 
challenges within the scope of the European Defence 
Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure 
Network. 
Keywords—Electromagnetic Spectrum; Resilience; Strategy; 
Infrastructure; Networks; Energy; Standards. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
In physics,  Electromagnetic Radiation (EM radiation or 
EMR) refers to the waves (or their quanta, photons) of the 
electromagnetic field, propagating (radiating) through space, 
carrying electromagnetic radiant energy. It includes radio 
waves, microwaves, infrared, (visible) light, ultraviolet, X-
rays, and gamma rays. In applications across civil, 
commercial, and government sectors, the characteristics of 
the waves used often drive the use [1] . Table 1 is an 
extraction from [2] and cross-referenced by the author to 
identify the specific use of the spectrum in Space and 
Defence. It highlights the theme of the paper’s magnitude for 
reflection on Spectrum capabilities in defence.  
In February 2021, the Congressional Research Service 
Report outlined DoD use of the EMS (Electromagnetic 
Spectrum) based on: (i) Interoperability, (ii) Ability to keep 
pace with technological advances by potential adversaries, 
(iii) The private sector’s increasing interest in using 
frequencies traditionally reserved for the military (for 
example the 5G spectrum), (iv) Spectrum Sharing, (v) The 
interagency process for spectrum allocation – such as the 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) authorisation 
of the Ligado 5G network, which could affect the global 
positioning system’s radio signals, and (vi) Anticipating 
future spectrum needs for both commercial and military 
users. These principles have called the DoD to action and 
develop a strategy to control and enable these 6 principles in 
order to advance the USA superiority in EM warfare.  
TABLE I. 
ELECTROMAGNETIC USES AND APPLICATIONS (EXTRACTED 
FROM [2]) 
The paper comprises of 7 main sections: i) introduction - 
observation and addressing the problem; ii) scope & 
objectives - what is required and measured; iii) project 
analysis - evaluation 'why it is needed'; iv) methodology - 
development of EMC standards and specification; v) 
proposed solution - how it will be achieved; vi) impact, 
opportunities & risks - the added value gained from such a 
strategy and risks associated with trying to achieve it; and 
vii) way ahead - funding. Overall results of the paper present 
a summary, synthesize, critique, and use of information as 
"background" for a research proposal. 
II.
SCOPE AND OBJECTIVES
This section will address the overall scope of the 
projects contribution and outline the objectives. 
A.
Scope 
This project is a contribution to the development of the 
European Defence Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience 
Infrastructure and raises the profile of its activities in 
particular by working on the following: i) support the 
operation of the European Defence Agency (EDA) 
Directed-Energy 
(DE) Weapons 
Concentrated EM energy rather than kinetic 
energy to incapacitate, damage, disable, or 
destroy enemy equipment, facilities, and/or 
personnel examples include ground forces in 
Counter Rocket, Artillery, and Mortar (C-RAM), 
Counter-Unmanned Aircraft (C-UAS), or Short-
Range Air Defense (SHORAD) missions. 
Radio frequency 
waves 
Can be used to transmit messages between 
electronic devices. Low frequency radio waves 
can travel long distances, and can penetrate 
seawater, but cannot support high data rates. 
These waves are useful for communications with 
submarines. long distance waves can pass 
through solid objects, like buildings and trees, 
making them useful for mobile communications.  
Microwaves 
Microwaves are used in radars—systems that 
send out pulses of high frequency waves that 
reflect off an object and back to the source. 
Microwaves 
are 
also 
used 
in 
satellite 
communications, which experience few obstacles 
in their transmission path. 
Infrared 
radiation (IR) 
Receives and converts light signals to electrical 
signals that instruct microprocessors to carry out 
commands, similarly infrared lasers can be used 
for point-to-point communications over short 
distances 
to 
provide 
high-speed, 
reliable 
connections.  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

governance structure; ii) conduct national and regional based 
process for preparing a Research and Innovation investment 
Roadmap and priorities by involving research and industry 
stakeholders, and engaging in wide dissemination of the 
Electromagnetic 
Resilience 
Infrastructure 
results; 
iii) 
organise outreach events and engage in structured 
discussions with the general public, including on the social 
implications and ethics of Electromagnetic technology 
development and innovation, particularly with regard to 
privacy and security, public trust and acceptance; iv) provide 
research dissemination services to projects; v) identify 
relevant training, education and infrastructure needs. The 
results should be compared with best practices of 
international cooperation partners of similar governance 
(e.g., USA and Canada), and shared based on mutual 
exchange.  
B.
Objectives 
1.
Investigate and map best practice activities in 
European and international spheres - where 
Electromagnetic technologies will play a major role 
in the near future and where resilience in such 
fields can enhance existing capabilities, protection 
and offer a competitive advantage to Europe. 
2.
Increase the adoption of standards and regulations 
in Electromagnetic Warfare - either in existing 
standardisation activities and bodies and where 
relevant, by contributing to creating and testing 
new standardisation activities in existing groups 
and/or creation of new groups. 
3.
Open Innovation Days – mobilise the whole value 
chain (research, standardisation and the industry 
sectors, and defence sectors) at innovation days and 
advance the discussions at European level to 
achieve impactful results promoting the European 
interests in Electromagnetic standardisation. 
4.
Perform an extensive mapping of current and 
future resilient requirements for Electronic Warfare 
education and training; define standards for 
implementing appropriate educational strategies; 
host existing and newly developed teaching 
materials and resources within a European Defence 
repository. 
5.
Develop 
strategies 
for 
scaling 
up 
training 
programmes across Europe in the use cases of 
advanced Electromagnetic Spectrum Management; 
and establish a network between science, civil 
society, and industry to exchange ideas, needs, and 
human resources. 
6.
Develop the European Defence Strategy for 
Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure Network 
- involve and be driven by representatives of the 
relevant actors of the field (e.g., academia, RTOs, 
and industry, including SMEs, and intermediaries). 
III.
PROJECT ANALYSIS
The 
project 
focuses 
on 
the 
capabilities 
of 
electromagnetic waves and how the infrastructure for 
supporting such emissions is protected such as Data 
Centers and 5G Networks. EM waves in basic principle 
carry energy, momentum, and angular momentum away 
from the source particle and radiates without the need for 
continuing charges. EMR is sometimes referred to as far 
field because it achieves sufficient distance from such 
charges whereas near field are close to charges and the 
current that produces them. In reference to the incredible 
evolution of communicating systems; “the deployment of 
Internet and mobile networks, connected objects and 
sensors, has brought about the emergence of silicon 
photonics to meet these new major challenges” [3].  
In 
essence, 
fiber 
optical 
communications 
have 
revolutionized the telecommunications industry as well as 
the data networking community. Fiber optic cables have 
enabled telecommunications links to be made over greater 
distances, with lower levels of transmission losses and 
enabled higher data rates. “As a result, fiber optic 
communication 
systems 
are 
widely 
employed 
for 
applications ranging from major telecommunications 
backbone infrastructure to Ethernet systems, broadband 
distribution, and general data networking [4].   
Why is this important? The need for high speed, more 
capacity and longer distances has made Dense Wavelength 
Division Multiplexing (DWDM - is an optical multiplexing 
technology used to increase bandwidth over existing fiber 
networks) the technology of choice for greenfield 
installations, for upgrading existing networks, and is 
compulsory for transmission of 100G and above. In fact, the 
DWDM C-band 1525nm – 1610nm spectrum supports up to 
96 wavelengths spaced at the standard ITU grid of 50GHz 
[5].  At higher data rates, including 400G and 1T, the signals 
will be transmitted over multiple subcarrier channels [6]. 
From a 5G commercial aspect, Intel acknowledged the 
benefits of their 100G silicon photonics transceivers that are 
optimised to meet the bandwidth requirements of next-
generation 
communications 
infrastructure 
while 
withstanding harsh environmental conditions. Furthermore, 
their market opportunity projection for its connectivity 
business, which includes silicon photonics, is to grow from 
$4 billion today to an estimated $11 billion total addressable 
market by 2022 [7]. 
However, Spectrum Sharing is an issue with emerging 
technologies and policies are demonstrating commercial 
systems can use the same frequencies without degrading 
defense capabilities. Such policies, best practices, standards, 
and regulations must be referenced within the European 
Defence Agency context. Integrated quantum, Photonic 
Devices, 5G security Networks (such as QKD and system 
lockout chip) are not only a part of defence resilience 
strategies, but also of the cities of the future. Data centers 
bandwidth for communication and the use of silicon such as 
Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor (IGBT) and Metal–
Oxide–Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistor (MOSFET) 
by STMicroelectronics to discharge batteries in electric and 
hybrid vehicles indicate 
the 
dependency 
on 
the 
Electromagnetic spectrum and thus the need for 
protection from advanced Electronic Warfare Systems
and Electromagnetic Interference in urban areas such 
as: 

Electronic Support, Networking & Cyber Enabling 
– i) networks with Tactical Radios, ii) electronic 
support (detect, direction finding and geo-location, 
iii) cyber-enabling platform. 

Counter Unmanned Aerial Systems (CUAS) – i) 
integrates with radars, sensors, and fire control 
solutions, ii) stationary and on-the-move capable, 
iii) configurable for dismounted, mounted, fixed 
site and airborne platforms. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

IV.
METHODOLOGY
In practice Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) is the 
engineering discipline concerned with the behavior of a 
system 
in 
an 
Electromagnetic 
Environment 
(EM). 
According to INCOSE [8]: “A system is considered to be 
electromagnetically compatible when it can operate without 
malfunction in an EM environment together with other 
systems or system elements and when it does not add to that 
environment as to cause malfunction to other systems.” The 
term electromagnetic interference (EMI) is recognised when 
a system causes interference, and in EMC the EM 
environment includes all effects classically attributed to 
electromagnetics (such as radiation) and electrical effects 
(conduction).
Fig 1. Process for achieving EMC (Arnold de Beer, cited by [8]:   INCOSE 
page 219)
Arnold de Beer developed the Business Process Map 
(BPM) in Fig 2 which outlines how EMC will be 
successfully achieved during system development. It has 5 
main areas: i) electrical and electromagnetic environmental 
effects (E4) - this analysis describes all the threats (natural 
and man-made) that a system may encounter during its life 
cycle, furthermore MIL-STD-46C [9] is still been used to 
determine requirements of a system such as installation; ii) 
EMC requirements (Standards and Specifications) – are 
used to regulate the EM environment in which a  system is 
operating, however the process acknowledges that existing 
standards and specifications (whether commercial, military, 
avionic, automotive, or medical) can be used as EMC 
requirement based on its class or category according to the 
outcome of the E4 analysis; iii) EMC Design and 
Implementation – overall EMC requirements are inputs for 
the concept and development stages of design that includes 
both 
mechanical 
and 
electrical/electronic 
hardware 
implementations, the use of zoning for system elements with 
similar emissions or sensitive circuits require a control of 
interface and the EMI control plan includes EMC 
requirements, zoning strategy, filtering and shielding, 
mechanical and electrical design to EMC; iv) EMC 
Engineering Test – prequalification testing is done on a 
system element level and even as low as the single circuit 
board assembly level during the development stage; v) EMC 
qualification – EMC qualification tests verify the EMC 
design of a system against its requirements, the first part of 
such tests is to compile an EMC test plan and map each 
requirement to a test and a test set up.  
Given the severity of EMI and the urban dependency on 
the Electromagnetic spectrum, the overall methodology is 
based on re-engineering the process for achieving EMC for 
urban interoperable design. For instance, challenges exist 
when testing for EMC qualification as the process must be 
in operational mode during emission testing to predict 
malfunctions during susceptibility. Just like EMC standards 
and specifications when it is impractical to test a large 
system such as ship, aircraft, or complete industrial plant, 
the qualification tests are based on the systems elements. In 
the opinion of this author, there needs to be an updated 
review EMS based on a similar international structured 
principle; (i) Interoperability, (ii) Ability to keep pace with 
technological advances, (iii) The private sector’s increasing 
interest in using frequencies, (iv) Spectrum Sharing, (v) The 
Interagency process for spectrum allocation and (vi) 
Anticipating future spectrum needs for both commercial and 
military users.
V.
PROPOSE SOLUTION
As part of a trains protection system, Delft University 
have been testing ERTMS/ETCS Hybrid Level 3 and ATO: 
A simulation-based capacity impact study for the Dutch 
railway network [10].  A EEIG ERTMS Users Group has 
been focusing on the implementation of ERTMS/ETCS 
Level 3, the Hybrid Level 3 concept. “The main 
characteristic of the concept is that it uses fixed virtual 
blocks for the separation of trains which are fitted with a 
Train Integrity Monitoring System (TIMS), while a limited 
installation of trackside train detection is used for the 
separation of trains without TIMS, as well as for the 
handling of degraded situations” [11] (EEIG ERTMS Users 
Group, page 5).
The common theme here for testing EM designs in 
reference to requirements is the creation of user’s groups, 
the analysis of best practices (case studies) and the use of 
personas. In order to ‘Develop European Defense Strategy 
for Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure Network’, the 
project must build upon existing networks and create similar 
Special Interest Groups (SIGs). 
Fig 2. IEEE Standard Association ICAP (Adaption of this Authors, 
Interpretation)  
Figure 2 is a graphical mind map representation of IEEE 
Conformity Assessment Programs based on the following 
10 main points of their ICAP working group Extensive 
Program Support [12]: 

ICAP is a facilitator and administrator of 
certification programs.

Full oversight 
for testing and certification 
activities. 

Certificate issuance. 

Development and management of test plans, test 
suites and certification schemes. 

Maintenance of certified products registry. 

Test laboratory assessment and authorisation. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions


Technical and logistical support services to 
industry 
groups 
executing 
interoperability 
demonstrations of specific technologies related to 
IEEE standards. 

Educating IEEE Working Groups on conformity 
assessment to ensure conformity assessment is 
injected early in the standards development 
process. 

The development of customised conformity 
assessment programs that meet industry needs. 

Defining and designing conformity assessment best 
practices. 
The concept for the Developing European Defence 
Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure 
Network is to build similar SIG groups to the IEEE 
Standard Association ICAP (IEEE Conformity Assessment 
Programs) but concentrate on attributes of the DoD 6 pillars. 
VI.
IMPACT, OPPORTUNITIES & RISKS
The following section will outline the impact of 
advancements associated to the Electromagnetic Spectrum, 
the opportunities relating to technologies and infrastructure, 
and the current known risks and challenges. 
A.
Impact 
Advancements in Electromagnetic Spectrum have 
revolutionised how we manage, control, use and distribute 
data that affects our digitally operated devices in order to 
advance our health and well-being on a daily basis. 
Optronics (the combination of optical and electronics) such 
as fiber optic communication and in particular fiber optical 
receivers have presented opportunities through wide band 
width devices. With the inclusion of WDM multiplexing 
technology 
the 
capacity 
to 
enable 
bidirectional 
communication over one strand fiber exists. This is just one 
example; other added advantages include: 

Security – quantum communications such as 
WDM have been operating through the protection 
of Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) can offer 
communication with unconditional security).

Speed – multiplexing enables high speed capacity 
and high-speed telecommunications. 

Energy – i) charge pumps circuits are capable of 
high efficiencies, sometimes as high as 90–95%, 
while being electrically simple circuits; ii) 
MOSFETs and IGBTs are powered by Charge 
pumps in H bridges in high-side drivers for gate-
driving high-side n-channel power [13] ; The 
Silicon Micro-Ring Resonator (MRR) has gained 
significant attention for use in an energy-efficient 
and high-bandwidth photonic system and is ideally 
suited for both inter- and intra- data center 
communication [14]. 

Cost – the use of DWDM (referring to optical 
signals multiplexed within 1550Nm) leverages cost 
and capabilities of Erbium Doped Fiber Amplifiers 
(EDFAs) for wavelengths between C-Band and L-
Band, 1525nm – 1565nm and 1570nm – 1610nm. 
B.
Opportunities 
According to RADIO WAVES [15], “Massive Multi-
Input Multi-Output (MIMO) antennas provide access to wide 
frequency bands for very high-speed connections. Their 
‘agile’ technology gives them the ability to direct their beams 
to countless moving devices thanks to their multifocal 
technology. As a result, they enhance a better direct signal to 
the user, by following them as they move. Furthermore, they 
provide: 

reduced energy consumption. 

the handling of a larger number of users, and 
increased speeds. 

a significant improvement in signal quality to the 
user while also reducing superfluous surrounding 
emissions. 
There have been many studies on the role that photonics, 
particularly microwave photonics, can have in implementing 
5G networks. Currently, there are several general disruptive 
technologies needed for 5G cellular networks, such as 
small-cell architectures, the utilisation of the millimeter-
wave (mmWave) spectrum, and the implementation of 
MIMO systems at mobile base stations [16]. Other benefits 
of fiber include the fact that “the mmWave frequency band 
is a “sweet spot” for Radio Frequency over fiber and 
mmWave signal with broadband data can be easily 
transported over large distances with minimal loss [17]. 
However, interoperability will always be the main issue 
when exchanging information and standards are the key 
mechanism to achieving interoperable solutions when 
developing systems and providing ICD (Interface Control 
Document). The U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA) has been working on “developing 100 
Gb/s RF Backbone (100G) program whose goal is to design, 
build, and test an airborne Millimeter based RF 
communications link with fiber-optic equivalent capacity 
and long reach capable of propagating through clouds and 
providing high availability.” DARPA’s focus is to provide a 
system comprising 100 Gb/s capacity at ranges of 200 km 
for air-to-air links and 100 km for air-to-ground links when 
installed in a high-altitude (e.g., 60,000 ft) aerial platform 
[18]. And these types of systems will adhere to DoD 
military specifications, therefore if commercial interests are 
also using frequencies traditionally reserved for the military 
there needs to be the inducement of technologies such as AI-
enabled dynamic spectrum sharing. Such technologies will 
require best practices regulation and standards to achieve the 
end game. 
C.
Risks & Challenges 

The main risks are related to not being able to build 
upon existing networks and create similar Special 
Interest Groups (SIGs). 

Another risk is the fact that typical military 
specifications and commercial specifications would 
need to be reviewed in order to proceed with a joint 
strategy for developing European Defense Strategy 
for 
Electromagnetic 
Resilience 
Infrastructure 
Network. 

This ambitious project will require collaboration 
between the Energy Consultation Forum’s Working 
Groups (CF SEDSS), the largest defence energy 
community in Europe, and support from Institutes 
such as the European Telecommunication Standard 
Institute 
(ETSI) 
and 
the 
International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU). While the CF 
SEDSS working groups do not implement projects, 
they can address conceptual design and, through 
the Forum, EU and Member States funding could 
be mobilized to produce tangible results.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions


Many of the disruptive technologies already exist 
for implementing the key systems but there is a 
significant lack of training and open collaboration 
that can involve all major players that will utilise 
the EMS with particular reference to resilience 
system engineering. For instance, the defence and 
private sectors may not wish to share information. 

To appreciate the challenges, all of the supply 
chain actors (Large enterprises, Mid-Caps, SMEs) 
must be included in the discussions at the 
innovation days. 

There will be challenges and risks associated with 
tests, particularly the new development of 
European Defense Electromagnetic Compatibility 
documents. 
VII.
WAY AHEAD
This section will focus on the core theme ‘a possible 
project’, case study, and funding mechanisms. 
A.
Theme 
A possible project would be to develop a framework for 
assessing EMS resilience in power plants in the context of 
hybrid threats that can be offered to Member States, along 
with a toolkit of best practices, guidelines and technical 
solutions to ameliorate the risks. The project could have a 
practical implementation at the level of 1 or 2 power plants 
volunteered by one of the participating Member States. It 
can also propose to deliver a network of stakeholders, 
including developers, beneficiaries, expert groups and 
research labs, to serve as a resource for supporting future 
efforts.  
Fig 3. Resilience System Developmental Configuration Architecture, 
Legend: Common Data Exchange (CDE); Extract, Transform, Load (ETL); 
Machine Learning (ML); Application Performance Interface (APIs); 
Industry 
Foundation 
Classes 
(IFC); 
Intentional 
ElectroMagnetic 
Interference (IEMI); Nuclear ElectroMagentic Pluse (NEMP); High 
Altitude Electromagnetic Pluse (HEMP); High Power ElectroMagnetic 
Pulse (HPEM) 
B.
Case Study 
According to [19] a case study is a strategy used to 
research an experimental theory or topic using set 
procedures. The authors are of the opinion that testing a case 
study starting at TRL2 (technology concept formulated) and 
finishing at TRL 4 (technology validated in lab) will add 
significant value to any potential funding key performance. 
Figure 3 below shows how pre-existing components 
(databases, platforms) and concepts of EMC for BIM model 
structure topology can be configured to developed 
‘Resilience 
System 
for 
Electromagnetic 
Resilience 
Infrastructure’.  
The following points identify the requirements: 
 According to [20] the starting point is to identify what we 
are looking for! Example: unauthorised, unlicensed 
wireless devices, new wireless services turning on in an 
area of interest, keeping up with changes in the spectral 
landscapes. 
Furthermore, 
a 
signal 
development 
environment is required to; a) enable rapid development, 
test, and optimisation of signal (or device) detection and 
isolation capabilities; b) utilise commercial tools and 
software; c) can be setup in a secure or open environment; 
d) can be configured as portable, rugged, or transportable 
system. In essence for EMC the basic question to answer 
is there a frequency plan and should frequency plan be 
statutory for cities with buildings of interest (civilian 
infrastructures etc.). 
 [21] Created a European project based on two phases: 
phase 1 consisted of assessment scenarios concerning 
IEMI - intentional malicious generation of electromagnetic 
energy introducing noise or signal into electric and 
electronic systems, NEMP – an electronic pulse produced 
mainly from gamma rays from a nuclear explosion, HEMP 
– a series of electromagnetic waveforms generated from a 
nuclear detonation at altitudes above 30km and the 
propagate to the earth surface, and HPEM which 
produces intense electromagnetic radiated fields or 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

conducted voltages and currents with the capabilities 
to damage or upset a city infrastructures. Phase 2 
investigated IEMI risks and introduced protection 
strategies based on sensor design, characteristics of 
susceptible devices and simulation tests. 
 Figure 3 illustrates such requirements under the EMC 
column. Investigating such requirements can be enacted 
and enhanced via Digital twins, while interoperability as 
previous identified will be provided through Common 
Data Exchange (CDE) using IFC (BIM open data 
exchange files), under point 2 Autodesk in the diagram it 
shows how collaborative workstations are implemented in 
modeling design and this type of collaboration allows 
various actors/stakeholders to review the model sections 
referring to their needs and any changes can be 
synchronised to a central sever, or unsynchronised and 
shared as an independent file. 
 The French National Database (BDNB) is a database built 
by joining multiple building-stock databases, including 
energy 
performances 
diagnostics, 
and 
energy 
consumption. BDNB concentrates on the Extraction, 
Transformation, and Loading (ETL) that refers to 
collecting raw data from disparate sources, transmitting it 
to a staging database for conversion, and loading prepared 
data into a unified destination system. This allows all the 
previous disjointed databases to be consolidated into a 
centralised system where analytics and calculations can be 
performed [22]. 
 The concept is to build upon [21] and create at national 
(French) and European level a centralised database that 
monitors HEPMs for civilian infrastructures. 
C.
Funding 
To take the project forward will require a partnership 
built on trust and mutual respect. Securing funding for such 
research will be an onerous task. However, there are 
existing funding mechanisms such as HORIZON EUROPE 
– Work Programme 2021-2022 Digital, Industry and Space. 
Other funding mechanisms include the European Defence 
Fund – EDF (information superiority and disruptive 
technologies) 
and 
the 
European 
Defence 
Industrial 
Development 
Programme 
(EDIDP) 
which 
has 
five 
priorities: 

Facilitating operations, protection, and mobility of 
military forces. 

Information, 
secure 
communications, 
and 
cyberspace. 

Ability to conduct peak operations. 

Innovative defence technologies and SMEs. 

Innovation in defence research in materials 
Actions of finance: 

Development of CBRN threat detection capabilities 
or anti-drone systems. 

Development of the next generation of precision 
ground 
strike 
capabilities, 
ground 
combat 
capabilities, aerial warfare capabilities and future 
naval systems. 

Solutions in the field of artificial intelligence, 
virtual reality and cybertechnologies. 
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The papers’ main objective was to illustrate a process 
model based on Developing European Defense Strategy for 
Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure Network. The 
paper highlighted the need/background for such a strategy 
by examining existing international strategies of reasoning 
such as the DoD Congressional Research Service Report 
that outlined the use of EMS. The capabilities of 
electromagnetic waves and how the infrastructure for 
supporting such emissions is protected such as Data 
Centres and 5G Networks is the background of the paper. 
The paper has also addressed KETs such as photonics in 
particular reference to Si photonics with CMOS electronics 
and bandwidth challenges. However, advancements in how 
we use standards to design a process that will achieve EMC 
taking into consideration EMI, needs to be addressed and 
function as part of an overall EMS strategy. The paper has 
outlined potential solutions such as the project must build 
upon existing networks and create similar Special Interest 
Groups (SIGs). The paper identified opportunities, risk and 
challenges and presented opportunities and the added value 
associated with utilising EMS, security, speed, energy and 
cost. In essence, the paper is a medium for identifying 
research opportunities within the scope European Defense 
Strategy for Electromagnetic Resilience Infrastructure 
Network.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The ideas of this article originated in the works of the 
Consultation Forum for Sustainable Energy in Security and 
Defence Sector (CF SEDSS) of the European Defence 
Agency (EDA), in its Working Group 3 on the Protection of 
Critical Energy Infrastructures (PCEI). The authors would 
like to address special thanks to Dr. Constantinos 
Hadjisavvas, Project Officer Energy at EDA and CF SEDSS 
Project Manager, Ioannis Chatzialexandris, CF SEDSS 
PCEI WG3Team Leader, and Dr. Nicolas Mazzucchi, CF 
SEDSS PCEI WG3 moderator. 
REFERENCES
[1]
Purcell and Morin, Harvard University. (2013). Electricity and 
Magnetism, 820p (3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press, New 
York. ISBN 978-1-107-01402-2. p 430:
[2]
J.R. Hoehn, J.C. Gallagher, and K. M. Sayler, “Overview of 
Department of Defense Use of the Electromagnetic Specturm,” 
Congresssional Research Service CRS Report; Prepared for Members 
and Committees of Congress, http://crsreport.congress.gov R46564 
[3]
L. Vivien, D. Marris-Morini, E. Cassan, C. Alonso-Ramos, C. 
Baudot, F. Bœuf, and B. Szelay, “Circuits Intégrés Photoniques 
Silicium, 
Photoniques, 
EDP 
Sciences, 
2018. 
Pp. 
18-22. 
10.1051/photon/201893/18. Hal-02413568 
[4]
Electronicnotes, “Optical Fibre Cable – an overview or tutoroial 
covering fibre optic cabling, the construction of the fibre optic cables, 
how they work, their applications and specifications, electronics-
notes.com/articles/connectivity/fibre-optics/optical-fibre-cable.php 
(access 13/04/2021) 
[5]
F. Maze, M. Traetta, M. Bentivegna, F. Kaiser, D. Aktas, W. Zhang, 
C. Alonso-Ramos, L. Bin-Ngah, T. Lunghi, E. Pichelle, N. Belabas- 
Plougonven, X. Le Roux, E. Cassan, D. Marris-Morini, L. Vivien, G. 
Sauder, L. Labonté, and S.Tanzilli, “High-quality photonic 
entanglement for wavelength-multiplexe of quantum communication 
based on a silicon chip,” Opt. Express 5128731 (2016) DOI: 
10.1364/OE.24.028731, arXiv:1609.00521 [quant-ph]. 
[6]
LIGHTWAVE, “Evolution to flexible grid WDM, WDM networks 
operate by transmitting multiple wavelengths, or channels, over a 
fiber simultaneously, Each channel is assigned a slightly different 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

wavelength, 
Nov 
26th, 
2013, 
 
(access 
14/04/2021) 
https://www.lightwaveonline.com/network-design/dwdm-
roadm/article/16649471/evolution-to-flexible-grid-wdm 
[7]
M. Alleven, “Intel takes aim at 5G infrastructure with latest silicon 
photonics 
technology”, 
FIERCE 
Wireless, 
Sep 
24, 
2018, 
https://www.fiercewireless.com/wireless/intel-takes-aim-at-5g-
infrastructure-latest-silicon-photonics-technology (access 14/04/2021) 
[8]
INCOSE 2015, Systems Engineering Handbook, A Guide for 
Systems Life Cycle Processes and Activities, 4th Edition  
[9]
DoD 
Military 
Standard, 
MIL-STD-46C 
(4 
August 
186), 
Electromagnetic Emission and Susceptibility Requirements for the 
Control of Electromagnetic Interference. M. Young, The Technical 
Writer’s Handbook. Mill Valley, CA: University Science, 1989. 
[10] R. Vergroesen, “ERTMS/ETCS Hybrid Level 3 and ATO A 
simulation based capacity impact study for the Dutch railway 
network”, Master Thesis: TU Delft Civil Engineering and 
Geosciences; TU Delft Transport and Planning, 2020-06-10, 
http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:971cdcde-1a9a-490a-b72c-
8490f2f668ed
[11] EEIG ERTMS Users Group, “Hybrid ERTMS/ETCS Level 3”, Ref: 
16E042, Version: 1A, Date: 14/07/2017, 123-133 Rue Froissart, 1040 
Brussels, 
Belgium, 
http://www.ertms.be/sites/default/files/2018-
03/16E0421A_HL3.pdf 
[12] IEEE Standards Association, “ The ICAP Advantage”, IEEE 
Conformity 
Assessment 
Program 
(ICAP), 
https://standards.ieee.org/products-services/icap/index.html, 
(access 
14/04/2021) 
[13] Toshiba, “MOSFET Gate Drive Circuit, Application Note”, Toshiba 
Electronic Devices & Storage Corporation, 2018-07-26 
[14] Z. Wang, D. Paez, A. I. Abd El-Rahman, P. Wang, L. Dow, J. C. 
Cartledge, and A. P. Knights, "Resonance control of a silicon micro-
ring resonator modulator under high-speed operation using the 
intrinsic defect-mediated photocurrent," Opt. Express 25, 24827-
24836 (2017)
[15] Radio Waves, “The Key role of antennas”, Orange, https://radio-
waves.orange.com/en/the-key-role-of-antennas/ (access 14/04/2021) 
[16] R. Waterhouse and D. Novack, "Realizing 5G: Microwave Photonics 
for 5G Mobile Wireless Systems," in IEEE Microwave Magazine, 
vol. 
16, 
no. 
8, 
pp. 
84-92, 
Sept. 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1109/MMM.2015.2441593. 
[17] A. L. Swidlehurst, E. Ayanogolu, P. Heydari, and F. Capolino, 
“Millimeter-wave massive MIMO: The next wireless revolution?” 
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, pp. 56–62, Sept. 2014.  
[18] R. Uppal, “DARPA Developing Millimmter Wave Wireless 
Communications to Connect Dismounted War fighters using UAVs 
and Provide 100 GB/S RF Backbone (100G) using high-altitude, 
Long-endurance 
Platforms”, 
Oct 
13, 
2018, 
https://idstch.com/technology/communications/darpa-developing-
milimmter-wave-wireless-communications-connect-dismounted-
warfighters-using-uavs-provide-100-gbs-rf-backbone-100gusing-
high-altitude-long-endurance-platforms/, (access 14/04/2021) 
[19] R. Fellows and A. Liu, Research Methods for Construction (2nd
edition), Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, 2003. 
[20] I.C. Tillman, “Accelerating  Signals  Development  for the  Modern 
Specturm Warrior “ BDM, RF/uW Senors, Geo Keysight 
Technologies, September 2019 
[21] S. van de Beek et al., "Overview of the European project 
STRUCTURES," in IEEE Electromagnetic Compatibility Magazine, 
vol. 
3, 
no. 
4, 
pp. 
70-79, 
4th 
Quarter 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1109/MEMC.2014.7023202. 
[22] M. Thorel and P. Schetelat, Construction de la base de Données 
Nationale 
des 
Bâtiments, 
June, 
2021, 
https://datafoncier.cerema.fr/sites/datafoncier/files/inline-
files/03_base_donnees_nationale_batimentaire_0.pdf 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Ensure A Stable Power Grid When Using Renewable Energy 
 
 
Aleksander Kulseng 
Department of Science and Industry Systems 
University of South-Eastern Norway (USN) 
Kongsberg, Norway 
e-mail: aleksanderkulseng@gmail.com 
Professor Mo Mansouri 
Department of Science and Industry Systems 
University of South-Eastern Norway (USN) 
Kongsberg, Norway 
e-mail: Mo.Mansouri@usn.no
 
 
Abstract— How can we ensure that we do not overload the 
power grid as we use more renewable energy sources, charging 
more electric vehicles and using more home electronics? In this 
paper we will investigate the limitations in the power grid, the 
consequence of using more renewable energy and charging 
more electric vehicles. We will also look into ways that smart 
home technology can make the grid more efficient, and reduce 
the need for infrastructure upgrades. 
Keywords- Systems Thinking; Systemigram; Power Grid; 
Smart Electricity; Sustainability; Renewable Energy; Electric 
Vehicle; Smart Charging; Smart Home Technology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Nordic Transmission System Operators (TSOs) 
Svenska kraftnät, Statnett, Fingrid and Energinet.dk has 
identified the following challenges for the Nordic power 
system: climate change, development of more Renewable 
Energy Sources (RES), technological development, and a 
common European framework for markets, operation and 
planning [1]. 
Before we continue, renewable energy is according to U.S. 
Energy Information Administration [2]: energy from sources 
that are naturally replenishing but flow-limited: renewable 
resources are virtually inexhaustible in duration, but limited in 
the amount of energy that is available per unit of time. The 
major types of renewable energy sources are: 
• 
Biomass 
o 
Wood and wood waste 
o 
Municipal solid waste 
o 
Landfill gas and biomass 
o 
Ethanol 
o 
Biodiesel 
• 
Hydropower 
• 
Geothermal 
• 
Wind 
• 
Solar 
 
The Nordic power system have experienced trouble during 
cold winter days with high consumption and limited 
generation and transmission capacity. It is easy to predict 
when these conditions will occur, and to implement corrective 
actions. In addition to days with high consumption, the power 
grid may also have hours with low load and high wind 
production. The power system (illustrated in Figure 1) needs 
to keep production at the same level as consumption at all 
times. To be able to do this, flexibility is required. This can be 
used to change the input or output for balancing purposes. 
Irregular renewable production is a main driver to increase the 
flexibility compared to today. Flexibility can be achieved 
through utilizing transmission capacity more efficient, utilize 
information from Automatic Metering System (AMS) to 
further develop demand response and new technology. As the 
world shifts for more renewable energy production, a new 
problem emerges. With some green energy, comes more 
unreliable production and with the increasingly bi-directional 
flow of power, there is a need to update the infrastructure. 
With the emerging number of prosumers (households and 
Electric Vehicles (EV) that consume power from the grid, but 
also produce electricity from their rooftop solar panels or wind 
turbine) installation of smart technology will be required to 
ensure flexibility [3]. 
 
Figure 1. Example of electrical grid [15] 
In this paper we will investigate the limitations in the 
power grid, the consequence of using more renewable energy 
and charging more electric vehicles. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

The reminder of this paper is organized as follows, Section 
II investigates the current limitations in the power grid. 
Section III investigates the consequences of using more 
renewable energy. Section IV investigates how agents can be 
applied. Section V investigates in to how we can achieve a 
holistic view of challenges. Section VI looks into how smart 
technology can be used for grid   efficiency.  
II. 
CURRENT LIMITATIONS IN THE POWER GRID 
Most of the Norwegian transmission grid is built from 
1950 – 1980 and the last part of the transmission grid 
connecting northern Norway with southern Norway was 
finished in 1994 (see Figure 2). Large parts of the power 
production happens in western Norway and in norther 
Norway, but eastern Norway has the highest consumption 
with limited local production. This is reflected in the 
transmission grid, where the flow of power basically flows 
from west to east and north to south (Figure 3). The 
government sees a need to modernize, restructure and expand 
the capacity in the transmission grid. This is to increase the 
security of supply in some areas, more RES, higher 
consumption in industry and rural areas with population 
growth [4].  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Overview of the Norwegian transmission grid [4]. 
III. 
CONSEQUENCE OF USING MORE RENEWABLE ENERGY 
To be able to reduce initial infrastructure cost its 
recommended to exploit the current transmission grid in 
relation to available transmission capacity, so that renewable 
energy production is localized in areas with low capacity or 
areas in need of more capacity. This may mean a more 
geographical distributed development.  
Renewable energy draw power from natural sources; 
solar, wind, ocean, hydroelectric and geothermal. This means 
that it is affected by environmental, seasonal and daily cycles 
that can limit their efficiency. This means that production will 
vary during all hours of the day and be less predictable. 
Because of this there is a need to store the energy, grid energy 
storage. There are multiple ways to store energy depending on 
the source; dammed hydroelectricity, batteries, thermal 
energy storage and mechanical energy storage. Dammed 
hydroelectricity is the largest way to store energy, using both 
conventional hydroelectricity generation and pumped storage 
hydroelectricity. Recent years the research and development 
of battery storage technology has enabled commercially 
viable projects to store energy during periods with low 
consumption and high production. Thermal energy storage is 
another way to store renewable energy using liquids or solid 
materials to store and release thermal energy. Water tanks in 
buildings are a simple example of thermal energy storage 
systems. Storage of energy may give the TSOs and grid 
operators the flexibility and ability to maintain security of 
supply. 
As a consequence of high electricity bills, lower cost for 
solar panels and the security of supply more and more 
consumers become prosumers. Not only do they consume 
power, they also generate their own (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Consumer vs. Prosumer [3]. 
 
The increase in electrical appliances and charging of EVs 
is making some cities experiencing higher peak loads. 
Increasing peak loads will lead to grid enhancements and 
increased cost. Some of this cost may be reduced if local 
generation, batteries or other demand flexibility resources 
reduce the required capacity during peak load hour. 
 
 
Figure 2. Development of the Norwegian transmission grid. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

IV. 
APPLICATION OF AGENTS 
The problem domain can be viewed as a system containing  
various agents. The agents and their characteristics can 
change based on the area that’s being researched or analyzed. 
The Energy Hub [20] has made some good examples of this,  
they present all consumers and producers of electricity are 
represented by an agent, connected to a power matching 
auctioneer agent (Figure 5).  
 
The report “NIST Framework and Roadmap for Smart 
Grid Interoperability Standards” written by The National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) [16] has useful 
illustrations showing the agents and domains that could exist 
in the problem domain. This is a good basis to understand the 
different stakeholders (Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6. NIST domains and agents for a Smart Grid [17]. 
 
V. 
ACHIEVING A HOLISTIC VIEW OF THE CHALLENGES 
A central approach in Systems Thinking is the holistic 
approach, which looks at the interrelationship between the 
parts in its environment [5]. We want to use this approach, and 
to get a holistic view, we model the problem domain and its 
relationship in a Systemigram. The Systemigram can be seen 
in Figure 7 below, and the full-scale Systemigram can be seen 
in Figure 8 at the end of this paper. From the Systemigram, 
we can see that there are many complex and complicated 
relationships and not individual problems. The Systemigram 
contains many stories, and every story has an unique color, 
and the reading direction is appointed by the arrow. By the 
help of the Systemigram, we get a holistic view of the problem 
domain. This is helpful because, as stated earlier, new 
solutions bring new challenges to the table, but with the 
Systemigram one can get an idea of how the other 
relationships are affected, so one can take precautions and 
make a more robust solution. From the Systemigram we can 
see that there is more than one system in action. 
 
 
Figure 7. Systemigram of the problem domain. 
VI. 
USING SMART TECHNOLOGY FOR GRID EFFICIENCY 
In recent years, there has been multiple research projects 
focusing on utilizing smart technology for grid efficiency. The 
focus has been to give TSOs and grid operators the flexibility 
needed to maintain security of supply and minimizing the 
impact on the customers. These research projects have been 
cooperation between different technology companies, grid 
owners and TSO. 
A. NorFLex 
Cooperation between Agder Energi, Statnett, Glitre 
Energi, Mørenett and NODES to develop new technological 
solutions to get a more flexible power consumption [6]. The 
solutions shall contribute to avoid overload in the power grid. 
The goal of the project is to find the smart technological 
solutions for the power grid that smooths out the peak loads 
over the hole day. One of the technologies used in this project 
is smart adapters for panel heaters and smart EV chargers 
Figure 5. Agents representing devices operating in a market with an 
auctioneer agent [20]. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

connected to Tibber. Tibber then pooled together the 
flexibility from these two device types in multiple homes and 
offered this aggregated flexibility to the local grid owner 
Agder Energi in an automated process. 
B. Electric vehicles and buildings keep the power grid in 
balance 
This is a cooperation project between Tibber, Entelios and 
Statnett to use electric vehicles and large buildings to maintain 
balance between the production and consumption of electric 
power [7]. Entelios and Tibber are working to deliver 
flexibility from a wide range of technologies. Tibber has now 
contributed flexible power consumption from EVs in Greater 
Oslo, while Enelios has tested automated flexibility from 
electric central heating boilers in industrial, commercial and 
public buildings in the eastern part on Norway, according to 
Statnett. Both research projects conclude that to be able to 
safeguard the supply of power in the future, there is a need for 
smart technological solutions. 
Tibber is currently using smart chargers for electric 
vehicles as load balancer in the real power grid in large scale 
in Sweden as they have moved into the Swedish balancing 
market for frequency containment reserve (FCR), using the 
capacity offered by electric vehicles [8] [18]. 
The U.S. Department of Energy´s Office of Electricity 
states that [9]: “The Smart Grid is not just about utilities and 
technologies; it is about giving you the information and tools 
you need to make choices about your energy use. If you 
already manage activities such as personal banking from your 
home computer, imagine managing your electricity in a 
similar way. A smarter grid will enable an unprecedented level 
of consumer participation. For example, you will no longer 
have to wait for your monthly statement to know how much 
electricity you use. With a smarter grid, you can have a clear 
and timely picture of it. "Smart meters," and other 
mechanisms, will allow you to see how much electricity you 
use, when you use it, and its cost. Combined with real-time 
pricing, this will allow you to save money by using less power 
when electricity is most expensive. While the potential 
benefits of the Smart Grid are usually discussed in terms of 
economics, national security, and renewable energy goals, the 
Smart Grid has the potential to help you save money by 
helping you to manage your electricity use and choose the best 
times to purchase electricity. And you can save even more by 
generating your own power.” 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Norway is committed to achieving its emission reduction 
target under the Paris Agreement, which sets a target of 
reducing emissions by at least 50% and towards 55% below 
1990 levels by 2030 [10]. Smart Grids are the digitalized and 
smart power grids of the future. They are also essential to 
Norway’s electrification efforts and success with the 
necessary reduction of greenhouse gas emissions [11]. 
Norway, the Nordic countries and the EU are all shifting 
from large, centralized coal- and gas power plants to de-
centralized wind- and sun power plants. It is estimated that 
from 2010 to 2025 the total capacity of wind power is 
quadrupled to 24.000 megawatt, or 22% in the Nordic. The 
most important challenges for the TSO and grid operators is 
to secure a stable power grid. One of the means to ensure this 
is flexibility; the possibility to get industry or households to 
reduce their consumption during peak load hours [12]. 
The Nordic TSOs has published a report “The Way 
forward – Solutions for a changing Nordic power system” 
where they summarize the key solutions that are needed to 
meet the challenges affecting the Nordic power system in the 
period leading up to 2025. One of the key areas is balancing 
the power system, with a new Nordic balancing concept 
called the Modernized Area Control Error (MACE) [13]. 
Compared to ACE control, MACE control utilizes modern IT 
solutions and optimization algorithm, automatic reserves and 
available transmission capacities in order to exchange 
reserves between zones [14]. 
There are multiple research projects underway or finished 
related to the topic we have investigated in this paper. All 
projects conclude that smart technology, used right, gives the 
flexibility needed to help balance the power grid as more RES 
are integrated. Tibber is doing this in Sweden using only 
smart charges for electric vehicles, this can be expanded to 
utilize other smart technology to balance the power and to 
postpone the need for infrastructure updates. The 
implementation Tibber is doing in the Swedish power grid 
can easily be expanded to Norway and Germany where 
Tibber also has established their business [19]. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Svenska kraftnät, Statnett, Fingrid, and Energinet.dk, 
``Challenges and Opportunities for the Nordic Power System,'' 
https://www.fingrid.fi/globalassets/dokumentit/fi/yhtio/tki-
toiminta/report-challenges-and-opportunities-for-the-nordic-
power-system.pdf, August 2015. [retrieved: June, 2022]. 
[2] U.S. Energy Information Administration, Renewable energy 
explained, 
https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/renewable-
sources/, May 2021. [retrieved: June, 2022] 
[3] U.S. Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency \& 
Renewable Energy, Consumer vs Prosumer: What's the 
Difference?, https://www.energy.gov/eere/articles/consumer-
vs-prosumer-whats-difference, May 2017. [retrieved: June, 
2022]. 
[4] The Royal Norwegian Ministry of Petroleum and Energy, 
``Meld. St. 14 (2011–2012) Vi bygger Norge – om utbygging 
av 
strømnettet'', 
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/19472ee2fcc54a0ea
ae169972fd61c98/no/pdfs/stm201120120014000dddpdfs.pdf 
March 2021. [retrieved: June, 2022]. 
[5] J. Gharajedaghi, ``Systems Thinking: Managing Chaos and 
Complexity'' Burlington, MA 01803, USA: Elsevier, Inc., 
2011. [retrieved: June, 2022]. 
[6] Agder Energi, Hva er NorFlex? https://www.ae.no/var-
virksomhet/fornyelse/norflex-prosjektet/hva-er-norflex/, 
August 2019. [retrieved: June, 2022] 
[7] Statnett, Electric vehicles and buildings help keep the power 
grid 
in 
balance, 
https://www.statnett.no/en/about-
statnett/news-and-press-releases/news-archive-2020/electric-
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

vehicles-and-buildings-help-keep-the-power-grid-in-balance/, 
June 2020. [retrieved: June, 2022] 
[8] E. Barbiroglio, A Swedish Energy Startup Wants To Make 
Electricity 
Consumption 
Smarter. 
Forbes, 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/emanuelabarbiroglio/2020/08/2
8/a-swedish-energy-startup-wants-to-make-electricity-
consumption-smarter/?sh=f2dd38528175, 2020. [retrieved: 
June, 2022]. 
[9] U.S. Department of Energy´s Office of Electricity, The Smart 
Grid, 
https://www.smartgrid.gov/the_smart_grid/smart_grid.html, 
[retrieved: June, 2022].  
[10] The Royal Norwegian Ministry of Climate and Environment, 
Norway’s 
comprehensive 
climate 
action 
plan, 
https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/heilskapeleg-plan-for-
a-na-klimamalet/id2827600/, January 2021. [retrieved: June, 
2022] 
[11] SINTEF, 
Smart 
Grids, 
https://www.sintef.no/en/shared-
research-areas/smart-grids/. [retrieved: June, 2022]. 
[12] K. M. Hovland, Ruster opp kraftnettet for milliarder: – Et 
historisk 
høyt 
nivå, 
https://e24.no/olje-og-
energi/i/gPm10B/ruster-opp-kraftnettet-for-milliarder-et-
historisk-hoeyt-nivaa, E24,  August 2018. [retrieved: June, 
2022]. 
[13] Svenska kraftnät, Statnett, Fingrid, and Energinet.dk, The Way 
forward – Solutions for a changing Nordic power system, 
https://www.statnett.no/globalassets/om-statnett/nyheter-og-
pressemeldinger/the-way-forward---solutions-for-a-changing-
nordic-power-system_lowres.pdf, March 2018. [retrieved: 
June, 2022]. 
[14] Statnett, A new balancing model for the Nordic power system, 
https://www.statnett.no/en/about-statnett/news-and-press-
releases/News-archive-2017/a-new-balancing-model-for-the-
nordic-power-system2/, October 2020. [retrieved: June, 2022]. 
[15] Wikimedia Commons, Electricity Grid Schematic English, 
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Electricity_Grid_Sc
hematic_English.svg, March 2010. [retrieved: June, 2022]. 
[16] “NIST 
Framework 
and 
Roadmap 
for 
Smart 
Grid 
Interoperability Standards , Release 1.0. United States National 
Institute of Standards and Technology,” 2010. [retrieved: June, 
2022]. 
[17] D. Saraansh, M. Sooriyabandara, and M. Yearworth, A 
Systems 
Approach 
to 
the 
Smart 
Grid, 
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/media-library/sites/eng-systems-
centre/migrated/documents/s-dave-paper.pdf 
, 
2011. 
[retrieved: June, 2022]. 
[18] Tibber, 
IMPACT 
REPORT 
2020, 
https://tibber.com/en/impact-report, 2021. [retrieved: June, 
2022]. 
[19] Tibber, About Tibber, https://tibber.com/en/about-us, 2021. 
[retrieved: June, 2022]. 
[20] Energy Hub, Agent based technology, http://www.e-
hub.org/agent-based-technology.html, 2022. [retrieved: June, 
2022]. 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
Figure 8. Systemigram of the problem domain. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Applying Systems Thinking for Early Validation of a Case Study Definition: An 
Automated Parking System  
Haytham B. Ali 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
haytham.ali@usn.no  
Mo Mansouri 
Stevens Institute of Technology 
Hoboken, USA 
mo.mansouri@stevens.edu  
Gerrit Muller 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
gerrit.muller@usn.no  
Abstract—Case study research and industry-as-laboratory 
research are well-known research methods in industry–
academia collaboration research projects. Defining a case study 
well in the early phase of an industry–academia complex 
sociotechnical and data-oriented research project is crucial for 
success. This success can be measured by the Company’s active 
participation and sharing of all data needed for the research 
project. In this paper, we apply systems thinking and its tools to 
validate the Company’s need in an early phase to define the case 
study in the research project. We use systemigrams for early 
validation. The foundation for the systemigram is system 
thinking tools. These tools include stakeholder analysis, context 
diagram, and Customers, Actors, Transformation, Worldview, 
Owner, and Environment (CATWOE) analysis. Systems 
thinking and its tools aid in communicating and sharing a 
common understanding of the Company’s case study and 
support further exploration of the value proposition for the 
Company’s actual needs.  
Keywords—early validation; systems thinking; CATWOE 
analysis; systemigram; company’s need; visualization. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
 A lack of available land and a need for more parking 
places, especially in urban cities, triggers the need for an 
Automated Parking System (APS) [1]. However, the APS fails 
mostly for two main reasons: when the system is used at a high 
rate and when the end-user is unfamiliar with it. In addition, 
the APS fails due to some mechanical failures[2][3]. The 
failure rate of an APS is higher than that of the traditional 
system. Thus, there is a need to increase the reliability of APSs 
[4]. 
In this paper, we investigate the application of systems 
thinking to validate the Company’s need in an early phase as 
part of defining the case study within the harvesting value 
from big data and digitalization through the Human Systems-
Engineering Innovation Framework (H-SEIF 2) research 
project. Defining a case study well during the early phase of a 
complex sociotechnical research project is crucial for the 
success of a research project. This success can be measured by 
the Company’s participation and data sharing. Data sharing is 
an essential factor in this research project. We systematically 
analyze the needs and investigate how external forces affect 
the project’s development [5]. 
1) The case. The H-SEIF 2 project is a research project
aiming to enable data-supported early decisions in the early 
design phase of the New Product Development (NPD) 
process. Today, an enormous amount of data is available. 
With the right approach, suitable algorithms, and structure, 
Norwegian companies can use big data to provide a decisive 
competitive advantage in the international market. This 
research project is an ongoing project that investigates how 
companies that deliver complex systems can streamline their 
innovation and NPD processes by using big data and 
digitalization more effectively [5]. 
2) The Company. The Company is small and medium-
sized enterprise that delivers APSs, including maintenance, 
primarily for land developers and building owners. The APSs 
include fully and semi-automated car parking systems. The 
Company is transitioning from selling to developing, 
producing, and marketing. Their systems are not designed 
with enough sensors to achieve proper condition monitoring, 
and they require proper data management. Company 
management believes that other parking systems are far 
behind this solution. 
The Company has stored data, also called big data. Big 
data refer to datasets whose size or complexity exceeds the 
capability of current or conventional methods within the 
Company. However, the challenge for companies is to explore 
value from their stored big data [6]. The application of big data 
will increase the reliability of APSs by making more data-
driven decisions for the early design phase within the NPD 
and maintenance processes [7]. The paper reminder is as 
follows: Section II illustrate the study’s research method. 
Section III shows systems thinking application in a case study. 
Section IV provides a thorough discussion, and ultimately 
Section V wraps up the study with a conclusion. 
II.
RESEARCH METHOD
A. Case Study Research
We use case study research, as we use industry-as-
laboratory research during the research project [8][9]. Case 
study research includes the following three steps: defining the 
case study well, selecting the design, and using theory in 
design work [9]. In this paper, we focus on the first step 
through applying systems thinking. A case study usually 
includes multiple units of analysis. We collected mainly 
qualitative data. The qualitative data include direct 
observations, 
participant 
observations, 
open-ended 
(nonstructured) interviews, and physical artifacts.  
The direct and participant observations resulted from the 
authors as researchers involved in a real-life context by 
participating in events and meetings within the Company-of-
Interest. We also conducted open-ended interviews as part of 
the observation and part of the workshops we performed with 
the Company. Moreover, we identified and collected stored 
data within the Company as physical artifacts. These data 
were downloaded by the Company’s employees and provided 
to the main author of this paper. 
Having different sources of evidence permits us, as 
researchers, to investigate and reinvestigate the consistency of 
the findings from various sources of evidence. Furthermore, 
we can converge these pieces of evidence, also called data 
triangulation, to increase the robustness of the results [10]. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

B. Checkland’s Soft Systems Methodology 
Applying systems thinking in a case study within the 
industry-as-laboratory enables soft systems methodology 
(SSM) and supports systems engineering. Boardman et al. 
(2009) [11] argue that systems thinking is the foundation of 
systems engineering, SSM, and applied complexity science.  
Figure 1 depicts Checkland’s SSM. We modified the 
methodology to be iterative, excluding the phases between the 
steps and emphasizing that there was no one right path. 
Further, we use the systemigram as a conceptual model, 
structured text as the root definition of relevant systems, and 
dramatization and dialogue as a comparison of steps 2 and 4. 
This modification was inspired by Sauser et al. (2011) [12], 
who called the SSM that includes those modifications 
Boardman’s SSM (BSSM).  
SSM allows for individuals’ different perspectives and 
different desirable outcomes of the case study. In addition, 
SSM bridges the real world and systems thinking [12]–[14]. 
The SSM consists of the seven steps visualized in Figure 1. 
Steps 1 to 7 are repeated until consensus is reached among the 
individuals involved in the in the case study. In other words, 
the process including the steps is repeated until the Company’s 
need as part of the case study definition is verified and 
validated.  
III. 
APPLYING SYSTEMS THINKING METHODOLOGY  
IN A CASE STUDY 
There are several definitions of systems thinking. 
However, Barry Richmond, one of the leaders of systems 
thinking, emphasizes that systems thinkers look at the tree and 
the forest simultaneously [15]. In this context, the tree is the 
Company, and the forest is the H-SEIF2 research project as 
the project includes other companies. We investigate the 
similarities and synergies between those companies further 
during a co-creation process. In this paper, we adopt Arnold 
and Wade’s definition of systems thinking: “Systems thinking 
is a set of synergistic analytic skills used to improve the 
capability of identifying and understanding systems, 
predicting their behaviors, and devising modifications to them 
in order to produce desired effects. These skills work together 
as a system” [16].  
To get a better understanding of the context, we describe 
the system. Furthermore, we define system boundaries with a 
context diagram. We then identify the stakeholders and their 
interests in a stakeholder interests map. We use systems 
thinking tools: CATWOE analysis and systemigram. 
A. Description of the APS 
The APS is a complex system due to its multiplex 
hardware and people’s interactions with the system [4]. 
Problems that occur include not retrieving the right car or no 
a car at all. Figure 2 shows the System-of-Interest (SOI): a 
semi-automated car parking system (garage). Figure 2 also 
depicts a drive-in indication. The car entrance can be a 
straightforward or inclined plane. The SOI has different 
configurations. These configurations include different 
heights, breadths, and depths. The car entrance and the SOI’s 
configurations depend on the building and its architecture. In 
addition, the SOI includes many parts, such as the gate, control 
unit, platform, wedges, and so forth.  
B. System Boundaries 
We can understand systems in the context within their 
environment [17]. The system context helps us to understand 
the openness of the system. Figure 3 depicts a context diagram 
for the SOI. 
The context diagram illustrates three variables: 
1) Controllable variables are variables in which we 
identified the SOI. Having the SOI within the 
innermost circle means that it is necessary to act 
sufficiently to achieve the needed outcome. 
2) Influencing variables are uncontrollable variables 
that we can influence. We identified the critical 
stakeholders within the influencing variables. The 
critical stakeholders are Company management, land 
developers, building owners, suppliers, local 
authorities (communes), maintenance personnel, 
development team, and car owners. We discuss the 
stakeholders more in the following subsection. 
Figure 1. Checkland’s soft systems methodology (SSM) based on [12]–
[14]. 
Figure 3. Context diagram of the SOI. 
Figure 2. The SOI: the semi-automated parking 
system. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

3) 
Appreciating variables are uncontrollable variables 
that we cannot influence; thus, we need to appreciate them. 
The appreciating variables include the following: 
a) Existing competitors. To date, there has been 
only one competitor in the Norwegian market. 
b) New competitors. Any new competitor can 
emerge and enter the market. We included new 
competitors, although the barrier to entry makes 
that problematic.  
c) Norwegian urban cities plan. Norwegian cities 
have their own development plans, including 
construction of new buildings 
and 
the 
architecture of old and new buildings [18]. 
d) Market situation. The market situation is 
crucial, as many Norwegian cities (including 
Oslo) aim to have car-free downtowns [19]. In 
addition, the Norwegian market is part of the 
global market and is highly affected by it. 
e) Norwegian 
government. 
The 
Norwegian 
government is responsible for existing and 
future 
regulations 
and 
standards. 
The 
regulations include which level of authorities 
have 
the 
local 
authorities, 
also 
called 
communes.  
f) 
Social skepticism toward automated systems. 
These automated systems include fully and 
semi-automated 
parking 
systems. 
Social 
skepticism is one of the challenges facing the 
SOI. Car owners may get the wrong car or no 
vehicle. Thus, increasing the system’s reliability 
is necessary to improve social acceptance. Using 
big data analytics, including two different data 
sources to monitor and maintain the SOI, is 
crucial. 
C. Stakeholders and Their Interests 
Figure 4 shows the critical stakeholders for the SOI. The 
SOI in the middle of the figure. Furthermore, we connected 
the essential stakeholders with the SOI with two types of 
arrows.  
The first type is a solid line and arrow, indicating an 
intense connection and a strong influence or interest in the 
SOI. The dashed arrows and lines indicate a weak association 
between the SOI and the stakeholders(s) and a weak influence 
on or interest in the SOI. For instance, we identified a weak 
connection between the government and the SOI, which has 
regulations, safety, and rules as their interest in the SOI. The 
government makes the regulations and standards for the 
systems, including the SOI. However, the government is not 
involved and does not strongly influence the development 
process. Thus, we chose to identify this relationship as a weak 
connection. Furthermore, we identified an intense relationship 
between the SOI and the following stakeholders: Company 
management, the development team, maintenance personnel, 
land developers, building owners, and car owners. This strong 
connection results from high involvement or influence in the 
SOI and its development process. 
We also identified relationships or connections among the 
stakeholders. For instance, there is a strong connection 
between car owners and Company management, as car owners 
are the end-users of the SOI. We present an intense 
relationship with a solid line between building owners, land 
developers, and Company management. The Company sells 
its SOI primarily to land developers. However, the Company 
also sells its SOI directly to building owners or land 
developers. Table I lists the stakeholders and their interests.  
TABLE I.  
STAKEHOLDERS AND THEIR INTERESTS  
 
D. CATWOE Analysis 
Customers, Actors, Transformation, Worldview, Owner, 
and Environment are called CATWOE. CATWOE analysis is 
an essential tool for understanding the different stakeholder 
perspectives. This understanding is the foundation of the 
systemigram that we present in the following section.  
The CATWEO analysis tool aids in constructing the root 
definition of the proposed system [20]. This tool also provides 
an understanding of what the Company wants to achieve with 
the stored data, alongside their need as a case study. In 
addition, the CATWEO analysis identifies the problem areas 
and suggests how the proposed solution could impact the 
Company and its critical stakeholders. 
We apply CATWEO analysis to the two main critical 
stakeholders in the case study: Company management and 
maintenance personnel. The results are shown in Table II and 
Stakeholder 
Interests (why) 
Government 
Urban city development, including building new 
buildings and car-free downtowns. The government 
has the authority for regulation and standards for the 
SOI and includes the Norwegian Competition 
Authority 
Company 
management 
A reliable SOI as the traditional parking system, 
customer satisfaction, profit maximation 
Land 
developers 
Operating Expense (OPEX) and Capital Expenditure 
(CAPEX) 
Building 
owners 
Operating Expense (OPEX) and Capital Expenditure 
(CAPEX) 
Car owners 
Availability of parking spots and reliability of the SOI 
(getting the right car without any damage at the right 
time) 
Suppliers 
Maximize profit by winning contracts and satisfying 
the Company, which is the supplier’s customer 
Maintenance 
personnel 
Accessibility and usability of the SOI to conduct 
maintenance 
Development 
team 
Accessibility and usability of the SOI for car owners 
and maintenance personnel or anyone who uses the 
SOI 
Figure 4. Stakeholder interests map. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Table III, respectively. The CATWOE illustrates the different 
aspects of the two main critical stakeholders. These different 
aspects show the different abstraction levels of the Company’s 
need as part of the case study in the H-SEIF2 research project. 
Thus, we use the CATWOE analysis as a foundation of the 
following systems thinking tool: a systemigram. 
TABLE II.  
CATWOE: COMPANY MANAGEMENT   
Aspect 
Description 
Customers 
Company management 
Actors 
Partners, suppliers, maintenance personnel 
Transformation 
Increase the reliability of the SOI 
Worldview 
H-SEIF2 research project: value from big data 
(provide data to the project) 
Maximize profit 
Owner 
Company management 
Environment 
Urban cities 
TABLE III.  
CATWOE: MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 
Aspect 
Description 
Customers 
Maintenance personnel 
Actors 
Suppliers, Company management, car owners 
Transformation 
Maintenance process and method 
Worldview 
Increase reliability and availability of the SOI 
Owner 
Department heads of service and maintenance 
Environment 
The Automated Parking System (APS), building, 
cars, traffic density, weather, city infrastructure 
E. Systemigram 
A systemigram, also called a systemic diagram, is a graphical 
visualization of the Company’s need in terms of storytelling 
[13]. Using a systemigram aids in communicating 
understanding of the Company’s need. The Company’s need 
represents the surface of the problem definition, as well as the 
Company’s case study in the H-SEIF2 research project. We 
developed a systemigram based on the analysis and discussion 
in the previous subsections. The systemigram represents the 
Company management’s and maintenance personnel’s 
perspectives, focusing on the SOI and Condition-Based 
Maintenance (CBM) system, CBM also seen as the System-
Of-System (SOS).  
The systemigram, showing the case study based on the 
Company’s need, is visualized in Figure 5. The flow for the 
systemigram is from the top left to the bottom right. In the 
upper left is the Company management who presents the SOI 
for the systemigram, where the primary goal is at the bottom 
right, which is to maximize business viability. The 
systemigram is sorted into two main categories with two 
colors. The first category is the mainstay in dark gray blue. 
The other main category is big data, in light blue. We aim to 
have an overview of available stored data and possible needed 
data for the Company’s proposed system (request) within the 
Company’s case study: the CBM system (SOS).   
The mainstay is diagonal and presents the central message 
of the systemigram. The mainstay can be read as follows: 
“Company management owns the SOI that comprises the 
NPD process that constitute sensor(s) that allow CBM system 
implementation, which permits observation of anomalies that 
aids mechanical failure detection and prediction in real-time 
which allows continuous monitoring of the SOI through a 
dashboard that maximizes business viability.” Business 
viability includes many other nodes: increase in the reliability 
of the SOI, increase in availability in the SOI, and increase in 
customer satisfaction.  
The SOI consists of parts and data. Data include service-
log data (maintenance records data) that constitute internal 
data, which are part of big data that can be provided to data 
analysts. Service-log data can be analyzed to identify 
measurable critical parameters and the most critical parts that 
can be used to decide which sensors to install. Data analysts 
include mainly researchers, in addition to the Company and 
partners.  Sensor(s) (already installed sensors and planned to 
install) generate sensor data that constitute internal data. 
Maintenance personnel who maintain the SOI have tacit 
knowledge, and researchers can transform part of it into 
explicit knowledge in terms of visualization (information) and 
data that also constitute internal data.  
Researchers conduct data analysis. Researchers including 
the main author are in process of the data analysis as part of 
the Company’s case study. Data analysis enhances decision-
making regarding the maintenance process of the SOI. Data 
analysis includes the following steps (nodes): data storage and 
retrieval, data pre-processing, data analysis, and data 
visualization. Decision-making regarding the maintenance 
process includes implementing the CBM system for the SOI 
(Company’s request as part of the case study).  
CBM implementation permits observation of anomalies 
that aids in detecting mechanical failure events. However, 
CBM passes over electronic failure events. Failure event 
detection and prediction allow continuous monitoring of the 
SOI through a dashboard using a traffic light color code. 
Researchers also identify the external data needed to verify the 
analysis results from internal data. External data is a third part 
data that the Company is not storing internally at their 
databases. Internal data is the data that the Company owns and 
is available to be downloaded. Implementing the CBM system 
requires external data. CBM generates sensor and stream data.   
External data and internal data constitute big data. Big data 
can be provided, as mentioned, to data analysts who conduct 
data analysis. Data analysis investigates patterns and trends. It 
also supports the decision-making of the SOI maintenance 
process, including CBM implementation.  
A CBM system can have system failures. These failures 
include data anomalies and downtime (CBM downtime). 
CBM can also give a false positive and a false negative. 
System failures and false alarms decrease business viability.  
F. Possible Leverage Points 
Applying systems thinking and its analysis tools aids in 
communicating and sharing understanding of the case study 
definition. This communication occurs through visualization 
of the systemigram. We developed the systemigram through 
several iterations after applying other systems thinking tools. 
These tools are the foundation of the systemigram 
development and include stakeholder analysis, a context 
diagram, and CATWEO analysis. 
The systemigram visualizes the case study, including its 
multiple-unit analysis. This visualization aids in defining the 
case study well and sharing mutual understanding of the 
Company’s need as part of the case study definition. The 
systemigram also helps communicate the case study definition 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

to the Company, scholars, and other partners in the complex 
sociotechnical research project. The Company and the 
researchers used the systemigram to prioritize the most 
significant unit analysis in the case study. For instance, we 
agreed that CBM system is a long-term vision to increase the 
SOI’s reliability. The second short-term vision is data analysis 
to investigate the use case for developing the CBM system. 
This communication aided in early validation of the 
Company’s need as part of the case study during the early 
phase of the research project. 
Early validation contributed to the project’s success. This 
observation results from the Company’s active participation 
in the research project. In addition, the Company shared all the 
stored and needed data with the main author of this paper. 
Moreover, the systemigram helped explore the problem 
domain that define the case study and not only touching the 
surface of the problem. In other words, systemigram helped at 
dig deeper into Company’s actual (real) needs, which 
continues this an ongoing case study. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
We developed the systemigram through several iterations. 
These iterations resulted in several versions of the 
systemigram. Some of the iterations were conducted with 
other researchers in the H-SEIF2 research project. The 
researchers were also involved in some of the workshops and 
interviews conducted with the Company. However, we 
struggled to visualize the systemigram so that is readable, as 
it included many nodes and explanatory links. We had to 
perform several iterations and use various tools. The iterations 
include feedback as part of the validation process with the 
Company. This visualization represents how researchers’ 
knowledge is chaotic and disordered, while the systemigram 
aims to visualize this knowledge in a nice storytelling way. 
Moreover, the systemigram aids in explaining all the aspects 
and key stakeholders’ perspectives and communicating and 
sharing understanding of the case study definition, including 
its multiple-unit analysis.  
One of the essential perspectives to evaluate is the 
profitability aspect of the Company’s request (the proposed 
system): the CBM system from an economic perspective. This 
profitability includes a business plan, including the capital 
expenditure (CAPEX), operating expense (OPEX), and return 
on investment (ROI) of the proposed system. However, we 
made a quick iteration to develop a rough business plan. This 
plan is not included in this paper, as we focus on using 
conceptual modeling, mainly systems thinking and its tools, to 
validate the Company’s need in an early phase as part of the 
case study definition. We could also evaluate it by using other 
conceptual models and could include the economic 
perspective, such as cost optimization and performance in the 
systemigram(s). However, including this perspective could 
make the systemigram unreadable. 
The Company’s key personnel, including Company 
management and department heads of service and 
maintenance, validated the systemigrams. The Company’s 
feedback 
indicated 
that 
the 
systemigram 
aids 
in 
communicating a common understanding and includes all the 
aspects and perspectives of the Company’s case study.  
Figure 5. The systemigram visualizes the value proposition of the Company’s need. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

The main author tested the systemigram as a 
communication tool for the Company’s case study with other 
companies in the H-SEIF2 research project. Company 
management also tested systemigrams as a communication 
tool for external stakeholders. The feedback indicated that the 
systemigram works as a communication tool. However, we 
may need to investigate further the need of other conceptual 
models that can be used as a supportive tool for 
systemigram(s). This support can be towards more concrete 
and specific solutions and technologies. 
We could also apply other systems thinking tools to 
explore and increase understanding of the problem and 
solution domains from all perspectives and at different 
abstraction levels. These tools could include casual loop 
diagrams and conceptagon(s). We could use these tools to 
increase understanding of system behavior and dynamics and 
to organize system information and definitions. However, we 
believe that the systems thinking methodology and tools we 
applied in this paper achieved the goal of its application: early 
validation of the Company’s case study definition.  
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
We aim to develop a financial model for the SOI. The 
model will investigate the profitability of implementing CBM 
in the short and long term. This model also aims to include the 
cost of the optimization and performance of adapting the 
Company’s proposed system or request (the CBM system) as 
an option to increase the SOI’s reliability. 
Another option we plan to investigate is data analysis. We 
aim to analyze service-log data (maintenance record data) to 
increase the SOI’s reliability. We believe that these data can 
support reliability engineering activities during the early 
design phase of the NPD process. In addition, we believe in 
using data analysis aids as input to discover the Company’s 
actual needs. In other words, exploring the problem definition 
for the case study and not only touching the problem 
definition’s surface by going forward for the Company’s 
actual needs.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Defining a case study well within the early phase of a 
complex sociotechnical research project is crucial for its 
success. This success can be measured by the Company’s 
active participation and trust by sharing all needed data. We 
applied systems thinking and its tools to a real-industry case 
study. The tools include stakeholders’ analysis, context 
diagram, CATWEO analysis, and systemigram. This 
application aims to validate the Company’s need early as part 
of defining the case study well, including its several unit 
analyses. Feedback on the application of systems thinking 
methodology and its tools indicates that systems thinking aids 
in communicating and sharing understanding of all aspects 
and critical stakeholders’ perspectives within the case study. 
This early validation helps researchers (academia) and 
Company (industry) investigate the Company’s need and what 
triggers such a need to further explore the actual needs of the 
Company’s case study.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This research is part of a larger research project, the second 
iteration of the Human Systems Engineering Innovation 
Framework (HSEIF-2), funded by The Research Council of 
Norway (Project number 317862).  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Nourinejad, S. Bahrami, and M. J. Roorda, “Designing 
parking facilities for autonomous vehicles,” Trans. Research 
Part B: Methodological, vol. 109, pp. 110–127, 2018. 
[2] G. Cudney, “Parking Today | Articles - Automated Parking: Is 
It 
Right 
for 
You?” 
Available: 
https://www.parkingtoday.com/articledetails.php?id=181&t=a
utomated-parking-is-it-right-for-you 
(accessed 
June. 
17, 
2022). 
[3] F. Robles, “Road to Robotic Parking Is Littered With Faulty 
Projects,” The New York Times, Nov. 28, 2015. Accessed: 
Junev 
17, 
2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/28/us/road-to-robotic-
parking-islittered-with-faulty-projects.html 
[4] A. Mathijssen and A. J. Pretorius, “Verified design of an 
automated parking garage,” in International Workshop on 
Parallel and Distributed Methods in Verification, 2006, pp. 
165–180. 
[5] “H-SEIF 2,” Universitetet i Sørøst-Norge, Nov. 25, 2020. 
https://www.usn.no/english/research/our-
research/technology/norwegian-industrial-systems-
engineering-research-group/h-seif-2/ 
(accessed 
June. 
17, 
2022). 
[6] H. B. Ali, “Unlocking the power of big data within the early 
design phase of the new product development process: A case 
study 
in 
a 
Company,” 
2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.gaudisite.nl/INCOSE2021_AliEtAL.pdf 
[7] “Defining 
and 
Clarifying 
Reliability.” 
https://www.reliableplant.com/Read/98/defining-reliability 
(accessed Aug. 15, 2021). 
[8] C. Potts, “Software-engineering research revisited,” IEEE 
software, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 19–28, 1993. 
[9] R. K. Yin, Applications of case study research. sage, 2011. 
[10] M. Duneier and O. Carter, Sidewalk. Macmillan, 1999. 
[11] J. Boardman, B. Sauser, L. John, and R. Edson, “The 
conceptagon: A framework for systems thinking and systems 
practice,” in 2009 IEEE International Conference on Systems, 
Man and Cybernetics, 2009, pp. 3299–3304. 
[12] B. Sauser, M. Mansouri, and M. Omer, “Using systemigrams 
in problem definition: A case study in maritime resilience for 
homeland security,” J. Homeland Security & Emergency 
Mang.,  
[13] J. Boardman and B. Sauser, Systems Thinking: Coping with 
21st Century Problems. CRC Press, 2008. 
[14] P. Checkland, “Systems thinking,” Rethinking management 
information systems, pp. 45–56, 1999. 
[15] B. Richmond, “System dynamics/systems thinking: Let’s just 
get on with it,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 10, no. 2–3, pp. 
135–157, 1994. 
[16] R. D. Arnold and J. P. Wade, “A definition of systems thinking: 
A systems approach,” Procedia computer science, vol. 44, pp. 
669–678, 2015. 
[17] J. Gharajedaghi, Systems thinking: Managing chaos and 
complexity: A platform for designing business architecture. 
Elsevier, 2011. 
[18] J. F. Nystad, C. B. Eckmann, and Gibbs, Walter, Building and 
urban development in Norway: a selection of current issues. 
2004. 
[19] Fast Company, “What happened when Oslo decided to make 
its 
downtown 
basically 
car-free?,” 
Jan. 
24, 
2019. 
https://www.fastcompany.com/90294948/what-happened-
when-oslo-decided-to-make-its-downtown-basically-car-free 
(accessed Sep. 28, 2021). 
[20] A. Basden and A. T. Wood-Harper, “A philosophical 
discussion of the root definition in soft systems thinking: an 
enrichment of CATWOE,” Systems Research and Behavioral 
Science, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 61–87, 2006, doi: 10.1002/sres.689. 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
Applying Conceptual Modeling and Failure Data Analysis for "Actual Need" 
Exploration 
Case Study for an Automated Parking System 
 
Haytham B. Ali  
University of South-Eastern Norway  
Kongsberg, Norway 
haytham.ali@usn.no  
 
Gerrit Muller 
University of South-Eastern Norway  
Kongsberg, Norway  
gerrit.muller@usn.no  
 
Fahim A. Salim 
University of South-Eastern Norway  
Kongsberg, Norway 
fahim.a.salim@usn.no  
 
 
Abstract— In complex sociotechnical research, organizations 
tend to plan to implement new technologies or solutions which 
may not fully address the actual need. This study demonstrates 
the use of conceptual modeling to explore an industry's "actual 
need" through a case study for a medium-sized company that 
delivers Automated Parking System (APS). Company plans the 
introduction 
of 
Condition-Based 
Maintenance 
(CBM). 
Conceptual modeling facilitated the exploration of the 
Company's actual need behind the plan, which is increasing 
APS reliability. We collected failure data to understand APS 
reliability in this context. We find that the combination of 
conceptual modeling and data analysis facilitates exploring and 
understanding the Company's actual need. The conceptual 
modeling supports communication and understanding, while 
the data analysis guides the modeling. This study concludes with 
suggestions regarding using a combination of data analysis and 
conceptual modeling as a short-term vision to increase the 
system’s reliability. On the other hand, this short-term vision 
may support the CBM as a long-term vision. 
Keywords— Conceptual modeling; failure data analysis; case 
study; actual need; value proposition.  
I. INTRODUCTION  
This paper investigates an Automated Parking System 
(APS) as our System-Of-Interest (SOI). APSs operate mainly 
in urban centers. There is a need for APSs, especially in 
metropolitan areas, due to land scarcity, increasing numbers 
of vehicles, and urban mobility [1]. Shoup [2] states that 
between 1927 and 2001, studies show that finding a parking 
lot in a metropolitan city consumed between 3.5 and 14 
minutes. The paper further mentions that research indicates 
that 8%–74% of traffic in urban areas was due to finding a 
parking for the car. Thus, APSs are needed to ease urban 
mobility. Internationally, there is a significantly increasing 
demand for semi-automated parking systems (garages). The 
value of APSs globally was 1.23 billion USD in 2019 and is 
expected to increase at a compound annual growth rate of 
almost 11% from 2020 to 2027 [3]. 
However, the SOI suffers from a variety of problems. 
These problems include end-user (car owner) mistakes, such 
as pushing or forgetting to push a button, which causes 
freezing of the SOI. In other words, end-users who are 
unfamiliar with the SOI can cause SOI failures. Furthermore, 
the SOI sometimes retrieves the wrong car, takes a long time 
to retrieve the vehicle, or does not retrieve the vehicle, 
especially during high-volume usage. In addition, there are 
mechanical failures related to the design of the SOI. These 
failures decrease the SOI's availability and increase downtime. 
Downtime increases costs. These costs include, but are not 
limited to, repair parts, and the fee for alternative conventional 
parking [4][5]. 
A. Introduction to the Case Study 
The Company we use as a case study in this paper is a 
medium-sized enterprise that delivers APSs, including 
maintenance. The Company delivers fully and semi-
automated parking systems. The Company starts its 
involvement before building. Nowadays, the Company is 
transitioning from only selling to developing, producing, and 
marketing APSs. The main customers for the Company are 
building owners and land developers. The main stakeholders 
to the case study are Company management, maintenance 
personnel, and car owners (end-users). The Company 
participates in a sociotechnical research project called H-SEIF 
2. H-SEIF stands for "Harvesting value from Big data and 
Digitalization through a Human Systems-Engineering 
Innovation Framework." This project aims at enabling data-
driven decision-making within the early design phase of the 
new product development (NPD) process. There are nine 
companies and two university partners within the research 
project. The company of interest in this case study came with 
a Condition-Based Maintenance (CBM) proposal as a case 
within the research project. 
B. Conceptual Modeling 
We use conceptual modeling to assist with the complexity 
of analyzing the Company's proposed CBM as a case study. 
Conceptual models are simple enough to share and 
communicate the understanding of needs, concepts, 
technologies, etc. These models are sufficiently detailed and 
realistic to guide system development. Conceptual modeling 
plays a vital role within various disciplines, such as 
simulations in the computer science domain, soft systems 
methodology (SSM), and systems engineering. Various types 
of conceptual modeling are in use, such as visualization and 
graphing of mathematical models (formulas), simulation 
models, and systems architecting models [6]. 
This study illustrates the use of conceptual modeling to 
explore CBM. Conceptual modeling is a way to find not 
obvious or "hidden" need of the Company; that is the actual 
problem that triggered the CBM. In other words, the employed 
conceptual modeling aids in communicating and sharing a 
common understanding of the Company's "actual need" and 
provides an overview of the case study. In addition, we 
support the conceptual model's discoveries with failure data 
analysis. Conceptual modeling, failure data analysis, and 
research data collected from interviews, observations, and 
workshops permit data triangulation in case study and thus 
increase the robustness of the results [7]. The research process 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

aided in exploring how increasing the SOI's reliability is the 
actual need, while the CBM is an envisioned solution to 
address this need. The company sees CBM as the first step 
toward a digital twin for the SOI. The data analysis results can 
be used as feedback into the early design phase of the NPD 
process.  
The research questions that the paper addresses are the 
following: 
RQ1: How can conceptual models help the different 
stakeholders within a sociotechnical research project to 
formulate a shared understating of the Company's request and 
its consequences? 
RQ2: How can shared understanding support reasoning 
and decision-making about options for solving the actual 
problem? 
RQ3: How can data support common understanding, 
reasoning, communicating, and decision-making for the actual 
problem? 
The reminder of the paper is as follows: Section II 
provides an informal literature review regarding conceptual 
modeling and reliability engineering. It continues with Section 
III that illustrates the case study. The case study section 
includes a description of the SOI and conceptual models from 
the case study. After the discussion in Section IV, the paper 
ends with a conclusion and suggestions for future work in 
Section V. 
II. LITERATURE 
This section discusses literature regarding conceptual 
models and reliability engineering. 
A. Conceptual Models 
Conceptual models have several definitions and origins. 
These origins include physics, simulations, tools for co-
creation or collaborative sessions, and tools that aid 
conceptual design in systems engineering. The common 
aspect among these origins is that conceptual models aid in 
sharing and communicating common understanding and ways 
of thinking.  
Co-creation sessions use conceptual models in several 
areas, such as design thinking, by focusing on human 
interactions [8]. Gigamapping, from system-oriented design, 
enhances communication and relates strongly to design 
thinking in its style [9]. Neely et al. [10] suggest a workshop 
for co-creation sessions for interdisciplinary teams; the 
workshop is similar to gigamapping.  
The scientific simulation field includes several definitions 
of conceptual models. Sargent [11] defines conceptual models 
as follows: "the mathematical/logical/graphical representation 
(mimic) of the problem entity developed for a particular 
study." Many other authors link the use of conceptual models 
to simulation, such as [12]–[14]. Robinson states that 
conceptual models are an essential aspect of simulation 
projects and mentions that conceptual models are more art 
than science [12][15]. 
Systems engineering uses various types of conceptual 
models. 
This 
variety 
results 
from 
interdisciplinary 
engineering wherein each engineering field uses its domain-
specific conceptual models [6]. For instance, Blanchard [16] 
uses several variations of conceptual models. Tomita et al. 
[17] consider conceptual system design and suggest using a 
systems thinking application to raise the consideration from 
the data and information level to the knowledge and wisdom 
level. Montevechi  and Friend [14] put forward the use of an 
SSM to develop conceptual models. Using the SSM in this 
case study, part of a complex sociotechnical research project, 
makes sense; this research project aims to bridge soft aspects 
(including knowledge and wisdom) with hard aspects (data 
and information). Systems thinking plays a vital role in the 
development of conceptual models. For instance, Jackson [18] 
connects systems thinking to label complex problems. In 
another example, Sauser et al. [19] apply systems thinking to 
define a complex problem within a case study.  
Muller's work illustrates bridging conceptual models with 
first principal and empirical models [20]. Empirical models 
aid in expressing what we measure and observe without the 
necessity of understanding what we observe. First principal 
models use theoretical science principles. These models are 
often mathematical formulas and equations. Conceptual 
models use a selection of first principles that explain 
measurements and observations. Conceptual models are a 
combination of empirical and first-principle models. This 
paper emphasizes that conceptual models need to be simple 
enough to reason and understand the case study. 
Simultaneously, conceptual models need to be realistic 
enough to make sense. This latter description of conceptual 
models emphasizes the need to balance between the simple, 
making sense, and the practical aspect when developing 
conceptual models.  
B. Reliability Engineering 
Reliability engineering is essential in systems engineering 
and quality management [21]. The main objective of 
reliability engineering is to prevent system failure. O'Connor 
and Kleyner [22] define reliability as "The probability that an 
item will perform a required function without failure under 
stated conditions for a stated period of time." This 
conventional definition of reliability emphasizes two aspects 
(scientific topics): statistics and engineering. The word 
"probability" emphasizes the mathematics and statistics 
aspects, whereas the phrase "required function, stated 
conditions, and period of time" emphasizes the engineering 
aspect. 
One of the statistical methods within reliability 
engineering is determining the Mean Time Between Failures 
(MTBF). MTBF is the inverse of the failure rate: MTBF = 
(total system(s) operation time) / (total number of failures). 
MTBF can be used to measure a system's reliability by 
showing how long the system operates before it needs 
maintenance [23][24]. 
Developing a reliability program plan is a crucial within 
engineering aspect. This plan includes activities for reliability 
engineering and aids in determining which activities to 
perform. These activities depend on factors such as system 
complexity, life cycle stage, failure impact, etc. The Systems 
Engineering Handbook includes guidelines for developing a 
reliability program plan [25]. There are also reliability 
program standards, such as ANSI/GEIA-STD-0009. This 
latter standard supports the system lifecycle for reliability 
engineering. It includes three crucial elements: (1) 
understanding system-level operation and environmental and 
resulting loads, and understanding the stresses throughout the 
structure of the system; (2) identification of the failure modes 
and mechanisms; and (3) mitigation of surfaced failure modes 
[26]. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

There are also two types of reliability engineering: 
proactive and reactive. Proactive reliability engineering 
occurs during design and development, emphasizing failure 
prevention. In contrast, reactive reliability engineering 
happens during production, especially during maintenance 
and operations, emphasizing failure management [27][28]. 
Figure 1 visualizes these two types of reliability engineering: 
proactive and reactive reliability engineering. Figure 1 also 
depicts the development process. This process is an iterative 
one. It indicates that reliability engineering is also iterative in 
its nature. Systems engineering integrates reliability within the 
processes. Verification occurs before production proceeds and 
consists mainly of analysis, testing, inspection, and 
demonstration [27]. 
 
Figure 1. Proactive and reactive reliability engineering within the product 
lifecycle, including the new product development (NPD) process, redrawn 
from [27]. 
Shortly after reliability engineering was founded in 1957, 
Hollis stated a need for conventional statistical reliability. 
However, Hollis also emphasized that the statistical aspect is 
insufficient. There is also a need for other reliability activities 
or techniques to improve the feasibility and robustness of the 
designed system(s). In other words, statistical and engineering 
aspects complement each other [29][30]. Reliability 
influences other dependability attributes of the system, such 
as maintainability and availability. Thus, reliability affects 
return on investment, market share, and competitiveness. In 
other words, a reliable system provides a competitive 
advantage and increases market share by having a proven field 
design (good system reputation).  
Reliability engineering includes different data sources 
[31]. These sources include the following: 
1. data from the design synthesis, 
2. testing and analysis from the verification process, 
3. published information (literature), 
4. expert opinion, 
5. system operation data, and 
6. failure data. 
Failure data may come from maintenance record data or 
service-log data. Failure data analysis plays a vital role in 
increasing the system's reliability, due to the following 
reasons [31]: 
1. increases knowledge regarding the system's design 
and manufacturing deficiencies; 
2. estimates the reliability, availability, MTBF, and 
system failure rate; 
3. improves 
reliability 
through 
design 
change 
recommendations; 
4. aids data-driven decision-making through design 
reviews; 
5. determining systems' maintenance needs and their 
parts; and 
6. conducting reliability and life cycle cost trade-off 
studies. 
In this study, we focus on closing the feedback loop from 
back-end data, represented by failure data, into the early 
design phase of the NPD process. Thus, it is also crucial to 
properly report and document the data, including failure data. 
III. APPLYING CONCEPTUAL MODELING AND DATA 
ANALYSIS 
This section starts by describing the SOI to give a 
contextual understanding for the case study. Further, the 
section illustrates the conceptual model application through 
the case study before it ends by analyzing failure data.  
A. Description of the System 
Figure 2 portrays the SOI: the semi-automated parking 
system and its configuration. Figure 2 visualizes a drive-in 
indication. The figure also visualizes a variety of SOI 
configurations. These configurations vary from 11 × 2 × 3 to 
4 × 2 × 2 and 9 × 1 × 3. The first number is the width, the 
second is the depth, and the third is the height. Depending on 
the building architecture, the car entrance can be a 
straightforward or inclined plane, as with the SOI's 
configurations. 
 
Figure 2. The System-Of-Interest (SOI): semi-automated parking system 
(left) and its configurations (right). 
The SOI consists of numerous hardware parts. We 
mention here some of the main parts to give a better 
understanding of the SOI. We visualize these parts in Figure 
3, which contains the following: 
• 
The gate is the entrance and exit before and after 
parking. 
• 
The control unit is a touch screen with operating 
instructions, including a key switch and emergency 
stop. The control is connected to the power unit 
through cables and fixed on a wall. 
• 
The platform carries the car to the correct position. 
• 
The wedge helps the driver position the car at the 
correct position.  
Figure 4 and Figure 5 visualize the workflow from the user 
perspective for car entry and retrieval for the SOI, 
respectively.  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
Figure 3. System-Of-Interest’s main parts. 
Figure 4. Workflow for car entry to the SOI. 
Figure 5. Workflow for car retrieval from the SOI. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

B. Applying Conceptual Models Through Case Study 
We applied conceptual modeling using multiple views on 
the SOI, the requested CBM, and its context to understand, 
reason, make decisions on, and communicate the system's 
specification and design [32]. This application ensures the 
Company's need fulfillment through eliciting customer value 
and business value propositions. These propositions drive the 
system's requirements, which further drive the system design. 
On the other hand, design and system requirements enable 
customer and business value propositions [33].  
We used core principles, objectives, and recommendations 
in applying conceptual modeling. The main principles we 
applied are using feedback and being explicit. Using feedback 
indicated whether we moved in the right direction by moving 
back and forth from the problem domain and solution domain, 
as well as indicated whether our solution solved the problem. 
These principles facilitated reaching our objectives. In turn, 
the objectives were to establish understanding, insight, and 
overview, support communication and decision-making, as 
well as facilitate reasoning [34]. The main principles and 
objectives translate into ten main recommendations:  
1. Timeboxing: We used timeboxing for developing 
several models. The timeboxing varies from 1 hour 
to days.  
2. Iteration: We iterated using feedback from expert 
input. The experts included domain scholars and 
industry practitioners. 
3. Early quantification: We translated the principle of 
being 
explicit 
into 
quantifying 
early. 
This 
quantification aids at being explicit and sharpening 
discussions through numbers. However, these 
numbers can evolve, as we conducted quantification 
at an early phase, and more confidence through 
validation may be needed.  
4. Measurement and validation: We calculated and 
measured numbers for the proposed system: CBM 
and SOI, for the early quantification. We validated 
these numbers through evidence and arguments from 
the literature and the Company. 
5. Applying multiple levels of abstraction: We 
considered the size and complexity within these 
levels of abstraction. We aimed at connecting a high 
level of abstraction to a lower level to achieve 
concrete guidance.  
6. Using simple mathematical models: We used simple 
models to be explicit and understand the problem and 
solution domain. These models aimed at capturing 
the relation between the parts and components for the 
Company's proposed system, to be able to reason 
these relations. 
7. Analysis of credibility and accuracy: We made 
ourselves and the Company aware of the numbers in 
such a way that these numbers were an early 
quantification that needed to be further verified and 
validated within more extended iterations. 
8. Conducting multi-view: We applied six main 
(different) views. These views are customer 
objectives ("what" for the customer), application 
("how" for the customer), functional view ("what" of 
the Company's proposed systems: black-box view 
the CBM), conceptual view, and realization view. 
The conceptual and realization views describe the 
"how" of the Company's proposed system (CBM). 
Figure 6. A3A0 shows the most significant results from applying conceptual modeling through the case study. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

These six views include more relevant views. Muller 
[20] describes these views accompanied by a 
collection of sub-methods. We iterated over these 
views by using different abstraction levels. 
9. Understanding the system in its context: We 
conducted several research data collection methods, 
including workshops, participant observation, and 
interviews, to understand the SOI context. We also 
conducted a literature review to understand the 
Company's proposed system (CBM) context. We 
needed to understand the SOI, CBM context for 
reasoning.  
10. Visualizing: We used visualization to develop all the 
figures (models) conducting the multi-view. The 
visualization facilitated communicating common 
understanding, reasoning, decision-making, and 
stimulating discussions among the domain experts: 
scholars and the Company [35]–[38].  
A3 Architecture Overview (A3AO) is an effective tool for 
communication [39]–[41]. Figure 6 visualizes the most 
significant results from applying conceptual modeling through 
the case study within an A3A0. The A3A0 (figure) content 
includes seven parts marked with a red numbered cycle in the 
figure. These parts are the following: 1) SOI; 2) functional 
model for the CBM system; 3) concepts for different 
maintenance systems, with a description. These systems 
include predictive maintenance, CBM, planned maintenance, 
and condition-based with planned maintenance; 4) CBM 
system context; 5) a prototype dashboard visualizing the CBM 
system functionality. This visualization includes traffic light 
color code indicating the condition for the different parts of 
the SOI; 6) key performance parameters for the CBM system; 
and ultimately 7) conclusion and recommendations. The 
conclusion and recommendations include the customer value 
proposition, business proposition, system requirements, and 
system design and technology for the Company's proposed 
system (CBM system). The lines between these parts illustrate 
the enables and drives among them. 
C. Failure Data Analysis 
This subsection illustrates the failure data analysis and its 
results. The failure data (also called maintenance record data) 
are unstructured. The maintenance personnel manually log 
failure events, using excel. In the excel file, there are several 
sheets. Each sheet belongs to a specific semi-automated car 
parking garage system. Each sheet's content includes the 
following columns, also called parameters: date (for a 
maintenance event), time, telephone number (for the 
maintenance personnel who investigated the failure event), 
place number (for which parking lot the failure event 
occurred), reason (possible reasons for the failure event), and 
reinvoiced yes/no (if the failure event is reinvoiced as it is not 
included within the maintenance agreement with the 
Company, or not). The main parameter within the failure data 
is the description of the failure event. The description includes 
data about what part of the SOI failed, possible reasons, and 
maintenance actions to fix the failure event. 
The excel file contains several sheets. Most of the sheets 
belong to private semi-automated car parking systems, 
whereas others belong to a public car parking system. The 
main difference between the private and the public is that in 
the public parking system the users get different parking plot 
in the system each time they use the system, while in the 
private the users have their permeant parking lot each time. 
However, for both the private and public parking, the users are 
permanent users. The raw dataset for the public parking 
system is larger than that for the private ones. The period for 
the failure events varies from one parking garage to another. 
Most of the sheets contain data for the previous 6 years (2016-
2021). Since the failure data are manually logged and include 
descriptions, especially the failure events, we employed an 
introductory natural language processing (NLP) method to 
analyze them.  
NLP is a well-known method for analyzing text entry 
fields, such as the description field within the Company's 
failure data [42]. Manual pre-processing is necessary for data 
analysis and data quality. Here, pre-processing consumed 
approximately 80% of the data analysis. Figure 7 visualizes 
the data analysis results for the public parking system as a use 
case for the analysis results. (The most-repeated words are 
translated from Norwegian to English.) Figure 7 shows the 
frequency of the most-repeated words for failure events. 
"Gate" constituted approximately 50% of the failure events.  
We dug deeper into the most frequently mentioned part: 
the gate. Figure 8 depicts the MTBF for the gate which is the 
inverse of the failure rate. We calculated MTBF per year for 6 
years. The MTBF average is approximately 80 hours for the 
gate. Moreover, we analyzed and visualized the gate with 
other field data or parameters. The parameters included both 
date and time. However, we show here only the time bar chart 
as it makes most sense. It indicates that most failure events 
involving the gate occur at 07:00 and 15 to 18:00 h, which are 
the rush hours (see Figure 9). The other parameters need more 
investigation, and other data source integration.  
We used Python for a customized code to analyze the 
failure data. We started by finding the most repetitive word in 
the description text entry field. Further, we compared and 
linked the "most failed" part of the SOI with the other 
parameters (columns) and conducted some analysis and 
calculations such as failure rate and MTBF. Then, we 
discussed the results with the Company to determine whether 
the data analysis and results made sense.  
IV. DISCUSSION 
Applying conceptual modeling through a case study 
facilitates communication, understanding, and decision-
making for a real industry problem within an early design 
phase of an industry–academia research project. A 
Figure 7. Percentages for most-repeated words for failure events. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

collaborative industry–academia project includes different 
stakeholders from industry and academia. Industry is more 
oriented toward "how" and developing their projects and 
systems. By contrast, academia is more oriented toward 
"what" and "why" with academic rigor, to understand, 
explore, and realize the problem. 
Conceptual models aid in explaining the value proposition 
for the Company's proposed system (solution) that touch the 
surface of the problem for the case study and further explore 
the actual problem. However, there are several conceptual 
models that can be applied using multi-views and different 
levels of abstraction. The challenge is to develop the optimal 
number of conceptual models that gives a full and sufficiently 
realistic picture for the case study but does not overwhelm the 
researchers implementing the conceptual models. In this 
context, we found that following the principles, objectives, 
and recommendations mentioned in subsection B (under 
section III) aid early validation [34].  
In addition, communicating the most critical results for the 
Company, including Company management, delivered 
effectively the full and detailed picture for the proposed 
system as part of a feasibility study. The company 
management gave feedback that they could see all the aspects 
for their proposed system as a case study (CBM) by using the 
A3A0 [39]–[41]. 
Collecting and analyzing failure data supported the 
conceptual model discoveries regarding the actual need that 
triggered the proposed system. The actual need was to 
increase the system's reliability, and the CBM was a solution 
to solve the Company's problem. The failure data analysis 
showed that the APS fails mostly during rush hours and due 
to the users' lack of familiarity with the system. This data 
analysis exploration concurs with state-of-the-art [4][5]. 
Failure data are one type of feedback data from the operation 
for the early design phase of the NPD process. We aim to 
investigate other data, such as the system's operation data, 
weather data, and so forth. This investigation aims to find a 
correlation to understand the data and their analysis in a way 
that makes sense. 
Industry members tend to jump to the solution they believe 
can solve the problem, whereas academia tends to explore and 
understand the problem more in-depth. Conceptual modeling 
facilitates balancing between these two perspectives by 
jumping to the solution, back to the problem through several 
iterations, zooming in and out, and using different timeboxing 
and multiple levels of abstraction. However, the case study's 
(research) context plays a vital role in both the number of the 
conceptual models needed and time to develop and conduct 
them. Thus, domain (context) knowledge facilitates 
conceptual modeling implementation. In this context, being an 
employee in the Company aided conceptual model 
implementation. However, the main author used several data 
collection methods, including participant observation, 
interviewing, and workshops. This data collection helped 
implement conceptual models and collect the failure data. The 
collected research data supported the conceptual models and 
failure data analysis results. This support allows for data 
triangulation and increases the robustness of the results and 
evidence validity [7].  
V. CONCLUSION 
The combination of conceptual modeling and failure data 
analysis facilitated exploring and understanding 
the 
Company's actual need as a case study within an industry–
academia, sociotechnical, systems engineering–focused, data-
oriented research project. The conceptual modeling lifts 
customer value and business value on the one hand. On the 
other hand, conceptual modeling implementation encourages 
concrete, 
specific 
solutions 
and technologies. 
Here, 
conceptual modeling aided in communicating and sharing 
understanding of analysis of the value proposition of the 
Company's proposed system, CBM, which is formulated as a 
need. The Company's feedback indicated that they were able 
to see all aspects within feasibility study of implementing the 
CBM as a system for their SOI—also CBM as a system-of-
system (SOS).  
We also discovered that the Company's "actual need" 
(actual or real problem) relates to the inferior reliability of the 
SOI. This actual need is the key driver beyond the CBM, as is 
increasing market share and scaling up the operation 24/7. 
Applying conceptual modeling triggered this actual need 
discovery, alongside data collection including participant and 
direct observation, interviews, and workshops. In addition, we 
collected and analyzed failure data. The data analysis 
supported our discovery. We proceed with a feasibility study 
of the CBM as a long-term vision for the Company, using the 
most critical part (gate) as a use case. In addition, we 
supported the Company by enabling data-driven decisions 
through data analysis as a primary short-term vision. These 
decisions aid the early design phase in NPD and maintenance 
processes. For further work, we plan to include external data 
such as environmental data, mainly weather data to investigate 
Figure 8. Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF) for 6 years period for the 
gate. 
Figure 9. Gate failure events versus time of day (hour). 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

any correlation between the failure events and environmental 
parameters such as humidity. We believe such further 
investigation would aid at facilitating decision making within 
the early phase in NPD and maintenance process, as well as, 
conducting new iterations with the conceptual modeling.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This research is part of a larger research project, the second 
iteration of the Human Systems Engineering Innovation 
Framework (HSEIF-2), funded by The Research Council of 
Norway (Project number 317862).  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Nourinejad, S. Bahrami, and M. J. Roorda, “Designing parking 
facilities for autonomous vehicles,” Trans. Research Part B: 
Methodological, vol. 109, pp. 110–127, 2018. 
[2] D. C. Shoup, “Cruising for parking,” Transport Policy, vol. 13, no. 6, 
pp. 479–486, 2006. 
[3] Grand View Research, “Automated parking systems market size report, 
2020-2027.” Available: https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-
analysis/automated-parking-systems-market (accessed June. 17, 2022). 
[4] G. Cudney, “Parking Today | Articles - Automated Parking: Is It Right 
for 
You?” 
Available: 
https://www.parkingtoday.com/articledetails.php?id=181&t=automate
d-parking-is-it-right-for-you (accessed June. 17, 2022). 
[5] F. Robles, “Road to Robotic Parking Is Littered With Faulty Projects,” 
The New York Times, Nov. 28, 2015. Accessed: June. 17, 2022. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/28/us/road-to-
robotic-parking-islittered-with-faulty-projects.html 
[6] G. Muller, “Applying Roadmapping and Conceptual Modeling to the 
Energy Transition: A Local Case Study,” Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 7, 
p. 3683, 2021. 
[7] M. Duneier and O. Carter, Sidewalk. Macmillan, 1999. 
[8] H. Plattner, C. Meinel, and L. Leifer, Design Thinking Research: 
Making Design Thinking Foundational. Springer, 2015. 
[9] Wettre, A. Sevaldson, B. & Dudani P. “Bridging silos: A new 
workshop method for bridging silos,”. In proceedings of Relating 
Systems Thinking and Design (RSD8) Symposium, 2019. 
[10] K. Neely, M. Bortz, and S. Bice, “Using collaborative conceptual 
modelling as a tool for transdisciplinarity,” Evidence & Policy, vol. 17, 
no. 1, pp. 161–172, 2021, doi: 10.1332/174426419X15468578119304. 
[11] R. G. Sargent, “Verification and validation of simulation models,” J. 
Simulation : JOS, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 12–24, 2013, doi: 
10.1057/jos.2012.20. 
[12] S. Robinson, “Conceptual modelling for simulation Part I: definition 
and requirements,” J. Operational Research Society, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 
278–290, 2008. 
[13] O. Balci, J. D. Arthur, and R. E. Nance, “Accomplishing reuse with a 
simulation conceptual model,” in 2008 Winter Simulation Conf., pp. 
959–965. 
[14] J. A. B. Montevechi and J. D. Friend, “Using a soft systems 
methodology framework to guide the conceptual modeling process in 
discrete event simulation,” in Proc. of the 2012 Winter Simulation 
Conf. (WSC), pp. 1–12. 
[15] S. Robinson, “Conceptual modelling for simulation Part II: A 
framework for conceptual modelling,” J. Operational Research 
Society, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 291–304, 2008. 
[16] B. S. Blanchard, Systems Engineering and Analysis, 5th ed. Boston: 
Pearson, 2011. 
[17] Y. Tomita, K. Watanabe, S. Shirasaka, and T. Maeno, “Applying 
design thinking in systems engineering process as an extended version 
of DIKW model,” in INCOSE Int. Symp., 2017, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 858–
870. 
[18] M. C. Jackson, Critical systems thinking and the management of 
complexity: Responsible Leadership for a Complex World, 1st ed. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2019. 
[19] B. Sauser, M. Mansouri, and M. Omer, “Using systemigrams in 
problem definition: A case study in maritime resilience for homeland 
security,” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 
Vol. 
8 
(Issue 
1), 
pp. 
0000102202154773551773. 
https://doi.org/10.2202/1547-7355.1773, 2011. 
[20] G. Muller, “CAFCR: A multi-view method for embedded systems 
architecting,” Balancing Genericity and Specificity, 2004. 
[21] H. N. Hosseini and T. Welo, “A framework for integrating reliability 
and systems engineering: proof-of-concept experiences,” in INCOSE 
Int. Symp., 2016, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1059–1073. 
[22] P. O’Connor and A. Kleyner, Practical Reliability Engineering. John 
Wiley & Sons, 2012. 
[23] M. Krasich, “How to estimate and use MTTF/MTBF would the real 
MTBF please stand up?,” in 2009 Annu. Reliability and 
Maintainability Symp., pp. 353–359. 
[24] Ridgway, M., Baretich, M. F., Clark, M., Grimes, S., Iduri, B., Lane, 
M. W., ... & Lum, N. “A Rational Approach to Efficient Equipment 
Maintenance, Part 2: A Comprehensive AEM Program,” Biomed. 
Instrum. & Technol., vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 350–356, 2018. 
[25] D. D. Walden, G. J. Roedler, K. Forsberg, R. D. Hamelin, and T. M. 
Shortell, Systems engineering handbook: A guide For system life cycle 
processes And activities. John Wiley & Sons, 2015. 
[26] E. A. Long and D. Tananko, “Best practices methods for robust design 
for reliability with parametric cost estimates,” in 2011 Proc. Annu. 
Reliability and Maintainability Symp., pp. 1–6. 
[27] R. W. A. Barnard, “3.2. 2 What is wrong with Reliability 
Engineering?,” in INCOSE Int. Symp., 2008, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 357–
365. 
[28] A. Barnard, “Reliability engineering: Value, waste, and costs,” in 
INCOSE Int. Symp., 2016, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 2041–2054. 
[29] R. Hollis, “Put engineering Efforts Back in Reliability Techniques,” 
IEEE Trans. on Parts, Mater. & Packag., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 297–302, 
1965. 
[30] A. Coppola, “Reliability engineering of electronic equipment a 
historical perspective,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 29–35, 
1984. 
[31] B. S. Dhillon, Robot System Reliability and Safety: A Modern 
Approach. CRC Press, 2015. 
[32] G. Muller, “System and context modeling—The Role of Time-Boxing 
and Multi-View Iteration,” in Systems Research Forum, 2009, vol. 3, 
no. 2, pp. 139–152. 
[33] G. Muller, “Teaching conceptual modeling at multiple system levels 
using multiple views,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 21, pp. 58–63, 2014. 
[34] G. Muller, “Challenges in teaching conceptual modeling for systems 
architecting,” in Int. Conf. on Conceptual Modeling, 2015, pp. 317–
326. 
[35] E. Engebakken, G. Muller, and M. Pennott, “Supporting the system 
architect: model-assisted communication,” in Systems Research 
Forum, 2010, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 173–188. 
[36] Rypdal, Muller, G., & Pennotti, M. Developing the Modeling 
Recommendation Matrix: Model-Assisted Communication at Volvo 
Aero. INCOSE International Symposium, 22(1), 2012, 1870–1883. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2334-5837.2012.tb01443.x. 
[37] E. Polanscak, G. A. N. AS, and G. Muller, “Supporting product 
development: A3-assisted communication and documentation,” 
unpublished master project paper at Buskerud Uni. Col., 2011. 
[38] Stalsberg, & Muller, G. (2014). 8.3.1 Increasing the value of model-
assisted communication: Modeling for understanding, exploration and 
verification in production line design projects. INCOSE International 
Symposium, 
24(1), 
827–842. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2334-
5837.2014.tb03184.x. 
[39] W. Pesselse, T. Hofman, M. Simons, and G. Muller, “Applying and 
analyzing A3 Architecture Overviews in a complex and dynamic 
engineering environment,” in INCOSE Int. Symp., 2019, vol. 29, no. 
1, pp. 952–970. 
[40] P. D. Borches Juzgado, “A3 Architecture overviews. A tool for 
effective communication in product evolution,” 2010. 
[41] G. Muller, D. Wee, and M. Moberg, “Creating an A3 architecture 
overview; A case study in subSea Systems,” in INCOSE Int. Symp., 
2015, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 448–462. 
[42] C. Stenström, M. Al-Jumaili, and A. Parida, “Natural language 
processing of maintenance records data,” Int. J. COMADEM, vol. 18, 
no. 2, pp. 33–37, 2015. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Preventing E-Government Tragedy Of The Clouds
Using System Thinking Methods
1st Geoffrey Lichtenheim
School of Systems & Enterprises
Stevens Institue of Technology
Hoboken, USA
email:glichten@stevens.edu
2nd Mo Mansouri
School of Systems & Enterprises
Stevens Institue of Technology
Hoboken, USA
email:mmansour@stevens.edu
Abstract—The purpose of this study is to propose the use of
system thinking methods in E-Government systems and system of
systems to drive greater efﬁciencies in the deployment of public
cloud services. Qualitative methods such as a systemigram, causal
loop analysis, as well as a novel cloud cost reduction model is
used to map complexity, display the multidimensional nature of
the system, as well as formulate an ontology. The ”tragedy of
the commons” economic concept is used to orient our research
towards the sustainable consumption of digital resources for
government agencies. Business and system dynamics concepts are
used to both discover as well as propose solutions for the research
problem, which is identiﬁed as E-Government cloud services
efﬁciency and cost optimization. We conclude with additional
ideas to further this research through the use of triangulation
and additional quantitative research methods.
Keywords—E-Government, E-Governance, Systems thinking,
Systems Dynamics, Public cloud.
I. INTRODUCTION
State and local governments continue to embrace digital
transformation initiatives that provide services and accessibil-
ity for both citizens as well as business in their respective ju-
risdictions. The emergence of E-Government, which is deﬁned
as the use of information and communications technology
(ICT) to provide public services for government to government
(G2G), government to citizen (G2C), and government to
business (G2B) has become a shaping force for the use of
cloud services [1] [2] [3]. Cloud computing, deﬁned by NIST
is ”a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand
network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with
minimal management effort or service provider interaction”.
This new technical consumption model operates similar to a
public utility where resources are charged based on the amount
of resources used by the agent. As E-governments continue
to expand, so does their requirement for cloud computing
services to host infrastructure platforms, applications, data
repositories, as well as network interfaces [4] [5] [6]. This
resource need, however creates a challenge as programs and
projects for E-services grow so does the respective budget
and spending. Government agencies now see value in digital
services and choose to leverage them to deliver positive
outcomes for constituents and businesses. This situation of
competing priorities as well as consumption can create a
modern-day ”tragedy of the commons”, which is the potential
rapid deterioration or complete elimination of a resource due
to overly aggressive demand without limitations or constraints
[7] [8].
A.
Research Questions
Research questions we aspire to answer are, ﬁrstly how do
we represent the complexity and boundary of the system, its
stakeholder interests, as well as multiple interconnections and
dimensions? Secondly, how do we deﬁne causal relationships
of the system to understand both virtuous, vicious, as well
as balancing cycles and the effect of time delay. Finally, how
can a cloud efﬁciency model applied to these public cloud
resources limit the potential for budgetary overruns and ensure
a resilient and sustainable E-Government service?
B.
Methods
We leverage a qualitative system thinking method known as
a systemigram to represent complexity and system boundaries
as well as a causal loop analysis to display the effect system
elements have on each other, both reinforcing as well as
balancing [9] [10]. Finally, we address governance and the
important role it will play in system dynamics to set thresholds
and limits by using a novel cost reduction model.
C.
Structure
A foundational conceptual understanding of cloud comput-
ing is provided in the primer section, followed by a view
of the complex E-Government system of interest using a
systemigram. Economics of cloud describes how this new
computing utility is ﬁnancially structured, and the unique ways
that stakeholders and consumers can interact and consume the
vast amount of technical resources. A new model developed
for E-Government, provides high-level guidance in the form
of capabilities, solutions, and respective outcomes, which we
call the ”cloud efﬁciency model” [11]. A Causal loop analysis
is an instrument out of system dynamics and is used to display
reinforcing behaviors, such as cloud spend and vendor revenue
generation as well as balancing factors, such as budgetary
constraints. The conclusion discusses ideas to enhance and
extend this research effort.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

II. CLOUD COMPUTING PRIMER
Today there are multiple large public cloud technology
providers and services used extensively by both private as
well as public sector customers [12] [13]. We list three
major cloud providers, also known as ”hyperscalers”, as
well as some of the most widely used services they host.
Public Cloud providers
• Amazon Web Services (AWS)
• Microsoft Azure Cloud (Azure)
• Google Cloud Platform (GCP)
Public Cloud Prominent Services
• AWS Services
1) Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)
2) Relational Database Service (RDS)
3) Elastic Container Service (ECS)
• Microsoft Azure Services
1) Azure Active Directory (AD)
2) Azure Content Delivery Network (CDN)
3) Azure Data Factory
• Google Cloud Platform Services
1) Database Services
2) Big Data Services
3) Machine Learning Services
III. E-GOVERNMENT SYSTEM COMPLEXITY
Using a systemigram, we can see in Figure 1 how the
mainstay represented in yellow displays primary system nodes,
which include government services, operations, employees,
and citizens, which are both important and relevant to our
narrative. Branching off in red are public cloud services that
connect to elements, such as third-party vendors, as well as the
information system (IS) budget, which has multiple outﬂows
and only a single inﬂow.
Fig. 1. Systemigram.
In the blue-colored section, we show the interconnections
of the federal government, revenue, as well as digital security
which in this environment is paramount to the success of the
system. As we can see from Figure 1, E-government’s use of
cloud computing has an inherent complexity in its mission to
provide secure, scalable, and resilient E-services to its citizens
[14] [15].
IV. ECONOMICS OF CLOUD
The concept of cloud computing is to provide a simpliﬁed
and consolidated platform hosted off-site that removes much
of the operational overhead of traditional private cloud data
center technologies. Many private and public sector IS teams
are adopting this cloud-hosted model as it allows them to
focus on the higher layer applications and remove the need
to spend resource cycles with physical equipment maintenance
and upgrade processes. This shifting of data center operations,
in many cases, removes the need for dedicated operational
staff; therefore operational expenditure budgets can be re-
appropriated towards greater consumption of compute re-
sources [16].
There are two ways to consume cloud-based services, the
ﬁrst is direct from the cloud provider, and the second is
indirect via a third-party integrator. Entities that consume
cloud services do so via a subscription that involves a legal
contract or ”terms of service” (TOS) that stipulates the rules
and guidelines for the consumer. Vendors have multiple ways
of selling cloud services, and one of the most popular is
under a consumption plan agreement that deﬁne how much
of a resource will be consumed over a certain period of time.
An example is a government organization that signs a three-
year multi-million dollar contract with a cloud vendor to use
services such as email for their staff. The government agency
beneﬁts from the use of this highly scalable email system for
its employees, and the cloud vendor receives revenue which
is assumed to be allocated to fund ongoing research and
development operations, ﬁnance, HR, as well as enhancing
shareholder value due to its favorable earnings projections.
While this cloud-hosted IS strategy seems to be an advan-
tageous relationship for all parties, there are some caveats to
consider. One of the issues with the cloud is its seemingly
endless supply of resources for end users of its services. The
reality is that physical data centers with compute, network, and
storage equipment are still required to host the infrastructure
required to deliver cloud services. This means that there is
a ﬁnite amount of resources from any cloud vendor, some
customers have experienced hitting these limits when provi-
sioning additional capacity. This was recently experienced due
to pandemic-related supply chain shortages in microprocessors
and hardware needed to expand hosted environments [4]. In
addition to the constraints possible by cloud providers, govern-
ment agencies have ﬁxed budgets, and these can shift based on
a multitude of factors such as government revenue or alternate
priorities. A possible scenario could be the case where a
government entity wants to expand its cloud services but
cannot due to the hosting costs being greater than the allocated
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

budget. The entity could request a budget enhancement or one-
time over allocation however, this may take time to obtain
requisite approvals or authorization, causing a potential delay
[17].
As we have seen in the research, this issue of cloud eco-
nomics, such as the panacea of cloud, requires careful planning
and proper allocation of funds and resources to ensure the
long-term effective use of the resources. Shaping forces are all
around to turn a well-run environment into a security breach or
system down emergency, negatively impacting mission-critical
systems [18].
V. CLOUD EFFICIENCY MODEL
With the goal of ensuring the prolonged efﬁcient use of
cloud computing resources in E-Government, a novel model is
created in Figure 2, which addresses the technical capabilities
desired, solutions which can be employed, as well as positive
outcomes which help in the conservation of budget. Based on
the E-Government service being delivered, one or many of
these solutions can be adopted, leading to outcomes that are
oriented towards sustainability [19]. The technical capabilities
are broad, high level domains spanning the most commonly
requested infrastructure components and services. The solu-
tion for each respective capability provides more conceptual
guidance as opposed to speciﬁc solutions. This is due to a
rapidly changing landscape of technical solutions constantly
entering and leaving the market.
Technical 
Capability
Data Storage 
Compute
Cloud Services
Platform Operations
Solution
Local and alternate 
repositories
Hyper Converged 
Infrastructure (HCI)
Multi-Cloud Architecture
Technical Enablement
Outcome
Reduce cost by leveraging 
several landing zones 
Move workloads to cost-
effective compute platform
Use multi-cloud services to 
avoid vendor lock-in
Maintain in-house technical 
expertise
Fig. 2. Cloud Efﬁciency Model.
The outcome maps to business value and is intended to
validate the goal of adopting the solution. Each outcome is di-
rected towards cost efﬁciency, sustainability, and preservation
of resources which can be technological, human, or monetary.
VI. CAUSAL LOOP ANALYSIS
To obtain a graphical representation of how E-government
spending on cloud computing affects other elements such as
cloud vendor revenue, a causal loop diagram is developed
[20] [21]. As we see in Figure 3, a reinforcing loop is
established by E-government consumption of cloud resources
which increases their digital service catalog and offerings.
Similarly, as the cloud vendor providing services continues
to grow, their offerings and revenue increases in another
reinforcing loop. The balancing portion of this analysis comes
via the ﬁnite E-Government budget that constrains both what
is consumed as well as what is offered.
Fig. 3. Causal Loop Analysis.
There is a delay factor which in some cases could prove
problematic if the consumption exceeds the budget or if the
budget gets cut without timely notice to the operations team,
which is provisioning new services. This situation could prove
harmful if a sustainable resource management system was not
planned for and executed. Also, having proper visibility to the
cost of cloud services and discounted rates can help ensure
continuity [22] [23].
VII. CONCLUSION
System thinking methods were employed in this study to
analyze how cloud computing impacts E-Government services.
First, we utilized the systemigram to map the complex re-
lationship between E-Government agents, vendors, citizens,
and the federal government [24]. This revealed different
stakeholder interactions and provided insight into possible
shaping forces that may impact how these digital services
are fulﬁlled, operated, and delivered. Next, a novel model for
E-Government cloud cost reduction was proposed to provide
technical leadership with solutions and respective outcomes
based on the capability being considered. Leveraged properly
and given due consideration, these solutions may have a
lasting impact on future costs associated with consumption of
cloud services. Finally a causal loop analysis was developed
to show the interconnections between E-Government use of
cloud, reinforcing vendor revenue streams, as well as how
budget constraints become balancing factors in this ﬂow of
resource and funds. This study lacks a complete quantitative
analysis component with data that would have enhanced our
models, speciﬁcally our causal loop. An idea for further study
and enhancement of the contribution would be to gather data
related to government spending on cloud computing platforms
and use mathematical models as a triangulation technique
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

to complement the qualitative components. Cloud technology
will continue to grow in government, therefore, being able to
ﬁnd sustainable and responsible ways to ensure its prolonged
use would provide value to those who are tasked with its
operation [3].
REFERENCES
[1] F. M. Al-Balushi, M. Bahari, and A. A. Rahman, “Deﬁning e-
Government integration and its objective: A systematic literature review,”
2016 3rd International Conference on Computer and Information Sci-
ences, ICCOINS 2016 - Proceedings, pp. 13–18, 2016.
[2] V. R. Prybutok, X. Zhang, and S. D. Ryan, “Evaluating leadership, IT
quality, and net beneﬁts in an e-government environment,” Information
and Management, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 143–152, 2008.
[3] J. Sangki, “Vision of future e-government via new e-government
maturity
model:
Based
on
Korea’s
e-government
practices,”
Telecommunications Policy, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 860–871, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2017.12.002
[4] H. Zhang, “Analysis of the impact of cloud computing technology
to e-government performance evaluation,” Proceedings - 2nd IEEE
International Conference on Mobile Cloud Computing, Services, and
Engineering, MobileCloud 2014, pp. 295–298, 2014.
[5] A. M. Al Khouri, “An Innovative Approach for E-Government Transfor-
mation,” International Journal of Managing Value and Supply Chains,
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 22–43, 2011.
[6] P.
L.
Sun,
C.
Y.
Ku,
and
D.
H.
Shih,
“An
implementation
framework
for
E-Government
2.0,”
Telematics
and
Informatics,
vol.
32,
no.
3,
pp.
504–520,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2014.12.003
[7] E. P. Purnomo and K. Hubacek, “Management of commons with a
proper way: A critical review Hardin’s essay on the tragedy of com-
mons,” ICEEA 2010 - 2010 International Conference on Environmental
Engineering and Applications, Proceedings, no. Iceea, pp. 4–7, 2010.
[8] M. J. Ahn and S. Bretschneider, “Politics of E-Government: E-
Government and the Political Control of Bureaucracy,” Public Adminis-
tration Review, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 414–424, 2011.
[9] M. Mansouri and A. Mostashari, “A systemic approach to governance
in extended enterprise systems,” 2010 IEEE International Systems Con-
ference Proceedings, SysCon 2010, pp. 311–316, 2010.
[10] R. Cloutier, B. Sauser, M. Bone, and A. Taylor, “Transitioning systems
thinking to model-based systems engineering: Systemigrams to SysML
models,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems,
vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 662–674, 2015.
[11] S. D. Ryan, X. Zhang, V. R. Prybutok, and J. H. Sharp, “Leadership and
Knowledge Management in an E-Government Environment,” Adminis-
trative Sciences, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 63–81, 2012.
[12] W. Zhang and Q. Chen, “From E-government to C-government via cloud
computing,” Proceedings of the International Conference on E-Business
and E-Government, ICEE 2010, pp. 679–682, 2010.
[13] A. A. Memon, C. Wang, M. R. Naeem, M. Aamir, and M. Ayoob, “Cloud
government-a proposed solution to better serve the nation,” Proceedings
of 2014 International Conference on Cloud Computing and Internet of
Things, CCIOT 2014, no. Cciot, pp. 39–44, 2014.
[14] T. McDermott, M. Nadolski, and L. Sheppard, “Use of systemigrams
to identify emergence in complex adaptive systems,” 9th Annual IEEE
International Systems Conference, SysCon 2015 - Proceedings, pp. 778–
784, 2015.
[15] B. Sauser, M. Mansouri, and M. Omer, “Using Systemigrams in Prob-
lem Deﬁnition: A Case Study in Maritime Resilience for Homeland
Security,” Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2020.
[16] Y. Alghofaili, A. Albattah, N. Alrajeh, M. A. Rassam, and B. A. S.
Al-Rimy, “Secure cloud infrastructure: A survey on issues, current
solutions, and open challenges,” Applied Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 11,
no. 19, 2021.
[17] D. Sagarik, P. Chansukree, W. Cho, and E. Berman, “E-government 4.0
in Thailand: The role of central agencies,” Information Polity, vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 343–353, 2018.
[18] S. Woodruff, T. K. BenDor, and A. L. Strong, “Fighting the inevitable:
infrastructure investment and coastal community adaptation to sea level
rise,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 34, no. 1-2, pp. 48–77, 2018.
[19] E. J. Ng’Eno, “Embracing e-Government in service delivery and busi-
ness to people through libraries: A case for Kenya,” 2010 IST-Africa,
pp. 1–9, 2010.
[20] J. Homer, “Best practices in system dynamics modeling, revisited: a
practitioner’s view,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 177–
181, 2019.
[21] M. Saeri, M. M. Lotﬁ, and M. R. Mazidi, “A Causal Loop Diagram to
Analyze Various Long-Term Effects of PV Integration into Power Sys-
tems,” ICEE 2019 - 27th Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering,
pp. 852–855, 2019.
[22] G. Haghighat and N. Hosseinichimeh, “Why Organizations Fail to Re-
ﬂect on Experiences: Insights from a Causal Loop Diagram of Reﬂection
on Experience,” IEEE Engineering Management Review, vol. 49, no. 1,
pp. 81–96, 2021.
[23] N. Ghaffarzadegan and R. C. Larson, “SD meets OR: a new synergy
to address policy problems,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 34, no. 1-2,
pp. 327–353, 2018.
[24] M. Mansouri, B. Sauser, and J. Boardman Dr., “Applications of systems
thinking for resilience study in maritime transportation system of sys-
tems,” 2009 IEEE International Systems Conference Proceedings, pp.
211–217, 2009.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

User-centered Data Driven Approach to Enhance
Information Exploration, Communication and
Traceability in a Complex Systems Engineering
Environment
Fahim A. Salim
Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: fahim.a.salim@usn.no
Haytham B. Ali
Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: haytham.ali@usn.no
Gerrit Muller
Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: gerrit.muller@gmail.com
Kristin Falk
Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: kristin.falk@usn.no
Abstract—Organizations
working
on
complex
engineering
projects have data scattered across many different systems. The
data is often disconnected, and its potential remain largely
untapped. Enterprises large and small find it difficult to explore
the information cluttered around different systems. A major
factor in this difficulty is a lack of the user perspective in complex
engineering environments. The presented research focused on a
case study of information exploration needs of engineers testing
sub-sea equipment. The case study observed that enterprise
software tools in complex systems engineering environment are
often designed for the content producer and not the consumer.
Which makes these tools difficult, and time consuming to use
and discourage their adoption. By utilizing user-centered design
and co-creation, the experience and needs of users is identified
to design, a data driven approach for enhance information
exploration. The proposed design has the potential to make
modifications to existing information systems, that would create
a large impact in information exploration, data utilization and
would provide a better experience for engineers, management
and other stakeholders and enhance the productivity of teams,
equipment testing and design.
Index Terms—User-centred Design; Participatory Design; Big
data; Early Phase Decisions;
I. INTRODUCTION
Most
organizations
working
on
complex
engineering
projects, generate a large amount of document centred data
during the project’s life cycle [1] [2]. The data is usually scat-
tered around many different often disconnected systems where
it is not easily explorable [1] [3]. Organizations understand
the need of getting more value out of their data to improve
their routine operations. However, its potential remains largely
untapped [4].
There are many factors identified by researchers, which
limits the utilization of available data in a complex systems en-
gineering environment to enhance operations. These includes
among others, a lack of common language among engineers
and interdisciplinary teams, ineffective knowledge sharing,
finding system information and ineffective communication
among stakeholders [1] [5]–[8].
The presented work focuses on the issue of data dispersed
around different systems and is not easily searchable by users.
As a case study, we focused on test engineers testing sub-sea
oil drilling equipment at our partner organization, which is a
multinational corporation that provides complete project life
cycle services for the energy industry.
The problem is not exclusive for our case study. Orga-
nization such as enterprises large and small find it difficult
to explore the information cluttered around different system
which may or may not be connected to each other [4] [7] [9].
One solution to this problem is to use a model base system
engineering approaches and store data in central repository [2],
[10]. However, it is not very likely as complex engineering
projects involve different companies such as vendors, other
contractors, separate subsidiaries, and different departments
geographically dispersed with their own workflows and Stan-
dard Operating Procedures (SOP). Therefore, the data is bound
to end up in silos and would require exploration through
multiple systems.
A major factor in this difficulty is a lack of the user
perspective in complex systems engineering environments [1]
[3] [11]. In a recent survey, Qlik and Accenture [4] found that
only 21% engineers reported to have access to dashboard style
exploration system suitable for their job roles while 18% said
that the systems were appropriate for their skill level.
Researchers have found that while employees are regarded
as crucial in utilizing big data systems, they are very often
neglected in the design process [12]. The needs of user control
is important in the data exploration process [13] [14] and also
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

there is a need to take in multiple perspectives in a soft systems
context [11].
Building upon previous work [3], It is our contention that
designing a data driven methodology to enable end users
to explore the content in an efficient manner in a complex
systems engineering environment would help users in utilizing
the available data in efficient manner to enhance operations
and make data driven early phase decisions.
The remainder of the paper is as follows: Section II
describes the related work. The case study and proposed
approach is described in Section III. Which is followed by
a discussion in Section IV and finally Section V contains the
concluding remarks and some plans for the future.
II. RELATED WORK
Dashboard style systems are used extensively to explore
data [15]. They often use semantic and video data [16]–[18].
Dashboard style systems often follow a familiar pattern of
providing detail on demand access to multimodal information
based on an issued query. Research is also done on novel
visualization to give quick insights for further exploration [19]
[20], and on new ways of querying large data sets [21].
In their recent survey regarding the utilization of big data
in enterprise environments, Qlik and Accenture [4] found
that about 21% of engineers have access to dashboard style
exploration systems which are designed to be suitable for
their needs and 18% believe that the tools are designed in
accordance to their skill level. Disparate data silos across
multiple systems and technical capabilities are regarded as
major obstacles [9].
Researchers have long identified the need for more user
control in exploration of data [13] and need for taking multiple
perspective when designing data exploration in a soft systems
context [11]. General purpose commercially available data
exploration and document retrieval tools have limitations [2]
[7] [22].
Co-creation [23] and user centred design (UCD) [24]–[26]
are often utilized to understand the user techniques to design
systems which are suitable for evolving user needs. Haesen
et al. use a user centred design approach and semi-structured
interviews to perform a qualitative analysis of the information
exploration needs of professional video searchers [25]. Similar
approach is utilized by Gravier et al. [24] in which authors
utilized mockups and non-functional prototypes to understand
the information exploration needs of different users to come up
with design solutions. Their analysis concluded that different
users may have different needs in terms of desired features in
exploration systems. Salim et al. [26] extend this approach
and use semi-functional prototypes, screen capturing, think
out loud and questionnaires to understand the user journeys
in engaging exploration of content. Similar techniques with
additional semi-structured interviews is used by Koesten et
al. [27] to understand users sense making with data-sets for
recommending design of tools and documentation practices to
allow data reuse.
To allow engineers to explore content beyond simple docu-
ment retrieval, researchers have proposed solutions like social
network systems specifically designed for engineering design
communication and project management [22] model based
system engineering (MBSE) approaches to model central
repositories to allow engineers and other stakeholders access
to relevant information [2].
Currently, there is a lack of taking in the user perspective
in designing exploration systems [12]. There exist a need
for considering the multiple user perspectives and user needs
while designing exploration systems [3] [11] [28].
III. CASE STUDY AND PROPOSED DESIGN
The presented research is utilizing Industry as a Laboratory
[29] , user-centered design [28] and Human Media Interaction
[14] [26] methodologies to focus on the issue of data dispersed
around different systems and is not easily searchable by users.
As a case study we focused on test engineers at our part-
ner organization. The partner organization is a multinational
corporation that provides life cycle services for the energy
industry. We conducted multiple workshops, observation ses-
sions and semi-structure interviews to understand the real-
life context of the company(team) of interest in a complex
engineering project. While the sessions overall focused on
the holistic view of the early phase activities of company of
interest in acquiring and developing/executing projects (subject
of future publications). The current paper is focused on the
information needs of test engineers.
A. Information Needs of Test Engineers
Test engineers need to access information during their
routine operations. The current case study focuses on test en-
gineers running different test on sub-sea oil drilling equipment
at their workshop. They require access to information about
the equipment they are testing. The information they require
about different parts may include:
• The project specification.
• The design specification of parts.
• The provider or designer of the part (i.e., the supplier).
• Product responsible department or person at that depart-
ment or supplier organization.
• The maintenance history of the part.
• The information about any modification done to the part
and its history.
During the different tests they run, e.g., System Integration
Test (SIT) where a combination of different part is tested to
see if the parts are performing as per the specifications. In
case of an unexpected event such as equipment not performing
as expected or has a fault or have a part missing or have
any other problem. It is logged in an event log. The event
contains information such as data about the equipment and its
serial number, etc. along with the description of the problem.
The log also contains information about the project such as
work package and product responsible department or supplier
and other project specific information. Currently those logs
are kept in excel sheets files which are project specific, and
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

the company does not do any analysis on the logs. They have
logs going back more than 10 years.
The test engineers at SIT, do know the value of data analysis
in terms adding value to their operations. They require the
following:
• Ability to log information centrally and follow up (can
be achieved by any online system).
• Traceability (of the equipment and reports):
– Keep track of reported errors.
– Keep track of equipment and its maintenance history.
• Trends: see what patterns or lack of them appears in the
event logs. Natural Language Processing (NLP) analysis
of the event logs shared with us has similarities with other
partners case studies [5]).
B. Proposed Approach Design
Figure 1 shows the component diagrams of the current
environment with our proposed components. In the first step a
prototype system is developed for them to log the unexpected
events and related data in a convenient manner i.e., enhance
their ability to log information centrally.
In terms of trends, basic NLP analysis of the event logs is
performed, and the functionality is added to the prototype.
In terms of traceability, the testing engineers need to be
able to keep track of the progress on the reported problems
by product responsible departments or suppliers. For this,
the researchers suggest a semantic ontology driven equipment
register based on the Digital Design Basis initiative to quickly
search the product related information and to update the event
log with relevant data, instead of current manual look up at
different systems, which is time consuming and cumbersome.
Testing engineers and other departments require traceability
of their equipment. The problem is that the equipment may be
at different departments or at different subsidiaries which are
dispersed all over the globe. Apart from that, the equipment
may have gone through maintenance-based changes and may
have alter in specification as the years have gone by. The
ontology base register has the potential to streamline the
process of crawling through different systems and find a match
of equipment based on the ontology properties [30]–[32]. Con-
nected to the event log system it could also help test engineers
in quickly finding the specification and functionality of the
different equipment and see product relevant information in
a dynamic manner, i.e., due to the machine-readable nature
of the data it can be used to transform the information to
be curated in any UI design, e.g., an excel style sheet or a
graphical representation of the equipment with overlapping
information i.e. (digital twins of various fidelities).
C. Description of prototype and interviews with test engineers
To facilitate the understanding of the information needs
of maintenance engineers. We developed a semi-functional
prototype and use this to conduct interviews with SIT test
engineering team. During our sessions we identified three basic
requirements of SIT engineers namely logging, traceability and
identifying trends (see Section III-A for details).
For event logging we propose an online system which shows
the event logs in a grid (see Figure 2). The reason behind is
that it is similar to an excel file so that, the engineers are
comfortable using it as they are very used to, using excel
files. In addition to centrally log all the events the users have
functionalities like sorting and filtering. They can also have
additional controls on updating the values of certain fields so,
for example, only a test manager could edit certain values (see
Figure 2).
For identifying trends, the prototype allows users to perform
analytics on the event logs, e.g., identify what equipment
or tag number is appearing most in the logs indicating a
trend of equipment which causes errors. Additionally, it also
lets user do NLP analysis of the event logs, e.g., to identify
repeatedly appearing phrases such as “need to be calibrated”
to identify trends and to communicate them with product
designers and other responsible parties (see Figure 3). Details
of the NLP analysis of the event logs are the subject of another
publication.
For traceability, the test engineers require information from
different systems. The information they usually require are
product specification, and equipment maintenance history and
location etc. currently engineers have to search for this in-
formation in several different systems and it is a very time
consuming and a tedious task. In the prototype we suggested
connections with those systems and to allow the engineers to
get that information from within the prototype.
The prototype also showed some alternative ways of rep-
resenting information to engineers, e.g., graphical represen-
tation of the equipment with equipment specific information
overlayed in a detailed-on demand manner. The idea is that
user could switch between excel like list and other represen-
tations to better suite their exploration and communication
needs. E.g., communicating an error with equipment image
and overlayed information to provide a richer experience
when communicating events with different departments and
stakeholders (see Figure 4).
The prototype was well received. Participants really liked
the concept. During our sessions and discussions, users wanted
to centrally view the events and the required information.
They really liked the simplicity of the concept. Interview
participants also liked the analytics features and saw a lot
of potential in the NLP analysis of the logs and the ability
to identify the trends and patterns occurring during different
equipment testing.
Participants reiterated our observations from our co-creation
sessions and observation of the team meetings, that looking
for information in different systems is indeed a very time-
consuming task and a drag to their productivity and user
experience. They really liked the idea of linking the different
information and presenting it in one interface. They also saw
the potential of using digital twin representation of different
fidelity and product specific information overlayed, instead of
simply linking to the product documentation.
When asked about what is missing in the prototype and what
functionality would further enhance their experience: the reply
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Figure. 1: Components Diagram overall approach (proposed).
Figure. 2: Viewing and updating event logs prototype.
was that they would prefer to have the information in different
layers i.e., they wanted better control on the amount of detail
they get about the equipment. It was also mentioned that
different stakeholder may need access to different information
and the need to control who can edit and view the information.
Finally, the need to have easy to use system was reiterated
and a need to standardized way to enter and edit the logs
consistently across different teams and projects.
IV. DISCUSSION
The co-creation sessions and interviews demonstrated the
need for considering the user perspective to allow users to eas-
ily explore the information in a complex systems engineering
environments. The case study shows that in large organizations
despite having most of the infrastructure in place, users in
Figure. 3: Trend identification by NLP analysis.
Figure. 4: alternative representation of equipment information.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

certain functions still end up using sub-optimal exploration
tools during their routine operations. This creates a big drag
on their productivity. It is the sentiment expressed by the test
engineers during our sessions.
Test engineers require a central place to search for the
required information and the ability to make changes in a user-
friendly manner. They also desire more control in viewing and
editing of certain data and the amount of detail they get when
looking at information i.e., detail on demand representation.
Linking information from different systems and representing
to them in easy to view manner is helpful for them. They
also require standardized way to log information that can be
achieve by implementing controlled vocabularies in the input
interfaces.
The key takeaway from our sessions is that in complex
systems engineering environments; the software tools are often
designed for the content producers and not for the different
users (consumers) of that information. There are also not easy
to user for non-daily users to explore the available information.
It makes it difficult for them to use, as it becomes time
consuming for them to perform their routine tasks. It leads
users to stick to old tools like excel files and not being able
to utilize the benefits of technological developments.
V. CONCLUSION
The presented case study demonstrated that while large
enterprises have many different systems to collect information
and generate documentation and they may also have the
necessary infrastructure to allow efficient use of the data. Users
still end up not having a good experience with such tools and
it creates hurdles in accessing the required information in an
efficient manner. It discourages the adaptation of new systems
and causes lost opportunities in terms of learning insights from
the available information which could enhance daily operation
or allow design decisions to avoid problems occurring in the
future.
The case study demonstrates that by understanding the
user needs, minor modifications to existing infrastructure can
create a large impact in information exploration and utilization
and a better experience for engineers, management and other
stakeholders and enhance the productivity of teams, equipment
testing and design.
In the future, we aim to extend the study to other teams
at the partner organization to understand the similarities in
information needs of different users in a complex systems
engineering environment. We also aim to extend this to other
partner organizations of the H-SEIF21. consortium to come up
with a design specification which could help in creating better
interactive systems for enterprise users.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is part of the H-SEIF 2 project and is funded
by the Research Council of Norway through the innovation
project (IPN project no.: 317862).
1https://www.usn.no/hseif last accessed on 20-06-2022
REFERENCES
[1] S. Engen, K. Falk, and G. Muller, “The need for systems awareness
to support early-phase decision-making—a study from the norwegian
energy industry,” Systems, vol. 9, no. 3, 2021.
[2] H. Kannan, “Formal reasoning of knowledge in systems engineering
through epistemic modal logic,” Systems Engineering, vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 3–16, 2021.
[3] F. A. Salim, H. B. Ali, and K. Falk, “Towards a Data Processing
Framework for Enhanced User Centric System Engineering ,” in PRO-
CEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, Workshop
on Smart Pervasive Computing, 2021, pp. 15–18.
[4] Qlik
and
Accenture,
“The
Human
Impact
of
Data
Literacy,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://thedataliteracyproject.org/humanimpact
[5] H. B. Ali and F. A. Salim, “Transferring Tacit Knowledge into Explicit:
A Case Study in a Fully (Semi) Automated Parking Garage,” in
PROCEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, 2021,
pp. 11–14.
[6] B. A. Delicado, A. Salado, and R. Momp´o, “Conceptualization of a T-
Shaped engineering competency model in collaborative organizational
settings: Problem and status in the Spanish aircraft industry,” Systems
Engineering, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 534–554, 2018.
[7] K. Falk, A. K. Kamara, E. P. Brathen, K. Helle, P. T. Moe, and
S. Kokkula, “Digitizing the Maintenance Documentation; A System of
Systems in Oil and Gas Industry,” SOSE 2020 - IEEE 15th International
Conference of System of Systems Engineering, Proceedings, pp. 493–
499, 2020.
[8] Juzgado P.D. Borches, “A3 Architecture overviews. A tool for effective
communication in product evolution,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Twente, 2010.
[9] R. Technology, “AI / ML Annual Research Report 2022,” 2022.
[10] J. Bickford, D. L. Van Bossuyt, P. Beery, and A. Pollman, “Operational-
izing digital twins through model-based systems engineering methods,”
Systems Engineering, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 724–750, 2020.
[11] M. Kjørstad, K. Falk, and G. Muller, “Exploring a Co-Creative Problem
Solving Toolbox in the Context of Norwegian High-Tech Industry,”
IEEE Systems, pp. 1–11, 2020.
[12] D. H. Shin, “Demystifying big data: Anatomy of big data developmental
process,” Telecommunications Policy, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 837–854, 2016.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2015.03.007
[13] C. Cobˆarzan, K. Schoeffmann, W. Bailer, W. H¨urst, A. Blaˇzek, J. Lokoˇc,
S. Vrochidis, K. U. Barthel, and L. Rossetto, “Interactive video search
tools: a detailed analysis of the video browser showdown 2015,” Multi-
media Tools and Applications, vol. 76, no. 4, pp. 5539–5571, 2017.
[14] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, S. Luz, and O. Conlan, “Automatic transformation
of a video using multimodal information for an engaging exploration
experience,” Applied Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 10, no. 9, 2020.
[15] A. Jackson, J. Lin, I. Milligan, and N. Ruest, “Desiderata for exploratory
search interfaces to Web archives in support of scholarly activities,”
Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries,
vol. 2016-Septe, pp. 103–106, 2016.
[16] J. Moreno-Schneider, A. Srivastava, P. Bourgonje, D. Wabnitz, and
G. Rehm, “Semantic Storytelling, Cross-lingual Event Detection and
other Semantic Services for a Newsroom Content Curation Dashboard,”
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)., pp. 68–73, 2018.
[17] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, D. Postma, R. van Delden, D. Reidsma, S. Luz,
and B.-J. van Beijnum, “Towards Automatic Modeling of Volleyball
Players’ Behavior for Analysis, Feedback, and Hybrid Training,” Journal
for the Measurement of Physical Behaviour, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 323–330,
2020.
[18] B. Yousuf and O. Conlan, “VisEN: Motivating learner engagement
through explorable visual narratives,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), vol. 9307, pp. 367–380, 2015.
[19] C. Perin, R. Vuillemot, C. D. Stolper, J. T. Stasko, J. Wood, and
S. Carpendale, “State of the Art of Sports Data Visualization,” Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 663–686, 2018.
[20] T. Polk, J. Yang, Y. Hu, and Y. Zhao, “TenniVis: Visualization for tennis
match analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2339–2348, 2014.
[21] L. Shao, D. Sacha, B. Neldner, M. Stein, and T. Schreck, “Visual-
interactive search for soccer trajectories to identify interesting game
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

situations,” IS and T International Symposium on Electronic Imaging
Science and Technology, vol. 0, pp. 1–10, 2016.
[22] J. A. Gopsill, H. C. McAlpine, and B. J. Hicks, “Supporting
engineering
design
communication
using
a
custom-built
social
media
tool
-
PartBook,”
Advanced
Engineering
Informatics,
vol.
29,
no.
3,
pp.
523–548,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2015.04.008
[23] M. Guntveit, M. Kjrstad, and B. Sevaldson, “Early Validation of Stake-
holder Needs by Applying Co-creation Sessions,” INCOSE International
Symposium, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1398–1415, 2020.
[24] G. Gravier, M. Ragot, A. Laurent, R. Bois, G. Jadi, E. Jamet,
and L. Monceaux, “Shaping-Up Multimedia Analytics: Needs and
Expectations of Media Professionals,” in The 22nd International
Conference on Multimedia Modelling, vol. 9516, Miami, 2016, pp.
303–314. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-
319-27671-7
[25] M. Haesen, J. Meskens, K. Luyten, K. Coninx, J. H. Becker, T. Tuyte-
laars, G. J. Poulisse, P. T. Pham, and M. F. Moens, “Finding a needle
in a haystack: An interactive video archive explorer for professional
video searchers,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 63, no. 2, pp.
331–356, 2013.
[26] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, O. Conlan, and S. Luz, “An approach
for exploring a video via multimodal feature extraction and user
interactions,” Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, no. October 2017,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s12193-018-
0268-0
[27] L. Koesten, K. Gregory, P. Groth, and E. Simperl, “Talking datasets
– Understanding data sensemaking behaviours,” International Journal
of Human Computer Studies, vol. 146, no. October 2020, p. 102562,
2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102562
[28] J. Pinto, K. Falk, and M. Kjørstad, “Inclusion of human values in
the specification of systems: bridging design and systems engineering,”
INCOSE International Symposium, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 284–300, 2019.
[29] C. Potts, “Software-engineering research revisited,” IEEE Software,
vol. 10, pp. 19–28, 1993.
[30] Y. A. Akter and M. A. Rahman, “Extracting RDF Triples from Raw
Text,” 1st International Conference on Advances in Science, Engineering
and Robotics Technology 2019, ICASERT 2019, vol. 2019, no. Icasert,
pp. 31–34, 2019.
[31] W. Baes, F. Portet, H. Mirisaee, and C. Labb´e, “RDF triples extraction
from company web pages: Comparison of state-of-the-art deep models,”
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2708, 2020.
[32] P. Exner and P. Nugues, “Entity extraction: From unstructured text to
dbpedia rdf triples,” CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 906, pp. 58–69,
2012.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

State of Affair in Terms of Big Data Utilization in
Complex System Engineering Organizations
Fahim A. Salim
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: fahim.a.salim@usn.no
Haytham B. Ali
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: haytham.ali@usn.no
Tommy Langen
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: tommy.langen@usn.no
Andreas Wettre
Centre for Design Research
Oslo School of Architecture and Design
email: andreas.wettre@aho.no
Gerrit Muller
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: gerrit.muller@gmail.com
Kristin Falk
Dept. of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
email: kristin.falk@usn.no
Abstract—The primary goal of this ongoing questionnaire
is understanding the state of affairs in terms of big data
utilization in Norwegian high-tech enterprises. Employees at
partner organizations were asked 24 questions. The questions
comprised of categories such as Data Availability, Usability,
Integrity, Competency and Organizational behavior. The survey
attempted to get a nuanced understanding of the current pro-
cesses at partner organizations of the H-SEIF2 [1] consortium,
or lack thereof to systematically utilize big data in their projects
from the perspective of employee’s perception. For example, the
survey found that the Project Managers have a more optimistic
perception of their usage of big data while upper management
has a more modest opinion of their current state. In addition to
providing insights, the results will act as a baseline for making
recommendations and propose adaptive digitalization solutions
for each partner organization.
Index Terms—Questionnaire; Big data; Early Phase Decisions;
I. INTRODUCTION
The benefits of using big data in enhancing operations
in general and in project life cycle management are well
understood by organizations of all types and sizes [2]–[5].
However, how to do so effectively is still an open questions for
most organizations [3] [6] [7]. For example, a study conducted
by Qlik and Accenture states that over 74% of employees
feel anxiety with working with data [8], while a recent
study by Rackspace Technology [2] reported that organizations
perceived a rise in difficulty in terms of utilizing Big Data
Analytics (BDA) and specifically Artificial Intelligence (AI)
and Machine Learning (ML).
Researchers have identified multiple challenges which lim-
its organizations ability for enhance utilization of big data.
This includes, a lack of common language among engineers,
ineffective knowledge sharing and difficulty in finding system
information to name of few [9]–[12]. The presented paper will
focus on the users of big data, specifically the internal users
such as employees working on projects.
The primary goal of the ongoing survey is to understand
the current state of affairs in terms of big data utilization
at the partner organizations in the H-SEIF2 [1] project. The
H-SEIF 2 project aims to harvest the value of big-data to
enhance the experience of stakeholders during complex system
engineering project by collaborating with industry partners to
improve their digitalization efforts. The goal is to design data
driven frameworks and methodologies to allow the industry
partners in data supported early phase decisions.
Employees at partner organizations were asked 24 ques-
tions. The questions were comprised of categories such as
Data Availability, Usability, Integrity, Competency and Orga-
nizational behavior. In doing so, the survey attempted to get
a nuanced understanding of the current processes at partner
organizations or lack thereof, to systematically utilize big data
in their projects from the perspective of employee’s perception.
It aims to provide deeper insights at gaps and differences
at different organizations or at different department within
a large organization. This will act as a baseline for making
recommendations and propose adaptive digitalization solutions
for each partner organization.
There are few other surveys which analyse the state of
affairs at organizations [2] [6] [8]. They have only focused
on Chief Information Officers (CIOs) or high level decision
makers. The presented paper takes a deeper dive and took the
perspective of a cross section of employees to get a better
understanding of the current state at each company.
The remainder of the paper is as follows: Section II de-
scribes the related work. Details about the questionnaire are
described in Section III. Which is followed by a discussion
in Section IV and finally Section V contains the concluding
remarks and some plans for the future.
II. RELATED WORK
Questionnaires and surveys are widely used for different
purposes e.g., comparing two products and/or services [7] [13].
They are often used to understand the needs of perspective
users of future products and services or as part of user-centric
design [14] [15], or to collect data on customer, employee
and/or student satisfaction, [16]–[18].
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Figure. 1: Respondents Profile: information about respondents
Regarding the utilization of big data in operations of or-
ganizations, Qlik and Accenture [8] conducted a survey to
have an understanding of big data utilization in enterprises .
They found that 60 to 70% of the collected data in enterprise
is never used and a vast majority of about 74% of employees
feel overwhelmed or simply unhappy working with data. They
also found that only 37% of employees trust their decisions
more when they are based on data while 48% preferred gut
feeling over data driven decision making [8].
Focusing on high level decision makers, a survey by
Rackspace Technology [2] found that employees perceived
difficulty with ML and big data has actually been increasing.
The survey [2] also found that employees considered data
dispersed across many different systems to be one of the
biggest barrier in drawing insights from it. Lack of skillset
and talented employees is perceived as a great concern and
limitation in fully utilizing big data in enterprise decision
making [2] [8] [19].
Raguseo [6] focused on the CIOs of French medium and
large enterprises to understand differences if any, across indus-
try and the size of organizations. Analysis of the questionnaire
found that investments in technologies like machine learning
software tools are influenced by the size of the organization
and the author did not find any statistical differences across
different industries.
While employees appear often in the discourse and con-
sidered a crucial element in utilizing big data systems, they
are often the ones most neglected [20]. Moreover, majority of
the above mentioned research focused on high level decision
makers and not a cross-section of employees, departments and
job roles.
The presented survey is part of the H-SEIF2 [1] research
project that aims to develop human centered framework for
the utilization of big data during early phase decision making.
The presented work, by focusing on Norwegian industry
partners extends the related work by focusing on a cross-
section of employees to get a more nuance understanding
of any differences among different departments, employee
profiles and across different industries.
III. SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE
The survey questionnaire consists of 24 questions in 5
categories. The categories were selected by a combination of
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

TABLE I: THE QUESTIONNAIRE.
Information About You
Organization / Company
Job title
Department
Job Description
Educational Background
Gender
Age group
In what Life-cycle phase(s) is your current work activities?
Idea Generation and Analysis, Concept Development, Detailed Engineering,
Fabrication Testing and Integration, Operations, Maintenance and Modification
Data Availability
1. In my current project, team spent a significant effort to gather relevant data for decision making.
2. In my current project we gather data of high relevance to end-user values.
3. When I do my work, I have easy access to all relevant data that I need to do my work.
4. I am familiar with tools and methods that can help me to better explore and analyze data that include AI and ML?
5. In my work, I have easy access to useful data-analysis tools and methodologies that help to better understand the task at hand.
6. I have available all the data-analysis tools and methods that I need to do my work effectively.
7. Pertinent data and information that is being held back from me in due to confidentiality.
Data Usability
8. Getting access to and analyzing big amount of data is an important part of the early-phase development-process in my company.
9. In my organization, we have a history of bashing out new ideas and products on data and information rather than on “gut-feeling”.
10. In My company, we make disruptive innovations rather than incremental product improvements.
11. In my company we use data from previous systems/projects to improve the performance of the current system/project.
12. In my company we have a consistent and effective procedure for storing/sharing data.
13. The procedure for storing/sharing data in my company is sufficient for our purposes?
14. I always use the existing stored data from old projects as “lessons learned” in new projects.
Data Integrity
15. In my work, I fully trust the data presented and developed by others.
Competency
16. I am fully confident about how to best use data to improve products, services and/or systems.
17. In early-phases of product-development, I am fully confident that my team has sufficient knowledge to effectively use all available data.
18. My managers always understand the data and simulations I present to him/her.
19. I always have enough context when I use data in my work.
20. My company encourage competency-development digital skills such as big data and digitalization.
Organizational Behavior
21. My company fully take advantage of operational data as feedback in the early development.
22. We spend sufficient time to collect and analyze all available data in the early phase.
23. My company has a process that helps us make use of big-data for early validation of system solutions.
24. Decisions in my company are made based on reliable data rather than gut feeling
literature review [2] [3] [6] [8] [20] and our initial co-creation
sessions with industry partners, in order to understand the
issues faced by the H-SEIF2 [1] industry partners in fully
utilizing big data in early phase decision making in their
projects.
Table I lists the questions asked in the questionnaire. The
participants were asked to rate the extent to which they agree
or disagree with the statements on a 7-point Likert scale. In the
initial phase, we have collected 40 responses from employees
at partner organizations. Figure 1 shows the basic information
about the survey respondents. Most respondents are from
the Tech and Engineering Consultancy firm that works on a
diverse range of innovative projects for their clients, followed
by an industrial conglomerate with division in shipping and
digital technology and startup incubation. More than half of
the respondents are engineers i.e., 23, while 7 are project
managers and 6 belong to top management positions.
In terms of educational background, 22 of the respondents
reported having a Masters degree. Engineering was the most
common reported educational background, while Finance and
Management the other. The age distribution of the respondents
is quite balanced as well (see Figure 1(f)), however our current
data have a gender imbalance, as 34 out of the 40 respondents
are male. We will make efforts to address that in future
versions.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The questionnaire results (see Figure 2) show that internal
stakeholders (employees) feel dissatisfied by the utilization of
big data in their projects, especially in early phase decision
making as the Net Promoter Score (NPS) is negative across
the board. It is not surprising, as it is not only the finding
of our initial conversations with industry partners but other
surveys reached the same conclusion [2] [8].
One notable surprise however is question# 7 which asks
the respondents if data is being held back from them for
confidentiality reasons; to which the respondents disagreed.
In this case it is a positive outcome and runs counter to our
earlier assumptions [21]. However, it may change when in
the next phase we collect data from additional respondents
belonging to industry partners involved with defense and
aerospace industries.
Another interesting outcome is that engineers and personnel
involved with technical aspect of projects gave lower scores
than project managers and upper management. Project man-
agers seem to have a rosier perception compared to others
(see Figure 3). There is a need for greater communication
among project managers and other non-technical stakeholder,
engineers and technical personnel. While the more positive
responses are somewhat in line with [8], there are notable
differences compared to [8]. For example, in our survey the
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Figure. 2: Overall responses
Figure. 3: Average responses per job roles.
upper management seems less optimistic compared to the
project managers.
Another notable exception is the “Competency” section
of the questionnaire. For example, the report [8] stated that
business leaders overestimate the capabilities of their work-
force, while our survey showed that both engineers and
project managers gave higher responses compared to the upper
management (see Figure 3).
In terms of age groups, employees in younger and older age
Figure. 4: Average responses per age group.
groups overall gave higher scores compared to middle (35-
44) age group, while the middle age group reported the most
confidence in their competency compared to the others (see
Figure 4). Also, in terms of the organization behavior category,
younger and senior employees express greater optimism com-
pared to the 35-44 age group. Question# 21 was an exception,
which asks about taking full advantage of operational data in
early phase decision making, to which the 35-44 age group
gave higher score compared to the others.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

V. CONCLUSION
The current version of the survey gave us a deeper under-
standing of the state of affairs as perceived by the internal
stakeholder at some of the industry partners. It provided a
glimpse at the disparity of different stakeholders in terms
of their perception of their utilization of big data in their
operations and decision-making process. Overall, the survey
concluded that employees at the H-SEIF2 industry partners
understand the need of using big data in their project to
enhance their operations as the NPS is negative across the
board. Another conclusion that can be drawn is that the project
managers need more communication with engineers and other
technical personnel to get a better calibration of their big data
needs.
In the future, we plan to extend the survey by gathering
responses from all the industry partners in the H-SEIF 2
consortium to allow us an even deeper understanding of the
perception of employees and the state of affairs. For future
versions, we will target different departments within larger
organizations to get a more balanced dataset for our analysis
and we also plan to conduct semi-structure interviews with
some employees to get further insights.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is part of the H-SEIF 2 project and is funded
by the Research Council of Norway through the innovation
project (IPN project no.: 317862).
REFERENCES
[1] U.
NISE,
“H-SEIF
2
Project.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.usn.no/hseif last accessed on 20-06-2022
[2] R. Technology, “AI / ML Annual Research Report 2022,” 2022.
[3] K. Falk, A. K. Kamara, E. P. Brathen, K. Helle, P. T. Moe, and
S. Kokkula, “Digitizing the Maintenance Documentation; A System of
Systems in Oil and Gas Industry,” SOSE 2020 - IEEE 15th International
Conference of System of Systems Engineering, Proceedings, pp. 493–
499, 2020.
[4] H. B. Ali and F. A. Salim, “Transferring Tacit Knowledge into Explicit:
A Case Study in a Fully (Semi) Automated Parking Garage,” in
PROCEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, 2021.
[5] F. A. Salim, H. B. Ali, and K. Falk, “Towards a Data Processing
Framework for Enhanced User Centric System Engineering,” in PRO-
CEEDINGS OF The Society for Design and Process Science, Workshop
on Smart Pervasive Computing, 2021.
[6] E. Raguseo, “Big data technologies: An empirical investigation on their
adoption, benefits and risks for companies,” International Journal of
Information Management, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 187–195, 2018.
[7] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, S. Luz, and O. Conlan, “Automatic transformation
of a video using multimodal information for an engaging exploration
experience,” Applied Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 10, no. 9, 2020.
[8] Qlik
and
Accenture,
“The
Human
Impact
of
Data
Literacy,”
Tech.
Rep.,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://thedataliteracyproject.org/humanimpact
last
accessed
on
20-
06-2022
[9] B. A. Delicado, A. Salado, and R. Momp´o, “Conceptualization of a T-
Shaped engineering competency model in collaborative organizational
settings: Problem and status in the Spanish aircraft industry,” Systems
Engineering, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 534–554, 2018.
[10] S. Engen, K. Falk, and G. Muller, “The need for systems awareness
to support early-phase decision-making—a study from the norwegian
energy industry,” Systems, vol. 9, no. 3, 2021.
[11] Juzgado P.D. Borches, “A3 Architecture overviews. A tool for effective
communication in product evolution,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Twente, 2010.
[12] T. Tomiyama, V. D’Amelio, J. Urbanic, and W. Eimaraghy, “Complexity
of multi-disciplinary design,” CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology,
vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 185–188, 2007.
[13] B. Laugwitz, T. Held, and M. Schrepp, “Construction and Evaluation
of a User Experience Questionnaire,” HCI and Usability for Education
and Work, pp. 63–76, 2008.
[14] F. A. Salim, F. Haider, O. Conlan, and S. Luz, “An approach for ex-
ploring a video via multimodal feature extraction and user interactions,”
Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, no. October 2017, 2018.
[15] G. Gravier, M. Ragot, A. Laurent, R. Bois, G. Jadi, E. Jamet, and
L. Monceaux, “Shaping-Up Multimedia Analytics: Needs and Expec-
tations of Media Professionals,” in The 22nd International Conference
on Multimedia Modelling, vol. 9516, Miami, 2016, pp. 303–314.
[16] G. Nicolini and L. D. Valle, “Errors in Customer Satisfaction Surveys
and Methods to Correct Self-Selection Bias,” Quality Technology Quan-
titative Management, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 167–181, 2011.
[17] B. Popovic, R. Maletic, and T. Paunovic, “Employee Satisfaction Survey
in Function of Business Improvement,” Management - Journal for theory
and practice of management, vol. 20, no. 76, pp. 31–40, 2015.
[18] L. She, L. Ma, A. Jan, H. Sharif Nia, and P. Rahmatpour, “Online
Learning Satisfaction During COVID-19 Pandemic Among Chinese Uni-
versity Students: The Serial Mediation Model,” Frontiers in Psychology,
vol. 12, no. October, 2021.
[19] B. Dudley, “Digital Transformation Initiative: Oil and Gas Industry In
collaboration with Accenture,” World Economic Forum, no. January,
p. 32, 2017. [Online]. Available: www.weforum.org last accessed on
20-06-2022
[20] D. H. Shin, “Demystifying big data: Anatomy of big data developmental
process,” Telecommunications Policy, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 837–854, 2016.
[21] N. M. Sjøkvist and M. Kjørstad, “Eliciting Human Values by Applying
Design Thinking Techniques in Systems Engineering,” INCOSE Inter-
national Symposium, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 478–499, 2019.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

AutoDrone - Use of Autonomously Operated Drone Technology in Forest Inventory 
An Approach Realized on Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Robert Richter, Christopher Dunkel, Oliver Michler 
Technische Universität Dresden, “Friedrich List” Faculty of Transport and Traffic Sciences, Chair of Transport Systems 
Information Technology 
Dresden, Germany 
email: robert.richter@tu-dresden.de 
email: christopher.dunkel@tu-dresden.de 
email: oliver.michler@tu-dresden.de 
 
Abstract— This paper describes the engineering solution of a 
system control technology for drones with the goal of 
autonomous drone flight on or over machine trails, skid trails, 
forest roads and similar line-like path in forest stands. The 
overall non-functional requirement here is for non-satellite 
positioning of the drone in real time based on a radio sensor 
network. The available open space above the line structures 
under the canopy of trees is used as the flight envelope. The 
problems of inaccurate satellite-based positioning inside the 
forestry environment are compensated primarily by the use of 
Wireless Sensor Networks for positioning. The goal is a valid 
recording of tree parameters and the creation of a digital map 
within the tree population. The control system of the drone is 
based on fused data from Wireless Sensor Networks, intertial 
sensors, satellite-based systems and visual position estimation. 
Our drone is thus able to automatically fly over freely 
selectable areas within the path without satellite-based 
positioning and thus fulfills the prerequisite for recording the 
tree parameters using suitable sensors. The practical 
application of this approach in the forest is presented and 
discussed.  
Keywords-Forest Inventory Monitoring; Wireless Sensor 
Network; Ultrawideband; GNSS Independent Localization; 
Drone 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For sustainable forest management, a solid data basis on 
the current stocking is absolutely necessary. In today's 
standard sampling method, trees in defined sampling circles 
are measured by terrestrial walking on the basis of a 
homogeneous, usually permanently established sampling 
grid. These data are stratified according to statistical 
procedures, aggregated and further processed for the 
calculation of forestry-relevant indicators. The current work 
process is becoming increasingly difficult for the following 
reasons:  
 
In the course of ecological forest conversion, mixed 
forests are aimed at that are rich in structure. This is 
associated with a highly developed vegetation layer 
near the ground, which makes accessibility and 
visibility extremely difficult for terrestrial methods. 
 
The sampling method used today is based on a 
personnel-intensive, time-consuming work process 
with a high cost burden for the forest enterprises. 
Although it is possible to reduce the costs associated 
with the surveys by means of the grids of the survey 
network, this is at the expense of the validity or 
statistical reliability of the results.  
 
With regard to accuracy, it must also be taken into 
account that manual measurement methods have a, 
high measurement error. Here, the error rate and 
measurement inaccuracies can be significantly 
reduced with the help of modern recording 
technologies.  
 
The process chains in forest management are for the 
most part still very extensive and decoupled. 
Automated 
data 
acquisition 
and 
subsequent 
automated data preparation allow the personnel and 
technical focus to be placed on data analysis and 
evaluations in the subsequent processing steps. Thus, 
the expertise is directed to the central tasks of 
silvicultural and forestry planning for the forest 
enterprise.  
Against this background, the approach realized the use of 
an autonomously moving drone technology in forest 
inventory and operational planning is to be the basis for a 
later practicable, technologically mature procedure for the 
automated recording of individual tree parameters and the 
generation of population parameters relevant to planning and 
management. The focus of the work is on the technological 
innovation and implementation, the development of a control 
technology for drones with the goal of autonomous drone 
flight on or above machine trails, skid trails, forest roads and 
similar line structures within forest stands. Thereby, the 
available free space profile above the line structures is used 
as flight space. An appropriate flight altitude neglects the 
edges of the paths near the ground, which are covered by 
structures and which prevent a valid recording of the tree 
parameters inside the stand due to the obstructed view in 
terrestrial methods. The control system of the drone is based 
on fused data from radio sensor networks, inertial sensors, 
satellite-based systems and visual position estimation. A 
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensor performs 
object avoidance. Our Drone is thus able to automatically fly 
over freely selectable areas within the path without global 
satellite-based (GNSS) positioning and thus fulfills the 
prerequisite for recording the tree parameters using suitable 
sensors. The specific tasks for this implementation were: 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
Compensation of weak or non-existent GNSS 
signals in a forest environment through the use of 
range-capable Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN). 
 
Automatic flight stabilization with respect to altitude 
and required lateral positioning over the forest floor 
 
Multisensor data fusion and position filtering 
algorithms for autonomous flight primarily based on 
a WSN and secondarily based on an imaging 
(visioning) position module 
 
Application of a Wireless Sensor System for 
communication, 
localization 
and 
environment 
detection of drones 
 
Adaptation / further development of visioning 
position modules for the forest environment with 
regard to obstacle detection of trees, branches, 
bushes and segmentation of the forest floor as well 
as a constant flight altitude 
 
Implementation of a Simultaneous Localization And 
Mapping (SLAM) algorithm for autonomous flight 
within a geofender of the back alley  
 
Figure 1 shows the system approach in this respect. 
 
Figure 1.  System approach for the use of drones in a forest environment. 
 
The paper is structured as follows. After this introduction to 
the topic, which describes the problems and the boundary 
conditions for the use of autonomous drones in a forest 
environment, the state of the art in science and technology 
regarding drones and position technologies described in 
Section II. Section III gives an overview about the 
technological process flow for realizing a GNSS independent 
drone flight on the back alley in the forest. The test of the 
whole system setup and first flights on a test field are shown 
in Section IV. Section V addresses the evaluation of recorded 
measurement results of the performed test flights in a forest 
environment. In this regard, the results and resulting 
problems are discussed. The paper ends with a summary and 
an outlook on further work to solve the problems presented 
before. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Smaller drones or multicopters are relevant for the 
intended use in the forest on skid trails under the leaf canopy 
at a height of about 2 to 3 meters. This is due to the intended 
area of application of the drones, which are to fly 
autonomously under the treetops up to three meters above 
the forest floor, specifically in the area of skid trails. This 
eliminates large and heavy devices from the selection. 
Nowadays, drones can be used for very many disciplines in 
science and research due to their small design, improved 
control technology and falling prices. They open up entirely 
new perspectives for ecological research and environmental 
protection. For example, drones are already being used to 
map landscapes that are difficult to access or to take stock of 
endangered animal species. Today, drones already offer an 
efficient way to collect, aggregate and store or transmit data 
for scientific purposes using appropriately equipped sensor 
technology. 
A. Overview of relevant Drone Technologies 
A special focus is navigation in visual flight or with 
difficult or no GNSS reception. In principle, GNSS-based 
systems (mostly GPS and GLONASS) can currently achieve 
resolutions of barely more than three meters [1], which is 
sufficient for uninhabited landscapes - but not for urban 
areas or use inside buildings or in the forest on skid trails. In 
this regard, heavily attenuated or scattered GNSS signals 
under 
the 
treetops 
make 
autonomous 
drone 
flight 
enormously difficult to the point of impossible feasibility. 
Furthermore, they have to permanently avoid smaller and 
larger tree trunks, branches, smaller trees from the tree 
regeneration and shrubs. This requires a complex camera 
system, gyroscopes, accelerometers and ultrasonic sensors. 
This is the only way the aircraft can find out where it is and 
if there are any obstacles in its way. The state of the art is far 
advanced in this respect. Using so-called intelligent flight 
modes, the visual, inertial, ultrasonic and GNSS data are 
combined in a multi-sensor data fusion. This enables an 
assisted flight depending on the environment. 
 
B. Introduction of Wireless Sensor Networks for Drone 
Positioning and Navigation in a Forestry Environment 
In order to ensure autonomous flight in the forest 
environment, a WSN is adapted for positioning and applied 
to drones. Technical basis for this was the recent increased 
miniaturization as well as the advancing development of 
microsystem technology for the design of highly complex 
sensor nodes, which are combined as individual systems in 
an infrastructure-free and self-configuring WSN. In contrast 
to wired configurations, particular importance is attached to 
the radio-based transmission of information within the WSN 
and to a central coordination unit. The main task of these 
networks is the monitoring of extensive and usually difficult 
to access areas or extensive process chains, which can only 
be 
monitored 
by 
conventional 
systems 
with 
disproportionately high and uneconomical effort. The totality 
of all sensor nodes thus forms an information source with 
significant spatial extent, high flexibility and an almost 
unrestricted scaling behavior. Sensor nodes are generally 
highly complex individual systems consisting of a 
microcontroller, sensors or actuators, a memory, the 
communication unit and a power source. Thus, sensor nodes 
are basically capable of describing relationships with the 
environment, 
such 
as 
topological 
and 
geometrical 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

information. The measured distance of sensor nodes to each 
other is, besides angular or simple presence information, the 
most commonly used form of neighborhood information and 
forms the data basis required for positioning and 
environment recognition methods. Broadband radio systems 
are used, which provide the required distance relations in the 
form of distance and angle measurements in corresponding 
real-time performance on the basis of the licensed Ultra-
Wideband Spectrum (UWB). Within a WSN with a 
minimum of four fixed anchor nodes, a suitably equipped 
drone can fly autonomously along path on a forestry skid 
trail. The anchor nodes are static fixed in pairs on the trees. 
In principle, the anchor nodes can be attached to forestry 
vehicles, trees and other "static" points. The mobile nodes 
can be integrated, for example, in the clothing of forest 
workers or directly on mobile devices such as drones, 
chainsaws. Operationally and algorithmically, static and 
mobile nodes can switch properties [2]. 
III. 
OVERVIEW OF THE TECHNOLOGICAL PROCESS FLOW 
OF THE RADIO SENSOR NETWORK BASED DRONE FLIGHT IN 
THE FOREST ENVIRONMENT 
First of all, the realized process flow is described. At 
least four anchor nodes are placed in the forest along the skid 
alley for Wireless Sensor Network-based tracking by a 
forestry employee. The anchor nodes are attached to trees at 
a height of 1 to 2 m with the antenna pointing towards the 
skid alley (see Figure 2) 
 
 
Figure 2.  Pinned anchor node on a tree [3]. 
 
This focuses the radio channel on the area of interest for 
the positioning within the skid alley (see red marked area in 
Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3.  Skidding trail for wood harvesting (a), area of interest for 
autonomous drone flight marked in red (b). 
A. Technologies Used on the Drone 
The corresponding wireless sensor for positioning 
determination is additionally attached and integrated as a so-
called node on the drone control unit. In this regard, the 
connection was realized via different interfaces like 
Universal Asynchronous Receiver / Transmitter (UART) and 
Controller Area Network (CAN). By calibrating the initial 
anchor into a geodetic reference system, especially a World 
Geodetic System 1984 (WGS84) coordinate and determining 
the angular offset to the north, the coordinate transformation 
into global coordinates then takes place. The novelty now is 
that the drone's determined relative position within the WSN 
is converted to a global coordinate and provided to the drone 
controller as a fake National Marine Electronics Association 
standardized position data exchange (NMEA) message. 
Missing NMEA parameters are simulated or replaced. The 
drone does not recognize any difference between converted 
or simulated and real GNSS environment. In this context, the 
interconnection of the system components required for this 
purpose is shown in the following Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Interconnection between system components regarding the 
WSN and the drone, especially the flight controller and the integrated 
mobile node. 
 
In the left part of the figure, the possibilities for drone 
control are shown. The control unit with the Mission Planner 
is a software for planning flight missions. It is used to plan 
the flight trajectory on the skid trail in prior, which the drone 
will then fly autonomously with the help of the WSN. 
Physically, the control unit is part of the so-called Ground 
Station (GS) and is equipped with a 433 MHz transceiver 
and connected to a computer running the planning software 
(see Figure 5). The trajectory planned on the computer is 
finally transferred via the telemetry channel to the drone and 
saved as a flight mission. Until now, the GS software used 
has been Mission Planner (MP) and QGroundControl 
(QGC). 
 
 
Figure 5.  Ground Station system architecture. 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

The other remote control shown in Figure 4 serves as a 
fallback level to switch from autonomous flight to manual 
control. This is a commercially available programmable 
remote control (FrSky Taranis / Herelink Transceiver), 
which is connected to the drone with 2.4 GHz for pure flight 
control. This is only used in an emergency if problems are 
detected in autonomous flight. 
The heart of the drone is the flight controller. This is 
where all sensor data ultimately converge. From this, the 
flight parameters are calculated and the corresponding rotors 
are controlled, for example, to execute the uploaded mission 
plan. The flight controller in this case is based on ArduPilot, 
an open source software for unmanned vehicles and the de 
facto standard for autonomous control of multicopters, fixed 
wing/Vertical Take Off and Landing (VTOL) gliders, 
helicopters, submarines and land vehicles. The FW variant 
for multicopters is called ArduCopter and is customizable. 
The configuration of the Firmware to the respective 
properties of the copter as well as its sensors is done via 
parameters. If changes to the FW are necessary, or if new 
modules not previously available, but have to be added such 
as positioning by using an extended Kalman filter (version 2 
or 3), this can be implemented using the corresponding 
environment dependencies. To clarify this, the system 
architecture of the FW shown in Figure 6 is used with 
examples of the connection of further components. Via a 
companion computer (e.g., Arduino or Raspberry Pi on the 
drone) with the ground station, data of the copter can be 
retrieved, configured or changed. MAVLink (Micro Air 
Vehicle Link) is the protocol for communication between the 
components. The actual ArduPilot firmware is described in 
the Flight Code part. In this regard the flight controller, is a 
Cube Orange. It works according to the open Pixhawk 
standard, which defines guidelines for the implementation of 
the hardware (e.g., interfaces, voltage levels, etc.). The 
superordinate operating system is the RTOS (Real Time 
Operating System) ChibiOS. In normal operation, access to a 
large part of these components is not possible or not 
necessary, since the entire configuration of the system is 
done via the parameters [4]. 
 
 
Figure 6.  ArduPilot system architecture [4]. 
Finally, this section will look at the drone as itself. The 
drone is an PM Q685 Quadcopter and has the following 
technologies relevant to this particular system approach: 
 
 
Real Time Kinematic GNSS Positioning Modul 
 
Cube Orange Flight Controller 
 
HereLink Transceiver 
 
ArduPilot flight stack 
 
Ultrawideband sensor node (Pozyx) with 
Arduino Uno 
 
The following Figure 7 illustrates the connection of the 
UWB sensor to the flight control of the drone. The Arduino 
Uno is responsible for the calculation of the positions to the 
individual anchors (PA1...PA4) as well as for the coordinate 
transformation. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Integration of the UWB-based sensor node into the flight 
controller [4]. 
 
Finally, Figure 8 shows the operational drone modified 
for the goal of autonomous flight over a skid trail under the 
leaf canopy of trees in a forest environment. This fulfills the 
requirements for GNSS independent and sufficiently precise 
positioning with the use of a WSN distributed within the 
forest. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Operational ready drone at the launch point in the forestry 
environment at the skid trail.  
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

B. Flight Mission Procedure 
The preparation of the flight mission, i.e., the trajectory 
to be flying on the skid trails follows the sequence diagram 
below (Figure 9). As a result, the flight trajectory is 
transferred to the drone as a flight mission. At this point, in 
principle the drone is ready itself for fly. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Sequence diagram for flight mission preparing. 
 
In order for the drone to fly the trajectory autonomously 
in the forest environment, the following preparations must be 
fulfilled on site (see sequence diagram Figure 10).  
 
 
Figure 10.  Sequence diagram for flight mission on site. 
 
After this sequence diagram is completed, GNSS is 
deactivated and the drone flies the programmed route from 
the start and back again. During the flight all sensor data 
arriving at the flight controller are logged. 
 
IV. 
TEST OF THE WHOLE SYSTEM SETUP AND FIRST 
FLIGHTS ON A TEST FIELD 
The first flight tests and measurements were carried out 
on a test field. Here, the pilot still retained control of the 
drone. All process sequences were optimized and an artificial 
return path created on the test field was successfully flown 
autonomously in the end. For this purpose, a best-case 
scenario was designed and implemented. This included no 
sources of interference from the real environment such as 
trees, i.e., no or hardly any signal attenuation and multipath. 
The following figure 11 shows the test field and the flight 
area equipped with a WSN (marked in red).  
 
 
Figure 11.  Overview about the test field as a surveyed map (a) and a 
satellite based view (b). The WSN area for flights is marked in red in each 
case. 
 
The first interesting measurements are related to the 
distances between the anchors and the mobile node on the 
drone (see Figure 12). The symmetrical overlap of the 
distance measurements of all anchors at two points 
(outbound and return flight to the starting point) can be seen. 
There are minimal deviations in the 10 cm range of the 
distances during the entire flight. In summary, the distances 
are not very noisy and without detected outliers for this case. 
A comparison with the flight behavior confirmed this 
measurement. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Anchor-Tag distance measurements during a flight in a radio 
sense optimal environment on a testfield. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Another important aspect of the investigation relates to 
the in-flight altitude measurement in the radio sensor 
network (see Figure 13). An optimization in terms of height 
measurement is the use of an ultrasonic sensor instead of the 
WSN. This type of sensor currently works more accurately 
due to the technical structure.  
 
 
Figure 13.  Flight altitude measurements during an autonomous flight on 
the test field. 
 
The maximum height measurement ends at 7 meters, which 
is more than sufficient for our application. In the diagram 
you can see some outliers, which should not have been there 
due to a flight observation. A sudden drift of the drone in 
altitude could not be observed with the deviating altitude 
measurements (deviations at 15 s and 26 s). Since these 
deviations were short-lived, the Extended Kalman filter used 
compensated for them. 
 
V. 
EVALUATION OF RECORDED MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
OF THE PERFORMED TEST FLIGHTS IN A FOREST 
ENVIRONMENT 
The extensive test flights carried out in the forest 
confirmed the measurements on the test field. As results its 
presented here two interesting figures. Figure 14 shows the 
positioning of the drone with the mobile node/tag during the 
flight along the back road in the forest based only on the 
distance measurements of the WSN. 
 
 
Figure 14.  Positioning of the drone based on raw distance measurements. 
 
It can be clearly seen that the positioning based on the raw 
data measurement of the distances varies with a deviation in 
the decimeter range. Thus, theoretically, no continuous 
smooth flight trajectory is possible on the sole basis of 
positioning in a WSN. Only by using the other onboard 
drone sensors, a smooth continuous flight trajectory becomes 
possible through a multi-sensor data fusion in the used 
Extended Kalman Filter (see Figure 15). 
 
 
Figure 15.  Data fused global positioning of the drone in the forestry 
environment. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
In this paper we have shown, that a GNSS-based 
positioning of a drone can be substituted by a local WSN for 
positioning. In this context, an already implemented 
solution of an autonomous drone flight within a skid trail 
was presented and discussed regarding its results (e.g., 
position accuracy, measurement setup). Further work relates 
to the objectives described in the introduction with respect 
to individual tree-to-tree mapping and radar-based tree 
condition detection. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the Agency for Renewable 
Resources (Fachagentur Nachwachsende Rohstoffe e. V. - 
FNR) as project sponsor of the Federal Ministry of Food and 
Agriculture (BMEL) [5]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Mansfeld, Werner, satellite positioning and navigation - 
basics and application of global satellite navigation systems. 
vol. 2, Wiesbaden, 2004 
[2] A. Born, Algorithms for position determination and their 
accuracies in Wireless Sensor Networks, PhD thesis, 
München 2011 
[3] Pozyx. 
2021, 
Pozyx.io. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://pozyx.io/products-and-services/creator 2022.06.25 
[4] Ardupilot, 2022, ardupilot.org. [Online] Available from: 
https://ardupilot.org/dev/docs/apmcopter-code-overview.html 
2022.06.25 
[5] BMEL 
2022, 
fnr.org. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.fnr.de/fnr-struktur-aufgaben-lage/fachagentur-
nachwachsende-rohstoffe-fnr.html 2022.06.25 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Implementation of the RAM Analyses into a Discrete Event Simulation of a Process 
in Early Stages of its Development 
Martin Kubic, Maurice Pendola 
Axone 
Meyreuil, France 
m.kubic@axonegroup.com 
 
 
Abstract — Modeling complex systems has become a common 
tool in many fields, especially in engineering, mathematics, 
military, and transport sciences. It provides a relatively 
inexpensive way to gather information for comprehensive and 
decision-making purposes. Since the size and complexity of real 
systems in these areas rarely allow analytical solutions to 
provide the information, simulation has become the method of 
choice. One difficulty in the engineering design processes of the 
designed system is to introduce this powerful tool in presence of 
all the design uncertainties that arise due to the early stage of 
the design knowing the fact that it will be useful for verification 
purposes and is to today widely used for that. This paper aims 
at given issues in order to introduce combined intention to use 
simulation tool for allocation purposed during the architecting 
process in order to help to perform decomposition and 
architecture tradeoffs during early stages of the design. Further, 
it illustrates the benefits of using simulation through an 
implementation of the aspects of Reliability, Availability, and 
Maintainability (RAM) into a Discrete Event Simulation (DES) 
tool in order to perform architecture tradeoffs and 
performances allocation based on both physical behavior and 
RAM considerations in the early design phase of a complex 
storage plant.  
Keywords - RAMS analyses, Discrete event simulation, 
Allocation process, System Engineering 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Recent studies have shown that engineers continue to 
spend an enormous amount of time researching information 
and assembling reports. This trend has only grown with the 
increase of scale and complexity of systems, resulting in a 
dramatic increase in system requirements. Thus, managing 
requirements using simplistic methods is no longer enough. 
With increasing system complexity, document-centric 
approaches have become increasingly difficult to manage due 
to the increased risk of overlooking critical information and 
key interfaces. This has given rise of the Model Based System 
Engineering (MBSE) in order to replace the document 
centered management by a management centered around the 
models all along the life cycle of a system starting early in the 
design phase up the verification and validation phases ([1]).  
Although the modelling of complex system has recently 
become a common practice in many industrial projects, the 
simulation methods are used primary in the later phases of the 
projects as a verification tool (Figure 1) [2][3]. The absence of 
the application of the simulations methods from the very 
beginning of a system life leads often to unpredicted 
additional costs and delays of the projects [4]. Although, there 
exist attempts to implement the simulation in the decision-
making stage [6], several challenges are faced including 
constant evolution of the system’s design or input data 
uncertainties. Very often, especially in the French nuclear 
environment, these obstacles overweight the potential 
outcome the simulation at the large scale of a system can 
provide. The aim of this paper to provide an example of the 
implementation of a simulation method at the very beginning 
of the design-phase of an industrial process to support the 
decision-making at the highest architect level. 
The paper is structured as follows. Firstly, an introduction 
to modeling from a system engineering point of view, 
particularly in the design phase, supplemented by the 
principles of discrete event modeling is provided with the 
emphasis on the SimEvents tool. The body of the paper is then 
devoted to the description of the implementation of the RAM 
elements into a case study model applied to a high-
performance process installation. Finally, the study is put in 
context with the implementation of the RAM analysis in early 
stages of a project as a decision-making support at the overall 
architect level to aim to improve the system design, to perform 
RAM requirements allocation based on the sensitivity of the 
subsystems, in order to put the efforts on important 
subsystems and then minimizing the design and operational 
costs over the system’s life cycle. 
II. MODELLING OF A COMPLEX SYSTEM 
As mentioned above, there are simulation methods, tools 
implementing these methods, but they are generally not 
applied correctly. Many system engineers start modeling with 
the goal of modeling, overdoing it, going too deep (with the 
focus more on using simulation to verify or validate 
performance) or simply to model the bad things. Model-based 
systems engineering is essential in the efforts to design 
increasingly complicated and complex systems in an era of 
unprecedented change. However, it is a tool and a technique 
in many systems engineering toolbox. Nevertheless, the focus 
should be on applying systems engineering to deliver the 
required value to the customer and stakeholders effectively 
and efficiently. 
Detailed models are not always desirable, especially in the 
early phases of the life cycle (the pre-study phase and the 
descending phase of the V-cycle). At this stage, the systems 
are not yet fully defined. The contribution of the models 
should provide a broader insight into the behavior of the 
system, giving directions and insights. The interest is not to 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

chase the precise values as the result of the model (which is 
already quite difficult given the complexity of the systems). In 
many cases, orders of magnitude are enough to understand it. 
At the same time, the models must be able to provide the 
flexibility to model various scenarios and possibilities of the 
system configuration. 
The objective of this paper is to demonstrate whether it is 
possible to build a recursive development of modeling as it is 
done elsewhere in system engineering on design in general by 
building à Simulation Breakdown Structure (SBS) and a 
corresponding Simulation Architecture in such way 
• 
From the most general (system performance) to the 
specific (component performance) while changing 
the 
paradigm 
on 
precision. 
To 
favor 
the 
approximately right at the general level in the 
upstream phase to the detriment of the precisely 
wrong. 
• 
Use this approximative modeling to develop and 
enrich the system engineering requirements model. 
 
 
Figure 1. Example of a V cycle. Very often there is a lack of simulation 
methods in the decision-making phase. 
 
In order to verify the above objectives, a simple test case 
is used consisting of a storage plant system which will be 
modeled as a discrete event system. The main principles of 
discrete event modeling are summarized in the following 
section. 
 
III. DESCRETE EVENT SIMULATION 
Discrete-event simulation is a method that allows to 
simulate the behavior and to quantify the performance of a 
process consisting of a series of ordered sequences. Unlike 
continuous 
systems 
whose 
state 
variable(s) 
change 
continuously over time, the state variable(s) of a discrete 
system varies only at a discrete set of points in time. A discrete 
system can be imagined as a set of entities that are connected 
and communicate when an event or activity occurs. Each 
entity is characterized by a set of properties (attributes) that 
describe their current state and affect their behavior. Entities 
representing components of the system under investigation 
must be explicitly modeled in order to capture the behavior of 
the system in relation to the simulation study. As the 
simulation time evolves, entities can change their state in 
consequence of activities that happened during a given 
simulation period. The time in the simulation at which such a 
state change occurs is called an event. The relationship 
between events and activities are defined by user and are 
based on the objectives of the studied system [5]-[9]. This 
includes in particular the specification of activity durations, 
which can be modeled as deterministic and based on 
stochastically influenced parameters (simulation of failures of 
the system’s elements).  
Discrete event simulation methods can be used in different 
fields of application. In this paper, the focus area is related a 
logistics process. The history of discrete event simulations 
goes back into the early 1960’s, but it was only towards the 
end of the last century the DES application has spread widely 
as the information technologies boomed [12]. Currently, there 
exist many discrete event simulation tools [10][11]. 
 
IV. MATLAB SIMEVENTS TOOL 
For the case study presented in this paper, it was decided 
to use the SimEvents software of the MathWorks company, 
because the SimEvents provides a wide range of predefined 
tools for the DES and in combination with Matlab Simulink 
allows the user to develop and customize the model according 
to his needs. 
From a practical point of view, while the SimEvents 
library contains all the crucial types of blocks needed for basic 
simulations, it is obvious that the development of add-on 
blocks might be unavoidable if the system becomes more 
complicated, for example, by adding the possibility of 
machinery breakdowns in a manufacturing/processing line. 
Matlab Simulink can be a tool for reliability calculations [14], 
but objective here was to model a process line, for which the 
SimEvents module is adopted to.  
However, in addition to the SimEvents library, Matlab 
contains a few exemplary models that users can test. The 
Matlab 2019a release provides an example of a Machine block 
that attempts to incorporate principles of failures, reliability, 
and maintainability into SimEvents simulations. 
The main downside to the native form of the Machine 
block is that it simply does not model properly the case of a 
failure. Firstly, the random failures are characterized by an 
exponential law rather than a gaussian law. Another problem 
was related to the management of the resources needed to 
maintain a failed block that were not use at all causing serious 
consequences for the optimization studies of the installation 
resources. The last limitation of the default version of the 
machine block was related to the preventive maintenance. The 
theory of dependability studies considers the components 
undertaken a maintenance task as new which translates in 
simulation by resetting the internal component clock to zero. 
The default block configuration omitted this fact yielding the 
maintenance as it has never happened. One by one, all these 
issues have been treated by authors and the associated 
problems eliminated as well as some additional features were 
added allowing to switch properly between the block’s 
internal states.   
V. ILLUSTRATION CASE STUDY 
This section is devoted to a demonstration of how a real 
system (which is in the design phase) can be modeled using 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

SimEvents. The case study concerns the modeling of the flow 
of storage / removal of items of a future installation in order 
to be stored.  For the policy reason, some details cannot be 
shared. However, the aim is to focus on the benefits of the 
simulation method as a decision-making support at the overall 
architect level in order to improve the design and minimize 
the operational costs over the system’s life cycle. 
The items storage process can be viewed as a 
manufacturing process that transforms an object into another 
object. To take this into account, and due to certain Matlab 
limitations (existing pre-programmed objects), a single type 
of entity is used to represent the different objects appearing in 
the process (convoys with full or empty items, wagons, the 
secondary elements to be stored, or waste products. The 
entities themselves have no graphical representation. Their 
flow is represented by arrows connecting the blocks. On the 
other hand, entities can transport data in the form of attributes. 
 
The installation is composed of several systems (that are 
denoted for simplicity as System1, System2 etc.) and some 
auxiliary systems to support the main systems (Figure 2). As the 
items advance through the storage line, each item undergoes a 
process of manipulation and transformation until it is 
temporary stored in the System3 (red lines). 
 
 
Figure 2. Illustration of the main elements of the storage facility. 
 
Each of the system is composed of several subsystems 
(workstations). At the design phase, the composition of the 
subsystems is not yet defined, and the performance allocations 
are made at the subsystems and system levels (level 0 and 
level 1 of a traditional Product Breakdown Structure, PBS). 
The items to be stored arrive to System1 by a convoy at a 
predefined rate and are processed through the installation line. 
Inversely, the stored items can be also evacuated as the new 
ones arrive. The requirements impose a certain number of 
items to be stored over a given period.  As can be seen, no 
detailed input data are provided and in fact there are not 
needed at this stage to model the system and its capabilities as 
is described next.  
 
A. 
Model Description 
In the model, each of the subsystem is represented by the 
improved block Machine which can transition between three 
predefined states that are defined in the operational phase of 
the considered system lifecycle 
• 
Operation state 
• 
Maintenance 
• 
Breakdown 
In the regular operation state, the machine acquires a 
working resource and processes a given task. In the scheduled 
maintenance state, the machine switches to service mode and 
the processing of a task is interrupted. After a fixed service 
time, the machine resumes regular operation. The machine 
can also break down sporadically following an exponential 
probability law and enter a breakdown state. The time to repair 
faults is defined through a mean time to repair and the 
machine resumes regular operation once the repair is 
completed. 
The main structure of the flow model in the SimEvents 
interface is shown in Figure 3. As can be seen, the model 
contains several distinct blocks. The blocks are built 
according to the principle of Russian dolls which has the 
advantage of being able to look at and analyze the model at 
different scales. It also allows building a progressive 
validation. 
 
 
Figure 3. Main structure of the model in the SimEvents interface. 
 
As the entity representing the treated object advance in the 
process, different events occur and trigger another subsystems 
and elements like resources.  
 
B. 
Model Validation 
The good performance of the model was systematically 
and incrementally validated. In addition, non-regression 
checks were carried out each time the model was upgraded 
(implementation of a new block, a control function, etc.): an 
immediate check in the simulation data inspector was 
performed in order to check if the behavior of the model was 
correct. 
To demonstrate that the flow inside the installation is 
correct, the case of a convoy transporting three objects 
arriving at the installation was considered. The Gantt chart 
representing the progress of the transformation of the arriving 
items into its stored location is shown on the Figure 4. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
Figure 4. Gantt diagram of the flow of three items. 
 
 
Figure 4 shows that the flow of the objects inside the 
installation is continuous and in order. This shows that the 
flow is controlled meaning that the entity (object) cannot 
advance if the next position is occupied by treating another 
object.  
In principle such a simple case can be modelled manually 
if some average values were considered reinforcing the model 
validation. However, if the random failures are considered, the 
situation changes dramatically. Figure 5 gives an example of the 
delay necessary to treat one convoy. As can be seen, that the 
delays are now becoming irregular as some subsystems break 
down and processing is delayed due to the time required for 
repair.  
 
 
Figure 5. Example of the delays necessary to treat the content of one 
convoy. Red line represents the mean delay.  
 
In addition to possibility to model the random breakdown 
of the various subsystems, the model allows to manage and to 
size the need of the resources. With regard to the resources 
involved in the operation of the installation, their rate of use is 
shown in Figure 6. Information on the rate of use of the 
resources allows to optimize the pace of work. For example, 
it does not appear necessary for the teams to be always present 
at the installation. In addition, their presence must be carefully 
planned, because some subsystems may break down, which 
would delay the flow. The model as it stands assumes that 
resources are available when needed. 
 
Figure 6. Resources use rate for various subsystems.  
 
VI. SUMMARY 
The model presented here was developed to simulate the 
storage process of a future installation. Model validity was 
performed systematically and incrementally. Non-regression 
checks were carried out at each evolution of the model in order 
to check whether the behavior of the model was correct. The 
model is based on decision parameters and model version for 
a given configuration state of the design with its associated 
definition 
artefacts 
(functional 
architecture, 
physical 
architecture, etc.)  
The line process is not difficult to imagine for simple 
cases, but the model becomes very useful when the 
introduction of workstations availability is applied. The model 
clearly shows that it can be considered as a reliable source for 
predictions of various scenarios. 
The results obtained with the model show that the 
installation is able to meet the requirement of receiving a 
given number of objects even if considering the availability of 
workstations. Failure modeling is completely random, which 
makes each simulation unique from the standpoint of 
workstation availability. The impact of the reliability of 
workstations on the flow can be visible over longer periods 
(mitigated by regular maintenance).  
The paper presents only certain scenario, but due to the 
wide variety of model parameters, the model allows the study 
of other scenarios as well. The modeling strategy adopted 
(starting from the most general or more specific) will allow to 
refine the model and gradually allocate performances 
/objectives to lower-level subsystems / components in the 
physical breakdown structure as the progress of the design 
advances and thus be able to simulate more precisely and 
progressively what is happening inside each subsystem up to 
the desired level of detail. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Although models are not a perfect representation of a 
system, MBSE can provide insight and feedback earlier and at 
lower cost than implementation alone. This approach tested in 
this case study has clearly shown that the use of the simulation 
method is suitable for managing the development of the 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

system by showing the weak points of the system and 
therefore the points for its improvement and adaptation. It has 
been shown that there is not always a need to go into deep 
detail when modeling a system. Parameters describing 
performance could be sufficient and subsystems could be 
treated as black boxes. In addition, when such a model is 
deployed early in the design phase, it can always be updated 
as the design studies progressively refine the physical 
breakdown structure and can finally serve as a validation / 
verification tool in the ascending phase of the V-cycle.  
Regarding the perspectives, it would be interesting to find 
out how accurately SimEvents can manage the management 
of human resources, especially if the pace of work is not 
continuous. Currently, the “Resource Pool” block does not 
offer the option to specify whether resources will only be 
available for a fraction of the time. On the other hand, it allows 
the use of a fraction of a resource. However, further 
investigation would be required to answer this question. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] INCOSE, “Systems Engineering Handbook, A Guide for 
System Life Cycle Processes and Activities”, 4th edn. Wiley, 
New York, 2015. 
[2] A. Hazle and J. Towers, “Good Practice in MBSE Model 
Verification and Validation”, INCOSE UK Annual Systems 
Engineering Conference (ASEC), 2020. 
[3] D. Cook and W. Schindel, “Utilizing MBSE Patterns to 
Accelerate System Verification”, Insightm vol. 20m pp. 32-41, 
2017. 
[4] M. J. Simões-Marques, “Modeling and Simulation in system 
life cycle”, Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, pp. 785 – 792, 
2015. 
[5] O. Ullrich and D. Lückerath, “An Introduction to Discrete-
Event Modeling and Simulation”, Simulation Notes Europe 
SNE 27(1), pp. 9-16, 2017. 
[6] T. Han, Q. Huang, A. Zhang, and Q. Zhang, “Simulation-Based 
Decision Support Tools in the Early Design Stages of a Green 
Building”, Sustainability, vol. 10(10), pp. 3696, 2018. 
[7] D. Antonelli, P. Litwin, and D. Stadnicka, “Multiple System 
Dynamics and Discrete Event Simulation for manufacturing 
system performance evaluation”, Procedia CIRP, Volume 78, 
Pages 178-183, 2018. 
[8] G. S. Fishman, “Discrete-Event Simulation: Modeling, 
Programming, and Analysis”, Springers series in operations 
research, 2001. 
[9] B. Babulak and M. Wang, “Discrete Event Simulation: State of 
the Art”, Int. Journal Online Engineering (iJOE), vol. 4, No 2, 
2008. 
[10] L. Dias, A. Vieira, G. Pereira, and J. Oliveira, “Discrete 
Simulation Software Ranking – A Top List of the Worldwide 
Most Popular and Used Tools”, Proceedings of the 2016 
Winter Simulation Conference, 2016. 
[11] J. J. Swain, “Simulation Software Survey”, OR/MS Today 
magazine from Institute for Operations Research and the 
Management Sciences (INFORMS). Lionheart Publishing. 
1991-2009. 
[12] R. E. Nance, “A history of discrete event simulation 
programming languages”, In: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM 
SIGPLAN conference on History of programming languages, 
pp. 149-175,1993. 
[13] R. F. Stapelberg, “Handbook of reliability, availability, 
maintainability and safety in engineering design”, Springer-
Verlag London Limited, 2009. 
[14] S. Kadwane, J. Kumbharem and D. Mohanta, “A 
Matlab/Simulink modeling for reliability analysis of inverter 
applied to MPPT based PV system”, 2015 Annual IEEE India 
Conference (INDICON), pp. 1-6, 2015. 
 
 
 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
 
VR-SysML: SysML Model Visualization and Immersion in Virtual Reality 
Roy Oberhauser[0000-0002-7606-8226] 
Computer Science Dept. 
Aalen University 
Aalen, Germany 
 e-mail: roy.oberhauser@hs-aalen.de 
 
 
Abstract - As systems grow in complexity, the interdisciplinary 
nature of systems engineering makes the visualization and 
comprehension of the underlying system models challenging for 
the various stakeholders. This, in turn, can affect validation and 
realization correctness. Furthermore, stakeholder collaboration 
is often hindered due to the lack of a common medium to access 
and convey these models, which are often partitioned across 
multiple 2D diagrams. This paper contributes VR-SysML, a 
solution concept for visualizing and interacting with SysML 
models in Virtual Reality (VR). Our prototype realization shows 
its feasibility, and our evaluation results based on a case study 
shows its support for the various SysML diagram types in VR, 
cross-diagram element recognition via our backplane followers 
concept, and depicting further related (SysML and non-SysML) 
models side-by-side in VR.  
Keywords - Systems Modeling Language (SysML); virtual 
reality; systems modeling; systems engineering. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Systems engineering (SysE) is an interdisciplinary 
collaborative engineering field dealing with the design, 
integration, and management of complex system solutions 
over their lifecycle. The field faces a continuous challenge of 
growing system complexity, an increasing share of 
functionality shifted to software, system resource constraints, 
while coping with compressed development timeframes and 
project budget and resource constraints. Furthermore, the 
interdisciplinary nature of SysE means that diverse 
stakeholder 
types 
and 
groups 
with 
their 
specialty 
competencies and concerns are involved and who may not be 
readily acquainted with the model types and modeling 
languages involved. Any models may be digitally isolated or 
practically inaccessible to all stakeholder types, "hidden" 
within "cryptic" modeling tools that certain modeling 
specialists may understand. Due to the interdisciplinary nature 
of SysE, the inaccessibility and lack of model comprehension 
can hamper collaboration and affect overall system validity 
and correctness with regard to requirements.  
While SysE can involve various models including 
physical, 
mechanical, 
electrical, 
thermodynamic, 
and 
electronic, the focus of this paper is on the Systems Modeling 
Language (SysML®) [1]. SysML is a dialect of the Unified 
Modeling Language (UML®) and defined as a UML 2 
Profile. Views and their associated diagrams can help reduce 
cognitive overload, yet their divided nature also risks 
overlooking a relation or element and comprehending the 
overall model. Ideally, a model should be whole and complete 
to the appropriate degree for the reality it is depicting and 
simplifying. Yet the modeling languages and associated 
tooling typically assumes a 2D display and portrays portions 
of models sliced onto 2D diagrams. Although 3D models can 
be portrayed on 2D displays, they lack an immersion quality.  
VR is a mediated visual environment which is created and 
then experienced as telepresence by the perceiver. VR 
provides an unlimited immersive space for visualizing and 
analyzing a growing and complex set of system models and 
their interrelationships simultaneously in a 3D spatial 
structure viewable from different perspectives. Lacking a 
proper 3D system modeling notation, in the interim we 
propose retaining the well-known SysML notation and 
interconnecting 2D SysML diagrams in VR, which can suffice 
for depicting the relations between elements across diagrams 
and assist with navigating and validating complex models. As 
system models grow in complexity and reflect the deeper 
integration and portrayal of their system reality and 
environment, an immersive digital environment provides an 
additional visualization capability to comprehend the “big 
picture” model for structurally and hierarchically complex 
system models via interconnected diagrams and associated 
digital elements. 
As to our prior work, VR-UML [2] provides VR-based 
visualization of UML diagrams. VR-BPMN [3] visualizes 
BPMN-based business process models in VR, while VR-EA 
[4] visualizes Enterprise Architecture (EA) ArchiMate® 
models in VR. This paper contributes VR-SysML, a solution 
concept for visualizing and interacting with SysML results in 
VR. Our prototype realization shows its feasibility, and a case-
based evaluation provides insights into its capabilities. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section 2 discusses related work. In Section 3, the solution 
concept is described. Section 4 provides details about the 
realization. The evaluation is described in Section 5 and is 
followed by a conclusion. 
II. RELATED WORK 
As to visualization approaches with SysML, Nigischer and 
Gerhard [5] proposed a lightweight 3D visualization for 
SysML models in Product Data Management. They describe 
an approach and concept, but no prototype is shown. Barosan 
et al. [6] describes a 3D SysML digital-twin-in-loop virtual 
simulation environment of a distribution center for truck 
driving test scenarios integrating IBM Rhapsody with 
Unity3D; VR and immersion are not considered. Mahboob et 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
 
al. [7] describe a model-based approach to generate VR object 
collision simulation scenes from SysML behavior models. 
Besides our own VR-UML [2], VR features are not yet 
commonplace in UML tools: Ozkaya [8] analyzed 58 different 
UML tools without any mention of VR, and Ozkaya and Erata 
[9] surveyed 109 practitioners to determine their UML 
preferences without any mention of VR. 
In 
contrast, 
VR-SysML 
provides 
a 
VR-centric 
visualization and immersive experience with SysML models, 
providing automatic layout of views as stacked 3D 
hyperplanes, visualizing the reality of inter-view relations and 
recurrence of elements, and enabling interactive modeling in 
VR. Hypermodeling enables SysML, UML, and other models 
to be simultaneously visualized in the same virtual space, 
supporting cross-model analysis across various diagram types 
and stakeholder concerns. 
III. SOLUTION CONCEPT 
Our solution concept is based on VR. In support of our 
view that an immersive VR experience can be beneficial for 
model analysis, Müller et al. [10] compared VR vs. 2D for a 
software analysis task, finding that VR does not significantly 
decrease comprehension and analysis time nor significantly 
improve correctness (although fewer errors were made). 
While interaction time was less efficient, VR improved the 
user experience, was more motivating, less demanding, more 
inventive/innovative, and more clearly structured. 
 
Figure 1.  Conceptual map of our various VR solution concepts. 
SysML is a general-purpose architecture modeling 
language for systems and systems-of-systems, supporting 
their specification, analysis, design, verification, and 
validation. Out of UML 2’s diagrams, it reuses seven 
(modifying four of these) while adding two additional ones. 
Thus, for VR-SysML (Figure 1) we chose to extend our VR-
UML [2] solution concept, which is based on our generalized 
VR Modeling Framework (VR-MF) (detailed in [4]). VR-MF 
provides a VR-based domain-independent hypermodeling 
framework addressing four aspects requiring special attention 
when modeling in VR: visualization, navigation, interaction, 
and data retrieval. Our other VR modeling solutions include 
VR-BPMN [3], VR-EA [4], and VR-EAT, which integrates 
the EA tool Atlas to provide dynamically-generated EA 
diagrams in VR. VR-EA+TCK adds additional capabilities, 
integrating enterprise Tool, Content, and Knowledge such as 
a Knowledge Management Systems (KMS) and/or Enterprise 
Content Management Systems (ECMS). While SysML is 
popular for embedded and model-based systems, it is also 
applicable to domains such as EA. 
A. Visualization in VR 
Our concept attempts to leverage the best of 2D and VR: 
to support diagram comprehension, we chose not to diverge 
significantly from the SysML notation. Yet placing 2D 
SysML images like flat screens in front of users would provide 
little added value in the 3D VR space. A plane is used to 
intuitively represent a diagram. Stacked hyperplanes are used 
to support viewing multiple diagrams at once, while 
permitting a user to readily have an overview of the number 
and types of diagrams. Furthermore, hyperplanes serve a 
grouping function and allow us to utilize the concept of a 
common transparent or invisible backplane to indicate 
common elements across diagrams via multi-colored inter-
diagram followers. Versus side-by-side, stacked diagrams are 
a scalable approach for larger projects since the distance to the 
VR camera is shorter. Multiple stacks can be used to group 
diagrams or delineate heterogeneous models. Diagrams of 
interest can still be viewed side-by-side by moving them from 
the stack via an anchor sphere affordance on a diagram corner, 
which is also used to hide or collapse diagrams to reduce 
visual clutter. To distinguish SysML elements types, 2D icon 
images can be placed on generic (e.g., block) model elements, 
in order to reduce the effort of modeling each SysML element 
type as a separate 3D form for VR. 
B. Navigation in VR 
One navigation challenge arising from the immersion VR 
offers is supporting intuitive spatial navigation while reducing 
potential VR sickness symptoms. Thus, we incorporate two 
navigation modes in our solution concept: the default uses 
gliding controls for fly-through VR, while teleporting 
instantly places the camera at a selected position.  Although 
potentially disconcerting, it may reduce the likelihood of VR 
sickness induced by fly-through for those prone to it. 
C. Interaction in VR 
As VR interaction has not yet become standardized, in our 
concept user-element interaction is supported primarily 
through VR controllers and a Virtual Tablet. The Virtual 
Tablet provides detailed element information with context-
specific Create, Retrieve, Update, Delete (CRUD) capabilities 
including a virtual keyboard for text entry via laser pointer key 
selection. The aforementioned corner anchor sphere 
affordance supports moving / hiding / displaying diagrams. 
Inter-diagram element followers can be displayed, hidden, or 
selected (emphasized). 
IV. REALIZATION 
The logical architecture for our VR-SysML prototype 
realization is shown in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2.  VR-SysML logical architecture. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
 
SysML models are imported in XMI format to our Data 
Hub that is implemented in Python. Xmitodict is used to 
convert the XMI to a key-value dictionary and the built-in json 
package is used for JSON conversion. Pymongo is used to 
store the JSON (as BSON) in the NoSQL document database 
MongoDB. The scripts in the Unity environment utilize 
json.NET. SysML XMI files produced from SparxSystems 
Enterprise Architect were used. Our prototype currently does 
not consider the Allocation Table (relationship matrices). 
V. EVALUATION 
We base the evaluation of our solution concept on design 
science method and principles [11], in particular, a viable 
artifact, problem relevance, and design evaluation (utility, 
quality, efficacy). A case study is used with an emphasis on 
SysML diagram type support, how these are visualized in VR, 
and additional capabilities in VR. A sample SysML project 
with all 9 SysML diagram types is used to compare the 
visualization in Enterprise Architect to that in VR-SysML, 
grouped as requirement, behavior, or structure diagram types. 
As shown in Figure 3, the various diagrams of the SysML 
model are mapped to stacked hyperplanes that provide an 
anchor affordance (black sphere) with which to expand, 
collapse, or move a diagram. Planes and elements have a 
shallow 3D depth with labeled edges to support recognition 
from different viewing angles. The colors of the planes can be 
configured to help with differentiation or grouping. 
Furthermore, our backplane concept creates followers that 
allow one to quickly find the same element across different 
diagrams in the same model, to readily see in which diagrams 
that element participates, or to determine that the element is 
only shown on one diagram (it not having a follower). The 
colored followers can be selected (made bold) and the other 
followers can be hidden if desired to reduce visual clutter for 
larger models. 
 
Figure 3.  Backplane with inter-diagram followers. 
A. SysML Requirement Diagram 
SysML extends UML with an additional diagram type, the 
Requirement diagram. It can be used to specify functional and 
non-functional requirements for the model. An example 
viewed in EA and in VR is shown in Figure 4. In VR, elements 
are labeled on edges to support reading from different angles. 
The VR Tablet can provide more details or interaction 
capabilities for a selected element, and while support for 
modeling capabilities is shown on the interface, these are 
currently placeholders and have not yet been fully 
implemented in the prototype (create, modify, delete, export). 
 
Figure 4.  Requirement Diagram in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
B. SysML Use Case Diagram 
As a behavior diagram, SysML includes the Use Case 
Diagram from UML as shown in Figure 5. In order to more 
readily recognize and differentiate the diagram type, an oval 
shape was used for the use cases. However, the actors utilize 
our generic cube concept with notation symbols placed on the 
various sides. This provides a flexible mechanism for quickly 
supporting various notation element types and tailoring or 
extending model element types using any icons or images. 
C. SysML Activity Diagram 
Another dynamic behavior diagram type that can be used 
to specify dynamic system behaviors, such as control flow and 
object flows, is the Activity diagram in SysML (see Figure 6). 
It is slightly modified from that in UML, adding additional 
semantics for Continuous Flow and Probability. 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
 
 
Figure 5.  Use Case Diagram in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
 
Figure 6.  Activity Diagram in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
D. SysML Sequence Diagram 
Sequence diagrams (unmodified from UML) provide a 
further dynamic behavior diagram, showing interactions via 
message sequences (see Figure 7). 
 
Figure 7.  Sequence Diagram in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
E. SysML State Machine Diagram 
State machine diagrams (unmodified from UML) are a 
dynamic behavior diagram showing states transitions that 
occur in response to events (see Figure 8). 
 
Figure 8.  State Machine Diagram in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
F. SysML Block Definition Diagram (BDD) 
A BDD (see Figure 9) is a static structural diagram, 
analogous to the UML Class diagram type with certain 
modifications, and shows system components, their contents 
(as properties, behaviors, constraints), interfaces, and 
relationships. It can be used for describing the system 
structure as a hierarchy of relations between systems and 
subsystems typically consisting of “black-box” blocks. As a 
possible specialization, it can be useful to explicitly model 
constraints separately, referred to as Constraint Block 
diagrams (see Figure 10), which can be referenced by 
Parametric diagrams. 
ƵĐ ΀ƉĂĐŬĂŐĞ΁ĂƐŝĐhƐĞĂƐĞDŽĚĞů΀^ŝŵƉůĞhƐĞĂƐĞDŽĚĞů΁
^ƵďũĞĐƚ
ĐƚŽƌ
hƐĞĂƐĞ
ĐƚŽƌ
hƐĞĂƐĞ
hƐĞĂƐĞ
ĐƚŽƌ
ͨĂĐƚŽƌͩ
^ǇƐƚĞŵĐƚŽƌ
hƐĞĂƐĞ
ĐƚŽƌ
hƐĞĂƐĞ
ĐƟŽŶ
/ŶŝƟĂů
ĐƟŽŶ
&ŝŶĂů
ĞĐŝƐŝŽŶ
ĐƟŽŶ
΀'ƵĂƌĚ΁
΀'ƵĂƌĚ΁
ĐƚŽƌ
KďũĞĐƚ
KďũĞĐƚ
DĞƐƐĂŐĞKŶĞ;Ϳ
DĞƐƐĂŐĞdǁŽ;Ϳ
Ɛƚŵ΀ƉĂĐŬĂŐĞ΁^ŝŵƉůĞ^ƚĂƚĞDĂĐŚŝŶĞ΀^ŝŵƉůĞ^ƚĂƚĞDĂĐŚŝŶĞ΁
/ŶŝƟĂů
^ƚĂƚĞ
ĞŶƚƌǇͬĐƟŽŶ;ƚǇƉĞKŶĞͿ
ĚŽͬĐƟŽŶ
ĞǆŝƚͬĐƟŽŶ
^ƚĂƚĞ
ĞŶƚƌǇͬĐƟŽŶ;ƚǇƉĞKŶĞͿ
ĚŽͬĐƟŽŶ
ĞǆŝƚͬĐƟŽŶ
^ƚĂƚĞ
ĞŶƚƌǇͬĐƟŽŶ;ƚǇƉĞKŶĞͿ
ĚŽͬĐƟŽŶ
ĞǆŝƚͬĐƟŽŶ
&ŝŶĂů
dƌŝŐŐĞƌ&ŽƵƌ΀'ƵĂƌĚ&ŽƵƌ΁
ͬīĞĐƚ&ŽƵƌ
dƌŝŐŐĞƌKŶĞ΀'ƵĂƌĚ
KŶĞ΁ͬīĞĐƚKŶĞ
dƌŝŐŐĞƌdŚƌĞĞ΀'ƵĂƌĚdŚƌĞĞ΁
ͬīĞĐƚdŚƌĞĞ
dƌŝŐŐĞƌdǁŽ΀'ƵĂƌĚ
dǁŽ΁ͬīĞĐƚdǁŽ
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
 
 
Figure 9.  BDD in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
 
Figure 10.  Constraint Block Diagram in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
G. SysML Internal Block Diagram (IBD) 
An IBD is a static structural diagram that depicts the 
internal (encapsulated) composition (structural contents) of a 
Block in a BDD, i.e., a “white-box” view. This includes 
properties, parts, interfaces, connectors, and ports, and can be 
used to depict the flow of inputs and outputs between them. 
 
Figure 11.  IBD in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
H. SysML Parametric Diagram 
A static structural diagram type, Parametric diagrams (see 
Figure 12) are a specialization of IBD to model equations with 
parameters and can be used to enforce mathematical rules or 
constraints defined via Constraint Blocks. 
 
Figure 12.  Constraint Parametric Diagram in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
ƉĂƌ΀ĐŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚďůŽĐŬ΁ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ΀ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ΁
ĞƋϭ͗ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ͘ϭ
΂ĂсďΎĐ΃
ĞƋϯ͗ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ͘ϯ
΂ĚсĞΎĨͬϮ΃
ĞƋϮ͗ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ͘Ϯ
΂ŐсĂнĚ΃
ď
Ă
Đ
ď͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ě
Ğ
Ĩ
Ě
Ă
Đ͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ğ͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ĩ͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ő͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ő
ŝďĚ΀ƉĂĐŬĂŐĞ΁ůŽĐŬǁŝƚŚ&ŽƵƌWĂƌƚƐ΀/ŶƚĞƌŶĂůůŽĐŬŝĂŐƌĂŵ΁
ͨďůŽĐŬͩ
ůŽĐŬKŶĞ
ŶĂŵĞƐƉĂĐĞ
ǀƚŽ͗sĂůƵĞ
dǇƉĞKŶĞ
ǀƩ͗
sĂůƵĞdǇƉĞdǁŽ
WĂƌƚϭ͗ůŽĐŬdǁŽ
WŽƌƚϰ͗
/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
WŽƌƚϰ
WĂƌƚϮ͗ůŽĐŬdŚƌĞĞ
WŽƌƚϱ͗
/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
WŽƌƚϲ
WĂƌƚϯ͗ůŽĐŬ&ŽƵƌ
WŽƌƚϳ
WŽƌƚϴ
WĂƌƚϰ͗ůŽĐŬ&ŝǀĞ
WŽƌƚϵ
WŽƌƚϭϬ
ͨďůŽĐŬͩůŽĐŬKŶĞ
ͨĞƋƵĂůͩ
ͨĞƋƵĂůͩ
ďĚĚ΀ƉĂĐŬĂŐĞ΁ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬWĂƌĂŵĞƚƌŝĐƐŝĂŐƌĂŵ΀ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬWĂƌĂŵĞƚƌŝĐƐŝĂŐƌĂŵ΁
ͨĐŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚͩ
ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ͘Ϯ
ĐŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚƐ
΂ŐсĂнĚ΃
ƉĂƌĂŵĞƚĞƌƐ
Ă͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ě͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ő͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
ͨĐŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚͩ
ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ͘ϭ
ĐŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚƐ
΂ĂсďΎĐ΃
ƉĂƌĂŵĞƚĞƌƐ
ď͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ă͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Đ͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
ͨĐŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚͩ
ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ
ƉĂƌĂŵĞƚĞƌƐ
Đ͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
ď͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ğ͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ĩ͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ő͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
ĐŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚƐ
ĞƋϮ͗ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ͘Ϯ
ĞƋϭ͗ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ͘ϭ
ĞƋϯ͗ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ͘ϯ
ͨĐŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚͩ
ŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚůŽĐŬ͘ϯ
ĐŽŶƐƚƌĂŝŶƚƐ
΂ĚсĞΎĨͬϮ΃
ƉĂƌĂŵĞƚĞƌƐ
Ě͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ğ͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
Ĩ͗/ŶƚĞŐĞƌ
нĞƋϮ
нĞƋϯ
нĞƋϭ
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
 
I. SysML Package Diagram 
A SysML Package diagram (see Figure 13) is further static 
structural diagram based on the equivalent UML type (with 
minor modifications). Packages provide a general-purpose 
mechanism for grouping model elements and diagrams, and 
the diagram can be used to show their contents and the 
relationship between them. 
 
Figure 13.  Package Diagram in EA (top) and in VR (bottom). 
J. Multi- and Heterogeneous Model Depiction in VR  
VR’s unlimited virtual space provides the potential to 
view, compare, and analyze multiple SysML (left and center 
models in Figure 14) or heterogeneous models side-by-side 
(exemplified with an ArchiMate enterprise architecture model 
on the right in Figure 14). For SysE, this immersive approach 
also has the potential to support interdisciplinary collaboration 
between specialization experts for complex systems. 
 
Figure 14.  Multiple and heterogeneous side-by-side models in VR. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
VR-SysML contributes an immersive SysML model 
experience for visually depicting and navigating SysML 
diagrams of models in VR. The solution concept was 
described and a VR prototype demonstrated its feasibility 
using a case study. Based on our VR hyperplane principle, 
SysML diagrams are enhanced with 3D depth, color, and 
automatically-generated inter-diagram element followers 
based on our back-plane concept. Interaction is supported via 
a virtual tablet and keyboard. The unlimited space in VR 
facilitates the depiction and visual navigation of large models, 
while relations within and between elements, diagrams, and 
models can be analyzed. Furthermore, in VR additional 
related (SysML or non-SysML) models can be visualized and 
analyzed simultaneously and benefit complex systems-of-
systems architectures or collaboration. The sensory 
immersion of VR can support task focus during model 
comprehension and increase modeling enjoyment, while 
limiting the visual distractions that typical 2D display 
surroundings incur. Future work includes support for 
modeling directly in VR, integrating further SysML tooling 
and simulation capabilities, supporting model verification and 
validation, and conducting a comprehensive empirical study. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Shadrach Arulrajah and 
Marie Bähre for their assistance with the design, 
implementation, evaluation, and diagrams. 
REFERENCES 
[1] OMG, “OMG Systems Modeling Language Version 1.6”, 
Object Management Group, 2019.  
[2] R. Oberhauser, R., “VR-UML: The unified modeling language 
in virtual reality – an immersive modeling experience,” 
International Symposium on Business Modeling and Software 
Design (BMSD 2021), Springer, Cham, 2021, pp. 40-58.  
[3] R. Oberhauser, C. Pogolski, and A. Matic, "VR-BPMN: 
Visualizing BPMN models in Virtual Reality," In: Shishkov, 
B. (ed.) BMSD 2018. LNBIP, vol. 319, Springer, Cham,  2018, 
pp. 83–97.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94214-8_6 
[4] R. Oberhauser and C. Pogolski, "VR-EA: Virtual Reality 
Visualization of Enterprise Architecture Models with 
ArchiMate and BPMN," In: Shishkov, B. (ed.) BMSD 2019. 
LNBIP, vol. 356, Springer, Cham, 2019, pp. 170–187.   
[5] C. Nigischer and D. Gerhard, “Lightweight visualization of 
SysML models in PDM systems,” DS 87-3 Proc.eedings of the 
21st International Conf. on Engineering Design (ICED 17) Vol 
3: Product, Services and Systems Design, 2017, pp. 61-70.  
[6] I. Barosan, A. Basmenj, S. Chouhan, D. Manrique, 
“Development of a Virtual Simulation Environment and a 
Digital Twin of an Autonomous Driving Truck for a 
Distribution Center,” Software Architecture (ECSA 2020). 
CCIS, vol 1269, Springer, Cham, 2020, pp. 542–557.  
[7] A. Mahboob, S. Husung, C. Weber, A. Liebal, and H. Krömker, 
“SYSML behaviour models for description of Virtual Reality 
environments for early evaluation of a product,” In DS 92: 
Proc. 15th Int’l Design Conf. (DESIGN), 2018, pp. 2903-2912. 
[8] M. Ozkaya, “Are the UML modelling tools powerful enough 
for practitioners? A literature review,” IET Software, vol. 13, 
2019, pp. 338-354. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-sen.2018.5409 
[9] M. Ozkaya and F. Erata, “A survey on the practical use of UML 
for different software architecture viewpoints,” Information 
and Software Technology, Vol. 121, 106275, 2020.  
[10] R. Müller, P. Kovacs, J. Schilbach, and D. Zeckzer, "How to 
master challenges in experimental evaluation of 2D versus 3D 
software visualizations," In: 2014 IEEE VIS International 
Workshop on 3Dvis (3Dvis), IEEE, 2014, pp. 33-36 
[11] A.R. Hevner, S.T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science 
in information systems research,” MIS Quarterly, 28(1), 2004, 
pp. 75-105 
WĂĐŬĂŐĞ
WĂĐŬĂŐĞ͘ϭ
WĂĐŬĂŐĞ͘Ϯ
WĂĐŬĂŐĞ͘ϯ
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

A Systematic Mapping of Natural Gas
Transportation Systems’ Reliability and Risks
Analysis
Yefeng Liang
School of Systems and Enterprises
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ, USA
yliang32@stevens.edu
Mo Mansouri
School of Systems and Enterprises
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ, USA
mmansour@stevens.edu
Abstract—This paper will analyze the challenges, profits,
and risks that the gas transportation systems could face. As
valuable economic and industrial systems, gas transportation
systems are complicated, comprehensive, and elastic. However,
gas transportation systems connect different levels of customers,
and gas transportation systems rely heavily on the relationship
loop between gas customers and gas producers, these factors
make the gas transportation systems have to face comprehensive
engineering and human-related challenges. In this paper, we will
analyze the natural gas transportation system together with four
parts of its interaction systems. First, we will list general gas
transportation challenges. Second, we will analyze the risks and
interactions between each part of the system. Finally, we will
bring our conclusions about the system’s construction risks.
Index Terms—system engineering; natural gas transportation
systems; system risks analysis; decision making; stakeholders.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Gas Transportation Systems can transport gas and
energy across the border, support thousands of residents,
families, commercial agents, product institutes, as well as
different industries. A natural gas transportation system is
made up of compressor stations, pipelines, city gate stations,
and storage facilities [9]. However, since this system has so
many stakeholders and bring benefits to so many people, it
is inevitable that the systems could face many transportation
risks. How to target those risks and avoid these effects could
be a important part to expand and maintain the system.
Current research put the concentrations on economic anal-
ysis for the transnational natural gas transportation system
[12][13][15], technology assessment [2][3], and policy analy-
sis of managing transnational natural gas transportation system
[6][8][17]. One of the basic consideration is the risks and
reliance of this high-level systems.
In this paper, we will list challenges and risks of transna-
tional natural gas transportation systems’ construction in sec-
tion 2, 3, 4, 5, analyze the reasons that cause these challenges
and potential consequences in section 6, 7, and bring the sug-
gestions about how to maintain target sub-systems 8. Finally,
in section 9, we explain our conclusions from the research. The
research of this paper is expected to bring more risk analysis
options, ideas, and methods on building transnational natural
gas transportation systems.
II. NATURAL GAS PRODUCTION AND TRANSPORTATION
OVERVIEW
First, we need to take an example to explain how normal
gas transportation systems work as a whole part.
The figure below shows the example of Malaysia Peninsula
Gas production and transportation systems.
Fig. 1. Malaysia Peninsula Gas Utilisation Natural Gas Natural-gas Process-
ing Pipeline Transportation [16]
As the figure shows here, there exits different commercial
gas using, thus, there are many forms of the gas generated
energy, this could cause the transportation systems to become
complicated. The production, processing, transportation and
selling processes make the whole systems full of uncertainty.
Those uncertainty things in each step leading significant
construction risks. In order to make the whole system works
normally and resiliently, we have to be aware of the factors
that cause those risks, how these factors work in the whole
system and what decisions need to be made at the same time.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Since the whole systems is complicated and technique
comprehensive, at the beginning, we should put the list of
factors in the natural gas transportation system, in this project,
we focus on these main factors: Pipelines constructions, gas
distribution limitations, gas distribution system’s stakeholders,
and the system shaping forces.
Besides those key factors, there are other defining charac-
teristics in constructing the system:
Local environment and residents’ energy-using safety and
health. Commercial monopoly. The system maintains’ prob-
lems. Realigned infrastructures Challenges of constructions
Local benefits of the gas supplement.
III. NATURAL GAS TRANSPORTATION AND PIPELINES
CONSTRUCTION
The natural gas transportation is a crucial activity performed
by the gas industry in which the gas and other energy has
to be moved from one location to another. Several types
of transportation means might be applied to transport the
gas, yet it is well known that pipelines represent the most
economical means to transport large quantities of natural gas.
In addition, the advent of metallurgical improvements and
welding techniques, coupled with the exponential increase
of pipeline networks during the last decades all over the
world, have made the gas transportation via pipelines more
economically attractive.
Currently, pipelines are used in constructions on both
offshore and onshore energy transportation systems, with a
remarkable difference in terms of security and construction
prices. Building pipeline systems under the sea is highly
costly and technically demanding, a lot more than onshore.
For example, the Nord Stream2 pipeline project is expected to
as long as 1,222km corresponds to the 965.7 km long onshore
pipeline system on Russian and German territories, whereas
the remaining is destined to the 259.4 km long offshore section
of the project. However, as the consequence of Russia’s recog-
nition of the Donetsk and Luhansk republics, Nord Stream 2
AG, a consortium for construction and operation of the Nord
Stream, filed for bankruptcy on 1 March 2022 and laid off all
106 employees from its headquarters in Zug, Switzerland [8].
Hence, when financial, political or environmental issues arise,
gas transportation operators need to look for different alter-
natives to perform this task inevitably. Especially for onshore
gas transportation, from which natural gas can be transported
as liquefied natural gas (LNG), medium conditioned liquefied
gas(MLG), or compressed natural gas(CNG), by using the tank
of specially constructed seagoing vessels.
The scale of a gas network system be greatly different from
one country to another. In the US, for example, a large gas
network system may encompass several hundreds of pipelines
(adding up to several hundreds of thousands of miles) and
tens of compressors stations strategically distributed along the
transmission lines. The US natural gas pipeline network has
about three million miles of mainline and other pipelines that
link natural gas production areas and storage facilities with
consumers. This natural gas transportation network delivered
more than 25 trillion cubic feet of natural gas in 2016 to about
74 million customers” (Natural Gas Pipelines, 2017). On the
contrary, the natural gas transmission network in Belgium is
composed of a relatively smaller number of pipelines (20–40)
and compressor stations (4–8) when compared to those found
in the US and Russia [10].
While the size of a gas pipeline system definitely plays
an important role when solving natural gas network flow
problems, it is the network topology that really defines the
complexity of the model, e.g., cyclic networks are extremely
more difficult to solve than its (gun-barrel and tree-shaped)
network counterparts [2]. The current state of the art on
natural gas transmission network problems in steady-state
can efficiently handle large gas systems by applying network
reduction and decomposition techniques, or hybrid-heuristic
algorithms, most of them, however, with no guarantee of
optimality, which enforces the scientific community to enhance
the existing methods [2].
IV. STAKEHOLDERS
We list the main stakeholders that rely on the natural gas
transportation systems.
1. Technical engineering institutes 2. Local residents 3.
Natural gas customers’ communities 4. Natural gas company
and government
• 1. Technical engineering institutes
1.1 Pipeline constructions 1.2 Pipeline operations
• 2. Safety and environment impact for residents
2.1 Health
2.2 Living environment
• 3. Impact on the natural gas customers’ community 3.1
Stability 3.2 reliability
• 4. Economic benefits for natural gas company and gov-
ernment 4.1 Revenues to the government 4.2 Employment
4.3 Flexibility of transport increases industry profit mar-
gins; minimizes price instability
After listing the main stakeholders, We draw a relationship
impact map and a interest map of stakeholders to discuss those
stakeholders.
Fig. 2. Stakeholder Relationship
According to Figures 2 and 3, each of those stakeholders
rely on the benefit of natural gas transportation systems. At the
same time, they have interactions with each other. The negative
impact between different stakeholders hurt the resilience of the
whole natural gas transportation system.
2
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Fig. 3. Interest Map of Stakeholders
One of the general and significant case is the natural
environment. The impact between natural gas providers and
natural environment, as well as the impact different levels
of natural gas customers and natural environment, both of
those two groups have to face environment challenges and
the value transformations brought by gas supply constitution.
The government, as the potential stakeholder controller, have
to consider some trade-off solutions and implement them as
policy. This case of natural environment decides the reliability
of the whole system. On the other hand, system’s controllers
have to face several specific and inevitable risks when they
make construction decisions on different parts of gas providing
facilities and gas consuming facilities.
Fig. 4. Value adding process
After those construction decision settle down, as different
parts of the natural gas transportation systems, those stake-
holders wish to keep the values that brought by the system
to be consistent, and expect to expand these values based on
their needs.
V. RISKS ANALYSIS
The specific attributes of transportation and the complexity
of gas pipeline networks both bring operation challenges.
Natural gas producers and different levels of consumers are
dominant stakeholders of the whole gas transportation system.
Those parts could be the sub systems that rely on the gas
transportation systems, even have inner reliance across sub
systems. We have to be aware of the risks during these sys-
tems’ interactions with gas transportation system, and strength
the reliance in building gas transportation system.
We would first try to analyze and summarize short and long
term risks exit on the natural transportation systems.
A. Short-term risks
The construction of gas transportation system require large
investment. Investment costs in the natural gas transportation
system would be higher due to the frequent need to invest
not only in the pipelines itself, but also in the insulation of
houses and additional supplementary infrastructure. Therefore,
a change would often have negative financial consequences
and hence potentially negative social consequences as well
[5].
Natural gas transportation brings health risks aligned with
natural gas producing system. Producing natural gas can
contaminate air and drinking water, creating negative health
impacts for citizens close to production sites. The gas-related
accidents and the threat of earthquakes also named as ad-
ditional threats. Studies also identified an increased human
mortality rate due to shale gas (compared to conventional gas,
nuclear, or renewables) [5].
B. Long-term risks
Long term risks of gas transportation systems always bring
concerns about energy security. For the example from Rus-
sia, concerns from two main aspects: -The need for long-
term shortage-free supply of consumers with the required
energy resources, provided the energy sector operates under
nominal conditions. -The creation of conditions for providing
consumers with energy resources under emergency conditions
[3]. For the example from Germany, the country is widely
recognised as a climate leader with impressive progress in its
energy transition and ambitious plans while at the same time
offering strong state support to three new LNG terminals.
Consideration of the energy security calls for identification
of critical facilities, i.e. energy transportation systems which,
in case of partial or complete failure to operate, can cause
severe damage to the country through the energy sector [3].
Some health risks, especially invisible ones (such as risks
that occur underground such as the contamination of aquifers
or seismic activity), are beyond the direct perception of lay
people. Moreover, those risks are spatially diffuse, uncertainty
exists about which region will be affected to what extent, and
the effects are often temporally delayed [6].
VI. SHAPING FORCES
Compared with other systems that high related with natural
transportation systems. Gas export system could be sensitive
and sometimes vulnerable when facing shaping forces. In this
project, it is the diplomatic situation.
In most cases, gas, oil, electricity, and other energy systems
have huge transportation costs. The values that exist in these
3
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

huge transportation systems could be a vital remedy and,
probably benefits for these transportation systems.
But in general, those transportation systems cover huge
areas, even across countries. When gas transportation work
across the border, the export system could be the sub-
component of this system. The export system of gas transporta-
tion systems could bring interests from political, commercial,
and economic values to gas transportation systems. Some-
times, those benefits could be affected and even dominated
by political forces.
In EU, many countries are small and failed to accomplish
energy producing-consuming balance. They rely heavily on
energy import from Russia. As the chart shows, some countries
rely on almost totally energy import from Russia. Actually,
until 2022, Russia supplies about 40% of the natural gas
European Union overall [18].
Fig. 5.
Europe gas import percentage chart (Sources: Bruegel/European
Network of Transmission System Operators for Gas/Eurostat/UK Govern-
ment/Government of Ukraine)
The diplomatic relationship between many countries could
shape and determine the export systems, transnational system
constructions, international energy transportation, and different
levels of stakeholders, as Figure 8 shows, all of these essential
components can’t work and add other values without stable
diplomatic agreement. Considering current Ukraine War, the
shaping force are definitely reshaping the energy map of the
EU.
Besides, the diplomatic activities could force the gas pro-
viding and transportation in a economic way, the price fluctu-
ations of energy market. This cause the stakeholders, such as
energy company and the government may face deficits. This
Fig. 6. Shaping Forces
deficits consequence, again, decrease the fund that used for
transportation facilities and security remediations.
VII. RELIANCE ANALYSIS
Many energy consumers rely on gas transportation systems.
Figure 9 shows the reliance among gas transportation systems
and other 4 main gas-using systems.
Fig. 7. Reliability between systems
Figure 10 shows the whole map of risks, reliance from
stakeholders, related gas using subsystems to the gas trans-
portation system, in most of cases, those different circle
parts in this graph shows bi-direction relationship. Those
relationship put risks, and the reliability of gas transportation
could decrease and avoid these risks.
4
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Fig. 8. Risk and reliance relationship graph of gas transportation system
Those reliance above need a operational gas transportation
system. They revealed how a stable gas transportation can link
those consuming systems together tightly.
Consider the complex of gas transportation, such as Nord
Stream1 and Nord Stream2 built though comprehensive ge-
ographic situations, offshore gas transportation and onshore
gas transportation bring more options for gas transportation.
For example, the onshore transportation can finish by using
either vessel with tanks or undersea pipelines. The latter
always face huge costs and uncertain risks, financial crisis,
diplomatic shaping forces, geographic limitations and benefits
for stakeholders could could the decision to be complicated.
In order to minimize the technical uncertainty and stabilize
the benefits, the gas transportation systems should be built to
be reliable at the early time.
Transporting energy by pipeline is safe and environmen-
tally friendly. Furthermore, pipeline transportation is safer
than transportation by road, rail, or vessel, as measured by
incidents, injuries, and fatalities even though more road and
rail incidents go unreported [17]. This means the pipelines
based gas transportation are more reliable compared to other
transportation methods.
A. Cost saving and safety improvement for energy providers
In Figure 11, the causal loop of the natural gas providers
shows the factors’ relationship with reinforcement (R in Figure
11) and balance forces’ explanations (B in Figure 11), positive
(+) and negative consequent effects (-) among these factors. In
this graph, one factor is among the causes of another factor.
According to this graph, the reliable gas provider could
inform a positive feedback loop, the factors in this loop
all receive potential benefits: The reliable gas transportation
system decrease the perceived need to adding new investment.
The gas company could use saved money to invest in the
improvement of natural gas pipelines’ modernization tech-
nology, this motivate would accelerate the new technology’s
innovation. All of these could reinhence the gas transportation
reliability, strengthen the positive loop and keep benefits, and
save cost for gas providers.
Fig. 9. Casual Loop analysis for gas providers
B. Price fluctuation and Monopoly
Figure 12 shows the natural gas price’ fluctuation in these
years. To avoid huge fluctuations, the whole gas transportation
system have to be built in a control organization, this organi-
zation generally consists of several gas producers, they aim to
stabilize the gas supply, to avoid the gas supply shortage when
one of the gas producers halt its gas providing, and protect the
reliable gas supply system.
Fig. 10. Gas price fluctuation chart in U.S
After the year of 2021, in 2022, with the influence of
Russia-Ukraine War, the U.S banned Russia energy, cause the
significant price increase over past 25 years.
If one country’s gas transportation systems not working for
providing gas, especially for the main gas export country like
Russia, this could cause chaois for the whole gas transportation
network, even cause the transportation halting. To avoid this
situation, the related stakeholders need a third party organiza-
tion to guarantee the price of the gas. The organization, such as
OPEC, could aim to stabilize the international energy supply
and price could make decisions to avoid energy price’s huge
fluctuations. During Iraq War time, this measure could even
flat the price fluctuations [5].
5
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

VIII. CONCLUSIONS
The transnational natural gas transportation systems brings
benefits for thousands of consumers. Stakeholders of natural
gas transportation systems rely heavily not on each other, but
also the natural gas transportation systems.
At same time, the complicated benefits groups may face
more specific risks from engineering challenges, making the
trade-off between system construction and environment, cus-
tomers living experience and gas benefits. Those consid-
erations bring more implementation uncertainty and risks.
Concerns from those challenges and issues need the natural
gas transportation system to be built reliability and durable.
In the end, try to identify risks and avoid related severe
consequences in early system-building stage, these measures
would lead the whole system become more stable and robust,
and the system could benefit more stakeholders in a very long
term. The controllers and decision makers of the system could
make the improvement of current system to be reality and with
low economic and environment cost.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Thanks to my research teammates, Meng Jiao and Shiyu
Yuan, they help draw those analysis graphs and contribute their
ideas about how to list and plot analysis steps for each research
section.
REFERENCES
[1] Joaqu´ın
Navarro-Esbr´ı,
Adri´an
Fern´andez-Moreno,
Adri´an
Mota-
Babiloni, “Modelling and evaluation of a high-temperature heat pump
two-stage cascade with refrigerant mixtures as a fossil fuel boiler
alternative for industry decarbonization,” Energy, Volume 254, Part B,
2022.
[2] Roger Z. R´ıos-Mercado and Conrado Borraz-S´anchez, “Optimization
problems in natural gas transportation systems: A state-of-the-art re-
view,” Applied Energy,Volume 147,2015, pp.536-555.
[3] S.M. Senderov and A.V. Edelev, “Formation of a list of critical facilities
in the gas transportation system of Russia in terms of energy security,”
Energy, Volume 184,2019, pp.105-112.
[4] Alvaro Silva-Calder´on, “Short and long-term energy security in the
UNECE region: trends and prospects Speech by Dr Alvaro Silva-
Calder´on, OPEC Secretary General to the Energy Security Forum, UN
Economic Commission for Europe Committee on Sustainable Energy”.
Geneva, Switzerland, 20 November 2003.
[5] G.P. Hammond and ´A. O’Grady, “Indicative energy technology assess-
ment of UK shale gas extraction Application,” Energy, 185 (2017), pp.
1907-1918.
[6] M. Cotton, I. Rattle, and J. Van Alstine, “Shale gas policy in the
United Kingdom: an argumentative discourse analysis,” Energy Policy,
73 (2014), pp. 427-438.
[7] Hanna Brauers, Isabell Braunger, and Jessica Jewell, “Liquefied natural
gas expansion plans in Germany: The risk of gas lock-in under energy
transitions,” Energy Research Social Science, Volume 76, 2021.
[8] Valentin Jeutner, “Amendments, annexations, alternatives: Nord Stream
2’s contemporary status under EU and international law,” The Journal
of World Energy Law Business, Volume 12, Issue 6, December 2019,
pp. 502–512.
[9] Anna Mikulska, “Gazprom and Russian Natural Gas Policy in the First
Two Decades of the 21st Century,” Orbis, Volume 64, Issue 3, 2020, pp.
403-420.
[10] Rios-Mercado and Roger. Z. Borraz Sanchez, Conrado, “Optimiza-
tion problems in natural gas transportation systems: A state-of-the-
art review,” Provided by the author(s) and the Los Alamos National
Laboratory (2016-01-08). Applied Energy, Volume 147, 1 June 2015,
pp.536-555.
[11] John A.P. Chandler, “Developing offshore petroleum to meet socio-
economic objectives: Lessons from Australia, Norway and the United
Kingdom,” Energy Policy, Volume 144, 2020.
[12] Justyna Wo´zniak, Zbigniew Krysa, and Michał Dudek, “Concept of
government-subsidized energy prices for a group of individual con-
sumers in Poland as a means to reduce smog,” Energy Policy, Volume
144, 2020.
[13] Bal´azs R.Sziklaiac, L´aszl´o ´A.K´oczyab, and D´avid Csercsikd, “The
impact of Nord Stream 2 on the European gas market bargaining
positions,” Energy Policy Volume 144, September 2020.
[14] Paulina Landry, “The EU strategy for gas security: Threats, vulnerabil-
ities and processes,” Energy Policy, Volume 144, 2020.
[15] James Conca, “Pick Your Poison For Crude – Pipeline, Rail, Truck Or
Boat,” Forbes, April 26 2014.
[16] V. Zapukhlyak, Yu. Melnychenko, . kipnyi, L. Poberezhny, Ya. Grudz,
N. Drin, and M. Chernetskyy, “Reliability assurance of gas-hydrogen
mixture transportation by gas pipeline system,” Procedia Structural
Integrity, Volume 36, 2022, pp. 378-385.
[17] Diana Furchtgott-Roth and Kenneth P. Green, “Intermodal safety in the
transport of oil,” Studies in ENERGY TRANSPORTATION. October,
2013.
[18] Jeff Tollefson, “What the war in Ukraine means for energy, climate and
food Russia’s invasion has caused a short-term spike in prices, but could
prompt a long-term shift towards sustainability,” NEWS FEATURE,
Nature, April 05, 2022.
6
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Multi-Protocol Interoperability Between Distributed Cyber-Physical Systems 
Towards Industry 4.0 Collaborative Optimization
Md Sabbir Bin Azad 
Dept. of Mathematics and Industrial Engineering 
Polytechnique Montreal 
Montreal, Canada 
e-mail: sabbirbinazad@gmail.com 
Dr. Christophe Danjou 
Dept. of Mathematics and Industrial Engineering 
Polytechnique Montreal 
Montreal, Canada 
e-mail: christophe.danjou@polymtl.ca
Abstract— Industry 4.0 has emerged as a potential strategy to 
providing 
extensive 
connectivity 
in 
the 
production 
environment, which is rapidly evolving combined with rising 
commercial demand, mass personalized manufacturing. Mass 
customization and complicated products necessitate more data 
and 
more 
adaptable 
Machine-to-Machine 
(M2M) 
communication that facilitates smooth data interchange and 
interaction 
between 
industrial 
components 
in 
smart 
manufacturing. Integrating industrial Internet of Things (IoT) 
devices to benefit different industry sectors simultaneously 
requires 
extensive 
network 
connectivity, 
interoperable 
communication, and collaboration among the networked 
machines. While critical technical issues with network 
connectivity have been properly addressed, the technology is 
not ready for flexible and seamless communication between 
disparate machines. One of the challenges that arises because 
of this development is the growing need for interoperable 
standards and protocols at various levels of the manufacturing 
ecosystem. Considering the interoperable infrastructure 
required for Industry 4.0, the paper provides a secure and 
cost-effective 
interoperable 
solution 
for 
multi-protocol 
translators. The key contribution of the paper is a method for 
mapping IoT multi-protocols into a low-cost gateway, as well 
as 
providing 
effective 
full-duplex 
interoperable 
M2M 
communication 
and 
cloud 
integration 
for 
compatible 
platforms. 
Keywords- IioT; Gateway; Interoperability; Protocols; M2M; 
Raspberry Pi. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Industry 4.0, fourth industrial revolution brought about 
by introduction of Internet of Things(IoT) and Cyber 
Physical Systems (CPSs) [1], has emerged as a promising 
approach to provide extensive connectivity in manufacturing 
environment [2]. The development of smart manufacturing 
technologies is fast changing, and when it is coupled with 
increasing commercial demand, additive manufacturing 
shows numerous advantages in providing customized and 
specifically designed products [3]. Mass customized and 
complex products leads to a greater needs of information and 
more flexible automation solutions [4]. This flexibility and 
more advanced information handling requires more 
intelligence in the system [5]. One of the resulting challenges 
of this flexible information management is the increased 
need for interoperability at different levels of the 
manufacturing ecosystem [6]. Successful system integration 
requires good strategies to manage middleware connectivity.  
However, integrating new devices to benefit different 
industry 
sectors 
simultaneously 
requires 
significant 
challenges as part of what is being called the Industrial 
Internet of Things (IIoT) [7]. IIoT devices have unique 
features, such as low processing and memory, low 
bandwidth for data download and upload, and limited battery 
life [8]. Given the ubiquity of these devices and facing such 
limitations, it is necessary to develop new types of 
communication protocols designed to deal with these 
limitations.  
Generally, 
the 
used 
protocols 
are 
based 
on 
communication through cloud and between machines [9]. 
Semantic interoperability should be achieved in an 
interworking solution in order to provide a common meaning 
of the data exchanged by heterogeneous devices, even if they 
belong to different domains [10]. Different communication 
protocols are employed in IoT, e.g., Hyper Text Transfer 
Protocol (HTTP), Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP), 
MQ Telemetry Transport (MQTT), Modbus Transmission 
Control Protocol and Internet Protocol (TCP/IP), Web 
Sockets, Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP). 
The main driving force for the design of such protocols is the 
hardware limitations of embedded devices, which impede the 
use of traditional network protocols. The integration of 
communication protocols would cause interoperability 
among several devices and services, and a possible solution 
is the conception of a multiprotocol strategy [11]. Though 
existing 
standards, 
e.g., 
MTConnect, 
OPC 
Unified 
Architecture (OPC-UA) and AutomationML, allow for 
specifications of industrial objects and information-rich 
machine-to-machine 
(M2M) 
communications, 
the 
information models generated from these standards are not 
semantically defined, making the semantic understanding 
and intelligent decision-making a challenge [12]. In this 
regard, an IoT system interchanging between access 
protocols 
may 
overcome 
the 
said 
challenges 
in 
interconnected heterogenous systems. 
       The primary contributions of this research can be 
summarized as follows:  

Design protocol selection framework among HTTP, 
MQTT, CoAP, WebSocket Modbus TCP protocol 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

based on the capabilities and requirements of the 
device and sensor data transmission. 

Design and Implement model of interoperable 
interpreter for effective M2M information exchange 
and action plan at a faster pace towards sustainable 
Industry 4.0 manufacturing 
  The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: in 
Section II, related work and interoperability standards are 
discussed; the strategy proposed, and its characteristics are 
defined in Section III; Section IV focuses on development 
model and strategy of proposed architecture; validation of 
the proposed system through case study is demonstrated in 
Section V; finally, in Section VI, we discussed conclusions 
and future work. 
II. RELATED WORK
  The popularity of the internet has led to the emergence 
of 
internet 
protocol-based 
communication 
standards, 
creating a unified infrastructure for the integration of 
disparate systems and devices. There are several solutions 
proposed or implemented with the aim of increasing IoT 
interoperability.  
  H. Derhamy et al. [13] developed a multi-protocol 
solution for IoT interoperability issue. The solution includes 
protocol implementation translators based on Service 
Oriented Architecture (SOA), intermediate format to reduce 
the number of translations necessary. The system also 
detects protocol incompatibilities and performs the 
translation.  
  Barros et al. [14] introduced Internet of Things 
Multiprotocol Message Broker (IoTM2B) strategy to 
integrate various communication protocols such as HTTP, 
MQTT and CoAP and their performance evaluation based 
on two scenarios, machine-to-machine (M2M) protocols   
Communication and cloud-based environment. This strategy 
extends IoT DSM to provide integration with embedded 
devices Via various protocols. 
  Derhamy et al. [15] proposed interoperability solution 
consists of a multi-protocol translator that is injected into 
the service exchange on demand. The main contribution of 
this research is to suggest ways to map OPC UAs to 
intermediate formats. Intermediate formats can be mapped 
to other standard IoT protocols such as CoAP, HTTP, and 
MQTT. 
  The main issue with current interoperable solutions is 
that there isn't a method that fits well with integration of IoT 
multi protocols in a gateway and effective full duplex 
interoperable communication to interconnect the sensors, 
IIoT devices, and machines and cloud integration for 
compatible platforms. 
III. PROPOSED SOLUTION
  To address this integration and interoperability 
challenges, we proposed a platform to develop an 
interoperable system which can connect heterogenous 
devices with different protocol, process and exchange the 
data with different machines and cloud platform. Fig. 1 
illustrates the architecture of the proposed research 
framework. We defined the architecture of the gateway with 
four modules which are the key functions of the embedded 
communication. 
A.
Protocol Selection Framework 
To facilitate safe and high-speed data transfer among 
end IoT devices, users set protocols among MQTT, CoAP, 
HTTP, WebSocket and Modbus TCP for the nodes and/or 
sensors to send data to the gateway. Each of these protocols 
have distinct features and capabilities, which add 
complexity to the identification of a protocol suitable for 
specific use cases.  
Figure 1. Architecture of the proposed research framework 
      For instance, MQTT is recommended in network 
scenarios where bandwidth consumption must be reduced 
and the devices involved in communication have low 
processing 
and 
memory 
capacity 
[16]. 
WebSocket 
protocol’s standard connectivity helps simplify many of the 
complexities and difficulties involved in the operation of bi-
direction communication.  
Figure 2.  Protocol Selector for IoT Application 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

However, a difficulty is that the sensors in industries and 
shop floors are mainly connected to Programmable Logic 
Controllers (PLCs) to collect large amount of sensor data 
and to transfer it to a communication system [17]. To enable 
IoT connectivity for these sensors connected to PLCs, the 
controller needs to configure with Modbus TCP protocol. 
Fig. 2 demonstrates protocol selection framework based on 
the capabilities and requirements of the sensor data 
transmission to gateway. In addition to the protocol 
selection for the nodes, it is necessary for the processor unit 
to have the ability to run and execute a Web Server, on 
which services will be deployed.  
B.
Connectivity with Heterogenous Nodes 
The First module of the IoT gateway system is to receive 
data from heterogenous nodes and/or sensor with multi-
protocol communication. The gateway uses wireless 
communication protocol (e.g., Zigbee, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi) 
and Local Area Network (LAN) to acquire the packet from 
the heterogenous sensor nodes, and use the 3G/4G and, 
other network interfaces to read and parse the data and then 
send it to data format module for standardizing. 
C.
Data Formatting 
Since heterogeneous nodes and sensors send data over 
different protocols, they send data with different data 
format. The gateway uses JavaScript Object Notation 
(JSON) format to systematize the representation of data 
coming from the nodes and sensors. An example of the 
representation of the data recorded by the temperature and 
humidity sensor, in JSON format, is shown in Fig. 3. 
Figure 3.  Example of systematized data format 
This format has important advantages such as simplicity 
and low resource consumption [16]. 
D.
Protocol Bridging 
The proposed IoT gateway acts as a bridge between 
different protocols, mainly among HTTP, MQTT, CoAP, 
WebSocket and Modbus TCP. The gateway is continuously 
being ready for listening for these multiprotocol connection 
requests and message payload with the standardized format. 
An example is given in Fig. 4 to illustrate the interoperable 
protocol communication among the nodes and gateways in 
the proposed architecture. 
The broker Mosquitto is a message broker that 
implements several versions of the MQTT protocol and it is 
relatively a lightweight software [18] and it has low power 
profile. The advantages of data transfer MQTT is good, 
reliable, easy to build and it uses less network resources 
even in conditions of unstable network [19]. In the gateway, 
WebSocket communication technology also is adopted in 
MQTT 
broker 
as 
WebSocket 
provides 
full-duplex 
communication channels over a single TCP/IP connection. 
Another most familiar protocol is HTTP which user can set 
for communication between nodes and gateway server. The 
data sent to the server with POST is stored in the request 
body of the HTTP request. Another high interoperability 
protocol for embedded devices with an increased level of 
security is CoAP. 
Figure 4.   Interoperable communication among the nodes and gateways 
  The node which acts as CoAP Client could send data to 
the server on a particular port 5683 with the help of browser 
add-on Copper (Cu) CoAP user-agent. A relevant 
characteristic of Modbus TCP is that it is supported by both 
proprietary and open-source hardware/software, so different 
equipment can seamlessly share information enabled by this 
protocol [20]. 
IV. RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT
  Key components and flows are described at a high level 
below. 
A.
Proposed System Architecture 
The solution proposed in this research aims at enabling 
interoperable connectivity from heterogenous devices and 
data acquired from different communication protocols and 
extending these networks towards the IoT universe. To this 
purpose, we implemented 5 modules within the application: 
(i)Multi-protocol gateway development (ii)Multi-protocol 
server integration (iii)Node MCUs and Sensors Integration 
(iv)Nodes and gateway interoperable communication 
(v)Data storage to multiple databases. Fig. 5 illustrates the 
implementation phases of the architecture. 
B.
Multi-Protocol Gateway Development 
For the development of the gateway, Raspberry Pi 4B 
was used which is illustrated in Fig. 5(f). At first, multiple 
single board computers were compared to find the cost 
efficient and complex task management compatible 
gateway. Table 1 is provided to show the comparison 
among the development boards.  
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

TABLE I. COMPARISON OF SINGLE BOARDS 
Raspberry Pi 
4 
Raspberry 
Pi 3 
Beagle Bone 
Intel 
Galileo 
Processo
r 
Quad core 64-
bit 
ARM-
Cortex A72 
Broadcom 
BCM2837 
Quad Core 
ARM 
Cortex-A8 
Quark 
SoC X1000, 
32-bit Intel 
Frequen
cy& 
RAM 
1.5GHz, 4GB 
1.2GHz, 
1GB 
1GHz, 
512MB 
400MH, 512 
KB SRAM 
256Mb 
DRAM 
Operati
ng 
System 
Raspbian, 
Debian, 
Fedora, 
ARCH Linux 
ARM, 
Ubuntu etc.  
Raspbian, 
Debian, 
Fedora, 
ARCH 
Linux, 
ARM 
etc. 
Android, 
Debian, 
Angstrom, 
Yocto, 
Fedora, 
Ubuntu etc. 
Arduino, 
Linux 
distribution 
for Galileo, 
Rocket etc. 
Power 
15.3W 
10W 
15W 
15W 
Cost 
70 CAD 
45 CAD 
70 CAD 
100 CAD 
      Raspberry Pi is proposed as gateway because of its 
lower cost, high processing capability, random-access 
memory (RAM), 40 general purpose input/output (GPIO) 
pins, RJ45 port and Wi-Fi connectivity. The Pi 4 is 
continuously 
being 
ready 
for 
listening 
for 
these 
multiprotocol connection requests and message payload 
with the standardized format through 802.11 b/g/n/ac 
Wireless LAN network. 
Figure 5.   Proposed Architecture Implementation Framework, [a]HTTP, 
[b]MQTT, [c]CoAP, [d]WebSocket, [e]ModbusTCP, [f]Raspberry Pi 4 as 
Gateway, [g]Azure IoT Hub Database, [h]KepwareServer Data Logging, 
[i]Local/Cloud Database 
C.
Multiple Server Configuration on the Gateway 
  MQTT, HTTP, CoAP, Modbus TCP and WebSocket 
server are integrated in the gateway. Raspbian OS has been 
installed in the system to configure all the servers and install 
the required software and libraries. 
1)
MQTT Broker Configuration: The software that is 
being used here is Mosquitto. After installation series of 
packages, the gateway broker was ready to publish or 
subscribe the topic. Fig. 6 illustrates the start-up Mosquitto 
MQTT broker on the terminal. 
Figure 6.   Mosquitto MQTT Broker Running on Terminal 
2)
HTTP Server: The Apache web server (HTTP 
server) is installed on the Raspberry Pi 4 IoT gateway. 
Apache can communicate between nodes and the server 
over the HTTP. The Apache profile opens the port 80. Fig. 7 
demonstrates apache2 Raspbian version running on the 
gateway.
Figure 7.   Apache3 Raspbian Version Webserver Installed 
3)
CoAP Server Implementation: In this work, the 
aiocoap Python CoAP library was used to implement the 
CoAP protocol [21]. Two access methods are initiated here 
one is PUT which allows the node connected with the 
sensors transfer data to the gateway and, the other is GET 
which allows the nodes with actuators to register with the 
resource so that nodes can be notified when gateway 
initiates any feedback command and transfer data.  
4)
Modbus TCP Server: For Modbus TCP/IP 
communication, an open-source and full modbus protocol 
called “pyModbus” is used. It works as fully implemented 
modbus server and supports read/write on discrete and 
register. 30 registers are written initially for receiving 
read/write requests from the clients. More registers can be 
added for further development.  
5)
WebSocket Server Deployment: As WebSocket 
enables bidirectional communication in real time over the 
web, WebSocket server is deployed in the gateway for 
horizontal interoperable communication. After enabling 
Node.js html server, http does the handling requests and 
serving content and Uniform Resource Identifier (URL) 
helps to parse requested URLs. 
D.
Communication between Node MCUs and Sensors 
For the development of the proposed design, sensors are 
connected through the GPIO pins and input/output (I/O) 
interface of the node MCUs. Three sensors DHT22 sensor, 
BME280 sensor, MQ-135 are connected to three node 
MCUs Raspberry Pi 3, Arduino Uno Rev2 and ESP32. 
These sensors collect the data from surroundings like 
temperature, humidity, pressure, altitude, and air quality. 
E.
Communication between Node MCUs and Gateway 
In this development, node2 Arduino Uno with bme280 
pressure sensor send data over WebSocket Protocol. Node3 
ESP32 send data over MQTT protocol. Node1 is configured 
to communicate with HTTP, CoAP and Modbus TCP 
protocol. 
In Fig. 5(d) node2 creates client socket and tries to 
establish a communication link to the gateway server using 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

its IP address and port number 80. When the communication 
established between node2 and gateway, it received pressure 
and altitude from node2 Arduino Uno Wi-Fi and showed the 
data to the interface. Here, the gateway is also devising as 
MQTT broker which facilitates the communication from 
node3 transferring messages from publisher to subscriber 
and subscriber to publisher in Fig. 5[b]. Node3 ESP32 with 
environmental sensor provides air quality data in ppm unit. 
In regards, reading data from sensor and sending data to the 
gateway broker, PubSubClient MQTT library is used on the 
node3 end. Node1 will use the Adafruit DHT library to 
retrieve the DHT22 sensor's current temperature and 
humidity readings. After the gateway is configured to 
receive data from node1 over CoAP protocol shown in Fig. 
5(c), CoAPthon Python library the script is activated to 
create a CoAP endpoint. Fig. 8 shows sensor data receiving 
in the gateway from node1, node2 and node3.  
Figure 8.   Node1, node2, node3 data collected from gateway 
To demonstrate Modbus TCP communication between 
the client and gateway, in Fig. 5 (e) node1 was configured 
as Modbus client that transfers temperature and humidity 
data to gateway which works as Modbus TCP server. As the 
gateway had register map for all data types with desired 
size, these registers received read/write requests from the 
node. 
For 
the 
demonstration 
of 
http 
protocol 
communication, node1 was also configured as HTTP client.  
F.
Data Collection and Storage 
Three databases are presented to visualize and process 
for server and device communications. We divided the 
databases 
into 
(i) 
local 
and 
cloud 
database 
(ii) 
KEPServerEX data logging and communication and (iii) 
Azure IoT hub databases. 
After processing data received from the nodes, the 
gateway sends data to MariaDB which is shown in Fig. 5(i). 
In the experiment, the gateway receives data from the 
different nodes and edge devices and provides it to 
KEPServerEX OPC server MQTT client by Kepware. From 
the Fig. 5(h), we demonstrated Air Quality data with the 
corresponding timestamp that received from the MQTT 
client through the KepServerex and stored into Microsoft 
Access Databases. Azure IoT hub environment is deployed 
to connect the gateway with nodes to the cloud. After 
obtaining primary connection string, gateway establishes 
communication with the IoT hub and sends data over 
MQTT protocol to the hub. In Fig. 5(g) data ingestion is 
shown in Azure Data Explorer Database. 
V. VALIDATION
  This section contains a case study to analyze a workflow 
involving data collection from nodes with sensors, gateway 
integration to cloud with the goal of validating the 
interoperability concept of integrating any platforms with 
the developed multi-protocol gateway. 
A.
Case Study: Implementation on ThingsBoard 
The case study refers to implementation communication 
between 
gateway 
and 
ThingsBoard 
IoT 
platform. 
ThingsBoard is an open-source IoT platform built on the 
Java 8 platform that functions as an IoT gateway between 
registered devices communicating via HTTP, CoAP, and 
MQTT protocols to collect, analyse, visualize, and manage 
data [22]. 
1)
Configuration: ThingsBoard is configured to 
monitor and visualize data by creating IoT Dashboards and 
updating in real-time. The multi protocol gateway receives 
sensor data from three different nodes with different 
protocols Modbus TCP, WebSocket and MQTT and, 
process the data as JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) 
format before sending to ThingsBoard Platform. Fig. 9 
illustrates the integration details between the gateway and 
the ThingsBoard platform. 
Figure 9: ThingsBoard platform integration with muti-protocol gateway 
  The gateway uses an access token to access the web 
interface of the ThingsBoard cloud server. Telemetry sent 
by the gateway for logging in the platform is inserted into 
the SQLite database table before being transferred to the 
ThingsBoard. To publish telemetry data to ThingsBoard, 
gateway 
publish 
message 
to 
the 
following 
topic: 
“v1/devices/me/telemetry”. Finally, the telemetry data get 
uploaded to the ThingsBoard using the MQTT publishing 
feature.  
2)
Real-time 
Visualization 
on 
ThingsBoard: 
ThingsBoard's integration APIs allow custom applications 
to be built, and they use their own data visualisation tools.   
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Figure 10: Real-time data visualization dashboard on ThingsBoard 
Devices configured as Gateway_device01 in the 
ThingsBoard received telemetry data from the multi-
protocol gateway. As seen in Fig. 10, gateway is sending all 
the sensor values received by ThingsBoard platform with 
timestamp. 
B.
Results 
  Successful integration of the multi protocol gateway to 
the open source IoT ThingsBoard platform validates 
interoperable data exchanges compatibility of the proposed 
gateway.  The gateway receives data from three different 
embedded devices over three different protocols such as 
Modbus TCP, WebSocket and MQTT. The gateway 
receives the signal, processes, and transfers the sensors 
values real time into ThingsBoard IoT platform over MQTT 
protocol. To address the IoT Interoperability challenges, the 
gateway can provide the strategy of using different protocol 
integration, and data conversion, as well as integrating real-
time data analysis with Kafka and Spark platforms on 
ThingsBoard platform for big data analytic applications. 
Thus, Integrating different protocol-enabled devices into 
each system enables the scalability, automation, and 
flexibility of Industry 4.0 manufacturing systems. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
      For 
interoperable 
M2M 
communication 
between 
heterogenous devices, we proposed and developed an 
interoperable middleware gateway by enabling multi 
protocol integration. In Section V, we evaluated the 
potential gain of deploying the middleware gateway in a 
case study to provide a real-time cloud-based integration 
and 
visualization 
that 
facilitates 
sensor-based 
data 
collection, 
gateway 
integration 
and 
interoperability 
management, and to validate the interoperability concept of 
integrating any platforms via any of the industry standard 
protocols MQTT, CoAP, HTTP, Modbus TCP and 
WebSockeT. Future development can be expanding the 
supported OPC UA service and AMQP, CAN, CC-Link 
protocols implementation and PLC and other controllers 
bridging in the gateway. Future experimental tests will 
evaluate the performance of data analytics systems in terms 
of responsiveness, flexibility, and scalability in large, real-
world scenarios. 
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Kagermann, J. Helbig, A. Hellinger, and W. Wahlster, 
Recommendations 
for 
implementing 
the 
strategic 
initiative 
INDUSTRIE 4.0: Securing the future of German manufacturing 
industry;report of Industrie 4.0 Working G. Forschungsunion, 2013. 
[2]
H. S. Li, L. F. Lai, and H. V. Poor, "Multicast Routing for 
Decentralized Control of Cyber Physical Systems with an Application 
in Smart Grid," IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., Article vol. 30, no. 6, 
pp. 1097-1107, 2012, doi: 10.1109/jsac.2012.120708.  
[3]
Y. Meng, Y. Yang, H. Chung, P.-H. Lee, and C. Shao, "Enhancing 
Sustainability and Energy Efficiency in Smart Factories: A Review," 
Sustainability, vol. 10, no. 12, 2018, doi: 10.3390/su10124779.  
[4]
H. A. ElMaraghy, "Flexible and reconfigurable manufacturing 
systems paradigms," Int. J. Flexible Manuf. Syst., Article; 
Proceedings Paper vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 261-276, 2005, doi: 
10.1007/s10696-006-9028-7.  
[5]
D. Zuehlke, "SmartFactory – from Vision to Reality in Factory 
Technologies," IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 
14101-14108,2008,doi:https://doi.org/10.3182/20080706-5-KR-
1001.02391.  
[6]
A. Zeid, S. Sundaram, M. Moghaddam, S. Kamarthi, and T. Marion, 
"Interoperability in Smart Manufacturing: Research Challenges," 
Machines,Review vol. 7, no. 2, 2019, doi: 10.3390/machines7020021.  
[7]
D. Serpanos and M. Wolf, "Industrial Internet of Things," IoT 
Systems: Architectures, Algorithms, Methodologies. Cham: Springer 
International Publishing, 2018, pp. 37-54.  
[8]
E. Sisinni, A. Saifullah, S. Han, U. Jennehag, and M. Gidlund, 
"Industrial Internet of Things: Challenges, Opportunities, and 
Directions,"IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., Article vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 
4724-4734, 2018, doi: 10.1109/tii.2018.2852491.  
[9]
N. Kshetri, "Can Blockchain Strengthen the Internet of Things?," IT 
Prof.,vol.19,no.4, pp. 68-72, 2017, doi: 10.1109/MITP.2017.3051335.  
[10] S. Cavalieri, "Semantic Interoperability between IEC 61850 and 
oneM2M for IoT-Enabled Smart Grids," Sensors, Article vol. 21, no. 
7, 2021, doi: 10.3390/s21072571.  
[11] P. Desai, A. Sheth, and P. Anantharam, "Semantic Gateway as a 
Service architecture for IoT Interoperability," IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Mob. S., NewYork, 2015, pp. 313-319, doi: 10.1109/ms.2015.51.  
[12] I. Grangel-González, Semantic Data Integration for Industry 4.0 
Standards. 2017, pp. 230-237.  
[13] H. Derhamy, J. Eliasson, and J. Delsing, "IoT Interoperability—On-
Demand and Low Latency Transparent Multiprotocol Translator," 
IEEE 
IoT 
Journal, 
vol.4, no.5, 
pp.1754-1763, 2017, doi: 
10.1109/JIOT.2017.2697718.  
[14] V. Barros, S. Junior, S. Bruschi, F. Monaco, and J. Estrella, "An IoT 
Multi-Protocol Strategy for the 
Interoperability of Distinct 
Communication Protocols applied to Web of Things," Brazillian 
Symposium on Multimedia and the Web, 2019.  
[15] H. Derhamy, J. Rönnholm, J. Delsing, J. Eliasson, and J. v. Deventer, 
"Protocol interoperability of OPC UA in service oriented 
architectures," IEEE Int. Conf. on Ind. Inf. (INDIN), 2017. 
[16] C. Wilder, M. Jose, P. Harold, and J. D. Alvarado, "Internet of things: 
a multiprotocol gateway as solution of the interoperability problem," 
in Mechatronics, Electronics and Telecommunications Advances 
Towards Industry 4.0, Bonaventuriana Ed., 2021, ch. 5, p. 24.  
[17] T. John and M. Vorbröcker, "Enabling IoT connectivity for 
ModbusTCP sensors," IEEE Int. Conf. on Emerging Tech. and 
FactoryAutomation(ETFA),2020.Available:https://ieeexplore.ieee.org
/document/9211999/.  
[18] R. Light, "Mosquitto: server and client implementation of the MQTT 
protocol," The Journal of Open Source Software, vol. 2, 2017, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00265.  
[19] N. Q. Uy and V. H. Nam, "A comparison of AMQP and MQTT 
protocols for Internet of Things," NAFOSTED Conf. on Info. and C. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Science(NICS),2019.Available:https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9
023812/.  
[20] I. González, A. J. Calderón, and J. M. Portalo, "Innovative Multi-
Layered Architecture for Heterogeneous Automation and Monitoring 
Systems: Application Case of a Photovoltaic Smart Microgrid," 
Sustainability, 
vol. 
13, 
no. 
4, 
p. 
2234, 
2021, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13042234.  
[21] Maciej 
Wasilak 
and 
C. 
Amsüss. 
"chrysn/aiocoap.", 
2014, 
http://github.com/chrysn/aiocoap/  
[22] L. T. D. Paolis, V. D. Luca, and R. Paiano, "Sensor data collection 
and analytics with thingsboard and spark streaming," IEEE W. on 
Environmental, 
Energy, 
and 
Structural 
Monitoring 
Systems 
(EESMS),2018, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/EESMS.2018.8405822.  
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

Achieving City Intelligence - A Systems Engineering Approach 
 
 
 
Yaw Adom-Mensah 
School of Systems and Enterprises, Stevens Institute 
of Technology 
e-mail: yawadom@gmail.com 
Mo Mansouri 
School of Systems and Enterprises, Stevens Institute 
of Technology 
e-mail: mo.mansouri@stevens.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—Intelligent systems sense and react to their 
environment. They are amenable to change, heterogeneous, 
sustainable and secure. By their nature, cities develop due to 
various preconditions affirmative to local sustenance of their 
inhabitants. They are complex systems that encounter 
ranging 
pressures 
stemming 
from 
urbanization 
to 
uncontrolled socio-technical effects. To control and manage 
these pressures, various suggestions, frameworks and 
concepts have been proposed including but not limited to 
transitioning into Smart Cities. It is relatively accurate that 
most cities will aspire to be Smart merely for the perceived 
benefits of such a state. Nonetheless, the research on 
attainability and progress measurement is varied and 
deferring in this regard. In this paper, cities are presented as 
complex sociotechnical systems such that their optimization is 
a function of people, social systems and network-
technological systems. Five incremental levels of the city’s 
intelligence journey are proposed: Insulation, Micro-
Functional, Macro-Functional, Spatial Dominance, Self-
Orchestration and Astute. 
Keywords-intelligent cities; systems thinking; smat cities. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cities happen to be problems in organized complexity, 
like the life sciences. They present "situations in which a 
half-dozen or even several dozen quantities are all varying 
simultaneously and in subtly interconnected ways.'' Like 
the life sciences, cities do not exhibit one problem in 
organized complexity, which, if understood explains all. 
They can be analyzed into many such problems or 
segments which, as in the case of the life sciences, are also 
related with one another. The variables are many, but they 
are not helter-skelter; they are "interrelated into an organic 
whole" [1]. 
The city is manifestly a complicated system and only 
partial control can be exercised over its growth and form. 
It is a product of growth rather than of instantaneous 
creation. [2] compared the city to a biological entity. That 
is, a single organism covering the entire landscape surface 
and showing signs of a vast intelligence [3]. Cities typically 
evolve spontaneously and subsequently governed into 
desired states. Thus, more often cities are self-organizing 
and evolve from local-actions. This spontaneity contains 
elements of spatial consciousness and random unique 
forms commonly called fractals. Understanding these 
interacting elements have taken precedence on research on 
city systems since the nascent stages of the 20th Century.  
As systems, cities have existed no less than over 5000 
years ago and changes in their form follows a randomized 
process that manifest simultaneously at different spatial 
levels. The need for a formal control mechanism to close 
the gap between fur-flung anarchy and sporadic orderliness 
inspired the development of disciplines such as City 
Planning, Urban Studies et al. These specialized disciplines 
engaged in atomistic and mechanistic approaches to plan 
communities. Urban studies and related, have exerted a 
great deal of effort in theoretical and practical techniques 
following this pursuit.  
Cities generally are taken as a composition of discrete 
spatial nodes that perform separate functions at different 
points in time. This view has been prominent and promotes 
a vertical hierarchical-node structure where everything is 
controlled from a [city’s] central core. A theoretical idea 
extended from 19th century German economist, von 
Thünen whose 1826 iconoclastic treatise, The Isolated 
State, a century later led to – the mono-centric city models 
– one of the fundamental insights in Urban Planning. The 
idea of location theory, as Thünen’s views are known, has 
since the mid-19th century inspired a revolution of 
economists’ and geographers who have extended location 
theory into mainstream economic models. The latter 
mainly were interested in economic consideration and 
physical analogies as a means to explain emerging city 
patterns. 
The vertical elaboration of the city system has been 
dominant therein with notable applications in research on 
scaling patterns and in land use planning. However, this 
structure is changing into a horizontal one and spatial 
processes are no longer mainly controlled from a central 
core. Thus, relational linkages tend to be horizontal rather 
than hierarchical/vertical. At the same time, there is the shift 
from competitive cities to cooperative cities. The rest of this 
paper is organized as follows. Section II elaborates more on 
the traditional view. Section III describes the core problem. 
Section IV discusses what an intelligent city is and Section 
V introduces and proposes the five stages. Section VI 
connects the dots. 
II. 
THE TRADITIONAL VIEW 
In Figure 1, foundational view about the city is 
dominated by well-defined familiar structures, a central 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

market place or core, distinct route structures that enable 
people to travel rapidly to the center from outlying places, 
suburban locations or neighborhoods or district centers that 
exist within a clearly structured hierarchy of places and 
segregated areas where industrial activities take place [4]. 
This view implicitly assumes that everything in space is 
homogenous and works as expected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     On the contrary, cities are open complex systems and 
exchange both mass and energy with their surroundings, 
and is a product many builders: Planners, Technologists, 
Architects, Scientists, Engineers and Policy Makers. They, 
[the] builders, constantly modify the structures of cities for 
reasons of their own. Regardless of the city exhibiting 
fundamental characteristics of open systems including the 
property 
of 
multiple 
builders, 
many 
theoretical 
propositions developed to explain and predict urban spatial 
structures typically describe the city as closed static 
system.  That is, a system permitting the export of mass but 
not energy. Forrester [5] attempted to introduce the concept 
of the closed dynamic system in his well-received but 
controversial book: Urban Dynamics. By a closed dynamic 
system, Forrester, does not outright describe the city as a 
conventional open system. Instead, as a system that 
generates its own problems and should be capable of 
reinventing itself to meet internal demands given 
institutional, economic, governance and infrastructural 
structures – a common property of all-natural systems. And 
as an emergent property, the boundaries do not exist in 
isolation - in order words, cities only have imaginary 
boundaries. Forrester strengthened his supposition and 
stated that: “it does mean cause and effect loops do not 
reach outside the boundary and return. For example, 
migration to the area [cities] has its effect by filling and 
thereby altering the area not by emptying the outside 
world”. 
      This position was fundamental in pioneering a 
complementing focus on the dynamics of urban systems as 
against only analyzing the current state and function of 
such cities.  In Figure 2, we demonstrate the representation 
of the city as a mesh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. 
THE CORE PROBLEM  
The governance of urban systems poses an enormous 
challenge to stakeholders and their community of decision 
makers; a challenge heighted by the increasing need for 
resilience, sophistication, durability and intelligence in 
urban instrumentation defined, embedded and utilized in 
cities. The city problem is getting more profound and 
complex. Since 2008 and for the first time in human 
history, the world became more urbanized than rural, with 
more than 50% of the human population residing in cities. 
Estimations predict this percentage to surpass 70% by 
2050. 
Attainment of this milestone ushered in a new era for 
which cities were opened to mega challenges and mega 
opportunities encapsulated in the complexities of 
sociotechnical systems – the fundamental goal for cities 
shifted. Cities seek to minimize problems and to maximize 
opportunities across systems and processes. Some cities by 
virtue of structures, processes and available infrastructure 
are better positioned to explore these opportunities, 
however, none is immune and many especially, most in the 
developing world are highly susceptible to the negative 
repercussions of urbanization. As cities continue to search 
for solutions in what is theoretically an infinite solution 
space, it is indispensable to implement and monitor 
systems, programs and policies that inform and enforce a 
set of key performance parameters. Making-A-City-Think; 
in order words, architecting an intelligent urban space has 
emerged as the indispensable strategy to cope with the 
problems generated by the changing dynamics – and there 
are many of such challenges. However, the success of such 
transformation depends on how it is done [6] 
     Smart or intelligent cities by definition and application 
imply an extended integration of new technologies, 
solutions, policies and decision making in the ontology of 
city existence comprising of mobility, living, governance, 
Figure. 1. Traditional view of Cities and spatial processes; 
akin to star networks exhibiting a one-to-one relationship 
Figure. 2 The city as a mesh with many-to-many relationships 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

economy, environment, civic/people support [7]. It is 
primarily enabled by new computational power, open data 
availability and advanced problem synthesis and analysis.  
     The city system has become an experimental plot to test 
propositions and suppositions emanating from different 
academic disciplines. A new generation of city scientists 
and researchers employing multidisciplinary approaches to 
address many challenging city problems is relatively new 
[although actually old] and has doubled over the last 
decade due to rapid urbanization. Unlike any period in 
history, we observe an active desire of more and more 
people wanting to the move towards the cityscape in search 
of city resurgence – and not necessarily wanting to vacant 
the bucolic peripheries of the country side. We make this 
distinction, and to borrow from Forrester, such a movement 
is not intended to empty the country side [which will never 
happen] but rather to fill the cities.   
     It is intuitive and conceptually appropriate to describe 
the shift to cities – migration on bases of ‘interpreted’ 
transaction cost theory. That is, we relate how people move 
as a set of transactions with the cost of the transaction split 
between: perceived individual benefit(s) and perceived 
collective benefit(s) of migrants [as agents]. That is, the 
decision maker(s) probabilistic outcomes of ‘success’ at 
their [intended] destination is/are larger than their origin. 
Assuming Occam Razor all individuals and groups – all 
things being equal –are greedy and rational and that 
tentatively, gain a cognitive [learning] ability to infer, 
approximate, distribute and map as a function of time their 
egoistic and collective goals relative to their current state. 
Where perceived state is greater than generated state, they 
seek a movement towards nearest (Basic mobility ability, 
that is: distance travelled depends on distance to be 
travelled to reach the destination of choice) destination for 
improvement, that is: (Ps > Pg).  For instance, in developing 
countries, the decline of subsistence farming [favoring the 
masses] – the rise of mechanized large scale [favoring the 
few] coupled with the growing knowledge-based 
information centric technological age has generated a shift 
of form and a change in occupational dependents. When 
speaking with a ‘Lagotian’ (Somebody that has lived or 
preferably lives in Lagos, Nigeria – Africa’s biggest 
megacity) recently, he remarked: “In Lagos, you can sell 
anything and make money out of anything”. In order words, 
whereas their economic choices in the bucolic regions are 
limited; opportunities are assumed to be abundant in cities 
– literally. Glaeser [8] sums this up: in reality, there is no 
such thing as a poor urbanized city or a rich rural region. 
     Succinctly, cities generate more interactions with more 
people than rural areas because they are central places of 
trade that benefit those who live there and so people moved 
to cities because they intuitively perceived the advantages 
of urban life [3]. While technically possible, the 
assumptions above are not intended for quantitative 
translations. In making the above logical constructs, we are 
only re-emphasizing a trait of Homo sapiens such that are 
learning creatures - we learn both voluntarily and 
involuntarily. And that in fact, our most valuable 
knowledge may be one acquired involuntarily – just like 
the seasoned power plant engineer who through acquired 
intelligent cognition can think-ahead of machine warnings 
and shut down generators before an inevitable power surge. 
As a pioneer, Skinner [9] was the first persuader in this 
direction when through a counter theory to [10] he stressed 
on the need to focus more on the productive behavior [of a 
system] itself rather than using it to make hypotheses about 
mental states. In Figure 3, we provide an implicit example 
of a pseudocode of a human agent program that may be 
used to explain the growth of the core problem.  
     The choices of many especially in the developing 
countries to move to urban areas underscore the high-level 
of attraction the city offers. In essence, people have 
elevated their expected value of city returns – partly 
economic, others technological and some cultural, others 
security, etc. Stereotypically, intelligence permeates our 
cities because we now live in a world where objects are 
capable of gathering, processing, displaying, transmitting 
or taking physical action on information all at the same 
time. The roles of cities are being gradually transformed 
into managers of these containers of intelligence - 
egocentric centers of innovation and cognition embedded 
in socio-technical complexities. 
IV. 
WHAT IS AN INTELLIGENT CITY? 
     The city’s problems are relatively similar everywhere, 
they just vary by the degree of sophistication, intensity and 
impact. Climate change affects all cities and megacities are 
not necessarily generating new kinds of problems but 
rather intensifying and exposing the inability of existing 
structures to cope with and or minimize negativities. 
     Due   to   its   definitional   impreciseness, numerous   
unspoken assumptions and a rather self-congratulatory 
tendency [11], a smart city can mean different things to 
different entities – there exist an inherent stakeholder bias 
that practitioners, civic leaders, technocrats and related 
must strive to. In most cases, where cities are using 
networked infrastructure. [sometimes mainly, ‘plug and 
play’] solutions to gain a centralized view of information 
across certain city departments and agencies, they are 
sometimes referred as smart cities.  
    To the citizen, a smart city can mean automatically 
finding the fastest way to get to work; where smart meters 
control power usage and even to some [especially in 
developing countries], where drinking water that can be 
counted on, or perhaps, where they are safer streets due to 
increased closed circuit monitoring.  To the city 
administrator, a smart city can mean optimization of 
process through the installation of city management 
systems, etc. To the environmentalist on the other hand, a 
smart city may mean a city that produces few carbon 
emissions or one whose citizens have a smaller ecological 
footprint. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

     Figure 4 is a Systemigram. Systemigrams are used to 
bring context to the meaning of togetherness that is, to 
unravel ambiguity in methodical system descriptions, parts 
and relationships. Through this approach Systemigrams are 
able to gather and clearly present the structure and behavior 
of systems diagrammatically as an emergent whole. 
     The mainstay [the diagonal, from left to right] is the 
principal stakeholder bias; this can also be termed as the 
dependent variable given that it acts as a centralized 
governance structure that depends on the perspectives of 
other interests/ agents in the urban system. Such a governed 
interplay is for purposes of good service delivery in urban 
systems. For instance, in the smart growth node, consider 
“walkable neighborhood” a citizen may not necessarily 
consider himself safe [his community walkable] on the 
street because business and convenient-shops are within 
his reach of < 10 minutes of walking but because the city 
has installed real-time communications technologies to 
monitor streets. 
      From above and by extension, an intelligent city is 
therefore a smart connected community capable of 
reinventing itself through appropriate and optimal 
communications between local nodes enabled by the 
network and in addition, it engages in interconnectedness 
with foreign entities relevant to local sustenance and/or 
evolution. Getting to this point is not guaranteed by the 
upgrade of a sub-system – it helps- but to achieve or work 
towards achieving intelligence, a city must navigate a 
systematic and holistic course comprising of Insulation, 
Micro-Functional, Macro-Functional, Spatial Dominance, 
Self-Orchestration 
and 
Astute. 
Therefore, 
where 
intelligence shall be a function of: 
C (intelligence) = f (Cw1, Aw2, Aw3, Sw4…) 
Function parameters: weighted rate of the 5 stages 
V. 
THE STAGES 
Below are the proposed incremental stages considering a 
city’s intelligence journey.  
A. Insulation 
The main purpose of insulation is to limit the transfer 
of energy between the inside and outside of a system [12]. 
Cities [as we know] have been complex open systems since 
the evolution of the first of its kind. They have acted as 
centers of knowledge incubation, dissemination and 
transfer. They are the drivers of political, structural and 
economic growth of the national dynamic boundaries 
within which they are situated. 
Cities need to articulate a complex insulation 
mechanism in the form of predictive models on people 
movement in and out of cities and to control the attraction 
and retention of talent, local education institutions and 
related. The above does not call for restrictive policies to 
constrain the mobility of people 
seeking 
social 
opportunities, as misguided interventions often divert 
resources to locations that are not profitable for local level 
growth [13].  One cannot design a system without 
understanding the boundaries of such a system. 
B. Micro-Functional 
Effective approximation of the simple functions of a 
city measured against a verification and validation 
mechanism contributed by the actors of each individual 
sub-system. This approach is intended to assess the optimal 
operation or lack there-off of the assets in a neighborhood. 
This approach is akin to a focus group intended to collect 
perceptions of a product performance, and/or to improve 
features. In theory, it is possible to account for all 
properties of any particular urban system; for instance, the 
Health care delivery system or the Energy system and so 
on if available data allowed for a comprehensive 
knowledge of all the characteristics of such and the 
relationships existing between them. Practically however, 
this is infeasible because, we will never be able to know or 
even approximate all the properties of these systems. Few 
reasons are because urban systems defer from city to city 
with multiple socio-technical interacting relationships that 
are varying, unpredictable and subject to multiple 
subjective interpretations. 
C. Macro-Functional 
This is the extrapolation and extension of a holistic 
representation of the state of a city. It is the assessment how 
micro-functional agents are working collectively and 
optimally. Given the whole is greater than the sum of the 
parts, Macro-functional states are distinct and poses a 
different set of challenges in complexity. From a far, there 
may not be direct link between mobility and education but 
the nuances in-between are the containers to the solution. 
As a satisficing [14] solution to this complexity, the 
properties of the complex wholes – independent systems 
embedded in the city’s system of system ecology – remain 
irreducible to the characteristics of their parts. Hence, they 
are grouped as like terms and each group of like terms is 
assigned a different singular or multi-objective function 
identified with that particular group. Any of these groups 
will possess a spatial view of the urban form which stems 
to be a representation of an urban system from their 
common concerns.  
D. Spatial Dominance 
There is almost never the best system, but there is an 
optimal system at any given point in space. While in many 
real-world situations, optimal strategies are unknown or 
unknowable [15], the city is not one of those. Enabling 
urban 
intelligence 
fueled 
by 
urban 
technological 
innovations begins as a pragmatic, engineering-based 
attempt to improve the operation of individual urban 
infrastructure and services; it can also be seen as 
perturbing unconsciously the interactions of the many 
systems within a city. Urban networks consist of 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

infrastructure systems, interconnected service delivery 
mechanisms and social networks. 
In the context of the city, spatial dominance represents 
the estimation of interconnectedness of cities. Regardless 
of how minuscule it might be, it is important for a city to 
achieve a preferred status, in-other-words, be known as the 
go-to in an area relative to another city with which is shares 
relation. It’s possible for multiple cities to be equally 
preferred in enumerated areas or metrics. 
E. Self-Orchestration 
While making a city think may be a new research 
domain, the study of cities as systems dates back to at least 
the mid-1950s. Cities were first treated formally as systems 
when General System Theory and Cybernetics came to be 
applied to the softer social sciences in the 1950s.  It is worth 
mentioning that the structure of a digital urban space is not 
static, that is, with the continuous improvement of theory 
and practice related to urban management and operations, 
urban components and their systems can be dynamically 
optimized and adjusted so that they can better cover all 
areas of the city [16]. 
With self-orchestration, there is an end-to-end function 
of cities as systems within systems of cities, such that 
multiple areas of the city function autonomously and at the 
same time controlled. Example, the automatic detection of 
a pothole and the prevention of a pothole. It is a trusted, 
integrated state. 
F. Astute 
This is the final stage and a culmination of insulation, 
micro-functional, macro-functional, spatial dominance and 
self-orchestration. Thinking in systems or systems thinking 
can be said to hold the city in its dichotomy: it helps to 
show how local processes and interactions give rise to 
global structures considering a plethora of local views and 
constraints and how these global structures feedback into 
local interactions. 
VI. 
CONNECTING THE DOTS 
Studies on cities as socio-technical systems are recent 
and not well developed. Either there have been undue 
emphases on creating diminutive artificial societies – a 
technology lead approach or a 180 degree turn to 
emphasize the value of social welfare. The study of cities 
as socio-technical systems recognizes an eminent social 
part and an important technological dependency. The 
COVID-19 crisis made it clear that cities suffer if their 
citizens do, and that without the well-being of the latter, 
they are merely empty structures [17]. This approach 
reduces the evidence of social and technical polarization 
cited in earlier works such as [18], [19]. 
The ability to deal with commonsense knowledge about 
the world is fundamental for any intelligent system that 
acts in the real world and it has been early recognized as 
one of the central topics of Artificial Intelligence to 
represent and reason about commonsense knowledge.  
Space has always been considered to be an important part 
of commonsense reasoning given the physical world has a 
spatial dimension and all objects which are dealt with are 
located in space relative to other objects. Early approaches 
involving commonsense knowledge about the physical 
world were trying to solve text book physics and math 
problems, e.g., [19, 17]. but it soon turned out that 
mathematical equations were not sufficient for solving 
most problems.   
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
Strong linkage between the state of cities and 
information technology is a function of time and obligate 
symbiosis. In order words, technological innovation, 
regardless of the geography within which it occurs: be it in 
a basement in India, Bangladesh, Nairobi, or in well-
organized centers in Silicon Valley, mostly occur in cities. 
Technology evolves when actors nurture and develop ideas 
directly impacting existing spatial dynamics of their living 
squatters’. Because money begets money, actors are 
attracted to disproportionally work towards where such 
technology will be needed. The law of disproportionality 
does not deny but delay diffusion into other areas.   
By 
employing 
systems 
thinking 
and 
systems 
engineering, we think about how a set of “city events” are 
governed and function as a function of nested complexities. 
We acknowledge learning in city spaces require abilities to 
decrypt, analyze, synthesize, apply, predict [actions] and 
re-configure an integral knowledge base.  Such 
information, where gathered can be molded into patterns of 
behavior, develop predictive models of likely outcomes 
allowing better decisions and informed actions [20]., 
learning in space require Networked Infrastructure, 
Information Systems and City Citizens as principal agents.  
Cities are complex spatial systems with social and 
technical rules, structures and networks. In the most 
general terms, there is a network of cities or a network in 
cities. Of more interest is network in cities where the city 
becomes less obtrusive and reinforce a network 
dependency of a system among systems, rightly called a 
system of systems.  By extension, it is important to realize 
these relationships because they serve a building blocks to 
understand how logical and physical networks work in 
cities. When we say a city is connected, more ‘smartly’ 
connected we mean it is capable of reinventing itself 
through appropriate and optimal communications between 
local nodes enabled by the network and in addition, it 
engages in interconnectedness with foreign entities 
relevant to local sustenance and/or evolution. 
In this paper, we have presented the background of the 
problem and introduced five stages of assessment and 
measurement. Further research will expand on guidance 
and evaluation of the proposed stages. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

REFERENCES 
[1]  J. Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great American Cities 
Part, New York: Random House, 1961.  
[2]  J. G. Miller, Living Systems, The Basic Concepts, 1978.  
[3]  D. V. Philippe Blanchard, Mathematical Analysis of Urban 
Spatial Networks, Springer, 2007.  
[4]  M. Batty, Cities as Complex Systems: Scaling, 
Interactions, 
Networks, 
Dynamics 
and 
Urban 
Morphologies, UCL Working Paper Series: London, 2008. 
[5]  J. Forrester, Urban Dynamics, MIT Press, 1969.  
[6]  J. Muvuna, T. Boutaleb, S. Mickovski, and K. J. Baker, 
"Systems engineering approach to design and modelling of 
smart cities," International Conference for Students on 
Applied Engineering (ICSAE), pp. 437-440, 2016.  
[7]  R. Giffinger, and H. Gudrun, "Smart cities ranking: An 
effective instrument for the positioning of the cities," 
Journal of the Center of Land Policy and Valuations, vol. 
4, no. 12, pp 13-18 2010.  
[8]  E. Glaeser, Triumph of the City, How our Greatest 
Invention Makes Us Richer, Smarter, Greener, Healthier 
and Happier, New York: Penguin press, 2011.  
[9]  B. F. Skinner, "Are theories of Learning Necessary?," The 
Psychological Review, Volume , vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 193-216, 
1950.  
[10] E. Tolman, "Cognitive Maps in Rats and Men," The 
Psychological Review, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 189-208, 1948.  
[11] R. Hollands, "Will the real smart city please stand up?," 
Analysis of Urban Change, Theory, Action, vol. 12, no. 3, 
pp. 303-320, 2008.  
[12] A. Bahadori, "Design and Application of Thermal 
Insulation," Thermal Insulation Handbook for the Oil, Gas, 
and Petrochemical Industries, 2014.  
[13] The Wor;d Bank Group, 2010. 
[14] H. Simon, "Rational Choice and the Structure of the 
environment," 1956. [Online].  
[15] H. Simon, "Rational decision making in business 
organizations," Advances in behavioral economics, vol. 1, 
pp. 18-47, 1987.  
[16] L. S. Souza, S. Misra and M. S. Soares, "SmartCitySysML: 
A SysML Profile for Smart Cities Applications," 
Computational Science and Its Applications , 2020.  
[17] IESE, "IESE Cities in Motion Index," IESE, Pamplona, 
2020. 
[18] A. Smith, A. Stirling, and F. Berkhout, "The governance of 
sustainable socio-technical transitions," Research Policy, 
pp. 1491-1510, 2005.  
[19] J. Peck, "Struggling with the Creative Class," International 
Journal of Urban and Regional Research, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 
740-770, 2005.  
[20] IBM Institute for Business Value, "A vision of smarter 
cities, How cities can lead the way into a prosperous and 
sustainable future," IBM Global Business Services, 2011. 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

 
 
 
           function   IMPROVE_QUALITY_OF_ LIFE(target)  
 returns   an action   
   
cognition:  localPercept,  access local conditions, initially set to null [0, 1]   
                                     
 foreignPercept 
, excepted opportunities for goal attainment [0, 1]  
                                    
Goal , access short term and long term  
                 DEFINE:   
localState  [‘current local State’ based on performance measure]   
                                           futureState 
 [‘perceived future State’ based on performance measure]  
       if {  
           localPercept  
approaches  1   &&  foreignPercept  
approaches  0 , then  
           Goal  ←  foreignPercept  
           VERIFY  
           Problem ((futureState – currentState) < (currentState – futureState))   
             execute  
← MIGRATIONDIRECTION  
( foreignPercept)  
                  ELSE if  
                 localPercept  approaches  0 then  
                break thought;  
           return action  
                    if   
                          
SOLUTION  is null [0]  after ‘x  LOOPS ’  
                          
AGENT   is  content  ←   SET  localPercept ( 
 approaches    0 )   
            }  
     END IF  
          return state 
  
  
Figure. 3 The core problem fueled by migration 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions

             
    Figure. 4. The Systemigram of a Smart City 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-021-6
MODERN SYSTEMS 2022 : International Conference of Modern Systems Engineering Solutions
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

