ICQNM 2016
The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro
Technologies
ISBN: 978-1-61208-495-4
July 24 - 28, 2016
Nice, France
ICQNM 2016 Editors
Victor Ovchinnikov, Aalto University, Finland
Thierry Ferrus, Hitachi Cambridge Laboratory, UK

ICQNM 2016
Forward
The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies
(ICQNM 2016), held between July 24-28, 2016 in Nice, France, continued a series of events
covering
particularly
promising
theories
and
technologies.
The
conference
covered
fundamentals on designing, implementing, testing, validating and maintaining various kinds of
materials, systems, techniques and mechanisms related to quantum-, nano- and micro-
technologies.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the ICQNM 2016
technical program committee, as well as the reviewers. We also kindly thank all the authors
that dedicated much of their time and effort to contribute to ICQNM 2016.
We also gratefully thank the members of the ICQNM 2016 organizing committee for their
help in handling the logistics and for their work that made this professional meeting a success.
We hope ICQNM 2016 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas and
results between academia and industry and to promote further progress in the area of
Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies. We also hope that Nice, France provided a
pleasant environment during the conference and everyone saved some time enjoy the beautiful
French Riviera.
ICQNM 2016 Advisory Committee
Vladimir Privman, Clarkson University - Potsdam, USA
Christian Kollmitzer, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Austria
Victor Ovchinnikov, Aalto University, Finland
ICQNM 2016 Research/Industry Chairs
Marco Genovese, Italian Metrological Institute (INRIM) -Torino, Italy
Keiji Matsumoto, National Institute of Informatics, Japan
ICQNM 2016 Special Area Chairs
QSEC
Masahito Hayashi, Nagoya University, Japan
Fluidics
Alireza Azarbadegan, University College London (UCL), UK
Quantum algorithms and quantum complexity
Francois Le Gall, The University of Tokyo, Japan
Quantum control
Daoyi Dong, University of New South Wales, Australia

ICQNM 2016
Committee
ICQNM Advisory Committee
Vladimir Privman, Clarkson University - Potsdam, USA
Christian Kollmitzer, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Austria
Victor Ovchinnikov, Aalto University, Finland
ICQNM 2016 Research/Industry Chairs
Marco Genovese, Italian Metrological Institute (INRIM) -Torino, Italy
Keiji Matsumoto, National Institute of Informatics, Japan
ICQNM 2016 Special Area Chairs
QSEC
Masahito Hayashi, Nagoya University, Japan
Fluidics
Alireza Azarbadegan, University College London (UCL), UK
Quantum algorithms and quantum complexity
Francois Le Gall, The University of Tokyo, Japan
Quantum control
Daoyi Dong, University of New South Wales, Australia
ICQNM 2016 Technical Program Committee
Andrew Adamatzky, University of the West of England - Bristol, U.K.
Gerardo Adesso, University of Nottingham, UK
Hossein Aghababa, University of Tehran, Iran
Irina Buyanova, Linkoping University, Sweden
Weimin M. Chen, Linköping University, Sweden
Taksu Cheon, Kochi University of Technology - Tosa Yamada, Japan
Sang H. Choi, NASA Langley Research Center, USA
Mihaela Corneanu, Banat's University of Agricultural Sciences and Veterinary Medicine, Romania
Sorin Cotofana, TU Delft, The Netherlands
Kamalika Datta, National Institute of Technology Meghalaya, Shillong, India
Brahim Dennai, ENERGARID Laboratory, France
Rolf Drechsler, University of Bremen/DFKI, Germany
Sao-Ming Fei, Capital Normal University - Beijing, China
Juan Carlos García-Escartín, Universidad de Valladolid, Spain

Yuval Gefen, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
Marco Genovese, Italian Metrological Institute (INRIM) -Torino, Italy
Bonnie Gray, Simon Fraser University, Canada
Masahito Hayashi, Nagoya University, Japan
Hoshang Heydari, Stockholm University, Sweden
Norman Hugh Redington, MIT, USA
Chul Huh, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Republic of Korea
Travis Humble, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA
Elżbieta Jankowska, National Research Institute - Warsaw, Poland
Zhengfeng Ji, Institute for Quantum Computing - University of Waterloo, Canada
Benjamin Jurke, Northeastern University - Boston, USA
Alena Kalendova, Tomas Bata University in Zlin, Czech Republic
Christian Kollmitzer, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Austria
Francois Le Gall, The University of Tokyo, Japan
Jun Li, Kansas State University, USA
Gui Lu Long, Tsinghua University, China
Stefano Mancini, University of Camerino, Italy
Constantinos Mavroidis, Northeastern University - Boston, USA Munehiro Nishida, Hiroshima University,
Japan
Masaki Nakanishi, Yamagata University, Japan
Andrej Orinak, University of P. J. Safarik in Kosice, Slovakia
Victor Ovchinnikov, MICRONOVA, Aalto University, Finland
Telhat Özdoğan, Amasya University, Turkey
Bill Parker, CreativeMicro, USA
Vladimir Privman, Clarkson University - Potsdam, USA
Stefan Rass, Universität Klagenfurt, Austria
Mohsen Razavi, University of Leeds, UK
Philippe Renaud, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Switzerland
Luis Roa Oppliger, Universidad de Concepción, Chile
Reza Sadr, Texas A&M University at Qatar – Doha, Quatar
Barry Sanders, iCORE/University of Calgary, Canada
Peter Schartner, University of Klagenfurt, Austria
Stefan Schauer, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Austria
Kristina Seklisinski, Université de Montréal, Canada
Simone Severini, University College London, UK
Ingo Sieber, Karlsruher Institut für Technologie (KIT), Germany
Anuvat Sirivat, Chulalongkorn University, Thailand
Maciej Sitarz, AGH University of Science and Technology - Cracow, Poland
Don Sofge, Naval Research Laboratory - Washington D.C., USA
Sandro Sozzo, School of Management and Institute for Quantum Social and Cognitive Science -
University of Leicester, UK
Ashok Srivastava, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, USA
Eric Suraud, Université Paul Sabatier, France
Alexander Tarasenko, Institute of Physics Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Czech Republic
Tzyh Jong Tarn, Washington University in St. Louis, USA and Tsinghua University - Beijing, China
Pramod Tiwari, National Institute of Technology - Rourkela - Odisha, India
Adriana Vâlcu, National Institute of Metrology, Romania
Salvador E. Venegas-Andraca, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico

Robert Wille, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
Shigeru Yamashita, Ritsumeikan University - Shiga Japan
Katerina Zaharieva, Institute of Catalysis - Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Bulgaria
Alexander Zhbanov, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Republic of Korea

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Population Inversion by an Adiabatic Cycle in 1D Boson System
Taksu Cheon and Atushi Tanaka
1
Reduction of Silver Oxide Film in Inert Gas Plasma
Victor Ovchinnikov
6
Quantum Hexagonal Quadrature Amplitude Modulation
YoungJun Kim and Young-Chai Ko
12
The Formation of Black Glasses from Ladder-like Silsequioxanes
Maciej Sitarz
17
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Population Inversion by an Adiabatic Cycle in 1D Boson System
Taksu Cheon
Laboratory of Physics, Kochi University of Technology
Tosa Yamada, Kochi 782-8502, Japan
Email: taksu.cheon@kochi-tech.ac.jp
Atushi Tanaka
Department of Physics, Tokyo Metropolitan University
Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0397, Japan
Email: tanaka-atushi@tmu.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we show that an adiabatic cycle excites
Bose particles conﬁned in a one-dimensional box. We consider a
cycle, during which a wall described by a δ-shaped potential is
applied and its strength and position are slowly varied. When the
system is initially prepared in the equilibrium ground state, the
adiabatic cycle brings all bosons into the ﬁrst excited one-particle
state, leaving the system in a nonequilibrium state. The absorbed
energy during the cycle is proportional to the number of bosons.
Keywords–Quantum mechanics; Quantum holonomy; Ultracold
gases.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The control of a physical system in at quantum level is at
the forefront of today’s physics research. Among the research
works, the population inversion in bosonic gas has a venerable
tradition, dating back to the early years of quantum mechanics.
The quantum population inversion has been studied for its
application to lasing [1]. The quantum control of atoms and
molecules has also been investigated to realize the popula-
tion inversion [2][3]. Recently, studies of the super-Tonks-
Girardeau gas, which also involves the population inversion,
have attracted a lot of attention in both experimental and
theoretical studies of nonequilibrium cold atoms [4][5][6][7].
In the super-Tonks-Girardeau gas, which may be described by
the Lieb-Liniger model [8] with strongly attractive interaction,
the population inversion is created through an “adiabatic”
process, where the interaction strength is suddenly ﬂipped from
inﬁnitely repulsive to inﬁnitely attractive [6][9].
Such a population inversion can be induced even by an
adiabatic cycle, which can be obtained with an extension
of the adiabatic process that connects Tonks-Girardeau and
super-Tonks-Girardeau gases both to weaker repulsive and
weaker attractive regime. The repetitions of this adiabatic cycle
transform the ground state of non-interacting bosons into their
higher excited states and achieve the population inversion [10].
This is counterintuitive, since there is no external ﬁeld to drive
the ﬁnal state of the bosons away from the initial state.
There have been studies of the excitation of quantum
systems by adiabatic cycles, which is referred to as the exotic
quantum holonomy [11][12][13]. We also mention, in studies
of atomic and molecular systems under the oscillating ﬁeld,
that an adiabatic cycle involving a level crossing may excite a
quantum system [14][15].
In this paper, we examine an adiabatic cycle that excites
a system consisting of Bose particles conﬁned in a one-
dimensional box. During the cycle, we vary an additional wall
adiabatically, while the interparticle interaction is kept ﬁxed.
This is in contrast to the scheme described in [6][10], where
the interaction strength between Bose particles is an effective
adiabatic parameter. In this study, we suppose that the wall is
described by a δ-function shaped potential [16][17][18]. We
show that the ﬁrst excited one-particle state is occupied by
all the bosons to achieve the population inversion completely,
if the system is prepared to be in the ground state. Namely,
the energy gained by the bosons during the adiabatic cycle is
proportional to the number of bosons.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the basic
setup of our model is presented in the simplest setting of one
boson. Section 3 and 4 deal with noninteracting and interacting
many bosons, respectively. The summary and the discussion
are found in Section 5.
II.
A PARTICLE IN A BOX WITH A δ-WALL
In order to examine N Bose particles in a one-dimensional
box with an additional δ-wall, we review the single particle
case, i.e., N = 1 [18], where the system is described by the
Hamiltonian
H(g, X) = p2
2m + V (x) + gδ(x − X),
(1)
where m is the particle mass, V (x) is the conﬁnement poten-
tial, and g and X are the strength and position of δ-wall. In
particular, we assume that V (x) describes an inﬁnite square
well with the length L, i.e., V (x) = 0 for 0 < x < L and
V (x) = ∞ otherwise [16][17].
We introduce an adiabatic cycle C, which consists of three
adiabatic processes CI, CII and CIII, as shown in Figure 1.
We suppose that the δ-wall is initially absent, i.e., g = 0 in 1,
and that the system is in a stationary state initially. In the ﬁrst
part of C, which will be called CI, an impenetrable wall is
inserted at x0 adiabatically. In terms of the δ-wall, the strength
g is slowly increased from 0 to ∞, while its position X is ﬁxed
at x0 during CI. Subsequently, in the second part CII, the
position X of the impenetrable wall is adiabatically changed
Figure 1. The adiabatic cycle C of a one-dimensional box, which contains
Bose particles. The strength and the position of an additional δ-wall is
adiabatically varied during C.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Figure 2. Parametric evolution of eigenenergies with N = 1 along the cycle
C, which consists of CI (left part), CII (middle part) and CIII (right
part). The eigenenergies are depicted by their normalized wavenumber ¯k 2.
We set x0 = 0.4703L and x1 = L − x0.
from x0 to x1. In the last part CIII, the δ-wall at X = x1 is
adiabatically turned off. At the end of the cycle C, the δ-wall
has no effect, again.
In Figure 2, we depict the parametric dependence of
eigenenergies of the single-particle Hamiltonian H(g, X) 1
along C. Throughout this manuscript, we indicate the eigenen-
ergy E using a normalized wavenumber ¯k
¯k ≡
r
E
Nϵ,
(2)
where ϵ = (ℏπ/L)2/(2m) is the ground eigenenergy of the
particle in the inﬁnite square well.
The adiabatic time evolution of the single-particle system
along C depends on x0 and x1. In the following, we explain
the case 2
5L < x0 < 1
2L < x1 < 3
5L, which may be explained
from Figure 2. A more rigorous argument is found in [18].
First, let us consider the case that the initial state is the
ground state |1(g = 0, X = x0)⟩ of the particle in the
inﬁnite square well, where |n(g, X)⟩ denotes the n-th adiabatic
eigenstate of H(g, X) during processes CI and CIII. We will
omit to indicate (g, X) in the following. After the completion
of CI, the state vector arrives at |R1⟩, the ground state of the
right well, since we choose the right well in CII is slightly
larger than the left well. During CII, there occurs a spectral
degeneracy between |R1⟩ and |L1⟩, the ground state of the
left well. This is because the size of the left (right) well is
increasing (decreasing) during CII, and these sizes coincide at
X = L/2. At the end of CII, |R1⟩ becomes the ﬁrst excited
state, which adiabatically continued to |2⟩, which is the second
excited state of the particle in the inﬁnite square well, through
CIII. Hence, the “population inversion” in the single-particle
system occurs if the system is prepared to be in the ground
state initially.
Second, we examine the case that the initial state is the ﬁrst
excited state |2⟩, which offers the “inverse” of the population
inversion. Through the adiabatic cycle C, the system arrives
at |L1⟩ after the completion of C1, and then arrives at |1⟩ at
the end of the cycle C. Namely, either |1⟩ and |2⟩ return to
the initial states after the completion of the adiabatic cycle C
twice.
Third, let us examine the cases that the initial states are
|3⟩ and |4⟩, which are the ﬁrst and second excited state,
respectively. Now C induces an interchange of these two
states, through the intermediate states |R2⟩ and |L2⟩, which
are localized the right and left well during the process II.
A similar interchange of initial eigenstates occurs as a
result of the adiabatic cycle C, as long as we choose x0 and x1
appropriately. In general, the level crossing of the one-particle
Hamiltonian 1 during the process CII plays an important role
to determine which pairs of eigenstates are interchanged by C,
while there is no level crossing generically during the processes
CI and CIII [18].
We make a remark on the stability of the present scheme
for the one-body population inversion. A crucial point is
the stability of the adiabatic time evolution across the level
crossing during CII. The level crossing may be lifted due to
an imperfection of the impenetrable wall, i.e., the δ-wall with
an inﬁnite strength. If the level splitting is small enough, we
may employ the diabatic process around the avoided crossing
to realize the one-body population inversion. It has been shown
that an open diabatic process made of time-dependent potential
well produces the second excited state from the ground state of
a bose particle [19]. This diabatic scheme is applied to create
collective excitations of interacting bosons [19][20][21].
III.
NON-INTERACTING BOSONS
We examine the case that the number of the Bose particles
is N, assuming the absence of interparticle interaction. It is
straightforward to extend the above result for N = 1, once we
restrict the case that N bosons initially occupy the one-particle
state |n⟩. Hence, the system is in an adiabatic state of the N
bosons
|n⊗N⟩ ≡ |nn. . .n⟩,
(3)
where the one-particle adiabatic state |n⟩ is occupied by N
bosons, during CI and CIII.
If there are no interparticle interactions, the parametric
evolution of averaged wavenumber ¯k for the adiabatic N-
particle state agrees with the one of the single-particle system.
This suggests that the adiabatic cycle C of the N-particle
system with no interaction delivers the ground state |1⊗N⟩ to
the excited state |2⊗N⟩, i.e., the complete population inversion,
as seen in Figure 2. The energy that the particles acquire during
the cycle C is proportional to the number of the particles.
IV.
INTERACTING BOSONS
We examine the adiabatic cycle C for N interacting Bose
particles. We mainly examine the case that the system is
initially in the ground state. In order to conﬁrm that the N-
particle population inversion really occurs, we need to examine
the effect of the interparticle interaction.
We assume that the interparticle interaction V consists of
two-body contact interactions. Namely, we suppose that V
takes the following form
V (x1, x2, . . . , xN) = λ
X
⟨i,j⟩
δ(xi − xj),
(4)
where λ is the interaction strength, and the summation is taken
over pairs.
We also assume that the interparticle interaction is weak
enough so that the topology of the parametric dependence
of eigenenergy remains unchanged, except around the level
crossing points of the noninteracting bosons. Namely, when
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

the gaps of the eigenenergies between neighboring levels in
the noninteracting system are larger than a constant value, the
interparticle interaction shifts the eigenenergy at most O(λ),
according to the standard perturbation theory. For small enough
perturbative energy correction, the corresponding adiabatic
time evolution of the stationary state of the interacting bosons
closely follows the one of the noninteracting bosons.
Accordingly, under the weak interparticle interaction con-
dition, the eigenstates of the interacting bosons can be labeled
by the quantum numbers of the noninteracting bosons. For
example, the ground state of the initial and ﬁnal points of
the adiabatic cycle C may be denoted as |1⊗N(λ)⟩, whose
overlapping integral with the unperturbed state |1⊗N⟩ is large.
Also, |1⊗N(λ)⟩ can be constructed by the standard perturba-
tion theory with a small parameter λ.
On the other hand, even a weak interparticle interaction can
strongly inﬂuence the parametric evolution of energy levels in
the vicinity of level crossings by making avoided crossings.
Hence, we need to closely examine the level crossing of the
non-interacting Bose particles.
In the following, we argue that the adiabatic time evolution
closely follows the one in the noninteracting system examined
above, if the number of particles is large enough. The key is
the selection rule for the matrix element of V in the adiabatic
representation in the vicinity of the level crossings of non-
interacting Bosons.
A. “Tunneling” and direct contributions of the interaction in
N = 2
We show that the effect of the interparticle interaction is
signiﬁcantly different, depending on whether a level crossing
locates either in CII, or in CI ∪ CIII, as for the two body
case. In the former case, the relevant matrix elements may
be small since it involves only tunneling processes through
the impenetrable wall. On the other hand, in processes CI
and CIII, the matrix element cannot be negligible. However,
it turns out that there happens to be no corresponding level
crossing that affects the population inversion whose initial state
is the ground state.
The parametric evolutions of eigenenergies of the noninter-
acting two particle system are depicted in Figure 3, in terms of
the averaged wavenumber ¯k (see, 2). The parametric evolution
of the eigenenergy that connects |11⟩ and |22⟩ has a level
crossing with two eigenenergies during CII. The initial states
of these energy levels are |22⟩ and |12⟩, which are |L1L1⟩ and
|R1L1⟩ during CII, respectively.
We examine the matrix elements of the interparticle inter-
action term V between the adiabatic basis vectors |R1R1⟩,
|L1L1⟩ and |R1L1⟩. Note that |R1R1⟩ corresponds to the
initial state |11⟩ of the adiabatic cycle
⟨R1, L1|V |R1, R1⟩=
√
2λ
Z L
0
{ψR1(x)ψL1(x)}∗{ψR1(x)}2dx,
(5)
for example. Since the single-particle adiabatic eigenfunctions
ψL1(x) and ψR1(x) are completely localized in the left and
right wells, respectively, the overlapping integral is zero, if
the δ-wall is completely impenetrable during CII. The level
crossing accordingly remains even in the presence of the
interparticle interaction. Thus the adiabatic cycle C induces
Figure 3. Parametric evolution of normalized wavenumbers for N = 2. Full
lines indicate the levels whose initial states are |nn⟩ (n = 1, . . . , 4) Other
levels are depicted by dashed lines. Parameters are the same as in Figure 2.
the complete population inversion from |11⟩ to |22⟩, as in the
non-interacting case.
Let us examine the case that the δ-wall during CII allows
the tunneling leakage of particles due to some imperfections.
Still, we may expect that the matrix elements due to the tun-
neling corrections are exponentially small. Since the resultant
energy gap of the avoided crossing is also exponentially small,
we may expect that the diabatic process easily almost recovers
the complete population inversion.
Also, during the second process CII, the left and right part
of the well may be separated. This allows us to make the tun-
neling correction arbitrarily small. Accordingly the adiabatic
limit that follows the extremely small avoided crossing would
be difﬁcult to realize.
On the other hand, if the level crossing appears during CI
or CIII, the interparticle interaction destroys the level crossing.
In Figure 3, such an example is seen between the levels whose
initial states are |33⟩ and |24⟩, which is delivered to |R2R2⟩
and |L1L2⟩, respectively, in the absence of V .
The matrix element ⟨33|V |24⟩ does not vanish in gen-
eral, since the relevant single-particle adiabatic eigenfunctions
extend the whole box. Accordingly the level crossings are
destroyed to form avoided crossing. Thus the adiabatic process
CI for example, delivers |33⟩ and |24⟩ at the initial point of CI,
to |L1L2⟩ and |R2R2⟩, respectively. This breaks the population
inversion whose initial state is a higher excited state, e.g., the
adiabatic cycle C delivers |33⟩ to |44⟩ in the absence of the
interparticle interaction.
B. Selection rule for N = 3
Here, we show that the interparticle interaction does not
suppress the population inversion for N > 2 due to a selection
rule of V .
We explain this with the case N = 3 (Figure 4). Let
us examine the level whose initial state is |1⊗3⟩ along C.
The corresponding ﬁnal state is |2⊗3⟩ in the absence of the
interparticle interaction.
First, the interparticle interaction has no, or exponentially
small effect on the level crossing during CII, as shown in the
case of N = 2.
Second, we examine the level crossing in CIII, where
the levels whose ﬁnal states are |2⊗3⟩ and |113⟩ exhibit
crossing. We examine the matrix element of the interparticle
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Figure 4. Parametric evolution of normalized wavenumbers for N = 3.
Other parameters are the same as in Figure 3.
Figure 5. Parametric evolution of normalized wavenumbers for N = 4.
Other parameters are the same as in Figure 3.
interaction ⟨113|V |2⊗3⟩, which vanishes since V is a two-
body interaction, and the set of quantum numbers (1, 1, 3) and
(2, 2, 2) has no common quantum number.
Still, there may be a tiny avoided crossing whose magni-
tude can be explained by the standard second-order perturba-
tion theory. We may expect that the diabatic process induces
the complete population inversion whose ﬁnal state is |2⊗3⟩.
Also, even if the interaction strength λ is moderately large,
where the topology of the level diagram remains unchanged
except that the avoided crossing becomes noticeable, the ﬁnal
state should be |113⟩, whose energy is far larger than the
ground state. In this sense, a incomplete population inversion
should be realized.
C. The population inversion for N > 2
We shall prove that the adiabatic cycle C delivers |1⊗N⟩
to |2⊗N⟩ for N > 2, even in the presence of the two-body
interparticle interaction. Here we explain the selection rule for
arbitrary N (> 2), and examine each part of the cycle C. For
example, N = 4 case is shown in Figure 5.
We explain the selection rule of the two-body interparticle
interaction for N > 2. Namely, we examine the matrix element
⟨n′
1n′
2 . . . n′
N|V |n1n2 . . . nN⟩. The matrix element vanishes
when the two sets of quantum numbers (n′
1, n′
2, . . . , n′
N) and
(n1, n2, . . . nN) has, at least, three different elements, i.e.,
the number of the common quantum numbers is equal to
N − 3 or less. In other words, non-vanishing matrix element
has the following ⟨n′
1n′
2n3 . . . nN|V |n1n2n3 . . . nN⟩ where
(n3, . . . , nN) are the common quantum numbers.
We examine the ﬁrst part CI of C. We assume that the
system is initially in the ground state |1⊗N(λ)⟩. According
to the selection rule, it is sufﬁcient to examine |1⊗N−2ψ, φ⟩,
where |ψ⟩ and |φ⟩ are single particle adiabatic states, e.g. |2⟩.
Now we examine whether the eigenenergies of these states are
degenerate. This is equivalent to compare the eigenenergies
corresponding to |11⟩ and |ψ, φ⟩ of the two particle system.
As is seen in Figure 3, there is no level crossing in CI. In
this sense, there is no effective level crossing with the level
|1⊗N(λ)⟩, during CI.
As for CIII, we conclude from an argument similar to the
above, that the energy level corresponding to |2⊗N(λ)⟩ has no
effective level crossing.
Next we examine CII, where the system is in |R⊗N
1
⟩.
According to the selection rule, it sufﬁces to examine
|R⊗N−2
1
ψ, φ⟩ with single particle adiabatic states |ψ⟩ and
|φ⟩. To clarify the level crossing, we compare |R1R1⟩ with
|ψ, φ⟩. There are three cases. First, the levels corresponding
to |R1R1⟩ and |Rn, Rn′⟩ ((n, n′) ̸= (1, 1)) do not occur.
Second, the levels corresponding to |R1R1⟩ and |Rn, Ln′⟩
exhibits a degeneracy only when n = 1 and n′
= 1,
where the corresponding matrix element involves a single-
particle tunneling. Third, the levels corresponding to |R1R1⟩
and |Ln, Ln′⟩ exhibits a degeneracy only when n = 1 and
n′ = 1, where the corresponding matrix element involves a
two-particle tunneling. Since the matrix elements involving a
tunneling contribution is exponentially small, the resultant gap
should be also small. Hence, the diabatic process should occur
even when the speed of the impenetrable wall is moderately
slow.
V.
DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY
We argue here that the experimental realization of the
population inversion suggested in this paper is feasible with
the current state of the art. For example, we may utilize the
scheme [22] to realize δ-wall with an approximate Gaussian
wall.
Another possibility is to use a heavy particle as a wall,
whose position may be manipulated by, say, an optical tweezer.
The effective interaction between the wall particle and other
particle may be tuned by external ﬁelds.
We note that the present scheme may offer a way to
realize other exotic nonequilibrium states. Let us suppose, for
example, the state of bosons is in |2⊗N(λ)⟩, which can be
generated from the adiabatic cycle C. After the interparticle
interaction λ is adiabatically increased to ∞, the system arrives
the higher excited state of the Tonks-Girardeau system, which
may be described by the Lieb-Linigher model with the inﬁnite
interparticle interaction strength [23][24]. Similarly, after λ is
adiabatically decreased to −∞, the system now arrives at the
higher excited state of the super-Tonks-Girardeau system [6].
This state is a much more highly-excited state compared to the
super-Tonks-Girardeau state, because the initial state |2⊗N(λ)⟩
is a higher excited state of noninteracting bosons.
In summary, we have shown that the adiabatic cycle C
induces the nearly complete population inversion of the multi-
boson system, when the interparticle interaction is not too
strong. As pointed out in [18] for a single particle case, the
present scheme may be extended to the case of an arbitrary
shape of the conﬁnement potential V (x).
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the Japan Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology under the
Grant number 15K05216.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Grynberg, A. Aspect and C. Fabre, Introduction to Quantum Optics
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 2010.
[2]
B. W. Shore, Manipulating Quantum Structures Using Laser Pulses
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 2011.
[3]
M. Shapiro and P. Brumer, Quantum Control of Molecular Processes
2nd ed (Weinheim: Wiley) 2012.
[4]
G. E. Astrakharchik, J. Boronat, J. Casulleras and S. Giorgini, ”Beyond
the Tonks-Girardeau Gas: Strongly Correlated Regime in Quasi-One-
Dimensional Bose Gases”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 190407 (4pp), 2005.
[5]
M. Olshanii, ”Atomic Scattering in the Presence of an External Con-
ﬁnement and a Gas of Impenetrable Bosons”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, pp.
938–941, 1998.
[6]
E. Haller, M. Gustavsson, M. J. Mark, J. G. Danzl, R. Hart, G. Pupillo
and H. C. N¨agerl, ”Realization of an Excited, Strongly Correlated
Quantum Gas Phase”, Science 325, pp. 1224–1227, 2009.
[7]
X. Guan, ”Critical Phenomena in One Dimension from a Bethe Ansatz
Perspective”, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 28, 1430015 (39pp), 2014.
[8]
E. H. Lieb and W. Liniger, ”Exact Analysis of an Interacting Bose
Gas. I. The General Solution and the Ground State”, Phys. Rev. 130
pp. 1605–1616, 1963.
[9]
M. Girardeau, ”Relationship between Systems of Impenetrable Bosons
and Fermions in One Dimension”, J. Math. Phys. 1, pp. 516–523, 1960.
[10]
N. Yonezawa, A. Tanaka and T. Cheon, ”Quantum Holonomy in the
Lieb-Liniger Model”, Phys. Rev. A 87, 062113 (6pp), 2013.
[11]
T. Cheon, ”Double Spiral Energy Surface in One-dimensional Quantum
Mechanics of Generalized Pointlike Potentials”, Phys. Lett. A 248, pp.
285–289, 1998.
[12]
A. Tanaka and M. Miyamoto, ”Quasienergy Anholonomy and its
Application to Adiabatic Quantum State Manipulation”, Phys. Rev. Lett.
98, 160407 (4pp), 2007.
[13]
A. Tanaka and T. Cheon, ”Bloch Vector, Disclination and Exotic
Quantum Holonomy”, Phys. Lett. A 379, pp.1693–1698, 2015.
[14]
N. V. Vitanov, T. Halfmann, B. W. Shore and K. Bergmann, ”Laser-
induced Population Transfer by Adiabatic Passage Techniques”, Annu.
Rev. Phys. Chem. 52, 763-809, 2001.
[15]
S. Gu´erin, L. P. Yatsenko and H. R. Jauslin, ”Dynamical Resonances
and the Topology of the Multiphoton Adiabatic Passage”, Phys. Rev. A
63, 031403(R) (4pp), 2001.
[16]
S. Fl¨ugge, Practical Quantum Mechanics vol 1 (Berlin: Springer-
Verlag) 1971.
[17]
A. G. Ushveridze, ”Analytic Properties of Energy Levels in Models
with Delta-function Potentials”, J. Phys. A. 21, pp. 955–970, 1988.
[18]
S. Kasumie, M. Miyamoto and A. Tanaka, ”Adiabatic Excitation of a
Conﬁned Particle in One Dimension with a Variable Inﬁnitely Sharp
Wall”, Phys. Rev. A 93, 042105 (5pp), 2016.
[19]
Z. P. Karkuszewski, K. Sacha and J. Zakrzewski, ”Method for Collective
Excitation of a Bose-Einstein Condensate”, Phys. Rev. A 63, 061601(R)
(4pp), 2001.
[20]
B. Damski, Z. P. Karkuszewski, K. Sacha and J. Zakrzewski, ”Simple
Method for Excitation of a Bose-Einstein Condensate”, Phys. Rev. A
65, 013604 (7pp), 2002.
[21]
Z. P. Karkuszewski, K. Sacha and A. Smerzi, ”Mean Field Loops versus
Quantum Anti-crossing Nets in Trapped Bose-Einstein Condensates”,
Eur. Phys. J. D 21, pp. 251–254, 2002.
[22]
T. P. Meyrath, F. Schreck, J. L. Hanssen, C. S. Chuu and M. G. Raizen,
”Bose-Einstein Condensate in a Box”, Phys. Rev. A 71, 041604(R)
(4pp), 2005.
[23]
B. Paredes, A. Widera, V. Murg, O. Mandel, S. F¨olling, I. Cirac, G.
V. Shlyapnikov, T. W. Hansch, I. and Bloch, ”Tonks-Girardeau Gas of
Ultracold Atoms in an Optical Lattice”, Nature 499, pp. 277–281, 2004.
[24]
T. Kinoshita, T. Wenger and D. S. Weiss, ”Observation of a One-
Dimensional Tonks-Girardeau Gas”, Science 305, pp. 1125–1128, 2004.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Reduction of Silver Oxide Film in Inert Gas Plasma
Victor Ovchinnikov
Department of Aalto Nanofab
School of Electrical Engineering, Aalto University
Espoo, Finland
e-mail: Victor.Ovchinnikov@aalto.fi
Abstract— Reduction of silver oxide in plasma is studied. Silver
oxide film was prepared by plasma oxidation of thermally
evaporated silver film. It is shown that silver oxide is reduced
with different rate in He, Ar and N2 plasmas excited by rf power.
To clarify mechanism of reduction, morphology, electrical and
optical properties of the samples are analyzed. Spectroscopic
ellipsometry is used to measure thicknesses and optical
constants of oxidized and reduced layers. It is concluded that the
reduction is activated by low energy electron bombardment of
silver oxide.
Keywords-silver oxide; plasma reduction; silver thin film.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Both silver and silver oxide are widely used as functional
material in microdevices. Silver is the best plasmonic material
in visible range and has found broad application in sensors,
photonics, catalysis and spectroscopy [1]. Unique properties
of silver oxide are used in optical storage devices, gas sensors,
photovoltaic cells and photonics [2]. Silver and silver oxide
are applied both in the form of thin films, and in the form of
nanostructures. Additionally, non-stoichiometric silver oxide
AgxO or silver oxide with silver inclusions can be used instead
of pure oxide. Properties of silver oxide nanostructures and
thin films are found to be sensitive to fabrication method. It
has caused a big variety of the applied methods, such as
thermal evaporation [3], reactive magnetron sputtering [4],
chemical-bath deposition [5], exposing silver ¿lms to atomic
oxygen environment [6][7], and so on. The last method is very
attractive, because it opens an opportunity for application of
well known Ag deposition methods in preparation of silver
oxide films. Furthermore, interconversion of Ag into AgxO
and AgxO in Ag would be desirable for fabrication of silver
containing nanostructures and AgxO films with controlled
silver content. Suitable reduction process of Ag2O  to  Ag
would be also benefit for removing of native oxide layer from
silver structures (SERS substrates etc.) after long storage.
However, reports about reciprocal conversion of AgxO into
Ag in dry ambient (gas, plasma) are concentrated on
application of reducing agents like H2 or annealing in inert
ambient [8][9]. In the first case, the reducing agent can involve
undesirable reactions with other materials of microdevice. In
the second case, high temperature can limit choice of materials
used in fabrication process. Nevertheless, publications about
conversion of AgxO into Ag without reducing agents are
occasional and devoted to interaction of AgxO surface with
energetic particles.
In this paper, we propose to use inert gas plasma for dry
reduction of silver oxide films. It is demonstrated that
conversion of AgxO in Ag is possible in a standard reactor for
dry etching using Ar, He or N2 plasma. The reduction rate is
proportional to ionization degree of plasma, i.e., concentration
of electrons near processed sample. Ag content in the obtained
films depends on plasma gas and can be controlled in broad
range by process parameters, including reduction time,
pressure and rf power.
The paper is organized in a following way. In the
subsequent Section II, details of sample preparation and
measurement procedures are presented. In Section III, results
of the work are demonstrated by scanning electron
microscope (SEM) images, electrical measurements as well as
ȥ, ǻ spectra and reflection spectra of the fabricated samples.
In Section IV, possible reduction mechanism of Ag2O in inert
gas plasma is discussed. In Section V, the conclusion is drawn.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
A crystalline Si wafer (100 mm in diameter, 0.5-mm-thick,
<100>) was used as a substrate. To increase accuracy of
optical measurements, a 609 nm thick SiO2 layer was prepared
by thermal oxidation of the Si wafer. A 15 nm thick silver
layer was deposited by electron-beam evaporation with the
deposition rate of 0.3 nm/s and base pressure 2×10-7 Torr. All
plasma treatments were made in two identical parallel plate
reactors, which differ by sample position in a reactor. In the
plasma etching (PE) reactor the sample was fixed on grounded
electrode, in the reactive ion etching (RIE) reactor the sample
was fixed on isolated electrode. Metal deposition and plasma
treatments were done at room temperature.
Plasma oxidation was done in PE reactor during 90
seconds at oxygen flow of 100 sccm, pressure 1000 mTorr and
rf power 20W. Several identical AgxO samples were prepared
to compare reduction in different conditions. For this purpose
the  whole  wafer  was  cut  on  chips  (2×2  cm2), which were
further processed separately, but at the same pressure 500
mTor and during the same time 60 s. The sample #1 was
treated in RIE reactor at Ar flow 50 sccm, the samples #2, #3
were processed in PE reactor at flow 500 sccm of He and N2,
respectively. Diluted ammonia solution (NH3 25  %  from
Honeywell) NH3:H2O = 1:1 was used for selective etching of
Ag2O. This treatment does not affect on Ag, Si and SiO2. All
samples were etched during 20 s.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Silver film was deposited in e-beam evaporation system
IM-9912 (Instrumentti Mattila Oy, Finland). Plasma
treatments were done in 13.56 MHz driven parallel electrode
reactors Plasmalab 80 Plus (Oxford Instruments Plasma
Technology). To investigate the prepared samples, plane-view
image observations were performed in Zeiss Supra 40 field
emission scanning electron microscope. Spectroscopic
ellipsometry (SE) measurements in the range of 700–1700 nm
at the angle 70º were done by spectroscopic ellipsometer SE
805 (SENTECH Instruments GmbH). Sheet resistance of
films was measured by four points probe method. Reflectance
measurements were carried out using a FilmTek 4000
(Scientific Computing International, USA) reflectometer at
normal light incidence in the spectral range 400–1700 nm.
III.
RESULTS
In this section, the results of sequential oxidation of as
deposited silver film and reduction of obtained silver oxide
film are reported. To justify silver oxidation and AgxO
reduction, comparison of electrical, optical and chemical
properties is performed.
A. Oxidation
In the beginning, reflection measurements for as deposited
and plasma-oxidized silver films were made. Due to thick
SiO2 layer (609 nm), reflection from the Si substrate and low
absorption in the upper layer, interference effects have been
observed in both films (Fig. 1). It was noted that interference
maxima of the silver film at 570 nm and 830 nm correspond
to  interference  minima  of  the  AgxO film at the same
wavelengths. Taking into account negligible optical thickness
of the upper layer (less than ɉ/8) and identical thicknesses of
SiO2 layers, this fact can be only explained by different phase
shift upon reflection from Ag and AgxO layers. Difference in
phase shift is close to 180°. It means that the original metal
layer has been converted into dielectric one after oxidation
[10]. The formation of silver oxide is also evident from wet
etching in ammonia solution. Silver film remains invariable,
but  AxO film is totally removed. The SEM images also
confirm difference between as deposited and oxidized silver
Figure 1.
Reflection spectra of as deposited, oxidized and reduced
(sample #2) Ag films.
Figure 2.
SEM images of as deposited (a) and oxidized (b) Ag films.
Figure 3.
ȥ, ǻ spectra of as deposited, oxidized and reduced (sample #1)
Ag films.
0
20
40
60
80
100
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
R(%)
Wavelength (nm)
Ag
AgxO
Ag-R
0
10
20
30
40
50
ɗ(°)
0
100
200
300
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
ȟ(°)
Wavelength (nm)
Ag
AgxO
Ag-R
a)
b)
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Figure 4.
Optical models of AgxO (a), Ag reduced in He or Ar (b), Ag
reduced in N2 (c).
films (Fig. 2). The discontinuous Ag film, including voids of
random shape converts in agglomeration of closely packed
crystallites. Cubic shape of crystallites resembles cubic
crystalline structure of Ag2O.
To measure optical constants of oxidized silver, SE was
used. It is based on measurement of ellipsometric angles ȥ, ǻ
in the range of wavelengths. After that the sample is described
by simplified model from several optical layers and ȥ, ǻ are
calculated for the model. Then, matching between measured
and calculated ȥ, ǻ is done for different parameters of optical
layers. The obtained ȥ, ǻ spectra of as deposited and oxidized
silver films are given in Fig. 3. Totally different ȥ, ǻ curves
before and after oxidation confirm conversion of Ag into
AgxO.
To extract optical constants of the oxidized silver, the
ellipsometric spectra were analyzed by model with layered
structure. The model contains the pure Ag2O layer (thickness
h1) and the Ag2O:Ag layer (thickness h2), as shown in Fig.4a.
The A2O:Ag composite was described in the assumption that
it consists of Ag2O matrix and Ag inclusions. The dielectric
function of composite was calculated according to the
Bruggemann eơective-medium approximation (EMA). The
unknown dielectric function of the Ag2O was found by using
Tauc-Lorentz dispersion formula with two oscillators.
Parameters of these Lorentz oscillators are linked to imaginary
part of the dielectric function and are listed in Table I. Ai is
related to strength of the i-th absorption peak (i=1,2), Ci is the
damping coefficient of the i-th oscillator, Ei is the energy
position of the i-th peak. Two additional parameters are
optical band gap energy Eg = 0.21 eV and high frequency
dielectric constant ɂλ = 1.06.
TABLE I.
PARAMETERS OF AG2O MODEL
Oscillator no.
A (eV)
E (eV)
C (eV)
1
7,30
4,27
0,15
2
20,80
3,20
2,40
The obtained model parameters for AgxO  are  given  in
Table II. Silver fraction in the composite layer A2O:Ag is 0.07
and total thickness of the layer (h1+h2) has increased to 34.5
nm after oxidation. The wavelength dependences of the
extracted refractive index n and extinction coef¿cient k for
Ag2O are shown in Fig. 5. Both of them are higher than
Figure 5.
Optical constants of AgxO.
reported values for sputtered Ag2O [4]. Both of them follow
normal dispersion, i.e., decrease for longer wavelength in
contrast to silver optical constants, which increase with
wavelength. The purpose of optical calculations is
justification of oxidation or reduction reactions in plasma
ambient. In this context, absolute values of optical constants
are not so significant as their variations in response on process
parameter changing.
B. Reduction
The wafer with silver oxide was cut in chips for reduction
experiments in different conditions. In Fig. 1, reflection
Figure 6.
SEM images of the sample #3 after reduction (a) and after NH3
etching (b).
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
2,8
2,9
3
3,1
3,2
600
800
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
k
n
Wavelength (nm)
n
k
a)
b)
c)
a)
b)
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

TABLE II.
SAMPLE PREPARATION PARAMETERS AND MEASUREMENT RESULTS
Sample 
Reactor 
Gas
Power,
W
ȡ,
ȍ m
Ag2O
Ag2O:Ag
Ag:air
Total
nm
nm
Aga
nm
airb
Thickness, nm
Aga
Ag
7,1×10-8
15,0
Ag2O
PE
O2
35
6,4×10-1
18,0
16,5
0,07
34,5
0,03
#1
RIE
Ar
12
8,0×10-8
6,9
0,84
14,3
0,05
21,2
0,91
#2
PE
He
20
9,7×10-8
12,5
0,82
8,8
0,18
21,2
0,82
#3
PE
N2
20
1,3×10-6
6,0
6,9
0,30
10,2
0,44
23,1
0,34
a. Ag fraction in the layer.
b. Air fraction in the layer.
Figure 7.
SEM images of the samples reduced in Ar (a), He (b) and N2 (c)
plasma.
spectra of original (Ag) and reduced (Ag-R) silver (sample #2)
are compared. The coinciding maxima and minima of Ag and
Ag-R prove conversion of semiconductor AgxO into metal
Ag. Etching in ammonia solution does not affect on samples
processed in Ar and He plasma (#1 and #2, respectively), but
removes central part of sample #3, processed in N2 plasma.
Only 4 mm wide strip of changed colour was left around
sample perimeter after ammonia processing. Fig. 6 shows
SEM images of the sample #3 before and after wet etching in
the edge area. The observed changing is possible, if the film
consists of Ag2O and Ag. After wet etching Ag2O is removed,
leaving Ag phase on the substrate. SEM images of the central
areas  of  the  AgxO film processed in Ar (sample #1), He
(sample #2) and N2 (sample #3) plasma are shown in Fig. 7.
While Ar and He processed samples demonstrate similar
images of silver films with different fragmentation, the image
of the sample #3 is more complicate. It can be considered as
dark background from AgxO at which bright silver inclusions
are visible.
The ȥ, ǻ spectra of reduced AgxO for the sample #1 are
shown  in  Fig.  3.  They  look  very  similar  to  spectra  of  as
deposited silver. Reconstruction of sample layers after
reduction was done by using optical models shown in Fig. 4b
and Fig. 4c. The composite Ag2O:Ag layer was described by
EMA and the model for Ag2O obtained at oxidation step
(Table 1) was used. After that, only thickness and Ag content
in layers were changed during matching. In such a way,
efficiency of reduction can be estimated by total Ag content
in films.
The results of optical measurements are given in Table II.
The samples processed in Ar and He can be considered
consisting of Ag2O:Ag layer (thickness h2) and rough silver
layer (thickness h3), modeled as Ag:air composite. The sample
processed in N2, additionally includes pure Ag2O layer
(thickness h1)  at  SiO2 interface. The total Ag fraction in
samples was calculated as average of layer Ag contents
according to thickness weight function (fraction of layer
thickness in total thickness). Total thickness of all reduced
samples is practically the same (Table II) and much less than
thickness of AgxO film. The thicknesses of as deposited and
reduced silver cannot be compared, because they were
estimated by quartz microbalance and SE, respectively.
Effect of process parameters on reduction result was
studied by monitoring resistivity and Ag content. Fig. 8
demonstrates dependence of these characteristics on process
a)
b)
c)
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Figure 8.
Dependence of resistivity and Ag content on reduction time for
film reduced in He plasma.
time for PE reactor with He plasma. Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 show
variation of resistivity and Ag content with process pressure
and rf power, respectively, in RIE reactor with Ar plasma. The
fullest reduction happens when processes is done during 60 s
at pressure 125 mTor. Mirror like behavior of curves for
resistivity and Ag content reflect the fact that Ag inclusions
are responsible for electrical conductivity of the samples.
IV.
DISCUSSION
The obtained film parameters and SEM images
demonstrate synthesis and decomposition of silver oxide
during forward reaction of oxidation and reverse reaction of
reduction, respectively. Indeed, total transformation of optical
and electrical properties of the film after O2 plasma processing
and full restoration of these properties after inert gas plasma
treatment (Table II), can be reasonably explained by
formation of silver oxide AgxO and its conversion into silver,
respectively. In this section, we discuss the possible reduction
mechanism of silver oxide.
Any sample treated in plasma is bombarded by electrons
and ions. The maximum energy of bombarding ions depends
on the sample potential. In the PE reactor, the processed
sample has potential around 10V relatively plasma. In the RIE
reactor, the sample potential is equal to dc self-bias (16 V for
sample #1) and depends on process parameters. The beginning
of sputtering is defined by threshold energy, which is equal 25
eV and 34 eV for silver sputtering by Ar and He ions,
Figure 9.
Dependence of resistivity and Ag content on process pressure
for film reduced in He plasma.
Figure 10. Dependence of resistivity and Ag content on rf power for film
reduced in He plasma.
respectively [11][12]. Therefore, ion energy for He reduction
process in the PE reactor is less than threshold sputtering level
and sputtering effect cannot be responsible for AgxO
reduction.
Energy required to break chemical bonds can be delivered
in different ways. For example, silver oxide is decomposed on
silver and atomic oxygen during low temperature treatment
(200 °C) or under UV irradiation. It means that Ag2O has low
bond energy and Ag-O bond can be easily broken. Electron
bombardment is often used for breaking chemical bonds. Low
energy primary electrons (160 eV) are able to generate
secondary electrons, displace oxygen anions and reduce
oxides, e.g., TiO2 [13]. In case of Ag2O, secondary electron
emission is strong enough and starts when primary electron
energy exceeds 5 eV. Therefore, reduction of Ag2O by low
energy electrons is also possible and mechanism of plasma
reduction is decomposition of Ag2O on Ag and atomic oxygen
under bombardment of electrons ejected from plasma. It
means, that reduction rate depends on electron concentration
in plasma or degree of its ionization.
At low rf power and low electron energy, most particle
collisions in plasma lead to molecule dissociation and
excitation, but not to ionization [14]. In monoatomic gases
(Ar, He), dissociation is not possible and ionization is more
effective than in diatomic gases (N2). In other words, plasma
concentration is higher for Ar and He, than for N2. In case of
sample #3 (N2 plasma), it explains the lowest reduction rate,
demonstrated by the highest resistivity, the lowest Ag fraction
and totally different morphology of reduced film in
comparison with He and Ar processed samples. Deviation in
plasma concentration leads also to different reduction
efficiency in Ar and He plasmas. Ionization energy for He and
Ar atoms is 25 eV and 16 eV, respectively. Lower ionization
energy leads to higher electron concentration in Ar plasma.
Increasing of Ag content with rf power (Fig. 10) is in
accordance with dependence of reduction rate on plasma
concentration, which is proportional to electrical field
strength. However, at rf power higher than 16W, trends in
behavior of ɏ and Ag content (Fig. 10) are changed. At high
power, bias exceeds 25 V, ion energy is above threshold
sputtering energy of Ag and sputtering effect becomes
significant. It results in preferable silver sputtering from
Ag2O:Ag composite.
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
0
5
10
15
0
200
400
600
Ag
ɏ(ȳ m),x10-8
Pressure (mTor)
R
Ag
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
0
20
40
60
80
0
100
200
300
400
500
Ag
ɏ(ȳ m),x10-8
Time (s)
R
Ag
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
0
5
10
15
10
15
20
Ag
ɏ(ȳ m),x10-8
Power (W)
R
Ag
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Plasma reduction of silver oxide requires only electron
impact and can take place in any plasma, e.g., in oxygen one.
Silver film oxidized by oxygen plasma is simultaneously
exposed to electron irradiation. Electrons facilitate Ag2O
reduction at the same time, when atomic oxygen oxidizes
silver. As a result full Ag oxidation does not happen and silver
inclusions are observed in Ag2O obtained in both PE and RIE
reactors (Table II).
V.
CONCLUSION
Standard parallel plate reactor can be used both for plasma
oxidation of silver, and for plasma reduction of silver oxide.
In contrast to oxidation, which happens in atomic oxygen
ambient, reduction does not require chemically active species
and is done in inert gas plasma. Possible reduction mechanism
is connected with breaking of Ag-O bonds and generation of
secondary electrons. Bond breaking happens due to
interaction of silver oxide with electrons and ions of plasma.
Rate of plasma reduction is proportional to plasma
concentration and can be tuned by plasma gas, rf power and
working pressure. Morphology of silver films obtained by
processing of AgxO in plasma depends on reduction rate and
differs for He, Ar and N2 plasmas.
Sequential silver oxidation and reduction in one reactor
may be useful in obtaining of AgxO films with controlled
silver content.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was undertaken at the Micronova
Nanofabrication Centre, supported by Aalto University.
REFERENCES
[1]
E.  C.  Le  Ru  and  P.  G.  Etchegoin,  Principles  of  Surface-
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy and Related Plasmonic Eơects,
Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 181-183, 2008.
[2]
J. Tominaga, “The application of silver oxide thin films to
plasmon photonic devices,” Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter, vol. 15, pp. R1101-R1122, Jun 2003.
[3]
G. Saroja, V. Vasu and N. Nagarani, “Optical Studies of Ag2O
Thin Film Prepared by Electron Beam Evaporation Method,”
OJMetal, vol. 3, pp. 57-63, 2013.
[4]
Gao X.-Y. et al., “Analysis of the dielectric constants of the
Ag2O ¿lm by spectroscopic ellipsometry and single-oscillator
model,” Physica B, vol. 405, pp. 1922–1926, 2010.
[5]
A. C. Nwanya, P. E. Ugwuoke, B. A. Ezekoye, R. U. Osuji,
and F. I. Ezema, “Structural and Optical Properties of Chemical
Bath Deposited Silver Oxide Thin Films: Role of Deposition
Time,” Advances in Materials Science and Engineering, vol.
2013, pp. 1-8, Mar 2013.
[6]
W. M. Moor and P. J. Codella, “Oxidation of Silver Films by
Atomic Oxygen,” J . Phys. Chem., vol. 92, pp. 4421-4426, Jul
1988.
[7]
M. L. Zheludkevich et al., “Oxidation of Silver by Atomic
Oxygen,” Oxidation of Metals, vol. 61, pp. 39-48, Feb 2004.
[8]
G. Schimo, A. M. Kreuzer, and A. W. Hassel, “Morphology
and size effects on the reduction of silver oxide by hydrogen,”
physica status solidi (a), vol. 212, pp. 1202–1209, June 2015.
[9]
C. C. Tseng, J. H. Hsieh, C. H. Lin, and W. Wu, “Effects of
deposition and annealing temperatures on the electrical and
optical properties of Ag2O and Cu2O–Ag2O thin films,” J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. A, vol. 28, pp. 791-794, 2010.
[10] Philip 
W. 
Baumeister, 
Optical 
coating 
technology,
Bellingham: SPIE Press, pp. 2-23 - 2-34, 2004.
[11] A. J. van Roosmalen, J. A. G. Baggerman, and S. J. H. Brader,
Dry Etching for VLSI, New York: Plemun Press, pp. 65-66,
1991.
[12] E. Hotston, “Threshold energies for sputtering,” Nucl. Fusion,
vol. 15, pp. 544-547, 1975.
[13] R. Patel et al., “The defective nature of the TiO2(110) (1×2)
surface,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, vol. 15, pp. 2553-2556,
Sep/Oct 1997, doi: 10.1116/1.580769.
[14] M. Lassus and J-P. Founaud, “Modern physics brings
semiconductor 
technology 
to 
a 
turning 
point,”
Microelectronics Reliability, vol. 16 (4), pp. 367-387, 1977.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Quantum Hexagonal Quadrature Amplitude Modulation
YoungJun Kim
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University
Seoul, South Korea
Email: mkeeper@korea.ac.kr
Young-Chai Ko
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University
Seoul, South Korea
Email: koyc@korea.ac.kr
Abstract—In this paper, we propose the hexagonal quadrature
amplitude modulation (QAM)-type modulation for continuous-
variable quantum communication systems. Our proposed hexag-
onal QAM modulation provides less detection error, which occurs
in discriminating non-orthogonal quantum states, compared to
the previous modulation schemes such as phase shift keying
(PSK)-type modulation or rectangular QAM-type modulation.
Square root measurement (SRM) is used in the receiver to
decrease the detection error probability and receiver complexity.
The theoretical detection error rate for the hexagonal QAM
modulation is obtained by form of square root of matrix. The
detection error rate is veriﬁed by Monte Carlo simulation.
Keywords–Quantum communication, hexagonal QAM, contin-
uous variables, coherent states
I.
INTRODUCTION
As the usage of personal communication devices increases,
the communication security system becomes more important
than ever. The quantum cryptography using quantum key dis-
tribution (QKD) is regarded as the future possible technology
to guarantee unconditional security [1]. Basically, the quantum
cryptography is based on the fact that nonorthogonal quantum
states can not be distinguished with certainty [2]. Note that
the detection of coherent states is accomplished by quantum
measurement which naturally brings about the detection errors.
In this paper, we consider a quantum detection problem. Al-
ice transmits classical information key to Bob through quantum
channel. Both Alice and Bob prepare a set of quantum coherent
states, and Alice chooses one of the states corresponding to
the message. The receiver, Bob, extracts the message from a
quantum measurement of the received quantum state. Because
the set of coherent states Alice and Bob use are not orthogonal
to be general, all measurement can bring about the detection
error. Our design goal is to build the shared set of quantum
states and to build the quantum measurement.
This quantum detection problem has been researched in
many previous papers [3]–[6]. In [6], Yuen contrived a new
quantum cryptography which also ensures the unconditional
security. The protocol invented by Yuen is called Y-00 protocol
named after himself. In Y-00, a set of phase shift keying (PSK)
type states is considered. Security is from the detection error
rate gap between Bob and Eve, an eavesdropper, where Bob
shares an initial secret key string with Alice but Eve does not.
Y-00 protocol opened a new type of QKD, continuous variable
quantum key distribution (CV-QKD), by using coherent states
as information carrier.
Positive operator valued measurement (POVM) is a set of
Hermitian positive semideﬁnite operators. In quantum mechan-
ics, all observable quantity is obtained by a special quantum
transaction called quantum measurement. By subjecting the
state to a quantum measurement, we can obtain a value
corresponding to the quantum state. POVM is widely used
to measure quantum states because it is easy to realize in
a physical system and because it has good mathematical
properties for performance analysis [2] [7].
The QAM provides better performance than the PSK in
terms of the error probability in higher spectral efﬁciency
case [8]. For this reason, QAM is adopted in many recent
communication standards to meet the demand of high speed
data rate. The constellation of QAM has several shapes such as
square QAM, circular QAM, hexagonal QAM and so on. It is
notable that the hexagonal QAM provides the largest minimum
Euclidian distance (ED) given the energy constraint compared
to other QAM schemes. Hexagonal QAM gives less error rate
performance than rectangular QAM but hexagonal QAM is
not popular in practical communication systems because of
its high implementation complexity compared to other QAM
shapes [9].
For PSK scheme, which has the circular symmetric quan-
tum states set, the square root measurement (SRM) detection
has been proven to provide the minimum detection error
probability [2]. On the other hand, for QAM state, which
does not have the circular symmetric quantum states set, the
optimum detection scheme in terms of error probability has not
been known yet. However, SRM detection can provide quite
a good performance when the average number of photons of
coherent states, Ns, is sufﬁciently large based on which the
application of SRM detection to QAM has been studied in the
literature [10]. The set of QAM state is not circular symmetric
but Kato employed SRM for QAM state detection problem.
Optimality of SRM for QAM state detection is not proven.
But detection probability of QAM state using SRM gives less
detection error than PSK state using SRM with same energy
constraint.
In SRM detection, the ED between two states is the
dominant factor for error detection. In a state set, we have
shown in a previous study [11] that the average detection error
probability is dominant with the minimum ED among the states
of the set. We have shown that circular QAM scheme can
reduce the detection error rate by enlarging the minimum ED
under a given energy constraint. Moreover, hexagonal QAM
scheme has larger minimum ED than circular QAM scheme
so we can expect that hexagonal QAM scheme gives less
detection error rate than PSK, rectangular QAM and circular
QAM.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Figure 1. System description
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the mathe-
matical representation of our considering system is described.
In Section 3, the SRM detection scheme in the receiver is
mathematically described. In Section 4, our new hexagonal
QAM scheme is suggested. In Section 5, we show the detection
error performance of our hexagonal QAM scheme with SRM
detection in a numerical way. Finally, Section 6 concludes the
paper.
II.
MATHEMATICAL SYSTEM REPRESENTATION
Let us consider the detection problem of quantum states
illustrated in Figure. 1. Alice chooses one of pure states in a
set of coherent states and sends it to Bob. Then Bob measures
the received state and chooses one of the states based on the
minimum detection error criterion. Note that an error occurs
if the state chosen by Bob is different from Alice’s state.
We consider a pure state set ρ of size M in Hilbert space
Hs. Each state of ρ is represented by density operator ρi which
is non-negative and unit trace.
ρi ≥ 0,
Tr [ρi = 1]
(i = 1, 2, . . . , M).
(1)
From the pure state assumption, each state can be also repre-
sented in vector form such as
ρi = |ψi⟩ ⟨ψi|
(2)
where |ψi⟩, called ket ψi, is Dirac’s bra-ket notation of the
quantum state and ⟨ψi|, called bra ψi, is the dual state of
|ψi⟩.
A coherent state |α⟩ is an eigen state of photon annihilation
operator, a [12],
a |α⟩ = α |α⟩
(3)
and can be expressed using the representation in the basis of
number states, |n⟩,
|α⟩ = e− |α|2
2
∞
X
n=0
αn
√
n!
|n⟩ .
(4)
Note that α can be an arbitrary complex value where the real
part of α relies on the position of the photon and the imaginary
part of α relies on the momentum of the photon [13].
For detection of the received states, we employ the POVM
ˆΠj which satisﬁes the following relations
ˆΠj ≥ 0,
(5)
and
M
X
j=1
ˆΠj = ˆI.
(6)
Let us denote P(j|i) ≜ P(ρj|ρi) as the conditional probability
that the quantum state ρi is decided as ρj. Then P(j|i) can
be represented as
P(j | i) = Tr [ˆΠjρi].
(7)
Note that the value P(j|i) for (j ̸= i) represents the decision
error probability. Then the average probability of decision error
Pe is given by
Pe
=
M
X
i=1
qi
M
X
j=1(̸=i)
P(j | i)
=
1 −
M
X
i=1
qiPi(i | i)
(8)
where qi is a priori probability of the quantum state ρi
satisfying
M
X
i=1
qi = 1,
qi ≥ 0.
(9)
To simplify the discussion, we focus on the equal probable
case, that is qi =
1
M for all i.
III.
DETECTION ERROR PERFORMANCE OF SQUARE
ROOT MEASUREMENT
Quantum measurement is deﬁned as a set of operators.
In quantum mechanics, an operator is similar to a system
in classical mechanics. As long as the state in quantum is
represented in a vector form, the quantum operator can also
be represented in a matrix form. POVM is a good example of
quantum measurement.
Now, we consider SRM for detection. SRM is known as
the optimal detection measurement scheme in distinguishing
circular symmetric states, i.e., PSK states, in terms of detection
error rate. Note that when the state set is not circular symmet-
ric, the optimal detection measurement scheme is not known
yet. However, as shown in [14]–[17], SRM is often employed
for non-symmetric case since it can be built by manipulating
the shared state set. Here, we also employ SRM for the signal
detection of hexagonal states considered in. The hexagonal
states set considered in this paper is not circular symmetric.
But SRM has been employed in many systems because of its
good properties [18].
The detection operator of SRM, denoted as ˆΠj for the j-th
state is deﬁned as [17]:
ˆΠj = |µj⟩ ⟨µj|
|µj⟩ = ˆG−1/2 |ψj⟩
ˆG =
M
X
i=1
|ψi⟩ ⟨ψi| .
(10)
We can easily prove that SRM, ˆΠj, satisﬁes (5) and (6) just by
substituting ˆΠj into (5) and (6). It means that SRM is a class
of POVM and we can get the advantage of POVM mentioned
in Section I.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

In the case of using SRM in detection, the conditional
detection error probability P(j|i) can be calculated by square
root of the Gram matrix G
p(j | i) =
(G1/2)ji

2
(11)
where the Gram matrix G is the Hermitian matrix whose
entries are inner products of coherent states [2]
G =


⟨ψ1| ψ1⟩
· · ·
⟨ψ1| ψM⟩
...
...
...
⟨ψM| ψ1⟩
· · ·
⟨ψM| ψM⟩

 .
(12)
From (4), the inner product of two coherent states can be
calculated as
⟨α| β⟩
=
e− |α|2+|β|2
2
∞
X
m=0
∞
X
n=0
α∗mβn
√
m!n!
⟨m| n⟩
=
e− |α|2+|β|2
2
∞
X
n=0
(α∗β)n
n!
=
e− |α|2+|β|2
2
+α∗β
=
Aαβ exp θαβ
(13)
where
Aαβ
=
exp

−1
2

5
10
15
20
25
10
−10
10
−8
10
−6
10
−4
10
−2
10
0
average number of photons, Ns
detection error rate
 
 
16 PSK
8 PSK
16 square QAM
8 square QAM
16 Hex
8 Hex QAM
Figure 3. Detection error rate for M = 8 and M = 16
15
20
25
30
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
average number of photons, Ns
detection error rate
 
 
64 PSK
32 PSK
64 square QAM
32 square QAM
64 HEX
32 HEX
Figure 4. Detection error rate for M = 32 and M = 64
As seen in Figure 3, we can certify that all types of QAM
schemes give less detection error rate than the PSK scheme.
The rectangular QAM states are from [17]. The detection
error rate of our hexagonal QAM scheme is less than other
modulation schemes. And we can also see that the performance
gain of our hexagonal QAM scheme is steady compared to
the rectangular QAM case which works well in M = 16 case
but does not work well in M = 8 case relatively. Figure 4
shows the detection error rates for higher order cases in large
Ns. Our hexagonal QAM scheme also performs better than
other schemes in detection error rate in higher order cases.
Especially, we can ﬁnd a cross-over between PSK scheme for
M = 32 and hexagonal QAM scheme for M = 64. It means
that our hexagonal QAM state can carry more information bits
and can give less detection error performance in some cases.
As the modulation size M grows, we need more photons
to meet a certain detection error rate. Our hexagonal QAM
scheme still has performance gain in higher modulation cases.
The average number of photons to meet a certain detection
error rate is still less in our hexagonal QAM state for higher
order cases.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new hexagonal QAM scheme
that reduces the detection error probability by maximizing
the minimum ED between states in the constellation. We
used SRM to detect the sent state. Numerical simulation
showed that our hexagonal QAM gives less detection error rate
under an average photon number constraint in several sizes of
modulation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of
Science, ICT and Future Planning), Korea, under the ITRC
(Information Technology Research Center) support program
(IITP-2016-R0992-16-1017) supervised by the IITP(Institute
for Information & communications Technology Promotion)
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Mayers, “Unconditional security in quantum cryptography,” J. of the
ACM, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 351–406, 2001.
[2]
M. Ban, K. Kurokawa, R. Momose, and O. Hirota, “Optimum mea-
surements for discrimination among symmetric quantum states and
parameter estimation,” Int. J. of Theoretical Phys., vol. 36, no. 6, pp.
1269–1288, 1997.
[3]
C. W. Helstrom, “Bayes-cost reduction algorithm in quantum hypothesis
testing (corresp.),” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 359–
366, 1982.
[4]
K. Kato and O. Hirota, “Quantum quadrature amplitude modulation
system and its applicability to coherent-state quantum cryptography,”
in Optics & Photonics 2005.
Int. Soc. for Optics and Photonics, 2005,
pp. 589 303–589 303.
[5]
——, “Square-root measurement for quantum symmetric mixed state
signals,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 3312–3317,
2003.
[6]
H. P. Yuen, “KCQ: A new approach to quantum cryptography i. general
principles and key generation,” arXiv preprint quant-ph/0311061, 2003.
[7]
M. Ziman and V. Buˇzek, “Realization of positive-operator-valued mea-
sures using measurement-assisted programmable quantum processors,”
Phys. Rev., A, vol. 72, no. 2, p. 022343, 2005.
[8]
J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications.
McGraw-Hill, 1995.
[9]
S. H. Han, J. Ciofﬁ, and J. H. Lee, “On the use of hexagonal
constellation for peak-to-average power ratio reduction of an ODFM
signal,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 781–786,
March 2008.
[10]
P. Hausladen and W. K. Wootters, “A pretty goodmeasurement for
distinguishing quantum states,” J. of Modern Optics, vol. 41, no. 12,
pp. 2385–2390, 1994.
[11]
Y. Kim and Y.-C. Ko, “Detection of quantum circular QAM signals,” in
Int. Conv. Inform. and Commun. Technology, Oct 2013, pp. 1078–1082.
[12]
H. P. Yuen, “Two-photon coherent states of the radiation ﬁeld,” Phys.
Rev., A, vol. 13, no. 6, p. 2226, 1976.
[13]
P. Carruthers and M. M. Nieto, “Phase and angle variables in quantum
mechanics,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 40, pp. 411–440, Apr 1968. [Online].
Available: http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.40.411
[14]
A. Peres and W. K. Wootters, “Optimal detection of quantum informa-
tion,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 66, no. 9, p. 1119, 1991.
[15]
M. Sasaki, K. Kato, M. Izutsu, and O. Hirota, “Quantum channels
showing superadditivity in classical capacity,” Phys. Rev., A, vol. 58,
no. 1, p. 146, 1998.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

[16]
M. Sasaki, T. Sasaki-Usuda, M. Izutsu, and O. Hirota, “Realization of a
collective decoding of code-word states,” Phys. Rev., A, vol. 58, no. 1,
p. 159, 1998.
[17]
K. Kato, M. Osaki, M. Sasaki, and O. Hirota, “Quantum detection and
mutual information for QAM and PSK signals,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 248–254, 1999.
[18]
Y. C. Eldar and G. D. Forney Jr, “On quantum detection and the square-
root measurement,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 858–872,
2001.
[19]
L. Snzecinski and M. Bacic, “Constellations design for multiple trans-
missions maximizing the minimum squared euclidean distance,” in
IEEE conf. Wireless Commun. and Networking, vol. 2, March 2005,
pp. 1066–1071 Vol. 2.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

The Formation of Black Glass with Ladder-like Silsequioxanes
Sitarz Maciej
Faculty of Materials Science and Ceramics, AGH University of Science and Technology
Cracow, Poland
e-mail: msitarz@agh.edu.pl
Abstract - The main objective of this paper is to determine the
process
of
formation
of
black
glasses
from
ladder-like
silsesquioxane precursors. Well-defined polysilsesquioxanes
with ladder-like structure obtained via the sol-gel process
allowed to control the amount of introduced carbon which
allows us to control the properties of received glasses. Raman
and middle infrared (MIR) spectroscopy research allowed to
determine the structure of obtained materials and thus, to
describe the process of formation of black glasses.
Keywords- silsesquioxanes; black glasess; SiOC.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Black glasses (SiOC glasses) are materials of amorphous
silica structure, in which two O2- ions are substituted by one
C4- anion (Figure 1). That type of substitution leads to a
local increase in the density of bonds and therefore to a
significant strengthening of the network. The ideal structure
of black glasses contains only Si-O and Si-C bonds.
Figure 1. The structural formula of: silica SiO2 (left), SiC (center), silicon
oxycarbide (right) [1].
Unfortunately, the silica glass structure can accept only a
limited amount of carbon ions. Therefore, black glasses
usually also contain so called free carbon (phase separation)
- that is responsible for their black color.
The presence of free carbon and its structure has a
tremendous impact on the thermal stability and mechanical
properties of the glasses. Analysis of the literature shows
that functional parameters of black glasses may vary within
very wide limits, depending on the amount of free carbon
and isomorphous substitution in the glass structure [2]-[9].
II.
EXPERIMENTAL
As it was mentioned, the main reason for the use of
ladder-like polysilsesquioxanes as precursors of black glass
was the need to ensure the stoichiometry of the glass. This
allows
to
control
the
amount
of
Si-C
bonds.
The
CH3Si(OCH3)3 (T units) and ((CH2Si(OC2H5)2) (D units)
were used as a silsesquioxane precursors. A mixture of
T/D=2/1 was hydrolyzed using water and HCl catalyst to
obtain ladder-like structures (P0). To obtain glassy SiCxOy,
dried samples were subsequently heat-treated in a tube
furnace at 200, 400, 600 and 800 oC temperature ranges.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The temperatures for further studies were selected based
on thermogravimetric analysis (Figure 2). The first weight
loss was observed around 200oC (P1), the second at about
400oC (P2), the third at 600oC (P3) and the end at about
800oC (P4).
Figure. 2. Thermogravimetric (TG) curve of P0 sample
Spectroscopic studies (MIR and Raman) of samples (P0-
P4) show that the transition from xerogel into black glasses
(Figures 3 and 4). On MIR spectrum of P1, an increase in
intensity of bands responsible for C-H vibrations (857,
1270, 1409, 2910, 2969 cm-1) and the appearance of
additional bands in the range of approx. 3055 cm-1
(vibration CH sp2) and OH at 3693, 3756 cm-1 is observed.
This is most probably due to formation of D-oligomers [1].
As temperature increases (P2 - P4) a decrease in the
intensity of the bands associated with the CH groups can be
observed [10].
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Figure 3. MIR spectra of xerogel and pyrolised samples
Figure 4. Raman spectra of xelogel (P0) and pyrolised samples (P0 - P4)
On Raman spectra (Figure 4), the so called G (at about 1615
cm-1) and D bands (P1-P4) characteristic for sp2 hybridized
carbon pairs and breathing of hexagonal carbon rings
respectively are visible. As temperature rises, an increase in
the intensity of the G band is observed. This is especially
visible for P3 (600 oC) and P4 (800 oC) samples.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, it has been shown that using ladder-like
silsesquioxanes, black glasses with different amount of free
carbon can be obtained. Spectroscopic studies showed that,
with the increase of temperature, free carbon phase starts to
form. Raman studies have shown that the process of
forming the carbon phase begins at about 600 °C.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by National Science Centre
Poland project “Functional layers of black glasses based on
ladder-like silsesquioxanes” 2014/15/B/ST8/0282
REFERENCES
[1] A. Strachota et al. “Optimization of sol–gel/pyrolysis routes to silicon
oxycarbide glasses,” J. Non-Cryst. Solids, vol. 358, pp. 2771–2782, 2012.
[2] F. I. Hurwitz and M. A. B. Meador, “Tailoring Silicon Oxycarbide
Glasses for Oxidative Stability,” J. Sol-Gel Sci. Tech., vol. 14, pp. 75-86,
1999.
[3] A. Saha, R. Raj and D. L. Williamson, “A model for the nanodomains in
polymer-derived SiCO,” J. Am. Ceram. Soc., vol. 89, pp. 2188-2195, 2006.
[4] J. Latournerie, P. Dempsey and D. H. Bahloul, ”Silicon oxycarbide
glasses: Part I thermochemical stability,” J. Am. Ceram. Soc., vol. 89, pp.
1485-1491, 2006.
[5] M. A. Mazo, A. Nistal, A. C. Caballero, F. Rubio and J. L. Oteo,
“Influence of processing conditions in TEOS/PDMS derived silicon
oxycarbide materials. Part 1: Microstructure and properties,” J. Europ.
Ceram. Soc., vol. 33, pp. 1195, 2013.
[6]. P. Du, X. Wang, I. K. Lin and X. Zhang, “Effects of Composition and
Thermal Annealing on the Mechanical Properties of Silicon Oxycarbide
Films,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 176, pp. 90-98, 2012.
[7] R. Harsche, C. Balan and R. Riedel, “Amorphous Si(Al)OC ceramic
from polysiloxanes: bulk ceramic processing, crystallization behavior and
applications,” J. Europ. Ceram. Soc., vol. 24, pp. 3471-3482, 2004.
[8]. R. Zhou, P. Colombo, C. Pantano and E. A. Vogler, “Silicon
oxycarbide glasses for blood-contact applications,” Acta Biomaterialia, vol.
1, pp. 583-589, 2009.
[9] J. Cordelair and P. Greil, “Electrical conductivity measurements as a
microprobe for structure transitions in polysiloxane derived Si-O-C
ceramics,” J. Europ. Ceram. Soc., vol. 20, pp. 1947-1957, 2000.
[10] R. J. P Corriu, D. Leclercq, P. H. Mutin and A. Vioux, “Preparation
and structure of silicon oxycarbide glasses derived from polysiloxane
precursors,” J. Sol-Gel Sci. Tech., vol. 8, pp. 327-330, 1997.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-495-4
ICQNM 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

