SOTICS 2020
The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies,
Communication, and Informatics
ISBN: 978-1-61208-832-7
October 18 -22, 2020
SOTICS 2020 Editors
Jose Miguel Jimenez, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

SOTICS 2020
Forward
The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and
Informatics (SOTICS 2020), held on on October 18 - 22, 2020, was an event on social eco-informatics,
bridging different social and informatics concepts by considering digital domains, social metrics, social
applications, services, and challenges.
The systems comprising human and information features form a complex mix of social sciences
and informatics concepts embraced by the so-called social eco-systems. These are interdisciplinary
approaches on social phenomena supported by advanced informatics solutions. It is quit intriguing that
the impact on society is little studied despite a few experiments. Recently, also Google was labeled as a
company that does not contribute to brain development by instantly showing the response for a query.
This is in contrast to the fact that it has been proven that not showing the definitive answer directly
facilitates a learning process better. Also, studies show that e-book reading takes more times than
reading a printed one. Digital libraries and deep web offer a vast spectrum of information. Large scale
digital library and access-free digital libraries, as well as social networks and tools constitute challenges
in terms of accessibility, trust, privacy, and user satisfaction. The current questions concern the trade-
off, where our actions must focus, and how to increase the accessibility to eSocial resources.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the SOTICS 2020 technical
program committee, as well as all of the reviewers. We also kindly thank all the authors who dedicated
much of their time and effort to contribute to SOTICS 2020.
We also gratefully thank the members of the SOTICS 2020 organizing committee for their help in
handling the logistics and for their work that made this professional meeting a success.
We hope that SOTICS 2020 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas and
results between academia and industry and to promote further progress in the area of social eco-
informatics.
SOTICS 2020 Publicity Chair
Lorena Parra, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

SOTICS 2020
Committee
SOTICS 2020 Publicity Chair
Lorena Parra, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
SOTICS 2020 Technical Program Committee
Safa’a AbuJarour, University of Potsdam, Germany
Millicent Akotam Agangiba, University of Mines and Technology, Tarkwa, Ghana
William Akotam Agangiba, University of Mines and Technology, Tarkwa, Ghana
Samer Al-Khateeb, Creighton University, USA
Federico Martín Alconada Verzini, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, Argentina
Qanita Bani Baker, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan
Grigorios N. Beligiannis, University of Patras, Greece
Hernane Borges de Barros Pereira,Centro Universitário Senai Cimatec, Brazil
Christos Bouras, University of Patras, Greece
James Braman, Community College of Baltimore County, USA
Miguel Carvalho, INESC-ID Lisboa, Portugal / Coordinating Center for Communications and Information
and Innovation Technologies, Regional Government of the Azores
K C Chan, University of Southern Queensland, Australia
Dickson K.W. Chiu, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Joshua Chukwuere, North-West University (NWU), South Africa
Dimitri Demergis, Rowan University, USA
Vasily Desnitsky, SPIIRAS, Russia
Nicolás Díaz Ferreyra, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany
Arianna D'Ulizia,National research council of Italy - IRPPS Research, Italy
Ritam Dutta, Surendra Institute of Engineering & Management | Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of
Technology, West Bengal, India
Larbi Esmahi,Athabasca University, Canada
Karina Frick, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Raji Ghawi, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Carlo Giglio, University of Calabria, Italy
Apostolos Gkamas, University Ecclesiastical Academy of Vella of Ioannina, Greece
William Grosky, University of Michigan-Dearborn, USA
Barbara Guidi, University of Pisa, Italy
Lingzi Hong, University of North Texas, USA
Tzung-Pei Hong, National University of Kaohsiung, Taiwan
Anush Poghosyan Hopes, University of Bath, UK
Hana Horak, University of Zagreb, Croatia
Pedram Hosseini, George Washington University, USA
Muhammad Nihal Hussain, University of Arkansas at Little Rock, USA
Sergio Ilarri, University of Zaragoza, Spain

Maria João Simões, University of Beira Interior / CICS.NOVA / LabCom.IFP, Portugal
Hanmin Jung, Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information, Korea
Evgeny Kagan, Ariel University, Israel
Attila Kertesz, University of Szeged, Hungary
Tiffany Kim, HRL Laboratories LLC, USA
Yannis Korkontzelos, Edge Hill University, UK
Jaroslaw Kozlak, AGH University of Science and Technology, Poland
Satoshi Kurihara, Keio University, Japan
Konstantin Kuzmin, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), USA
Johannes Langguth, Simula Research Laboratory, Norway
Jinfeng Li, University of Southampton, UK
Munir Majdalawieh, Zayed University, United Arab Emirates
Estela Marine-Roig, University of Lleida, Catalonia, Spain
Philippe Mathieu, CRIStAL Lab | University of Lille, France
Susan McKeever, Technological University Dublin, Ireland
Abdelkrim Meziane, CERIST, Algeria
Elina Michopoulou, University of Derby, UK
Salvatore Monteleone, CY Cergy Paris Université, France
Jenny Morales Brito, Universidad Autónoma de Chile, Chile
Marcel Naef, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Andrea Nanetti, School of Art, Design, and Media | Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Cuong Nguyen, Investors' Business Daily, USA
Anastasija Nikiforova, University of Latvia, Latvia
Debora Nozza, University of Milano - Bicocca, Italy
Antonio Opromolla, Link Campus University, Rome
María Óskarsdóttir, Reykjavík University, Iceland
Rachid Ouaret, INP de Toulouse -ENSIACET, France
Luigi Patrono, University of Salento, Lecce, Italy
Cindarella Petz, Technical University of Munich / Bavarian School of Public Policy, Germany
Scott Piao, Lancaster University, UK
Agostino Poggi, Università degli Studi di Parma, Italy
Elaheh Pourabbas, National Research Council of Italy, Italy
Taiane Ritta Coelho, Federal University of Parana, Brazil
Henry Rosales-Méndez, University of Chile, Chile
Cristian Rusu, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, Chile
Luis Enrique Sánchez Crespo, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Spain
Ali Shahrabi, Glasgow Caledonian University, Scotland, UK
Vivek Shandilya, Jacksonville University,USA
Marianna Sigala, University of South Australia, Australia
Anurag Singh, National Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
Evaggelos Spyrou, University of Thessaly | NCSR Demokritos, Greece
Raquel Trillo-Lado, University of Zaragoza, Spain
Lorna Uden, Staffordshire University, UK
Stefanos Vrochidis, ITI-CERTH, Greece
Gang Wang, Hefei University of Technology, China
Huadong Xia, Microstrategy Corporation, USA

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Interfaces of Political Participation: Challenging the Analysis of Communicative Spaces
Yulia Belinskaya and Joan Ramon Rodriguez-Amat
1
Does Social Media Behaviors Reflect Users’ Anxiety? A Case Study of Twitter Activities
Tian Wang and Masooda Bashir
8
Managing Role Identities on Various Social Network Sites: Analysis of the Use of Social Network Sites by
Latvian Youth
Velta Skolmeistere
14
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Interfaces of Political Participation: Challenging the Analysis of Communicative 
Spaces 
Yulia Belinskaya 
University of Vienna 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: yulia.belinskaya@univie.ac.at 
Joan Ramon Rodriguez-Amat 
Sheffield Hallam University 
Sheffield, UK 
e-mail: mon.rodriguez@shu.ac.uk 
Abstract—Opening politics to direct citizen participation 
seems a double-edged operation that aligns communicative 
infrastructures with the governmental executive political 
sphere of participatory citizenship. While citizens’ initiative 
platforms wave civic participation as a democratic 
opportunity, their relative distance from the executive core 
conditions their political effectiveness. This paper considers the 
participatory platforms as communicative spaces and analyses 
them following the four-mode model that considers 
communicative spaces under four facets: representations, 
structures, connections, and textures. This paper reports on the 
initial results of a study of the effectiveness of three 
participatory portals available to Russian citizens to test the 
analytical tool, and to adapt, expand, and challenge it. This 
brief paper is first at exploring the possibilities of the four-
mode model of analysis of communicative spaces, applied to 
participatory portals. 
Keywords-direct participation; citizen initiatives; interfaces; 
communicative spaces. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 Opening politics to direct citizen participation seems a 
double-edged operation. The effort to facilitate grassroots 
movements showing “a renewed interest in community, 
place, and ‘local identity’” [1] also challenges traditional 
governmental approaches that consider citizens as passive 
receivers and taxpayers [2]. Citizen participation is 
considered as a response to the civic engagement crisis 
within traditional democratic welfare states, moving them 
towards an XXI century-like active role of citizenship in 
policy-making processes, including volunteering, 
engagement with non-governmental organisations (NGOs), 
solidarity projects, or certainly, legislative initiatives. In this 
light, technology being both empowering and restrictive [3], 
helped the instalment of the transnational European Citizens 
Initiative (ECI), in 2007, and opened strands for research 
and critical discussion about the European Public Sphere [4]
[5]; this trend has seen platforms sprout up either connected 
with national Parliaments (Spain, UK, Germany) or as non-
governmental platforms (Belgium, Netherlands).  
Online participatory platforms are considered to be 
communicative spaces [6] that can be analysed as such [7]. 
This paper explores how such an analytical model can be 
used to critically analyse participatory portals.  
This piece focuses on the three main participatory 
platforms available in Russia today (the Russian Public 
Initiative [8], Petition to the President [9], and Change.org 
[10] the four-mode model (describing representations, 
textures, structures and connections) helps to compare them 
while suggesting ways of expanding the analysis to other 
platforms in the future.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
briefly describes the state of participatory spaces in Russia, 
theoretical considerations are discussed in Section III. 
Section IV is devoted to the methodology and the four-mode 
model of analysis and results are outlined in Section V. A 
critical discussion is provided in Section VI. The paper 
concludes with Section VII. 
II. OPENING POLITICS IN RUSSIA 
Russia has opened several participatory spaces [11], but 
research insists on pointing at an endemic disconnection 
between civic participation and executive power. Mamay 
[12] underlined that the concepts of e-government and e-
participation were relatively new in Russia and unexplored 
in scientific discourse. Kuryachaya [13] criticised the 
development stage of the Russian e-democracy based on 
information shortage about the activities of the authorities, 
the absence of appropriate legal regulation, and the general 
inefficiency of the citizens’ participation practices. The 
question looms, thus, on why do existing participatory 
portals not succeed at sorting this gap. Currently, several 
participatory platforms at a local level, such as “Active 
citizen” [14] in Moscow (launched in 2014) or “Our 
Petersburg” [15] also launched in 2014 [16]. Such platforms 
are aimed at building dialogue with local authorities; 
however, they do not provide any legislative power to the 
citizens, and because of their municipal range, they were not 
included in this study.  
Instead, this piece considers three active portals that link 
citizens' direct participation with legislative processes at a 
national level. First, the Russian Public Initiative (ROI - The 
acronym comes from the Russian title “Российская 
Общественная Инициатива” and the web address “roi.ru”) 
was established in 2012. It allows citizens to submit 
legislative initiatives on the federal, regional, and municipal 
levels. Second, Petition to the President - PP (established in 
2007) collects initiatives directed to the President of the 
Russian Federation. The third platform, Change.org is the 
most active, however, it does not have any legislative power 
or responsibility towards its contributors [16]. To bridge the 
relative distance of these platforms from the executive 
power, the 2013 law RF N183 [17] called for the creation of 
expert groups liaised with Parliament. These groups assess 
the ROI initiatives with more than 100 000 signatures on the 
federal level. The political effectiveness of the two other 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

platforms, instead, depends exclusively on actual 
parliamentary mediation. 
III. COMMUNICATIVE SPACES, INTERFACES AND 
ANALYSIS OF PLATFORMS 
Platforms for citizen participation are interfaces and 
communicative spaces. For Scolari et al. [18], interface is a 
network that includes various actors, users, individuals, 
institutions, organisations or technological actors. Interfaces 
are also described as “the connections between human 
psychological, perceptual, and motor systems on the one 
hand and codes, software, and hardware on the other 
hand.” [19]. Furthermore, new platforms of a cultural 
metainterface are built on the capitalisation of a net culture 
[20] and their industry is based on a “semio-capitalism” that 
generates data that can be used to anticipate user behaviour. 
In this sense, platforms of citizen participation are interfaces 
that facilitate connections between the highly bureaucratic 
governmental processes and grassroot initiatives. Platforms 
are allegedly aimed at reducing the e-participation divide.  
Communicative spaces are structurally necessary for 
democracy, as they set the conditions for civic 
(dis)agreement and struggle [21]. Platforms, thus, are also 
communicative spaces because, as in the public sphere, they 
are places for meaningful interaction where the differences 
between participants, their access, and critical discourse are 
necessary conditions for achieving consensus on public 
issues [22][23].  
Even if the Internet public sphere can be fragmented 
[24], citizen participation platforms can function in their 
double role as interfaces and as communicative spaces 
facilitating deliberation by allowing the complex flows of 
communication within the interface: “...discussion forums, 
chat rooms, and other virtual communities‘ may very well 
be ideal discursive spaces for political deliberation” [25]. In 
this sense, the democratic potential of the Internet which 
functions globally and enjoys the freedom of regulations has 
been seen as a utopian rebirth of the Habermasian concept. 
Yet, research insists on showing that there is an “e-
participation divide” – when the initiatives of the citizens do 
not meet the requirement of “the bureaucratic complexity of 
official decision-making procedures” [16] and while the 
European Union (EU) rhetorics includes the “potential shift 
from government-led to community-led planning” [1], the 
success rates and implementation levels of the initiatives are 
low. Factors are diverse, but evaluation of the viability of 
the platform seems favourite - “its ability to sustain the level 
of efficiency, popularity and, broadly, the changes in 
government – society relations it brings.” [16]. The 
participation of the public “relies heavily on whether 
political leadership is stable and long-lasting to suppress or 
change stable informal institutions” [16]. 
Antecedents in the analysis of participatory platforms 
[26] identified four groups of factors to assess ROI: 1) 
organisational development; 2) technological parameters of 
the portal; 3) regulatory support, review procedure; and 4) 
the openness of procedures for citizens and feedback 
possibilities. Each group contained four discrete sub-factors 
to answer with “yes” or “no”. Also, Fedotova et al. [27] 
developed a model assessing e-informing, e-consulting, e-
involving, e-collaborating, and e-empowerment 
participation levels of various Portuguese platforms, 
indicating, in percentages, the degree of public availability 
of these factors per platform. These authors employed 
quantitative approaches to measure efficiency and compare 
the portals. Chugunov et al. [16] used a combination of 
quantitative and qualitative techniques to study the 
popularity and viability of the portals.  
Following Scolari et al. [18] and the concept of 
metainterfaces, we argue that a quantitative approach to 
analyse these platforms is not sufficient and that instead, a 
qualitative approach can bring a more comprehensive 
understanding, particularly if considering the involvement 
of specific narratives, attributes, and contexts embedded in 
the design of the platforms. 
IV. METHODOLOGY 
This paper analyses the three platforms available in 
Russia: ROI, PP, and Change.org. The analysis of the 
platform interfaces follows the four-mode model for the 
analysis of communicative spaces as described by 
Rodriguez-Amat and Brantner [28]. The model assumes the 
non-neutrality of the communicative spaces and helps 
dismantle the assumption that the public sphere is neutral. 
As an empirical tool, the four-mode model discerns the 
features of such non-neutrality, highlighting where 
participatory platforms become factors of inequality. The 
four modes upon which the analysis rests are:  
1) Representations: the mode involves how platforms 
are perceived (by third parties), used (by participants), and 
how they are designed (as agents/actors) in the intentional 
shaping of the (conflicting) understandings of the public 
debate. Questions that guide this mode are the following:  
a) What are the prevalent contents and the recurrent 
topics, what is understood as politically relevant? 
(Narratives); 
b) What types of actors do the platforms distinguish? 
(Actors); 
c) How much participation had the petitions? What 
is the success rate? (Diffusion and reach). 
2) Textures: the symbolic charge of the site in which 
interactions happen. Some precedents identified as textures 
include the communicative value of places on their own, 
nuancing the conditions for the debate and the speech 
formulated from a historical balcony adding value to its 
contents [19]. The discussion of the historical success rates 
of the platforms settles a non-intentional precedent for 
forthcoming initiatives. The following questions may be 
asked:  
d) Who owns the platform and where is this platform 
hosted? (Ownership);  
e) When was it established and why? (Symbolic 
capital); 
f) What ideological or political attributes does the 
platform have? (Attributes). 
3) Structures: explain the (communicative) inequalities 
generated by the platforms: (un)equal access, barriers, 
transparency, direction, and channelling of information, 
priorities, centrality and peripheral interactions, or 
communication flows. This requires an analysis of the 
conditions for participation and the implicit conditions for 
success. The guiding questions are:  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

g) What mechanisms are there to disable or enable 
participation to the citizens? Are the contents moderated? 
(Access and Moderation); 
h) What data is collected from the participants? 
(Privacy and Transparency). 
4) Connections: explain what virtual possibilities of 
interaction enabled by the platforms and the identification of 
factors that multiply the network of contacts (social media 
sharing, engagement, media coverage). Connections are the 
imaginary territory of possibilities of interaction. The 
following questions are in the centre of attention:  
i) Does the platform facilitate the sharing of the 
initiative across social media platforms? (Shareability); 
j) Does the platform incorporate spaces of 
participation (such as comments, support, fundraising)? 
(Engagement). 
The extension of this paper allows only to open the 
strands of future specific analyses of the Russian 
participatory platforms and sheds some light on the 
possibilities and challenges of the model to be applied in 
this context. 
V. RESULTS 
Tables I-IV represent a comparative overview of the 
analysis of the three Russian platforms for citizen 
participation aligned by the four modes – representations, 
textures, structures and connections. Tables I-IV visualise 
the answers to the ten questions a)-j) formulated in the 
Section IV (all data from June-July 2020). 
A. Representations 
The analysis of representations was structured along 
with three sets of questions (columns) that identified 1) 
Narratives and Understandings, 2) Actors, and 3) Diffusion 
and Reach (see Table I). The combination of the three and 
the general diversity or homogeneity of the contents are 
good indicators of how the platform can become an 
emerging space of discussion or rather a closed territory of 
status-quo confirmation.  
 The first look at the most popular topics (Figures 1-3) 
presents these differences: whereas the Change.org calls for 
more universalist principles such as human rights, the ROI 
is more specifically oriented towards regulatory decisions. 
The initiatives submitted through ROI are aimed at the 
legislative system and describe the measures, policies, or 
laws (for example, medical education reform with >50k 
votes). The PP includes more general value-loaded measures 
(against an increase of retirement age with >160k votes or 
increase of the period for legal abortion). Most of the 
petitions do not include any legislative propositions, and 
instead are broader and connected to general values: 
ecologic statements, animal protection, and health 
protection issues are considered politically relevant on this 
platform. Change.org has more human rights entries and has 
more cases-oriented character (for example, petitions to 
“free a journalist”). 
The analysis of actors and participants is a fundamental 
feature of representational mode. The latent presence of 
“The President” in the same title of the Petition to the 
President gives a specific frame to that platform. This 
actoral analysis also needs to include the possibility of 
interactivity between participants. The anonymity seems to 
increase the participation but at the same times does not let 
identify the iteration - how many times one posts a petition 
or if there is a political organisation behind a petition (in 
case of PP). Instead, the necessity to sign with official state 
documents (ROI) grants the traceability of the authors. In 
the representation mode the perception plays a central role, 
for example, the chance of writing comments (Change.org) 
helps to believe that the ‘debate’ is permitted even if the 
platform has clearly fewer chances of generating laws. The 
official character of ROI is further consolidated by the 
presence of the Committee and its reports written in 
bureaucratic language. 
 
Figure 1. The main topics for discussion (ROI) 
 
Figure 2. The main topics for discussion (PP) 
Figure 3. The main topics for discussion (Change.org) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Similarly, with the analysis of the diffusion and reach of 
each platform, the possibility of success should taint the 
activity in the platforms. Instead, the blind leap between the 
Committee publishing the assessment of the petitions and 
the Parliament results opens a space of uncertainty to the 
reliability of the platform as political space. PP does not 
count on this connection with the parliamentary activity and 
this makes the platform free in terms of content, the same is 
true for Change.org. This also turns the platforms into the 
spaces of discussion without further political consequences.  
B. Textures 
The textural analysis involves the values that come from 
the platform itself, as an aprioristic condition. Textures, 
therefore, derive from the crystallisation of the 
representations. The analysis of textures is done along three 
lines: ownership, symbolic and cultural capital, and 
attributes (see Table II).  
The ownership of the platforms nuances their role. For 
instance, the distance of the site from the centres of power is 
the first point of reference. Whereas the owner of ROI is a 
former vice-Minister of Digital Development, PP was 
initially embedded within the Presidential official (currently 
it is disconnected). The aim of PP was to provide a more 
direct and personal channel of communication with the 
President. Change.org, instead, is a lucrative global platform 
with servers located in the United States of America (USA). 
Such nuance is also built by the accumulated cultural and 
symbolic capital: PP appeared within the liberal agenda of  
President Medvedev in 2007, which explains its 
disconnection from the current Presidential site. Change.org 
was created by Ben Rattray – a private individual (citizen of 
the USA), whereas ROI belonged to Putin’s presidential 
campaign in 2012. The ideological colours of the three 
platforms also have a strong weight: Russian national 
symbols are visible in the outline of the interfaces of PP and 
ROI against the global map that characterises Change.org as 
a platform.  
C. Structures 
Structures of communicative spaces are the settings that 
generate centres and peripheries of the interactions: who can 
interact with whom, and where are the barriers and the 
operations allowing or restricting these activities. The 
structures describe the efficiency of these barriers, their 
validity, and capacity to affect. Therefore, two columns 
helped the analysis of structures (see Table III): one 
involving access features such as identification and 
moderation, and another about privacy, transparency, and 
data management features of the site.  
The condition of access to online platforms is a key 
factor explaining the e-divide. PP makes it particularly easy 
for Russian citizens to register and to participate since it 
does not require any official digital identification. Both ROI 
and PP require knowledge of Russian, which limits 
inhabitants not knowing the language. The case of 
Change.org requires online registration which means access 
to an email account. The possibility of logging in from other 
platforms (such as Google or Facebook profiles) is also 
indicative of flows of data between the corporations, and 
ultimately how the citizens and participants’ digital footprint 
can be traced back to other sources of information. 
The data collected by the platforms, and the policies 
involving its storage have multiple implications, such as 
secrecy of the vote or ideological leaning of the Russian 
citizens who aim to participate. The possibility of deleting 
the digital footprint of inappropriate initiatives immediately 
shows the conditions for participation and the presence of a 
TABLE I. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE REPRESENTATIONS
Representations
Platform
Narratives and Understandings 
Actors
Diffusion and reach
ROI 
Established 
in 2012
Popular initiatives: medical 
education reform, toughening 
liability for offences on trains, 
prevention of domestic violence, 
“waste” reform, animal protection, 
e-government, corruption, 
retirement age, labelling of drugs.
- Authors (not visible); number of votes 
(visible). Number of votes on main page 
(votes against only on the page of initiative).  
- Committee resolves to forward (or not) 
initiatives to Parliament. Committee reports 
are available online. Committee Chair is 
known, not the rest of members.
- 17219 initiatives (8 years), 1983 active. 12 
initiatives with >10 000 votes, (2 under revision). 35 
(0,002% revised and approved by Committee, 
claimed success rate of 51%). 7 initiatives were 
supported by expert Committee (27,7%). 
- 2 were approved by Parliament and implemented: 1) 
Equip all railway crossings with video registration 
systems; 2) Green Shield around Moscow.
PP 
Established 
in 2007
Popular initiatives: against raising 
the retirement, increase of the 
“legal abortion” period, ban of 
animal hunting, suggestions to 
award Putin, support of a 
convicted mayor, suggestions 
regarding coronavirus, revival of 
monarchy or the Soviet Union.
- Authors are visible (pseudonyms allowed). 
Anonymity allows provocations: “Stalin” 
posted initiative for revival of Soviet Union. 
Comments can be logged in from any of 19 
social media sites. 
- There is free legal chat support available. 
on site 
- 1 902 petitions published (13 years)  
- 6 petitions >10 000 signatures.  
- Petitions allow comments. 
- Latest comments featured on the main page.
Change.org 
Established 
in 2007
Popular initiatives: petitions 
related to coronavirus payments, 
proposal of 5 steps to support the 
Russian economy.
- Authors, politicians, organisations, victims, 
promoters, etc. Network of actors on the 
platform. 
- Author or organisation are visible; can be 
followed. Some initiatives can be followed 
too.
- Petitions allow comments. Not discussion. 
- It is not possible to choose most popular or petitions 
with more than N votes.  
- Algorithms decide on “popularity”.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

dominant-authoritative operation of decision making. The 
moderation of petitions also establishes invisible conditions 
regarding what can and what cannot be petitioned and voted 
for, what can be discussed or not. It is impossible to 
determine which of the many possibilities of initiatives have 
been simply dismissed on ROI due to pre-moderation. In 
this sense, the diversity of calls on PP shows a more open 
approach as it allows all types of initiatives not necessarily 
formulated as legislation initiatives. 
D. Connections 
Connections explore the virtual network of possible 
interactions. The connectivity of a communicative space is a 
factor to make it legitimate and valid. To analyse the 
connections, Table IV shows two columns: shareability and 
engagement. The former refers to how much social media 
platforms can help expand and increase the knowledge and 
impact of the campaign. If the initiative is located only on 
the platform, citizens are required to visit it, whereas if it 
can be shared on social media, other users might show 
interest. The case of engagement involves the chances of the 
campaigns to be grown by activating new users in the 
promotion and development of the initiative, for instance, 
fundraising.  
ROI and PP incorporate a possibility to share the 
initiatives on the social media platforms that are more 
visible within the Russian cultural landscape such as 
Odnoklassniki (“Classmates” with 200 million users mostly 
from the former Soviet Republics), vk.com (“Russian 
facebook” - social media platform with more than 500 
million accounts, mostly Russian speaking) or the service 
Mail.Ru, as well as on Facebook, Twitter or via email. Such 
similar connectivity of both platforms shows a preference 
for the Russian social media landscape, as a difference to 
what Change.org offers. The platform requires a vote before 
sharing while enabling the possibility of fundraising, events, 
news, campaigns, as well as the involvement of celebrities 
and politicians.  
VI. DISCUSSION 
The four aspects analysed in the communicative spaces 
as modes are not independent of one another. In this section, 
the columns defined as analytical operations are explored in 
TABLE II. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE TEXTURES
Textures
Platform
Ownership
Symbolic 
Capital
Attributes
ROI
- Non-profit 
organisation 
- Private but 
known owner 
(linked to the 
Gov-t)
Established 
for Putin's 
presidential 
campaign 
(sign of 
Internet 
Freedom) 
- Colours of Russian 
flag.  
- Similar design to 
Parliament sites.  
- Interactive map of 
Russia with regional 
numbers of petitions
PP
- Hosted in 
presidential 
website (no 
longer 
connected to 
it)
Product of  
Medvedev’s 
liberalisation 
agenda
- Cyrillic URL 
- Design not changed 
since 2007 
- Flag (movicon) 
- Flag and Russian 
Kremlin as background
Change.org
Private 
organisation, 
servers in the 
USA
Links to 
Russian 
Gov-t not 
known
World map as icon
TABLE IV. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE 
CONNECTIONS
Connections
Platform
Shareability
Engagement
ROI
- Initiatives can be shared: via 
platforms: Odnoklassniki, 
vk.com, mail.ru, Facebook, 
Twitter, Mail 
- Petitions need to be structured: 
Problem-Result of 
implementation-Steps to be taken
No other forms of 
engagement
PP
- It can be followed and shared 
via platforms: Odnoklassniki, 
vk.com, mail.ru, Facebook, 
Twitter, Google+.  
- Initiatives can be followed on 
social media
No other forms of 
engagement
Change.org
- Sharing and donation request  
- Comments allowed if voting, 
comments can be liked 
- Change.org has Facebook and 
Twitter account
Alternative forms: 
fundraising, events, 
news, campaigns, 
involvement of 
celebrities or 
politicians
TABLE III. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE 
STRUCTURES
Structures
Platform
Access and Moderation
Privacy and 
Transparency
ROI
- Russian language, Version for 
visually impaired. Registration 
through Russian e-government 
system (18+) 
- Petitions published after 
moderation (up to two months)  
- Singular votes collected for a year, 
a vote is permitted once
Login through the 
system of e-
government
PP
- Russian Language 
- No registration required for 
voting: vote permitted every 24h 
with no log-in 
- Petitions pre-moderated, 
comments not
Comments after 
login from 19 
social platforms
Change.org
- Many Languages 
- Registration required 
- Author can chose vote target 
- Petitions not pre-moderated
Login with 
Google and 
Facebook 
accounts 
(asks for photo 
when publishing)
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

combination to eventually respond to the underlying 
question: do participatory platforms in the Russian political 
landscape demonstrate serious efforts to enhance 
participation? 
The analysis of the platforms has shown that the level of 
diversity and dispersion of topics among them is not 
straightforward. Whereas there are some overlapping 
combinations amongst them, and they could be assumed to 
give a comprehensive understanding of the political 
relevance and efficiency of the e-democratic participation, 
the differences between platforms show that they are 
established with different purposes. There is a clear 
tendency on Change.org to engage with topics beyond the 
strictly national debates and involve universal values. The 
textural analysis has shown, precisely, that the three 
platforms are loaded with aprioristic intentions and that they 
emerge as part of previous political strategies: PP is related 
to a Medvedev strategy that ceased with his presidency and 
ROI aligns with Putin’s strategic interests.  
The analysis of the structures also complements those 
findings. There are clearly several forms of barriers that 
insist on the nationalistic framing of the debates. Even then, 
if they do not say it explicitly, the platforms set rules and 
conditions about who can and who cannot participate. Even 
if from the representations the debates seem diverse, 
structures show three kinds of barriers: 
- identity (established through conditions for 
registration); 
- language (established by the conditions of the 
interface access, impaired access enabled only in PP); 
- skills and legislative knowledge.  
ROI requires a high level of formality for an initiative to 
be considered by the Commission. The set of requirements 
and rules (a necessary high number of adhesions, and a 
complex niche legislative language used by highly 
bureaucratic and law-educated committees) work as the 
perfect mechanism of exclusion for the public participation 
in the debate. These three structural barriers still do not 
consider other external factors: how many citizens have 
access to the Internet to participate in the public debate, how 
many of those citizens know about the platform, and how 
many of them would try publishing initiatives that would 
later be moderated as irrelevant. Connections also insist on 
the setting of national and cultural boundaries to the 
participation in the platforms. This includes, for example, 
the prioritization of Russian social media platforms. The 
sovereignty of legislation still resides on the national 
citizenry, but considering the formal difficulties identified in 
the structures, this operation of visually and conceptually 
appealing to the national community might respond more to 
a form of flagging the nation than an actual form of 
empowering citizens. Allegedly, the apparent openness of 
Change.org could be a counter-argument to this, but the fact 
that it is a for-profit platform and that it does not have any 
link to the Russian government only confirms that the gap 
remains. These initial considerations are already pointing 
out that the platforms are not immediately empowering 
spaces to enhance the public debate. Some of those 
interfaces work more as activating devices of national pride 
through language and flagging symbols, or as 
propagandistic tools to “consolidate” a democracy for a 
show, or eventually to channel the social outrage as 
disconnected spaces of highly emotional interaction.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
This article has analysed the main three platforms of 
political participation in Russia. The analysis has been done 
by considering them as interfaces planted as a way of 
sorting the gap between the society and government and as a 
communicative space that should enable the citizens to 
engage in public debates. This analysis is based on a model 
that identifies four aspects of the communicative spaces: 
representations, textures, structures, and connections. Such a 
model helps move beyond the quantitative research that 
could count the effectiveness of the initiatives by simply 
measuring their success. Instead, the analysis has led to the 
formulation of questions about the openness and closure of 
the three platforms. However, there are still some 
limitations: even if the model could incorporate the press 
coverage as forms of representations of the platforms, it 
cannot analyse invisible processes such as the petitions that 
were not considered or moderated out or external factors 
such as the extension of Internet access among the citizenry 
or their knowledge of the platforms.  
The analysis has shown that the three platforms are not 
neutral. They are neither innocently enabling the flow of 
information from the debate to the parliament, nor are they 
free of intentional preferences. All the platforms considered 
are loaded with historical and symbolic capital that taints the 
result and balances the expected equality of opportunities of 
the initiatives. All three platforms appear disconnected and 
limited in their capacity of fulfilling their expected role. 
ROI includes highly complex legislative features while 
requiring the participation of rather broad citizen numbers, 
PP's openness and lack of moderation make it a space of 
fast-spinning emotional posts. Similarly, Change.org seems 
to have more in common with any social media platform 
than with a political participatory platform. The initiatives 
expect to have some impact on the public opinion and then 
to be picked either by the media or by the political 
organisations. The gap seems, therefore, to remain. The 
signs suggest that the platforms were never established as a 
real instrument of political participation, but rather as one-
directional interfaces from power.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Da Silva, L. G. Horlings and E. Figueiredo, “Citizen 
initiatives in the post-welfare state,” Social  
Sciences, vol. 7, 
no. 252, pp. 1-21, 2018. 
[2] L. Schulpen and H. Huyse, “Citizen Initiatives for Global 
Solidarity. The New Face of European  Solidarity,” Forum for 
Development Studies, Routledge, May 2017, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 
163-169. 
[3] Z. Papacharissi, A private sphere: Democracy in a digital age. 
Polity, 2010. 
[4] J. Organ, “EU citizen participation, openness and the European 
citizens’ initiative: the TTIP legacy,” Common Market Law 
Review, 2017. [Online]. Available from: https://
livrepository.liverpool.ac.uk/3010694/ [retrieved: August, 2020].  
[5] P. Vigier, “Towards a Citizen-driven Innovation System in 
Europe: A governance approach for a European innovation 
agenda,” Innovation, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 191-202, 2007. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

[6] J. R. Rodriguez-Amat and C. Brantner, “Occupy the squares 
with tweets. A proposal for the analysis of the governance of 
communicative spaces,” Obra Digital, vol. 11, pp. 2-19, 2016. 
[7] Y. Belinskaya, C. Brantner, and J. R. Rodriguez-Amat, 
“Revisiting the (urban) public sphere: A model of 
analysis” [Revisitando la esfera pública (urbana): un modelo de 
análisis], LIS Letra. Imagen. Sonido. Ciudad Mediatizada, vol. 20, 
pp. 106-133, 2019. 
[8] Russian Public Initiative / Российская Общественная 
Инициатива. [Online]. Available from: http://roi.ru/ [retrieved: 
October, 2020]. 
[9] Petition to the President / Петиция Президенту. [Online]. 
Available from: http://петиция-президенту.рф/ [retrieved: 
October, 2020]. 
[10] Change.org. [Online]. Available from: http://change.org/ 
[retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[11] O. N. Demushina, “Portals of electronic petitions as a form of 
interaction between government institutions and Russian citizens. 
State and municipal government” [Порталы электронных 
петиций как форма взаимодействия институтов власти и 
граждан в России. Государственное и муниципальное 
управление]. Scientific notes, vol. 4, 2016. 
[12] E. Mamay, “Citizens’ inclusion and eParticipation initiatives 
in Russia,” Proceedings of the International Conference for E-
Democracy and Open Government (edited by P. Parycek, and N. 
Edelmann), pp. 99-110, 2014. 
[13] М. М. Kuryachaya, “E-Democracy in modern Russia: the 
establishment, development and prospects,” Kutafin University 
Law Review, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 93-105, 2016. 
[14] Active citizen / Активный Гражданин. [Online]. Available 
from: https://ag.mos.ru/ [retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[15] Our Petersburg / Наш Петербург. [Online]. Available from: 
http://gorod.gov.spb.ru/ [retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[16] A. V. Chugunov, Y. Kabanov, and Y. Misnikov, “Citizens 
versus the government or citizens with the government: a tale of 
two e-participation portals in one city-a case study of St. 
Petersburg, Russia.” Proceedings of the 10th International 
Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, 
Mar. 2017, pp. 70-77. 
[17] Decree of the President of the Russian Federation N183 “On 
consideration of public initiatives by citizens of the Russian 
Federation using the Internet resource ‘Russian Public 
Initiative’ (with amendments and additions)”, Mar. 2013 [Online]. 
Available from: hhttp://base.garant.ru/70326884/ [retrieved: 
October, 2020].  
[18] C. A. Scolari and F. Pires de Sá, “Media ecology, transmedia 
literacy, and redesign of interfaces,” Matrizes, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 
129-39, 2018. 
[19] P. C. Adams and A. Jansson, “Communication geography: A 
bridge between disciplines,” Communication Theory, vol. 22, no. 
3, pp. 299-318, 2012. 
[20] C. U. Andersen and S. B. Pold, The metainterface: The art of 
platforms, cities, and clouds. MIT Press, 2018. 
[21] A. M. Schlesinger, The cycles of American history. HMH, 
1999. 
[22] J. Habermas, The Theory of Communicative Action: Jurgen 
Habermas; Trans. by Thomas McCarthy. Heinemann, 1984. 
[23] H. Arendt, Hannah Arendt: critical essays. Suny Press, 1994. 
[24] J. Habermas, “Political communication in media society: Does 
democracy still enjoy an epistemic dimension? The impact of 
normative theory on empirical research,” Communication theory, 
vol. 16(4), pp. 411-426, 2006. 
[25] R. S. Geiger, “Does Habermas understand the Internet? The 
algorithmic construction of the blogo/public sphere,” Gnovis. A 
Journal of Communication, Culture, and Technology, vol. 10, no. 
1, pp. 1-29, 2009. 
[26] L. Bershadskaya, A. V. Chugunov, and D. Trutnev, “E-
participation development: a comparative study of the Russian, 
USA and UK e-petition initiatives.” Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic 
Governance, Oct. 2013, pp. 73-76. 
[27] O. Fedotova, L. Teixeira, and H. Alvelos, “E-participation in 
Portugal: evaluation of government electronic platforms,” Procedia 
Technology, vol. 5, pp. 152-161, 2012. 
[28] J. R. Rodriguez-Amat and C. Brantner, “Space and place 
matters: A tool for the analysis of geolocated and mapped 
protests,” New Media and Society, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1027-1046, 
2016.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

 Does Social Media Behaviors Reflect Users’ Anxiety  
A Case Study of Twitter Activities 
 
Tian Wang 
Illinois Informatics 
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
Champaign, USA 
Email: tianw7@illinois.edu 
Masooda Bashir 
School of Information Sciences 
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
Champaign, USA 
Email: mnb@illinois.edu
 
 
Abstract—Anxiety has been a common mental health disorder 
that affects many people, especially young adults, but it is often 
undetected 
or 
untreated. 
Meanwhile, 
mental 
health 
professionals and services available are insufficient for the 
assessment and treatment of mental illnesses, including 
anxiety, due to cost, availability, and other factors. Therefore, 
there is an urgent need to develop new approaches for mental 
healthcare services. Considering that the number of young 
adults using social media has increased significantly in the last 
decade, data from social media activities could possibly be a 
new approach for individual’s mental health assessment. In 
this study, we recruited 95 participants and examined their 
Twitter activities to learn if young adults’ social media 
activities are relevant to their anxiety level. Twitter activities 
were assessed between two groups of users, namely, those 
participants who reported symptoms, and participants 
reporting few or no anxiety symptoms. Our preliminary results 
show that certain social media behaviors differ for individuals 
that report anxiety symptoms and those with less or no 
symptoms of anxiety. Results from this study could be 
beneficial for both researchers and mental health professionals 
as a supplemental source of information and could potentially 
provide a new approach for mental health assessment and 
treatment in the future.  
Keywords – Social media behaviors; Mental health; Data 
analytics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
While mental health is a growing concern around the 
globe in recent years, anxiety disorders have been one of the 
most commonly diagnosed mental illnesses. According to 
National Institute of Mental Health, about 18% of U.S. 
adults aged 18 or older are affected by anxiety in any given 
year [1], and over 20% of those adults with anxiety disorders 
have severe symptoms. Moreover, 31.1% of U.S. adults are 
estimated to experience anxiety disorders at some time in 
their lives [2]. In particular, anxiety disorders are very 
common among children, adolescents, and young adults. 
Statistics show that about 30% of young adults aged 18-29 in 
U.S. have some type of anxiety disorders [3]. However, 
assessments and treatments for mental illness have been 
considered to be insufficient in the recent past. A previous 
study in 2017 [4] pointed out that although effective 
treatment may be theoretically available, healthcare services 
are still lacking for many mental illnesses including anxiety 
disorders. According to a survey study by National 
Comorbidity Survey (NCS), about 75% of nearly 10,000 
people with generalized anxiety disorder or social anxiety 
disorder did not receive any treatment [2]. Therefore, it is 
necessary for researchers and mental health professionals to 
explore new approaches to provide more effective and 
efficient mental healthcare services besides the current 
applied methods. 
Nowadays, interactive communication technologies such 
as social media have become ever more popular all over the 
world. Research studies have found that 72% of the US 
population uses some type of social media [5]. Especially, 
social media continues to be popular among young adults. 
Reports found that usage of social media for young adults 
has increased from 9% in 2005 to 89% in 2013 [6]. Social 
media is mostly used by individuals to share information, 
express feelings and emotions, catch up with latest news, and 
connect with other people. Hence, the information from an 
individuals’ social media activities which provides a great 
reflection of their daily life could be helpful in determining 
their mental wellbeing. 
This research study aims to examine the relationship 
between young adults’ social media behaviors and their 
mental health status, especially general anxiety level. We 
selected Twitter as the social media platform to observe and 
analyze in this study based on its large number of users and 
content. As of 2019, Twitter has 139 million active users per 
day [7] with a total of 500 million Tweets being posted [8]. 
To understand the relationship between individuals’ Twitter 
activities and anxiety level, two research questions will be 
addressed when conducting the study: 
• 
Is there a relationship between Twitter activities and 
one’s anxiety level? 
• 
Are there any differences in Twitter activities among 
people with symptoms of anxiety and people without 
such symptoms? 
The subsequent parts of this paper are organized in the 
following way. In Section II, previous literature will be 
reviewed and summarized to provide an overview of the 
current practices related to social media analytics and mental 
health predictions. Section III will explain the methodology 
used in this research study, including the process of data 
collection, and elements measured in the study. Results will 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

be displayed in Section IV, and Section V will discuss the 
characteristics of the preliminary results. We conclude the 
work in Section VI. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Although typical diagnosis on mental health status is 
based on self-reported information and mental status 
examinations [9], social media provides reflections of an 
individual’s personal life given its massive amount of 
information on people’s personal experiences, feelings, and 
emotions that is being shared. Individuals use social media 
for various reasons: social interaction, information seeking, 
entertainment, relaxation, or expression of opinions [10], and 
each of these activities involve significant personal data 
collection, sharing, and processing. Previous research 
suggested that social media activities could be used for 
personal 
identification, 
including 
age, 
gender, 
and 
personality [11]. For example, one research study reported 
that users’ personality traits could be predicted by their 
information shared publicly on Facebook, and the results of 
the predictive models were more accurate than the 
predictions made by close friends and family [12]. The 
statistical models also provided accuracy rates on predicting 
other personal information, for example, sexual orientations 
(if someone was homosexual or heterosexual), or political 
opinions (if the user was Democrat or Republican) [13]. In 
addition, expressed emotions on social media websites have 
been used by commercial companies to improve their 
business decision making and tailor their marketing 
strategies [23].  
Previous studies on social media found that individuals’ 
social media activities could be used to assess, identify, and 
predict their health status. For instance, a study on Twitter 
behaviors by Choudhury et al. [9] found that people with 
major depression may behave differently on social media 
compared with people without any symptoms. Another study 
also suggested that people with depression symptoms may 
have different perspective on sharing personal information 
on social media compared with people without such 
symptoms [21]. Besides predicting depression, similar work 
by Choudhury et al. [14] also applied predictive models to 
forecast if new mothers could possibly experience significant 
postpartum changes by analyzing their social media 
activities. Social media behaviors are not only used for 
personal health assessment, but also could be used for overall 
community healthcare. Social media analytics have been 
widely used in the field of medical sciences, examples 
including biomedical outcome prediction [15], infectious 
disease risk prediction [16], predicting and tracking the 
trends of disease outbreaks [17]. Using social media for 
health predication have also been shown to have accuracy 
rates in previous studies. One such study found that 
Facebook postings on two health issues were very similar to 
the actual results on official reports about the same topics 
[18].  
III. 
METHODS 
An online survey was designed and used to conduct this 
research study. Participants were recruited randomly via 
Amazon Mechanic Turk (MTurk), which is a crowdsourcing 
platform. The online survey used General Anxiety Disorder-
7 (GAD-7), which is a seven-item, self-report questionnaire, 
to assess participant’s health status based on the scores. The 
GAD-7 has been used in both research and clinical settings 
to detect individual’s anxiety level [19]. The survey also 
includes questions on Twitter usage, as well as general 
demographic information. Participants were asked to provide 
their Twitter links and give permission to researchers for 
observing their Twitter activities. No personal identifiable 
information was collected in this study. The recruitment 
process and the online survey were reviewed and approved 
by the Institutional Review Board. In addition, relevant 
resources were provided to participants at each page of the 
survey in case they felt upset or needed any help during the 
study.  
By using filters on MTurk, only adults aged 18-25 in 
U.S. holding a Twitter account were recruited in this study 
since the aim of this study is to analyze the relationship 
between young adults’ social media activities and their 
mental health status. A total of 200 participants were 
randomly recruited from MTurk, and 95 responses were 
recorded after excluding noisy data (i.e., incomplete survey 
or filling out the survey within extremely short time period), 
with 52 out of 95 (54.74%) participants being female. The 
average age of participants was 25.35, and 65 participants 
(68.42%) held a bachelor’s degree or higher. Over half of the 
participants (56 out of 95) indicated that they use Twitter 
every day. Participants’ responses on their health status were 
converted to numerical scores based on GAD-7 guideline. 
Total score for each participant was calculated, and 
participants were divided into two groups, participants with 
symptoms of anxiety and participants with less or no 
symptoms of anxiety, by using the cut-off point (10 or 
greater) recommended by GAD-7. There were 34 
participants who received a total score of 10 or greater, while 
61 participants received less than 10 in the GAD-7 
questionnaire.  
By using Twitter links provided by each participant, data 
on all the publicly available information was collected, 
including information on user’s profile, followings and 
followers, Twitter postings (Tweet), liked Tweet, and photos. 
Twitter’s developer API was used to retrieve content of 
Tweets from user’s timeline. One notable exclusion during 
the retrieving process was that only historical Tweets posted 
before the participant took the survey were collected, since 
the measurements on GAD-7 are based on previous 
experience. In addition, this step was taken to minimize 
social desirability on Twitter based on the study 
participation. A total number of 353514 Tweets were 
retrieved from the 95 participants’ public Twitter links.  
To analyze participants’ Twitter activities, three elements 
were measured: overall engagement, negative emotions, and 
level of personal information revealed publicly. In a previous 
study, Choudhury et al. have defined and explained the 
measurements of engagement [9], and similar methods were 
applied in this study. Besides that, since posting personal 
content on social media is on the rise [10], we were also 
interested in assessing negative emotions and the level of 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

personal information revealed on participant’s Twitter links 
to see if those two elements are also related to their mental 
health status.  
• 
Engagement: Number of Tweets, Retweets, replies, 
liked Tweets, followers, and followings. We 
considered those elements to be a reflection of how 
active an individual is on Twitter. For example, if an 
individual posts a huge number of Tweets in a short 
time period, it may imply that he or she spends a lot 
of time on social media every day. We also 
considered Retweets and replies to be related to the 
interaction with other people, and the number of 
followings and followers to show how close the 
individual connects to the social media community 
[20].  
• 
Negative emotions: Sentiment analysis has been 
widely applied in Twitter data analytics. For 
example, models of sentiment analysis such as  
polynomial regression, classification modeling, and 
lexicon-based sentiment analysis models, all have 
been helpful in categorizing data and hence enabling 
fast decision making [22]. To analyze the negative 
emotions 
expressed 
in 
participants’ 
Twitter 
activities, we considered and examined two specific 
elements: frequency of words with negative 
sentiment used in original Tweets, and if any 
negative attitude was exhibited in Twitter activities 
other than original Tweets, such as liking or re-
posting negative Tweets, or including negative 
words in profile description. Content and sentiment 
analysis were applied to assess the negative 
emotions.  
• 
Level of personal information shared publicly: In 
a previous study on depression and social media 
activities, results showed a relationship between the 
level of personal information shared publicly and the 
person’s depression [20]. More specifically, we 
observed activities such as using selfie as a profile 
photo, posting photos or videos related to personal 
life, or adding personal identifiable information on 
profile description. Therefore, examining publicly 
shared personal information might potentially 
indicate if individuals are open and willing to 
disclose and share their personal life publicly with 
the online community, including both acquaintances 
and strangers. 
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
As described in Section III, three elements are analyzed 
based on data retrieved from participants’ Twitter activities: 
engagement, negative emotions, and level of personal 
information shared publicly. For each of the two groups, 
participants with anxiety symptoms and participants with 
few or no symptom of anxiety, the results were recorded 
accordingly and then compared. The results and comparisons 
for all of the three elements are shown in the following sub-
sections: 
A. Engagement 
To analyze the engagement element, the average number 
of Tweets, followings, and followers are recorded. The 
statistics on the engagement for both groups are shown in 
Table 1.  
TABLE I.  
STATISTICS ON ENGAGEMENT 
Participants 
With anxiety 
symptoms 
Without anxiety 
symptoms 
N=34 
N=61 
Average # of Tweets 
4970.30 
4138.04 
Average # of followings 
449.96 
373.13 
Average # of followers 
190.18 
229.42 
Ratio of Followings/Follower 
2.37 
1.63 
 
From the table above, statistics show that participants 
with anxiety symptoms have a slightly larger number of 
Tweets posted. One reason could be that the sample size is 
small and outliers exist when analyzing the data (for 
example, there is one particular participant who posted over 
30,000 Tweets, and another participant only posted 1 Tweet 
although the Twitter was registered in 2011). Note that the 
number of Tweets recorded in Table 1 includes both original 
posts, re-posts (Retweets), and replies, and most of the 
participants with larger number of Tweets have a lot of 
Retweet, which increased the total number. Although outliers 
may influence the results, those outliers were not excluded 
from our analysis because the number of Tweets could be a 
determining factor when evaluating how active a participant 
is on a given social media. Only Tweets posted before the 
participant took this study’s survey were collected. One 
challenge that we faced was related to collecting all of the 
user’s historical data and relating that to their mental health 
condition because, for this study, we did not asses or know 
the onset of anxiety. Therefore, our study results may be 
limited in explaining the relationship between participants’ 
Twitter activities and their anxiety level. Further research 
studies with more comprehensive survey questions that 
assess the onset of the mental health condition would be 
recommended to have more precise results.  
Based on observations of the data collected, participants 
with anxiety symptoms had significantly higher percentage 
of Retweets in their total number of Tweets, for example, 
sharing an external link from other websites, or re-posting a 
celebrity’s Tweet. However, people with less or no 
symptoms of anxiety were more likely to post original 
content or interact with others by replies.  
Also, participants with anxiety symptoms have more 
followings but less followers than participants with less or no 
symptoms. Ratios of number of followings to number of 
followers for these two groups are 2.37 and 1.63, 
respectively. Further observations found that participants 
with anxiety symptoms are more likely to follow verified 
Twitter accounts (celebrities, organizations’ official accounts, 
website accounts), while participants with less or no 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

symptoms tend to follow personal accounts like their family 
and friends that are close to them in real life.   
B. Negative Emotions 
To understand the emotions expressed on participants’ 
Tweets, only original posts (Tweets) and replies were 
retrieved and analyzed as measurement, since content on re-
posts (Retweets) were not created directly by participants 
themselves. Although those Retweets may also imply 
participants’ attitude, in this study, we only focused on posts 
from the participants directly. The first step was to analyze 
word occurrence and frequency for Tweets and replies. After 
excluding common used words like pronouns and 
prepositions (i.e., “my”, “you”, “the”), or words without 
clear sentiment (i.e., “time”, “video”, “do”), Table 2 shows 
the top 10 most frequently used words (with sentiment) for 
participants with symptoms of anxiety and participants with 
few or no anxiety symptoms.  
TABLE II.  
WORD FREQUENCY FOR ORIGINAL POSTS 
Rank 
With anxiety symptoms 
Without anxiety symptoms 
1 
love (0.27%) 
love (0.74%) 
2 
good (0.20%) 
good (0.52%) 
3 
new (0.12%) 
new (0.52%) 
4 
better (0.10%) 
liked (0.41%) 
5 
great (0.09%) 
best (0.40%) 
6 
best (0.09%) 
chance (0.38%) 
7 
happy (0.08%) 
right (0.37%) 
8 
over (0.07%) 
never (0.37%) 
9 
stop (0.06%) 
happy (0.33%) 
10 
bad (0.05%) 
amazing (0.27%) 
 
From Table 2, we could see that there are similarities for 
the most frequently used words with sentiments between the 
two groups. However, although participants with anxiety 
symptoms mentioned positive words in their original posts, 
the percentage of word occurrence (how many times the 
word occurred / total number of all the words) for those 
words is lower than the one for participants with less or no 
anxiety. For example, the percentage of word occurrence for 
the word “love” is 0.74% for participants with less or no 
anxiety, but only 0.27% for participants with reported 
anxiety symptoms. It is similar for the words with positive 
sentiment like ‘good”, “new”, and “best”. Another 
observation from Table 2 is that the group with anxiety 
symptoms frequently used some words with negative 
sentiment, for example, the word “bad” was ranked 10th for 
participants with anxiety symptoms, but was not in the top 
10 for the other group.  
Since there were too many words in the list, we took a 
closer look at the words with negative sentiment. For 
participants with anxiety symptoms, the frequency of words 
with negative sentiment in their Tweets and replies was 
higher than the one for participants with less or no symptoms. 
For example, the frequency for the word “sad” was about 
0.07% for participants that reported anxiety, but was less 
than 0.01% for the other group.  
Participants with anxiety symptoms were not only 
expressing negative emotions on Tweets, but also on their 
Twitter profile descriptions. One example was a participant 
who described herself as “an awkward girl trying to find 
herself” in her Twitter profile, and there was another 
participant from this group using the phrase “pseudo human” 
in his profile description.   
C. Level of Personal Information Shared Publicly 
In this study, the level of personal information shared 
publicly on Twitter is examined by three sub-categories: 
• 
Profile photo: Is the user’s selfie being used as 
profile photo? If so, is the photo clear enough to 
identify the person? 
• 
Profile 
description: 
Is 
there 
any 
personal 
identifiable information disclosed in the profile 
description? For example, gender, age, education 
level/school, geolocation, occupation. 
• 
Media posts: Is there any media post (photo or 
video) related to the user’s personal life? For 
example, selfie, photos of personal experiences 
(hobbies, travels, daily life), or photos with family 
and friends. 
The results showed that participants with less or no 
anxiety symptom (21 out of 61, 34.4%) are more likely to 
use their selfies as profile photos than participants with 
anxiety symptoms (7 out of 34, 20.6%). For participants who 
reported anxiety symptoms, 6 of them were using photos that 
were not clear enough to identify their faces in different 
ways: some of those pictures included blur effects, some 
pictures were taken from far away, and some selfies were 
taken from the right/left side of the face. Most of the 
participants with anxiety symptoms were using irrelevant 
pictures as profile photos, like animation picture, landscape, 
celebrities, and so on.  
For profile description, 13 of the 61 participants with few 
or no anxiety symptoms had detailed information about 
themselves in the profile description. Most of them were 
indicating their job occupations, school and graduate year, 
place (state or city) of residency. However, only 2 of 34 
participants who reported anxiety symptoms included some 
basic level of personal information in their profile 
description.  
Participants with few or no anxiety symptoms were also 
more willing to post photos and videos about themselves, 
their family and friends, and photos related to personal 
experiences. On the other hand, participants who reported 
anxiety were more reserved to post any media that could 
potential disclose their personal information. They were 
more cautious with media posts shared publicly, and they 
were more likely to only post default gif pictures by Twitter, 
or irrelevant pictures from the Internet.  
Overall, from the comparison between the two groups in 
the three sub-categories described above, participants with 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

few or no anxiety symptoms are more open to reveal their 
personal information or daily life in their profile and posts. 
The level of personal information shared publicly is much 
lower for participants with anxiety symptoms.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Based on the preliminary results described in the above 
section, there are some initial findings on the relationship 
between social media behaviors and individuals’ mental 
health status. In our study, we found that participants with 
reported anxiety symptoms behave differently on social 
media like Twitter compared with participants with few or 
no anxiety symptoms. For the social media engagement, 
study participants with high anxiety level are more likely to 
re-post content from others instead of creating original 
content. Considering they have much more followings than 
followers, this may be an indication that they are less active 
in connecting with others or with a community since they 
tend to follow verified accounts like official organizations or 
celebrities instead of interacting with others. Our sentiment 
analysis from Twitter content showed that participants with 
anxiety symptoms tend to be more passive and negative by 
using more words with negative sentiment and fewer 
positive words being mentioned. In contrast to participants 
with less or no symptoms of anxiety, who are more likely to 
express their negative attitude (for example, loneliness, 
sadness, anxiety, or frustration), not only on Twitter posts, 
but also on their Twitter profile descriptions. The results also 
reveal that participants with anxiety symptoms are more 
cautious with sharing their personal information publicly via 
Twitter, while participants with few or no anxiety symptoms 
being more open to share their photos, information, and 
personal life with the Twitter online social media 
community.   
Considering the preliminary results found in this study, 
as well as previous research studies on social media and 
mental health, social media behaviors may be a useful source 
of information for individuals’ general mental health status. 
Thus, in our quest of wanting to provide more timely, cost 
effective, and broader coverage of mental health services, 
perhaps social media data analysis may provide a way 
forward. Also, such information could be potentially used as 
a novel and effective approach to identify, detect, and predict 
one’s mental health status other than traditional methods like 
self-reported information and screening tests, with two 
additional benefits. First, this approach is easy to implement 
and it includes rich content coverage of an individual’s 
online activities. Second, compared to traditional methods, 
this approach could provide more efficient, objective, and 
unbiased information sources since it is entirely based on 
individuals’ behaviors in their daily life without their 
awareness of being assessed or tested when applying 
traditional methods. 
However, it is important to address privacy violations 
that may occur given the fact that people with reported 
anxiety symptoms could be identified according to their 
social media activities. There are already some commercial 
companies or third-party services using social media users’ 
data to categorize them into certain groups and send targeted 
advertisements [21]. While data sharing and personal 
identification 
might 
be 
unavoidable 
given 
current 
circumstances for the online environment, it is vital to 
recognize the importance of user privacy protections since 
social media users with mental health disorders may be more 
vulnerable and sensitive. Thus, such social media analytics 
should only be considered if and when privacy protections 
are of the highest priority. 
Still, more research studies are needed to pave the way 
forward as our study is the first one and it includes some 
limitations. First, although our preliminary results suggest 
relationships between individuals’ social media activities and 
their mental health status, especially anxiety level, more 
research studies with larger sample of participants and more 
accurate mental health assessment are necessary to confirm 
the results since the sample size is small and the mental 
health assessment is based on self-reported information. The 
crowdsourcing platform (MTurk) used for recruitment in this 
study also has its own limitations such as not being a 
representative of all populations and only including online 
participants. Second, only U.S. participants were selected to 
be involved in this study, but young adults from other 
counties may have different social media behaviors because 
of cultural differences. Studies on other social media 
platforms, such as Facebook and Instagram are also 
suggested to analyze individual’s behaviors on various social 
media platforms, since this study only focused on one 
specific platform (Twitter). In addition, while social media 
activities could provide supplemental information for 
clinicians and researchers when assessing individual’s 
mental health status, it is also important to address privacy 
protections when such level of personal information is 
involved.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This research study shows initial findings that 
individuals’ social media behaviors may be relevant to their 
mental health status, and people with symptoms of anxiety 
may behave differently than people without such symptoms. 
Information from social media activities could potentially be 
considered as a new method for mental health assessment 
and treatment along with traditional methods given how 
much it reveals an individual’s personality and daily life. 
Results from this study may provide the initial steps towards 
a new direction in mental healthcare services that can be 
timely and reach broad and diverse populations.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
National Institute of Mental Health, Any Anxiety Disorder, 
Retrieved: 
August, 
2020 
from 
https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/any-anxiety-
disorder.shtml. 
[2] 
Harvard Medical School, National Comorbidity Survey (NCS), 
Retrieved: 
August 
2020 
from 
https://www.hcp.med.harvard.edu/ncs/index.php, 2007. 
[3] 
Behavioral Health in the United States, Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration, n.d., 7 February 2016. 
[4] 
J. Weissman et al, "Disparities in health care utilization and 
functional limitations among adults with serious psychological 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

distress, 2006–2014," Psychiatric Services, vol. 68, no.7, pp. 653-659, 
2017. 
[5] 
Social Media Fact Sheet, Pew Research Center, Retrieved: August, 
2020 from https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/fact-sheet/social-
media/, 2019. 
[6] 
D. C. Brooks, and J. Pomerantz, "ECAR Study of Undergraduate 
Students and Information Technology, 2017," EDUCAUSE, 2017. 
[7] 
I. Lunden, Twitter Q2 beats on sales of $841M and EPS of #0.20, 
new metric of mDAUs up to 139M, Retrieved: August, 2020 from 
https://techcrunch.com/2019/07/26/twitter-q2-earnings/, 2019. 
[8] 
Twitter, The power of Twitter, Retrieved: August, 2020 from 
https://business.twitter.com, 2019. 
[9] 
M. D. Choudhury et al, "Predicting depression via social media," 
Icwsm 13, pp. 1-10, 2013. 
[10] A. Whiting, and D. Williams, "Why people use social media: a uses 
and gratifications approach," Qualitative Market Research, vol. 16, 
no. 4, pp. 362-369, 2013. 
[11] H. A. Schwartz et al, "Personality, gender, and age in the language of 
social media: The open-vocabulary approach," PloS one, vol. 8, no. 9, 
e73791, 2013. 
[12] J. Golbeck, C. Robles, and K. Turner, "Predicting personality with 
social media," CHI'11 extended abstracts on human factors in 
computing systems, pp. 253-262, 2011. 
[13] M. Kosinski, D. Stillwell, and T. Graepel, "Private traits and 
attributes are predictable from digital records of human behavior," 
Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, vol. 110, no. 15, pp. 
5802-5805, 2013. 
[14] M. D. Choudhury, S. Counts, and E. Horvitz, "Predicting postpartum 
changes in emotion and behavior via social media," Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems, pp. 
3267-3276, 2013. 
[15] S. D. Young, "Behavioral insights on big data: using social media for 
predicting biomedical outcomes," Trends in microbiology, vol. 22, 
no. 11, pp. 601-602, 2014. 
[16] J. Rushmore et al. "Social network analysis of wild chimpanzees 
provides insights for predicting infectious disease risk," Journal of 
Animal Ecology, vol. 82, no. 5, pp. 976-986, 2013. 
[17] C. W. Schmidt, "Trending now: using social media to predict and 
track disease outbreaks," Environmental Health Perspectives, vol. 
120, no. 1, pp. a30-a33, 2012. 
[18] N. Vincent, "Social Media and Environmental Health Crises: An 
Examination of Public Response to Imported Drywall and Perchlorate 
Health Risks," American Public Health Association Annual Meeting 
and Exposition, Washington, DC, vol. 31, 2011. 
[19] N. Williams, "The GAD-7 questionnaire," Occupational Medicine, 
vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 224-224, 2014. 
[20] T. Wang, and M. Bashir, "A Study of Social Media Behaviors and 
Mental Health Wellbeing from a Privacy Perspective," International 
Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, vol. 1213, 
pp. 137-144, 2020. 
[21] K. Leetaru, What Does It Mean For Social Media Platforms To "Sell" 
Our 
Data? 
Forbes, 
Retrieved: 
August, 
2020 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/kalevleetaru/2018/12/15/what-does-it-
mean-for-social-media-platforms-to-sell-our-data/#1d8005892d6c, 
2018. 
[22] X. Guo, and J. Li, "A Novel Twitter Sentiment Analysis Model with 
Baseline Correlation for Financial Market Prediction with Improved 
Efficiency, " 2019 Sixth International Conference on Social Networks 
Analysis, Management and Security (SNAMS). IEEE, pp. 472-477, 
2019. 
[23] P. Madhala, J. Jussila, H. Aramo-Immonen, and A. Suominen, 
"Systematic literature review on customer emotions in social 
media," ECSM 2018 5th European Conference on Social Media, 
Academic Conferences and publishing limited, pp. 154, 2018. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

Managing Role Identities on Various Social Network Sites 
Analysis of the Use of Social Network Sites by Latvian Youth 
Velta Skolmeistere 
Faculty of Social Sciences 
University of Latvia 
Riga, Latvia 
email: velta.sk@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—Since the beginning of the Web 2.0 era, social 
network sites have been an important method of self-
presentation in the digital environment. Although the result of 
self-presentation is often reduced to a distinct digital identity, it 
can also be seen as a reflection of the complexity of the 
individual’s self, which includes various role identities one can 
possess. What makes social network sites as a research field 
interesting is the potential of context-collapse. In opposition to 
real life, where one can organize different flows of behavior for 
different audiences and situations of role identity activation, 
this environment exposes the individual to a combination of 
various audiences, thus, it is the individual's choice to select 
which role identities will be presented. This article offers a 
pilot research that focuses on the habits of presenting role 
identities on various social network sites, aiming to understand 
which role identities (for example, being a student, an 
employee, a friend, etc.) are more likely to be presented on 
which of the most popular social network sites (Facebook, 
Instagram, Snapchat). The methodology includes an assisted 
paper-based survey (n = 76, first-year college students in 
Latvia), consisting of production task and Likert scale 
statements. The results offer an evaluation of the potential of 
the tested methodology and give insight into some differences 
between various social network sites in the context of role 
identity presentation, as well as help to understand some of the 
challenges of self-presentations that are perceived by the youth 
when trying to take care of their digital self. 
Keywords-role identities; self-presentation; social network 
sites; youth. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent times, society has become much more complex; 
people tend to get involved in various activities and take on 
many status roles, therefore the number of life decisions to 
be made also continues to increase [1]. As education is 
available at various stages of life, multiple workplaces can be 
combined, and people can network while pursuing a 
common hobby or volunteering project. The increasing 
complexity of the society is tightly connected to the 
development of the social network culture where people 
maintain a few long-lasting ties and many accidental or 
temporary ties [2]. 
At the same time, the social media era has given a 
platform to social network sites that help individuals to 
construct their selves in the digital environments, as well as 
to build virtual connections with people significant to them 
[3]. 
The theoretical approach of symbolic interactionism 
states that the individual chooses which part of self to 
communicate depending on the conversational partner [4] or 
the public; also, the performance of one’s role depends on 
the presence of one’s counter-part [5]. 
Yet, the communication environment defined by the use 
of social network sites makes the picture more complicated, 
as it is often described by using the term context-collapse 
[6], meaning that the social and physical borders of various 
groups of people disappear, thus the individual is exposed to 
an unknown audience, causing overlap of different social 
circles. At the same time, people, especially youth, often use 
more than one social network site; this leads to the fact that 
there are multiple facets of self presented on social network 
sites. 
Taking into account the above-mentioned points, this 
paper advances the following research questions: 
1. Which role identities are more likely to be 
presented on which social network sites (Facebook, 
Instagram, Snapchat)? 
2. How do the youth perceive the presentation of role 
identities, maintaining a coherent image and 
avoiding contradictions between the meanings 
implied by the various roles? 
3. How is the view of the youth influenced by the 
multiplicity of the social network sites they use? 
This being a pilot research, the sample consists of 76 
first-year college students in Latvia, all being 18 – 20 years 
old. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 
2, the theoretical background of the research is described, 
which consists of the ideas of symbolic interactionism 
regarding self and identities, as well as differing approaches 
on separating digital self from real-life self. Section 3 offers 
an outline of the methodology used. Section 4 presents the 
most important findings of the pilot research. In section 5, 
the conclusion is given, as well as the limitations, and the 
advantages of the current research are evaluated. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
The approach chosen for the paper is based on symbolic 
interactionism (opting for its structural direction, instead of 
the traditional one), as well as key insights about digital self 
and self-presentation on social network sites. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

A. Multiplicity of Self and Role Identities 
Symbolic interactionism sprung from the ideas of G. H. 
Mead [4], who spoke of self as a social structure born in 
social experience and reflected in communication. Although 
the meanings are conveyed through communication and 
conversation, later on, it can be a mere cognitive process, as 
the individual already has ideas about how he/she is 
perceived. What Mead also stated was that, in the 
communication, the individual does not reflect all of self, but 
rather a part of self - the aspect of the self that is relevant to 
the context. 
Being affiliated to a group was defined by G. Simmel [7] 
not only as a component for the formation of an objective 
group, but also a forming aspect of one’s personality, as each 
individual realized the participation in a group in a unique 
way; thus, the combination of multiple groups one is 
affiliated with “creates in a turn a new subjective element”. 
The idea of the role as a basis for an identity (a subunit of 
a multifaceted self [5]) was taken up by G. J. McCall and J. 
L. Simmons, who described role-identity as an imaginative 
view of a person of oneself that is based on what one thinks 
of oneself as an occupant of a specific position [8]. 
Regarding the specific meanings, each role identity includes 
idiosyncratic 
and 
conventional 
meanings, 
thus, 
the 
individual, on one hand, follows some of the societal norms, 
and, on the other hand, creates one’s own performance of the 
role. 
B. Digital Self and Presentation of Identities on Social 
Network Sites 
The approaches on how to differentiate the digital self (or 
identity) from the “real-life” self have changed over time, as 
the role of social media in everyday life has increased and 
the meanings of both environments almost completely 
overlap. Yet, it is important to mention one of the first 
explanations of identity in cyberspace, given by S. Turkle. 
She used a metaphor of windows to emphasize that any 
opened site can offer a possibility of self-transformation and 
development of a new self, which is a great alternative to 
having just one real-life self [9]. However, when keeping in 
mind the complex personality one has described in the 
previous sub-section, it might be more rational to stick to the 
view of S. Zhao who used the term “digital self” to address 
the self, expressed in the digital environment, yet, which is 
not considered as a different part of a person, rather a 
dimension of communication [10]. 
All that being said, when an individual acknowledges the 
presence of various social groups in social network sites, 
he/she must make a decision (even if unconscious) of which 
role identities to present and fulfill in each of the sites, at the 
same 
time 
working 
his/her 
way 
through 
possible 
discrepancies. This problem is the focus of the paper. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The research uses a survey conducted in person. Because 
of the complexity of questionnaire design, in person 
communication was needed. The sample consists of 76 first-
year college students (18 – 20 years old). 
The first part of the survey consists of a production task – 
a table where each person was asked to fill in the roles he/she 
considered to possess and all of the social network sites 
he/she used on a regular basis. Then, each person was asked 
to select which identity they considered they presented on 
each of the social network sites; also, each person was asked 
to evaluate how important each of the identities was (using a 
scale from 1 to 10). 
The second part of the survey included 24 statements 
about the process of maintaining a coherent image on social 
network sites to be evaluated using a Likert Scale. Among 
them, there were statements about maintaining a united 
image, being aware of contradictions between various roles, 
trying to present most of the roles one possesses, as well as 
whether or not one reflects about the possible reactions of 
various audiences, etc. 
IV. 
EARLY RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
When considering the differences between various social 
network sites, some peculiarities could be observed. 
Facebook was most likely to be used for presenting the 
student role (92% of students using it considered this identity 
as presented there; whereas, for Instagram it was 64% and 
for Snapchat – 67%), as well as for professional, volunteer, 
child and relative identity. Yet, speaking about professional 
identity, it could be observed that when a person considered 
this identity to be important, he/she was more likely to 
present it on Facebook. In turn, if the importance of the role 
was evaluated as low, he/she was more likely to present it on 
both Instagram and Snapchat. This fact could be interpreted 
as willingness to complain about having a boring work or 
other similar messages to peers, instead of presenting oneself 
in a professional context (here, it should be mentioned that 
very 
few 
respondents 
claimed 
to 
use 
LinkedIn). 
Consequently, the representation of a specific role may rely 
on one’s relationship with the role or attitude toward its 
realization. 
Also, there were some significant correlations between 
some of the statements and the facts drawn from the 
production task. For example, people who tended to agree 
with the statement “It is complicated to take care of one’s 
image in the digital environment” were also more likely to 
provide a greater number of various social network sites they 
used for self-presentations (.308; sig.=.007; here and further 
the Spearman correlation coefficient is used, where the first 
number is the correlation coefficient, while the second 
number describes the significance level – the smaller, the 
more significant), and to agree with the statement “Some of 
the roles I possess restrict what I can / want to post on social 
network sites” (.284; sig.=.011). It was also visible that more 
youth (52%) tended to agree with a statement that they feel 
worried about reactions to their content by people they did 
not want to show the content to, yet, fewer of them (37%) 
were worried that there were strangers who saw the content. 
This goes together with the view of D. Boyd [6], who 
emphasized that the youth see privacy as being protected 
from being observed by people they know (mostly 
authorities, for instance, parents or teachers), meanwhile 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics

striving for publicity and being seen by broader audience of 
people they do not know. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The correlations help to understand that the maintenance 
of a coherent digital self is considered as a more complex 
task when more role identities and more social network sites 
are involved, as well as when this process is rather conscious 
(people tend to reflect about it).  
However, the stage of life when one starts to attend a 
college is also a period when the set of role identities is not 
stable yet and a lot of transformation is experienced. 
Although these youth have more potential role identities than 
previously, during the school years, adults could have a 
wider range of role identities and a more complex approach 
to control their presentation. Having said that, a broader 
sample could bring many interesting findings, yet, the 
interpretation of the current results makes it clear that, in 
order to explore the process that regards identities, an 
integration of qualitative methods would be helpful to assign 
meaning to the various approaches of the individuals 
revealed by the quantitative data. Analysis of the content 
posted by the individuals to present each of the roles also 
could be of interest to gain more concrete insights. 
Having that said, the pilot research aims to find a way to 
analyze the interaction and presentation of all the role 
identities one possesses, rather than focusing on some 
distinct ones. The data gathered serves as first insight in the 
exploration of the topic and can be used to understand the 
way the youth treat their digital self, possession of various 
roles, and being aware of the social network audience.  
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been funded by the Advanced Social and 
Political Research Institute project “The social aspects of 
the interaction between individuals and technologies” (Riga, 
Latvia; Project No. lzp-2018/2-0260). 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. C. Cuff, W. W. Sharrock, and D. W. Francis, “Perspectives in 
Sociology,” London: Routledge, pp. 194, 2005. 
[2] A. Pescosolido and B. Rubin, “The Web of Group Affiliations 
Revisited: Social Life, Postmodernism, and Sociology,” American 
Sociological Review, vol. 65, pp. 52 – 76, 2000. Available from: 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2657289 [Retrieved: September, 2020] 
[3] B. Light, “Disconnecting with Social Networking Sites,” Hampshire: 
Plagrave Macmillan, pp. 12 – 13, 2014. 
[4] G. H. Mead, “Mind, Self and Society from the Standpoint of a Social 
Behaviorist,” Chicago, IL: University of Chicago, 1934/1967. 
[5] S. Stryker, “Symbolic Interactionism: A Social Structural Version,” 
Caldwell, NJ: The Blackburn Press, 1980. 
[6] D. Booyd, “It’s Complicated: The Scoail Lives of Networked Teens,” 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Pres, 2014. 
[7] G. Simmel, “Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliation,” Glencoe, 
IL: The Free Press, pp. 140 – 141, 1955. 
[8] G. J. McCall and J. L. Simmons, “Identities and Interactions: An 
Examination of Human Associations in Everyday Life,” New York, 
NY: The Free Press, pp. 57, 1966/1978. 
[9] S. Turkle, “Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet,” 
New York, NY: Simon & Shuster Paperbacks, pp. 192, 1995. 
[10] S. Zhao, “The Digital Self: Through the Looking Glass of 
Telecopresent Others,” Symbolic Interaction, vol. 28, pp. 387 – 405. 
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1525/si.2005.28.3.387 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-832-7
SOTICS 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Social Media Technologies, Communication, and Informatics
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

