MESH 2013
The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
ISBN: 978-1-61208-299-8
August 25-31, 2013
Barcelona, Spain
MESH 2013 Editors
Eugen Borcoci, University "Politehnica" of Bucharest (UPB), Romania
Sandra Sendra Compte, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Spain

MESH 2013
Foreword
The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks [MESH 2013], held
between August 25-31, 2013 in Barcelona, Spain, built on the previous editions to address the
most challenging aspects for designing and deploying mesh networks.
The wireless mesh networks came to rescue the challenging issues related for predicting
the location of a user and choosing the position of access points in wireless distributed systems.
Basically mesh networks guarantee the connectivity through a multi-hop wireless backbone
formed by stationary routers. There is no differentiation between uplink and downlink, but
performance depends on the routing protocols. There are several challenging issues for
properly exploiting wireless mesh networks' features, such as fast-link quality variation, channel
assignments, performance, QoS-routing, scalability, slow/high speed mobile users, service
differentiation, and others.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the MESH 2013
Technical Program Committee, as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a high
quality conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also
kindly thank all the authors who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to
MESH 2013. We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program
consisted of top quality contributions.
Also, this event could not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the MESH 2013 organizing
committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this professional
meeting a success.
We hope that MESH 2013 was a successful international forum for the exchange of
ideas and results between academia and industry and for the promotion of progress in mesh
networks.
We are convinced that the participants found the event useful and communications very
open. We hope Barcelona provided a pleasant environment during the conference and
everyone saved some time for exploring this beautiful city.
MESH 2013 Chairs:
MESH Advisory Chairs
Eugen Borcoci, University "Politehnica" of Bucharest (UPB), Romania
Petre Dini, Concordia University, Canada / China Space Agency Center - Beijing, China
Andreas J. Kassler, Karlstad University, Sweden

MESH 2013 Industry Liaison Chairs
Michael Bahr, Siemens AG - München, Germany
Vladimir Sulc, Microrisc s. r. o. - Jicin, Czech Republic
MESH 2013 Research/Industry Chairs
Mathilde Benveniste, Wireless Systems Research/En-aerion, USA
MESH 2013 Publicity Chair
Sandra Sendra Compte, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Spain
MESH 2013 Special area Chairs
Ad Hoc
Karoly Farkas, University of West Hungary / Budapest University of Technology and Economics,
Hungary
WiMax
Jens Myrup Pedersen, Aalborg University - Aalborg Øst, Denmark
QoS/Routing
Mats Björkman, Mälardalen University, Sweden
Testbeds
Stefan Bouckaert, Ghent University - IBBT, Belgium
João Paulo Barraca, University of Aveiro, Portugal

MESH 2013
Committee
MESH Advisory Chairs
Eugen Borcoci, University "Politehnica" of Bucharest (UPB), Romania
Petre Dini, Concordia University, Canada / China Space Agency Center - Beijing, China
Andreas J. Kassler, Karlstad University, Sweden
MESH 2013 Industry Liaison Chairs
Michael Bahr, Siemens AG - München, Germany
Vladimir Sulc, Microrisc s. r. o. - Jicin, Czech Republic
MESH 2013 Research/Industry Chairs
Mathilde Benveniste, Wireless Systems Research/En-aerion, USA
MESH 2013 Publicity Chair
Sandra Sendra Compte, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Spain
MESH 2013 Special area Chairs
Ad Hoc
Karoly Farkas, University of West Hungary / Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary
WiMax
Jens Myrup Pedersen, Aalborg University - Aalborg Øst, Denmark
QoS/Routing
Mats Björkman, Mälardalen University, Sweden
Testbeds
Stefan Bouckaert, Ghent University - IBBT, Belgium
João Paulo Barraca, University of Aveiro, Portugal
MESH 2013 Technical Program Committee

Michael Bahr, Siemens AG - München, Germany
Paolo Ballarini, Ecole Centrale de Paris, France
Mostafa Bassiouni, University of Central Florida - Orlando, USA
Francisco Jose Bellido Outeiriño, University of Cordoba, Spain
Roberto Beraldi, University of Rome "La Sapienza", Italy
Mats Björkman, Mälardalen University, Sweden
Eugen Borcoci, University "Politehnica" of Bucharest (UPB), Romania
Fernando Cerdan, Universidad Politecnica de Cartagena, Spain
Edna Dias Canedo, Universidade de Brasília - UnB Gama, Brazil
Karoly Farkas, University of West Hungary / Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary
Gianluigi Ferrari, University of Parma, Italy
Li-Ling Hung, Aletheia University, Taiwan
Jarkko Kneckt, Nokia Corporation - Helsinki, Finland
Volker Köster, TU Dortmund, Germany
Ha Cheol Lee, Yuhan University, Bucheon City, Korea
Hamid Menouar, QU Wireless Innovations Center - Doha, Qatar
João Paulo Barraca, University of Aveiro, Portugal
Jens Myrup Pedersen, Aalborg University - Aalborg Øst, Denmark
Ravi Prakash, University of Texas at Dallas, USA
Saquib Razak, Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar, Qatar
Curtis Sahd, Rhodes University, South Africa
Susana Sargento, University of Aveiro, Institute of Telecommunications - Pole of Aveiro, Portugal
Young-Joo Suh, Pohang University of Science and Technology - Pohang, Korea
David R. Surma, Indiana University South Bend, USA
Dirk Timmermann, Universität Rostock, Germany
Tzu-Chieh Tsai, National Chengchi University, Taiwan
Fabrice Valois, INSA - Lyon, France
Christian Wietfeld, TU Dortmund University, Germany
Sherali Zeadally, University of the District of Columbia, USA
Krzysztof Zielinski, AGH University of Science and Technology - Kraków, Poland

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Blue Bridge and Linkage - Connecting Africa through 802.11, Bluetooth and Raspberry Pis
Curtis Sahd and Hannah Thinyane
1
Addressing the Effects of Missing Receiver Problem in Access Networks
Mthulisi Velempini
8
Vertical Handover in Wireless Mesh Networks and its Impact on Routing
Ferdawss Douma and Rafik Braham
14
Throughput Improvement of a Range-aware WiFi network by Minimizing Signal Interference
Jie Zhang, HwaJong Kim, GooYeon Lee, and Yong Lee
20
XMPP Distributed Topology as a Potential Solution for Fog Computing
Jonathan Bar-Magen Numhauser and Jose Antonio Gutierrez de Mesa
26
Flow Classification in Delay-Aware NUM-Oriented Wireless Mesh Networks
Przemyslaw Walkowiak, Maciej Urbanski, Mateusz Poszwa, and Radoslaw Szalski
33
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

 
Blue Bridge and Linkage 
Connecting Africa through 802.11, Bluetooth and Raspberry Pis 
 
Curtis Sahd and Hannah Thinyane 
Department of Computer Science 
Rhodes University 
Grahamstown, South Africa 
{curtissahd@gmail.com, h.thinyane@ru.ac.za}
 
 
 
Abstract—Public Switched Telephone Networks (PSTNs) are 
predominantly comprised of proprietary protocols and are not 
well suited to integration with the ever expanding Voice over 
IP (VoIP) network. PSTNs have evolved from analogue circuit 
switched systems and purely fixed line services, to the digital 
and mobile realms, but still remain proprietary. With the 
advent of wireless technologies and the explosion in VoIP 
services, the combination of these two technologies results in a 
large number of integration possibilities and inter-connection 
of systems. In this paper, we show how existing technologies 
can be used in the creation of community telephone networks. 
Specifically, we provide an overview of our system (Blue 
Bridge), which performs the bridging of Bluetooth and IEEE 
802.11 wireless. We also provide an overview of the associated 
lightweight hybrid protocol (Linkage), which delivers status 
updates and data transmissions. 
Keywords-Bluetooth 
bridging; 
Community 
telephone 
networks; Linkage; Raspberry Pi; Wireless mesh networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs) and VoIP have 
become key players in IP-based telephony services and have 
revolutionized the industry in terms of cost, geographically 
constrained infrastructure and service, and interoperability 
between devices [6]. 
WMNs can be defined as dynamic self configuring 
networks in which all nodes have the ability to route traffic 
directly to the endpoint, or via a multi-hop path. The network 
is dynamic, which enables it to deal with nodes entering the 
network, as well as nodes leaving the network due to node 
failure or connectivity issues [8]. WMNs are comprised of 
two types of nodes: mesh routers and mesh clients [1]. Mesh 
routers provide similar functions to traditional wireless 
routers, except that they provide more routing functions 
which are suited to WMNs. Mesh routers achieve the same 
coverage as traditional routers, but with less transmission 
power, by means of multi-hop communications [1]. Mesh 
clients can also work as routers, but do not have gateway or 
bridge functionality as found with mesh routers. WMN 
architecture is an important consideration when determining 
how and where the WMN should be implemented. WMN 
architecture can be classified according to three primary 
implementations: infrastructure WMNs, client WMNs, and 
hybrid WMNs [2]. The backbone of an Infrastructure WMN 
is predominantly comprised of mesh routers with which 
mesh clients associate.  
Client 
WMNs 
provide 
peer-to-peer 
network 
functionality, and are mostly comprised of mesh clients 
which perform the routing of packets. 
Hybrid WMNs are a combination of Infrastructure and 
Client WMNs, with the infrastructure being comprised of 
both mesh routers and mesh clients [2].  
The concept of WMNs has been around for quite some 
time, and the development of protocols which enable the 
efficient functioning of these networks has been a core focus 
area. Since the inception of  VoIP, the way in which we 
communicate has drastically changed, enabling long distance 
phone calls at a fraction of the cost when compared to 
previous years. Although easily and universally accessible, 
VoIP communication has traditionally taken place with 
somewhat limited mobility, with instances such as calls 
being made from fixed landlines and scattered wireless 
hotspots. There still exists a heavy reliance on mobile 
networks utilizing proprietary protocols, and with the cost of 
data being close to that of calls, the reality of reliable VoIP 
communication over mobile networks is an optimistic idea. 
Over and above the cost of data communications on mobile 
networks, the filtering and throttling of VoIP protocols on 
these networks is not an uncommon practice [7] [12]. 
Extensive development of the IEEE 802.11 wireless protocol 
has taken place and drastically increased the ease with which 
we are able to communicate, as well as the general mobility 
of people and services. IEEE 802.11 wireless technology 
provides reliable mobile communication with equipment 
costs being a fraction of those encountered with traditional 
radio networks.  
A community, city, and even country wide WMN 
running open standards can prove to be a feasible solution in 
providing cost effective communication along with ease of 
integration and expandability.  
As such, we propose the implementation of a WMN-
based Community Telephone Network (CTN), which 
enables communication for Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

wireless clients by means of distributed bridging nodes (Blue 
Bridges) and a lightweight protocol enabling Push To Talk 
(PTT) communication and signaling (Linkage). Section II 
provides an overview of the Bluetooth protocol and the 
benefits it provides in the South African context, as well as 
the associated constraints. Section III introduces PTT 
systems and provides a brief overview of how they aid in 
minimizing scalability concerns and constraints inherent in 
the Bluetooth protocol. Section IV, then introduces CTNs 
and outlines the benefits of such networks as well as a brief 
literature review of the common issues encountered with 
these networks. Section V builds on the ideas introduced and 
discussed in the aforementioned sections and discusses the 
various components of our prototype system (Blue Bridge). 
Section VI provides an in depth discussion of the functioning 
of our hybrid notification and communication protocol 
(Linkage). Future work is discussed in Section VII and this 
paper is then concluded in Section VIII. 
II. 
BLUETOOTH OVERVIEW 
Bluetooth is a low powered, low cost, and short range 
wireless Radio Frequency (RF) technology, which operates 
in the unlicensed 2.4 GHz Industrial Scientific Medical 
(ISM) frequency range [9]. Bluetooth is comprised of three 
classes ranging from 1m to 100m. Bluetooth was originally 
developed to alleviate the problems caused by incompatible 
connectors, and also as a cable replacement technology [3]. 
Although, while very limited in terms of bandwidth and 
scalability, Bluetooth proves to be a widely adopted protocol 
in South Africa, with a large portion of the population not 
able to afford IEEE 802.11 wireless enabled mobile phones. 
Bluetooth communication is typically used in Wireless 
Personal Area Networks (WPANs), which are best suited to 
ad hoc communication between devices within close 
proximity of one another. Piconets are the most common 
type of Bluetooth WPAN, and enable communication 
between a maximum of 7 active slave nodes and 1 master 
node. Master nodes control the ability of slave nodes to 
transmit on the channel [4]. 
The obvious drawback of Piconets is the maximum 
number of nodes which are able to simultaneously 
communicate. The total available bandwidth for Class 2 
Bluetooth chips (commonly found in mobile devices) is 800 
kb/s, which severely limits Bluetooth in terms of scalability 
[4]. PTT-based communication requires minimal bandwidth 
and also places a low memory footprint on constrained 
devices such as those commonly used throughout 
impoverished communities in South Africa. The next section 
provides a brief overview of PTT systems. 
 
III. 
PUSH TO TALK COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
PTT communication is a well-known system used in two 
way radios, which eliminates the need for call signaling 
procedures encountered in traditional cellular calls. PTT calls 
can be established between two users, or alternatively, in 
group communication, between multiple users [2]. PTT-
based communication systems prove to be considerably more 
cost effective than cellular or landline-based services in that 
charges are only deducted for the time used while speaking, 
and not for the elapsed time of the call.  
Some of the benefits of IP-based PTT systems include: 
faster communication and less call setup overhead, group 
communication, integration with existing applications on 
LANs, unlimited range and improved costs [12]. PTT-based 
systems can be compared to instant messaging systems in 
that communication is instant and requires minimal call 
setup and signaling. Apart from faster communication than 
traditional 
systems, 
PTT 
systems 
provide 
group 
communication, which proves to be incredibly cost effective 
in organizations consisting of teams of employees. One of 
the major drawbacks of two way radio communication is the 
range at which communication can occur. LAN-based PTT 
systems overcome the range limitation of traditional radio 
network PTT systems and integrate with existing network 
infrastructure and software. 
LAN-based PTT systems prove to be a cost effective 
solution to communication in the African context, and as 
such we have chosen a PTT-based system for the 
implementation of our CTN.  
The next section introduces WMN-based CTNs and 
shows the relationship between the number of hops and 
supported calls on the network. 
 
IV. 
COMMUNITY TELEPHONE NETWORKS 
The idea of VoIP communications over IEEE 802.11 
wireless networks is by no means a novel one, and the 
benefits of such implementations are well researched with 
plenty of optimizations available [6]. For the purposes of this 
research, we will define CTNs as those which are run by the 
community, for the community, consisting of open protocols, 
and subscribed to with very little or no cost. We envision the 
architecture of CTNs, to be comprised of either fixed 
wireless access points spanning the area of the community 
concerned, or WMNs where clients participating in the CTN 
are an extension to the network and its functionality.  
In the case of WMN-based CTNs, it is important to 
understand the effect of multiple hops between clients on the 
efficient functioning of the network. Ganguly et al. [6]  
found that eight calls are supported when each call utilizes a 
single hop on a 2 Mb/s wireless link en route its destination. 
They observed that as the number of hops increased from 
one to four on the 2 Mb/s wireless link, the number of 
supported calls decreased from eight to one. They suggest, 
that reason for the drastic drop in the number of supported 
calls is in converse relation to the number of hops. This can 
be attributed to the following: 1) a decrease in the User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP) throughput as a result of self 
interference; 2) large amount of packet loss due to the 
increased number of hops and the subsequent need for 
forwarding; 3) a high protocol overhead for the small VoIP 
packet sizes (20 bytes for IEEE 802.11 IP/UDP/RTP). They 
suggest two approaches which reduce the effects of multiple 
hops on the number of simultaneous calls supported: packet 
aggregation and packet header compression. They found a 
200% - 300% increase in the capacity by implementing these 
methods. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Due to the dynamic creation and association capabilities 
of WMNs, they are ideal for peer-to-peer-based systems and 
are thus very suitable as the underlying platform for CTNs. 
As seen in [1] and [6], the main constraint regarding WMNs 
is the number of hops and the throughput each hop is capable 
of carrying.  
Apart from being limited by the number of hops and 
available bandwidth, WMNs and Bluetooth often suffer from 
a large number of lost packets which are related to the 
interference caused by the plethora of devices operating in 
the 2.4 GHz frequency range. With an overview of PTT 
systems and CTNs, the next section introduces Blue Bridge, 
and demonstrates the important role it plays in the creation of 
cost effective CTNs in the South African context. 
 
V. 
BLUE BRIDGE 
Blue Bridge aims to combine the Bluetooth and IEEE 
802.11 wireless protocols across a series of Raspberry Pi 
[11] computers, in an effort to create a CTN using existing 
technologies. Due to the transmission limitations of the 
Bluetooth protocol, we propose the implementation of Blue 
Bridge on multiple Raspberry Pi computers in order to create 
an array of Bluetooth hotspots. People within range of the 
Bluetooth hotspots will be able to connect to the CTN and in 
turn place calls to other parties connected via Bluetooth or 
IEEE 802.11 Wireless. 
In order to avoid a large amount of broadcast traffic in an 
already bandwidth constrained network, we found it 
necessary to centralize client specific information on the 
Centralized Authentication and Accounting Server (CAAS). 
Figure 1 shows architecture of our proposed CTN: 
 
 
Figure 1.  CTN Architecture 
From Figure 1, it can be seen that multiple Blue Bridges 
form the infrastructure of the WMN. Bluetooth and IEEE 
802.11 wireless clients connect to the CTN through nearby 
Blue Bridges. The CAAS minimizes broadcast traffic by 
centralizing the status of each client, as well as which router 
each client is currently associated with. In the event of 
clients moving between hotspot locations, updates are sent to 
the CAAS with the newly associated access point address 
and the status of the client. Multiple IEEE 802.11 wireless 
clients are able to associate with each Blue Bridge, however, 
a total of 7 active Bluetooth clients are able to communicate 
with each Blue Bridge due to constraints inherent in the 
Bluetooth protocol. 
Connections can be made to and from Blue Bridges via 
the external Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 Wireless interfaces 
attached through the USB ports on the Raspberry Pi.  Figure 
2 provides an overview of the internal structure of each Blue 
Bridge and shows how connections on the same interface as 
well as varying interfaces are bridged: 
 
 
Figure 2.  Blue Bridge Architecture 
From Figure 2, it can be seen from step (ii) that incoming 
Bluetooth connections (via the Bluetooth Receiver) are sent 
to the Central Bridge Unit (CBU), which performs the 
necessary bridging and compression and forwards the data 
and control packets to the called party on the IEEE 802.11 
wireless interface (IEEE 802.11 Wireless Transmitter). Since 
the concerned Blue Bridge is connected to other Blue 
Bridges via the WMN, incoming Bluetooth connections can 
be connected to any other client on the network without 
encountering typical range limitations inherent in the 
Bluetooth protocol. Incoming connections via the IEEE 
802.11 wireless interface can similarly be bridged with 
clients on the attached Bluetooth interface. 
In the event where two clients connected to the same 
Blue Bridge 
via 
the Bluetooth 
interface 
want 
to 
communicate, a connection from the calling party is first 
made to the Blue Bridge which then forwards the connection 
to the called party. This process can be seen in Figure 2 (i). 
In terms of enabling communication between clients 
communicating with one another via Bluetooth, there is no 
need for the Blue Bridge to perform any bridging functions 
or be involved with the communication process at all. With 
that 
said, 
a 
number 
of 
advantages 
of 
routing 
calls/communication via the Blue Bridge exist: the ability to 
perform authentication and accounting functions, which 
provides useful statistics for network and call monitoring; the 
ability to create and participate in group calls where clients 
are distributed across the CTN. There are of course 
disadvantages of routing local connections via the Blue 
Bridge: since the Bluetooth Master (Bluetooth interface of 
each Blue Bridge) communicates with other locally 
connected Bluetooth clients, the bandwidth is divided among 
each connected client and thus reduces the quality of calls; 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

and increased processing requirements are placed on each 
Blue Bridge. 
An SDL diagram of the functioning of the Blue Bridge 
can be seen in Figure 5. The process can be outlined as 
follows: the Blue Bridge listens for and accepts new 
connections. Upon accepting a connection the Blue Bridge 
attempts to find the routing information and status of the 
called client locally (and if not found locally, the CAAS is 
queried, as seen in Figure 4). This process is illustrated by 
(a) in Figure 5. Upon finding the routing information for the 
destination device, the Blue Bridge determines the interface 
from which the data should be sent (as seen in b). If the 
destination device is connected via the IEEE 802.11 wireless 
interface, data is forwarded between the concerned devices 
(as seen in steps c and d). However, if the destination device 
is connected via the Bluetooth interface, the number of active 
connections needs to be determined (as seen in g). If the 
number of active Bluetooth connections is less than or equal 
to 7, then data is forwarded between the participating devices 
(as seen in h). In the event where the number of active 
connections is greater than 7, the Blue Bridge terminates the 
connection and sends the "calling" status to the CAAS as 
well as the client (not depicted in Figure 5). 
With an overview of Blue Bridge and how it performs the 
bridging of the Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 Wireless 
protocols, the next section introduces our signaling and voice 
payload protocol, Linkage. 
VI. 
LINKAGE 
Although each Blue Bridge performs the bridging 
between the IEEE 802.11 wireless and Bluetooth protocols, 
without the ability for Blue Bridges to communicate, the 
CTN would cease to exist. We therefore propose Linkage, 
which facilitates inter-communication between Blue Bridges 
and between each Blue Bridge and the CAAS. Linkage is a 
lightweight hybrid (UDP and TCP) protocol, which performs 
the following functions: determining status updates and 
which Blue Bridge each client is currently associated with; 
informing the CAAS of new clients connected at each Blue 
Bridge; informing the CAAS of existing clients associating 
with new Blue Bridges; status updates between clients, and 
between Blue Bridges and the CAAS; and the transportation 
of traffic between Blue Bridges  and clients. 
Traditional voice communication is generally session-
based, which means that communication between clients and 
servers 
is 
request-response-based. 
Since 
voice 
communication is essentially the transmission of voice data 
from one client to another and the subsequent playback of 
this voice data at the receiving end, we decided to abandon 
the traditional session-based model of voice communication. 
As such, packets are transmitted from one client to another 
(via Blue Bridges) in a best effort attempt without the need 
for exchange of information between clients.  
We envision a CTN, to be one in which all protocols are 
open and easily expandable. As such, we designed Linkage 
in such a way that it can be extended beyond its original 
function (transportation of voice data between Blue Bridges 
and clients) and transport various other types of traffic by 
means of custom field addition in the protocol structure. 
In order for communication between clients to take place, 
the following processes are followed: 
 
1. The calling client communicates with the 
CAAS to determine which Blue Bridge the 
destination client is currently associated with. 
2. Once the calling client has knowledge of the 
destination Blue Bridge, it then sends data 
(voice data in the case of our CTN) via Linkage 
to the destination Blue Bridge. 
3. Upon receipt of voice data the concerned Blue 
Bridge utilizes the information contained within 
Linkage to route the packet to the destination 
client. 
4. The destination client can then respond to the 
calling client by utilizing information contained 
within Linkage.  
 
In order to better understand how Linkage performs the 
necessary functions required for the implementation of a 
CTN we provide an overview of the protocol structure and 
the components used throughout the process above. 
 
Figure 3 shows the structure of Linkage packet: 
  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Linkage packet structure 
Due to the nature of our CTN and for the purposes of 
efficiency, we utilized the UDP protocol as the underlying 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

protocol for communication between the clients and Blue 
Bridges, and the TCP protocol for communication between 
Blue Bridges and the CAAS. UDP was chosen as the primary 
protocol between clients and Blue Bridges due to the fact that 
potential lost packets would only result in a decrease in audio 
quality and would not cause the CTN to cease functioning. 
TCP 
was 
chosen 
as 
the 
preferred 
protocol 
for 
communication between Blue Bridges and the CAAS to 
ensure reliable conveyance of client status information, new 
client registrations, and reporting of statistical data. 
For 
the 
purposes 
of 
client 
and 
Blue 
Bridge 
communication, we propose the addition of the following 
fields to the UDP protocol: Linkage specific fields, and the 
payload data field which carries the voice data. In cases 
where Linkage is used merely for informational transfer, the 
payload data field is left empty. 
From Figure 3, it can be seen that the Linkage fields are 
as follows: the packet ID field; client source information; 
and client destination information. 
The PacketID field uniquely identifies each packet for 
the purposes of accounting, and returned routable responses. 
The client source is comprised of the telephone number 
of the calling client; the IP address of the source Blue 
Bridge; the current state of the client; the total number of 
packets being transmitted during the voice communication 
session (if applicable); the current progress of the voice 
transmission (if applicable); and any additional number of 
custom fields. The current progress, and total number of 
packets for the voice communication session, play an 
important role in optimizing the CTN in that they allow the 
CAAS to change the status of communicating clients as soon 
as the voice transmission is complete. These fields also 
ensure that statuses are updated in the event of lost packets. 
The client destination is comprised of the telephone 
number of the called party, the IP address of the destination 
router with which the called party is associated; and then any 
additional custom fields. Due to changing IP addresses, the 
client telephone numbers serve as the main identifier for 
communication in the CTN.  
A. Statuses and Notifications 
In order for the CAAS to be notified of new clients 
joining the CTN, the above Linkage packet is ideal in that 
new clients can encapsulate their telephone number, and the 
Blue Bridge with which they are associated, as well as their 
current status. In order to minimize network congestion and 
unnecessary strain on clients, Blue Bridges are required to 
inform the CAAS of new client associations as well as 
changes in client statuses. A client can have the following 
statuses: available; calling; and offline. 
It is important to notify calling clients of the status of 
called clients, so as to avoid engaged calls being mistaken 
for non-existent clients. An example of this would be, where 
Client A attempts to call Client B and Client B is currently 
participating in another call. As such, we have implemented 
a status field so as to notify the CAAS of the statuses of 
communicating clients. This scenario can be seen in Figure 
4: 
 
 
Figure 4.  Typical communication session 
From Figure 4, Client B and Client C are in a 
communication session with one another. Client A attempts 
to call Client B by querying Client B's information from 
Blue Bridge A (shown as (i) above). Since Blue Bridge A 
does not have any information pertaining to Client B, it then 
queries the CAAS for this information (show as (ii) above). 
The CAAS retrieves Client B's status from the database, and 
determines that Client B's status is "calling". The CAAS then 
alters the status field of the Linkage packet to "calling" and 
notifies Blue Bridge A (shown as (iii) above). Blue Bridge A 
then notifies Client A that Client B is engaged and terminates 
the connection (shown as (iv) above). 
A typical communication session between Client B and 
Client C can be seen in Figure 4. The communication 
process begins with Client B querying Blue Bridge B for 
information pertaining to Client C. The Linkage packet sent 
to Blue Bridge B contains the first media packet to be 
transmitted to Client C.  Since Blue Bridge B does not 
contain any routing information pertaining to Client C, it 
strips and stores the voice data temporarily while it attains 
this routing information from the CAAS (steps 2 and 3). If 
the CAAS determines that the status of Client C is 
"available" it updates Client C's status to "calling", which 
will prevent unnecessary call setup when other clients try to 
call Client B or C while in the "calling" state. 
Throughout the attainment of Client C's routing 
information, Client B continues to transmit voice data to 
Blue Bridge B. Blue Bridge B records packet information in 
a local MYSQL database which references the stored 
Adaptive Multi-Rate (AMR) media files. Once Blue Bridge 
B has determined the necessary routing information of Client 
C, it processes the stored queue of media data and transmits 
the packets to Blue Bridge C (as seen in step 4). Since Blue 
Bridge C has a local record of Client C being associated with 
it, packets can be sent directly to Client C without the need 
to obtain routing information from the CAAS (as seen in step 
5). Blue Bridge C's local database is then also updated with 
the routing information of Client B. In order to eliminate the 
storage of non-current client routing information, the local 
database of Blue Bridges is purged every 10 minutes. Client 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

C is then able to respond to Client B by sending the voice 
data to Blue Bridge C (as seen in step 6) which forwards the 
packet to Blue Bridge B (step 7). Blue Bridge B in turn 
forwards the data to Client B (step 8). Since both Blue 
Bridge B and C contain the necessary routing information, 
communication between Clients B and C then takes place via 
Blue Bridges B and C (independent of CAAS queries and 
updates).  
When Client B is done communicating with Client C, a 
status packet (stripped of all voice data) is sent to Blue 
Bridge B (step 9), which then updates the local database of 
the status of Client B. Blue Bridge B then notifies the CAAS 
of the status update (the two way arrow in the diagram 
indicates a TCP connection, which ensures delivery of the 
packet - step 11). Similarly, Client C, Blue Bridge C, and the 
CAAS perform the necessary updates and termination of the 
communication session as seen in steps 10 and 12.    
B. Lost Packets 
Since Linkage is a best effort based protocol operating 
across interference prone wireless protocols, the likelihood 
of lost packets is quite high. In order to minimize the effect 
of lost packets on the functioning of the CTN we transmit the 
state the client is currently in; the total number of packets to 
be transmitted; and the current progress of the transmission 
from each client transmitting data to its associated Blue 
Bridge. The last packet transmitted from either client 
contains the "available" state, which notifies the concerned 
Blue Bridge that the client is not participating in a 
communication session.  
In the event where the last packet is lost, the associated 
Blue Bridge is able to determine when the communication 
session should have ended based on the total number of 
packets and the last noted progress. The concerned Blue 
Bridge then terminates the connection and changes the status 
of the client to "available  
 
VII. FUTURE WORK 
Although channeling all communication through Blue 
Bridges may result in increased delays throughout the CTN, 
this type of architecture allows for the system to be extended 
by providing group calling functionality. This is made 
possible by Blue Bridges forwarding voice packets to 
everyone in a particular group. By enabling group broadcasts 
on Blue Bridges, processing requirements of constrained 
client handsets is reduced. The ability to provide instant 
messaging functionality, and create community polling and 
support systems are other possible extensions. Community 
polling is particularly useful in areas where there is a 
shortage of staff. This allows the community to inform the 
municipality of areas which require attention. These polling 
systems could also provide benefits for the security and 
emergency industries, providing a means for people to alert 
authorities in the event of an emergency.  
Our CTN network implementation currently only 
provides node status updates from Blue Bridges to the CAAS 
when calls between clients are complete; when new clients 
join 
the 
CTN, 
or 
when 
Blue 
Bridges 
terminate 
communication sessions in the event of suspected packet 
loss. The disadvantage of status updates only in these 
instances is that client statuses on communicating Blue 
Bridges are updated, but the CAAS does not have the most 
recent client statuses (except where clients have not 
communicated since their last session). A possible extension 
could be to enable client status updates upon Blue Bridges 
querying routing information for destination clients from the 
CAAS. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
This paper provided an overview of WMNs, CTNs and 
the Bluetooth protocol, as well as instances of how these 
technologies and systems are implemented in related work. 
This paper demonstrated a need for cost effective 
communication methods utilizing existing technologies and 
provided an architectural overview of our proposed CTN. 
This paper explained the benefits and potential constraints of 
the system, as well as possible solutions to these constraints. 
This paper identified the problems associated with voice 
communication in South Africa; provided an overview of 
existing systems and where they can be improved; and 
proposed a solution to these problems by means of bridging 
Bluetooth and IEEE 802.11 wireless connections on a series 
of Raspberry Pi computers (Blue Bridge). This paper also 
demonstrated how a CTN can be created through the inter-
connection of these Blue Bridges by means of the proposed 
protocol - Linkage. Finally, this paper suggested possible 
extensions to the current infrastructure and how these 
extensions could be implemented. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank our sponsors, the Telkom Centre 
of Excellence at Rhodes University, funded by Telkom SA, 
Business Connexion, Verso Technologies, THRIP, Stortech, 
Tellabs and the National Research Foundation. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. Ian Akyildiz, X. Wang, and W. Wang, "Wireless mesh 
networks: a survey," Computer Networks., 2005, vol. 47, no. 
4, pp. 445-487. 
[2] At&t., "Learn more about Push to Talk," 2012. Available at: 
http://www.wireless.att.com/learn/popups/push-talk-faq.jsp. 
[Accessed 04-10-2013]. 
[3] C. Bisdikian, "An overview of the Bluetooth wireless 
technology," Communications Magazine IEEE., 2001, vol. 
39, no. 12, pp. 86-94. 
[4] R. Bruno, M. Conti, and E. Gregori, "Bluetooth: Architecture, 
protocols and scheduling algorithms," Cluster Computing., 
2002, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 117-131. 
[5] M.C. Castro, P. Dely, J. Karlson, and A. Kassler, "Capacity 
Increase for Voice over IP Traffic through Packet 
Aggregation in Wireless Multihop Mesh Networks," IEE 
Journal., 2007, vol. 2, pp. 350-355. 
[6] S. Ganguly, V. Navda, K. Kim, A. Kashyap, D. Niculescu, R. 
Izmailov, S. Hong, and S.R. Das, "Performance Optimizations 
for delpoying VoIP Services in Mesh Networks," IEEE 
Journal, November 2006, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 2147-2158. 
[7] R. Huang, "Heavy-handed network throttling 'bad for 
business'," 2012. Available at: http://www.zdnet.com/heavy-
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

handed-network-throttling-bad-for-business-7000001953/. 
[Accessed 03-21-2013]. 
[8] J. Ishmael, S. Bury, D. Pezaros, and N.J.P Race, "Deploying 
rural community wireless mesh networks," IEEE Journal, 
2008, vol. 12, no 4, pp. 22-29. 
[9] P. Johansson, R. Kapoor, A. Kazantzidis, and M. Gerla, 
"Rendezvous scheduling in Bluetooth scatternets," IEEE 
International Conference., 2002, vol. 1,  pp. 318-324. 
[10] Push to Talk LTD., "Benefits of PTT," 2011. Available at: 
http://www.pushtotalkuk.com/push_to_talk_benefits.aspx. 
[Accessed 04-09-2013]. 
[11] Raspberry Pi., "An ARM GNU/Linux box for $25," 2012. 
Available at: http://www.raspberrypi.org. [Accessed 04-08-
2013]. 
[12] B. Tubb, "Operators deny VOIP throttling," 2013. Available 
at: 
http://www.itweb.co.za/index.php?option=com_content&vie
w=article&id=61979. 
[Accessed 
03-21-2013].
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Process diagram for proposed CTN 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Addressing the Effects of Missing Receiver Problem in Access Networks
Mthulisi Velempini 
Information Systems 
North-West University 
Mmabatho, South Africa 
mvelempini@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—The implementation of multi-channels at the MAC 
layer has created a new interference problem, the Missing 
Receiver Problem (MRP). The MRP is a multi-channel 
problem which relates to the 
use 
of 
multi-channels 
concurrently. As nodes communicate on different channels, 
they become unreachable and deaf. Bandwidth will be wasted 
when communication is initiated with deaf nodes. The paper 
evaluates the effects of MRP on network performance. The 
bandwidth of one control and two data channels is considered 
in relation to the size of control and data packets. Channel 
switching delay is also factored in the analysis. An analysis of 
channel bandwidth given the size of packets is presented. The 
proposed MRP solution is based on the cyclical scheduling 
algorithm, a proposed framework for solving multi-channel 
interference challenges. The framework is described at length 
and thereafter the analyses and the analytical results are 
discussed. The results show that the effects of the MRP can be 
reduced. 
Keywords-Channel 
Coordination; 
Channel 
Selection; 
Common Control Channel; Deafness; Missing Receiver Problem 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wireless Mesh Networks (WMN) can be deployed 
effectively as a community wireless access network. 
However, the capacity of WMN falls short in meeting the 
requirements of time bounded data, largely due to 
interferences, such as the Hidden Terminals, the Exposed 
Terminals and the Terminal Deafness Problem. In general, 
the implementation of multi-channel systems has availed 
more capacity for wireless systems and improved their 
performance. Nevertheless, the above mentioned problems 
still require to be addressed for the increased network 
capacity to be realized. 
WMN are widely touted as the possible future 
community access network offering high speed broadband 
connectivity offer last mile broadband wireless access. They 
overcome the shortcomings of ad hoc networks by 
overlaying or integrating mobile terminals with static nodes. 
The static nodes have high processing power, are more 
energy efficient and do act as a semblance of an 
infrastructure based network. However, more has to be done 
to position WMN as high speed last mile broadband wireless 
network solution. 
One of the proposed directions of research aimed at 
increasing network capacity exploits the availability of the 
multi-channels at the physical layer prompting the need to 
redesign the Medium Access Control (MAC) protocols to 
handle multiple channels. In general, the results of the multi-
channel schemes are encouraging [1] [2]. However, multi-
channel interferences, such as the MRP still require attention. 
This paper first presents in detail a proposed Cyclical 
Scheduling Algorithm (CSA), through which the multi-
channel interferences such as the MRP can be addressed. 
The CSA is the multi-channel coordination, scheduling and 
channel selection scheme which transmit data in phases. The 
MAC schedules data transmissions in cycles. It then presents 
the assumptions underpinning the MRP solution. The MRP 
solution is premised on wasted bandwidth, given the ratio of 
control channel dwell on time to the data channel dwell on 
time, when an instance of the MRP is encountered. 
The Missing Receiver Problem is caused by a would-be 
receiver, which is currently busy on a different channel either 
receiving or transmitting or just listening on it, while a 
sender is trying to send packets to it on a different channel. 
The sent packets fail to reach a receiver because the intended 
receiver would be tuned on a different channel. The MRP is 
caused by lack of synchronization between the sender and 
the receiver in multi-channel systems. The lack of 
synchronization of the sender and the receiver wastes 
bandwidth and network resources. 
The need to reduce multi-channel interferences and for 
multi-channel approaches at the MAC layer is discussed in 
Section 2. Section 3 discusses related work. The proposed 
CSA model is presented in Section 4. The impact of the 
MRP on network performance and the analytical results are 
presented in Section 5. Section 6 and Section 7 summarize 
the future work and the proposed model, respectively. 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
Mesh networks combine the advantages of ad hoc 
networks and infrastructure based networks into one 
community based network. Different access networks can be 
deployed in a community forming an auto configuring, self 
healing and self organizing mesh network. The need and the 
requirements of quality of service and the time bounded data 
can be met by well designed multi-channel mesh networks. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Multi-channel techniques are robust, flexible and do increase 
network capacity. However, the coordination, selection and 
scheduling of multi-channels needs to be explored further. 
The increase in network capacity in multi-channel 
systems comes at the expense of channel switching delay. 
The net effect of trading off channel switching cost with 
network capacity may improve the overall network 
performance.  
The multiple channels are available at the physical layer; 
unfortunately the MAC layer is not designed for multi-
channel systems; while the network layer is optimized for 
multi-channels and is designed to address the shortcomings 
of the MAC layer. The reconfiguration of the MAC will 
therefore, result in the realization of more capacity and 
flexibility. The channel selection, coordination and the 
terminal deafness challenges may be solved at the MAC 
layer for improved network performance.  
We propose a multi-channel cyclical scheduling 
algorithm and present it as a framework for solving multi-
channel interference problems.  The MRP solution which is 
based on the proposed multi-channel framework is then 
presented and evaluated analytically. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Maheshwari et al. [1] reduces the effects of MRP by 
employing a receiver initiated solution. Unfortunately, it 
only alerts transmitters which are in their back off intervals. 
A new collision technique may be required to resolve 
contention of two or more invited transmitters which respond 
to the same invitation simultaneously. Furthermore, the user 
based quiescent channels may lead to network portioning. 
Shi et al. [2] solve the multi-channel interference 
challenge through the synchronization of nodes on the 
control channel. However, synchronization is a challenge for 
mobile nodes.  
Toham and Jan [3] employ a multi-interfaces approach 
and it solves MRP at high overhead cost of hello messages 
which degrade the network performance. It is also expensive 
in terms of hardware requirements. Mo et al. [4] proposed a 
similar multi-interfaces scheme. It also solves the deafness 
problem at high hardware cost. 
Toham and Jan [3] argue that the use of a common 
control channel causes bottleneck. The implementation of a 
common control channel facilitates network connectivity and 
ensures that the network is not partitioned.  
Seo and Ma [5] proposed a synchronous scheme using 
one transceiver. The system broadcast channel releases 
messages, and keeps both a neighbor status list and a channel 
status list.  A significant percentage of bandwidth is lost in 
signaling and synchronization is a challenge. The proposed 
contention window may be too small in backlogged 
environments. 
A CTS packet reserves a channel in [6] and fails to notify 
nodes in the neighborhood of the transmitter. However, the 
use of two transceivers minimizes the effects of missing 
receivers albeit at high cost of hardware.  
Incidents of the missing receiver problem increase due to 
lack of coordination in multi-channel systems. The pair of 
nodes may be on two different channels or one node may 
switch to a different channel thereby becoming unreachable. 
When one node is busy on one channel while a number of 
nodes (at least one) are trying to communicate with it on 
different channels, an unreachable terminal is said to be deaf 
[7]. 
IV. 
THE SYSTEM MODEL  
The proposed CSA framework has four distinct 
components. The framework has the following techniques: 
the channel switching penalty, the Request To Send (RTS) 
based data channel reservation and access scheme, the inter-
cycle, and the phasing of data transmission in cycles. We 
describe each of these four aspects separately and then show 
how they are integrated. The framework employs one 
dedicated control channel and N number of data channels. 
We then show how the envisaged framework reduces the 
effects of MRP.  
The channel switching technique associates all the 
switching costs with the data channels. It considers two 
channel switching penalties. When a transceiver switches to 
and from a given data channel from the control channel it 
incurs two channel switching delays. When the transceiver 
switches to the data channel, it incurs a switching delay of 
224µs (the maximum cost specified by the IEEE 802.11 
standard) and the same duration is also incurred when it 
switches back onto the control channel. The effective 
channel switching delay is therefore set to 448µs to capture 
its double effect on data channels. The value of the switching 
delay is added to the data packet transmission duration.  
Ideally, this will keep a data channel busy for a longer 
duration. However, it improves the performance of the 
control channel and it increases its capacity to drive more 
data channels before it saturates. In general, this approach is 
capable of improving the overall system performance. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 1.  The channel switching penalty model. 
In Fig. 1a, we model the conventional approach where 
the next transmitter waits for the channel switching process 
to be performed first before contending for the control 
channel. All the terminals should be on the control channel 
before the next transmission is initiated. This approach 
wastes the capacity of the control channel and increases its 
saturation rate. The capacity of the control channel may be 
Control 
Control 
Switching 
Data 
Switching 
Idle 
Idle 
Idle 
Control 
Control 
Switching 
Data 
Switch 
Inter-Cycle 
Idle 
Idle 
Data 
Inter-Cycle 
 
Control 
Switching 
Idle 
Inter-Cycle 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

increased to improve the performance of the network. As 
shown in Fig. 1b, the capacity of the control channel has 
been improved. The control channel can now drive more 
data channels. In the proposed scheme, the data channel is 
reserved when it is about to finish the current transmission. 
As the current communicating pair switch back onto the 
control channel, the next pair switch onto the data channel. 
The terminals will cross each other as they switch to opposite 
directions. This equips the control channel with more 
capacity to support more data channels, which, in essence, 
increases its scheduling capacity and reduces its idleness. It 
should also be noted that there is no need in this case for 
nodes to perform a channel switching prior to control 
channel contention. 
The RTS-based data channel reservation and access 
scheme limit channel contention to the control channel. Two 
terminals intending to exchange data will contend for and 
reserve the control channel. Thereafter, there will not 
exchange packets to negotiate which data channel to reserve. 
The reservation of the data channels will be linked to the 
reservation of the control channel. This is possible in the 
CSA framework given the fact that data transmission is 
scheduled in phases. The control channel is reserved during 
timeslots in which a given data channel is known to be idle. 
The main goal of this scheme is to reduce the contention and 
channel reservation duration and to avail more bandwidth for 
network performance improvement.  
 
 
Figure 2.  The RTS based channel reservation scheme. 
In Fig. 2, the transmitter has to first identify idle data 
channels between time T and T1 and then sends the list to the 
receiver including its preferred data channel at T1. The 
receiver will also upon receiving the RTS packet at time T2, 
check whether the sender’s preferred data channel is also 
free at its end. It may check other data channels in the list if 
the preferred data channel is not available. Thereafter, it will 
send either the confirming or the rejecting CTS back to the 
transmitter [2]. These processes are shown in the top block.  
The bottom block shows the proposed approach where a 
sender does not have to first check whether the preferred data 
channel is indeed idle. The sender only includes one data 
channel in its RTS packet which is known to be idle and the 
receiver would be expected to accept it. The receiver will 
agree with the sender on the preferred data channel without 
having to first sense the medium. The sender chooses a 
preferred data channel without sensing the medium using 
virtual carrier sensing and network support scheme. The 
nodes are, therefore, able to determine when channels would 
be idle without relying on both the physical and the virtual 
carrier sensing mechanisms.  
The implementation of the RTS-based data channel 
reservation assumes that the data channels would be 
available when the sender reserves the control channel. The 
receiver will therefore be expected to agree with the sender 
on the preferred data channel. 
The inter-cycle scheme marks the beginning and the end 
of a given cycle. It defines the shortest duration a data 
channel will be busy before it is available for the next data 
transmission in the next cycle. It is the hold off duration 
which forces all terminals intending to use a given data 
channel to hold off their next transmissions long enough to 
allow data packets to be delivered successfully. In essence 
the inter-cycle is the time when the last control packet was 
received in the previous cycle to the time the next control 
packet is sent in the next cycle. 
The inter-cycle duration is not fixed it varies with the 
number of data channels implemented. It is inversely related 
to the number of data channels. It has the longest duration 
when there are only two data channels and its length 
decreases as more data channels are added.  
 
Figure 3. The Inter-Cycle Scheme. 
Fig. 3 shows the behavior of the inter-cycle duration as 
the number of data channels is increased. The inter-cycle 
duration decreases with the number of data channels. As it 
shrinks, the control channel becomes busier and its capacity 
improves. The control channel can schedule and drive more 
data channels.   
The top row depicts a situation where there are two data 
channels. The control channel will lie idle after performing 
the first handshake of the two data channels until the current 
data transmissions are about to complete. Then the next 
handshake will be performed in the next cycle. The duration 
of the inter-cycle will reduce in the next row when two more 
data channels are added. This behavior will be exhibited by 
the inter-cycle for every additional data channels to been 
added. For the purposes of the analytical work, we assume 
that all the channels are orthogonal to each other. 
Lastly, we describe briefly the cyclical nature of the 
algorithm. This attribute of the algorithm is related to the 
inter-cycle technique.  All the available data channels will be 
accessed in phases through the control channel. When the 
last data channel in the current cycle finishes its 
transmission, the first channel, will be reserved for the first 
transmission in the next cycle. This attribute of the CSA is 
detailed in [8] [9] with accompanying diagrams. 
The following pseudo-code gives an overall picture of 
the entire algorithm with its four components. The pseudo 
code gives the bird’s view of the CSA. It explains the CSA 
T 
T1 
ΔT1 
T2 
T 
Sensing 
Sending 
Receiving 
Transmitter 
Receiving 
Sending 
Sensing 
Sensing 
Sending 
Sending 
Receiving 
T1 
ΔT1 
ΔT2 
T3 
ΔT3 
T2 
ΔT2 
ΔT2 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS 
RTS/CTS RTS/CTS 
Inter-Cycle 
Inter-Cycle 
Inter-Cycle 
Inter-Cycle 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

in a very concise manner. The pseudo code also shows how 
the components of CSA are integrated to each other. 
 
PSEUDO-CODE 1. 
CHANNEL SELECTION AND SCHEDULING 
For (j && i = 0; j && i <= n-1; j++ &&i++) 
1. 
Begin channel access for terminal X+j 
2. 
defer for the inter-cycle duration for next cycle NC+i 
3. 
Contend for the control channel access C0 
4. 
RTS and CTS agree to reserve Data Channel DC, i+1 
5. 
Sender and receiver both Switch to DC, i+1 
6. 
Transmit on DC for DATA + 2 * switching delay( sw_p) 
7. 
Switch back to C0 
8. 
repeat 2 to 7 until DC, is equal  i + n - 1 
9. 
Reset counters and Begin next cycle, NC + i 
 
 
 
We now discuss how the framework reduces the effects 
of the MRP. We assume that there are three channels, one 
control and two data channels. In each cycle, two data flows 
are scheduled. Given this assumption, we consider the 
number of terminals which are likely to be deaf and how 
terminals can be quickly synchronized to reduce the MRP. 
In any given cycle there are two possible nodes which 
may be deaf. If other terminals try to send packets to them, 
bandwidth will be wasted. Furthermore, returning nodes will 
not have a complete picture of the network upon their return 
to the control channel. The status of some nodes is likely to 
change during their absence. Technically, two nodes may be 
unknown to any returning node when two data channels are 
implemented. This is possible because data channels are 
reserved whilst some nodes are still busy transmitting on 
data channels. As terminals in the current cycle are switching 
back to the control channel, the next set of terminals for the 
next cycle will be switching onto the data channels.  
To reduce the effects of terminal deafness, returning 
terminals may be starved of their next transmission until they 
have knowledge of the network. 
Deaf 
terminals 
are 
within 
the 
transmitter’s 
communication range but are not able to overhear or receive 
packets from a transmitter because they are busy receiving or 
transmitting on a different channel. We therefore do not 
consider transmission ranges of terminals. We assume that 
all terminals are within the communication range of each 
other and can decode all received or overheard packets. The 
impact of MRP is modeled and analytically explored in the 
following section. 
V. 
ANALYTICAL RESULTS  
This section analyzes the effects of the missing receivers 
on network performance and analytical results are presented.  
Throughput y, which is available to each node in the 
network, is given by dividing the capacity of the network by 
the number of nodes in the network [10]. Given this formula, 
the allotment of throughput to the nodes can be ascertained 
and predicted. The equation is given below: c is the capacity, 
while N the number of nodes.  
𝑦 = 𝑐 𝑁
   
 
 
(1) 
In the multi-channel environment, the capacity of the 
network increases with the number of channels implemented. 
It increases approximately at N times the channel capacity. 
Nc is therefore the total capacity of all the channels. 
So and Vaidya [11] argues that a dedicated control 
channel in a three channel system constitutes a third of the 
total capacity. Generalizing the capacity of the control 
channel Cc, with M, the number of channels, the following 
formula is obtained: 
𝐶𝑐 = 
𝑁𝑐
𝑀 , 
            (2) 
The instance of the MRP is equivalent to the control 
channel overhead as it wastes the same amount of 
bandwidth. Factoring the effects of the MRP in the allotment 
of bandwidth in (3) is obtained. 
The network throughput in the presence of MRP, denoted 
by YMRP is expressed as follows: 
𝑌𝑀𝑅𝑃 = 
𝑁𝑐 (1−𝑛
𝑀)
𝑁
                          (3) 
Network capacity is denoted by Nc, the instance of the 
MRP by n and N denotes the number of nodes. 
Given (3), the effects of the MRP can be modeled. If 
there are three channels, then one encounter of the missing 
receiver will result in one third degradation of the network 
throughput.  
Two encounters of deafness in the proposed CSA will 
result in two-thirds throughput degradation. Fig. 4 depicts 
network throughput degradation under these assumptions, 
when the capacity is set to 12 Mbs and M to 3. YMRP 
denotes throughput in the presence of MRP. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Effects of MRP on throughput 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
Throughput
Number of Nodes
NO MRP
ONE MRP
TWO MRP
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

When the transmission durations of the control and the 
data channels are considered, it becomes apparent that the 
effects of MRP would be less severe. The transmission ratio 
of the control channel to the data channel is approximately 
11 to 1 in terms of transmission durations taking into 
consideration the channel switching delay. The results of an 
11 to 1 ratio are expected to differ significantly from the 
results in Fig. 4 which are based on a 2 to 1 ratio. The 
instance of a MRP will therefore cause a twelfth of network 
degradation. 
Control channel overhead is represented by (1), when M 
is 12. 
 
 
To calculate the network throughput after factoring the 
effects of the node deafness problem, equation (3) is 
employed. When an RTS is sent to a deaf node, a complete 
RTS/CTS handshake is recorded as a complete transmission 
amounting to a control channel overhead. 
The amount of bandwidth utilized is therefore equal to 
the control channel overhead. The assumption that an 
instance of a MRP amounts to the control overhead is valid 
as the control channel would be unavailable for the entire 
duration of the RTS/CTS handshake.  
The overhead caused by the instance of the MRP now 
translates to, 𝑛
12. Taking this fraction and factoring it into (3), 
we get the following equation. 
 
𝑌𝑀𝑅𝑃 = 
𝑁𝑐 (1−𝑛
𝑀)
𝑁
 
 
 
(4) 
 
Given equation (4) and that Nc is 12 Mbs and M is 12; the 
results in Fig. 5 are obtained. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Effects of MRP on throughput in our proposed solution 
Fig. 5 shows that the proposed approach is likely to 
perform better in the face of Missing Receivers and its 
performance would improve as more instances of MRP are 
encountered. For example, in Fig. 5 where two instances of 
node deafness are encountered, the proposed approach 
performed better that when only one instance was 
encountered. However, in any given cycle, at most two 
terminals may be deaf and unreachable, according to the 
CSA assumptions for a network with three channels.  
The solution to MRP will improve the network 
throughput and reduce significantly the control channel 
overhead cost. Fig. 5 shows that the instances of missing 
receivers do increase the overhead of the control channel. It 
can also be seen in the same figure that the effects of node 
deafness in the proposed architecture will be less severe as 
compared to Fig. 4. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
Given the proposed underlying protocol the CSA, the 
MRP will be limited to the returning terminals. The returning 
nodes should be forced to delay their next transmissions until 
they have adequate information about the status of the 
network. This will reduce the effects of MRP. The waiting 
delay may be reconsidered where network support is 
implemented. 
 When the instance of the MRP is considered to be equal 
to the overhead of the control channel, and taking into 
consideration the actual packet lengths of both data and 
control packets, the effects of MRP will be reduced further. 
The phasing of data transmission enables terminals to have 
the correct information about the channels and to know when 
to contend for data channels when they become free. 
The CSA also facilitates the implementation of the RTS-
based data channel reservation and access scheme. 
Contention will be limited to control channel and there will 
be no need for the signaling packets to be employed in 
reserving and in agreeing on data channels to be used. The 
reservation of the data channels will be scheduled through 
the control channel when a given data channel is idle and 
available for the next data transmission. 
The implementation of the CSA will make use of the 
virtual carrier sensing technique for data channel reservation.  
The physical carrier sensing, and the virtual carrier sensing, 
will be employed only for the control channel reservation.  
The control channel facilitates network connectivity. 
Furthermore, there can be at most four channels available 
when non overlapping channels are considered [12]. We are 
experimenting on how network improves, assuming that all 
the channels are available and are orthogonal. Future work 
will look at how many possible channels can be utilized if 
the additional data channels do improve the performance of 
the network. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
 Ritesh Maheshwari, Himanshu Gupta, and Samir R. Das,  
“Multichannel MAC protocols for wireless networks”, SECON 2006, 
Volume 2, 28 September 2006, Reston,VA, pp.393-401 [retrieved: 
May, 2013]. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13
Throughput
Number of Nodes
NO MRP
ONE MRP Proposed
TWO MRP PROPOSAED
ONE MRP
TWO MRP
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

[2] 
 Jingpu Shi, Theodoros Salonidis, and Edward W. Knightly (2006), 
“Starvation Mitigation Through Multi-Channel Coordination in 
CSMA Multi-hop Wireless Networks”, MobiHoc’06, May 22–25, 
2006, Florence, Italy, pp.214 - 225 [retrieved: June, 2013] 
[3]  Carine Toham, and François Jan  (2006), “Multi-interfaces and Multi-
channels Multihop Ad Hoc Networks: Overview and Challenges”, 
Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems (MASS 2006), Vancouver, BC, 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/freeabs_all.jsp?arnumber=4053982 . 
pp.696 -701[retrieved: May, 2013] 
[4] 
 Jeonghoon Mo, Hoi-Sheung Wilson So, and Jean Walrand (2005), 
“Comparison of Multi-Channel MAC Protocols”, MSWiM 2005, 10 – 
13 October, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. pp.209 – 218 [retrieved: 
June, 2013] 
[5]  Myunghwan Seo and Joongsoo Ma (2007), “Flexible Multi-channel 
Coordination MAC for Multi-hop Ad hoc Network”, Technical 
Report, January 2007. [retrieved: July, 2011] 
[6]  Sudthida Wiwatthanasaranrom and Anan Phonphoem,  “Multichannel 
MAC Protocol for Ad-Hoc Wireless Networks”, Computer 
Engineering, Kasetsart University. pp.393-401 [retrieved: May, 2013] 
[7]  Pradeep Kyasanur Jungmin So, chandrakanth Chereddi, and Nitin H. 
Vaidya, “Multi-Channel Mesh Networks: Challenge and Protocols”, 
University of Illinois. pp.30-36 [retrieved: July, 2013] 
[8]  Mthulisi Velempini and Mqhele E. Dlodlo (2008). Combating the 
effects of Hidden Terminals in Multi -channel MAC Protocols.  
SATNAC 2008, 7 – 10 September  2008. [retrieved: May, 2013] 
[9]  Mthulisi Velempini and Mqhele. E. Dlodlo (2009). Analyzing the 
effects of increasing data channels and the number of data flows on 
network performance. Wireless Vitae 2009, Aalborg, Denmark. 
pp.600 – 605 [retrieved: June, 2013] 
[10]  BelAir Networks (2006).Capacity of Wireless Mesh Networks. 
BelAir 
NetworksNorth 
America, 
Whitepaper. 
www.belairnetworks.com [retrieved: May, 2013]. 
[11]  Jungmin So and Nitin Vaidya (2004), “Multi-Channel MAC for Ad 
Hoc Networks: Handling Multi-Channel Hidden Terminals Using A 
Single Transceiver”, MobiHoc’04, May 24–26, 2004, Roppongi, 
Japan. pp.222-233 [retrieved: July, 2013] 
[12]  Danilo Valerio, Fabio Ricciato, and Paul Fuxjaeger (2008). On the 
feasibility of IEEE 802.11 multi-channel multi-hop mesh networks. 
Computer 
Communications 
31 
(2008), 
www.elsevier.com/locate/comcom  pp.1484 - 1496 [retrieved: June, 
2013] 
[13]  Jeonghoon Mo, Hoi-Sheung Wilson So, and Jean Walrand, 
“McMAC: A Parallel Rendezvous Multi-Channel MAC Protocol”,  
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 2007 
www.ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber= 4224312 . pp. 
334 – 339 [retrieved: June, 2013]    
[14]  Jenhui 
Chen 
and 
Shiann-Tsong 
Sheu 
(2004), 
“Distributed 
multichannel MAC protocol for IEEE 802.11 ad hoc wireless LANs”, 
Computer Communications 28 (2005). pp.1000-1013 [retrieved: June, 
2013] 
[15]  Wing-Chung Hung, K.L. Eddie Law, and A. Leon-Garcia (2002), “A 
Dynamic Multi-Channel MAC for Ad Hoc LAN”, 21st Biennial 
Symposium on Communications, 5 April 2002. pp.1 -5 [retrieved: 
July, 2013] 
[16]  Balvinder Kaur Thind (2004), “A receiver-initiated mac protocol 
with enhancements for multi-hop wireless networks”, Washington 
State University, master of science Thesis, May 2004. pp.1 – 122 
[retrieved: June, 2013] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Vertical Handover in Wireless Mesh Networks and its Impact on Routing 
Ferdawss Douma and Rafik Braham 
PRINCE RG, ISITCOM - University of Sousse, Tunisia 
E-mails :{ Ferdawss_douma@live.fr, rafik.braham@ensi.rnu.tn}
 
 
Abstract —This paper proposes a new idea to improve routing in 
wireless mesh networks using IEEE 802.21’s Media Independent 
Handover (MIH) functions. First, we evaluate the performance of 
a vertical handover using IEEE 802.21 protocol between WiFi 
and WiMax networks. Then, we present our proposal of using 
MIHF for optimizing the performance of IEEE 802.11s Wireless 
Mesh Networks (WMN) routing protocols, such as Hybrid 
Wireless Mesh Protocol (HWMP). 
Keywords-Wireless 
mesh 
networks; 
routing 
protocol; 
Handover; MIH; packets loss ratio; handover delay.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, wireless communication technologies have 
evolved thanks to their utility and flexibility. This has led to the 
emergence of new wireless network solutions. 
One such solution consists of Wireless Mesh Networks 
(WMN), which are gaining importance [1].  
IEEE 802.11s Group [2] was established in January 2004 to 
provide mesh functions to IEEE 802.11 architectures and 
protocols. 
Research in the field of WMNs [3] is broad and diverse. 
Indeed, substantial works are currently carried out by 
researchers on routing protocols and their performance 
indicators. In addition, many other works focus on higher-level 
protocols (Quality of Service (QoS), service discovery, etc.). 
Mobility is also a very active area of research.  
Handover process causes a number of problems in routing, 
which degrades the service continuity. We have noticed, 
however, that works that connect routing and handover or use 
the characteristics of one to enhance the other are extremely 
rare. Our idea then is to link these two operations.  
For this, we exploit the handover protocol described in 
IEEE’s Media Independent Handover (MIH) [4] in order to 
improve routing between different network components and 
maintain service continuity.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents an 
overview of WMNs and popular routing protocols. Section III 
presents the MIH standard and Section IV describes related 
works found in the literature. Then, Section V describes 
simulation experiments. Different applications are used for this 
topic such as Constant Bit Rate (CBR) video and voice traffic. 
 Our approach to improve routing in WMNs using MIH is 
presented in Section VI. In Section VII, we discuss simulation 
results and present the advantages and disadvantages of our 
proposed idea. Finally, Section VIII provides a summary of 
this paper and some perspectives. 
II. OVERVIEW OF IEEE 802.11S AND ROUTING 
PROTOCOLS 
WMN technology is widely used in the world and its 
standardization becomes very necessary for large-scale 
applications. Currently, WMN standards are: IEEE 802.15.5, 
IEEE 802.16 and IEEE 802.11s. 
IEEE 802.15.5 [5] is a standard which aims to introduce the 
MESH technology at the personal area networks level. This 
standard aims to identify and develop mechanisms that must be 
present at the physical and MAC layers in order to implement 
the MESH technology in WPANs. This standard provides 
personal area networks that offer higher rate and ensure 
transmissions over longer distances. 
IEEE 802.16 standard group [6] introduces the Mesh 
structure in the IEEE 802.16 d/e standard. In IEEE 802.16 
Mesh, any node in the network can form several links with its 
adjacent nodes and one of the links is selected to transmit the 
information from local node or other nodes.  
IEEE 802.11s is a flexible and extensible standard for 
WMNs based on IEEE 802.11 family. One of the important 
functionalities of IEEE 802.11s is the wireless multi-hop 
routing, which sets up paths for wireless forwarding.  
IEEE 802.11s mesh networks can be used in a wide range 
of application scenarios. These scenarios include residential for 
the digital home, companies and public places and temporary 
infrastructure in case of a disaster. Mesh networks are 
extensible to allow support for diverse applications and future 
innovation. 
Routing, also called path selection, consists of finding the 
optimal route from source to destination. IEEE 802.11s routing 
protocols are particularly based on the work of the IETF 
MANET [7], but operate at layer 2 unlike MANET protocols, 
which operate at layer 3. The 11s group has as target 
configuration a network which contains 32 entities that 
participate in routing. 
Two routing protocols are considered: Hybrid Wireless 
Mesh Protocol (HWMP) and Radio Aware Optimized Link 
State Routing Protocol (RA-OLSR) [8]. 
The HWMP is the default routing protocol for wireless 
mesh networks. It combines two approaches: reactive routing 
and proactive tree-based routing [9]. 
The main characteristic of reactive routing is that a path is 
computed only if one is needed for sending data between two 
mesh points.  
Proactive routing is based on three routing bases: 
 
A distance vector routing tree is built and maintained if 
a root portal is present. 
 
Tree-based routing is efficient for hierarchical 
networks. 
 
Tree-based routing avoids unnecessary discovery 
flooding during discovery and recovery. 
The RA-OLSR Protocol is an improvement of the 
Optimized Link State Routing Protocol OLSR [10]. The 
shortest path algorithm uses a radio-aware metric instead of the 
hop count metric. For that reason, a metric field is added to all 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

topology information messages. RA-OLSR uses MAC 
addresses rather than IP addresses. 
III. MEDIA INDEPENDENT HANDOVER (MIH) 
The scope of the IEEE 802.21 MIH standard is to develop a 
standard that would provide generic link layer intelligence and 
other network related information to upper layers to optimize 
handovers between different heterogeneous media such as the 
3rd Generation Partnership Project ( 3GPP), 3GPP2 and both 
wired and wireless media of the IEEE 802.21 family [11]. 
The main objective of MIH is to provide a framework that 
enables 
seamless 
handover 
between 
heterogeneous 
technologies. It uses a protocol stack implemented in all the 
devices involved in the handover which provides the necessary 
interactions among devices for optimizing handover decisions. 
The standard allows providing information which could 
help at the phase of selection of the network and the activation 
of the interface. The execution and the decision of handover is 
not part of the standard. 
In the mobility management protocol stack of both the MN 
and network element, the Media Independent Handover 
Function (MIHF) is logically defined as a sub-layer between 
L2 data link layer and L3 network layer. The upper layers are 
provided services by the MIH function through a unified 
interface. 
The services exposed by the unified interface are 
independent of access technologies. This unified interface is 
known as Media Independent Handover Service Access Point 
(MIH_SAP). The lower layer protocols communicate with the 
MIHF via media dependent SAPs [11]. 
 This standard defines services that comprise the MIHF 
services. These services which facilitate handovers between 
heterogeneous access links are: 
 
Media Independent Event Service (MIES) that 
provides event classification, event filtering and event 
reporting corresponding to dynamic changes in link 
characteristics, link status, and link quality. 
 
Media Independent Command Service (MICS) that 
enables MIH users to manage and control link behavior 
relevant to handovers and mobility, 
 
Media Independent Information Service (MIIS) that 
provides details on the characteristics and services 
provided by the serving and neighboring networks. The 
information enables effective system access and 
effective handover decisions. 
MIHF provides asynchronous and synchronous services 
through SAPs for link layers and MIH users. In the case of a 
system with multiple network interfaces of arbitrary type, MIH 
users employ event service, command service, and information 
service provided by MIHF to manage, determine, and control 
the state of underlying interfaces. 
These services provided by MIHF help the MIH users in 
maintaining service continuity, service adaptation to varying 
quality of service, battery life conservation, network discovery, 
and link selection.  
The handover is considered as “hard” or “soft,” depending 
on whether the handover procedure is “break-before-make” or 
“make-before-break”.  
 
IV. RELATED WORKS 
Many papers associated with MIH have focused on 
improving handoff performances.  
Several 
research 
studies 
have 
investigated 
the 
improvements that MIH could make to different mobility 
protocols at various levels.  
At the network layer, Mussabbir and Yao [12] proposed 
using MIH services in order to optimize the procedure of 
handover for Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers (FMIPv6). 
Magagula [13] shows that Proxy Mobile IPv6 is a protocol 
for mobility management. It is effective in improving the 
performance indicators of the operation such as handover 
latency and packet loss in particular when used with the IEEE 
802.21 protocol services MIH. 
At the transport layer, Chen [14] proposed an interaction 
between SCTP and 802.21. This optimizes the handover 
mechanisms in networks within the campus for VoIP 
applications. 
At the application layer, Choong [15] analyzes the 
improvements that can be gained by interaction between SIP 
and MIH. 
Lee et al. [16] proposed a framework for the integration of 
IEEE 802.21 MIHF with OLSR to improve the performances 
of this ad-hoc routing protocol using the Hello interval. 
Several research works evaluated routing protocols 
performances in mesh networks IEEE 802.11s. For example, 
N.R.Nomulwar et al. [17] presented performance analysis of 
routing protocol in Wireless Mesh Network such as HWMP, 
Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector (AODV), Dynamic 
Source Routing (DSR), and Destination-Sequenced Distance-
Vector (DSDV). 
Baumann [18] introduced a notification protocol driven by 
the access points and independent of used routing protocol. 
When access points detect the clients’ macro mobility by the 
change of addresses, the MAPs send to source node a 
notification message which contains the new configuration 
parameters. The notification message will be sent periodically 
for each client, which may cause a heavy additional signaling 
overhead in Wireless Mesh Network.  
A fast handoff management scheme in WMN have been 
developed by Kowalik et al. [19]. It is called MeshScan. It 
includes three main steps. First, a client device maintains a list 
of active Mesh Nodes (MNs) (SmartList). Then when it 
receives a disassociation message from the serving MN or 
when the measured signal strength from the serving MN 
exceeds the threshold, it performs the handoff. Finally, when 
handoff is required, a client transmits Authentication Request 
frames to all MNs on the list instead of broadcasting Probe 
Request frames as is usually the case in an active scan in order 
to discover available MNs.  
The goal of our proposal is to achieve improvements in 
network performances for wireless mesh network environments 
through the integration of MIH with mesh routing protocols 
like HWMP. 
V. SIMULATION MODEL BASED ON MIH PROTOCOL 
The simulation scenario consists of one WLAN cell and a 
WiMAX cell. It is assumed that one MN, equipped with 
multiple interfaces, is connected to WiFi before it goes through 
the WiMAX coverage area.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

The handover between the WLAN cell and WiMAX is 
performed when the MN leaves the coverage area of the 
WLAN AP. 
Figure 1 shows four main elements:  
 
The WLAN AP  
 
WiMAX BS 
 
The router connected to CN (Correspondent Node) 
 
The multi-interface MN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Simulation scenario 
A. Simulation  Parameters 
Table I summarizes parameter values used in the 
simulations which illustrates the generic network topology 
used. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Network Topology 
WiMAX cell coverage 
1000 m 
WLAN cell coverage 
20 m 
Router Configuration 
MAX_RA_DELAY (s) 
0.5 
Router lifetime (s)Wlan 
1800 
Router lifetime (s)WiMax 
20 
802.11 MAC Layer Configuration 
WLAN beacon interval (s) 
0.1 
Default scanning mode 
Passive 
MinChannelTime (s) 
0.02 
MaxChannelTime  
0.06 
802.16 Configuration 
Dcd_interval 
5 
Ucd_interval 
5 
Client_timeout_ 
50 
Default modulation (s) 
OFDM_16_QAM 
Application Traffic for Mobile Node 
Type 
Depends on application 
Packet size (bytes) 
Depends on application 
Packet inter-arrival time (s) 
Depends on application 
 
To evaluate handover performances, we have chosen to 
compare results between two applications. These are: 
 
CBR Video traffic (real-time data). 
 
CBR Voice traffic (real-time data). 
We used a real-time traffic to study the effect of the 
handover on this type of application that requires a good 
Quality of Service (QoS). 
The realization of our simulations is based on the NIST 
NS-2 implementation [20] of IEEE 802.21 for infrastructure-
based network environments. 
B. Performance criteria  
The performance criteria adopted in our simulations to 
evaluate the vertical handover between WLAN and Wimax are 
Delay and Packets Loss Ratio. These parameters are the main 
criteria of QoS in the networks. 
C. Simulation results:  
1) Packet Loss Ratio 
We calculate in this section the percentage of lost packets. 
Figure 2 demonstrates that the handover causes a jump in 
packet loss. Each curve contains a peak, which corresponds to 
the Packet Loss Ratio during roaming period. As expected, the 
handover process causes an increase in the number of dropped 
packets.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Packets Loss Ratio during simulation: voice and video traffic 
For voice traffic, the packet size is 160 bytes, the CBR 
interval is 0.02 seconds and the mobile node velocity is 13 
m/s. Figure 2 shows that the packet loss ratio increases 
suddenly at the beginning of handover to a value of 1.95%. 
In the foreign network, the packet loss ratio for the mobile 
node degrades to achieve 0.06%. 
For video traffic, we use a packets size of 1240 bytes, a 
CBR interval of 0.1 seconds and a velocity of 13 m/s. 
We deduce that for low mobility handover performances 
are acceptable. Indeed, for a speed of 13 m/s the packet loss 
ratio is less than 3.2%. The higher value of loss appears during 
the execution of the handover (the peak of the curve), which 
reached 3.2% (see Figure 2). 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

When the mobile moves to the foreign network (WiMAX) 
the packet loss ratio decreases to a value below 0.5%. 
The packets loss ratio for voice traffic during handover 
was 1.95%. Compared to the packets loss ratio of video type 
traffic (3.2%), it is much smaller. The result was as expected 
since the packet size will necessarily affect the packets loss 
ratio.  
2) Delay 
The delay is a very important parameter to evaluate the 
QoS for real time traffic. This is the time needed for a packet 
to be transmitted across a network from source to destination 
(end-to-end). 
In this section, we discuss packet delays during the 
simulation time when applying the scenario of the handover 
from WLAN to WiMAX. 
We present voice traffic results first. We notice the 
existence of a peak at the moment of the handover execution 
because the transfer time becomes quite important (between 
0.76 and 1.18 s). 
After executing the handover, the delay of packet 
transmission falls, it becomes almost constant and less than 
0.2 seconds. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Delay during simulation :Video and voice traffic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Delay during simulation: voice and video traffic. 
For video traffic, we note that at the time of handover 
execution, the delay of packets transmission becomes 
important (between 0.8 and 1.43 s). The delay increases with 
the execution of the handover. This explains the occurrence of 
the peak at the starting moment of handover. 
After executing the handover, the delay falls and becomes 
almost constant and less than 0.2 seconds. 
VI. PROPOSED APPROACH TO IMPROVE ROUTING IN WMN 
WITH MIH 
A mobile node that implements MIH module includes two 
agents: MIH agent and routing agent. In wireless mesh 
networks, the routing agent used is HWMP or RA-OLSR. 
MIHF in the ad hoc node interacts with the MAC Layer and 
MIH users in higher layers. 
Triggers for handoffs may be initiated from MAC, 
PHYSICAL or upper levels through the MAC SAP either at 
the Mobile node or at the BS [11]. The cause for these triggers 
can be either within the local stack or from the distant stack. 
Layer 2 triggers are classified into two types, predictive and 
event triggers. Predictive triggers express a probability of a 
change in system properties in the future. Event triggers 
describe an exact event that has occurred. Link_Up is an 
example of an event trigger. Link-Going-Down is an example 
of a predictive trigger. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  MIHF interaction to uper and lower layers. 
The MAC layer receives measurement data of neighboring 
nodes and provides information to MIH. The MIH triggers the 
handover and HWMP/OLSR routing agent registers as a user 
and performs MIH stains triggered by the MIH agent. 
For this, we propose to exploit the messages exchanged 
during the procedure of handover by the routing agent to detect 
the mobility of nodes faster and consequently routing can take 
place quickly. 
We propose to use 2 messages to realize our approach:  
 
MIH_Link_Down.indication is sent to local MIHF 
users to notify them of a local event, or is the result of 
the receipt of a MIH_Link_Down indication message 
to indicate to the remote MIHF users who have 
subscribed to this remote event. Parameters used in 
this case are Type of link, MAC Address of mobile 
node, MAC Address of old Access Router and of 
course “Reason” for the link down. 
 
MIH_Link_Up.indication is sent to local MIHF users 
to notify them of a local event, or is the result of the 
receipt of a MIH_Link_Up indication message to 
notify remote MIHF users who have subscribed to this 
remote event. Parameters for this trigger are Type of 
link, MAC Address of mobile node, MAC Address of 
old Access Router, MAC Address of new Access 
Router, and Network Identifier for detecting possible 
change in subnet. 
Figure 5 below illustrates the communication between the 
MIH agent and HWMP protocol. 
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Communication between HWMP and MIH agent. 
At the beginning, we must register the routing protocol 
HWMP as an MIH user to receive messages issued by the 
MIHF. This can be implemented by providing an interface 
between the MIHF and HWMP agents in NS2 simulator, as in 
[16].  
We will study two cases of mobility: 
 
A mobile node leaves a wireless mesh network to a 
foreign network. 
 
A new MN joins a wireless mesh network from 
another network. 
We start by explaining the first case. As we have already 
indicated, when the received signal quality drops, the link layer 
of the terminal can anticipate the handover and triggers the 
event service Link_Going_Down on both MIH entities: MIHs 
terminal of the local mobile network and the MESH. 
Then, the MIH agent informs the HWMP routing agent to 
update its routing table and remove the node corresponding to 
this link. A routing table’s update must be invoked at all nodes 
in the network. They must in turn remove the node associated 
with the message MIH_Link_Going_Down and do not wait for 
the periodic updating of routing tables. With this method, the 
node mobility is detected faster by all network users. 
In the case when a mobile node tries to join a wireless mesh 
network while executing a handover and once all steps of link 
attachment are completed and the link is ready to send packets, 
a trigger event link-up indication may be sent to the MIH 
function on the local and remote link. 
Once the MIH agent receives this message, it triggers the 
HWMP routing agent to update routes. The access point, then, 
triggers a links update throughout the network by broadcasting 
a PREQ message and putting the MN as destination. 
Thereafter, when an intermediary Mesh Point receives PREQ, 
it creates a path to the request source and forwards PREQ to 
the destination and so on until it reaches the mobile.  
When the mobile node receives PREQ, it sends in unicast a 
PREP message to the source. When the source node receives 
the PREP message, it creates a path to the mobile node. This 
update will accelerate the detection of a new node that joins the 
network, which will therefore accelerate the data routing to that 
node.  
VII. DISCUSSION  
Through the simulation of MIH protocol and according to 
our results, we note that the delay of a vertical handover can 
reach a maximum value of 1.43 s. To evaluate the performance 
of the this protocol, we can compare this value with that of a 
vertical handover without the MIH protocol like the case of 
[21], in which for streaming traffic between CDMA 2000 and 
IEEE 802.16e networks, handover delay can reach a value of 2 
seconds. Concerning the packet loss ratio, in our scenario we 
have a maximum value of 3.2%. This value is lower than that 
of [21], which can reach 5%. We can conclude that the MIH 
provides a transaction from one network to another with a low 
delay and an acceptable packet loss ratio.  
Our idea to accelerate routing data in WMN using 
messages exchanged during handover process may have 
positive and negative impacts. 
When node movement is detected faster than before even 
by few seconds, it will accelerate data routing to the mobile 
node since the corresponding nodes will be informed of its new 
location and route data based on this new information. 
Consequently, Packets Loss Ratio will be reduced. 
On another side, this route update needs a significant 
exchange of extra control messages, which can cause 
additional signaling overhead. It can also cause loss of energy 
of the mobile node. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we studied the mechanisms of vertical 
handover between WiMAX and WiFi networks by the 
implementation of protocols related to these mechanisms. 
We defined a simulation scenario to implement this 
principle. Then we gave an analysis of vertical handover 
between WiFi and WiMAX and performance figures with the 
use of NS-2 simulator.  
The objective of this work was to propose an approach that 
creates a link between the handover process and routing 
operation. Our main idea consists of using Media Independent 
Handover protocols in order to optimize routing in wireless 
mesh networks. 
As a future work, we propose to simulate other scenarios. 
Indeed, we can illustrate the effect of the number of mobile 
nodes on the performance of vertical handover between 
WiMAX and WiFi. Other types of applications can also be 
simulated, such as a non-real time applications like FTP and 
best effort services (TELNET). 
Another possible investigation may consist of evaluating 
the performance of MIH and other mobility protocols with 
other types of heterogeneous networks such as LTE, MPLS, 
etc. 
Finally, it would also be interesting to run further 
simulations with our approach in order to further study its 
impact on routing in other mesh network scenarios. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. R. Hiertz, S. Max, E. WeiB, L. Berlemann, D. Denteneer, and S. 
Mangold, "Mesh Technology enabling Ubiquitous Wireless Networks," 
in Proceedings of the 2nd Annual International Wireless Internet 
Conference (WICON), Boston, USA, Aug. 2006, pp. 11-23. 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

[2] IEEE, “Draft amendment: ESS mesh networking”, IEEE P802.11s 
Draft1.00, November 2006. 
[3] I.F. Akyildiz, X. Wang, and W. Wang, “Wireless mesh networks: a 
survey”, Computer Networks, vol. 47, no. 4, Mar. 2005, pp. 445-487. 
[4] IEEE 802.21, “IEEE 802.21 Media independent handover,” vol. 2006: 
IEEE 802.21 standards, http://ieee802.org/21/, 06.14.2013. 
[5] M. Lee, R.Zhang, Ch.Zhu , and T.Park “Meshing wireless personal area 
networks: Introducing IEEE 802.15.5”, Communications Magazine, 
IEEE (Volume: 48, Issue: 1 ), January 2010, pp. 54–61. 
[6] IEEE Std 802.16-2004, “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan 
Area Networks, Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless 
Access Systems, IEEE Revision of 802.16-2001”, Oct 2004. 
[7] “Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANET) Working Group,” Internet 
Engineering 
Task 
Force 
(IETF), 
http: 
//www.ietf.org/html.charters/manet-charter.html, 06.14.2013. 
[8] M. Bahr, “Proposed Routing for IEEE 802.11s WLAN Mesh Networks”, 
The 2nd Annual International Wireless Internet Conference, Boston, 
,2006, pp. 6-13. 
[9] A. Amir Pirzada, M. Portmann, and J. Indulska. “Hybrid Mesh Ad-hoc 
On-demand Distance Vector Routing Protocol”, Proceeding ACSC '07 
Proceedings of the thirtieth Australasian conference on Computer 
science-Volume 62, Australian Computer Society, Inc. Darlinghurst, 
Australia, 2007, pp. 49-58. 
[10] P. Jacquet, P.Mühlethaler, A. Qayyum, A. Laouiti, T. Clausen, and L. 
Viennot, “Optimized Link State Routing Protocol”, IEEE INMIC 
Pakistan, Dec 2001, pp.62–68. 
[11] Draft IEEE standards ,“IEEE802.21 Standard and Metropolitan Area 
Networks: 
Media 
Independent 
Handover 
Services”, 
Draft 
P802.21/D00.05, March 2006 
[12] Q.B. Mussabbir, and W. Yao, “Optimized FMIPv6 handover using 
IEEE802.21 MIH Services”, Proc. of MobiArch 2006, ACM Press, New 
York , 2006, pp. 43–48. 
[13] L Magagula, O.E. Falowo, and H.A. Cha. , “ PMIPv6 and MIH-
enhanced PMIPv6 for mobility management in heterogeneous wireless 
networks.” Proceedings of Africon,Kenya, September 2009, pp. 23-25. 
[14] Y.M. Chen, M.Y. Lai, S.C. Lin, S.C. Chang, and T.Y. Chung, “SCTP-
based handoff based on MIH triggers information in campus networks”, 
The 8th International Conference of Advanced Communication 
Technology (ICACT’06), February 2006, pp. 1301-1305. 
[15] K.N. Choong, V.S. Kesavan, S.L. Ng, F. de Carvalho, A.L.Y. Low and 
C. Maciocco, “SIP-based IEEE802.21 media independent handover - a 
BT Intel collaboration”, BT Technology Journal, vol. 25, no. 2, April 
2007, pp. 219–230. 
[16] J. Lee, A.McAuley and S.Das, “Framework for Integration of IEEE 
802.21 MIH Function with Ad Hoc Routing Protocol”, Vehicular 
Technology Conference (VTC Spring) IEEE 73rd, Budapest-Hungary, 
2011, pp. 1-6. 
[17] N.R.Nomulwar, J. N. VarshaPriya, B. B. Meshram, and S. T. Shinghade, 
“Comparision of performance of routing protocol in Wireless Mesh 
Network”, The International Journal of Computer Science & 
Applications (TIJCSA), vol. 1, no. 3, May 2012, pp. 61-65. 
[18] R. Baumann, O. Bondareva, S. Heimlicher, and M. May, “A Protocol for 
Macro Mobility and Multihoming Notification in Wireless Mesh 
Networks”, Advanced Information Networking and Applications 
Workshops (AINAW '07), 2007, pp. 34-37. 
[19] Chen, Y., K. Kowalik, and M. Davis, “MeshScan: Fast and Efficient 
Handoff in IEEE802.11 Mesh Networks”, The 7th ACM International 
Symposium on Mobility Management and Wireless Access (MobiWAC 
2009), Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain, October 2009, pp. 105-108. 
[20] The Network Simulator NS-2 NIST add-on IEEE 802.21 model, NIST 
January 2007. 
[21] S. Park, S. Kim, J. Cho, I. Ryoo, D. Lee, J. Yu, J. Lim, and S. Oh, “A 
Performance Evaluation of Vertical Handoff Scheme between IEEE 
802.16e and cdma2000 Networks”, Communications in Computing, Las 
Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2006, pp. 104-109. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Throughput Improvement of a Range-aware WiFi network  
by Minimizing Signal Interference 
 
Jie Zhang 
HwaJong Kim 
GooYeon Lee 
Yong Lee 
Dept. Computer Engineering 
Kangwon National University,  
ChunCheon, Korea 
zarg_1982@hotmail.com 
hjkim3@gmail.com 
leegyeon@kangwon.ac.kr 
yleehyun@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—In the smart-phone era, many WiFi devices around 
us need higher throughput and larger signal coverage which 
also generate unwanted signal interference among the devices. 
Signal interference is inevitable problem because of the 
broadcast nature of wireless transmissions. However, the 
interference could be minimized by reducing signal coverage of 
nearby wireless devices. But, smaller signal coverage means 
low transmission power and low data throughput. In the paper, 
we analyze the relationship among signal strength, coverage 
and interference of WiFi networks, and as a tradeoff between 
transmission power and data throughput, we propose a range-
aware WiFi network scheme which controls transmission 
power according to locations and RSSI of WiFi devices. We 
analyze the efficiency of the proposed scheme by simulation. 
Keywords- 
signal 
interference; 
range-aware; 
data 
throughput; WiFi network,;signal coverage 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many WiFi networks have been introduced these days, 
and they usually need high power for larger transmit range 
and data throughput. However, with rapid increasing number 
of wireless devices such as smart phones, large signal 
coverage of WiFi causes high signal interference especially 
in densely populated area.  
Signal interference is inevitable problem in wireless 
network, which may decrease throughput and cause security 
problems. The signal interference could be reduced by 
controlling network configuration. [1] and [2] suggested 
topology control method with changes transmission power in 
order to reduce signal interference in wireless ad-hoc 
network.  
In WiFi networks, the interference can be managed by 
controlling the sender's transmission power. However, small 
signal power results in low throughput. There is a trade-off 
between signal interference and network throughput [5] [6]. 
In the paper, we analyze the relationship among signal 
transmission power, interference and network throughput. 
We propose a range-aware WiFi Network, which can adjust 
transmission power depending on the locations and Received 
Signal Strength Indication (RSSI) of the devices. We also 
showed the efficiency of the proposed scheme by 
simulations. 
Section II is about interference problems in wireless 
network and related researches. In section III, we extract the 
relationship between signal strength, signal coverage and 
data throughput with experiments. Section IV proposes the 
Range-aware WiFi network and analyzes the efficiency with 
simulations. Conclusion followed.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance 
(CSMA/CA) is IEEE 802.11 wireless protocol designed to 
avoid signal collision in local area network. CSMA/CA 
operates in the process: 
 
1) Before sending data, listen the channel to be IDLE 
2) When channel is IDLE, send a Request To Send 
(RTS) to the receiver, and wait for a Clear To Send (CTS). 
After receiving CTS, the sender starts transmission, and 
broadcast a NAV(Network Allocation Vector) message to its 
neighbors to announce the transmission activity. 
3) After successful data receiving, the receiver sends an 
ACK (acknowledgement) to the sender. 
 
Giuseppe Bianchi [3] analyzed the network performance 
of CSMA/CA, including network throughput with RTS/CTS 
handshake. Long distance communication with CSMA/CA 
suffers tough signal interference due to many interfering 
devices in between the sender and receiver.  
Signal interference deteriorates network throughput and 
also wastes power. Reducing signal interference is widely 
researched in wireless ad-hoc network in order to minimize 
power consumption. Martin Burkhart et al. compared several 
topology 
control 
methods 
which 
claim 
to 
resolve 
interference, and proposed an interference-minimal method 
in wireless ad-hoc network with connectivity-preserving and 
spanner construction [1]. N. M. Karagiorgas introduced a 
multicost routing that constructs route with variable 
transmission power to reduce interference in ad-hoc network 
[2]. Sutep Tongngam [4] proposed a reducible transmission 
range approach for wireless network, which optimizes 
broadcasting latency. Ilenia Tinnirello and Giuseppe Bianchi 
analyzed the interference effects in WiFi networks [5]. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Anand Kashyap et al. presented a passive monitoring of 
wireless traffic to estimate interference in WiFi networks [6].  
Above researches show that in any of wireless network 
like ad-hoc network or broadcasting network, performance in 
data throughput takes high influence from signal interference. 
Wireless interference cannot be removed because of 
broadcasting properties but can be optimized by routing 
algorithms or topology control algorithms. 
III. 
WIFI SIGNAL STRENGTH AND TRANSMISSION RATE 
A. Signal strength and data transmission rate 
The IEEE 802.11 WiFi network is composed of Basic 
Station Set (BSS), which contains an Access Point (AP) as a 
relay station to the Internet for the wireless local area 
network (see Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  A WiFi network is composed of BSS (Basic Station Set), which 
contains AP(Access Point) and wireless devices 
The most widely used scheme for a WiFi station to 
choose the appropriate AP is measuring the received signal 
strength from AP, known as RSSI. However, many 
researches showed that AP selection scheme based on the 
RSSI does not show good efficiency in optimizing 
throughput 
[7-9]. 
This 
is 
because 
the 
wireless 
communication quality depends on signal interference, 
fading and many other effect besides the signal strength itself. 
In the paper, we first simulate an interference-free 
environment and measure data throughput with different 
signal strength to find out the relationship between RSSI 
level and network throughput. Then, we extend the 
experiment with various signal interferences. 
B. Throughput under interference-free conditions 
Table 1 shows the specifications of the wireless device 
we used in the experiment to measure the RSSI and 
throughput under interference-free conditions. 
 
TABLE I.  
EXPERIMENT DEVICE PARAMETERS USED TO MEASURE THE 
RSSI AND THROUGHPUT 
Wireless protocol 
802.11g 
Transmission power(AP) 
18dBm 
Antenna gain(AP) 
4dBi 
Receive sensitivity 
-74dBm 
Maximum signal range 
70m 
Maximum throughput 
54Mbps 
We measured the upload and download throughput for 
every 5dBm of RSSI from -35dBm to -70dBm, and the result 
is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Throughput in a WiFi network without signal interference as a 
function of RSSI 
Maximum bandwidth of the WiFi channel was 54Mbps, 
as a common throughput of WiFi network in 2.4GHz, 
however, the actual maximum throughput was 20Mbps 
because of the protocol overhead, such as control traffic and 
Ack frames etc. 
C. Signal transmission range and throughput 
In order to analyze interference effects in wireless 
network, we estimate the number of active WiFi networks in 
the signal range and evaluate the average throughput. Signal 
range is expressed by the path loss model as [10]. 
 
PL = PL1Meter + 10log(dn) + s 
(1) 
 
RSSI = TxPower + AntennaGain - PL 
(2) 
Variables used in the formula are: 
· 
PL: Total path loss experienced between the receiver 
and sender in dB 
· 
PL1Meter: Reference path loss in dB for the desired 
frequency when the receiver- to-transmitter distance 
is 1 meter 
· 
d: Distance between the transmitter and receiver in 
meters 
· 
n: Path loss exponent for the environment, 2 in free 
space, 3.5 – 4.5 in indoor environment 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

· 
s: Standard deviation associated with the degree of 
shadow fading in dB (3 ~ 7 dB) 
 
From (1) and (2), signal distance between transmitter and 
receiver is given by 
 
d = 10 (TxPower + AntennaGain – RSSI – PL1Meter – s)/10n 
(3) 
Signal distance between AP and client devices obtained 
from the experiment of Section 3.2 and (3) is shown in Table 
2. Distance and throughput is measured in each RSSI levels. 
TABLE II.  
NETWORK THROUGHPUT AND SIGNAL TRANSMISSION 
DISTANCE FOR DIFFERENT RSSI VALUES 
RSSI  
Distance  
Throughput (Downlink)  
-35dB 
1 m 
21.49Mbps 
-40dB 
1.778279m 
21.03Mbp 
-45dB 
3.162278m 
20.94Mbp 
-50dB 
5.623413m 
19.25Mbp 
-55dB 
10m 
18.42Mbp 
-60dB 
17.78279m 
13.04Mbp 
-65dB 
31.62278m 
11.47Mbp 
-70dB 
56.23413m 
5.79Mbp 
 
In (1), PL1Meter is set to be 54dB, path loss exponent n is 2 
assuming free space, and shadow fading s is 3dB.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Signal transmission coverage for various RSSI values 
Figure 3 shows the signal range variations for various 
RSSI levels, which may explain the relationship between 
distance of wireless nodes and related signal degrees. 
IV. 
RANGE-AWARE WIRELESS WIFI NETWORK 
High transmission power gives high signal interference. 
Low transmission power may increase throughput because of 
low interference, but small signal power would make shadow 
areas. We proposed a range-aware WiFi network in order to 
find optimum value of transmission power and signal 
interference. Figure 4 shows an instance of the proposed 
network scheme where APs have different signal coverage in 
order to minimize signal interference. 
 
Figure 4.  An example of range-aware wireless WiFi networks where APs 
have different signal coverage in order to minimize signal interference 
The range-aware WiFi network can increase network 
efficiency by minimizing signal interference. The rationale 
of the range-aware wireless WiFi networks is controlling 
AP’s transmission power considering the locations of the 
wireless devices. There are three steps in configuring a 
range-aware WiFi Network. 
1) Measuring clients ’  RSSI periodically, calculate 
distances to the devices 
2) Set AP's transmission power to reach the farthest 
client device 
3) Announce the transmission power set at 2) to client 
devices 
Clients’transmission power control is set based on AP's 
transmission power. When client moves, the transmission 
power of AP and client are adjusted (see Figure 5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

 
Figure 5.  Transmission coverage changes as a client wireless device 
moves 
The steps in Figure 5 are described as follows. 
1) Initial state of AP and client device 
2) AP sets signal coverage considering clients' location, 
transmission power and announce it 
3) Client device sets transmission power based on the 
announced AP's transmission power 
4) The client device moves away from its AP 
5) Client device uses default transmission power  
6) AP recalculates distance between client and adjusts 
signal coverage 
We performed simulations to investigate the proposed 
method. Simulation topology is illustrated in Figure 6. A 
120m x 120m area is divided into 9 cells, each cell contains 
one AP at the center and 6 randomly located devices. 
Network throughput for downlink (from AP to clients) is 
measured for different transmission powers of 18dBm, 
13dBm and 8dBm. In the simulation, we assumed all clients 
use same channel and channel access time is equally shared 
by all client devices no matter how the actual throughput is. 
The simulation program is written by Java language, UDP 
unicast is used with maximum throughput of 54Mbps. 
 
Figure 6.  Simulation topology with 9 cells and 54 devices 
First, we considered a conventional WiFi network 
without range-aware WiFi scheme. Figure 7 shows the 
simulation result with 18dBm (high) transmission power. All 
client devices show similar network throughput, however the 
throughput is quite low because of the high signal 
interference. Figure 8 shows the case with transmission 
power of 8dBm, where the network throughput is much 
higher than the case of Figure 7 (i.e., 18dBm) because of low 
signal interference. However, in this case, the AP's signal 
coverage is not long enough to cover all clients in the 
network that may cause shadow zone.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Throughputs at randomly located 54 clients with 18dBm 
transmission power 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

 
Figure 8.  Throughputs at randomly located 54 clients with 8dBm 
transmission power 
Figure 9 shows the simulation result of the proposed 
range-aware WiFi network. AP's transmission power is 
adjusted depending on the clients' location to be 18dBm, 
13dBm and 8dBm, respectively. As shown in Figure 9, 
shadow zone does not exist and network throughput is much 
better than that of Figures 7 and 8. By choosing optimum 
transmission power associated with client's distance, we can 
minimize signal interference and maximize network 
throughput. 
 
Figure 9.  Throughputs at randomly located 54 clients with range-aware 
WiFi network scheme 
Table III compares average network throughput of 
conventional WiFi network and range-aware WiFi network 
with transmission power 8dBm, 13dBm and 18dBm. It also 
compares the cases with 6 client devices in every cell (6x9 
clients) and 9 client devices in every cell (9x9 clients). 
 
 
 
TABLE III.  
AVERAGE 
THROUGHPUT(MBPS) 
COMPARISON 
OF 
A 
RANGE-WARE AND CONVENTIONAL WIFI NETWORK 
 
Range-Aware 
8dBm 
13dBm 
18dBm 
6 x 6 
2.09 
1.58 
1.09 
0.64 
9 x 9 
1.30 
1.07 
0.78 
0.42 
 
 
Figure 10.  Average throughput comparison of a range-ware and 
conventional WiFi network (with different transmission powers)  
Figure 10 shows that the proposed range-aware WiFi 
network gives much higher throughput from clients than 
conventional WiFi network. Throughput with the case of 9 
client devices in each cell shows lower throughput than the 
case of 6 client devices in a cell, because 9 clients in a cell 
will use small amount of bandwidth than 6 clients in average. 
In [7], Yutaka Fukuda et al. presented an AP selection 
scheme based on measurement of signal interference and 
showed a throughput improvement of 100% around. 
Controlling client to reach interference-minimum AP might 
improve certain node’s throughput however should show few 
efficiency in improving whole network performance; the 
scheme should show similar result of Figure 9 with our 
simulation model. Today’s WiFi environment has a very 
high density of wireless client due to rapid increase of WiFi 
devices, typically Smartphones. The most efficient way to 
optimize WiFi network should be controlling network 
topology, proposed Range-aware WiFi network presents one 
example. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Performance of a WiFi network does not only depend on 
signal strength but also on the interference from neighbor 
wireless devices. Higher transmission power from AP gives 
higher signal interference to other WiFi network. On other 
hand, if transmission power is too small it can reduce signal 
interference but may cause shadow zones where client 
devices could not connect to the network. 
In the paper, we analyze the relationship between signal 
power, signal interference, and network throughput. We 
proposed a range-aware WiFi network that may increase 
network efficiency by minimizing signal interference with 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

controlled transmission power. Simulation results show that 
the range-aware WiFi network gives higher network 
throughput than conventional WiFi network.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the MSIP(Ministry of 
Science, ICT&Future Planning), Korea, under the C-
ITRC(Convergence 
Information 
Technology 
Research 
Center) support program (NIPA-2013-H0401-13-1002) 
supervised by the NIPA(National IT Industry Promotion 
Agency) and Basic Science Research Program through the 
National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the 
Ministry of Education(No. NRF-2011-0013951). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Martin Burkhart, Pascal von Rickenbach, Roger Wattenhofer, 
and Aaron Zollinger, “Does topology control reduce 
interference?”, Proceedings of the 5th ACM international 
symposium on Mobile ad hoc networking and computing, 
2004, pp.9-19 
[2] Karagiorgas, N.M., Kokkinos, P.C., Papageorgiou, C.A., and 
Varvarigos, E.A, “Multicost Routing in Wireless AD-HOC 
Networks with Variable Transmission Power”, Personal, 
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, IEEE 18th 
International Symposium,  2007, pp. 1 – 5 
[3] Giuseppe Bianchi, “Performance analysis of the IEEE 802.11 
Distributed Coordination Function”, Selected Areas in 
Communications, Vol. 18,  2000,  pp. 535 – 547 
[4] Sutep Tongngam, “A Reducible Transmission Range 
Approach for Interference-Aware Broadcasting in Wireless 
Networks”, International Conference on Future Information 
Technology, 2011, pp. 144 – 148 
[5] Tinnirello, I. and Bianchi, G., “Interference Estimation in 
IEEE 802.11 Networks”, Control Systems, vol. 30, 2010, pp. 
30-43, 
[6] Anand 
Kashyap, 
Utpal 
Paul, 
and 
Samir 
R. 
Das, 
“Deconstructing Interference Relations in WiFi Networks”, 
Sensor Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks, 7th 
Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference, 2010, pp. 
1 – 9 
[7] Yutaka 
Fukuda, 
Masanori 
Honjo, 
and 
Yuji 
Oie, 
“Development of Access Point Selection Architecture with 
Avoiding Interference For WLANs”, Personal, Indoor and 
Mobile Radio Communications, IEEE 17th International 
Symposium, 2006, pp.1-5  
[8] Heeyoung Lee, Seongkwan Kim, Okhwan Lee, Sunghyun 
Choi, and Sung-Ju Lee, “Available Bandwidth-Based 
Association in IEEE 802.11 Wireless LANs”, Proceedings of 
the 11th international symposium on Modeling, analysis and 
simulation of wireless and mobile systems, 2008, pp.132-139 
[9] Daniel 
Wu, 
Petar 
Djukic, 
and 
Prasant 
Mohapatra, 
“Determining 
802.11 
Link 
Quality 
with 
Passive 
Measurements”, Wireless Communication Systems, IEEE 
International Symposium, 2008, pp. 728 – 732 
[10] Cisco, “WiFi Location-Based Services 4.1 Design Guide - 
Location Tracking Approaches”, 2008 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

XMPP Distributed Topology as a Potential Solution for Fog Computing
Jonathan Bar-Magen Numhauser, Jose Antonio Gutierrez de Mesa
Department of Computer Science
University of Alcala
Alcala de Henares, Spain
e-mail: {jonathan.bar-magen, jantonio.gutierrez}@uah.es
Abstract—Fog Computing is potentially harmful towards
existing Cloud Computing systems as well as Big Data
structures. Lack of privacy and potentially unauthorized
content distribution are some of many issues to solve. As a
possible solution, we propose in the following paper the
definition of a new Network Topology as well as a working
methodology to reduce its impact. It serves as an introduction
to our investigation line and for future works that aim to solve
the effect of the Fog Computing.
Keywords-Fog Computing; topology; network; Big Data;
XMPP.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Our previous studies into Fog Computing [1][2] were
basically introductory; being such an innovative subject
devised by our research team, we defined its identity, and
eventually obtained a structure that established what Fog
Computing is, as well as its implications on Big Data
structures. In this paper, we are following the established
research steps, and present later the second part of the
research process, which is equivalent to the first technical
phase of the research guideline.
Fog Computing can be perceived both in large Cloud
systems and Big Data structures, making reference to the
growing difficulties in accessing objectively to information.
These results in a lack of quality of the obtained content and,
in some cases, even it’s dumping. The effects of Fog
Computing on Cloud Computing and Big Data systems may
vary; yet, a common aspect that can be extracted are the
limitations in accurate content distribution, an issue that for
long has been tackled with the creation of metrics that
attempt to improve such [9].
The influence of a variety of entities in the cloud/big data
market impacts the magnitude of Fog Computing [6], as
described by Agrawal et al. [4]. For this study, we supposed
a network structure of Cloud or Big Data where we may find
and advanced stage for Fog Computing. To bring a solution
to such advanced stage, we are about to propose a number of
methods, which were later tested. These results are examined
for optimization and future research steps, as well as
feedback for collaborative methodologies [1]. The first
section of this paper will expose the necessary requirements
needed for Fog Computing to appear in Cloud Computing
and Big Data. It will be followed by a description of the
evolution of Fog Computing in such structures. Once we
establish the necessary requirements for a Big Data structure
affected by Fog, this paper will explain the first steps taken
to find a solution to such a situation, and show the
development steps taken to find possible alternatives to solve
the existence of Fog.
This paper will start by describing how Fog Computing
manifests itself in Big Data structures; it will be followed by
the analysis of algorithms to manage information systems. In
the Methodology and Technological Background sections
that follow, a study of the methods to use in the research
work as well as the technological necessities will be treated.
Once
established
the
background
variables,
in
the
Investigation process section, the steps taken in the overall
research work will be described to details.
After the research section, the Development section will
establish the development process that took part in our work.
Finally, the conclusion section will summarize all the work
that took place in this project phase.
It is imperative to highlight that this is the first phase of a
three-phase research process that will culminate in a
complete empiric result analysis, which implies that in the
early phases no more than topological and structural results
will be exposed.
II.
FOG COMPUTING IN BIG DATA
Big Data structures in the last few years have been
acquiring a central role [5]. As the following evolution step
of Cloud Computing, before entering into it, this evolution
has to take place with a number of precautions to ensure that
the Fog do not pass towards the Big Data structures [3].
Cloud Computing and Big Data function on the topology
of third party storage information [4]. This structure
advocates
that
each
node
of
the
network
relies
its
information on a centralized data bank and allows the
powerful core mainframes to process such information and
obtain richer results. In case of Cloud Computing, the second
part with regard to processing is not as evolved as in Big
Data, in which the core calculations are a fundamental part
of the system [5].
When creating these types of data structures, we have to
consider the following issues: Relying the impact of size and
memory in the mainframe, and Hardware costs that requires
an effective and optimized algorithm to manage such
information.
The research lines of semantic and indexation are having
a major importance in many universities and laboratories,
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

aiming at obtaining better search algorithms and reduce the
impact of size and memory in the mainframe. This field of
study is of such importance that most of the largest
technological entities have independent research departments
only to find new and improved search methods.
The need to find such solutions is intertwined with the
constant change in the global network topology. The
information-based structure is pushing towards studies to
dedicate an increasing amount of time and energy in finding
metrics and algorithms to improve search engines, and by
default the management of information [7].
It is this increase of information structures that we
consider is the trigger to the Fog Computing, and so the
establishment of our research line [2]. Cloud Computing and
Big Data implies a significant amount of information
management, information that can be easily manipulated and
filtered as it was proven in our previous introductory
paper[2]. Fog Computing is the situation in which mass
information
structures
loose
control
of
the
attempted
impartial nature of information search. If we search for
information of type “A”, a
system affected
by Fog
Computing may intentionally or unintentionally filter the
resulting information, which will have the effect of a limited
visual spectrum for the user.
The causes of this manipulation can be either intentional
or non intentional, as a result of the evolution of algorithms
and their attempts to achieve perfection in result accuracy.
Fog Computing can be instigated by a number of external
variables,
those
variable
that
covers
numerous
fields
including security, commerce and politics, all of which have
the same objective: the filtering or obscurity of information
of type “A” behind information of type “B”.
These requirements can be found in most existing Cloud
and Big Data networks, commercial and political in search
engine information as seen in Bar-Magen [2]. From search
engines, like Google Search, and Bing to profile-based
networks, like Facebook or Twitter, Fog Computing can be
found in each, represented by sponsored manipulated results,
lack of user privacy and remote manipulation of sensitive
data.
F Fog Computing has to be considered at the moment of
designing a Big Data system; in the following sessions, we
will expose a possible solution based in topological structure
to reduce the impact of Fog in the network systems. It is
important to state that Fog Computing cannot be totally
solved, but we work to reduce its impact as much as
possible.
III.
ALGORITHMS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
A.
Algorithms for result optimization
Before heading on to the topology analysis and how to
use it to solve Fog Computing, we would like to state a
number
of
issues
regarding
the
situation
of
present
algorithms to manage information.
Algorithms to manage information are being devised
constantly to improve the visualization of information. The
evolution of these algorithms aims to optimize search results
on regional and profile learning interests. These algorithms
make use of a complex profile map, based on user interests,
of the user who searches for such information [6]. The
evolution of those algorithms aim to increase the search
spectrum to use linked profiles of users related to the alpha
user, which today attempts to use the power of profiled
networks, like Facebook, and search engines, like Bing. The
combination of these two tools attempt to keep optimizing
the information management algorithms.
The
overall
objective
of
information
management
algorithms is to achieve a precise result and adapt it to the
user’s instant necessities. By now, as a result of our previous
studies, we obtained that such attempts to improve search
algorithms result in the increment of Fog Computing in the
information networks [2]. Many of the current top content
management entities use such algorithms to stay at the
highest position in search results success hits, pushing
forward the algorithm evolution. Yet, this evolution ends up
in
the
unconscious
filtering
of
a
larger
amount
of
information, prioritizing one type of information over the
other.
B.
Information management and increase revenue
Information management had a main role in advanced
civilizations and its motives are so vast that it merits a study
of its own. In our case, the use of several algorithms in
information management allows the benefit of several
entities above others [8]. Those algorithms are mold to deal
with the specific variables; the variables are, in general,
established
by
entities
that
benefit
from
information
management engines, which eventually render them partial
and biased.
As a result of such partiality, we decided to approach the
definition of a topological structure for network components,
and once the structure is established define a new brand of
algorithms that will manage the new network structure.
Some of those resulting algorithms that will be exposed in
the following sections are based on standardized XMPP/XEP
XML
protocols
as
well
as
localized
environmental
frameworks; for example, the iOS XMPPFramework created
by Hanson [19].
The information management in a new topology will
result in a different concept of data distribution and control.
The most significant difference will be noticed in the content
distribution
and
recollection,
reducing
the
centralized
management of such. This may be noticed in the choice of
hardware for our project, being strongly based on mobile
devices, and considering the dynamic characteristic of those
devices, a swarm based structural functionality may be
adopted imitating Swarm-Computing structures, which will
imply the creation of a mobility-swarm based architecture
[17]. We have chosen such distribution because it will allow
us to establish a decentralized smart based peer to peer
network in which each node will form part of a complete
swarm structure. New content storage and distribution will
allow an alternative option to achieve an impartial content
exposure, and reduce substantially the Fog in many actual
centralized network structures.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

IV.
METHODOLOGY CHOICE
The following step will be to establish the methodology
to use in the following research work. To accurately predict
the future steps of our work process, it is imperative that an
appropriate methodology be chosen. Looking at our previous
investigation into collaborative methodologies [1], that
contemplated the creation of standardized rules for correct
functionality in collaborative work, and alternatively analyze
the results of our research in Native Based Development that
included the definition of working steps to follow facing a
project that spreads a large spectrum of technological
environments, we concluded that a combined working
technique of both fields is needed for our current project.
Collaborative Methodology requires the participation of a
number of entities at the development phase of a project, and
so we were able to obtain the collaboration of at least a
couple of entities to work on this development. A second
issue in Collaborative Methodology work is the dependency
on collaborative tools, and the way to manage them in the
course of the project development. The tools are related to
the agile nature of this methodology, translated to the
creation of a number of roles dedicated to the completion of
certain objectives.
For
this
project,
we
adopted
a
Collaborative
Methodology because we are also familiar with its workflow
and phases allowing us to easily adapt the objectives of our
software and hardware development.
As a result of the technical specification, it will be
necessary
to
develop
on
each
device,
natively
the
intelligence necessary to manage the content transaction
between each device. Combining it with Collaborative
Methodology it will substantially reduce the work load,
ensuring the coordination and synchronization of each
member and each component being developed.
The resulting endeavor was influenced by the chosen
methodology and allowed us to achieve a number of results
that were not initially expected in the hypothesis.
V.
TECHNOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Defining the correct background
variables for our
research process will help defining the basic development
necessities to comply with our objectives. Peer-to-peer,
Swarm Computing and privacy and security measures will
be some of the issues that were studied as a background
analysis.
A.
Peer-to-Peer Concept
The studies on peer-to-peer have been numerous in the
last years [14][15][16]. In our work we decided to make use
of this network structure to attempt a possible by pass of
centralized information flow, and so, create a new data
structure for transactions that may permit the establishment
of a standardized information distribution. This new data
structure will be strongly based on peer-to-peer topological
distribution used for our practice XMPP/Jabber system.
This new information distribution standard will be part of
the main study to solve Fog. What we aim to describe in this
section is that the concept of peer-to-peer information
transaction has been adopted as an initial background
requirement to solve the issue at hand.
Peer-to-peer network structures can be widely seen in a
number
of
file
transaction
systems,
as
well
as
communication clients, in particular, based on either Adobe
Cirrus multimedia server, or, in our case, the XMPP Jabber
server [14].
XMPP server supports partial peer-to-peer connection in
the messaging method, and full peer-to-peer transactions
with the use of the Jingle extension [18]. With the available
channels for distribution of information, we will be able to
establish a main working method to follow in the research
process.
B.
Swarm Computing
As established in a number of places in the previous
section, the adoption of Swarm Computing development
rules will allow us to emulate a Swarm Computing behavior
in the overall peer-to-peer system that will act as the solution
to the Fog Computing issue.
Swarm Computing [17] refers to the technological field
of independent processing modules coordinating to offer
unified and larger information in a certain spectrum. Swarm
Computing is strongly linked to the described in the previous
point, for our research peer-to-peer and Swarm Computing
refers to the same network structure. Depending on its use,
the network structure can be more or less dependent on a
centralized source.
In our study case, we opt to define the structure as mostly
decentralized, offering the minimum required common
points for successful communication establishment. An
analysis of Swarm Computing on the propagation of Fog
Computing and its synchronization with the rest of the
background variables will follow.
C.
Privacy and Security
Privacy and security of the shared data is a serious issue
to be concerned with regarding Big Data structures. At the
present, high security risks that can be found in common Big
Data and Cloud Computing structures drive users to lower
their trust levels in those systems, thus reducing the
efficiency of Big Data systems.
Big
Data
thrives
on
the
possible
combination
of
information with the purpose of obtaining new and more
optimal content. A great example is disease spreading, that
with an efficient Big Data structure, can be better controlled
and offer better solutions.
When we regard the issue of security and privacy in Big
Data, we should always consider two main sources of
difficulties, either the information exploits by the central
system, which is the existence of an impartial and abusive
central administration, or exploits driven by individual
attackers, which can result in the trafficking of information
by third parties.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Both issues form part of Fog Computing, and that is why
we are driven in our research to find a trusted solution to
these problems.
We believe that through the establishment of a new
network structure, as well as the use of a number of studied
technologies, we may be able to increase the security and
privacy of members in a Big Data structure, and so reduce
the impact of the Fog Computing in the system.
VI.
RESEARCH PROCESS
To initiate the first phase of our research, once defined
the
background
variables,
we
proceeded
with
the
establishment of the network structure that will form the new
communication systems.
We seek to achieve a new method of communication and
information distribution that may emulate a Big Data or
Cloud Computing structure and offer a counter solution
incase of a centralized structure affected by Fog Computing.
Fogs in large information structures are the main issue to
solve, and we started by defining a peer-to-peer based
Swarm Computing topological system.
The
system
will
require
the
functionality
of
XMPP/Jabber server to allow a centralized address access,
serving as a directory for the members of the Big Data
structure to communicate. To solve the massive information
filtering systems, we studied the importance of background
interaction of services with the technological environment.
Each member of the swarm will be considered as a
component from now on, with an associated entity id.
A.
Component's background services
In our project we defined that each component of the
swarm should contain a minimum number of services to
function
autonomously,
considering
it
as
part
of
its
intelligence. This behavior will be achieved by using
appropriate hardware and software characteristics. The basic
hardware/software will be an operating system with I/O
capabilities and network connection. In this specific test case
we made use of an iOS device, and we categorized it as a
component in the swarm.
Background services are what allowed components of the
swarm to react to environmental changes, defining the
importance of these services, that without them all the theory
of our topological structure will fail. In the first phase, we
opted to develop simple software to simulate the swarm
activity in a component, and see the behavior of such
component on a macro scale.
Those services will constantly communicate with other
services in other components, and so complete the swarm
behavior. It is through those services that we will achieve a
complex Big Data counterpart to the traditional centralized
structure.
B.
Native-Based Development for Components
Even though we used for this sample case an iOS based
environment, we should consider the importance of a native
based development in our research process. Each component
will be developed according to its environmental variables,
on a software level. These native environments will cover
iOS, Android, or AS3 in case of a PC device.
Their common denominator will be the communication
protocol, which will be the Jingle XMPP protocol. Their
communication will pass through a common server that will
route the connection between two or more members of the
swarm. That is why the use of a proper native development
methodology is essential for a successful result.
C.
Component's Characteristics.
If we consider each component to have enough autonomy
to send and receive information, as well as to store it, we will
notice the a creation of a peer-to-peer structure that at the
same time also simulates a distributed network system and a
Big Data structure.
By increasing the amount of sensors and interaction
abilities of the components with its environment, we are
successfully creating a richer swarm and
an optimal
information distribution algorithm. The importance of one
type of information in regard to another will be defined not
by centralized entities algorithms or interests, but by the
same components that form the swarm.
The propagation of information in the swarm will
exclusively depend on the components that form part of the
swarm.
If
we
compare
it
with
the
existing
content
distribution systems that make use of components as
extremities instead of independent members of a swarm, we
will notice that the need to route by content packages
through a centralized device will result in a non arbitrary
control of the obtained content, which will eventually
increase the Fog in the system.
D.
Lighthouse concept
In our new structure, we attempt to define each
component in the swarm as independent enough to behave as
a
lighthouse
in
regard
to
information
distribution.
Components will store information, and propagate it as long
as it will see fit, depending on the surrounding swarm
members. Such is the dependency that eventually there may
be a case in which information will not transcend more than
one component or node.
This structure increases the efficiency of security and
privacy of user information in the overall network, allowing
him or her to freely hide and delete information from the
general swarm. The lighthouse effect in the swarm structure
will be the core solution for Fog Computing, allowing the
component to decide either autonomously or by manual
intervention what information should or should not be
propagated.
This will instigate the need to establish new content
treatment algorithms, and so we will introduce an initial
phase for content manipulation in the swarm.
E.
Content mangement in the swarm
Algorithms to manage content are vast in present
systems, yet if we pretend to create a secure and private
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

content control structure, as well as a trusted and optimized
access to content, it is essential to establish a structure that
will permit the evolution of content management and its
algorithms.
Such changes should be open for either autonomous
improvement as well as manual intervention. And it will
have to contemplate the possible random improvement of
information management algorithms. All this requisites will
be
treated
towards
the
second
phase
of
our
study.
Nonetheless we will establish a basic communication
standard, on the foundation of XMPP XEP extensions, as
well as the creation of new extensions [15]. The algorithms
will be improved with time and increase in efficiency as the
project advances. It will also contemplate the use of smart
components as well as intermediate nodes that will allow a
better flow of the content, but not its manipulation, so we can
avoid a possible appearance of Fog in the system.
The increase in components complexity can either
increase the efficiency of the structure or decrease it,
depending on the algorithmic methods that are being
followed.
F.
The Work Process
Once we obtained all the pre requisites from our
investigation into peer-to-peer, Swarm Computing, content
management algorithms and XMPP servers, we proceeded
with the creation of our first swarm based network, and
analyze the possible existence of variables that may result in
the appearance of Fog Computing.
VII.
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
At first we devised a network structure that will comply
with the aspects described in the previous sections. The use
of complex swarm components will suppose on one hand a
higher cost in development, but on the other hand it may
result in a greater source of information resulting from the
created algorithms.
Initially
we
implemented
a
simple
communication
program that will use the network structure to simulate a
peer-to-peer communication. The adaptation of XMPP
libraries to the development environments was a costly
process, but once it was completed, the propagation of the
same
enterprise
to
different
native
environments
was
successfully optimized.
The creation of custom extensions required a previous
study of the limitation that XMPP structures have, in
particular de XEP protocols, and how they restrict the
exchange of content. The extensions required to be registered
on a public domain. XMPP uses XML language structure,
which also needed the preparation of modules to interpret
those extensions in each network component or device.
Once
established
the
peer-to-peer
communication
structure, we run some tests on the overall process of content
transaction obtaining favorable results in regard to latency
and
bidirectional
interaction.
The
bidirectional
communication resulted in a fast and almost instantaneous
interaction, having used in our case components existing in
the Madrid surrounding area with a small component number
of 20. Later on we passed the test components to a larger
distance, from Latin America to Europe, resulting in
favorable and low latency results. An average instantaneous
message inside the Madrid area took 35ms to be received
from source to destination. On the other hand, a message
from Spain to Brazil took longer but not on a level out of our
prediction: 125ms.
On pure peer-to-peer communication through Jingle
node, latency was calculated using Wireshark package
reader, receiving a number of interesting results. Latency
inside the Madrid area was under 50ms, while latency
between Madrid and Sao Paulo was around 230ms.
The following step was to improve the communication
tools, and allow a higher quality of content exchange.
Implementing a Jingle extension could do this. For this
process we made use of a variety of sources, which in their
core ended up resulting in the use of the Jingle Library
supported by the Google Development Group.
This library created in C, is easily adapted to a variety of
environments allowing a smoother process of integration in
our swarm components. The result was favorable, and we
were able to transmit audio content from one component to
another using the peer-to-peer communication structure.
Latency results on this case depended on a number of
variables, including the unified size of the byte stream being
sent, but in an overall analysis we obtained that the
connection speed between the two nodes was favorable as
well.
On regard to the internal behavior of the components, we
established
a
number
of
methods
to
store
relevant
information. Initially we allowed the user to define if the
swarm component will be a storage node and a propagator,
or only a propagator. The difference will be noticed on the
level of priority the component will have, where the storage
nodes are of higher security priority. Storage nodes not only
send their information, but also store the information for
future
distribution,
and
in
case
of
deletion,
if
such
information is not replicated in another storage node marked
as origin, it will be completely removed from the system.
The available table management environment in the
mobile devices, through the use of SQL structures, allowed
the creation of an improved communication flow. By having
a strong intelligence base, each node of the swarm can work
as storage and propagator, as well as contain a variety of
complex algorithms.
The final step of our first research phase was the creation
of a unified extension to communicate between swarm
components, and as a result analyze the frequency in which
background services used to exploit these extensions. We
noticed that some simple commands could be avoided from
being used through Jingle extensions. Jingle uses an open
socket channel between two nodes, and such channels may
require a greater management level from the components
software, which will result in higher complexity. Push
commands could be passed by a normal extension and an IQ
or Message type, which resulted in a cleaner and less
dependent communication.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Information requests could also be executed through push
requests instead of Jingle, but the greatest inconvenient will
be in the limitation of content transaction and content size.
The background services that were implemented, in this
case normal message reception as well as automatic light
level management, worked according to our expectations.
Later
on
we
also
incorporated
the
detection
of
the
components movement based on the accelerometer. All those
sensors sent information to the components that requested it,
and even in some cases activated other components on the
execution of a certain event, imitating the behavior of a
smart swarm system.
The best example was the execution of an alert on the
main control panel in the PC version of the program when
the device fell from a high altitude. Thus it confirms the
possible interaction of swarm elements, and the potential
improvements
for
more
complex
content
exchange
algorithms.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
For this research project we established a number of
objectives to achieve. The first was to obtain the necessary
requirements to identify a big data structure affected by Fog
Computing. This was detailed in the first sections of this
paper. The following goal was to obtain a study of the
appropriate methodologies for the development of this
project and the creation of this new content structure [2].
When we look into the topological study of a network
structure, inflicted by Fog Computing, we have to consider
privacy, security, and scalability and efficiency issues. These
were our considerations when we approached the second
step of our project. Basing on our experience from previous
studies we concluded that opting to use a Collaborative
Methodology, and a native based development workflow,
would be the best choice confronting the existence of a
swarm peer-to-peer network structure.
We should point that those methodologies will be
composed of agile elements such as SCRUM amongst
others. When we proceeded to the practical phase, we
encountered the need to establish the technological pre
requisites, as well as the overall structure that our network
should be based on, as is shown by the compared network
structures in Figure 1. From this study we devised the use of
a swarm structure, and its combination with a decentralized
peer-to-peer communication standard [16].
As part of our study we also decided to use XMPP
protocol to achieve a true peer-to-peer communication
structure, and also the use of smart components that will are
parts of the swarm network [18].
The development ended up in the creation of a software,
that can be run in a variety of components that allowed us to
achieve substantial empiric results that are being studied to
be exposed in the second phase of our research, and that in
summary, show the possible peer-to-peer communication
between components that are part of a decentralized swarm
network, and even the possible incorporation of independent
background services that will add complexity to the content
manipulation.
Being this the first phase of a three-step project, we
cannot yet inform on empiric results of the impact of this
system on Fog Computing. What we can report is that a first
phase of communication in a new swarm network structure
was possible, and that the Fog Computing was reduced by
allowing information to be stored in the components and so
creating an alternative for improvements in privacy and
security.
Future study will bring us more empiric results that may
be compared to existing centralized structures, being one of
them a Z Mainframe execution of such a network structure.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Bar-Magen, A. Garcia-Cabot, E. Garcia, L. de-Marcos, and
JA.
Gutierrez
de
Mesa.
“Collaborative Network Development for an Embedded
Framework”. In: Uden L, Herrera F, Pérez JB, Corchado
Rodríguez JM, editors. 7th International Conference on
Knowledge Management in Organizations: Service and Cloud
Computing: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2013. p. 443-453.
[2]
J. Bar-Magen, “Fog Computing- Introduction to a new Cloud
evolution”. In: Jose F. Fornies Casals, Paulina Numhauser,
editor. Escrituras Silenciadas: El paisaje como Historiografia.
1st ed. Alcala de Henares, Madrid, Spain: UAH; 2013. p. 111-
126.
[3]
F. Frankel and R. Reid,Big data: “Distilling meaning from
data.” Nature 2008 09/04;455(7209):30-30.
[4]
D. Agrawal, S. Das, and A. El Abbadi. “Big data and cloud
computing:
current
state
and
future
opportunities.”
In
Proceedings
of
the
14th
International
Conference
on
Extending
Database
Technology
(EDBT/ICDT
'11),
Anastasia Ailamaki, Sihem Amer-Yahia, Jignesh Pate, Tore
Risch, Pierre Senellart, and Julia Stoyanovich (Eds.). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 530-533.
[5]
C. Lynch, “Big data: How do your data grow?” Nature 2008
09/04;455(7209): pp. 28-29.
[6]
J. Brandon, “Living in the Cloud.” PC Magazine 2008;27(8):
pp.19-20.
[7]
D. Angeli, “A cost-effective cloud computing framework for
accelerating multimedia communication simulations.” Journal
of Parallel & Distributed Computing 2012;72(10): pp.1373-
1385.
[8]
MR. Nelson, “The Cloud, the Crowd, and Public Policy.”
Issues in Science & Technology 2009;25(4): pp.71-76.
[9]
S.J.
Stolfo,
M.B
Salem.,
and
A.D.
Keromytis,
"Fog
Computing: Mitigating Insider Data Theft Attacks in the
Cloud," Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), 2012 IEEE
Symposium on , vol., no., pp.125,128, 24-25 May 2012
[10] A.S. Yüksel, M.E. Yuksel, and A.H. Zaim, "An Approach for
Protecting
Privacy
on
Social
Networks,"
Systems
and
Networks Communications (ICSNC), 2010 Fifth International
Conference on , vol., no., pp.154,159, 22-27 Aug. 2010
[11] R. Buyya, J. Broberg, and A.M. Goscinski. 2011. “Cloud
Computing Principles and Paradigms.” Wiley Publishing.
[12] K. McDonald, “Above the Clouds: Managing Risk in the
World of Cloud Computing.” 2010.
[13] E. Boritz and W. Gyun No. 2009. “A Gap in Perceived
Importance of Privacy Policies between Individuals and
Companies.” In Proceedings of the 2009 World Congress on
Privacy, Security, Trust and the Management of e-Business
(CONGRESS '09). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC,
USA, 181-192
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

[14] DA Bryan, BB Lowekamp, and C. Jennings, “SOSIMPLE: A
Serverless,
Standards-based,
P2P
SIP
Communication
System.” Advanced Architectures and Algorithms for Internet
Delivery and Applications, 2005 AAA-IDEA 2005 First
International Workshop on 2005: pp. 42-49.
[15] C. dos Santos, S. Cechin, L. Granville, M. Almeida, and L.
Tarouco,
“On
the performance
of
employing
presence
services in P2P-based network management systems.” In
Proceedings of the 2008 ACM symposium on Applied
computing (SAC '08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2090-
2094..
[16] L. Stout, M. Murphy, and S. Goasguen,” ”Kestrel: an XMPP-
based framework for many task computing applications.” In
Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Many-Task Computing
on Grids and Supercomputers (MTAGS '09). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, , Article 11 , 6 pages.
[17] G. Beni, “From Swarm Intelligence to Swarm Robotics”
Lecture
Notes
in
Computer
Science.
Springer
Berlin
Heidelberg, 2005, 1-9 pages.
[18] P.
Saint-Andre,
"Jingle:
Jabber
Does
Multimedia,"
MultiMedia, IEEE , vol.14, no.1, pp.90,94, Jan.-March 2007.
[19] R.
Hanson,
XMPPFrameWork
for
iOS
environments,
https://github.com/robbiehanson/XMPPFramework/wiki/Intro
ToFramework
Figure 1.
Network structures: (a) Centralized information network system, (b) XMPP P2P based information network system
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

Flow Classiﬁcation in Delay-Aware NUM-Oriented Wireless Mesh Networks
Przemyslaw Walkowiak, Maciej Urbanski, Mateusz Poszwa, Radoslaw Szalski
Institute of Control and Information Engineering
Poznan University of Technology
Poznan, Poland
Email: {przemyslaw.walkowiak, maciej.urbanski, mateusz.poszwa, radoslaw.szalski}@put.poznan.pl
Abstract—The Network Utility Maximisation (NUM) framework
is one of the most widely investigated approaches for designing
the resource management system for wireless mesh networks. In
order to perform the NUM-oriented per-ﬂow network resource
management, data ﬂows have to be recognised and classiﬁed.
Relevant solutions that are constituents of the state-of-the-art
NUM frameworks are insufﬁcient, since they are able to dif-
ferentiate between various network ﬂows only according to the
transport layer protocol used. The paper describes improvements
introduced to an existing DANUM System (DANUMS) imple-
mentation. They provide means for ﬂexible ﬂow classiﬁcation
enabling more accurate utility estimation for more diverse types
of ﬂows. The solution improves DANUMS’ ability to assign
appropriate utility functions suitable for different types of trafﬁc.
The experiments show that the enhanced framework enables
improving the performance of the DANUMS.
Keywords-DANUMS; wireless mesh networks; Network Utility
Maximisation; trafﬁc classiﬁcation
I.
INTRODUCTION
As the wireless network access is becoming more and more
widespread, the needs of its users grow. When the demands
exceed the network’s capacity, not all ﬂows can be served
equally well. NUM [1] aims to manage network resources
in an optimal way, which ensures maximal satisfaction of
network users. DANUMS [2] provides NUM functionality by
identifying and classifying ﬂows, as well as by measuring and
acting on changes of their utility. It is an application of and an
enhancement to the NUM model providing delay awareness.
The framework improves the fairness of the resource allocation
among ﬂows with different delay requirements. DANUMS has
been designed to work in wireless mesh networks [2].
DANUMS is a part of the architecture developed within the
Carrier-grade delay-aware resource management for wireless
multi-hop/mesh networks (CARMNET) project [3] referred
to as CARMNET architecture. This architecture consists of
multiple components (see Figure 1): a routing component in
the form of Optimised Link State Routing Protocol daemon
(OLSRd), a custom SIP User Agent integrated with a Linux
Loadable Kernel Module (LKM), a user interface (WebUI)
and an IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) platform. SIP User
Agent is responsible for asynchronous communication between
LKM and the IMS. The user interface is a WWW application
that allows users to bind utility functions to various types of
trafﬁc. The WebUI also provides insight into statistics about
transmitted trafﬁc and network usage cost.
Internet
CARMNET Node
User space
Kernel space
DANUMS SIP
User Agent
IP Stack
DANUMS
LKM
OLSRd
DANUMS
plug-in
WebUI
IMS
netlink
IP
Figure 1.
Architecture of the CARMNET network [3].
In NUM, network resource allocation is performed on per-
ﬂow basis. The ﬂow classiﬁcation is necessary for recognition
of ﬂow-to-application associations. Once the ﬂow’s category
is identiﬁed, its utility can be computed according to its
characteristics. Bidirectional ﬂows, which can be referred to
as request-response ﬂows, also should be properly identiﬁed
as their performance may affect each other’s utility. TCP
ﬂows’ rate and responsiveness depend on the timely delivery
of ACK segments. Thus, it is desirable to prioritise request
and response ﬂows similarly in order to avoid unnecessary
congestion window reductions due to excessive ACK segments
queueing. Moreover, recognition of response ﬂows is beneﬁcial
from the business perspective, which is important in the
CARMNET architecture integrating Authentication, Authori-
sation and Accounting (AAA) and charging functionality [3].
Each node that generates trafﬁc should have control over both
request and response ﬂows’ virtual prices (see Section III).
The basic DANUMS implementation [2] differentiates
ﬂows according only to the transport layer protocol. While
effective for basic scenarios, this solution is not versatile
enough to control media streams with different needs. This
paper describes a practical implementation of a more robust
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

method for ﬂow classiﬁcation and recognition of response
ﬂows.
The paper structure is as follows. Related work is described
in Section II. Section III introduces the Delay-aware Network
Utility Maximisation (DANUM) model and provides its main
purposes. Section IV discusses the problem of ﬂow classiﬁca-
tion. Methods of recognition of response ﬂows are described
in Section V. Experiments and their results are described in
Sections VI and VII, followed by conclusion in Section VIII.
II.
RELATED WORK
Many NUM systems determine utility of ﬂows according
to the ﬂows’ throughput only [4]–[7]. Such an approach is not
sufﬁcient to effectively measure the utility of delay-sensitive
ﬂows. DANUMS, on the other hand, takes the delay into
consideration as well [2].
The work [6] presents a policy ensuring constant worst-
case delay, however, the utility function used in a maximisation
scheme is based only on throughput. In [4], it is assumed
that the mechanism based on providing inelastic ﬂows with
bandwidth exceeding their injection rate ensures satisfying
their end-to-end delay requirements. The framework presented
in [5] considers only TCP ﬂows. Solutions presented in [7]
require modiﬁcation of a network card driver, which does not
comply with the basic assumptions of CARMNET [3].
In order to estimate the ﬂow’s utility accurately, its type
has to be determined. Advanced techniques, such as payload
examination [8], machine learning algorithms [9], [10] or
solutions based on neural networks [11], have been used for
this purpose. However, DANUMS is also aimed at serving
mobile nodes, which may be power-constrained. For this
reason, classiﬁcation methods for DANUMS should not be
computationally complex.
III.
DANUM SYSTEM
The aim of the DANUM model is to provide an optimal
packet scheduling policy regarding the maximisation of the
network users’ satisfaction. It targets the maximum of the
network utility (a sum of utility of all ﬂows within the
network):
max
X
r∈S
Ur(xr, dr),
(1)
where S denotes a set of ﬂows within the network; xr – rate
of ﬂow r; dr – delay of ﬂow r; Ur – the utility function of
ﬂow r. In other words, DANUMS aims at solving the NUM
problem in a delay-aware way.
The relation between measurable ﬂow transmission quality
parameters and its utility is modelled by means of a utility
function. Each function corresponds to ﬂows of a given type
or, more precisely, to ﬂows with speciﬁc network requirements.
In DANUMS the utility is determined not only according to
the ﬂow’s throughput, but also to its end-to-end delay. Each
ﬂow may have a distinct utility function since it may prioritise
different network performance parameters. Assigning utility
functions to ﬂows is a task of the Flow Classiﬁer described in
Section IV.
It has been proven that the Max-Weight Scheduling (MWS)
algorithm is a solution to the standard throughput-oriented
NUM problem formulation [12]. The DANUMS applies the
MWS algorithm to virtual queue levels in order to determine
the next ﬂow queue to transmit a packet from.
A virtual queue is deﬁned as a product of ﬂow’s packet
backlog level and a virtual price of a single packet. Packet’s
virtual price is a value of the derivative of a utility function
assigned to the ﬂow. In other words, the more utility a ﬂow
would gain from improving its network performance parame-
ters (e.g., by lowering its delay), the higher is the virtual price.
The virtual price plays an important role in packet scheduling
as well as inﬂuences the cost of CARMNET network usage.
DANUMS LKM is responsible for packet queueing, mea-
suring ﬂows’ characteristics, as well as applying utility func-
tions and the backpressure scheduling algorithm. Packets
scheduled by DANUMS are relayed to the network interface
output buffer, the level of which is kept low as a result of
using Layer-2 Queue level Estimation [13]. Possible routes
acquisition and explicit signalling of virtual queues is done
through modiﬁed OLSRd. The details concerning the DANUM
and its implementation can be found in [2], [13]–[15].
IV.
FLOW CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK FOR DANUMS
Flows can be divided into two general groups: throughput-
demanding and delay-sensitive. They roughly correspond to
the TCP- and UDP-based trafﬁc, respectively. Such a division
was used in DANUMS prior to implementation of the Flow
Classiﬁer presented in this section. However, for some scenar-
ios, this simple classiﬁcation is insufﬁcient. The application of
the classiﬁcation subsystem in DANUMS allows a more ﬁne-
grained ﬂow classiﬁcation. The more trafﬁc classes a given
NUM system is able to recognise, the more accurately the
utility functions may reﬂect the requirements of different types
of trafﬁc.
Flow Classiﬁer used in DANUMS is a cascade of simple
ﬁlters (see Figure 2). Flow’s properties are checked against
rules deﬁned for each of the ﬁlters. Each rule is a pair
composed of ﬁlter-speciﬁc constraints and a ﬂow type. If any
of the rules matches the ﬂow, i.e., the ﬂow’s properties meet
the rule’s constraints, the classiﬁcation yields a ﬂow type
assigned to the matching rule as a result. An unspecialised
utility function is assigned if all the ﬁlters fail to classify
the ﬂow. Using this utility function is equivalent to setting a
constant virtual price for each packet, i.e., excluding the ﬂow
from the evaluation of NUM.
Response ﬂow recognition
Classiﬁcation by application name
Classiﬁcation by port numbers
Classiﬁcation by application protocol
Classiﬁcation by transport protocol
Figure 2.
Overview of the Flow Classiﬁcation Framework for DANUMS.
Arrows denote the order of applying the ﬁlters.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

A. Classiﬁcation by a transport layer protocol
Classiﬁcation by the transport layer protocol is the sim-
plest solution, nevertheless, it lacks the ability to differentiate
speciﬁc uses of each of the protocols. An example of different
TCP protocol applications can be provided: the comfort of Web
navigation depends on low delay, whereas comfort of sending
an e-mail does not.
B. Classiﬁcation by source and destination port numbers
A common way to determine ﬂow’s type is to assume
that the trafﬁc of a certain service or an application is bound
to a predeﬁned port. The advantage of this approach is that
the port numbers are already known to the classiﬁer, so no
additional processing is needed to determine them. However,
this assumption usually holds true only for services using the
well-known ports provided they were not conﬁgured to use
non-standard ports. Moreover, some application layer protocols
can be used with random ports, or even different transport
protocols. For the given reasons, the method assuming that
the trafﬁc of a certain service or an application is bound to
a predeﬁned port would require constant reconﬁgurations to
ensure an optimal classiﬁcation of ﬂows.
C. Classiﬁcation by an application layer protocol
In order to address the limitations of the above-described
approaches, classiﬁcation by the application layer protocol has
been considered. The transport layer and network layer proto-
cols’ headers do not provide any indication of the application
layer protocol used. Therefore, it has to be determined by a
direct analysis of the payload data, which is a complex task and
should be delegated to an external program such as l7-ﬁlter [8].
However, its kernel-space implementation is known to cause
problems on SMP-enabled processors [16], and the use of the
user-space implementation in critical systems is discouraged
by its authors [16]. Due to these disadvantages as well as lack
of well tested alternatives, this classiﬁcation method was not
yet implemented.
Even if it was possible to use some version of the l7-ﬁlter to
classify ﬂows, some of its patterns return false results [17] and
the cost of this method is considerably higher than the cost of
other methods discussed here. This may have an inﬂuence both
on performance and energy consumption. The latter aspect is of
great importance for the use of mobile nodes, which DANUMS
is designed for [2].
D. Classiﬁcation by ﬁlename of sending application
It is possible to use locally available information to au-
tomatically determine the ﬁlename of the application sending
the ﬂow. Moreover, it is much more probable that the node’s
user is able to state the name of the application she uses, than
that she is able to determine the port numbers bound to ﬂows
sent by the application. Thus, this method supports associating
ﬂows with desired utility functions chosen by the user through
the WebUI.
On the other hand, some applications send many types
of ﬂows simultaneously. A VoIP client, for example, is re-
sponsible for setting up sessions, sending multimedia streams
and reporting statistics by means of SIP, RTP and RTCP
protocols respectively. It is essential to choose a utility function
meant for the protocol whose transmission quality impacts the
application usability the most (in this case – RTP). In this
approach, heterogeneous ﬂows sent by a single application are
assigned the same utility function, which is, obviously, not the
optimal assignment.
E. Combining the classiﬁcation methods
Each of the aforementioned methods has disadvantages,
which render each of them insufﬁcient when used separately.
Some of the disadvantages may be avoided or minimised by
combining several classiﬁcation methods.
Response ﬂows are already classiﬁed by their destination
nodes (referred to as “owners”). They are treated specially and
should be ﬁltered out ﬁrst.
The most desired classiﬁcation criterion is the application
layer protocol used for the ﬂow payload. Unfortunately, as
discussed above, it is computationally expensive to determine.
For this reason, classiﬁcation based on regular expressions
should be preceded by less complex methods. Classiﬁcation
by the sending application ﬁlename is unreliable in case
of applications that send multiple ﬂows of various types.
Nevertheless, it reﬂects the end user’s needs most strictly, so
it should be the ﬁrst ﬁlter for request ﬂows. Classiﬁcation by
the transport layer protocol can serve as a fallback mechanism
for ﬂows which fail to be classiﬁed by any other criteria. The
ﬁnal order of ﬁlters is illustrated in Figure 2.
V.
RECOGNITION OF REQUEST AND RESPONSE FLOWS
A request ﬂow originating from one node and addressed
to the other is usually accompanied by a response ﬂow
transmitted in the opposite direction. These two ﬂows provide
a duplex point-to-point connection between two nodes.
However, as far as DANUMS is concerned, a node which
initiates a request ﬂow should also be charged for the response
ﬂow. Such a node is marked as the “owner” of both ﬂows.
Information about ﬂow “ownership” is propagated by OLSRd
along the ﬂow’s path and allows the ﬂow classiﬁer to differ-
entiate request and response ﬂows.
If the ﬂows were considered separately, a utility function
would be assigned to each of them by the source node. Such a
scheme would have undesirable consequences. Let us consider
a scenario in which the requesting node assigns a utility
function demanding a very low delay to a certain type of ﬂow,
but the responding node user does not require such low delay
for that type of ﬂow. Even though the requests could be sent
quickly, thanks to the assigned utility function, the perceived
utility of network may not be satisfying for requesting node’s
user, as the response ﬂow may fail to be prioritised by the
replying node.
Another example of undesirable consequence of mismatch-
ing utility functions is related to the CARMNET business
model [3]. When the source node is outside the CARMNET
network, the destination node is charged for the transmission
of the ﬂow. Were the ﬂows considered separately, their utility
would be decided by the node at the border of the CARMNET
network (an Internet-sharing node), which forwards the ﬂow to
the destination node inside the CARMNET network. Since the
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

utility of a ﬂow is closely related to its virtual price, it should
not be set by a node other than the one which is charged for
transmitting the ﬂow.
For the aforementioned reasons, a mechanism for recog-
nising response ﬂows has been implemented that enables two
methods for response ﬂows’ virtual price adjustment. Their
performance has been evaluated in Section VI.
1) Copying the request ﬂow’s virtual price: The informa-
tion about the virtual price of each ﬂow, encapsulated in the
Queue Report Message (QRM) packets [15], is propagated
through the network along the ﬂow’s path. Therefore, it is
available for the replying node and can be applied to the re-
sponse ﬂow. This simple method does not require the replying
node to analyse the ﬂow to which virtual price is applied or to
fetch requesting node’s proﬁle. However, the potential issues
this method introduces need to be considered.
In DANUMS, characteristics of a certain path are measured
on per-ﬂow basis. When the network is congested, throughput
and delay measured at both endpoints of a ﬂow may differ
signiﬁcantly. Undesired consequences of using this method
may also arise when request and response ﬂows’ requirements
differ. Such situation is illustrated by the ﬁrst experiment
described in Section VI-B1.
2) Calculating the request ﬂow’s new virtual price by
applying a utility function at the replying node: The other
method of controlling the virtual price of a response ﬂow is
to assign a utility function chosen by the requesting node.
This information can be retrieved from IMS by sending the
Get Proﬁle message [3]. While ﬂows’ owner node can assign
the same utility function to both request and response ﬂows,
its parameters will differ from those measured on each end-
point of respective ﬂows. Network characteristics perceived at
both nodes may be inﬂuenced by factors such as congestion,
asymmetry of links or choice of routes. Therefore, it is more
accurate to calculate the ﬂow’s virtual price at the transmitting
node, whether or not it is the ﬂow’s “owner”.
VI.
EXPERIMENTS
A. Testbed
Experiments have been performed in a wireless network
testbed called wnPUT [18]. The wnPUT testbed deployment
approach has been inﬂuenced by the Distributed Embedded
System Testbed (DES-Testbed) [19] architecture. Currently our
testbed consists of about 20 PC-class machines, each equipped
with two network interfaces, wired and wireless. The wired
network is used for out-of-band management. The wireless
connections are used for experimentation purposes only. Each
testbed node runs a Debian GNU/Linux distribution.
A
B
C
Internet
P1
P1
P1
P1
Figure 3.
Copying the ﬂow’s virtual price. A – CARMNET node, B –
CARMNET Relaying node, C – CARMNET Internet Sharing node, P1 –
Virtual price calculated at Node A
A
B
C
getProﬁle(A)
Internet
P1
P2
P1
P2
Figure 4.
Applying utility function at replying node. A – CARMNET node,
B – CARMNET Relaying node, C – CARMNET Internet Sharing node, P1 –
Virtual price calculated at Node A, P2 – Virtual price calculated at Node C
The testbed allows for an easy and automated experiment
execution. It handles parsing of the experiment description
ﬁles, setting up wireless network, conﬁguring topology, ex-
ecuting speciﬁed commands and, ﬁnally, gathering results.
Experiments are described using the scenario ﬁles written in
XML. The syntax of those ﬁles is an extension of the DES-
CRIPT [20] language used in DES-Testbed [19]. The uniﬁed
format of experiment description ﬁles has many beneﬁts such
as portability and expressiveness, as well as allowing the
experiments to be performed on different testbeds. Although
the testbed framework was heavily modiﬁed, the phases of
experimentation remain as deﬁned in the previous work [18],
[19]. Status of performed commands and the DANUMS LKM
is acquired in real-time by means of rsyslogd and visualised
by a monitoring system in order to make the analysis easier.
Due to space constraints, currently all nodes are directly
connected to each other in a wireless mesh network sharing the
same collision domain. Taking the wireless networks charac-
teristic into account, in which even nodes separated by 2 hops
might interfere with each other, it has been assumed that 2-
hop topology can be simulated by blocking trafﬁc on software
level. Thus, the wnPUT testbed framework allows user to
specify desired topology, which is attained with iptables
rules generated automatically during experiment initialisation.
B. Experiment scenarios
In order to illustrate the beneﬁts of recognising response
ﬂows, two experiment scenarios were prepared. Their purpose
is to show possible undesirable outcome of miscalculating
ﬂows’ virtual price, which may result from taking wrong mea-
surements under consideration. For both scenarios, the linear
topology consisting of three nodes was used (see Figure 3).
In both experiments, Node A initiates communication by
sending data to Node C. Since Nodes A and C are not directly
connected, Node B forwards the ﬂow in order to provide
connection between them. Node C responds with a reverse
ﬂow addressed to Node A.
In the ﬁrst experiment, Node C marks the destination of the
response ﬂow (Node A) as its owner in order to inform relaying
nodes (Node B) that the ﬂow’s virtual price has to be copied
from Queue Information Block (QIB) blocks corresponding to
the request ﬂow. In the second experiment, Node C fetches
the proﬁle of Node A and applies the utility function corre-
sponding to the served ﬂow in order to determine response
ﬂow’s virtual price. These two experiments correspond to the
methods of adjusting the virtual price described in Section V.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks

1) Experiment 1: The ﬁrst experiment illustrates a possible
undesired consequence of using the method based on virtual
price copying described in Section V-1. This scenario models
a VoIP call (labelled as “RTP C→A” in Figure 5 and Figure 6)
made during a HTTP ﬁle transfer (labelled as “HTTP C→A”).
The experiment starts with a HTTP request (labelled as “HTTP
A→C”) sent from Node A to Node C. Its size was artiﬁcially
enlarged to 5MB for experiment clarity purposes. Node C
responds to the requester with a 25MB HTTP response, one
second after receiving the request. While the response is
being transmitted, Node C initiates a 35-second long RTP
ﬂow at constant rate of 2.5Mbit/s addressed to Node A. The
experiment ends when both ﬂows originating from Node C are
terminated.
2) Experiment 2: In the second experiment, timing and
characteristics of ﬂows are the same as in Experiment 1. The
only difference is the virtual price of the response ﬂow, which
is now calculated at Node C according to the method described
in Section V-2.
C. Utility functions assignment
For RTP ﬂows, the following utility function was used [15]:
UU(x, d) =
wu

0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Delay
[ms]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Average Rate
[Mbit/s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
Queue
(Node C)
[packets]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Queue
(Node B)
[packets]
1
10
100
1000
Virtual Price
[denarii]
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Virtual Queue
(Node C)
[denarii]
HTTP A→C
RTP C→A
HTTP C→A
Figure 6.
Results of Experiment 2.
nodes to acquire and store users’ proﬁles, as well as to
perform additional calculations. Most importantly, after all, this
approach achieves the highest stability.
The implementation of the ﬂow classiﬁer improved ﬂex-
ibility of DANUMS by enabling the use of utility functions
adapted to speciﬁc applications’ requirements. However, the
classiﬁcation could likely be enhanced even further by intro-
ducing more reliable or more ﬁne-grained, but still power-
efﬁcient (in terms of the battery power consumption caused
by necessary computations) ﬁlters. Adding the possibility of
combining multiple criteria into a single rule may also be
beneﬁcial to the quality of ﬂow classiﬁcation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Supported by a grant from Switzerland through the Swiss
Contribution to the enlarged European Union (PSPB-146/2010,
CARMNET).
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Kelly, “Charging and rate control for elastic trafﬁc,” European
Transactions on Telecommunications, vol. 8, no. 1, Jan. 1997, pp. 33–
37. [Online]. Available: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/ett.4460080106
[2]
A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, and P. Walkowiak, “Delay-Aware NUM
system for wireless multi-hop networks,” in European Wireless 2011
(EW2011), Vienna, Austria, Apr. 2011, pp. 530–537.
[3]
M. Glabowski and A. Szwabe, “Carrier-Grade Internet Access Sharing
in Wireless Mesh Networks: the Vision of the CARMNET Project,”
The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications,
Jun. 2013, in print.
[4]
U. Akyol, M. Andrews, P. Gupta, J. D. Hobby, I. Saniee, and A. Stolyar,
“Joint scheduling and congestion control in mobile ad-hoc networks,” in
The 27th IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM 2008), Apr 2008, pp. 619–627.
[5]
B. Radunovi´c, C. Gkantsidis, D. Gunawardena, and P. Key, “Horizon:
Balancing TCP over multiple paths in wireless mesh network,” in
Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on Mobile
computing and networking, MobiCom 2008, 2008, pp. 247–258.
[6]
M. Neely, “Delay-based network utility maximization,” In Proc. IEEE
INFOCOM 2010, 2010, pp. 1–9.
[7]
A. Warrier, S. Janakiraman, S. Ha, and I. Rhee, “DiffQ: Practical
differential backlog congestion control for wireless networks,” in The
28th IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM 2009), Apr. 2009, pp. 262–270.
[8]
Application Layer Packet Classiﬁer for Linux. [Online]. Available:
http://l7-ﬁlter.clearfoundation.com [retrieved: Jun., 2013]
[9]
N. Williams, S. Zander, and G. Armitage, “A preliminary performance
comparison of ﬁve machine learning algorithms for practical IP trafﬁc
ﬂow classiﬁcation,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
Review, vol. 36, no. 5, Oct. 2006, pp. 5–16. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1163593.1163596
[10]
I. Anantavrasilp and T. Sch¨oler, “Automatic ﬂow classiﬁcation using
machine learning,” in Software, Telecommunications and Computer
Networks, 2007. SoftCOM 2007. 15th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–6.
[11]
M. Ilvesm¨aki, M. Luoma, and R. Kantola, “Flow classiﬁcation
schemes in trafﬁc-based multilayer IP switching–comparison between
conventional
and
neural
approach,”
Computer
Communications,
vol. 21, no. 13, Sep. 1998, pp. 1184–1194. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140366498001637
[12]
L. Tassiulas and A. Ephremides, “Stability properties of constrained
queueing systems and scheduling for maximum throughput in multihop
radio networks,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 37,
no. 12, Dec. 1992, pp. 1936–1949.
[13]
A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, and P. Walkowiak, “Protocol Architecture
for DANUM Systems,” Poznan University of Technology, Institute of
Control and Information Engineering, Tech. Rep. IAII-595, Apr. 2010.
[14]
A. Szwabe, “DANUMS: The First Delay-Aware Utility Maximization
System for Wireless Networks,” in Proc. of NEM Summit - Towards
Future Media Internet. NEMS 2009, Sep. 2009, pp. 59–64.
[15]
A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, and P. Walkowiak, “DANUM System for
Single-hop Wireless Mesh Networks,” In Proceedings of 2010 Inter-
national Conference on Future Information Technology (ICFIT 2010),
volume 1, Changsha, China, IEEE Press, Dec. 2010, pp. 365–369.
[16]
Application Layer Packet Classiﬁer for Linux – Getting started.
[Online]. Available: http://l7-ﬁlter.clearfoundation.com/docs/readme#
getting started [retrieved: Jun., 2013]
[17]
L7-ﬁlter
supported
protocols.
[Online].
Available:
http://l7-ﬁlter.
sourceforge.net/protocols [retrieved: Jun., 2013]
[18]
A. Nowak, P. Walkowiak, A. Szwabe, and P. Misiorek, “wnPUT
Testbed Experimentation Framework,” in Distributed Computing and
Networking, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, L. Bononi,
A.
Datta,
S.
Devismes,
and
A.
Misra,
Eds.
Springer
Berlin
Heidelberg, 2012, vol. 7129, pp. 367–381. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-25959-3 27
[19]
The Distributed Embedded Systems Testbed (DES-Testbed) Webpage.
[Online]. Available: http://www.des-testbed.net [retrieved: Jun., 2013]
[20]
M. G¨unes¸, F. Juraschek, B. Blywis, and O. Watteroth, “DES-CRIPT - A
Domain Speciﬁc Language for Network Experiment Descriptions,” in
Next Generation Wireless Systems 2009 – Proceedings, N. Chilamkurti,
Ed., Mar. 2010.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-299-8
MESH 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

