ICDS 2023
The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society
ISBN: 978-1-68558-077-3
April 24th – 28th, 2023
Venice, Italy
ICDS 2023 Editors
Olga Levina, Technische Hochschule Brandenburg, Germany
Lasse Berntzen, University of South-Eastern Norway, Norway

ICDS 2023
Forward
The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society (ICDS 2023) was held in Venice,
Italy, April 24 - 28, 2023.
Nowadays, most of the economic activities and business models are driven by the
unprecedented evolution of theories and technologies. The impregnation of these achievements into
our society is present everywhere, and it is only question of user education and business models
optimization towards a digital society.
Progress in cognitive science, knowledge acquisition, representation, and processing helped to
deal with imprecise, uncertain or incomplete information. Management of geographical and temporal
information becomes a challenge, in terms of volume, speed, semantic, decision, and delivery.
Information technologies allow optimization in searching an interpreting data, yet special
constraints imposed by the digital society require on-demand, ethics, and legal aspects, as well as user
privacy and safety.
The event was very competitive in its selection process and very well perceived by the
international scientific and industrial communities. As such, it is attracting excellent contributions and
active participation from all over the world. We were very pleased to receive a large amount of top
quality contributions.
The accepted papers covered a large spectrum of topics related to advanced networking,
applications, social networking, security and protection, and systems technologies in a digital society.
We believe that the ICDS 2023 contributions offered a panel of solutions to key problems in all areas of
digital needs of today’s society.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the ICDS 2023 technical
program committee as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a broad and high quality
conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also kindly thank all
the authors that dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to the ICDS 2023. We truly
believe that thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program consists of top quality
contributions.
This event could also not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations and sponsors. In addition, we also gratefully thank the members of the ICDS 2023
organizing committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work that is making this
professional meeting a success.
We hope the ICDS 2023 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas and
results between academia and industry and to promote further progress on the topics of digital society.
We also hope that Venice provided a pleasant environment during the conference and everyone saved
some time for exploring this beautiful city
ICDS 2023 Chairs
ICDS Steering Committee
Lasse Berntzen, University of South-Eastern Norway, Norway
Claus-Peter Rückemann, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster (WWU) / DIMF / Leibniz Universität

Hannover, Germany
Theo Lynn, Irish Institute of Digital Business, Dublin City University, Ireland
Olga Levina, Technische Hochschule Brandenburg, Germany
ICDS 2023 Publicity Chair
Laura Garcia, Universitat Politècnica de València (UPV), Spain
Javier Rocher Morant, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

ICDS 2023
COMMITTEE
ICDS Steering Committee
Lasse Berntzen, University of South-Eastern Norway, Norway
Claus-Peter Rückemann, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster (WWU) / DIMF / Leibniz Universität
Hannover, Germany
Theo Lynn, Irish Institute of Digital Business, Dublin City University, Ireland
Olga Levina, Technische Hochschule Brandenburg, Germany
ICDS 2023 Publicity Chairs
Javier Rocher Morant, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Laura Garcia, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
ICDS 2023 Technical Program Committee
Chiniah Aatish, University of Mauritius, Mauritius
Mohamad Ibrahim Al Ladan, Rafik Hariri University, Lebanon
Laura Alcaide Muñoz, University of Granada, Spain
Mark Alfano, Macquarie University, Australia
Ludivine Allienne, Université Picardie Jules Verne - laboratoire CURAPP-ESS, France
Kambiz Badie, ICT Research Institute, Iran
Alessandra Bagnato, Softeam, France
Sanmitra Banerjee, NVIDIA, Santa Clara, USA
Ilija Basicevic, University of Novi Sad, Serbia
Najib Belkhayat, Cadi Ayyad University of Marrakech, Morocco
Lasse Berntzen, University of South-Eastern Norway, Norway
Aljosa Jerman Blazic, SETCCE Ltd. / IT association at Chamber of commerce, Slovenia
Mahmoud Brahimi, University of Msila, Algeria
Justin F. Brunelle, The MITRE Corporation, USA
Maria Chiara Caschera, CNR-IRPPS, Italy
Sunil Choenni, Dutch Ministry of Justice and Security / Rotterdam University of Applied Sciences,
Netherlands
Yul Chu, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV), USA
Andrei V. Chugunov, ITMO University, St.Petersburg, Russia
Soon Ae Chun, City University of New York, USA
María E. Cortés-Cediel, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain
Vladimir Costas-Jauregui, Universidad Mayor de San Simón, Bolivia
Arthur Csetenyi, Budapest Corvinus University, Hungary
Ibibia K. Dabipi, University of Maryland Eastern Shore, USA
Fisnik Dalipi, Linnaeus University, Sweden
Monica De Martino, CNR-IMATI (National research Council, Institute of applied Mathematics and
Information technology), Italy
Alexander Dekhtyar, California Polytechnic State University, USA
Joakim Dillner, Karolinska University Laboratory | Karolinska University Hospital - Center for Cervical
Cancer Prevention, Sweden
Ilie Cristian Dorobat, "Politehnica" University of Bucharest, Romania

Higor dos Santos Pinto, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Brazil
Fernanda Faini, CIRSFID - University of Bologna / International Telematic University Uninettuno, Italy
Marco Furini, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy
Amparo Fuster-Sabater, Institute of Physical and Information Technologies (CSIC), Madrid, Spain
Olga Gil, School of Political Science and Sociology - UCM Madrid, Spain
Carina S. González González, Universidad de La Laguna, Spain
Damian Gordon, Technology University, Dublin, Ireland
Huong Ha, Singapore University of Social Sciences, Singapore
Stephan Haller, Bern University of Applied Sciences, Switzerland
Ileana Hamburg, Institute for Work and Technology (IAT), Germany
Teresa M. Harrison, University at Albany - SUNY, USA
Orit Hazzan, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
Gerold Hoelzl, University of Passau, Germany
Atsushi Ito, Chuo University, Japan
Christos Kalloniatis, University of the Aegean, Greece
Dimitris Kanellopoulos, University of Patras, Greece
Sokratis K. Katsikas, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway
Αngeliki Kitsiou, University of the Aegean in Mitilini, Lesvos, Greece
Scott Klasky, Oak Ridge National Laboratory | Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
Richard Knepper, Cornell University Center for Advanced Computing, USA
Yulia Kumar, Kean University, USA
Junghee Lee, School of Cybersecurity - Korea University, Seoul, Korea
Azi Lev-On, Ariel University, Israel
Olga Levina, Technische Hochschule Brandenburg, Germany
Gen-Yih Liao, Chang Gung University, Taiwan
Chern Li Liew, Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
Yi Lu, Queensland University of Technology, Australia
Theo Lynn, Irish Institute of Digital Business, Dublin City University, Ireland
Aurelie Mailloux, 2LPN laboratory Nancy / Reims hospital / Reims odontology university, France
Rafael Martínez Peláez, Universidad De La Salle Bajio, Mexico
Riccardo Martoglia, Universita’ di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Italy
Elvis Mazzoni, Alma Mater Studiorum - University of Bologna, Italy
Shegaw Anagaw Mengiste, University of South-Eastern Norway, Norway
Andrea Michienzi, Università di Pisa, Italy
Alok Mishra, Atilim University, Turkey
Gianluca Misuraca, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid Spain / Politecnico di Milano, Italy
John Morison, Queen’s University of Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK
Diane R. Murphy, Marymount University, USA
Panayotis Nastou, University of the Aegean, Greece
Erich Neuhold, University of Vienna, Austria / Darmstadt University of Technology, Germany
Rikke Toft Nørgård, Aarhus University, Denmark
Daniel O'Leary, University of Southern California, USA
Myke Oliveira, University of São Paulo, Brazil
Samantha Papavasiliou, James Cook University, Australia
Augustin Prodan, Iuliu Hatieganu University, Romania
J. Javier Rainer Granados, Universidad Internacional de La Rioja, Madrid, Spain
Thurasamy Ramayah, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Malaysia
Semeen Rehman, Vienna University of Technology (TU Wien), Austria
Jan Richling, South Westphalia University of Applied Sciences, Germany
Alexandra Rivero-García, University of La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
Manuel Pedro Rodríguez Bolívar, University of Granada, Spain

Nancy Routzouni, University of Aegean, Greece
Claus-Peter Rückemann, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster (WWU) / DIMF / Leibniz
Universität Hannover, Germany, Germany
Peter Y. A. Ryan, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
Niharika Sachdeva, IIIT-Delhi | Info Edge, India
Imad Saleh, University Paris 8, France
Iván Santos-González, University of La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
Demetrios Sarantis, United Nations University, Japan
Kurt M. Saunders, California State University, Northridge, USA
Deniss Ščeulovs, Riga Technical University, Latvia
Andreas Schmietendorf, Berlin School of Economics and Law - University of Magdeburg, Germany
Thorsten Schöler, Augsburg University of Applied Sciences, Germany
M. Omair Shafiq, Carleton University, Canada
Navid Shaghaghi, Santa Clara University, USA
Andreiwid Sheffer Correa, Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Sao Paulo, Brazil
Ecem Buse Sevinç Çubuk, Aydın Adnan Menderes University, Turkey
Åsa Smedberg, Stockholm University, Sweden
Evgeny Styrin, National Research University Higher School of Economics, Russia
Dennis S. Tachiki, Hosei University, Tokyo, Japan
Chrisa Tsinaraki, EU JRC, Italy
Taketoshi Ushiama, Kyushu University, Japan
Giacomo Valente, University of L’Aquila, Italy
Esteban Vázquez Cano, Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia (UNED), Spain
Genanew B.Worku, University of Dubai, UAE
Yuling Yan, Santa Clara University, USA
Yingjie Yang, Institute of Artificial Intelligence - De Montfort University, UK
Michele Zanella, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
Sergio Zepeda, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana, Mexico
Qiang Zhu, University of Michigan - Dearborn, USA
Ewa Ziemba, University of Economics in Katowice, Poland

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Taking the Matter in Their Own Hands – Can Business Unit Developers Fullfill their Digital Demands with Low-
Code Development Platforms?
Katharina Frosch and Olga Levina
1
Mobile Instant Messaging and User Interface Design - Different Age Groups, Different Requirements?
Olga Levina
5
Decision-Support Systems and Decision Making: Managing Decisional Deskilling in Human-DSS Interactions in
Organizations
Nadine-Christine Wessel
9
Implementing the Cyber Security Act in Public Financial Institutions in Ghana: What are the Constraints and
Enabling factors?
Emmanuel Awuni Kolog and Tijani Mohamed
14
Long-Term Risks of IoT Devices: The Case of the Smart Fridge
Erik Buchmann
21
AI Philosophy: Sources of Legitimacy to Analyze Artificial Intelligence
Olga Gil
27
Design of Personalized Recommender System based on Hybrid Filtering and Fog Computing Architecture: Survey
of Recent Personalized Recommender Systems in Ubiquitous and IoT Environment
Abdaoui Noura, Hadj Khalifa Ismahene, and Faiz Sami
31
The Open Government Data Digital Disconnect: Observations on Open Data Support by Local Government in
Ireland
Theo Lynn, Jennifer Kennedy, Pierangelo Rosati, Grace Fox, Colm O'Gorman, Declan Curran, and Kate Hynes
39
Web Accessibility of Irish Local Government Websites
Theo Lynn, Jennifer Kennedy, Pierangelo Rosati, Grace Fox, Colm O'Gorman, Declan Curran, and Kate Hynes
44
The Coloniality of Accessibility Links: From Universal Design to a Decolonial Model of (Dis)ability
Lorenzo Dalvit
54
Wine Live Label: A Consumer-Oriented Augmented Reality Design for Wine Labeling
Georgios Lappas, Alexandros Kleftodimos, Michalis Vrigkas, and Amalia Triantafillidou
56
CryptoPad: Dedicated Device for Convenient and Secure Wallet
Jione Choi, Kiseok Jeon, Junghee Lee, Junsik Sim, and Myungsun Kim
59

The Aggregator as a Trust Builder in a Renewable Energy System
Lasse Berntzen, Marius Rohde Johannessen, and Qian Meng
63
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking the Matter in their own Hands – Can Business Unit Developers Fullfill their 
Digital Demands with Low-Code Development Platforms? 
 
Katharina Frosch 
Department of Economics 
Brandenburg University of Applied Sciences 
Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany 
katharina.frosch@th-brandenburg.de 
Olga Levina 
Department of Economics 
Brandenburg University of Applied Sciences 
Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany 
olga.levina@th-brandenburg.de 
 
 
Abstract— Low Code Development Platforms (LCDP) often 
promise an easy and fast way to include data processing and 
support into the otherwise non-digital process. Nevertheless, it 
often remains unclear, besides anecdotal evidence, how business 
users are getting on with transformation of business 
requirements into the software. This research explores the 
potential low code development has for business users to address 
their needs for process support via software tools. The 
experiment was chosen as the research method to assess the 
feasibility of software development with LCDP by novices. The 
results point towards a dedicated LCDP implementation 
approach if the technology is to be implemented in the business 
context. Hence, the research provides suggestions on how 
Business Unit Developers (BUD) can be supported to efficiently 
deliver productive results and how to assess LCDP-based 
development process and points towards potential challenges of 
LCDP implementation.  
Keywords- low code development platforms; software 
development proces; digital novices; socially-aware software; 
performance indicators 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Routine data processing within a process can take up time, 
which might be required in a more expert context. 
Nevertheless, integration of a specific software or data layer 
might not be enough to start a development process due, 
among others, to the lack of resources in the developer teams. 
Low Code Development Platforms (LCDP) promise an 
easy and fast possibility to include data processing and data 
exchange support in the otherwise non-digital process [1]. The 
terms “citizen developer” [2] or “business unit developer” [3] 
are often used in the LCDP context to underline the potential 
of the software tools to involve programming novices in the 
development of the solution for their needs [4]. 
LCDP allow platform users to develop applications based  
on a Graphical User Interface (GUI) without creating code and 
thus to develop programming skills [4]. Each GUI object is 
programmed in a hard code that can be adapted to some degree 
of personalization. 
This research follows up on this promise with the goal of 
exploring the potential low code development has for business 
users to answer their need for support via software tools. The 
research questions were as follows: Are LCDP feasible for 
programming novices? And: What aspects need to be 
considered if an LCDP is provided for the user? Hence, this 
research provides suggestions on how Business Unit 
Developers (BUD) can be supported to efficiently provide 
productive results. This research was not previously published 
and is the first to be presented here. 
The paper is structured as follows: First, the current 
literature on LCDP and its use in a business context is 
reviewed, and the research questions are derived in Section 2. 
Research methods description in Section 3 and results 
descriptions in Section 4 lead to recommendations on how to 
implement LCDP in productive environment. Section 5 
provides summary and outlook on future research as a 
conclusion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The use of the LCDP in different business domains has 
been increasingly the focus of research in the last years. 
Sanchis et al. [5] showed that rapidity and the cost reduction 
through intuitive development and management can be 
attributed to the LCDP in manufacturing context. Nowak et al. 
[6] show case the usage of LCDP in the context of the internal 
logistics processes in a company from the E-Commerce 
industry. This case study is meant to display the use of LCDP 
in the context of process improvement as is allows for direct 
eliminations of found limitations in processes. The authors 
argue that the implementation of the IT support using LCDP 
was effective, #, an enhancement in terms of time and costs 
needed for its realization. 
Bies et al. [7] conduct a mixed-method study to identify 
challenges and promising perspectives for digital innovations 
in Small and Middle Enterprises (SME). The authors found 
the LCDP application areas are mostly of the supportive 
nature such as creation of application for resource 
management or creation of customized digital forms. 
Nevertheless, the majority of the surveyed SMEs stated LCDP 
to be of high to very high relevance. Factors that diminish the 
relevance for low-code in SME are according to the authors: 
limited human resources, as personnel is still necessary to 
develop and maintain the application, knowledge transfer 
between the platforms as well as training in dealing with IT 
structures and detailed knowledge of the platforms.  
Lethbridge [8] also explores the development process of 
the software product as well as the aspects of implementation 
and maintenance of the LCDP software within the existing 
enterprise architecture. His findings suggest that LCDPs 
create “technical debts” that can be overcome by the 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development 
of 
the 
LCDP 
towards 
“scaling, 
understandability, 
documentarily, 
usability, 
vendor- 
independence and user experience for the developers”. 
Hintsch et al. 2021 [9] also identify threats and opportunities 
in the LCDP development concerning the security and 
availability of the created applications. Nevertheless, the 
authors also uncover success factors for LCDP use in a 
business context by novices. 
Kermanchi et al. [10] focus in their research on software 
development methods and the use of LCDP. In their 
experiment, they explored the episodic experience with 
different LCDP among software developers with varying 
levels of programming experience but no experience in the 
specific LCDP. The findings show that previous programming 
experience seems to have a significant impact on developers' 
performance, experience, and tool preferences, yet most 
developers continue to have doubts about the scalability and 
maintainability of applications created with LCDPs. Opinions 
on the effectiveness of the instruments vary among the 
participants.  
Bernsteiner et al. [11],  conduct expert interviews in their 
research to investigate what skills developers with little or no 
software development experience, i.e., novices, need to 
successfully develop software on LCDP platforms. Several of 
the interviewed experts mention that successfully developing 
an LCDP solution requires at least basic programming skills. 
This is in line with research findings stating that LCDPs still 
require some prerequisites in software development [12] or in 
database structures [13], which hampers the adoption of 
LCDP by non-programmers without any further training.  
Krejci et al. [13] report in a case study how non-IT 
employees were involved in the process of digital innovation 
while making efficient use of their IT resources. These citizen 
developers, i.e., employees who are working outside of the 
Information Technology (IT) department and are not 
professional programmers, as users of LCDP are in the focus 
of the analysis by Lebens et al. [14]. The authors conducted a 
survey about the use of LCDP in organizations. The results 
show that companies both large and small are making use of 
low- and no-code platforms. Additionally, the majority of the 
surveyed organizations have employees outside of the IT 
department who are creating IT solutions. 
Bock and Frank [15] provide a critical overview of the 
LCPD features, architecture, and opportunities, while pointing 
out research directions for information systems research in 
this domain. They state that although both professional 
developers and citizen developers use LCDP, there is a lack 
of research on how to make LCDPs fit cognitive capabilities 
and personal working styles of these two groups [p. 739]. This 
is in line with other studies pointing out that successfully 
developing software on LCDP requires at least basic 
programming skills.  
The use of development templates in the context of 
software creation is analyzed by Boot et al. [16]. The authors 
compare instructional software products made by developers 
with low production experience and high production 
experience, working with a template-based authoring tool. 
The analysis showed that the technical and authoring quality 
was equal for both groups, indicating that templates enable 
domain specialists to participate successfully in the 
production process. Research in agile software development 
shows that SCRUM projects profit from having a coach on the 
team [17]. The same is visible in software engineering 
education [18]. 
BUD and job crafting, i.e., proactive strategies to improve 
work processes according to one’s own needs and goals, are 
subjects of the analysis by Li et al. [3]. The authors found that 
using LCDP provides positive jobs crafting consequences 
such as meaningfulness, for the employees using these tools 
[3][19]. In what follows, we prefer to use the term BUD 
instead of citizen developers, stressing that they might make 
up for the lack of programming skills by their large expertise 
in the respective business domain. Nerveless, the research 
does not focus on the description of how much support was 
needed for BUD to finish their application.  
Despite these first attempts to understand the “human 
side” of LCDPs, research is still scarce with respect to 
acceptance and successful adoption by domain experts outside 
corporate IT departments. To our knowledge, there are no 
empirical studies yet to gain a deeper understanding of how 
BUD fare when using LCDPs. With our study, we contribute 
to closing this gap and explore:  
 
Whether BUD can develop functional applications 
based on LCDPs to improve their business operations  
 
Whether the amount of time invested and developing 
behavior differ between BUD and IT experts when 
using an LCDP to develop applications  
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
To gain evidence for answering our research questions, we 
draw upon a field experiment where BUD and IT experts build 
apps in the business domain of Human Resource Management 
(HRM) based on an LCDP given a finite time frame of few 
weeks. The experiment was divided in three challenges with 
modified compositions of participants. The challenges are 
described below. For the experiment, BUD are Master 
students of business management with the specialization in 
HR (20 students). In the third challenge, BUD were included 
in teams with experts. The experts were Master students of 
Information Systems Research (ISR) (18 students).  All of the 
ISR students had already taken at least one course in advanced 
software engineering within their master program at the time 
of the experiment, thus gaining the definition as “IT experts”. 
None of the participants was familiar with or has heart of the 
LCDP selected for the experiment. 
The LCDP used for the experiment was Joget [20], an 
open-source LCDP with the promise to easily build, run and 
maintain apps. A visual builder allows drag-and-drop for 
pages, forms, views, data lists, menus, and a process builder 
to automate workflows. It also offers user management and 
role-based authentication. We used the community edition 
that can be self-hosted at no license cost.  
The experiment is divided into three self-contained 
challenges. Challenge #1 was run with a few BUD only, in 
order to have a pretest and check whether business students 
are, at all, able to use the LCDP to develop simple apps. The 
pretest was run between April 21 and June 6, 2021. To kick 
start app development, BUD were provided with links to 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tutorials as well as with a basic app template and a 30-min-
video showing exemplarily how an app can be built starting 
from this template. In this context, they were also explicitly 
pointed to the open-source character of app development in 
this setting, and about the possibility to share and reuse app 
elements from other groups. In the pretest, BUD managed to 
develop apps, but pointed out that they would have enjoyed 
working in teams in order to solve problems collaboratively. 
Furthermore, support by one student who previously had 
graduated from a bachelor program in software engineering 
and acted as informal coach for his fellow students has been 
acknowledged as extremely helpful.  
Based on the insights gained in the pretest, we recruited 
the informal coach from challenge #1 to act as a formally 
appointed coach in challenge #2 and decided to run 
development in teams. For Challenge #2: BUD teams (with 
three to four students) developed their apps within six weeks 
(April 21 – June 6, 2021, 42 days). The team members 
cooperated online, due to the restrictions because of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Developers got the same kick start as 
in the pretest and were also pointed towards the template and 
the possibility to share and reuse apps. Furthermore, a coach 
with experience in software development was available to get 
help with questions on tool usage and minor development 
questions.  In Challenge #3, expert teams (including four to 
seven students) developed their apps between May 20 and 
June 7, 2022 (19 days). During the development challenge, 
two teams joined forces within the development process, 
resulting in a seven members team working on the challenge. 
The first day of the development phase (May 20, 2022) was 
organized as a face-to-face daylong hackathon. The 
introductory video and tutorials were made available 
beforehand, but no template or coach were provided for the 
teams.   
IV. 
RESULTS 
The experiment has shown that in all three challenges, 
BUD were able to create a software application using LCDP 
in a given amount of time without any additional training in 
software development. All 15 apps created during the 
challenges 
have 
been 
successfully 
developed 
and 
implemented. 
Successful means 
that 
they 
met 
the 
requirements depicted in the conceptual papers, and that apps 
worked when tested. The technology readiness of the resulting 
apps corresponds to level 3 (experimental proof of concept) 
according to the European Union Technology Readiness 
Levels [21]. 
To address the second research question, the logs were 
archived and anonymized to calculate time spent at the 
platform and number of actions taken to create an app. The 
development activities of challenge #2 and #3 were then 
compared using indicators for time spent on platform as well 
as number of actions taken (per developer and per app, 
respectively). Overall, our data comprises 320 logins by BUD 
and 206 logins by experts, resulting in 4895 and 4094 actions 
taken, respectively. Figure 1 shows that the distribution of 
time spent on the platform, logins and actions taken is right-
skewed, with most developers investing not more than 10 
hours in development. Moreover, in both the BUD and the 
expert group, we observe one outlier with more than 60 
(BUD) and more than 30 (expert) hours, respectively. As 
comparing means given such a data structure may lead to 
misleading results, we use modal values to compare 
development activities between BUD and experts.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Time spent on platform 
Table 1 shows that BUD tend to spend more time on the 
LCDP platform, but the total time investment per app is 
somewhat higher in the expert group. This result may be 
partly explained by the fact that on average, BUD teams were 
smaller than expert teams. BUD take fewer actions per app 
and per person as compared to experts. None of the 
indicators, 
however, 
shows 
statistically 
significant 
differences between the expert and the BUD groups when 
conducting a t-test on mean differences, also not when 
leaving out the extreme outlier in the BUD group (not 
displayed in Table 1).  
TABLE I.  
MODAL VALUES FOR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY 
INDICATORS 
Indicator 
BUD 
Experts 
Time spent on platform (h), per developer 
6.5 
4.3 
Time spent on platform (h), per app 
23.7 
30 
Number of actions taken, per developer 
152 
165 
Number of actions taken, per app 
807 
946 
To conclude, we can state that BUD can create their own 
software applications in their business domain using an 
LCDP, and that time and effort invested in development are 
not significantly different from that of developers with 
programming knowledge.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The research question of this paper was whether LCDPs 
are a suitable tool for BUD to develop a digital solution that 
meets their requirements for information and data 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management within the business process without the 
involvement of the IT department. To answer this question, an 
experiment with three different challenges was conducted. All 
the solutions for the challenges led to an app that was ready to 
be implemented in the business context. Although, the quality 
of the created artifacts was not measured, and the size of the 
developer groups varied, the research offers valuable insights 
on the development process using LCDP by both non-IT and 
IT-trained users. Furthermore, some approaches were 
identified that might support BUD in the first steps during 
their engagement with the tool. Here, the use of templates and 
the availability of a coaching person is suggested.  
In addition, this paper presented some indicators to 
measure LCDP performance within the software development 
process. The results can be used by managers and practitioners 
to support an effective and successful LCDP implementation. 
The applied research method can be expanded by HR and ISR 
researchers to support their conceptual artifacts in a low-code 
development context with data. Also, the suggested indicators 
can be used to assess the process performance of the software 
development with LCDP.  
The experimental setting provided a near real life situation 
that allowed assessing the interaction with LCDP as well as 
resulted in interactional data that will be used to derive further 
insights on the LCDP-based business software development. 
Nevertheless, the group work made it more difficult to derive 
explicit indicators, so that future research will be based on 
individual software creation in collaborative stings. We will 
focus on the development of further interaction metrics for the 
assessment of the impact of LCDPs on the working styles of 
BUD and experts. Here, we will look at the engagement and 
interaction efficiency with the LCDP across the groups of 
experts and BUD. Another future research direction will focus 
on the job crafting effects of LCDP-based development for 
BUD and experts. Here, motivational and engagement aspects 
will be guiding the development of metrics to allow further 
comparative analysis. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Rafi, M. A. Akbar, M. Sánchez-Gordón, and R. Colomo-Palacios, 
“DevOps Practitioners’ Perceptions of the Low-code Trend,” Int. 
Symp. Empir. Softw. Eng. Meas., pp. 301–306, Sep. 2022, doi: 
10.1145/3544902.3546635. 
[2] 
K. Rokis and M. Kirikova, “Challenges of Low-Code/No-Code 
Software Development: A Literature Review,” in Lecture Notes in 
Business Information Processing, 2022, vol. 462 LNBIP, pp. 3–17, 
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-16947-2_1. 
[3] 
M. M. Li, C. Peters, M. Poser, K. Eilers, and E. Elshan, “ICT-enabled 
job crafting: How Business Unit Developers use Low-code 
Development Platforms to craft jobs,” ICIS 2022 Proc., Dec. 2022, 
Accessed: 
Feb. 
03, 
2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2022/is_futureofwork/is_futureofwork/16 
[4] 
K. Talesra and N. G. S., “Low-Code Platform for Application 
Development,” Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res., vol. 16, no. 5, p. 346, May 
2021, doi: 10.37622/IJAER/16.5.2021.346-351. 
[5] 
R. Sanchis, Ó. García-Perales, F. Fraile, and R. Poler, “Low-code as 
enabler of digital transformation in manufacturing industry,” Appl. 
Sci., vol. 10, no. 1, p. 12, Dec. 2020, doi: 10.3390/app10010012. 
[6] 
F. Nowak, J. Krzywy, and W. Statkiewicz, “Study on the Impact of 
the Use of No-code Application on Internal Logistics Processes in a 
Company from the E-Commerce Industry - Process Analysis,” Eur. 
Res. Stud. J., vol. XXV, no. Issue 2B, pp. 59–71, Aug. 2022, doi: 
10.35808/ERSJ/2936. 
[7] 
L. Bies, M. Weber, T. Greff, and D. Werth, “A Mixed-Methods 
Study of Low-Code Development Platforms: Drivers of Digital 
Innovation in SMEs,” Int. Conf. Electr. Comput. Commun. 
Mechatronics 
Eng. 
ICECCME 
2022, 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICECCME55909.2022.9987920. 
[8] 
T. C. Lethbridge, “Low-Code Is Often High-Code, So We Must 
Design 
Low-Code 
Platforms 
to 
Enable 
Proper 
Software 
Engineering,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect. 
Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics), vol. 13036 LNCS, 
pp. 202–212, 2021, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-89159-6_14/COVER. 
[9] 
J. Hintsch, D. Staegemann, M. Volk, and K. Turowski, “Low-code 
Development 
Platform 
Usage: 
Towards 
Bringing 
Citizen 
Development and Enterprise IT into Harmony,” ACIS 2021 Proc., 
Jan. 2021, Accessed: Feb. 06, 2023. [Online]. Available: 
https://aisel.aisnet.org/acis2021/11. 
[10] 
A. Kermanchi, S. P. Fabian, F. Advisor, and A. Teronen, “Developer 
Experience in Low-Code Versus Traditional Development Platforms 
- A Comparative Experiment,” Dec. 2022, Accessed: Feb. 03, 2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi:443/handle/123456789/118413. 
[11] 
F. Bernsteiner, R., Schlögl, S., Ploder, C., Dilger, T., and Florian 
Brecher, “Citizen vs. Professional developers: Differences and 
Similarities of Skills and Training Requirements for Low Code 
Development Platform,” in ICERI2022 Proceedings, 2022, pp. 
4257–4264. 
[12] 
A. Sahay, A., Indamutsa, A., Di Ruscio, D., and Alfonso Pierantonio, 
“Supporting the understanding and comparison of low-code 
development platforms.,” in Euromicro Conference on Software 
Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA), 2020, pp. 171–
178. 
[13] 
D. Krejci, L. Küng, and S. Missonier, “A Case Study of Enterprise-
wide Digital Innovation: Involving Non-IT Employees,” ECIS 2022 
Res. Pap., Jun. 2022, Accessed: Jan. 23, 2023. [Online]. Available: 
https://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2022_rp/55. 
[14] 
M. Lebens, R. J. Finnegan, S. C. Sorsen, and J. Shah, “Rise of the 
Citizen Developer,” Muma Bus. Rev., vol. 5, pp. 101–111, 2021, doi: 
10.28945/4885. 
[15] 
A. C. Bock and U. Frank, “Low-Code Platform,” Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng., 
vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 733–740, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1007/S12599-021-
00726-8/FIGURES/1. 
[16] 
E. W. Boot, J. J. G. Van Merriënboer, and A. L. Veerman, “Novice 
and experienced instructional software developers: Effects on 
materials created with instructional software templates,” Educ. 
Technol. Res. Dev., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 647–666, 2007, doi: 
10.1007/s11423-006-9002-9. 
[17] 
C. Bunse, I. Grützner, C. Peper, S. Steinbach-Nordmann, and G. 
Vollmers, 
“Coaching 
professional 
software 
developers 
an 
experience report,” Softw. Eng. Educ. Conf. Proc., vol. 2006, pp. 
123–130, 2006, doi: 10.1109/CSEET.2006.11. 
[18] 
H. I. Akyüz and M. Kurt, “Effect of teacher’s coaching in online 
discussion forums on students’ perceived self-efficacy for the 
educational software development,” Procedia - Soc. Behav. Sci., vol. 
9, pp. 633–637, Jan. 2010, doi: 10.1016/J.SBSPRO.2010.12.209. 
[19] 
E. Elshan, E. Dickhaut, and P. Ebel, “An Investigation of Why Low 
Code Platforms Provide Answers and New Challenges,” Accessed: 
Mar. 
01, 
2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://hdl.handle.net/10125/103380. 
[20]  
Joget, “Open Source Platform to Easily Build, Run and Maintain 
Apps”, 
Accessed: 
Mar 
7, 
2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.joget.org. 
[21] 
European Commission, Technology readiness levels (TRL), 2014, 
Accessed: 
Mar 
7, 
2023 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/wp/2014_
2015/annexes/h2020-wp1415-annex-g-trl_en.pdf
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

Mobile Instant Messaging and User Interface Design - Different Age Groups, 
Different Requirements? 
A survey of Indonesian users 
Olga Levina 
Brandenburg University of Applied Sciences 
Department of Management 
Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany 
levina@th-brandenburg.de 
 
 
Abstract—Instant Messaging (IM) is an increasingly popular 
form of communication in which two or more people exchange 
text-based multi-media messages in real time. However, as a 
result of aging, users have different needs and requirements 
towards the design of the communication application. This 
paper examines the preferences of users of different ages 
towards the User Interface (UI) design of Mobile Instant 
Massage (MIM) applications, i.e., instant message applications 
that can operate on smartphones. An online survey data about 
users' preferences towards the UI of this application type, 
limited to Indonesian users, was obtained. The results indicate 
that for some UI elements, both age groups showed the same 
preferences, while other requirements were significantly 
different. This paper aims to give a better understanding of the 
interface of the MIM application preferred by its users 
according to their age and thus inform application designers 
and product owners.  
Keywords: application requirements; usbality; user interface; 
age-based requirements; socially-aware information systems. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 With more than 3.5 billion smartphone users worldwide, 
their considerable proportion is constituted of so-called non-
generic users such as children, older people and users with 
impairments. Hence, many applications and devices that are 
designed to cater to these users already exist. User Interface 
(UI) design is one of the most important aspects when 
developing a mobile device application, as the success of an 
application mainly relies on its usability and User 
eXperience (UX).  
Instant Messaging (IM) can be seen as one of the first 
manifestations of digital communication technologies, which 
can reasonably be used as a substitute for real-life human 
interaction [1]. Being a text-based form of communication 
between two or more people exchanging text messages in 
real time, it can also provide asynchronous communication. 
Increasingly, it can be enriched with other forms of media 
such as pictures, videos, or audio files. For interpersonal 
exchanges, using instant messaging apps is associated with 
decreased feelings of loneliness for both young adults [2] 
and older users [3][4]. 
However, as a result of aging, adults have different needs 
and requirements for the design of communication 
applications compared with young people [5][6]. Current IM 
applications often design interfaces according to the needs of 
young people [7]. Based on these observations, this paper 
examines the user preferences of different age groups 
towards the User Interface (UI) design of Mobile Instant 
Massage 
(MIM) 
applications, 
i.e., 
instant 
message 
applications that can operate on smartphones. 
An online survey was conducted. The user preferences 
analyzed in this paper will focus on two interfaces of the 
MIM application, namely, the message list and the 
messaging interface. The survey was distributed to 
Indonesian users. Sespiani and Ernungtyas [4] outlined a 
technological gap in Indonesia between age groups, as well 
as the difficulty in adapting to novel technologies for elderly 
Indonesian users. The results of the online survey indicate 
that for some UI elements, both age groups showed the same 
preferences, while other requirements were significantly 
different. This short paper aims to provide a better 
understanding of the interface of MIM applications preferred 
by its users, specifically Indonesian users. These insights are 
useful for designers, developers, and product managers of 
mobile messaging applications. 
The paper is structured as follows: First, the current 
research on age-related UI preferences is described in section 
2. The research method and results of the online survey are 
presented in sections 3 and 4 respectively. A discussion of 
the findings and further research directions are outlined in 
section 5. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
IM is an internet service that allows users to 
communicate via text-based short massages directly in real 
time 
[8], 
while 
also 
allowing 
for 
asynchronous 
communication. In addition, IM allows users to share all 
types of messages, including video, sound, streaming 
content, web links, documents, and images [8][9]. The 
interface of IM is therefore focused on creating messages 
and displaying received massage, i.e., messaging and 
message list interface. A messaging interface is a UI where 
messages can be created and sent, as well as read and a voice 
over IP call can be associated.  
The message list interface, mentioned as the main section 
of the IM application by Caro-Álvaro et al. [10], is where the 
feature chat management takes place. Furthermore, here 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

received messages can be displayed, new messages can be 
created, individual or group messages can be pinned, among 
other functionalities. Given the focus on short, informal, 
unlimited, one-to many and many-to-many chat modes [9], 
as well as the charge-free [11] communication mode, IM 
applications are widely spread among smart phone users.  
With the increase of user requirements and usage of 
mobile devices the number of UI guidelines also increases. 
Differences in UI requirements between different age groups 
have been abundantly discussed in research, e.g., in [12], 
[13]. Older users have been shown to exhibit difficulty 
understanding a series of tasks or actions in application 
menus designed for mobile applications [5]. Age-related 
aspects also lead to different UI interactions between the age 
groups [6]. Krayz et al. [7] showed UI mostly focuses 
specifically on the needs and recommendations of younger 
users to attract them. Hence, users frustrated with technology 
or who have difficulty learning technology will not be able to 
interact richly with the MIM application, thus often 
becoming dissatisfied with these applications [14]. 
Several age- related issues with UI design, as well as the 
potential solutions have been already discussed in research. 
Faisal et al. [15] show that the button design for mobile 
phones is unsuitable for the elderly, i.e. the buttons in the UI 
are too small. Similarly, many older users consider the 
positioning of the letters on the mobile keyboard as too 
dense, which exhibits a high error rate for text input [5]. 
Research by Kiat and Chen [9] shows that elderly users 
found the icons confusing and hard to identify. However, the 
choice of icons is not trivial as users from different 
demographics and cultures may interpret the same icon 
differently.  The authors also state that that some older users 
have issues understanding the flow of existing MIM 
applications. Ahmad et al. [16] state that if it is confusing for 
older people to use the app, i.e., the application provides too 
many features, they become reluctant to use it. 
Following these research insights, this paper explores the 
requirements for MIM messaging interface between different 
age groups using an online survey distributed among 
Indonesian users. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
In developing countries, such as Indonesia, older 
population is experiencing technological leaps [3]. As the 
average welfare increases, the availability of better 
infrastructure and increasingly affordable technology for 
people in Indonesia is also rising. Even though digital 
technology has become increasingly affordable, elder users 
in Indonesia have experienced a wide technological gap [4]. 
Due to a lack of skills and knowledge of technology, the 
motivation of older users to grapple with the understanding 
of IT is moderate. Thus, a further gap in technology 
understanding and user competence between older and 
younger generations is persistent [3]. 
Hence, the research question here is: What are the 
preferences of the younger users, those aged 20-30 years, 
and older users, those aged 50-60 years, toward the message 
list interface of an IM application? Specifically, to:  
 
 
a. create a new message, 
b. mark an individual or group message, and 
c. see online-status information. 
 
To answer this question, an online survey was created 
based 
on 
the 
results 
of 
usability 
research 
and 
recommendations described above. The survey included text-
based questions, as well as A/B-test images to better 
understand the usability requirements. The online survey was 
designed using Google Forms and consists of four sections. 
The first section surveys for the demographics of the 
respondents. Also, some geographical data such as place of 
residence was gathered, as MIM preferences often depend on 
the region [11].  The second section collects the experience 
of the respondents on using the MIM applications.  
The last two sections of the survey consist of questions 
that could summarize the respondent’s preferences for the UI 
of MIM applications. Thus, they have three subsections that 
address each subitem of the research question. The first 
subsection collects the requirements for the preference for 
the button to create a new message (see Figure 1). Two types 
of floating action buttons were suggested (buttons A and B), 
as well as button C following the suggestion by Barros et al. 
[17], to add text on an icon button to increase the 
understanding of users towards the function of the feature. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Selection of “create new message” buttons 
Then, the respondents are asked to choose an icon to pin 
or mark an individual or group message as a favorite. The 
first option is a pin icon, according to the function “pin a 
message,” the second option is a star icon. The last option is 
the bookmark icon. 
Finally, the requirements regarding the message list 
interface are surveyed. The focus is to find the respondents’ 
preferences in viewing the online status of their contacts. 
Ogar et al. [14] stated that viewing the online status of the 
user’s contacts is a concept of social presence.  
First, the importance of the online status visibility is 
questioned. Then, the respondents are asked whether they 
would like to have the contact’s online status available on the 
message list interface. This question collects the responses 
through a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from “strongly 
dislike” to “strongly like”. Next, the participants are asked 
about how helpful it was to see people’s online status on the 
message list interface (Figure 2). 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
Figure 2.  Overview of potential message interfaces for MIM 
The different possibilities of the indication of the online 
status are visible in Figure 2. The left and right screen show 
the status in the message overview, while the screen in the 
middle provides the status information in the dedicated chat. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A total of 150 Indonesian MIM users participate in the 
online survey. Among the respondents, 75 users are aged 20-
30 years old (group A) and 75 users are in the age group of 
50 and 60 years old (group B). From the results obtained, 66 
respondents identified themselves as male, and 84 as female. 
The countries where the respondents live vary, although the 
majority (112 out of 150 respondents) live in Indonesia. 
Others live in Germany, Australia, United States of America, 
and Canada. Regarding the type of the operation system on 
their mobile device used by respondents, 72 respondents use 
Android and 78 use iOS- based devices. 
A total of 149 survey participants stated that they use 
WhatsApp as their MIM. The second most used application 
by the respondents is Line, with 29 people, 25 respondents 
used Telegram, and 20 people used Facebook Messenger to 
communicate. When asked how self-explanatory the features 
in the MIM were, most of the features were rated as self-
explanatory (see Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3.  Understanding of the MIM features  
Hence, the most self-explanatory feature is sending 
messages, while the feature that is the least self-explanatory 
is “pin messages”. 
When asked to rate the need for a user manual on a scale 
from 1 ”not at all” to 5 “very much needed”, the responses of 
different age groups varied significantly. With an average 
2.44 for older users (group B) an average of 1.70 for young 
users (group A), group B was more likely to have an 
additional explanation of the application and its functions. 
To assess UI preferences a 5 point Likert scale was used 
with 1= “very dissatisfied” to 5 = “very satisfied” with a 
specific feature or option. The position of the floating button 
on the top bar of the MIM application to create new 
messages was equally satisfactory for both age groups. 
Group A showed an average satisfaction of 3.96 and group B 
of 3.92. Significant differences between the button 
preferences for the function “create new message” (see 
Figure 1) were also visible: group B prefers button B, with 
an average of 2.01, while group A (younger users) are not 
clear for the preference between button A or B with an 
average of 1.75. 
In addition, for the function of marking the message as 
favorite, group B preferred the start, while group A preferred 
a pin. Both age groups have similar preferences for the 
visibility of the online status of their contacts, with the 
average importance rated as 3.24 for younger users and 3.45 
for older users. 
Nevertheless, the importance of where the online status 
of contacts is displayed differs among age groups. The 
visibility of the online status in the message list is 
significantly more important for older users (group B) with 
an average importance of 3.52 than for younger users, with 
an average of 3.04. 
Both age groups find it equally helpful to see online 
status in the message list interface, with an average of 3.55 
(group A) and 3.63 (group B). 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This research analyzed the UI requirements for MIM 
applications depending on the age of the users. An online 
survey was conducted, with 150 responses to answer the 
question about the preferences of the younger users and older 
users toward the message list interface of an IM application. 
The analysis of the results showed that for some UI 
elements, both age groups had the same preferences, while 
other features were met with different preferences. 
Regarding the preferences for the button to create a new 
message in the message list interface, younger and older 
users preferred the button at the top bar over the floating 
action button. Each age group had different opinions on the 
type of button used for this feature. Button A was equally 
preferred by both age groups, while button B (chat bubble) 
and button C (text marker) were more preferred by younger 
and older users respectively. In terms of the function of 
marking a message as favorite, both age groups prefer to 
place the option to do that besides the swiped chat. However, 
each age group has a different icon choice that suits them 
better. Younger users like the pin icon better, whereas older 
users find the star icon more suitable. Finally, regarding 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

seeing people’s online status in the message list interface, 
more of the older users liked and found it helpful to have the 
online status in the message interface.  
This analysis provided some insights into the usability 
factors that can help design user-friendly and efficient user 
interfaces for MIM in different age groups. These insights 
can be used by product owners and application developers to 
adopt their products to the aging population and minimize 
the inconveniences experienced by older users. 
 
Acknowledgements: This research was based on data 
collected by Jennifer Surjanto. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. A. Bardi and M. F. Brady, “Why shy people use instant 
messaging: Loneliness and other motives,” Comput. Human Behav., 
vol. 
26, 
no. 
6, 
pp. 
1722–1726, 
Nov. 
2010, 
doi: 
10.1016/J.CHB.2010.06.021. 
[2] E. Fumagalli, M. B. Dolmatzian, and L. J. Shrum, “Centennials, 
FOMO, and Loneliness: An Investigation of the Impact of Social 
Networking and Messaging/VoIP Apps Usage During the Initial 
Stage of the Coronavirus Pandemic,” Front. Psychol., vol. 12, p. 211, 
Feb. 2021, doi: 10.3389/FPSYG.2021.620739/BIBTEX. 
[3] Restyandito, Febryandi, K. A. Nugraha, and D. Sebastian, “Mobile 
Social Media Interface Design for Elderly in Indonesia,” 2020, pp. 
79–85. 
[4] K. A. Sespiani and N. F. Ernungtyas, “Connecting Elderly and Digital 
Devices: a Literature Review of User Interface Studies for Indonesian 
Elders,” J. Soc. Media, vol. 6, no. 1, 2022. 
[5] C. Dodd, R. Athauda, and M. T. P. Adam, “Designing user interfaces 
for the elderly: A systematic literature review,” 2017, Accessed: Mar. 
06, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://aisel.aisnet.org/acis2017/61/. 
[6] K. Chirayus and A. Nanthaamornphong, “A Systematic Mapping 
Review: Mobile User Interface Design Guidelines for the Elderly 
with Cognitive Impairments,” in 2019 23rd International Computer 
Science and Engineering Conference (ICSEC), Oct. 2019, pp. 35–42, 
doi: 10.1109/ICSEC47112.2019.8974698. 
[7] K. Krayz Allah, N. A. Ismail, and M. Almgerbi, “Designing web 
search UI for the elderly community: a systematic literature review,” 
J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput., Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1007/s12652-
020-02772-8. 
[8] R. Bridgewater and M. Cole, Instant Messaging Reference: A 
Practical Guide. Elsevier Science, 2008. 
[9] B. W. Kiat and W. Chen, “Mobile Instant Messaging for the Elderly,” 
Procedia 
Comput. 
Sci., 
vol. 
67, 
pp. 
28–37, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.246. 
[10] S. Caro‐Álvaro, E. García‐López, A. García‐Cabot, L. De‐Marcos, 
and A. Domínguez‐Díaz, “Applying usability recommendations when 
developing mobile instant messaging applications,” IET Softw., vol. 
16, no. 1, pp. 73–93, Feb. 2022, doi: 10.1049/sfw2.12039. 
[11] H.-Y. Wang, “A Review of Instant Messaging and Mobile Messaging 
Applications,” Int. J. Econ. Financ. Manag. Sci., vol. 7, no. 1, p. 13, 
2019, doi: 10.11648/j.ijefm.20190701.13. 
[12] S. Sharma, “Age Based User Interface In Mobile Operating System,” 
Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng. Appl., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 177–184, May 2012, 
doi: 10.5121/ijcsea.2012.2215. 
[13] J. J. Chang, N. S. Hildayah binti Zahari, and Y. H. Chew, “The 
Design of Social Media Mobile Application Interface for the 
Elderly,” in 2018 IEEE Conference on Open Systems (ICOS), Nov. 
2018, pp. 104–108, doi: 10.1109/ICOS.2018.8632701. 
[14] S. O. Ogara, C. E. Koh, and V. R. Prybutok, “Investigating factors 
affecting social presence and user satisfaction with Mobile Instant 
Messaging,” Comput. Human Behav., vol. 36, pp. 453–459, Jul. 2014, 
doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2014.03.064. 
[15] M. Faisal, N. Romli, and M. Faiz Mohamed Yusof, “Design for 
Elderly Friendly: Mobile Phone Application and Design that Suitable 
for Elderly,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 28–31, Jun. 
2014, doi: 10.5120/16576-6261. 
[16] B. 
Ahmad, 
I. 
Richardson, 
and 
S. 
Beecham, 
“Usability 
Recommendations for Designers of Smartphone Applications for 
Older Adults: An Empirical Study,” in Software Usability, 
IntechOpen, 2022. 
[17] A. C. de Barros, R. Leitão, and J. Ribeiro, “Design and Evaluation of 
a Mobile User Interface for Older Adults: Navigation, Interaction and 
Visual Design Recommendations,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 27, 
pp. 
369–378, 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2014.02.041.
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

Decision-Support Systems and Decision Making: Managing Decisional Deskilling in 
Human-DSS Interactions in Organizations 
A Quantitative Study 
 
Nadine-Christine Wessel 
Department of Business and Management 
Technische Hochschule Brandenburg 
Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany 
e-mail: nadinechristine.wessel@th-brandenburg.de 
 
 
Abstract—The loss of individual decision-making skills and 
knowledge, also known as Decisional Deskilling, constitutes a 
significant threat to knowledge workers in the interactions 
with intelligent Decision-Support Systems (iDSS). The study 
used an online survey to test six hypotheses for examining the 
relationship between the extent use of intelligent decision-
support systems and the impact on financial professionals’ 
knowledge. The findings support the idea that extensive iDSS 
use 
decreases 
declarative 
and 
procedural 
knowledge. 
Therefore, balancing technology use with preserving employee 
skills and knowledge is vital. Proposed mitigation techniques 
include training and support programs, monitoring reliance on 
iDSS, and reevaluating system effectiveness. 
Keywords-decisional 
deskilling; 
artificial 
intelligence; 
decision-support 
systems; 
financial 
services; 
mitigation 
techniques. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The increasing adoption of intelligent Decision-Support 
Systems (iDSS) in various industries, including healthcare 
and finance, has raised concerns regarding their impact on 
knowledge workers and their decision-making skills [1]-[3].  
Decision-Support 
Systems 
(DSS) 
encompass 
any 
computerized system that assists with decision-making in 
organizations [4]. Emerging technologies, such as artificial 
intelligence have influenced the current DSS landscape [5], 
demanding a concept extension of the research field into 
iDSS. Artificial Intelligence (AI), which is also known as 
“machine intelligence”, is a field in computer science that 
aims to develop systems capable of performing tasks that 
typically require human intelligence [6]. By using algorithms 
to learn from data, Machine Learning (ML) enables task 
automation [6]. According to [7] decision-making processes 
in organizations include 1) issue identification and problem 
finding, 2) decision question specification and problem 
formulation, 3) alternative generation and evaluation, 4) 
choice and 5) implementation. An iDSS that uses ML can 
perform any or all these phases. Despite the widespread use 
of DSS, there is limited research on the impact of iDSS on 
decision-making under these novel conditions [7][8]. 
iDSS implementation in organizations alters individual 
information processing and decision making [9] and can 
cause unintended deskilling [10]. This study defines this 
phenomenon as Decisional Deskilling (DD), which involves 
a decline in decision-making abilities and knowledge loss 
[1][11]. Literature suggests that DD is often caused by over-
reliance on technology, also known as automation bias 
[1][12]. One possible explanation is that humans tend to 
delegate the responsibility of information seeking and 
processing to iDSSs, resulting in reduced individual effort 
[13]. This can also affect decision-makers’ declarative 
knowledge and procedural knowledge [14]. Declarative 
Knowledge (DK) is “the storage of fact and events,” whereas 
the memory of Procedural Knowledge (PK) “is more like a 
technique applied when necessary” [15]. For effective 
decision making, both types of knowledge, i.e., knowing the 
“What” and the “How” of the specific task are relevant [15]. 
[16] discovered that DD may only become apparent 
when iDSSs are discontinued, even though it can occur on a 
latent level. Prior research has therefore mainly focused on 
reliance and its short-term effects. [1] explored the impact of 
iDSS on DM and defined reliance based on factors, such as 
user’s experience level, problem complexity, familiarity with 
the iDSS, and cognitive fit. In a case study of a German bank 
group with a fully automated iDSS [2] found that loss of 
critical thinking, knowledge, and expertise, as well as misuse 
of the system, were unintended employee-related short-term 
effects. [14] used a qualitative approach to investigate 
partially automated iDSS and identified three factors that 
reduce auditors' DK and PK, namely, the extent to which the 
tool takes over routine tasks, the auditors' reliance on the 
tool, and the time spent with iDSS. 
Expanding on [14] this study explores the relation 
between the extent use of iDSS and financial professional’s 
knowledge. Objectives were to 1) identify contributing 
factors, 2) assess the impact on professionals’ knowledge, 
and 3) inform mitigation strategies. The paper is organized as 
follows: Section II outlines the empirical method, Section III 
presents survey results, Section IV discusses findings and 
implications, and Section V concludes. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
II. 
METHOD 
The study adopted a quantitative empirical approach and 
employed an online survey for data collection. Figure 1 
shows the research framework based on [14]. 
Figure 1.  .Research Framework 
A. Sampling and Data Collection 
Sampling involved professionals from the financial 
services sector in Germany, encompassing investment 
banking, commercial banking, asset management, insurance, 
and other financial services. The additional criteria included 
experience in decision making, familiarity with DSS, and 
usage of partially or fully automated iDSS in their current 
role. These iDSS could be deployed to aid decision-making 
processes in risk management, fraud detection, portfolio 
management, credit scoring and underwriting, as well as 
financial forecasting and modeling. Data was collected 
through an anonymous online survey between 15th 
November to 15th December 2022, resulting in 39 completed 
questionnaires. The survey consisted of questions from the 
research framework, outlined in Table I, along with open-
ended inquiries regarding access to training and support 
programs, and the participants' experiences with iDSS. 
B. Data Analysis 
To test the indicated relations of the three potential 
contributing factors and their impact on declarative and 
procedural knowledge, six initial hypotheses were built. The 
collected questionnaire data concerning the items for 
hypothesis testing were imported and computed using the 
software SPSS Statistics 28.0.1. In the first step, a null 
hypothesis and an alternative hypothesis were built for each 
of the hypotheses: 
 
H0: ρ = 0 
() 
 
HA: ρ ≠ 0 
() 
The Greek letter ρ indicates the population correlation, 
i.e., corresponding to the sample Pearson correlation 
coefficient r. The expression (1) of the null hypothesis H0 
means that Pearson coefficient equals zero, suggesting no 
association between the two tested variables. Based on the 
assumption that there is an association between the two 
variables, the alternative hypothesis HA requires the 
coefficient to be different from zero as shown in (2). In the 
second step, the correlation coefficient r, two-tailed, was 
calculated and the strength of the correlation between both 
variables were determined according to Table II. In the next  
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONNAIRE (EXCERPT) 
Question 
Item 
Years of experience with IT tools for decision 
making? 
Time spent with 
iDSSa 
Which best describes the use of IT tools in your 
decision making? 
iDSS performs 
routine &time-
intensive tasks  
How much do you feel that you rely upon IT-
enabled support tools in carrying out your work?  
Dependence on 
iDSS 
Do you believe that your ability to recall details 
recorded in the IT tool (for example, customer data 
or financial data) is impacted as a result of your use 
of IT tool? 
Declarative 
Knowledge 
Do you believe that your ability to run your 
working tasks without the IT tools is impacted as a 
result of your use of the IT tools? 
Procedural 
Knowledge 
a. Multiple choice with single answer: 1) < 2 years, 2) 2 - 3 years, 3) 3 - 5 years, and 4) > 5 years 
b. Multi select answers possible. Stages included: 1) Gathering information, 2) Identifying problems, 
3) Developing options 4), Selecting the best course of actions, and 5) Implementing the decision. 
TABLE II.  
THE SCALE OF PEARSON’S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT 
Value of Coefficient r 
Correlation 
0 ≤ r ≤ 0.1 
No Correlation 
0.1 ≤ r ≤ 0.29 
Low Correlation 
0.3 ≤ r ≤ 0.49 
Medium Correlation 
0.5 ≤ r ≤ 0.69 
High correlation 
0.7 ≤ r ≤ 1.0 
Very High Correlation 
 
step, the statistical significance was determined by 
calculating the value of p. A relation is considered 
statistically significant if the calculated value of p is lower 
than alpha, with a predefined value of α < 0.05. A qualitative 
content analysis and additional word frequency computations 
in R were used to examine the answers to the open questions.  
III. 
RESULTS 
This study analyzed survey responses from 39 financial 
services professionals to determine the correlation and 
statistical significance among variables. The correlation 
results are summarized in Table III. Further insights were 
gathered from open questions on training and support 
programs, and participants’ experiences with iDSS. 
A. Hypothesis Testing 
The study found significant correlations between “iDSS 
performs routine and time-intensive tasks” and “Declarative 
Knowledge”, as well as “iDSS performs routine and time-
intensive tasks” and “Procedural Knowledge”, with medium 
effect sizes. These associations were statistically significant 
at the 0.05 level, indicating a probability of less than 5% that 
the null hypothesis, H0, was correct. Thus, H0 was rejected in 
favor of HA, for both cases, providing support for hypotheses 
H1 and H2 as shown in Table IV.  
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

Moreover, “Dependence on iDSS” showed a high 
correlation with both “Declarative Knowledge" and 
“Procedural Knowledge”, with correlation coefficients of 
0.63 and 0.66, respectively. These associations were 
statistically significant at the 0.05 level with a p-value of less 
than .001. As a result, H0 was rejected in favor of HA, 
providing support for hypotheses H3 and H4.  
TABLE III.  
RESULTS OF CORRELATIONS 
a. Correlation is statistically significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed) 
TABLE IV.  
HYPOTHESES RESULTS 
 
However, the negative correlations that were observed 
between “Time spent with iDSS” and “Declarative 
Knowledge” as well as “Time spent with iDSS” and 
“Procedural Knowledge” were not statistically significant. 
Hence, H0 could not be rejected for both cases, and thus, 
hypotheses H5 and H6 were not supported in the sample.  
B. Training and Support Programs 
The survey question on access to training and support 
programs for skill development in the working field found 
diverse responses. Some financial professionals have access 
to various programs, while others do not require any training 
due to fully automated software. Employers offer different 
types and modes of programs, such as internal academies 
with basic and advanced trainings, mentoring, and online 
courses, and some are setting up new programs due to the 
implementation of new software. Other participants reported 
that their employers offer soft skills, hard skills, and new 
technology training, as well as career development and 
coaching. Some also offer career consultation. Participants 
with access to training programs, stressed the importance of 
these programs in maintaining and improving skills. While 
some have access to technology-outdated programs, others 
do not use any offered by their employer. 
C. Training and Support Programs 
The finance professionals surveyed responded with a 
range of experiences and opinions on iDSS. Some found 
automation helpful in focusing on clients, while others felt 
pressure and risk of deskilling. The systems in place helped 
some organize their work, but others found the information 
superficial and not useful. Many said their organizations still 
had a traditional mindset despite technological changes, and 
they needed more training on the impact of new technology. 
Some found it challenging to understand the information 
provided by the software and explain their decisions. A few 
expressed concerns over the limited control they had over 
the software and its decisions. Some found automated 
systems convenient, but others found them difficult to 
navigate with overwhelming amounts of customer data. 
Difficulty in explaining decisions to other internal 
stakeholders due to the confusing solutions of systems and 
superficial answers to problems were also mentioned. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The results showed significant associations between two 
of the three contributing factors and financial professionals’ 
declarative and procedural knowledge, supporting four of 
the six hypotheses according to Table IV. The survey 
responses show a diverse range of experiences and opinions 
on iDSS, access to training and support programs for skill 
development.  
A. Interpretation of the Findings 
While some employers offer a variety of internal and 
external training and support programs, few participants 
have no access to training programs. Other participants feel 
they do not need them due to the ease of automated systems 
in place. Those with access emphasize their importance in 
maintaining and developing their skills. Some financial 
professionals appreciate technology’s assistance, while 
others feel pressure to make quick decisions, struggling with 
the limitations and difficulty in navigating the systems in 
place effectively, and risking deskilling.  
The results showed a significant association between 
financial professionals' dependence on the iDSS and a 
decrease in their DK and PK. In addition, there is a 
significant association between iDSS taking over routine and 
time-intensive tasks in decision making and a decrease in 
financial professionals' DK and PK. However, no significant 
association was found between time spent with the iDSS and 
DK and PK. Overall, the results suggest that a greater 
reliance on iDSS leads to a decrease in financial 
professionals' knowledge.  
Contributing Factors 
Declarative 
Knowledge 
Procedural 
Knowledge 
N=39 
N=39 
r 
p  
r 
p 
iDSS taking over decision 
making activities 
0.37a 
.019 
0.37a 
.021 
Dependence on iDSS  
0.63a 
< .001 
0.66a 
< .001 
Time spent with iDSS 
-0.09 
.588 
-0.03 
.853 
Hypothesis 
Result 
H1 The greater the extent to which the iDSS performs 
routine and time intensive tasks, the less declarative 
knowledge possessed by the financial professional.  
Supported  
p = .019 
H2 The greater the extent to which the iDSS performs 
routine and time-intensive tasks, the less procedural 
knowledge possessed by the financial professional. 
Supported 
p = .021 
H3 The greater the financial professional’s dependence on 
the intelligent system the less declarative knowledge 
possessed by the financial professional. 
Supported 
p = < .001 
H4 The greater the financial professional’s dependence on 
the intelligent system the less declarative knowledge 
possessed by the financial professional. 
Supported 
p = < .001 
H5 The greater the time the financial professional has 
spent with the intelligent system, the less declarative 
knowledge by the financial professional. 
Not 
supported 
p = .588 
H6 The greater the time the financial professional has 
spent with the intelligent system, the less procedural 
knowledge by the financial professional. 
Not 
supported 
p = .853 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

B. Theoretical and Practical Contributions 
The theoretical contribution of this research lies in its 
examination of the relationship between the extent of use of 
iDSS 
and 
the 
knowledge 
possessed 
by 
financial 
professionals. By exploring this relationship, the study 
provided insights into potential contributing factors. The 
results indicate that the use of iDSS in organizations can 
notably influence the financial professionals` knowledge. 
The findings of the study highlight the importance of 
striving for a balance between technology use and 
maintaining a capable workforce. Mitigation techniques to 
address DD include providing proper training resources and 
programs to support employee growth and development, as 
well as encouraging participation among employees. As AI 
becomes more prevalent in decision-making processes, 
monitoring employees' reliance on intelligent decision aids 
becomes crucial to identify areas where additional training 
and support is needed. By offering knowledge workers 
opportunities to participate in purely human decision 
making, organizations can further counteract the loss of 
specific task knowledge and skills. Finally, to ensure iDSS 
remains a supportive tool for decision making, the 
effectiveness of the system in place should be regularly 
reevaluated 
and 
information 
processes 
be 
adjusted 
accordingly.  
C. Limitations 
This study has several limitations that should be 
acknowledged. Firstly, the sample size of 39 finance 
professionals is relatively small, which may limit the 
generalizability 
of 
the 
results 
to 
other 
industries, 
organizations, or larger populations. Secondly, the findings 
of the study are based on the participants' own opinions and 
ratings, which may introduce some bias into the results. 
Additionally, these opinions and ratings are time-sensitive, 
which may impact the applicability of the results in the 
future. Lastly, this study only examined three contributing 
factors to decisional deskilling and did not consider other 
individual, technical, and organizational factors. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
By studying the relation between the extent use of iDSS 
and the knowledge possessed by financial professionals, the 
study found significant associations of the two contributing 
factors “iDSS takes over routine and time-intensive taks” and 
“Dependance on iDSS” with DK and PK. However, there 
was no significant association with the variable of “Time 
spent with iDSS”. The results also revealed varied 
experiences and opinions on iDSS, as well as on 
participants’ access to training and support programs. Some 
professionals appreciated technology's assistance, while 
others felt pressure to make quick decisions and struggled 
with the limitations of the IT tool in place. 
The study highlights the potential drawbacks of over-
relying on emerging technology for decision-making and 
emphasizes the need to mitigate potential negative impacts 
on workforce knowledge and skills. The results can be used 
to raise awareness of the significance of providing proper 
resources and programs to support employee growth and 
development, and to encourage organizations to invest in 
these resources. Mitigation strategies includes increasing 
participation 
in 
human 
decision-making 
activities, 
monitoring employees' reliance on iDSS, and reevaluating 
the effectiveness and efficiency of the system in place 
present further mitigation strategies to address DD. 
Future research could benefit from a longitudinal study 
tracking the effects of DD over time and combining survey 
data with methods, such as interviews or case studies to gain 
a deeper understanding of the concept of DD.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author likes to thank Olga Levina and the reviewers for 
their constructive feedback. Any opinions expressed in this 
article are those of the author. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. G. Sutton, V. Arnold, and M. Holt, “How Much 
Automation Is Too Much? Keeping the Human Relevant 
in Knowledge Work,” J. Emerg. Technol. Account., vol. 
15, no. 2, pp. 15–25, September 2018, doi: 10.2308/jeta-
52311. 
[2] A.-S. Mayer, F. Strich, and M. Fiedler, “Unintended 
Consequences of Introducing AI Systems for Decision 
Making,” MIS Q. Exec., pp. 239–257, December 2020, doi: 
10.17705/2msqe.00036. 
[3] M. Schemmer, N. Kühl, and G. Satzger, “Intelligent Decision 
Assistance Versus Automated Decision-Making: Enhancing 
Knowledge 
Work 
Through 
Explainable 
Artificial 
Intelligence.” arXiv, Sep. 28, 2021. [Online]. Available at: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.13827. [retrieved: 6 April, 2023] 
[4] R. Sharda, D. Delen, and E. Turban, Business intelligence and 
analytics: systems for decision support, 10th ed. Boston: 
Pearson, 2015. 
[5] D. Arnott and S. Gao, “From Radical Movement to 
Organizational 
Mainstream: 
ABehavioral 
Economics 
Perspective on DSS History,” in EURO Working Group on 
DSS, J. Papathanasiou, P. Zaraté, and J. Freire de Sousa, Eds., 
in Integrated Series in Information Systems. Cham: Springer 
International 
Publishing, 
2021, 
pp. 
239–257. 
doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-70377-6_13. 
[6] V. B. Sowmya, B. Majumder, A. Gupta, and H. Surana, 
Practical natural language processing: a comprehensive guide 
to building real-world NLP systems, 1st ed. Sebastopol, CA: 
O’Reilly Media, 2020. 
[7] D. J. Power, C. Heavin, and P. Keenan, “Decision systems 
redux,” J. Decis. Syst., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1–18, January 2019, 
doi: 10.1080/12460125.2019.1631683 
[8] D. Paradice, “Two Grand Challenges for DSS Evolution,” in 
EURO Working Group on DSS, J. Papathanasiou, P. Zaraté, 
and J. Freire de Sousa, Eds., in Integrated Series in 
Information 
Systems. 
Cham: 
Springer 
International 
Publishing, 2021, pp. 33–49. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-70377-
6_3. 
[9] V. U. Vincent, “Integrating intuition and artificial intelligence 
in organizational decision-making,” Bus. Horiz., vol. 64, no. 
4, 
pp. 
425–438, 
July 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.bushor.2021.02.008. 
[10] T. Hoff, “Deskilling and adaptation among primary care 
physicians using two work innovations,” Health Care 
Management Review, vol. 36 no. 4, pp. 338–348, June 2011 
doi:10.1097/HMR.0b013e31821826a1. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

[11] R. Parasuraman, T. B. Sheridan, and C. D. Wickens, “A 
model for types and levels of human interaction with 
automation,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. - Part Syst. 
Hum., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 286–297, May 2000, doi: 
10.1109/3468.844354. 
[12] K. Goddard, A. Roudsari, and J. Wyatt, “Automation bias: A 
systematic review of frequency, effect mediators, and 
mitigators,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. JAMIA, vol. 19, pp. 
121–7, June 2011, doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000089. 
[13] L. J. Skitka, K. L. Mosier, and M. Burdick, “Does automation 
bias decision-making?,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., vol. 51, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
991–1006, 
November 
1999, 
doi: 
10.1006/ijhc.1999.0252. 
[14] M. Axelsen, “Continued use of intelligent decision aids and 
auditor knowledge: Qualitative evidence” The 18th Americas 
Conference on Information Systems (ACMICS 2012), 5, 2012 
pp. 
3860-3869 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2012/proceedings/AccountingInf
ormationSystems/19. [retrieved: 6 April, 2023]. 
[15] T. ten Berge and R. van Hezewijk, “Procedural and 
Declarative Knowledge: An Evolutionary Perspective,” 
Theory Psychol., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 605–624, October 1999, 
doi: 10.1177/0959354399095002. 
[16] T. Rinta-Kahila, E. Penttinen, A. Salovaara, and W. Soliman. 
(2018) “Consequences of Discontinuing Knowledge Work 
Automation - Surfacing of Deskilling Effects and Methods of 
Recovery,” Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, (HICSS 2018), March 2018, 
pp. 5244–5253, doi:10.24251/HICSS.2018.654. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
Implementing the Cyber Security Act in Public Financial Institutions in Ghana 
What are the Constraints and Enabling factors? 
 
Emmanuel Awuni Kolog  
Operations and MIS, University of Ghana 
Accra, Ghana 
Email: eakolog@ug.edu.gh  
Tijani Mohammed  
Operations and MIS, University of Ghana 
Accra, Ghana 
Email: mtijani003@st.ug.edu.gh 
 
Abstract— The Cyber Security Act of Ghana was enacted as a 
result of the National Cyber Security Policy and Strategy in 
Ghana. However, two years after its implementation, progress 
has been slow. This paper aimed to explore the constraints and 
enabling factors affecting the implementation of the Cyber 
Security 
Act 
in 
Ghana, 
based 
on 
the 
International 
Communication Union's pillars of cybersecurity. A mixed-
method approach was used, with data collected from 168 
respondents through a questionnaire and interviews. The 
survey data was analysed using Partial Least Square- Structural 
Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM), while the interview data was 
analysed using theory-based content analysis. The study found 
that financial institutions in Ghana have satisfactory policies 
and regulatory measures on cybersecurity, but lack the 
technical capacity to implement them effectively. The study also 
revealed satisfactory organizational and capacity development 
measures, but more awareness creation and organizational 
support are needed, including budget allocation and support 
from top management, to effectively implement cybersecurity 
policies in Ghana. 
Keywords- information security; cyber security act; public 
financial institutions; Ghana. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Governments 
and 
organizations 
worldwide 
are 
increasingly utilizing Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICTs) to promote economic growth and 
national development [1]. However, the growing number of 
Internet users globally is hindering this progress. As of April 
2022, there were over 5 billion active Internet users and 
approximately 
1.92 
billion 
websites, 
making 
cyber 
monitoring and control extremely difficult [2]. This 
development has also made cyberspace more susceptible to 
attacks and exploitation. Cybersecurity breaches can be 
catastrophic, resulting in loss of life, financial loss, and 
business collapse. Infamous cyberattacks, such as those on 
Sony Pictures, the USA pipeline shutdowns, and the NotPetya 
virus, for instance, were reported to have caused over US $10 
billion in damages [3]. 
On December 29, 2020, Ghana's President assented to the 
2020 Cyber Security Act 1038 [7]. The policy's aim is to 
provide a secure cyberspace to support the country's 
digitalization agenda and its transition to a knowledge-based 
economy. The Act draws on eight frameworks from Ghana's 
National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy (NCSPS): 
legislative 
and 
regulatory 
frameworks, 
cybersecurity 
technology frameworks, culture of security and capacity 
building, research and development towards self-reliance, 
compliance and enforcement, child online protection, 
cybersecurity 
emergency 
readiness, 
and 
international 
cooperation frameworks [8]. 
The Act contains 100 sections and three schedules and 
assigns it to a Cybersecurity Authority (CSA) [8]. The CSA's 
objectives include regulating, managing, and promoting 
cybersecurity issues, as well as preventing and responding to 
cyber threats and incidents in Ghana. Sections 5 to 34 outline 
the CSA's structure, administrative provisions, financial 
provisions, and the establishment of a cybersecurity fund to 
support the authority's operations. Sections 41 to 48 provide 
for the establishment of national and sectoral computer 
emergency response teams (CERT) and cyber security 
incident reporting (CIRT). Licensing of cybersecurity service 
providers, 
accreditation 
of 
cyber 
professionals, 
and 
certification of cyber products are covered in Sections 49 to 
58. The Act also promotes cybersecurity standards and their 
enforcement, public awareness and education as detailed in 
Sections 59 to 61. 
As ICTs continue to fuel economic growth and national 
development, the number of active Internetusers worldwide 
has surpassed 5 billion, with over 1.92 billion websites as of 
April 2022 [2]. However, this increased digitalization has also 
made cyberspace vulnerable to cyber attacks, which can have 
severe consequences such as loss of life, financial loss, and 
business collapse. To address this, countries and organizations 
worldwide are now incorporating cybersecurity regulatory 
measures into their national and sectoral security strategies. In 
Ghana, the government is pursuing an ambitious digitalization 
agenda, which has led to increased cyber-related activities 
among government agencies, private sector institutions, and 
citizens. However, this has also led to an increase in 
cybercrime and cyber threats [5], such as ransomware, 
identity fraud, blackmail, online child exploitation, and social 
engineering.  
 This study aims to explore the implementation of Ghana's 
Cybersecurity Act 2020 (Act 1038) by public financial 
institutions and investigate the constraints and enabling 
factors needed to improve its implementation. The study is 
divided into six sections. Section I introduces the study and 
emphasizes the importance of the topic. Section II presents the 
study's framework and the development of its hypotheses. In 
Section III, the methodology is discussed, including data 
collection and analysis methods. Section IV presents the 
study's findings, while Section V interprets and discusses the 
results in depth. Finally, in Section VI, the paper concludes by 
summarizing the main points and drawing conclusions about 
the implementation of the Cybersecurity Act. 
II. 
FRAMEWORK AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT  
In the section, we present the study’s conceptual framework 
and the hypothesis development. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
A. Framework 
A 
comparative 
analysis 
of 
current 
international 
cybersecurity indexes by [10] [13] identified three key 
frameworks developed by cybersecurity experts and globally 
accepted for evaluating cybersecurity capacities: the Global 
Cybersecurity Index (GCI) by the ITU, the National 
Cybersecurity Index (NCSI) developed by the e-Governance 
Academy Foundation, and the Index of Cybersecurity (ICS) 
developed by the New York University Centre for 
Cybersecurity. Table I presents the GCI framework, which 
shows the various constructs. 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING ITU MEASURES TO GHANA’S NCSPS 
ITU 
Measures 
Corresponding NCSPS Framework 
Legal  
§ 
Policies and regulatory framework 
§ 
Compliance and enforcement measures 
§ 
Child online protection 
Technical  
§ 
Cyber security technology framework 
§ 
Cyber security emergency 
Organisational  
§ 
Effective governance 
Capacity 
Development  
§ 
Culture of security and capacity building 
§ 
Research and development towards self-
reliance 
Cooperation 
§ 
International cooperation 
 
Although each framework seeks to measure cybersecurity 
capacities at the national and organizational level, their 
application and context vary because they have different 
systems of indicators and evaluation. The GCI is the most 
comprehensive and widely accepted framework, and it is used 
in this study. 
 
B. Hypothesis Development  
The legal measures, as presented in Table I, focus on the 
presence of legal and regulatory frameworks, which serve as 
the foundation of all cybersecurity policies. These measures 
provide clear guidance for cybersecurity governance and 
include indicators such as regulations for prosecuting 
cybercrime, protecting online identities and data, child online 
protection, privacy, system breaches, cybersecurity audits, 
implementation of standards, and identification and protection 
of Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) [10]. The 
implementation of these measures provides legal support in 
the form of policies and procedures that protect individuals 
and CII from exploitation and harm [11]. The question now is 
whether financial institutions are adapting to Ghana's 2020 
Cyber Security Act 1038 or revising their existing policies to 
align with it. This leads to the first hypothesis of this study: 
H1: Financial institutions in Ghana have legal measures 
to implement cyber security Act 
 
The technical measures focus on the presence of structures 
and mechanisms to address cyber threats and incidents. This 
pillar acknowledges the significance of national and sectoral 
Computer Incident Response Teams (CIRT) and Computer 
Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) in promoting cyber 
resilience. Technical capacity also includes the existence of 
standards and baseline requirements for the deployment and 
use of technological resources. As technology is rapidly 
advancing, the technical capacity and technologies necessary 
to combat cybercrime and enhance national cybersecurity 
must also be continually improved to remain relevant. The 
2020 Cyber Security Act 1038 contains provisions for 
establishing national and sectoral CERTs, CIRTs, and early 
warning systems, developing system standards, and capacity 
building [10]. Therefore, the study hypothesis is: 
H2: Financial institutions in Ghana have the technical 
capacity to implement cyber security Act 
 
The organizational measure examines the IT governance 
structures, including the establishment of cybersecurity 
objectives and strategic plans, as well as the formal definition 
of institutional roles and responsibilities to ensure 
accountability [10]. It assesses the existence of a central 
governing body and how it coordinates with various 
departments to implement and enforce these regulations. Key 
organizational indicators include the existence of a legitimate 
and enforcement authority; organizational cybersecurity 
strategies with an action plan; protection of Critical 
Information Infrastructure (CII); and a clear definition of roles 
and accountability for key stakeholders. Therefore, the third 
hypothesis for this study is: 
H3: Financial institutions in Ghana have organizational 
capacity to implement cyber security Act 
 
The Capacity measure involves activities required to 
increase human and institutional knowledge [10]. This 
measure supports the development of cybersecurity solutions 
to prevent and respond to threats and cyber risks. Under 
resource constraints environment, risk of cyber threats is 
higher because of absent or limited tools and technical 
knowledge [17]. Capacity building includes targeted 
awareness campaigns; a system for certification and 
accreditation of cyber security professionals and service 
providers; support for professional training packages in 
cybersecurity for key stakeholders; and the inclusion of 
cybersecurity in training programs. Other capacity-building 
measures also include research and development; the 
existence of a cybersecurity industry to support the 
development of cyber security products and services; and the 
growth of cyber start-ups. The study thus, hypothesize that: 
H4: Financial institutions in Ghana have developed a 
capacity building measures towards awareness of the 
Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual framework 
 
Cybercrimes are borderless and transnational; hence, 
promoting 
cybersecurity 
requires 
collaboration 
and 
Capacity building 
Measures  
Cooperation Measures 
Legal Measures 
Organisational Measures 
Technical Measures 
Implementatio
n framework 
of Cyber 
security Act 
H1 
H2 
H3 
H4 
H5 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
cooperation amongst internal stakeholders and external 
agencies [17]. This requires a multi-stakeholder approach, 
including bilateral and multilateral agreements; participation 
of industry forums, international fora/associations; public-
private partnerships; inter-agency partnerships; and alluring to 
best practices. This also assesses the number of partnerships, 
cooperative frameworks, and information-sharing networks 
established to build capacity and cyber resilience. Hence, we 
hypotheses that: 
H5: Financial institutions in Ghana are collaborating and 
cooperating to implement Act  
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The purpose of this section is to provide an overview of the 
approach and methodology used in the study 
A. Research Approach and Data collection  
A mixed research method was chosen for this study in line 
with its purpose. An empirical review was conducted to 
identify the constraints and enabling factors in the 
implementation of cyber security policies. The review 
revealed that a quantitative method combined with a 
qualitative approach would be the most appropriate way to 
gather data and insights from subject matter experts in the 
field of cybersecurity [13]. 
       To achieve this, a survey questionnaire was developed 
along with structured interview questions for qualitative 
insights [14]. Efforts were made to ensure that the 
questionnaires relating to the hypothesis and conceptual 
framework could accurately ascertain discriminant validity 
and reliability [15]. The questionnaires used in this study 
were adapted from ITU's model questionnaires for cyber 
security evaluation (see Table II). Data was collected using 
online survey questionnaires and semi-structured interviews 
conducted simultaneously.  
TABLE II.  
MAPPING ITU MEASURES TO GHANA’S NCSPS 
 
Constructs 
# of Items 
Source  
1 
Legal measures 
LM (7) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
2 
Technical measures 
TM (7) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
3 
Organisational measure 
OM (7) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
4 
Capacity measures 
CD (5) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
5 
Cooperation measures 
CM (4) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
 
A purposive sampling technique was used, and survey links 
were sent to about 200 staff of financial institutions in Ghana. 
This provided a wide population reach to supplement the 
interviews conducted with 14 IT managers and chief 
information security officers (CISOs) from selected financial 
institutions. 
B. Method of Data Analysis  
A total of 154 valid responses were received from the 
survey, and data cleaning was performed. The data from the 
Likert scale were coded into numerical values for easy 
analysis. For close-ended responses, partial least squares 
structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) was used for 
analysis. PLS-SEM is recommended for quantitative data 
analysis as it provides tools for estimating multiple and 
interrelated dependencies in a single analysis, which tends to 
provide a high level of predictive accuracy [16]. SmartPLS 
software was used as it is more feasible for measuring and 
developing comprehensive structural and predictive models. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS  
The study’s result is presented in this section.  
A. Demorgraphic  
Respondents spanned 12 banks and 4 rural banks in Ghana, 
with an average of 10 staff from each institution. 52 of the 
participants were females (34%) with the remaining being 
male (66%). For age distribution, there were distinct age 
groupings, which were Gen X, Gen Y, and Gen Z. 
Interestingly, the lowest level of education of the participants 
was bachelor’s degree holders. Table III shows the summary 
statistic of the demographic data. 
TABLE III.  
PARTICIPANT DEMOGRAPHY 
Category 
Variable 
Frequency 
(N=154) 
Percentage 
Gender 
Male 
102 
66 
Female 
52 
34 
Age 
18-23 years  
6 
4 
24-39 years 
128 
83 
40-55 years 
20 
13 
Education 
Bachelor 
78 
51 
Masters 
76 
49 
Employment 
Level 
Operational 
90 
58 
Middle mgt 
52 
34 
Top Mgt. 
12 
8 
 
We assessed the respondent’s knowledge of the Cyber 
Security Act in Ghana. From the results in Table III, 69% of 
participants were aware of the Act, with 31% not being 
aware. A question on cyber security attributes was asked by 
providing six options as follows: confidentiality, security, 
availability, protection, reliability, and policies. The 
respondents were tasked to select those that they know.  
 
B. Cyber Act Implementation in Ghana   
In using PLS-SEM to analyse the quantitative data, a 3-
stage approach involving initial estimates of the measurement 
model and the structural model was developed, after which a 
final estimate for both the measurement and structural model 
was constructed. 
 
1) Measurement Model Assessment  
The latent variable with the indicators is reflective, hence, 
in its assessment, an analysis was conducted on the size and 
significance of the loadings, construct reliability, and 
convergent and discriminant validity [17]. The purpose of 
these assessment was to test for the relationship between 
indicators and constructs to ascertain their relevance. The 
initial step in measurement model assessment was to assess 
the indicator loadings of each construct. According to Hair et 
al. [12] loadings at 0.70 and above indicates that the construct 
explains more than 50% of the indicator’s variance. As 
indicated in Table IV, some of the indicators were weak and 
deleted eventually.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
An assessment of the reliability of the constructs was 
undertaken to identify the degree to which the indicators 
measuring the same constructs are related. This was done 
using Cronbach’s alpha and composite reliability. However, 
for reflective PLS-SEM models, composite reliability is 
preferred to Cronbach’s alpha because Cronbach's alpha can 
over or underestimate reliability due to its usage of the entire 
model for estimation [18]. Higher values indicate higher 
levels of reliability when interpreting construct reliability with 
a value at 0.70 and above preferred [16]. The composite 
reliabilities of the constructs in the research model are all 
above 0.70, indicating reliability among constructs to their 
indicators as shown in Table V. 
After satisfying indicator and construct reliability, 
construct validity was performed to measure the extent to 
which the defined construct in the research model measures 
what it is intended to measure, such as legal measures truly 
measuring only legally related indicators. This assessment 
was done using convergent and discriminant validity. 
TABLE IV.  
CONSTRUCT LOADINGS 
  
CD 
CM 
LM 
OM 
TM 
CD2 
0.912 
 
 
 
 
CD3 
0.923 
 
 
 
 
CM1 
 
0.870 
 
 
 
CM2 
 
0.812 
 
 
 
CM4 
 
0.902 
 
 
 
LM1 
 
 
0.927 
 
 
LM2 
 
 
0.906 
 
 
LM7 
 
 
0.779 
 
 
OM1 
 
 
 
0.969 
 
OM2 
 
 
 
0.967 
 
TM1 
 
 
 
 
0.903 
TM2 
 
 
 
 
0.912 
TM3 
 
 
 
 
0.919 
TM5 
 
 
 
 
0.903 
TM7 
 
 
 
 
0.932 
 
Convergent validity examines if two interrelated 
constructs in the model are theoretically connected. This is 
also referred to as communality and it is measured with 
Average Variance Extracted (AVE). AVE value above 0.50 is 
always desired [20]. From Table V, all the constructs’ AVE 
exceeds 0.50 which is above the desired threshold. 
TABLE V.  
CONSTRUCT RELIABILITY AND VALIDITY 
Constructs 
Cronbach's 
Alpha 
rho_A 
Composite 
Reliability  
AVE 
Capacity 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
Cooperation 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
Implementation 
framework 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
Legal 
0.843 
0.871 
0.905 
0.762 
Organisational 
0.933 
0.933 
0.968 
0.937 
Technical 
0.953 
1.125 
0.962 
0.835 
 
TABLE VI.  
HETEROTRAIT-MONOTRAIT RATION MATRIX= 
 
CD 
CM 
IF 
LM 
OM 
TM 
Capacity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cooperation 
0.765 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
framework 
0.328 
0.169 
 
 
 
 
Legal 
0.313 
0.216 
0.876 
 
 
 
Organisational 
0.786 
0.590 
0.269 
0.293 
 
 
Technical 
0.576 
0.429 
0.170 
0.126 
0.699 
 
 
Discriminant validity is the last assessment done in the 
measurement model. This determines that two unrelated 
constructs are theoretically not connected. Three approaches 
are generally used to assess discriminant validity. They are 
Fornell and Larcker’s [19] criteria, cross-loadings, and the 
Heterotrait-Monotrait Ration (HTMT) criterion [9]. However, 
PLS-SEM recommends using HTMT.  
The HTMT criterion estimates the true correlation 
between two constructs as if they were perfectly reliable. 
HTMT value above 0.90 suggests a lack of discriminant 
validity. From Table VI, all constructs in our model score 
below 0.90, hence the indication of model discriminant 
validity. 
 
2) Structural Model Assessment  
After satisfying all the measurement model requirements, 
an assessment is conducted on the structure of the model to 
test the hypothesis of the study. Multicollinearity amongst 
constructs is assessed using the variance inflation factor 
(VIF). Higher VIF indicates critical levels of collinearity, with 
values below 5 being desirable. Table VII shows the VIF 
values for the constructs in the research model, with the 
highest being 3.987, indicating good indicator collinearity. 
Higher VIF indicates critical levels of collinearity, with values 
below 5 being desirable. Table VII shows the VIF values for 
the constructs in the research model, with the highest being 
3.987, indicating good indicator collinearity. 
TABLE VII.  
VARIANCE INFLATION FACTOR (VIF) 
Constructs 
VIF 
Capacity 
3.987 
Cooperation 
2.422 
Legal 
1.106 
Organisational 
2.895 
Technical 
1.758 
 
Once there are no collinearity issues amongst the 
indicators, the value of 𝑅! was computed to determine the in-
sample predictive power of the model. 𝑅! values range from 
0 to 1, with higher values closer to 1 indicating better 
predictability of the structural model. 𝑅! for this model is 
0.710, as indicated in Table VIII, which is closer to the 
substantial preferred value of 0.75 and greater than the 
moderate value of 0.5. This indicates that the model predicts 
by a combined percentage of 71% how legal, technical, 
organisational, capacity development, and cooperation 
measures predict the policy implementation framework of the 
2020 Cyber Security Act 1038 by financial institutions in 
Ghana. 
TABLE VIII.  MODEL FIT WITH R2 
 
R2 
Adjusted R2 
Implementation framework 
 
0.686 
0.675 
 
The effect size represents the change in the coefficient of 
determination when a specified construct is omitted from the 
model. This is measured with 𝑓!, where values of 0.02, 0.15, 
and 0.35 represent small, medium, and large effects, 
respectively. Thus, values of less than 0.02 indicate no effect, 
whilst values above 0.15 indicate significant effects. From 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
Table 4.8, legal measures have the largest effect size with 
values of 1.788. Capacity had 0.043 which is substantive. 
Cooperation and technical measures had medium effects with 
0.025 and 0.015 respectively. Organisational had no effect 
with a value of 0.011 which is below 0.02. 
Hair et al. [20] recommend a minimum acceptable sample 
size for bootstrapping to be 1000 samples. However, for more 
reliability, a sample size of 10000 was chosen using a two-
tailed distribution with a bias-corrected and accelerated (BCa) 
bootstrap method. This produced t-values and p-values as 
shown in Table IX. 
At the 0.95 significance level, t-values above 1.96 show 
significance, whilst values below show no significance. In that 
order, legal measures, cooperation measures, and capacity 
measures are significant. t-values of 1.649 and 1.112 for 
technical and organisational measures indicate they have no 
statistical significance in this research model. 
TABLE IX.  
EFFECT SIZE 
Constructs 
Effect size (𝒇𝟐) 
Capacity 
0.043 
Cooperation 
0.025 
Legal 
1.788 
Organisational 
0.011 
Technical 
0.015 
 
Hair et al. [20] recommends t-values of at least 196 before 
a hypothesis can be inferred as supported. Therefore, this 
model supports three of our hypotheses outlined in Section 3. 
𝐻!  and 𝐻" are rejected based on the t-values.  𝐻#,  𝐻$, and 𝐻%  
can be considered viable hypotheses and hence accepted.
 
TABLE X.  
CONSTRUCTS SIGNIFICANCE 
 
Original 
Sample (O) 
Sample 
Mean (M) 
Standard 
Deviation  
T Statistics 
(|O/STDEV|) 
p-values 
 
 
 
Legal =>implementation 
0.358 
0.356 
0.024 
15.037 
0.000 
𝐻" 
Supported 
Technical -> implementation 
0.042 
0.042 
0.025 
1.649 
0.099 
𝐻# 
Not Supported 
Organisational -> implementation 
-0.045 
-0.043 
0.04 
1.112 
0.266 
𝐻$ 
Not Supported 
Capacity -> implementation 
0.105 
0.105 
0.045 
2.339 
0.019 
𝐻% 
Supported 
Cooperation -> implementation 
-0.063 
-0.063 
0.029 
2.154 
0.031 
𝐻& 
Supported 
C. Constraints and Enabling factors  
All the interviewed participants affirmed their knowledge of 
the 2020 Cyber Security Act and indicated that their 
organizations are taking steps to implement it. With regards to 
the frequency of review of cyber security policies, about 90% 
of the participants suggested 2 years and must be guided by 
the frequent changes in the threat landscape in the cyber 
ecosystem. At the organizational level, it is recommended that 
policies are reviewed annually, but when new threats or 
technologies emerge, changes in national or international 
regulations occur, or internal incidents happen that were not 
captured in existing policies, they should be reviewed and 
updated. Tables XI and XII are sample extracts (response) 
from participants during the interview. 
 
TABLE XI.  
CONSTRAINTS OF IMPLEMENTING CYBER SCEIRTY ACT IN GHANA 
 
Sample Extract 
Identified Themes 
1 
“For the implementation, it’s fully done. But it's one thing to implement and another to enforce. Now 
the question is, are we enforcing all the policies in the act as stated??” 
Policy enforcement 
2 
“In my opinion, the cost and resources are the constraints. Cost can be broken down into 
infrastructure and human resource costs. Resources will be human and tools to be used.” 
Financial cost, Limited technical 
capacity, Human resources 
3 
“Lack of awareness on the 2020 Cyber Security Act 1038” 
Lack of awareness 
4 
“The understanding of Act 1038 is still not too much by the public and the institutions tasked to 
implement, simply because the institutions tasked to do so may not be doing its job” 
Lack of understanding of the Act, 
Ineffective organisations 
 
TABLE XII.  
ENABLING FACTORS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF CYBER SECURITY ACT IN GHANA 
Participant 
Sample Extract 
Identified Themes 
 1 
“The first task is to identify those charged to implement it and those charged to ensure more 
education. Identification of what has been done so far by these two separate bodies will inform the 
awareness mechanism to undertake. When people get informed, it empowers them to take proactive 
and preventive actions” 
Collaboration 
 
Awareness 
 2 
“Training of persons in IT roles to enable them to focus on cyber security issues. Government to give 
waivers for certain cyber security tools or operations for cyber security service providers” 
Training 
Government support 
3 
“Creation of awareness on the Cyber Security Act amongst stakeholders. Capacity building and 
knowledge transfer between personnel of stakeholder agencies.   
Collaboration, Awareness 
creation, Capacity building 
4 
“Establish and adopt cyber security standards for education, skills development, risk management, 
research and development and practitioners.” 
Cyber security standards, Skills 
development, Research 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The ITU's Global Cyber Security Index assessed Ghana's 
cyber security score as 89.69% in 2021, a significant increase 
from 32.6% in 2017 [6]. This achievement was celebrated by 
the CSA and the Ghana Ministry of Communication, as it 
placed Ghana in the 3rd position as the most cyber-committed 
country in Africa after Mauritius and Tanzania. The 
assessment evaluated five key pillars, including legal, 
technical, 
organizational, 
capacity 
development, 
and 
cooperation measures [10]. However, the public financial 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
institutions in Ghana still need to fully comply with the ITU's 
cyber security index despite Ghana's progress in the cyber 
space due to the implementation of the Act. 
The findings of this study indicate that the public financial 
institutions in Ghana have sufficient legal measures to 
implement the 2020 Cyber Security Act 1038, which is a 
crucial determinant of the model's reliability. Financial 
institutions in Ghana have appropriate policy and regulatory 
measures on data protection, unauthorised use of computer 
systems, and cyber security audit and risk management. 
However, policies on enforcing cyber security standards, 
managing online harassment, and mitigating cyber security 
risks are either non-existent or inadequate, despite public 
financial institutions in Ghana implementing several policy 
measures 
 The study findings indicate that financial institutions in 
Ghana lack adequate technical capacity to comply with the 
Cyber Security Act 1038. This means that these institutions 
do not have sufficient technical measures to implement the 
Act. Despite these technical limitations, financial institutions 
in Ghana employ only certified cyber security professionals 
and procure and use genuine software systems, as the risks 
and implications of using pirated or fake software are high. 
This is due to the strict directive from the Bank of Ghana, 
which enforces regulations that require all financial 
institutions in Ghana to only employ certified IT managers 
and chief information security officers. 
The study rejects the third hypothesis, which states that 
public financial institutions in Ghana are organized to 
implement the 2020 Cyber Security Act 1038. Critical 
organizational measures that are lacking include the absence 
of a dedicated cyber security unit, and cyber security policies 
that are not readily available and disseminated [18]. 
Additionally, the management of financial institutions in 
Ghana must be more committed to supporting the 
implementation of the Act through financial support and any 
other means possible at the strategic level. The supervisory 
division of the Bank of Ghana could help ensure proper 
organization of financial institutions in terms of cyber 
security implementation and enforcement. 
The study has found that the capacity building 
development initiative by financial institutions in Ghana is 
satisfactory. However, more needs to be done to increase their 
capacity building initiatives through investing in cyber 
security infrastructure, research, and providing security 
education, training, and awareness. In addition, the study 
identified constraints in the implementation of the Cyber 
Security Act, including lack of awareness and training, lack of 
top management support, policy enforcement challenges, lack 
of understanding of the Act, and user non-compliance. The 
study also highlighted cross-cutting themes, including 
awareness creation and training, policy enforcement, cyber 
security technical measures and standards, human resource 
development, management support, and collaboration, which 
need to be addressed to enable the successful implementation 
of the Act. It is crucial to provide these enabling factors for 
the implementation of the 2020 Cyber Security Act 1038. 
Moreover, CSA should be supported and equipped to perform 
its mandates while developing the capacities of various CIIs 
and stakeholders necessary to ensure the Act's successful 
implementation 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the Global Cyber Security Index and the Ghana 
National Cyber Security Policy and Strategy, a conceptual 
framework was developed to explore the state of the 
implementation of cyber security in Ghana. Five key themes 
were identified, which underpin all cyber security policies and 
implementation strategies. These are legal, technical, 
organizational, capacity development, and cooperation 
measures. Questionnaires were administered and interviews 
were conducted to collect data. The study found that financial 
institutions have instituted several policy measures but lack 
the capacity to implement them. In future, we intend to expand 
the study by exploring he various cyber security techniques 
being adopted by the financial institutions in Ghana. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. Thapa and Ø., Saebø, “Exploring the link between ICT and 
development in the context of developing countries: A literature 
review” The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing 
Countries, vol 64, no. 1, pp. 1-15, 2014.  
[2] 
Statistica, “Internetusers in the world 2022”. [Retrieved: January 2023] 
https://rb.gy/7h9ots  
[3] 
M. Hepfer and T.C. Powell, “Make Cybersecurity a Strategic 
Asset”. MIT Sloan Mgt.  Review, vol. 63, no. 1, 4pp. 0-45, 2020 
[4] 
V. Lebogang, O. Tabona., and T. Maupong, “Evaluating Cybersecurity 
Strategies in Africa”. In Cybersecurity Capabilities in Developing 
Nations and Its Impact on Global Security, pp. 1-19, 2022. 
[5] 
R. Sabillon, V. Cavaller and J. Cano, ”National cyber security 
strategies: global trends in cyberspace. International Journal of 
Computer Science and Software Eng. Vo. 5, no.5, p. 67, 2016. 
[6] 
O. Longe, O. Ngwa, F. Wada, V. Mbarika, and L. Kv asny,“Criminal 
Use of Informationand Communication Technologies in Sub-Saharan 
Africa: Trends, Concerns andPerspectives”. Journal of Information 
Technology Impact, vol 9, no. 3, pp.155-165, 2009. 
[7] 
Paliament of Ghana, “Cyber Security Act 2020”. [Retrieved: January 
2023] available at https://rb.gy/al3oky  
[8] 
GNCSP. "Ghana National cyber security policy and strategy” 
[Retrieved: January 2023], available at https://rb.gy/7u9lfj  
[9] 
J.F Hair, J.J Risher, M. Sarstedt, C.M, Ringle “When to use and how 
to report the results of PLS-SEM”. European business review. Vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 1-24, 2019 
[10] ITU (2015), “Global security index”. [Retrieved: January 2023] 
https://www.itu.int/en/action/cybersecurity/Pages/gca.aspx 
[11] M. Kaur, “Cyber Security Challenges in the Latest Technology”. 
In Proceedings of Third International Conference on Communication, 
Computing and Electronics Systems, pp. 655-671, 2022. 
[12] J.F Hair, G.T.M. Hult, C.M Ringle, M. Sarstedt, “A primer on partial 
least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM)”.Sage 
publications, New York, 2021. 
[13] J. Mayoh, and A.J. Onwuegbuzie, “Toward a conceptualization of 
mixed methods phenomenological research”. Journal of mixed 
methods research, vol. 9 no. 1, pp. 91-107, 2021. 
[14] J.L Myers, A.D Well, and R.F Jr, “Research design and statistical 
analysis” 3rd ed, Routledge, 2013. 
[15] E. Dubois and U. Tatar “Data analysis in research: Why data, types of 
data, data analysis in qualitative and quantitative research. 
QuestionPro. [Retrieved: January 2023] at https://rb.gy/apfphh  
[16] K.K.K Wong, “Mastering Partial Least Squares Structural Equation 
modelling ” Universe: Bloomington. IN, USA, pp. 1-184, 2019. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
[17] Jr., J. F., Hult, G. T., Ringle, C. M., Sarstedt, M., Danks, N. P., and 
Ray, S, “Partial least squares structural equation modelling (PLS-
SEM) using R: A workbook” no. 1, pp. XIV, 197, 2021 
[18] Bank of Ghana (2018). Cyber and Information security directives. 
[Retrieved: January 2023], https://rb.gy/ylvoz  
[19] C. Fornell and D.F, larcker, “ Evaluating structural equation models 
with unobservable variables and measurement error”. Journal of 
Marketing Research, vol 18, no. 1, pp. 39–50, 1981. 
[20] J., Hair, C, Ringle, and m. Sarstedt, M., “PLS-SEM: Indeed a Silver 
Bullet”,  Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, no. 19, pp. 139-
151, 2011. 
 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

Long-Term Risks of IoT Devices: The Case of the Smart Fridge
Erik Buchmanna,b
a Dept. of Computer Science, Leipzig University, Germany
b Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence Dresden/Leipzig, Germany
Email: buchmann@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
Abstract—Replacing conventional devices with smart ones
has many advantages, e.g., a seamless integration of physical
objects into the user’s digital environment or improved modes of
use. However, if a conventional device is replaced by a smart
device, its IT components can cause risks, that shorten the
life of the device. Such risks stem from different life cycles of
embedded soft- and hardware, libraries and protocols used, and
the IT ecosystem required. This is problematic, because many
conventional household appliances, say, a fridge or TV, have a
much longer life span than typical IT equipment. In this paper,
we use a systematic approach to identify long-term risks for the
operational life span of a smart fridge. In particular, we identify
8 different use cases of three typical smart fridges, e.g., cooling
or managing ”best before” dates. We model the IT ecosystem
needed to run these use cases, and we inspect each asset in
this ecosystem for potential long-term risks. We found that even
cooling, the most basic use case, is at risk in the long run. This
is because the setting cooling parameters may depend on parts
of the IT ecosystem that are not under the user’s control. On
the other hand, we did not find any risk that may lead to harm
of the category ”threatening”. Our findings on the smart fridge
can be generalized to other smart devices easily.
Keywords—Internet of Things; Security; Risk Management
I. INTRODUCTION
Advances in hard- and software have led to the trend
to add sensors, computational resources and communication
interfaces to traditional consumer products, and to connect
them over the Internet to cloud services where an artificial in-
telligence approach interprets voice commands or enhance user
experience. Together, such smart devices form the Internet of
Things (IoT) [1]. In many cases, smart devices stem from non-
smart predecessors. For example, a modern smart refrigerator
looks and feels much like a classic non-smart refrigerator with
some extras, e.g., remote control and expiration management
for perishable foods.
Smart devices allow consumers to create smart homes with
devices that can be controlled remotely via smartphone, adapt
to the user’s habits, and provide convenient services locally or
on the Internet. However, media provide evidence that smart
devices might come with operational risks that occur well
after the time of purchase. With a familiar non-smart device
in mind, customers may not expect risks like Examples 1-3,
when choosing a smart device.
Example 1: The software of a smart device may have an
operational life-span that is much shorter than the life-span of
its hardware [2]. For example, without regular functional and
security updates, a smart TV soon becomes useless [3].
Example 2: Smart devices may be tied to a cloud service.
For example, after a third-party service provider ceased its
business, tens of thousands smart Internet radios became non-
functional [4] without warning in advance.
Example 3: Changes in the legislation may prohibit the
use of smart devices after years of operation. In Germany, for
example, a child’s smart toy [5] has been forbidden as a spying
tool, three years after it had been introduced to the market,
because it was not visible that the toy sends voice recordings
into the cloud.
In order to make smart devices accessible for risk manage-
ment, a comprehensive catalog of potential risks is required.
It is challenging to find a research method that delivers such
a catalog. For example, the results of a study [6] depend on
the insights of the study participants.
In this paper, we use smart fridges as a use case to compile
a comprehensive set of long-term risks that are (a) specific for
the smart fridge, i.e., do not exist for conventional fridges, and
(b) may materialize years after the fridge has been purchased.
We define our problem statement as follows:
Which specific risks for the continued long-term use of
a smart fridge may appear after purchase, but cannot be
expected from a conventional fridge?
We call a fridge a “smart fridge”, if it contains computa-
tional capabilities and data links, which are not essential for
the primary function ”cooling food products”. By “long-term”,
we refer to an operational life of >10 years, which can be
expected from a fridge’s hardware [7]. Intuitively, this may be
the expectation of a customer replacing a broken fridge.
In this paper, we adapt our research method from [8] to
methodically derive such long-term risks for a smart fridge
in a domestic environment. We have identified compliance
risks resulting from changing local, national or international
rules, economic risks from future business decisions of the
organizations involved, and operational risks considering the
technical perspective of operating a smart fridge together with
its IT ecosystem for more than 10 years. Due to our methodical
approach, we consider our set of risks to be complete for this
application scenario. We think that it can be easily adapted to
similar scenarios.
The paper is structured as follows: In Section II, we briefly
review related work. In Section III, we sketch our approach to
identify long-term risks of smart fridges. In Section IV, we use
this approach to obtain our set of risks. Section V concludes.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Router
Smart Fridge
End-User Device
Embedded Dev.
Embedded Dev.
Smart Phone
Environmental 
Sensors
Environmental 
Sensors
Camera
Camera
Network Interface
Network Interface
Network Interface
Operating System
Operating System
Operating System
Apps, Plugins etc.
Apps, Plugins etc.
Internet
External Dev.
Cloud Service
3rd Party Services
Home Network
Figure 1. IT Architecture
II. RELATED WORK
This section summarizes methods, standards and findings
related to our work. Design science research [9] is a method
to design an artefact from a knowledge base, and evaluate and
improve it in several rounds. Each round is divided into three
cycles: The relevance cycle specifies and refines the use cases
needed to construct the artefact and evaluate its applicability.
The rigor cycle builds a knowledge base from literature and
experience that is needed to evaluate the novelty and the
research contribution of the artefact. The central design cycle
iterates between building and evaluating the artefact, based on
information from the other cycles.
The BSI-Standard 200-3 [10] is based on IT-Grundschutz.
It defines a process that allows organizations to assess their
information security risks. In particular, the standard describes
how to identify, classify, consolidate, assess and treat risks.
Our concern is risk identification. In this respect, the standard
distinguishes risks that arise from elementary threats, e.g., fire,
theft, misconfiguration or manipulation, and specific threats
from specific use cases. The risk identification starts with the
modelling of the use cases. The risk catalog is then compiled
from the consolidated risks of the individual IT assets, which
are part of the model.
Advances in technology call for risk analyses before
adoption. However, risk analyses typically use a descriptive
research approach, focus on the current situation and/or have
a narrow perspective, e.g., on current IT security or return
on investment. For example, [11] reviews vulnerabilities of
smart devices in the consumer market. The risk assessment
approach in [12] considers the management of risk over the
past two years, but does not project into the future, e.g., when
security breaches remain untreated for a discontinued product.
A study [6] provides a holistic view on future IoT risks,
but a standardized questionnaire cannot provide a complete
overview on future risks. In consequence, existing approaches
that deal with IoT risks during the operational life of the
device [13] [14] do not consider that vendors may loose
interest in supporting discontinued products, or that it will
be hard to find experts to maintain outdated technology. [2]
uses threat models to assess risks due to discontinued services,
breaking updates, trade conflicts, etc., but it remains unclear if
this risk assessment is exhaustive for the devices in question.
In [8], we have defined a research method to identify long-term
risks that are specific for smart devices. Because this method
is fundamental for our paper, we will explain it in more detail
in the next section.
The long-term preservation of digital goods has been
extensively discussed [15] in the past years. The risks for
digital content [16] overlap with the risks of using an outdated
smart device in a modern environment. Examples are media
obsolescence and format obsolescence [16], i.e., the digital
object cannot be read with current devices due new media or
new formats. Security properties have been established with
protocols that are insecure now [17]. Digital objects, such as
dynamic web pages [18] or computer games [19], require a
complex execution environment.
III. HOW TO IDENTIFY LONG-TERM IOT RISKS
In this section, we briefly describe our research method,
which we have developed in [8]. Our method adapts BSI-
Standard 200-3 [10] so that it creates the knowledge base and
designs a risk catalog that fits into relevance and design cycle
of Design Science Research [9]. We use research literature to
foster the rigor cycle.
For this paper, we have extended two aspects of [8]: We
explicitly refer to an operational scenario (in our case: a
domestic environment) to assess the extent of potential harms
and damages. Furthermore, we do not add assets to our
infrastructure model that do not add specific risks for the smart
device in question, e.g., the Internet router or the electricity
supplier. In particular, we use the following steps:
1) Select typical devices and identify the use cases for these
devices in a given scenario. Model its IT infrastructure.
2) Determine under which conditions each asset in this
infrastructure operates as intended by the use cases.
3) Append this condition to the risk set, if it is not present
at purchase and doesn’t exist for non-smart devices.
4) Assess the harm the risks could cause, and consolidate
risks that are identical for multiple assets.
5) Back up each individual risk by literature.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

IV. LONG-TERM RISKS OF A SMART FRIDGE
In this section, we apply our research method from Sec-
tion III to identify a comprehensive set of long-term risks
associated with smart fridges.
Operational scenario: We base our analysis on a domestic
environment, where the fridge stores perishable food that
needs cooling and has a limited economic value. The user of
the fridge values the user experience more than privacy and
likes to use all technical possibilities of the digital services
offered by the smart fridge. The user can be expected to detect
spoiled food, but does not possess the IT-security knowledge
needed to detect cyber attacks on the smart fridge. Figure 1
illustrates the IT architecture for this scenario.
A. Device Selection and Use Cases
According to Step 1 of our research method, we select three
typical devices from the category ”Smart Fridge”:
1) Bosch KGN36HI32
2) Samsung RF27T5501SG
3) LG GSX960NEAZ
The Bosch KGN36HI32 can be controlled via the Bosch
Home Connect platform, which connects to Amazon Alexa
and other voice assistants and sends temperature alarms to
the user’s smartphone. It is equipped with internal cam-
eras, that monitor the cooled food products. The Samsung
RF27T5501SG provides similar technical features as the
Bosch fridge, but uses the Samsung product family: It contains
a Samsung Family Hub and connects to a voice assistant called
Bixby. In addition, it provides a large LCD screen with apps
and Internet access via WLAN, and an ice dispenser. The LG
GSX960NEAZ provides the smallest set of smart features: It
only controls fridge parameters and functions, such as defrost
and alerts, via LG smartphone app. But it does not contain
cameras, smart home hubs or LCD screens.
TABLE I. CATEGORIES OF USE CASES
Id
Name
Description
U1
Cooling
Storing and cooling food products.
U2
Monitoring
Monitoring the food storage via camera.
U3
Management
Managing food expiration and shopping lists.
U4
Shopping
Replenish food storage.
U5
Multimedia
Playing music, TV streams, Internet access.
U6
Remote
Remote control of cooling and alarms.
U7
Apps
Other apps, e.g., for searching wine temperatures.
U8
Updates
Functional upgrades or security updates.
To obtain typical use cases for smart fridges, we have
browsed the manuals and web pages of our selected devices.
Table I lists all use cases we have identified. Cooling (U1)
is the traditional use of a fridge. Monitoring (U2), manage-
ment (U3), shopping (U4) and remote control (U6) refer to
typical domestic requirements, which are now enhanced by
digital services. Smartphone apps control cooling parameters
and various alarms (opening, temperature, humidity), look
inside the fridge via cameras, and might also identify food
products that are used up or are close to its expiration date.
If the smart fridge is part of a larger smart-home solution, it
typically serves as a multimedia (U5) hub to deliver audio
and video streams to connected devices. Some smart fridges
allow further apps (U7), e.g., to manage recipes, to search for
optimal wine temperatures or to browse the Internet. Updates
(U8) are important to maintain the security and functionality
of the smart fridge during its operational life.
B. IT Infrastructure Model
TABLE II. CATEGORIES OF DEVICES
Id
Name
Description
A1
Smart Fridge
The smart fridge.
A2
End-User Dev.
Smartphone (WLAN), TV, smart speaker, etc.
A3
Cloud
Digital fridge services on the Internet.
A4
3rd Party Serv.
Digital smart home services on the Internet.
A5
External Dev.
Smartphone (LTE) or tablet (LTE).
Table II lists all categories of devices or appliances needed
to run the use-cases U1-U8. The smart fridge (A1) contains
an embedded computing device with network interface and
operating system. It may or may not also contain further
plugins and apps, e.g. a web browser. Some smart fridges are
equipped with internal cameras that monitor the stored food
products. Any smart fridge we are aware makes use of sensors
to monitor parameters, such as temperature and moisture. Both
end-user device (A2) and external device (A5) are used to
control any smart, digital service the fridge offers. Respective
devices include laptops, smartphones, tablets, smart TVs or
smart speakers. The difference between A2 and A5 is that
the external device connects via LTE, i.e., it uses a network
connection that leaves the home WLAN. Thus, we need to
model it separately. A3 refers to a cloud service that is bundled
with the smart fridge, and provides services tailored to the
fridge. For example, Bosch KGN36HI32 connects to Bosch
Home Connect. In contrast, A4 means any other 3rd-party
service, e.g., a smart-home system, a voice assistant or a
content-delivery network from a third-party cloud. Since our
focus is on the smart fridge, we leave aside the router.
TABLE III. CATEGORIES OF DATA
Id
Name
Description
D1
Sensor data
Video, audio, temperature, power consumption.
D2
App data
Data from apps installed on the smart fridge.
D3
Metadata
Timestamps, soft- and hardware versions.
D4
Configuration
Parameters, credentials, certificates.
D5
Telemetry
Device behavior, log information.
D6
Op. System
Software libs, updates, operating system data.
Use cases U1-U8 require the smart fridge to manage and
share 6 categories of data with devices A1-A5, as shown in
Table III. Sensor data (D1) includes any information delivered
by internal sensors of the fridge, e.g., video streams from an
internal camera or the temperature in the wine compartment.
App data (D2) refers to data managed by the various kinds
of apps executed on the smart fridge. Examples are the
user’s shopping lists, multimedia data from external parties or
expiration dates. Metadata (D3) is any information produced
by the operation of smart services. Examples include version
numbers, timestamps or patch levels of software libraries.
Configuration (D4) data stores parameters about how the use
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

cases should work. This means cooling parameters as well
as WLAN credentials or HTTPS certificates. Telemetry (D5)
means any information that is typically part of the log file
of the smart fridge, e.g., internal errors, defrost times, power
outage, and the like. Operating System (D6) refers to the
program code of the operating system and its apps, updates,
patches, libraries, etc.
TABLE IV. CATEGORIES OF ORGANIZATIONS
Id
Name
Description
O1
User
The user of the smart fridge.
O2
Vendor
The manufacturer of the smart fridge.
O3
Cloud Provider
The operator of the cloud service.
O4
3rd Party Provider
External cloud service providers.
O5
Other 3rd Parties
Other services.
The devices are operated by different parties, as shown in
Table IV. Since our problem definition focuses on specific
risks for a smart fridge, we leave aside the parties that might
cause generic risks. Such parties are the Internet provider, the
LTE provider or the electricity supplier. Large companies, such
as LG, have their own cloud infrastructure and cloud services,
like voice assistants used by the smart fridge. Thus, O2 and
O3 can be the same organization.
TABLE V. CATEGORIES OF NETWORK CONNECTIONS
Id
Devices
Int.
Pers.
Description
C1
A1-A2
✓
✓
smart fridge – end-user device
C2
A2-A3
✗
✓
end-user device – cloud
C3
A1-A3
✗
✓
smart fridge – cloud
C4
A3-A4
✗
✓
cloud – 3rd party cloud
C5
A1-A5
✗
✓
smart fridge – external device
Table V contains all categories of network connections we
need to consider. Note that all connections are bi-directional.
Column ”Int.” indicates that a connection transfers data within
the home WLAN. ”Pers.” means that a connection might
transfer data related to the activities or habits of a person.
TABLE VI. ASSET MATRIX
U. C.
Data
Devices
Connections
Orga.
U1
D1, D3-D5
A1
O1
U2
D1-D4
A1, A2, A5
C1, C5
O1
U3
D2-D4
A1-A3, A5
C1-C3, C5
O1, O3
U4
D2-D4
A1, A2, A4, A5
C1, C4, C5
O1, O4
U5
D2-D4
A1-A5
C1-C5
O1, O4
U6
D1-D5
A1-A3, A5
C1-C3, C5
O1, O3
U7
D1-D5
A1-A5
C1-C5
O1, O3-O5
U8
D2-D6
A1, A3
C3
O2
After having defined the categories of use cases, devices,
data, organizations and network connections we need to con-
sider, we can define an asset matrix (cf. Table VI). The asset
matrix tells which use case is tied to which IT asset. U1
(Cooling) is the only use case that does not need network
connections, other devices or other organizations. All other
use cases depend on an operational IT ecosystem.
C. Potential Harms and Damages
Table I allows us to devise four categories of potential harm,
as shown in Table VII. The categories are in line with [20].
Potentially, a smart fridge may produce threatening physical
or financial damages, e.g., from spoiled food or a violation of
legal regulations. Negligible harm could be a brief interruption
or malfunction of digital or cooling services.
TABLE VII. CATEGORIES OF POTENTIAL HARM
Category
Examples
negligible
Food spoils a bit earlier, digital services are unavail-
able for a short time, isolated false alarms.
limited
Fridge contents spoils, services are unavailable for
some time, many false alarms.
substantial
Permanent unavailability of digital services or cool-
ing results in a total economic loss, privacy issues.
threatening
High fines from violation of the law results in private
insolvency, severe sickness from food poisoning.
From Table VII we can derive the protection needs of
the data. In Table VIII, we have analyzed if an interruption,
interception, modification or fabrication of data has an impact
on integrity, availability or confidentiality. If this impact can
produce negligible or limited harm, the protection need is
normal. If it can be substantial, the protection need is high. If
the harm can be threatening, the protection need is very high.
TABLE VIII. PROTECTION NEEDS
Data
Integrity
Availability
Confidentiality
D1
normal
normal
high
D2
normal
normal
high
D3
normal
normal
high
D4
high
high
high
D5
normal
normal
high
D6
high
high
high
D1–D5 might allow to infer personal information, e.g.,
eating habits, preferred foods, the daily routine or if the user
is sick or on vacation. Thus, D1–D5 have ”high” protection
needs for confidentiality. The security of the user’s network
and the functionality of the fridge depend on D4 and D6. A
misconfiguration, a disclosure of passwords, a manipulated OS
update or an attacker knowing the patch-level of the software
might result in a substantial harm (cf. Table VII). Thus, D4 and
D6 have the protection need ”high” for all three dimensions. In
our domestic setting, a threatening harm is highly improbable,
and we do not assign the protection need ”very high”. This
may be different in other scenarios, e.g., if a hospital uses the
smart fridge to cool medications.
The protection needs are inherited from the data to each IT
asset managing the data, as listed in the asset matrix Table VI.
The maximum principle requires that an asset is assigned with
the highest protection need of all data it uses. For example,
the vendor’s cloud (A3) is part of the use case ”Update” (U8),
which includes data of the operation system (D6) with the
protection need ”high” for the protection dimensions integrity,
availability and confidentiality. Thus, even if A3 handles less
sensible data (D1 and D2), the protection need of A3 is ”high”
for each protection dimension.
From the asset matrix it follows that any device, network
connection and organization need to maintain a ”high” level
of protection for each dimension, because either D4 or D6 is
part of any use case. As consequence from the asset matrix,
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

TABLE IX. LONG-TERM COMPLIANCE RISKS
Risk
Orga.
Devices
Connections
Description
Privacy
O2-O5
A2-A5
C2-C5
Changing legislation, new codes of conduct, etc. impose limitations on the
exchange of personal data with certain countries or parties [21].
Global Rules
O2-O5
A2-A4
C2-C4
New trade restrictions, sanctions, technology bans etc. restrict the use of an
asset from certain countries or parties [22].
Local Rules
O1-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
Local regulations, e.g., from environmental protection, consumer protection or
electromagnetic compatibility, restrict the use of an asset [23].
Expiration
O2-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
Disagreements to common compliance standards, expired certifications or
approvals, non-renewed audits, etc., render the involved asset untrusted [24].
Concealment
O1-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
Unknown characteristics at time of purchase disallow the further use of an
asset, e.g., if it turns out that a build-in camera falls under espionage acts [5].
TABLE X. LONG-TERM ECONOMIC RISKS
Risk
Orga.
Devices
Connections
Description
Degradation
O2-O5
A3, A4
C2-C4
The service quality of an asset might be reduced, e.g., to nudge customers into
new services by delaying updates or reducing performance of old services [25].
Licensing
O2-O5
A1, A3, A4
C2-C4
The revenue model might change. For example, an organization might switch
its services to a pay-per-use model for an asset [26].
Discontinuation
O2-O5
A3, A4
C2-C5
One of the parties involved discontinues its service or makes it unattractive to
use it from an economic point of view [27].
Liabilities
O2-O5
A3, A4
C2-C5
One of the parties involved discontinues its business, and its contractual
liabilities become void at once [28].
TABLE XI. LONG-TERM OPERATIONAL RISKS
Risk
Orga.
Devices
Connections
Description
Inflexibility
O1-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
Due to missing functional updates, it becomes challenging to connect an asset
to recent services or devices [29].
Unreliability
O2-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
The service level in terms of reliability, throughput, etc. of the asset degrades,
e.g., due to reduced support for legacy products [30].
Unmaintainability
O2
A1
C1, C3, C5
Due to the use of outdated interfaces and closed-source components it becomes
difficult to find manuals, experts or spare parts to that maintain the asset [31].
Insecurity
O2
A1
C1, C3, C5
Without security updates and by using out-of-date security protocols, the asset
cannot be operated any more [30].
Defectiveness
O2
A1
C1, C3, C5
Modernizations in the IT ecosystem make technical debts of an asset visible,
e.g., if a network protocol uses bits that were reserved for future use [32].
it is problematic to use a smart fridge as a multimedia hub
in a smart home as well. Because the fridge runs services
with ”high” protection needs, the much less sensitive media-
playback service must be secured at level ”high” as well.
D. Long-Term Risks
After having identified the potential harms and the assets in
our IT ecosystem that need special protection, we can compile
IT-security risks. In order to obtain a comprehensive set of
risks, we inspect each asset (organization, device, connection)
in isolation, and we look for reasons why, at some point in the
future, the asset in question will no longer operate as it did at
the time of purchase. Recall that we are specifically interested
in long-term risks of the smart fridge. Thus, in line with Step 3
of our research method, we filter out any potential risk that
(a) is apparent at the time of purchase, or (b) is identical for
a traditional fridge and a smart fridge. For example, we do
not consider risks, such as the smart fridge is delivered with a
pre-installed virus in its operating system, or the cooling unit
fails after some time.
The resulting set of risks is long and repetitive, because
some risks materialize across different assets. For example,
licensing risks due to changing revenue models can affect
many assets and network connections at some time in the
future, and occur at multiple organizations. For this reason,
we need Step 4 of our research method to consolidate risks.
Tables IX-XI show our consolidated set of long-term risks
for 8 use cases for smart fridges. To our surprise, many of
those risks are identical to the risks, which we had exemplarily
identified for a single artefact (the network connection between
a smart device and a cloud server) in [8]. This confirms the
reproducibility of our research method.
We have structured our set of risks into three groups:
Long-term compliance risks are produced by changing local,
national or international rules and standards. Risks from this
group mean that using the smart fridge may violate regulatory
requirements in the future, even if it has fully complied with
them at the time of purchase. Long-term economic risks are
the result of future business decisions of the organizations
involved. Seven of the identified use cases require a complex
IT ecosystem, as shown in our asset matrix (Table VI). If an
organization ceases operation or moves to a different revenue
model in the future, the remaining IT ecosystem may no longer
able to support all use cases in an economic manner. This
also includes a pay-per-security-update model. Finally, long-
term operational risks consider the technical perspective
of operating a smart fridge together with its IT ecosystem
for more than 10 years. Operational risks include technical
challenges when trying to connect an outdated device to a
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

new one, and maintenance issues due to missing experts and
spare parts for the IT ecosystem needed.
The tables only specify risks that impede a smart fridge,
even if the same risk may be also associated with other devices
in our IT ecosystem. For example, risk ”Unmaintainability” is
listed for device A1 (the fridge itself) and organization O2 (the
fridge’s vendor), although the same risk exists for any other
IT asset that is used for a decade or more.
Note that even ”cooling” (U1), the most basic use case, is at
risk in the long run. A smart fridge may have a reduced control
panel. Such fridges depend on the use case ”remote” (U6),
which needs an Internet connection to the vendor’s cloud and
a smartphone app. For example, the Samsung RF27T5501SG
requires the user to download the ”SmartThings” app and
register for the Samsung cloud with a personalized account.
V. CONCLUSION
When non-smart devices are replaced by smart ones, the
integrated IT components generate new risks, that may limit
the operational life-span of the smart device unexpectedly.
Such risks originate from different life cycles of digital and
physical objects, from changing legislation, from future busi-
ness decisions by the parties involved and from the technical
complexity of the IT ecosystem needed.
In this paper, we have compiled a catalog of long-term risks
for smart fridges. Our catalog consists of risks, which might
materialize years after the purchase. The risks are specific to
the smart device, i.e., we have omitted any traditional risk
that also exists for conventional fridges. Because we have
used a well-structured research method, we think that our risk
catalog is exhaustive for compliance risks, economic risks and
operational risks. Our risk catalog can be adapted to many use
cases and smart devices that use a similar IT architecture.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Badr Aldin Saada for his outstanding
help and support with our risk analysis.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A survey,”
Computer networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, 2010.
[2] P. Zdankin, M. Waltereit, V. Matkovic, and T. Weis, “Towards Longevity
of Smart Home Systems,” in International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications Workshops, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[3] B.
Schoon,
“Android
tv
needs
better
standards
for
long-
term
updates
and
support,”
https://9to5google.com/2019/08/29/
android-tv-long-term-updates-support/, 2019, retrieved: March, 2023.
[4] Frontier Nuvola Support, “Why did the service change on the 7th
may
2019?”
https://srsupport.frontier-nuvola.net/portal/en/kb/articles/
service-change, 2019, retrieved: 2020-06-10.
[5] V.
Gabrielle,
“It
sees
you
when
you’re
sleeping:
A
clash
of
privacy
and
play,”
https://www.governing.com/security/
it-sees-you-when-youre-sleeping-a-clash-of-privacy-and-play,
2022,
retrieved: March, 2023.
[6] L. M. Tanczer, I. Steenmans, M. Elsden, J. Blackstock, and M. Carr,
“Emerging risks in the iot ecosystem: Who’s afraid of the big bad smart
fridge?” in Living in the Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of the IoT-
2018, 2018, pp. 1–9.
[7] Statista, “Average life expectancy of major household appliances
in
2011
and
2022,”
https://www.statista.com/statistics/220020/
average-life-expectancy-of-major-household-appliances,
2023,
retrieved: March, 2023.
[8] E. Buchmann and A. Hartmann, “Identifying long-term risks of the in-
ternet of things,” in 14th International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous
Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies (UBICOMM’20), 2020.
[9] A. Hevner and S. Chatterjee, “Design science research in information
systems,” in Design research in information systems.
Springer, 2010,
pp. 9–22.
[10] Bundesamt
f¨ur
Sicherheit
in
der
Informationstechnik,
“BSI
Standard
200-3:
Risk
Analysis
based
on
IT
Grundschutz,”
https://www.bsi.bund.de, 2017, retrieved: March, 2023.
[11] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, B. Sikdar, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Consumer
iot: Security vulnerability case studies and solutions,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 17–25, 2020.
[12] M. Aydos, Y. Vural, and A. Tekerek, “Assessing risks and threats
with layered approach to internet of things security,” Measurement and
Control, vol. 52, no. 5-6, pp. 338–353, 2019.
[13] O. Garcia-Morchon, R. Rietman, S. Sharma, L. Tolhuizen, and J. L.
Torre-Arce, “A comprehensive and lightweight security architecture to
secure the IoT throughout the lifecycle of a device based on HIMMO,”
in Symposium on Algorithms and Experiments for Wireless Sensor
Networks, 2015, pp. 112–128.
[14] J. L. Hern´andez-Ramos, J. B. Bernab´e, and A. Skarmeta, “Army:
architecture for a secure and privacy-aware lifecycle of smart objects
in the internet of my things,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54,
no. 9, pp. 28–35, 2016.
[15] Digital Preservation Coalition, “Digital preservation handbook,” https:
//www.dpconline.org/handbook, 2015, retrieved: March, 2023.
[16] S. Vermaaten, B. Lavoie, and P. Caplan, “Identifying threats to suc-
cessful digital preservation: the spot model for risk assessment,” D-lib
Magazine, vol. 18, no. 9/10, pp. 1–21, 2012.
[17] H. M. Gladney, “Trustworthy 100-year digital objects: Evidence after
every witness is dead,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems
(TOIS), vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 406–436, 2004.
[18] G. Truman, “Web archiving environmental scan: Harvard library report,”
Digital Access to Scholarship at Harvard, 2016.
[19] J.
Andersen,
“Where
games
go
to
sleep:
the
game
preservation
crisis,”
https://www.gamedeveloper.com/business/
where-games-go-to-sleep-the-game-preservation-crisis-part-1,
2011,
retrieved: March, 2023.
[20] Bundesamt f¨ur Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik, “BSI-Standard
200-2, IT-Grundschutz Methodology,” https://www.bsi.bund.de, 2017,
retrieved: March, 2023.
[21] K. McCullagh, “Brexit: potential trade and data implications for digital
and fintech industries,” International Data Privacy Law, vol. 7, no. 1,
p. 3, 2017.
[22] C. Ziye and L. Bin, “China-US High-Tech Competition, Trade Conflict
and Development Rights,” China Economist, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 66–73,
2020.
[23] Council of the European Union, “Directive 2012/27/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council on energy efficiency, amending Directives
2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and
2006/32/EC,” Document 02012L0027-20210101, 2021.
[24] Y. T. Mak, S. Carr, and J. Needham, “Differences in strategy, quality
management practices and performance reporting systems between ISO
accredited and non-ISO accredited companies,” Management Accounting
Research, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 383–403, 1996.
[25] D. A. Lyons, “Net neutrality and nondiscrimination norms in telecom-
munications,” Arizona Law Review, vol. 54, p. 1029, 2013.
[26] M. A. Cusumano, “The changing software business: Moving from
products to services,” Computer, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 20–27, 2008.
[27] M. A. Lemley and T. Simcoe, “How essential are standard-essential
patents,” Cornell Law Review, vol. 104, p. 607, 2018.
[28] A. Schwartz, “Products liability, corporate structure, and bankruptcy:
toxic substances and the remote risk relationship,” Journal of Legal
Studies, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 689–736, 1985.
[29] P. Mutchler, Y. Safaei, A. Doup´e, and J. Mitchell, “Target fragmentation
in android apps,” in IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops. IEEE, 2016,
pp. 204–213.
[30] B. Ford, “Icebergs in the clouds: the other risks of cloud computing,”
in Hot Topics in Cloud Computing, 2012, pp. 2–2.
[31] L. M. D. Ferreira, A. Arantes, and C. Silva, “Discontinued products,” in
Conference on Operations Research and Enterprise Systems, 2017, pp.
210–223.
[32] P. Kruchten, R. L. Nord, and I. Ozkaya, “Technical debt: From metaphor
to theory and practice,” IEEE Software, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 18–21, 2012.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

AI Philosophy: Sources of Legitimacy to Analyze Artificial Intelligence
Olga Gil
Instituto Complutense de Ciencias de la Administración
Departamento de Historia, Teorías y Geografía Políticas
Facultad de Ciencias Políticas y Sociología
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Madrid
olgagil@ucm.es
.com
Abstract—The following pages aim to reflect upon how to
analyze
the
governance
of
artificial
intelligence
in
a
comparative perspective. In doing so, a dashboard is developed
for
the
analysis
and
for eventual comparisons between
democratic and non democratic regimes. The Gil dashboard of
legitimacy would allow us to assess key features that determine
the governance model for artificial intelligence at the national
level, for local governments and other participant actors. The
framework also allows us to appraise aims of the governance
strategy, and what aims are left aside. The work opens
windows to discuss 1) the complex reality of AI command and
control
2) uncertainties about future society and the polity
against AI development and 3) cultural values enshrined in
countries' AI development. The theoretical framework could
be of use to advance case studies globally, and comparative
endeavors.
Keywords-
Artificial
intelligence;
governance;
philosophy;
ethics; political theory
I.INTRODUCTION
This work aims to present a general framework to analyze
artificial intelligence (AI), and to discuss legitimacy and
governance from political theory as a stream of philosophy.
As such, the work addresses questions related to command
and control, that are at the base of political and social power
and of technical engineering in global societies. In section
two, the methodology is introduced. In the third section, the
theoretical framework follows. This theoretical framework
is based on the sources of legitimacy to analyze artificial
intelligence. Here we are bringing to the fore political
theory to address a contemporary problem. This part of the
work presents an eight dimensional view of sources of
legitimacy, based on the works by Max Weber and Craig
Mathesson [6][7]. In the fourth section, method as source of
change and legitimacy the Gil dashboard on legitimacy are
presented. The Dashboard has been developed in a wider
context that is not addressed in this short article. The wider
context aims to compare the AI regulatory framework of
China, the European Union and the United States [1]-[5],
which is the endeavor the author is currently devoted to in
the draft of a book. The selection of cases, the European
Union, the United States and China has been made by their
relevance for the development of AI globally today. The
case of China has been included because as a political
scientist
doing comparative politics, the fine line of
including most different cases is very important to know
better the most equal cases, such as the United States and
the European Union, both with democratic components.
Today we focus on the theoretical dashboard that has been
developed to make the comparisons. In the fifth and last
section
conclusions
are
presented,
followed
by
acknowledgments
II. METHODOLOGY
The methodology of the general work –the book that the
author is writing about artificial intelligence- includes a
discussion about the objective of the work, definitions from
different perspectives, and questions related to the social
basis of knowledge. Additionally, it includes the research
approach to the selection of articles reviewed for the work
tackled. Finally, the work includes a theoretical framework
allowing for a comparison of the three cases, and eventually,
a bigger number of cases. For the purpose of comparison of
the three main cases in the book of reference, the selection
of works started by a search in scopus with the terms
artificial intelligence AND China in 2020, 2021, 2022. This
brought about 776 works. The selection was further refined
under the social sciences category, with 170 documents
published matching the query. These works were reviewed
looking for governance and legitimacy as topics for retrieval
and further work, identifying 37 source articles. Once first
relevant works were identified, the reference list of these
works became a main source of materials, whether those
were included in the scopus database or not, as detailed
knowledge became crucial to build up the study. Google
scholar was also utilized, searching for the first 10 works on
artificial intelligence and social sciences, the 10 most cited
works, and the ten most recent ones. These works were
reviewed
searching
for
interesting
insights.
Proquest
database has also been consulted, with the query artificial
intelligence in the Financial Times newspaper. Specific
articles on the query were of value to identify authors with
new ideas on artificial intelligence nowadays and how AI
affects governance. As a result, these searches brought about
information
from
comparative
reports
with
general
information on the United States [1], the work on Europe
[2][3], and on China and China local AI ecosystems [4][5]
–which I focus on for the purpose of this brief paper.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

This research and discussion have been pursued without the
aid of artificial intelligences or data bases in the process of
ideas. Research and discussion are the result of a human
mind. There is no use of any big data software, organic life
engineering, or cyborg aid. Thus, at this stage, the results of
the work are solely the responsibility of a human author´s
mind. At a future stage, it could be explored whether there
are interesting possibilities from non natural intelligences to
broaden the scope and findings of this research.
III. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK OF AI PHILOSOPHY: THE
SOURCES OF LEGITIMACY TO ANALYZE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The following work tries to unveil a complex reality, 1)
where there are new rules attached to command and control
and 2) to bring to light new ways of thinking. A framework
for analysis, the Gil dashboard for legitimacy is developed.
The dashboard allows for comparisons of most similar and
most different cases. The theoretical framework is in the
intersection between values and AI development, and allows
to
unveil
how AI is mediating problems related to
coordination and control, what uncertainties about the future
society and the polity different countries face against AI
development, and what could we say about different cultural
values.
We depart from the work on legitimacy from Max Weber
-for
whom
there
exist
three
types
of
domination,
charismatic, traditional and rational or legal [6]. This
framework was revised by Matheson [7] in 1987, nearly a
century after Weber started writing. Matheson qualifies and
opposes Max Weber theory on legitimacy. Later on, and
departing from Matheson, this work develops a theoretical
framework to allow for the comparison of AI legitimacy
bases in the European Union, the United States and China -
and could be valuable for the analysis of developing
countries, and countries in the global south.
Weber distinction among the three types of domination
differentiating
three types of domination, charismatic,
traditional and rational or legal is based on the legitimacy of
the power-holder. The work by Matheson nearly a century
later includes eight types of domination, including the
perspective of both
the power holders and the power
subjects. The main critique that Matheson introduces to
Weber's work is that democracy and its effects along the XX
century are not reflected in Max Weber typology. Matheson
reaches new layers of granularity for the study of the polity
and society with his revised proposal. From Matheson´s
critique of Weber I develop the following table: The table
explains visually the eighth types of domination. This would
be an eight dimensional view of sources of legitimacy.
TABLE I. THE EIGHT DIMENSIONAL VIEW OF SOURCES OF LEGITIMACY, BY OLGA
GIL
Dimension
Definition of the dimension
Convention
Norms, rules: legal or customary rules that prescribe
forms of behavior
Contract
as
basis
of
legitimacy
Mutual rights and obligations. The theory of consent as
the basis of obligations
Basis
of
legitimacy in
a conformity
with
universal
principles:
natural law
Theories of natural law, aka, the existence of a natural
order superior to man-made law
Sacredness of
authority
Power-holder or his/her norms considered to be sacred
divine right of reigns. For Max Weber it could also be
an attribute of an office rather than a person
Legitimacion
by expertise
Technical
expertise,
in
the
vein
defended
by
Saint-Simon, Taylorian theories, or historic laws
A
popular
mandate in a
constitutional
democracy
Popular mandate: a claim to democratic election in
accordance with constitutional procedures. Based on
constitutionalism, power holders elected in accordance
with
constitutional
procedures.
Here
we
find
a
distinction between polulist democracies, where the
will
of
a
majority
rules,
and
constitutional
democracies, were there will of the majority is limited
by a constitution
Personal
relation
Domination in which there are close ties between
power-holders and power-subjects such as personal
authority or paternal authority relationships
Personal
quality of the
power holder
Domination based on the personal quality of the power
holder, by virtue of which he/she can claim a right of
command
Having AI in mind and looking at this framework for the
analysis of the cases selected, observations about new
sources of legitimacy out of the scope of the table above can
be drawn. A first one would be coercion as an instrument
for legitimacy. A second source of legitimacy would be AI
development outside the umbrella of the state, based in
ethics codes. For instance, an applied comparison of
national AI strategies in nine countries, including China and
the United States finds that national AI strategies have an
approach towards AI governance that entails cooperation
among the public sector, industry and academia and is based
on ethics [8]. For this purpose cooperation is achieved with
voluntary mechanisms including best practices, codes of
conduct, and guidelines.
IV. METHOD AS A SOURCE OF CHANGE AND LEGITIMACY
A third source of legitimacy would be linked to method.
Matheson's approach to sources of legitimacy reviews Max
Weber work making important contributions. However, the
search of improved democracies through method as a source
of legitimacy -a type of legitimacy based in experimenting
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

with method and in an active process, not only based in a
popular mandate, to reach better results- is not included in
Matheson analysis. Method is the base to reach new
knowledge following the scientific revolution in Europe.
Method, in contrast, has not been explored as a feature to
improve democratic governments. The result is that there
has not been an appraisal of method as a way to reach better
results in democratic regimes. An example of the dangers
and limitations of not including method as a source of
improved legitimacy is the work comparing national AI
strategies in nine countries, including China and the United
States [8], stressing the lack of concrete mechanisms for
inclusion of civic society and public engagement in AI
control. Moreover, at the core of a general approach to use
ethic guidelines as an efficient measure to prevent or reduce
harm caused by AI the general argument is for its higher
flexibility, as opposed to hard regulations that could
represent an obstacle to economic and technical innovation
[8] [9], or other means of legitimacy.
These new sources of legitimacy will be incorporated in the
previous table in order to develop a new table, the Gil
Dashboard, allowing us to analyze artificial intelligence
from a comparative perspective. The sources of legitimacy
are incorporated close to the category that is more akin to
the concept, if any. Additions are included in bold text.
TABLE II. THE GIL DASHBOARD: THIRTEEN SOURCES OF LEGITIMACY TO
ANALYZE AI
Dimension
Definition of the dimension
Convention
Norms, rules: legal or customary rules that
prescribe forms of behavior
Contract as basis
of legitimacy
Mutual rights and obligations. The theory of
consent as the basis of obligations
Basis of
legitimacy in a
conformity with
universal
principles:
natural law
Theories of natural law, aka, the existence of a
natural order superior to man-made law
Sacredness of
authority
Power-holder or his/her norms considered to be
sacred divine right of reigns. For Max Weber it
could also be an attribute of an office rather than a
person
Legitimation by
human expertise
Technical expertise, in the vein defended by
Saint-Simon, Taylorian theories, or historic laws
Legitimation
based on an
algorithm
Legitimation based on macrodata –hindering
the idea of individual liberty
A popular
mandate in a
constitutional
democracy
Popular mandate: a claim to democratic election in
accordance with constitutional procedures. Based
on constitutionalism, power holders elected in
accordance with constitutional procedures. Here
we find a distinction between populist
democracies, where the will of a majority rules,
and constitutional democracies, were there will of
the majority is limited by a constitution
Improved
democracies
through method
A type of legitimacy based not only in a popular
mandate but experimenting with method and in
a continuous process in order to reach better
results, including accountability
Dimension
Definition of the dimension
Regimes -non
democracies-
developed
through method
A type of legitimacy based on experimenting
with method and a continuous process to justify
objectives and reached results
Personal relation
Domination in which there are close ties between
power-holders and power-subjects such as personal
authority or paternal authority relationships
Personal
quality
of
the
power
holder
Domination based on the personal quality of the
power holder, by virtue of which he/she can claim
a right of command
Coercion
The use of power to influence someone to do
something they do not want to do, from exerting
fear to nudging as positive reinforcement
Societal
cooperation,
excluding the
polity
Development of mechanisms of cooperation
among the public sector, industry and
academia: cooperation is achieved with
voluntary mechanisms including best practices,
ethical codes of conduct, and guidelines
V. CONCLUSIONS
This work allows us to unveil a complex reality from the
perspective of philosophy, political theory and sociology,
where AI brings new rules attached to command and control
to governance in general. The Gil dashboard proposed
shows how AI is mediating problems related to coordination
and control in governance. This theoretical dashboard could
be also useful to apply in a comparative perspective, in
countries in Asia, western countries and countries in the
global south. The dashboard brings to light new ways of
thinking in methodological terms [10]. It also allows to
address and reflect upon the following changes of present
societies:
a)
What uncertainties about the future society and the
polity countries face against AI development?
b)
What can it be said about cultural values?
c)
What may we find in the intersection between
values and AI development?
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wants to acknowledge the comments of five
anonymous reviewers, which helped to improve the final
manuscript when the paper was accepted for presentation at
IARIA
Annual
Congress
on
Frontiers
in
Science,
Technology, Services, and Applications, Venice, Italy April
24 - 28. The author also wants to acknowledge the
inspiration of Prof. Joaquín Abellán, teaching together at the
Master on Political Theory and Democratic Culture at UCM
in the 2000-2022 editions, and to Prof. Carmelo Moreno´s
comments at the 2022 AECPA Congress in Girona (Spain).
REFERENCES
[1] World Bank Group. Harnessing artificial intelligence for
development in the post-covid-19 era. A Review of National AI
Strategies and Policies. May 2021.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

[2 ] Eichler, William. “‘Shockingly small’ number of councils
embrace
automation”.
LocalGov.
10
May
2019.
https://www.localgov.co.uk/Shockingly-small-number-of-councils-
embrace-automation-study-reveals/47387, retrieved october 20th,
2022.
[3] Justo-Hanani, Ronit. The politics of Artificial Intelligence
regulation and governance reform in the European Union. Policy
Sciences, 2022, vol. 55, no 1, p. 137-159.
[4] Ding, Jeffrey. Promoting nationally, acting locally: China´s
next generation AI approach. In NESTA. The AI Powered State.
China´s Approach to public innovation. 2020. P. 11-17.
[5] Ding, Jeffrey. Deciphering China’s AI Dream: The Context,
Components, Capabilities, and Consequences of China’s Strategy
to Lead the World in AI. Future of Humanity Institute, Oxford
University. 2018.
[6] Abellán, Joaquín. El político y el científico: Weber. Madrid,
Alianza Editorial. 2021.
[7] Matheson, Craig. Weber and the Classification of Forms of
Legitimacy. British Journal of Sociology, 1987, p. 199-215.
[8] Gianni, Robert; Lehtinen, Santtu; Nieminen, Mika. Governance
of responsible ai: from ethical guidelines to cooperative policies.
Frontiers in Computer Science, 2022, vol. 4.
[9] Gianni, Letizia. Democratic Accountability in Stressful Times:
When Decisions Must Be Made Quickly. Penn State Journal of
Law & International Affairs, 2023, vol. 11, no 1, p. 1.
[10] Moreno, Carmelo. “Los fundamentos de la política. La noción
de política, las teorías sobre el concepto de poder y el dilema de
legalidad
vs.
legitimidad
política.”
Análisis
de
la política.
Enfoques y herramientas de la Ciencia Política, Mikel Barreda.
2016.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

Design of Personalized Recommender System based on Hybrid Filtering and Fog 
Computing Architecture 
Survey of Recent Personalized Recommender Systems in Ubiquitous and IoT environment 
Noura Abdaoui 
National School of Computer Sciences (ENSI) 
University of Manouba, Tunisia 
E-mail: noura.abdaoui@gmail.com 
Ismahene Hadj Khalifa, Sami Faiz 
Higher Institute of Multimedia Arts of Manouba (ISAMM) 
University of Manouba, Tunisia 
 E-mail: ismaheneawatef.hadjkhalifa@isamm.uma.tn, 
sami.faiz@isamm.uma.tn
 
 
Abstract—Ubiquitous recommendation systems aim to provide 
users personalized recommendations of online products or 
services. Various recommendations techniques have been 
developed to fulfill the needs in different scenarios.  This paper 
presents a survey of recent Personalized Recommender Systems 
in Ubiquitous and Internet of Things (IoT) environment, 
followed by an in-depth analysis of groundbreaking advances in 
recommendation systems based on big data. Furthermore, this 
paper discusses the  issues faced in modern recommendation 
systems,  such as sparsity, scalability, and diversity and 
illustrates how these challenges can be transformed into 
personalized recommender model that is described in the final 
Section.  The novel recommender model aims to integrate 
hybrid filtering technique and fog architecture in order to 
generate contextual and personalized recommendations.  The 
Fog computing architecture aims to solve the ubiquitous 
recommendations issues related to IoT challenges. As result, the 
given model is a multi-layer fog structure which is implemented 
in Smart shopping and used multi sources big data in order to 
propose personalized offers according to the users' profiles and 
analyze their feedbacks to improve their experiences. 
Keywords-Ubiquitous Recommender System;  personalized 
recommendation;  hybrid recommender approach;  fog 
architecture;  IoT. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ubiquitous recommender systems assist the mobile user 
by providing him with personalized recommendations of 
items or services that are in his device while context is the 
most important aspect [3] context-awareness as defined by [4] 
includes parameters, such as Location, Time, Date and 
Weather. 
Thereby 
in 
order 
to 
provide 
accurate 
recommendations, we have to let the system use the context 
and at the same time have our privacy respected.  Nowadays, 
technologies have become ubiquitous and users tend to use 
smart devices to use the internet. These devices used 
connected sensors coming under IoT [5].  This is a new 
paradigm-shift from traditional interactions between mobile 
user and devices, which provides the ubiquitous computing 
environment. 
This new paradigm paves the path for huge applications 
on the mobile user level to improve the quality of being or 
service, and on the decision-makers' level to afford an 
enduring raise in revenue. This has created enormous potential 
for ubiquitous recommender systems in many industries and 
domains to provide tailored recommendations for mobile 
users. Since, thus enhancing the patient's quality in smart 
health, the customer's shopping experience in smart marketing 
as well as the enterprise goal, and improving the smart 
traveling plans, etc. As we know, most of the IoT applications 
are connected with cloud computing. And this cloud gives the 
services as on-demand and scalable storage, along with 
processing facilities according to IoT application needs. 
According to [1]  for real-time applications, 30 million clients 
are transferring data up to 25 000 records every second, which 
is not efficient for the cloud. Together with the growth of data 
quantity and the emergence of different kinds of dynamic end-
user and access smart IoT devices, the information overload 
problem is becoming serious. To address these limitations, fog 
computing technology was first introduced by Cisco in 2012, 
which integrated edge devices and cloud resources [2]. 
The main objective of this paper is to describe and discuss 
the existing recommend approaches in different fields.  Then, 
we will give a brief description of our novel recommender 
system that aims to integrate hybrid filtering approach and fog 
architecture in order to generate personalized and ubiquitous 
recommendation collected from dynamic and heterogeneous 
big data.  The paper is structured as follows: Section II gives 
an introductory of the studies of ubiquitous computing  , the 
recent state of the art recommendation systems in ubiquitous 
and Cloud computing with similar discussion of given issues.  
Subsequently, the integration of fog architecture in the 
proposed recommender system will be presented in Section 
III.  Section IV describes the system's implementation and 
highlights the results. In Section V, we wrap up the paper with 
conclusions and horizons of work that would improve the 
suggested ubiquitous fog-based recommender system. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this Section, we present the background and studies of 
ubiquitous computing. Then, different ubiquitous and fog 
recommender systems are shown in many sectors using 
different filtering techniques that exist in literature.  Finally, 
we will discuss the different limitations to improve our novel 
recommender model in the future work. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

A. Ubiquitous Computing 
The term ubiquitous computing, was conceived by Mark 
Weiser in 1988 at Xerox PARC. It is an embedded 
computational technology in the form of a microprocessor in 
every object [3].  Ubiquitous computing can occur with any 
device, any time, any place and in any data format across the 
network technologies, such as RFID, Wi-Fi and Bluetooth.  
Moreover, in order for ubiquitous to be achieved, common 
objects that humans use daily are appeared and afford 
computational services without expecting from users to 
explicitly interact with them. Apart of ubiquitous research 
deals with Location-Based Information Systems. Such 
systems utilize the user's location as context to provide users 
with the ability to produce and access information that is 
related to a location. Thus, context is an information that can 
be used to characterize the situation of a user in his interaction. 
Consequently, Ubiquitous recommender systems facilitate 
users on location by providing them with personalized 
recommendations of items in the proximity via mobile 
devices.  
A number of ubiquitous recommender systems (RS) 
challenges  exist, ranging from technological, such as wireless 
technology limitations and storage limitations, to challenges 
related to context-awareness, tracking user intentions and 
privacy concerns [6].  Without forgetting the amount of 
information, a user has to access is often lost and left with a 
feeling of disappointment and frustration.  
In the next subsections, we will present the several 
approaches used to make the RS. 
B. Collaborative Recommender System 
The Collaborative Filtering (CF) technique recommends 
items based on the similarity measures between users and 
items [7].  The system recommends those items that are 
preferred by similar category of users. The CF approach has 
been used for recommendations in the IoT. There are two 
main CF techniques: memory-based CF and model-based CF.  
In memory-based CF, user recommendations or predictions of 
ratings on future items are based on the users' rating behavior 
by using correlations between items or between users. Model-
based CF is more scalable in cases where only the training set 
is used to make the pattern. It uses this pattern to recommend 
future ratings. Compared with memory-based CF, model-
based CF is considered less accurate because of the large 
fraction among the item-user values in the training part of the 
dense dataset [10].  In [11], the  authors proposed a unified CF 
model based on a probabilistic matrix factorization 
recommender system that exploits three kinds of relations in 
order to extract the latent factors among these relations: user–
user, thing–user and thing–thing. The author in [12] exploited 
the CF method to design an IoT trust and reputation model 
that investigated trust and reputation among IoT nodes and 
Probabilistic Neural Networks (PNN). The Quality of 
Recommendation (QR) is defined as a 
score 
of 
trustworthiness. In [13], the CF approach was adapted to the 
weather and location data that were collected by the sensors 
to provide effective recommendations for the residents of that 
geographical region. It is the weather and location-aware 
recommendation system. A Ubiquitous Context Aware 
Recommender 
Systems 
for 
Ubiquitous 
Learning 
(UbiCARsUL) is proposed by [14]. The system enables 
students to scan QR Code tag attached to the corresponding 
plant in order to display related multimedia materials on the 
screen of mobile phones. This new paradigm uses 
Collaborative Filtering Approach in recommender systems, 
Clustering Algorithm for grouping students and Association 
Rules Algorithm in Data Mining for discovering interesting 
relations between variables. Smart devices are far connected 
in IoT to allow ubiquitous service access. This can produce 
heavy service redundant. Therefore, a recommender  
searching mechanism  for trust-aware recommender system 
(TARS) is proposed to enhance CF in IoT environment by 
[17], named S_Searching: based on the scale-freeness of trust 
networks, selecting the global highest-degree nodes to 
construct a Skeleton, and looking for the recommenders via 
this Skeleton. Benefiting from the higher outdegrees of the 
nodes in the Skeleton, S_Searching can find the 
recommenders efficiently. S_Searching can find almost the 
same number of recommenders as that of conducting full 
search, which is much  more than that of applying the classical 
searching system in the scale-free network, while the 
computational complexity and cost is much less. But, the 
research on the recommender searching mechanism of TARS 
is still always at the beginning stage. It is not easy to find the 
most reliable recommenders for the active users in the scale-
free network. 
However, Collaborative Filtering (CF) suffers from many 
problems, such as : 
 
Scalability RSIoT deals with a large amount of data 
that need computation power to conduct the 
recommendations, as well as fast response to online 
user requirements.  
 
Cold start problem particularly when a new user joins 
the system.  
 
Data sparsity may affect the accuracy of collaborative 
RS. 
C. Contetnt-Based Recommender System 
In Content-Based Filtering CBF [23] methods, the 
algorithm recommends items or similar to those items that 
were liked in past. It examines previously rated items and 
recommends best matching item. The CBF approach also has 
been used for recommendations in the IoT. SOMAR is a 
recommender system proposed by [20], which aims to suggest 
activities to user and the data used are based on Facebook and 
sensor data.  In [21], the authors adapted CBF approach in 
medicine to recommend a suitable activity plan for the 
patient's data through their medical sensors that can be worn 
and a virtual nurse explains this. In [22], the  authors adapted 
a CBF approach to building a recommendation module for 
their smart restaurant, which aims to provide dish 
recommendations based on the customers' tracking history. 
A natural limitation of Content-Based Filtering is the need 
to have a generic and rich representation of the content of the 
items. Moreover, this type of system generally suffers from 
the problem of overspecialization; for example, when a user 
likes an event (e.g. ads of discount pricing) during shopping, 
it does not mean that he will want to see it again. However, 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

using  a CBF approach, the system will suggest him to come-
back a second time to the same place with the same type of 
event (even if it is not organized). When he might be more 
interested in events, he did not discover on the last shopping. 
D. Knowledge-based Recommender System 
Knowledge-based approach suggests products based on 
inferences about user's needs and preferences. It is based on 
the identified relationship between a user's need and a possible 
recommendation [24].  Ontology is a formal method of 
representing knowledge that is central to building RSIoT.  For 
example, the authors in [25] proposed a method for generating 
automatic rules and recommending the best rule.  The user has 
the opportunity to add new rules for newly connected devices. 
Three ontology models were created: (i) Things, which 
provides all information for things; (ii) Context, which 
provides contextual information about people, environment 
and things and (iii)  Functionality, which links the 
functionality of context and things. For smart health 
applications, ontology plays a significant role in building a 
recommender system. [26] Adapted a fuzzy ontology to build 
a system that monitors diabetes patients and recommends 
specific food and drugs.  
However, such models still face major issues, which 
cannot treat decisions that have no rules allied to the system, 
and needs knowledge engineering in the building, and can be 
expensive. 
E. Hybrid Recommender System 
Hybrid recommender approach [27] is the one that 
combines multiple recommendation techniques together to 
produce the output with higher accuracy. A lot of research 
work has been done to peruse the healthy life style, by 
employing machine learning algorithms on past user activity 
data, heart rate data, and  accelerometer data to identify the 
type of activity, and/or estimate caloric consumption. PROFIT 
[28] is a hybrid recommendation system that matches the 
user's profile to available activities according to his geo-
location and time availability. It is a personalized fitness 
assistant framework that integrates activity data collected by 
the user's smart phone, their preferences and fitness goals, 
their availability and their social network.  Then, it 
automatically generates fitness schedules and socially 
enhanced recommendations of new activities, as well as 
fitness buddies by using the collaborative filtering. FOBA [5] 
is a fog computing system aims to recommend products of a 
banking entity. The solution developed by a hybrid method of 
recommendation: Collaborative Filtering combined with 
Content-Based Filtering. 
F. Recommendations with machine learning (ML) 
ML algorithms can be divided into three (supervised, 
unsupervised and semi supervised), based on the nature of the 
data involved. Many studies of RS have investigated this 
approach. In [16], the authors designed the Optimal State-
based Recommender System by exploiting ML algorithms as 
Distributed Kalman Filters, Distributed mini-batch SGD and 
Distributed Alternating Least Square based classifier and 
some ML platforms. In [18], a recommendation engine that 
provides 
personalized 
wearable 
technologies 
recommendations for proactive monitoring. The framework 
consists of three main models: (i) the classifier model; (ii) the 
optimization model, (iii) the Monitoring Framework. Rasch in 
[19] adapted unsupervised learning to build an RS for smart 
homes. The system learns user patterns and conducts 
recommendations based on user contexts. A decision tree [8] 
is used to build a system that provides lifecare 
recommendations. A personalized recommendation system 
for e-commerce based on big data analysis is improved by [9]. 
The system is divided into four levels, which are data layer, 
management layer, business layer and  presentation layer, and 
each layer is closely related to big data. The results improve 
that the text matching algorithm used in the system can define 
the membership of goods with the search keywords input by 
customers.  But When the method is applied to full goods 
search, due to the variety of goods, the proposed method is 
difficult to understand when selecting the representative 
features and defining membership, so it needs further study. 
With the increase of IoT connected devices, the amount of 
data has increased. Many research contributions have 
employed ontology-based semantic approaches to improve 
the access and integration of heterogeneous information from 
various sources in many areas.  ProTrip, a health-centric 
tourism recommender system has been proposed by [29]. It 
based on hybrid filtering, which is capable of suggesting the 
food availability through considering climate attributes based 
on user's personal choice and nutritive value.  
G. Discussion of recommender system's challenges 
  Nevertheless, 
despite 
the 
success 
of 
ubiquitous 
recommender systems in IoT research there is still room for 
more studies to resolve many constraints as: 
 
Scalability. 
Traditional 
algorithms 
will 
face 
scalability issues as the number of users and items 
increases. However, recommendation systems must 
respond to the user's needs immediately, regardless of 
the user's rating history and purchase situation, which 
requires high scalability [30]. 
 
Sparsity. Many commercial recommendation systems 
use big data, and the user-item matrix used for 
filtering may be very large and sparse. Therefore, the 
performance of the recommendation process may be 
degraded due to the cold start problems caused by 
data sparsity [31]. 
 
Diversity. Unfortunately, some traditional algorithms 
may accidentally do the opposite because they always 
recommend popular and highly-rated items that some 
specific users love. Therefore, new hybrid methods 
need to be developed to improve the performance of 
the recommendation systems [32]. 
III. 
INTEGRATION OF FOG COMPUTING ARCHITECTURE 
FOR IMPLEMENTING THE PROPOSED RECOMMENDER SYSTEM 
Fog computing expands the traditional cloud by adding an 
intermediate layer between mobile users and the cloud, where 
the new layer involves fog servers directly used near mobile 
users and IoT devices. The integration of fog architecture in 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

the proposed recommender system with the influx of huge 
amounts of data referred to big data is a crucial axis of the 
proposed model.  This solution aims to provide intelligent 
tools to target and recommend the personalized offers 
according to the mobile users' profile, and to track and analyze 
their feedbacks to improve the customers experiences and 
predict their demands. The proposed architecture consists of 
three main layers as presented in Figure 1, which are IoT layer  
, Fog layer and cloud layer. 
 
Things Layer: is the layer closest to the end mobile 
user and ubiquitous environment where data is 
generated. This layer contains the mobile user sensors 
that operate to feed the system with data.  
 
Fog Layer: contains a number of decentralized fog 
nodes in each given location. Fog nodes have the 
potential to reduce the amount of data transmitted to 
the cloud layer and minimize the request response 
time for ubiquitous recommendations. Moreover, the 
fog nodes are also connected with cloud data center 
by IP core network. 
 
Cloud data center Layer: is the top layer of the 
architecture consists of multiple high-performance 
servers, storage devices and network access to shared 
resources over the IoT network. Thus, Cloud 
performs the "heavy services" of data analysis and 
processing that fog cannot perform, such as big data 
processing. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Fog architecture for implementing the recommender system 
The principle of the designed model is that each mobile 
user should be connected with different fog nodes (fog server) 
in different floors by wireless access technologies Wi-Fi. Each 
fog server is linked into the cloud by IP core network. This 
architecture provides efficient data processing and storage 
services because each fog node represents RS that has a 
number of mobile users interfaces connected to both layers: 
IoT 's sensors, mobile users, other intelligent devices and the 
cloud layer.  The RS provides personalized and contextual 
preferences recommendations to mobile user. Many resident 
modules are parts of the Context-A ware RS, including big 
data resources, new users, recommendations, list of 
personalized offers.  Therefore, hybrid algorithm is 
implemented 
combined 
Content-Based 
Filtering 
and 
Collaborative Filtering to build the recommendations list. The 
goal is to rank most suitable content from contextual 
preference and user's profile. Then according required 
information and his interaction with fog nodes, we provide 
personalized recommendations. 
As Figure 2 shows,  there are four principal components 
in  the proposed Personalized Recommender System 
Architecture namely; mobile user profile, Process of 
ubiquitous fog recommendations, mobile user interface and 
the fog data processing. 
 
Figure 2.  Personalized RS Architecture 
A. Mobile User Profile 
The user's profile can be extracted from many sources. 
Like inscription or by social login, even without log-in: such 
as frequency and duration of browsing, number of clicks, 
scrolling, 
etc. 
Also, 
through 
integrating 
contextual 
information (location, time, physical environment, ...). The 
data collected about the mobile user are then selected, 
analyzed, and saved as independent modules. These modules 
are combined to build the "user profile". A profile will 
contain information that can be used to determine mobile 
user's preferences in terms of items. 
B. Process of ubiquitous and fog personalized 
recommendations 
The process takes as input all the modules that constitute 
the target user's profile:  
 
The 
Content-Based 
Filtering 
describes 
the 
characteristics of center activities that the mobile user 
has consulted in the past in the form of key-word 
vectors. These key words are generally extracted 
automatically during the consultation or manually 
assigned during the inscription.  
 
The Collaborative Filtering contains the rating data 
of the consulted items and the user's context. 
 
Demographic 
filtering 
contains 
the 
user's 
demographic attributes. These attributes can either be 
entered by the user himself by filling in the 
registration form or extracted from his social login. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

Once the mobile user profile modules are detected, 
recommendation 
approaches 
and 
the 
appropriate 
hybridization technique are selected, this process returns a list 
of items with the degrees of appreciation that the target user 
can give to each item. This process is detailed over several 
modules as shown below. 
1) Update user's personal preference Model : it takes as 
input the historical data of a single user and outputs the user's 
contextual preference. Concerning the newly registered users 
for those the system has no historical data, a clustering block 
is designed using K-means [33] and Density-based spatial 
clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) [34] 
algorithms. These algorithms are used easily with any data 
type, various distance functions, and efficient indexing 
approaches facilitating the analysis of large datasets. 
According to the mobile user profiles of all the users, the 
system identifies clusters of users with similar profile 
information. Then, for each cluster, it collects the historical 
data of all the users belonging to that group. Next, the 
classification module used to learn a group-level contextual 
preference model. Having a clustering model and group-level 
contextual preference models for groups in hand, as soon as 
new user registers to the system. Finally, the group-level 
contextual preference model will be used as the user's 
personal preference model. The model will be in use until the 
system collects enough historical data from the new user for 
building a pure personal contextual preference model. 
2) User's recommender Model : it receives as input the 
historical data of a single user or all users that belong to the 
cluster. To capture the user context, each historical data of 
user is made of the most recent user profile information, the 
offer (purchased or not). To create the training dataset, the 
system takes the received user data. Then, we use the data to 
find the best algorithm and best parameters and then save the 
final model. For each new offer, the system predicts the 
probability that the user will buy it and considers this value 
as the score of the offer; finally, offers are ranked according 
to their scores (i.e., the probability that they will be bought). 
To compute the prediction, and in particular to build the 
personal recommender models, we use popular classification 
algorithms is Bayes Search Cross-Validation (BSCV) [15], 
because it updates the current best model during each 
iteration and changes parameter settings according to the 
search ranges. Finally, we store the best model to be used in 
the future. 
3) Ranker : for each personnalized offer, the system 
computes the offer's score (the probability of buyin the offer 
by user) using the user's recommender model. The Ranker 
receives the corresponding preference model of the user. 
Then, we obtain, for each offer, the probability that it will be 
bought by the user and use that as the offer score.   Finally, 
the Ranker sorts the travel offers according to their scores and 
presents them to the user. 
C. Mobile user interface 
After the ranked list of offers is shown to the user in the 
mobile user interface, the users will typically buy an offer 
from the list shown to them and ignore the rest. The user's 
historical data are updated with the offers in the list (where 
each offer is tagged as purchased/not purchased). This 
interface consists of collecting the feedback of the purchasing 
decision after the ranked recommendation. This interface 
supports interactions between the mobile user and the 
Context-Aware personalized system of recommendation. 
D. Fog Data processing 
In this module, raw datasets are filtered converted and 
stored into various databases. The aim of data filtering is to 
extract useful information to the recommender system. We 
categorize six databases that describe a way of identifying the 
dataset: Item Profile, User profile, User-Item Preference, Fog 
Server List, Contextual Information, Recommendation 
Output. 
 
Item Profile: this database contains item attributes, 
such as item ID, description and category, and virtual 
content size. 
 
User's profile: this database contains user's attributes, 
such as age and gender.  
 
User-Item Preference: this database contains user-
item preference information that has been converted 
from raw data. A preference could either be explicit 
or implicit. 
 
Fog Server List: fog server ID, workload capability, 
processing capability, storage capability and power 
usage.  
 
Contextual Information: this database contains 
contextual information such as user's localization, 
time, and network bandwidth information. 
 
Recommendation Output: this database contains the 
final output. It stores the output generated during the 
process of creating a recommendation, such as 
similarity matrix, training data and testing data. 
The basic idea is to maximize the use of a fog server 
closer to the user.  We try to process and store data as close 
as possible to the user who connects to the target fog server. 
If the target fog server cannot provide such a service, it will 
send a request to neighboring fog servers. If neighboring fog 
servers cannot provide the requested service, then the request 
will be sent to the cloud. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROPOSED RECOMMENDER 
SYSTEM  
In the following Section, we implement the Ubiquitous 
fog recommender system in smart shopping by deploying 
five fog servers.  We perform a set of experiment based on a 
real-world dataset. 
A. Integration of Ubiquitous Fog-Based RS in Smart 
Shopping 
Ubiquitous fog recommender system is evaluated using a 
dataset containing ID address, destination IP address, 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

connected fog server IP address, and the localization of the 
mobile user. We treat each ID address as a user, because it is 
a unique identifier of his Mobile in our fog environment. An 
item could refer to Idsensor connected to a product or a web 
site visited by a person. In our use case, we have used many 
types of nodes in the three floors. Static nodes such as 
beacons attached to different products and fog nodes in the 
different floors. Also, we use mobile nodes such as mobile 
phone. Each mobile user is identified by his mobile's API. 
Mobile user sensor is detected by mobile devices which 
contact the fog node with the proximity information. We have 
deployed also the fog-based hybrid recommender system on 
each fog server and an Alibaba cloud server. The mobile user 
can access the Internet and use smart devices by connecting 
to the corresponding fog server. The dataset is obtained from 
the deployed fog servers. 
We have used different platforms to simulate fog servers. 
A typical platform is Windows10 OS with Intel Core i5 
CPU@2.7 GHz and 16 GB memory. All algorithms were 
implemented using python with the following installed 
libraries: NumPy, pandas, matplotlib, scikit-learn, nltk, scipy. 
Anaconda has been used for python package management 
and deployment.  We collect 200 records of different users' 
interaction with different items in the mall. All data are 
obtained from the deployed five simulated fog servers. Due 
to the small amount of data set, we use all the data and split 
data into 80% for training purpose, 20% as test data set. 
B. Evaluation Data Utility vs RMSE and MAE 
In the following experiments, each floor which includes 
fog server is the target level. Any user connected to fog 
servers deployed on these floors is considered in location.  In 
the experiments, we vary the weight value wj and attempt 
identifying the best value of each parameter to obtain the 
most accurate result. We use two popular evaluation methods 
for recommendation, mean absolute error (MAE) and root-
mean-square error (RMSE), to justify our quality of the 
prediction. RMSE, as in (1), penalizes large errors by 
amplifying the differences between the predicted preferences 
items and the real ones: 

RMSE√test-rsl)2/|test|.

MAE, as in (2), is the average absolute deviation of the 
predicted ratings from the real ratings of items: 

test-rsl|/test.

We set up a decay factor for the weight parameter wj to 
observe its impact on the prediction accuracy and data utility. 
Here, the decay factor has been set up as (wj/n) for present 
location, the weight of the third level of location is (wj/n)3.  
wj is the weight at level j that controls prediction at each 
location level and affects the final prediction. The weights 
satisfy the following constraints: wj ε [0,1], w1+w2...+wj=1.   
In Figure 3, wj is fixed as 0.7, n varies from 1 to 4. This value 
has also been mapped to the amount of privacy levels, thus 
there are 4 privacy levels from ε [0, β] based on location.  
 
Figure 3.  Data utility vs RMSE and MAE. 
In Figure 3, we observe that all three measurements show 
a similar trend. The value of data utility decreases from 1.3 
to 0. 5. The RMSE and MAE value both decreases. RMSE 
decreases from 3.5 to 0. 77. MAE decreases from 1.7 to 0. 5. 
If wj is higher, both MAE and RMSE results are better. If n 
is higher, both evaluation results are better as well. However, 
the trend becomes weaker. 
C. Evaluation Values of Precision and Recall 
Here, also each floor which includes fog server is the 
target level. Wk is the weight value of the target level. As a 
result, we need to be aware of the impact of recommended 
content size on the server.  We use the recall and precision 
method to measure our result. Both methods (as defined in 
(3) and (4)) are broadly used in evaluating information 
retrieval and statistical classification. In general, precision 
represents the prediction accuracy, while recall represents the 
prediction scale. Ideally, both values would be high. 

P.


R.

 is the Number of correct items recommended and  
is the Number of items recommended.  is the Number of 
relevant and recommended items.
We vary the weight value wk from 0 to 1 with the step size 
of 0,2 to observe the impact of result accuracy. We also 
modify the number of prediction items from 4 to 10 to 
observe the impact of result accuracy.  In Figure 4, each band 
represents the change of the wk from 0 to 1. The height of 
each point on a given band is the evaluation value of recall. 
The length between two points on a given band represents the 
difference between two results. Various bands represent 
different numbers of predictions, corresponding to items 
recommended to a fog server. A higher value of the 
prediction number means requiring more storage space on a 
fog server. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
Figure 4.  Evaluation value of recall. 
Figure 4 shows that the more items are predicted, the 
higher the recall value is. 
In Figure 5, the height of each point on a band represents 
the evaluation value of precision. We also observe that the 
more items are predicted, the lower the precision value. If wk 
is 0.3, we obtain most accurate result on each band. So, if wk 
is 0,3, we obtain the best evaluation results for both precision 
and recall. The prediction number does not impact the trend 
pattern of the evaluation value. However, the more items are 
predicted, the worse the predicted results are, and the higher 
the recall is. 
 
Figure 5. Evaluation value of precision. 
The obtained results prove that the efficiency of 
Ubiquitous fog-based RS and its sample algorithms are 
feasible and can run independently from the cloud server. The 
system helps fog servers choose the most frequently 
requested content to purchase in order to save bandwidth, 
storage resources and used network resources. It also 
provides much more accurate recommendation results for 
certain items based on fog server location. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this research, we presented a literature review of the 
current recommender systems and then we discussed the 
different challenges in order to present our new conceptual 
framework of recommendation.  The innovative aspect of 
designed model is how to address the problem of information 
overload ubiquitous environment, and become a tool of fog 
computing optimization.  Further, the proposed system of 
recommendation improved the user's experience in the smart 
shopping center where we used IoT devices. 
Experimental results demonstrated that Ubiquitous fog-
based RS provided highly accurate and personalized 
recommendations to mobile users.  It considered the fog 
server as well as contextual data of mobile user. Furthermore, 
it incorporated feedbacks collected from mobile users.  
Adding to that, it improved customers' experiences stored in 
the server and anticipated new users' needs.  In future 
research, we intend to extend our proposal to areas with deep 
learning algorithms and reinforcement learning which can be 
used to improve the current research and overcome 
limitations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M . Mukherjee, R. Matam, L. Shu, L. Maglaras, M. A. Ferrag, 
N. Choudhury, and V. Kumar, "Security and privacy in fog 
computing: Challenges," IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 19293–
19304, 2017. 
[2] M. Chiang and T. Zhang, "Fog and iot: An overview of 
research opportunities," IEEE Internet of Things Journal, Vol. 
3, No. 6, pp. 854–864, 2016. 
[3] Christos Mettouris and George A. Papadopoulos, "Ubiquitous 
recommender systems," Computing, vol. 96, no. 3, pp. 223-
257, 2014. 
[4] G. Adomavicius, B. Mobasher, R. Francesco, and A. Tuzhilin, 
"Context-aware recommender systems," AI Magazine, vol. 32, 
no. 3, pp.  67-80, 2011. 
[5] Elena Hernández-Nieves , Guillermo Hernández , Ana-Belén 
Gil-González , Sara Rodríguez-González , and Juan M. 
Corchado, "Fog computing architecture for personalized 
recommendation of banking products," Expert Systems With 
Applications, 2020. 
[6] J. H. Hong, J. Ramos, and AK. Dey, "Toward personalized 
activity recognition systems with a semipopulation approach," 
IEEE Trans Human-Mach Syst, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 101–112, 
2016. 
[7] Prateek Parhi, Ashish Pal, and Manuj Aggarwal, "A survey of 
methods 
of 
collaborative 
filtering 
techniques," 
2017 
International Conference on Inventive Systems and Control 
(ICISC), 2017. 
[8] H. 
Yoo 
and 
K. 
Chung, 
"Mining-based 
lifecare 
recommendation using peer-to-peer dataset and adaptive 
decision 
feedback," 
Peer-to-Peer 
Networking 
and 
Applications, vol. 11, pp. 1309–1320, 2018. 
[9] Hua Chen, "Personalized recommendation system of e-
commerce based on big data analysis," Journal of 
Interdisciplinary Mathematics vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1243-1247, 
2018. 
[10] X. Su and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, " A survey of collaborative 
filtering techniques," Advances in artificial intelligence, 2009. 
[11] L. Yao, Q. Z. Sheng, A. H. Ngu, H. Ashman, and X. Li, 
"Exploring recommendations in internet of things," 37th 
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research & 
development in information retrieval, pp. 855–858, 2014. 
[12] S. Asiri and A. Miri, "An iot trust and reputation model based 
on recommender systems," 14th Annual Conference on 
Privacy, Security and Trust (PST), pp. 561–568, 2016. 
[13] S. Chakraverty and A. Mithal, "Iot based weather and location 
aware recommender system," 8th International Conference on 
Cloud Computing, Data Science & Engineering (Confluence), 
pp. 636–643, 2018. 
[14] Sukanya Thiprak and Werasak Kurutach, "Ubiquitous 
computing technologies and Context Aware Recommender 
Systems for Ubiquitous Learning," 12th International 
Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, 
Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-
CON), IEEE. 2015 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

[15] T. H. Chung, and J. W. Burdick, "Analysis of Search Decision 
Making Using Probabilistic Search Strategies," IEEE Trans. 
Robot, pp. 132–144, 2012. 
[16] M. Sewak and S. Singh, "Iot and distributed machine learning 
powered optimal state recommender solution," Internet of 
Things and Applications (IOTA), International Conference on, 
pp. 101–106. IEEE, 2016.  
[17] Weiwei Yuan , Donghai Guan, Lei Shu and Jianwei Niu, 
"Recommender Searching Mechanism for Trust Aware 
Recommender Systems in Internet of Things," Automatika, 
vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 427–437, 2013. 
[18] S. Asthana, A. Megahed, and R. Strong, " A recommendation 
system for proactive health monitoring using iot and wearable 
technologies," AI & Mobile Services (AIMS), IEEE 
International Conference on, pp. 14–21. IEEE, 2017. 
[19] K. Rasch, "An unsupervised recommender system for smart 
homes," Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart 
Environments, vol. 6, pp.  21–37, 2014. 
[20] Zanda, Andrea, Santiago Eibe, and Ernestina Menasalvas, 
"SOMAR: A social mobile activity recommender," Expert 
Systems with Applications vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 8423-8429, 2017. 
[21] S. P. Erdeniz, I. Maglogiannis, A. Menychtas, T. N. Trang 
Tran, and A. Felfernig "Recommender systems for iot enabled 
m-health applications," IFIP International conference on 
artificial intelligence applications and innovations, pp. 227–
237, 2018.  
[22] N. Koubai and F. Bouyakoub, "My restaurant: A smart 
restaurant with a recommendation system," International 
Journal of Computing and Digital Systems, vol. 8, pp. 143–
156, 2019. 
[23] Umair Javed, K. Shaukat, I. Hameed, Farhat Iqbal, Talha 
Mahboob Alam, and S. Luo, "A Review of Content-Based and 
Context-Based Recommendation Systems," Int. J. Emerg. 
Technol, 2021. 
[24] Eva Zangerle and  Christine Bauer, "Evaluating Recommender 
Systems: Survey and Framework," ACM Computing Surveys 
(CSUR), 2022.  
[25] I. Hwang, M. Kim, and H. J. Ahn, "Data pipeline for generation 
and recommendation of the iot rules based on open text data," 
In Advanced Information Networking and Applications 
Workshops (WAINA), 30th International Conference on, pp. 
238–242. IEEE, 2016. 
[26] F. Ali, S. R. Islam, D. Kwak, P. Khan, N. Ullah, Sang-jo Yoo, 
and 
K.S. 
Kwak, 
"Type-2 
fuzzy 
ontology–aided 
recommendation systems for iot–based healthcare," Computer 
Communications, vol. 119, pp. 138–155, 2018. 
[27] Erion Çanon and Maurizio Morisio, "Hybrid recommender 
systems: A systematic literature review," Intelligent Data 
Analysis, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1487–1524, 2018. 
[28] Saumil Dharia, Magdalini Eirinaki, Vijesh Jain, Jvalant Patel, 
Iraklis Varlamis, Jainikkumar Vora, and Rizen Yamauchi, 
"Social recommendations for personalized fitness assistance," 
Personal & Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 245-257, 
2018. 
[29] V. Subramaniyaswamy, Gunasekarn Manogaran, R. Logesh, 
V. Vijayakumar, Naveen Chilamkurti, D. Malathi, and N. 
Senthilselvan, 
"An 
ontology-driven 
personalized 
food 
recommendation in IoT-based healthcare system," The Journal 
of Supercomputing, vol. 75, pp. 3184–3216, 2018. 
[30] J. Shokeen and C. Rana, "A study on features of social 
recommender systems," Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 53, 
no. 2, pp. 965–988, 2020. 
[31] J. D. West, I. Wesley-Smith, and C. T. Bergstrom, "A 
recommendation system based on hierarchical clustering of an 
article-level citation network," IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 113–123, 2016. 
[32] X. He and X. Ke, "Research summary of recommendation 
system based on knowledge graph," 3rd International 
Conference on Big Data Engineering, pp. 104–109, 2021. 
[33] S. Lu, H. Yu, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, F. Li, Z. Liu, and F. Ning, 
"Clustering method of raw meal composition based on pca and 
kmeans," 37th Chinese Control Conference (CCC), pp. 9007–
9010, 2018. 
[34] A. Smiti and  Z. Elouedi, "Dbscan-gm: An improved clustering 
method based on gaussian means and dbscan techniques," 
IEEE 16th International Conference on Intelligent Engineering 
Systems (INES)," pp. 573–578, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

The Open Government Data Digital Disconnect: Observations on Open Data Support 
by Local Government in Ireland 
 
Theo Lynn 
Jennifer Kennedy 
Pierangelo Rosati 
Irish Institute of Digital Business 
Irish Institute of Digital Business 
J.E. Cairnes School of Business & Economics 
Dublin City University 
Dublin City University 
University of Galway 
Dublin, Ireland 
Dublin, Ireland 
Galway, Ireland 
Email: theo.lynn@dcu.ie 
Email: jennifer.kennedy@dcu.ie 
Email: pierangelo.rosati@universityofgalway.ie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grace Fox 
Colm O’Gorman 
Declan Curran 
Kate Hynes 
Irish Institute of Digital Business 
DCU Business School 
DCU Business School 
DCU Business School 
Dublin City University 
Dublin City University 
Dublin City University 
Dublin City University 
Dublin, Ireland 
Dublin, Ireland 
Dublin, Ireland 
Dublin, Ireland 
Email: grace.fox@dcu.ie 
Email: colm.ogorman@dcu.ie 
Email: declan.curran@dcu.ie 
Email: kate.hynes@dcu.ie 
 
 
Abstract—The 2019 European Union (EU) Open Data 
Directive requires that public sector data should be open by 
design and by default. The EU Digital Economy & Society Index 
ranked Ireland as second in terms of data maturity amongst the 
EU Member States. In Ireland, local government is administered 
by 31 local authorities. In light of the Open Data Directive being 
transposed into Irish law in 2021, this paper explores the 
commitment of local authorities in the Republic of Ireland to the 
provision of open data by examining their activity on data.gov.ie, 
the Irish national data portal, and the treatment of open data in 
local authority corporate plans and digital strategies. We find 
preliminary evidence of a disconnect between national policy and 
local government activities and a potential urban-rural divide 
with respect to local government open data provision. 
 
 
Keywords—open data; Public Sector Information; PSI, open 
government; 
open 
government 
data; 
e-government; 
local 
government; local authorities 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Open data is defined as data that meets three conditions i.e., 
it is (i) accessible at no more than the cost of reproduction, 
without limitations based on user identity or intent, (ii) in a 
digital, machine readable format for interoperation with other 
data; and (iii) free of restriction on use or redistribution in its 
licensing conditions [1]. Open government data is concerned 
with making Public Sector Information (PSI) freely available.  
in open formats and ways that enable public access and 
facilitate exploitation [2]. A wide range of political and social, 
economic, and operational and technical benefits have been 
ascribed to open data, and open government data specifically 
[3]. For example, the European Union (EU) [4] cite a number 
of reasons for supporting greater access to PSI and open data 
specifically including: 
 
• stimulating economic growth and spur innovation: public 
data has significant potential for re-use in new products 
and services; 
 
• helping address societal challenges with the development 
of innovative solutions such as in healthcare or in trans-
port; 
 
• enhancing evidence-based policymaking and increase 
efficiency in public administrations; 
• becoming a critical asset for the development of new 
technologies, such as artificial intelligence (AI), which 
require the processing of vast amounts of high-quality 
data; 
 
• fostering the participation of citizens in political and 
social life and increase the transparency of government. 
in open formats and ways that enable public access and 
facilitate exploitation [2]. A wide range of political and social, 
economic, and operational and technical benefits have been 
ascribed to open data, and open government data specifically 
 
[3]. For example, the European Union (EU) [4] cite a number 
of reasons for supporting greater access to PSI and open data 
specifically including: 
 
• stimulating economic growth and spur innovation: public 
data has significant potential for re-use in new products 
and services; 
 
• helping address societal challenges with the development 
of innovative solutions such as in healthcare or in trans-
port; 
 
• enhancing evidence-based policymaking and increase 
efficiency in public administrations; 
• becoming a critical asset for the development of new 
technologies, such as artificial intelligence (AI), which 
require the processing of vast amounts of high-quality 
data; 
 
• fostering the participation of citizens in political and 
social life and increase the transparency of government. 
 
The economic value of PSI should not be underestimated. 
A 2018 study by Deloitte suggests that the total direct 
economic value of PSI is expected to increase from a baseline 
of €52 billion in 2018 for the EU28 to C194 billion in 2030 
[5]. 
Driven by these potential benefits, the European Union 
(EU) has sought to encourage, promote, and regulate the 
provision and (re)use of PSI for over a decade. More recently, 
the EU has shifted its emphasis from PSI to open government 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

data. This support is reflected in the reframing by the EU of 
the 2003 Public Sector Information Directive as the 2019 
Open Data Directive whose central principle is that public 
sector information data should be open by design and by 
default while ensuring a consistent level of protection of 
public interest objectives including the protection of personal 
data [6]. In effect, this means that public sector data in EU 
Member States should be considered open by default unless 
access is restricted or excluded [7]. It has been long-
recognised that open data has little has little intrinsic value 
i.e., its value is created by its use [3]. A significant feature of 
the Open Data Directive is that the EU specifically recognises 
that not all data is equal. 
 
Chapter V of the Directive specifically defines and 
prioritises high-value data sets. Article 14(2) defines high-
value datasets as having the potential to (a) generate 
significant socioeconomic or environmental benefits and 
innovative ser-vices; (b) benefit a high number of users, in 
particular SMEs; 
 
(c) assist in generating revenues; and (d) be combined with 
other datasets [6]. Article 13(1) refers to six initial thematic 
categories of high-value datasets - geospatial, earth 
observation and environment, meteorological, statistics, 
companies and company ownership, and mobility. [6]. Article 
17 required Member States to transpose the Directive into 
local laws, regulations, and administrative provisions by 17 
July 2021 [6]. 
 
 
The EU Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) ranks 
EU Member States based on their commitment to open data 
based on an assessment of the Member State’s open data 
policy, open data impact, open data portal, and open data 
quality [8]. In 2022, Ireland was ranked second of the EU28 
countries for open data maturity with a score of 95% of the 
maximum available score. The 2019 Open Data Directive was 
transposed into Irish law by S.I. No. 376 of 2021, the 
European Communities (Open Data & Re-use of Public 
Sector Information) Regulations 2021 and came into force on 
22 July 2021 [7]. As well as promoting and encouraging the 
sharing of open data by public sector bodies and emphasising 
the principle of open by design and default, Irish law requires 
that where data is made available for re-use in open format, 
this data must be linked to the national open data portal, 
data.gov.ie [7]. These regulations apply to all public sector 
bodies including local authorities [7]. Indeed, the Department 
of Public Expenditure and Reform Open Data Strategy 2017-
2022 and the Office of the Government Chief Information 
Officer’s (OGCIO) Public Service Data Strategy 2019 – 2023 
strategies both reinforce the general principles of the Open 
Data Directive. 
There are currently 31 local authorities in the Republic of 
Ireland - 26 county councils, three city councils (Cork, Dublin 
and Galway), and two city and county councils (Limerick and 
Waterford). This paper explores the commitment of local 
authorities in the Republic of Ireland to the provision of open 
data. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows; 
Section 2 outlines the data, methodology, results and 
discussion, and Section 3 concludes with the implications of 
the findings. 
 
II. METHODS, RESULTS & 
DISCUSSION 
 
The study involves all 31 local authorities in the Republic 
of Ireland. Data was collected in December and January 2023. 
Data on open data provision and public use was collected 
manually from data.gov.ie, the Irish national data portal. To 
assess the strategic commitment of a local authority to open 
data, corporate plans and digital strategies (where available) 
were reviewed for references to open data. 
As of January 2023, data.gov.ie featured 14,812 datasets 
from 160 publishers. Our results suggest 20 (65%) of the 32 
local authorities were registered as publishers on data.gov.ie 
although three of the registered local authorities had yet to 
publish a dataset. The 20 local authorities registered represent 
12.5% of publishers on data.gov.ie. In total, the remaining 17 
local authorities had published 1,152 datasets. Local 
authorities represent a mere 7.8% of all datasets on 
data.gov.ie. The average number of datasets published by the 
17 active local authorities on data.gov.ie was 67. Only five of 
the 12 local authorities published more than the average. The 
20 local authorities registered represent 12.5% of publishers 
on data.gov.ie. In total, the remaining 17 local authorities had 
published 1,152 datasets. Local authorities represent a mere 
7.8% of all datasets on data.gov.ie. The average number of 
datasets published by the 17 active local authorities on 
data.gov.ie was 67. Only five of the 12 local authorities 
published more than the average. The local authority dataset 
average is significantly lower than the average for data.gov.ie 
as a whole, i.e., 93 datasets. Six local authorities account for 
over 84% (968) of the published datasets, four of which are 
associated with the greater Dublin area (Dublin City Council, 
Fingal County Council, South Dublin County Council, and 
Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council) and a further two 
in Connacht located in the West of the country i.e., 
Roscommon County Council and Galway County Council. 
Six city councils and county councils located fully in the 
functional urban area of cities accounted for 56% (646) of all 
datasets suggesting a significant urban-rural divide with 
respect to open dataset availability. Of the remaining 506 
datasets, one county council, Roscommon, accounts for 56% 
(284) of the datasets. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

TABLE I 
 
DATA.GOV.IE PUBLISHER STATUS, DATASETS AND VIEWS BY LOCAL AUTHORITY. 
 
Local Authority 
 
Datasets (No.) 
Datasets (%) 
Views (No.) 
Views (%) 
Carlow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Cavan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Clare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Donegal CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Dublin CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fingal CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Kerry CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Kildare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Kilkenny CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Laois CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Leitrim CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Limerick CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
Longford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Louth CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Mayo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Meath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Monaghan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Offaly CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Roscommon CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Sligo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
South Dublin CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Tipperary CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Waterford CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
Westmeath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Wexford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Wicklow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes: CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City and County Council. 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
TABLE II 
 
SUBSTANTIVE REFERENCES TO OPEN DATA IN CORPORATE PLANS OR 
DIGITAL STRATEGIES BY LOCAL AUTHORITY. 
 
Local Authority 
Corporate Plan 
Digital Strategy 
Carlow CC 
N 
NA 
Cavan CC 
N 
N 
Clare CC 
N 
N 
Cork CiC 
Y 
Y 
Cork CC 
N 
N 
Donegal CC 
N 
NA 
Dublin CiC 
N 
NA 
Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown CC 
N 
Y 
Fingal CC 
N 
Y 
Galway CiC 
N 
NA 
Galway CC 
N 
Y 
Kerry CC 
N 
N 
Kildare CC 
N 
NA 
Kilkenny CC 
N 
NA 
Laois CC 
N 
N 
Leitrim CC 
N 
NA 
Limerick CCC 
N 
Y 
Longford CC 
N 
Y 
Louth CC 
N 
NA 
Mayo CC 
N 
NA 
Meath CC 
N 
N 
Monaghan CC 
Y 
N 
Offaly CC 
N 
N 
Roscommon CC 
N 
NA 
Sligo CC 
N 
Y 
South Dublin CC 
N 
Y 
Tipperary CC 
N 
Y 
Waterford CCC 
N 
Y 
Westmeath CC 
N 
Y 
Wexford CC 
N 
NA 
Wicklow CC 
N 
Y 
 
Notes: CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City & County Council. 
 
Dataset views was used as a proxy for utility. The 1,152 
datasets published by Irish local authorities generated 189,659 
views, an average of 6,118 views per dataset. Dublin City 
Council alone accounts for 72% of all local authority dataset 
views and the greater Dublin functional area accounts for over 
83% of all local authority dataset views. The urban-rural 
divide is further emphasised when views from other cities are 
included rising to nearly 88% of views. Table I summarises 
our findings by website. In a recent study of 146 cities 
worldwide by the United Nations Local Online Services Index 
(LOSI) found that 46% of the city portals assessed for the 
LOSI 2022 study provide open data [11]. Against this 
backdrop, 17 active open data publishers representing 54% of 
local authorities may be viewed in a positive light. However, 
LOSI measure cities from a wide range of countries 
worldwide, most of which are outside of the EU where open 
data provision is regulated 
To evaluate the strategic commitment and prioritisation of 
open data for local authorities in the sample, the most recent 
corporate plan and the most recent digital strategy (where 
available) were reviewed for references to open data. 
  Table II summarises our findings by website. First, while 
nearly all local authority corporate plans reference a desire to 
be open and transparent and a significant number listing the 
national open data plan in their reports, only two local 
authorities include a substantive reference in their corporate 
plan. Second, as can be seen from Table II, eleven local 
authorities did not have a current digital strategy accessible on 
their website. Of the remaining 20 local authorities, 12 had a 
substantive reference to open data in their digital strategy. 
However, despite the widespread lack of documented strategy, 
this should not be interpreted as a lack of open data 
prioritisation. Both Dublin City Council and Roscommon 
County Council, for example, have significant presences on 
data.gov.ie (see Table I), and both have their own data portal, 
and its own data portal, data.smartdublin.ie. and data - 
roscoco.opendata.arcgis.com. 
 
III. CONCLUSIONS 
 
Our results suggest that there is a disconnect between the 
EU and national policies and plans for open data and local 
authorities. This surfaces both in a lack of strategic intent as 
evidenced by the dearth of references to open data in local 
authority corporate plans, by a lack of action as evidenced by 
the relatively small number of datasets being contributed by 
local authorities, and finally by a lack of impact as evidenced 
by the number of views per dataset. Extant research posits a 
wide range of implementation and barriers to use that impede 
open government data projects including an inability to 
extract value from the data, local government willingness to 
share data, task complexity and individual or institutional 
skills and capabilities, amongst others [3] [12] [13]. In sum, 
there are challenges in will and skill for both data providers 
and users that need to be understood and overcome if the 
much-vaunted benefits of open data are to be accrued. 
Our results also suggest a potential urban rural divide with 
respect to the provision and re-use of open data. In our 
sample, the greater Dublin area accounts for 83% of the open 
data provided by local authorities on data.gov.ie. Even if high-
value datasets that generate significant socioeconomic or 
societal value are provided and exploited, they are likely to be 
biased towards urban communities thereby exacerbating 
existing digital and societal divides. 
In many respects while the Open Data Directive and 
associated regulations require local authorities to make PSI 
available by default and design, enforcement, and indeed 
exploitation, is effectively left to the public. Janssen et al. [3] 
note that merely publishing and providing open government 
data is not enough, open data is only value when used, not 
only citizens and companies but the public sector. Ten years 
ago, Bertot et al. [13] noted a lack of evaluative metrics for 
open government data. Today, international benchmarks such 
as DESI and LOSI, and to some extent this paper, are limited 
due to their continued emphasis on supporting policies, 
availability of open government data and input-related 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

metrics, such as the number of datasets, views, and 
downloads, rather than outcomes from the use of open data. 
To paraphrase Golding [14], open government data has “the 
potential to nourish and enhance the public sphere” but not 
without fixing the disconnect between national and local 
government policy and action, and the provision and 
exploitation of open data. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This research was partially funded by the Irish Department 
of Rural and Community Development with additional 
support from .IE, the official registry of .ie domain names. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] HM Government. Open data white paper – “Unleashing the 
potential”. 2012. [retrieved: month, year] 
 
[2] E. Kalampokis, E. Tambouris, and K. Tarabanis, “A 
classification scheme for open government data: towards linking 
decentralised data”, International Journal of Web Engineering 
and Technology, Jan 1, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 266-85, 2011. 
 
[3] M. Janssen, Y. Charalabidis, and A. Zuiderwijk, “Benefits, 
adoption barriers and myths of open data and open 
government”, Information systems management, Sep 1, vol. 29, 
no.4, pp.258-68, 2012. 
[4] European Commission, “Open Data”. Available online: 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/open-data. 
 
[5] Deloitte, “Study to support the review of Directive 2003/98/EC 
on the re-use of public sector information”. 2018. 
 
[6] European Union, “Directive (EU) 2019/1024 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on open data and 
the re-use of public sector information”, Official Journal of the 
European Union, 26 June 2019. 
 
[7] C. Menton, “Circular 20/2021 - Open Data Directive”, 
Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, DPE 
212/007/2020, 2021. 
 
[8] European Commission, “Digital Economy and Society Index 
(DESI) 2022”, Digital public services, 2022. 
 
[9] Open Government Unit, “Open Data Strategy 2017 – 2022”, 
Department of Public Expenditure and Reform, 2017. 
 
[10] Office of the Government Chief Information Officer, “Public 
Service Data Strategy 2019-2023”, Department of Public 
Expenditure and Reform, 2021. 
[11] United Nations, “United Nations e-government survey 2022”, 
UN, 2022. 
[12] J. A. Bichard and G. Knight, “Improving public services 
through open data: public toilets”, Proceedings of the Institution 
of Civil Engineers-Municipal Engineer, Sep, vol. 165, no. 3, pp. 
157-165, Thomas Telford Ltd, 2012. 
[13] C. Martin, “Barriers to the open government data agenda: 
Taking a multi-level perspective”, Policy Internet, Sep, vol. 6, 
no. 3, pp. 217-40, 2014. 
[14] J. C. Bertot, P. McDermott, and T. Smith, “Measurement of 
open government: Metrics and process” 45th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE, Jan 4, pp. 
2491-2499, 2012 
[15] P. Golding, “World wide wedge: division and contradiction in 
the global information infrastructure” Monthly review, Jul 1, 
vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 70, 1996. 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

Web Accessibility of Irish Local Government Websites 
 
 
Theo Lynn 
Jennifer Kennedy 
Pierangelo Rosati 
Irish Institute of Digital Business 
Irish Institute of Digital Business 
J.E. Cairnes School of Business & Economics 
Dublin City University 
Dublin City University 
University of Galway 
Dublin, Ireland 
Dublin, Ireland 
Galway, Ireland 
e-mail: theo.lynn@dcu.ie 
e-mail: jennifer.kennedy@dcu.ie 
e-mail: pierangelo.rosati@universityofgalway.ie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grace Fox 
Colm O’Gorman 
Declan Curran 
Kate Hynes 
Irish Institute of Digital Business 
DCU Business School 
DCU Business School 
DCU Business School 
Dublin City University 
Dublin City University 
Dublin City University 
Dublin City University 
Dublin, Ireland 
Dublin, Ireland 
Dublin, Ireland 
Dublin, Ireland 
e-mail: grace.fox@dcu.ie 
e-mail: 
colm.ogorman@dcu.ie 
e-mail: 
declan.curran@dcu.ie 
e-mail : kate.hynes@dcu.ie 
 
 
Abstract—The European Union Web Accessibility Directive 
requires public sector bodies in EU Member States to ensure that 
their websites are accessible to users and, in particular, for people 
with disabilities, by September 2020. This paper examines the web 
accessibility of local authority websites in the Republic of Ireland. 
It provides an evaluation of web and accessibility statement 
availability, web accessibility, search engine visibility, and social 
media visibility, using manual and automated methods. Despite 
the minimum requirements set out in the Web Accessibility 
Directive, the overwhelming majority of local government 
websites examined continue to present significant accessibility 
issues and vary in the form and detail of their accessibility 
statements. 
 
Keywords—web accessibility; mobile accessibility; accessibility 
audits; e-government; local government; web accessibility directive; 
local authorities 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
In 2021, almost 58% of people in the European Union (EU) 
aged 16–74 years made use of the internet to interact with 
public authorities [1]. The ISO define accessibility as ”...the 
extent to which products, systems, services, environments and 
facilities can be used by people from a population with the 
widest range of user needs, characteristics and capabilities to 
achieve identified goals in identified contexts of use, where 
such contexts include direct use or use supported by assistive 
technologies.” [2]. In scholarly literature, website accessibility 
is an oft-referenced term but has many meanings. As Krol 
Zdonek [3] note it may refer to (i) the ability to browse web 
content comfortably, regardless of physical limitations, (ii) 
search engine visibility, (iii) social media visibility, and (iv) 
web availability. A key theme in web accessibility literature is 
the removal of barriers to access and use online information and 
services for people with disabilities and the elderly [4][5][6]. 
While commentators note that the concept of ’disability’ is 
ambiguous, indeterminate, multifarious, political, culturally 
contingent, multi-dimensional and highly complex [3][5][7], 
the focus of web accessibility evaluation literature, standards, 
and legislation has been on visual and auditory disabilities and 
to a lesser extent cognitive, and motor disabilities. 
 
  
The legal standing of web accessibility has been debated 
since the first decade of the worldwide web [4]. In particular, 
there has been a significant and growing movement to legislate 
for government websites and those of public sector bodies to 
meet minimum web accessibility standards resulting in Section 
508 of the US Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1998, Section 
20(6) of the UK Equality Act 2010, and most recently the EU 
Directive on the accessibility of the websites and mobile 
applications of public sector bodies. These laws typically 
require public sector websites to meet a set of testable criteria 
based on the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design and 
guidelines recommended by the world wide web consortium 
(W3C). 
  
Over the last two decades, the introduction and ubiquity of 
the smartphone has significantly changed how the public access 
online information and services including public sector 
websites. This is reflected in the Directive (EU) 2016/2102 of 
the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 
on the accessibility of the websites and mobile applications of 
public sector bodies (the Web Accessibility Directive) enacted 
on 26 October 2016, which became law in Member States on 
23 September 2018. The Web Accessibility Directive requires 
public sector bodies to ensure that their websites and mobile 
applications are more accessible in particular for people with 
disabilities. The Web Accessibility Directive specifically 
requires public sector websites to meet the so-called POUR 
principles of accessibility i.e. perceivability, operability, 
understandability, and robustness, and is testable against 
criteria such as those laid out in the European standard EN 301 
549 V1.1.2, which is largely based on the W3C Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. The Web Accessibility 
Directive allowed for a phased implementation of measures 
with all public sector websites to be compliant by 23 September 
2020. As a result, there has been a renewed interest by scholars 
in the web accessibility of both national and local government 
websites in the EU (see for example [3][8]). 
 
Article 28A of the Irish Constitution recognises the role of 
local government in providing a forum for the democratic 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

representation of communities and in exercising and 
performing powers conferred by law. The primary legislative 
code outlining the structures, powers, functions, and duties of 
local government in Republic of Ireland is laid out in the Local 
Government Act 2001 and the Local Government Reform Act 
2014. There are currently 31 local authorities in the Republic 
of Ireland - 26 county councils, three city councils (Cork, 
Dublin and Galway), and two city and county councils 
(Limerick and Waterford). The operations of local authorities 
are also impacted by other legislation. This paper assesses the 
website accessibility of the 31 local authorities in the Republic 
of Ireland. The Web Accessibility Directive was transposed in 
to Irish law through the European Union (Accessibility of 
Websites and Mobile Applications of Public Sector Bodies) 
Regulations 2020, which came into force on 23 September 
2020. The remainder of this paper will be organised as follows; 
in Section 2 the data and methods will be presented, Section 3 
will discuss the results over four headings (namely website 
availability, accessibility statements and assistive technologies, 
website accessibility, search engine visibility, and social media 
visibility), and finally Section 4 will outline our conclusions. 
 
II. DATA AND METHODS 
 
The study involves all 31 websites of local authorities in the 
Republic of Ireland. This study examined four aspects of web 
accessibility, namely: web availability, web accessibility, 
search engine visibility, and social media visibility. We only 
focus on websites. Data was collected in December 2022 and 
January 2023, both manually and using automated tools. 
Firstly, whether the website uses secure http (HTTPS), data on 
the availability of a web accessibility policy, the availability of 
assistive tools on each local government website, and social 
media presence was manually collected. In addition, search 
engine accessibility was examined by manually checking 
whether (a) a robots.txt file blocked search engine crawling, 
 
the local authority was displayed in a knowledge panel and 
whether it was claimed or unclaimed, and (c) as per King & 
Youngblood [10] whether the county website ranked on the 
first page of search engine results on Google, Bing, Twitter and 
Facebook. Secondly, we utilised PowerMapper’s OnDemand 
Suite, a commercial software tool that scans web code against 
1,300 standards-based checkpoints including WCAG 2.1, 
WCAG 2.0, Section 508 (2017), accessible file formats, 
desktop and browser mobile compatibility, broken links and 
errors, web standards (including W3C HTML and CSS 
standards), and Google and Bing SEO best practice guidelines. 
Thirdly, Google Lighthouse, an open-source, automated tool 
for improving the quality of web pages, was used to assess both 
desktop and mobile quality of experience. Finally, the Google 
Mobile Friendly Test tool was used to test mobile usability. 
PowerMapper’s OnDemand Suite and Google Lighthouse are 
used widely by private and public sector organisations for 
accessibility and quality of experience evaluation, and 
increasingly in scholarly research (see, for example, 
[3][10][17]). 
 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
  
The following section evaluates these websites over four 
points of discussion, namely; website availability and its 
adherence to regulations on accessibility statements and 
assistive technologies, the accessibility of the websites in a 
number of categories; the search engine visibility, and the 
social media visibility. 
 
A. Website Availability, Accessibility Statements and Assistive 
Technologies 
 
With respect to web availability, local authorities in Ireland 
all have a dedicated website. Over 77% of Irish citizens use a 
smartphone for private purposes [19] and over 99% of Irish 
Internet users use a smartphone to access the Internet [20]. As 
such, mobile usability is an important factor in web availability 
and accessibility for local authorities. The Google Mobile 
Friendly Testing tool was used to test usability on smartphones. 
One local authority blocked Google crawls. Of the other 30 
websites, 28 were deemed usable on a smartphone (mobile 
friendly). HTTPS provides and additional layer of protection to 
data transferred between users and websites by providing 
cryptographic security protection for data, authenticating 
websites using digital certificates, and enabling browser-based 
security mechanisms [21]. These mechanisms provide 
protection to web traffic from network attackers and build trust 
in websites and the web in general. Without HTTPS, any data 
passed is insecure. Furthermore, if HTTPS is not used search 
engines will display a warning which may adversely impact 
trust in the local authority. Only one website in the sample did 
not use HTTPS. While this suggests high penetration, it is still 
surprising that there was not full coverage. 
Regulation 7 of the European Union (Accessibility of 
Websites and Mobile Applications of Public Sector Bodies) 
Regulations 2020 requires an accessibility statement in a 
required form to be published on local authority websites. 
While our results found that the requirement to publish an 
accessibility statement on local authority websites has been 
generally complied with, the form and detail varies 
significantly particularly with respect to the accessibility links 
on local authority homepages. Implementation ranges from 
detailed accessibility statements to links to empty web pages or 
external third-party websites. The Web Accessibility Directive 
and associated regulations do not require local authorities to 
integrate or implement assistive tools; it is as a ‘minimum 
harmonisation’ directive. This means that it only sets out the 
absolute minimum requirements that must be met by public 
sector bodies for their websites and mobile applications. 
Notwithstanding this, for public sector bodies it is reasonable 
to consider the provision and integration of assistive 
technologies as best practice. Only eight local authority  
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

TABLE I 
 
LOCAL AUTHORITY WEBSITE AVAILABILITY 
 
Local Authority 
Website 
HTTPS 
Mobile Friendly 
Carlow CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Cavan CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Clare CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Cork CiC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Cork CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Donegal CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Dublin CiC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Fingal CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Galway CiC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Galway CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Kerry CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Kildare CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Kilkenny CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Laois CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Leitrim CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Limerick CCC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Longford CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Louth CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Mayo CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Meath CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Monaghan CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Offaly CC 
Y 
N 
Y 
Roscommon CC 
Y 
Y 
NA 
Sligo CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
South Dublin CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Tipperary CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Waterford CCC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Westmeath CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Wexford CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Wicklow CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Notes — CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City and County Council. 
 
websites in the sample featured integrated assistive 
technologies. Table I summarises our findings by website. 
 
Article 7 of the Web Accessibility Directive requires local 
authorities to produce an accessibility statement in an 
accessible format and to be published on the website concerned. 
26 county councils had web accessibility statements of some 
form on their website and 23 featured web accessibility 
statements of some form on the homepage of their website. 
The Web Accessibility Directive also requires accessibility 
statements to be prepared using the model accessibility 
statement referred to in Commission Implementing Decision 
EU 2018/1523. While our results found that the requirement to 
publish an accessibility statement on a local authority website 
has been generally complied with, the form and detail varies 
significantly. For example, one merely provided links to the 
Access Officer, another linked to the W3C Web Accessibility 
Initiative (WAI), and one linked to a page containing no 
content. 
The Web Accessibility Directive and associated regulations 
do not require local authorities to integrate or implement 
assistive tools. As discussed above, it is a ‘minimum 
harmonisation’ directive. Notwithstanding this, for public 
sector bodies it is reasonable to consider the provision and 
integration of assistive technologies as best practice. Only eight 
local authority websites in the sample featured integrated  
 
 
TABLE II 
 
LOCAL AUTHORITY ACCESSIBILITY STATEMENT AND ASSISTIVE TOOL 
AVAILABILITY. 
 
Local Authority 
Statement Homepage Link Assistive Tools 
Carlow CC 
N 
N 
N 
Cavan CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Clare CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Cork CiC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Cork CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Donegal CC 
Y* 
Y 
N 
Dublin CiC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Fingal CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Galway CiC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Galway CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Kerry CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Kildare CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Kilkenny CC 
N 
N 
Y 
Laois CC 
Y 
N 
N*** 
Leitrim CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Limerick CCC 
Y 
N 
N 
Longford CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Louth CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Mayo CC 
Y 
Y 
N*** 
Meath CC 
Y 
N 
N 
Monaghan CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Offaly CC 
N** 
Y 
Y 
Roscommon CC 
Y 
Y 
N*** 
Sligo CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
South Dublin CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Tipperary CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
Waterford CCC 
Y 
N 
N 
Westmeath CC 
Y 
N 
N 
Wexford CC 
N 
N 
Y 
Wicklow CC 
Y 
Y 
N 
 
Notes — CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City and County Council. *Links to W3C WAI 
Guidelines. **Website featured link to webpage however no content was present on target page. 
***Accessibility statement references assistive tools but tools were not integrated into website. 
 
assistive technologies; a further three referenced recommended 
assistive technologies. Three such technologies were prevalent 
- Recite Me (6), Reachdeck (3), and Browse Aloud (2). Table 
II summarises our findings by website. 
 
B. Website Accessibility 
 
PowerMapper’s OnDemand Suite was used to evaluate five 
categories of standards-based checkpoints: 
  
• Errors - quality issues including broken links, server 
configuration problems, script errors and issues with 
Internet RFCs; 
• Accessibility issues - compliance with WCAG 2.1 and 
Section 508 (2017); 
• Compatibility issues - browser-specific content, 
functionality, layout or performance problems; 
• Standards issues - validation that pages meet W3C 
HTML/XHTML and CSS standards and identification of 
issues related to W3C deprecated features; and, 
 
• Usability issues - general usability issues based on Us-
ability.gov 
guidelines, 
W3C 
Best 
Practices, 
and 
readability. 
In addition, to identifying the number of pages with issues, 
PowerMapper provides a benchmark against websites in their 
test database. Sites are designated worse or better. Overall, 29 
local authority websites could be scanned; two blocked remote 
scanning. Our results also suggest that the local authorities in 
the sample had significant volumes of pages on their websites 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

featuring quality issues and errors, as well as browser 
incompatibility and non-compliance with accessibility, 
technical web standards and usability guidelines. All 29 
websites performed worse than the PowerMapper benchmark. 
Overall, the sample websites performed better than the 
benchmark in only one category, Errors, where 21 websites 
performed better than the benchmark. Only one website in the 
sample performed better than the Powermapper benchmark for 
each of accessibility and usability. Table III summarises our 
findings by website. 
 
Google Lighthouse was used to measure the quality of 
experience of each website across three measures - 
performance, accessibility, and best practice - for both mobile 
and desktop users. Performance measures how well a given 
page is optimised for users to be able to see and interact with 
page content. Accessibility assesses the extent to which all 
users can access content and navigate a given website 
effectively. Best practices assess the underlying code health of 
a given website against best practice. Google Lighthouse score 
ranges are: 0 to 49 (red): Poor; 50 to 89 (orange): Needs 
Improvement; and 90 to 100 (green): Good. Table IV presents 
the results from Google Lighthouse analysis. Our results 
suggest while local authority websites in the sample are usable 
on smartphones, performance, accessibility, and alignment 
with best practices for mobile use varies significantly with most 
websites requiring significant improvements. Desktop results 
were significantly better than those for mobile suggesting that 
the websites were primarily designed for desktop users. 
Notwithstanding this, there is clear room for improvement. 
Table V summarises our results. 
 
C. Search Engine Visibility 
 
Search engine visibility are not required under legislation 
although they play an important role in information 
accessibility and discoverability. As per King & Youngblood 
[9] we manually assessed whether each local authority website 
ranked on the first page of search engine results on Google and 
Bing. In all cases, the local government website featured in the 
first search engine results page. Knowledge panels give 
websites more exposure as they occupy more space in a search 
engine results page, is more understandable and provides better 
usability by giving faster access to important information and 
links. In each case, a knowledge panel was displayed for each 
local authority however in 11 cases, the knowledge panel had 
not been claimed thereby limiting the range and timeliness of 
data that could be displayed. If a website uses a robots.txt file 
to limit crawling, its URL can still appear in search results but 
the search result will not have a description, non-HTML files 
will be excluded, and rich results will not display. As such, it 
can impact website accessibility and usability. Only three 
websites blocked search engine crawling. Table VI summarises 
our findings by website. 
 
OnDemand Suite was also used to evaluate whether a given 
website met Google, Bing and Yahoo! search guidelines, 
robots.txt guidelines, and search best practices. Again, two 
websites blocked scans of their website. Of the remaining 29, 
only two websites performed better than the PowerMapper 
benchmark in the search category. Furthermore, Google Light-
house was used to assess how well a given website is optimised 
for search engines. Again, score ranges are: 0 to 49 (red): Poor; 
50 to 89 (orange): Needs Improvement; and 90 to 100 (green): 
Good. Generally speaking, Google Lighthouse results for SEO 
were relatively high for both mobile and desktop with an 
average score of 84 for both. Table VII summarises our 
findings by website. 
 
D. Social media visibility 
 
In Europe, on average 58% of the individuals participated in 
online social networking sites in 2022 [23]. While statistics are 
not available for Ireland for 2022, historically Irish social media 
use has been higher than the EU average [24]. 30 of the 
websites provided links to at least one social networking sites 
on their home page and 28 provided links to two or more social 
networking sites. Twitter (30) and Facebook (208) were the 
most prevalent. Table VIII summarises our findings by website. 
In addition, we completed the same manual assessment on 
social media search engine results on Facebook and Twitter. 
All local authorities featured on the first (extended) search 
engine results page for Twitter and 29 local authorities featured 
on the first search engine results page on Facebook. 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
 
Policymakers and legislators have made significant efforts to 
ensure that minimum standards are met for website 
accessibility. Our findings suggest that in Ireland, despite these 
efforts, there are some key issues to be addressed in nearly all 
local authority websites. Many of these issues are neither 
difficult to implement nor costly. As demonstrated from this 
paper, the identification of issues at a page level can be 
achieved using free and commercial off-the-shelf tools. Further 
research is required to identify the specific barriers to achieving 
and maintaining web accessibility. 
 
Regulation 8 of the European Union (Accessibility of 
Websites and Mobile Applications of Public Sector Bodies) 
Regulations 2020 names the National Disability Authority as 
the monitoring body. Although testing different samples with 
some overlap, our findings are consistent with their 2021 
Monitoring Report (see [21]). This suggests that greater 
commitment to accessibility is required by public sector bodies 
but also that the monitoring body requires more effective 
enforcement procedures (including penalties). Local authorities  
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
TABLE III 
 
LOCAL AUTHORITY ONDEMAND SUITE SCAN RESULTS. 
 
Local Authority 
 
 Errors 
 Compatibility 
 
 Overall Errors 
 Compatibility 
 
 
Carlow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cavan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Donegal CC 
 
 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NA 
 
Dublin CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fingal CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kerry CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kildare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kilkenny CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leitrim CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limerick CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Louth CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mayo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monaghan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Offaly CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roscommon CC 
 
 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NA 
 
Sligo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South Dublin CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tipperary CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waterford CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westmeath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wexford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wicklow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes — CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City and County Council 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
TABLE III 
 
LOCAL AUTHORITY ONDEMAND SUITE SCAN RESULTS. 
 
Local Authority 
 
 Errors 
 Compatibility 
 
 Overall Errors 
 Compatibility 
 
 
Carlow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cavan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Donegal CC 
 
 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NA 
 
Dublin CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fingal CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kerry CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kildare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kilkenny CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laois CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leitrim CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limerick CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Louth CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mayo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monaghan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Offaly CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roscommon CC 
 
 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NA 
 
Sligo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South Dublin CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tipperary CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waterford CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westmeath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wexford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wicklow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes — CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City and County Council. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
TABLE IV 
 
GOOGLE MOBILE FRIENDLY AND GOOGLE LIGHTHOUSE PERFORMANCE RESULTS 
 
County Council 
Mobile Friendly 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carlow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cavan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Donegal CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dublin CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fingal CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kerry CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kildare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kilkenny CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laois CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leitrim CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limerick CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Louth CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mayo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monaghan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Offaly CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roscommon CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sligo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South Dublin CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tipperary CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waterford CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westmeath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wexford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wicklow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes — CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City and County Council. 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

should be the leaders in ensuring a more accessible Internet in 
their community. While much has been done, there would seem 
to be a lot more to do.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
This research was partially funded by the Irish Department of 
Rural and Community Development with additional support 
from .IE, the official registry of .ie domain names. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Eurostat, Digital society statistics at regional level. May 2022. 
 
[2] ISO, ISO 9241-11:2018 - Ergonomics of human-system 
interaction — Part 11: Usability: Definitions and concepts. 
2018. 
[3] K. Krol and D. Zdonek, “Local Government Website 
Accessibility—Evidence from Poland”, Administrative 
Sciences, Mar 31; vol.10, no. 2, pp.:22, 2020. 
[4] C. Peters and D. A. Bradbard, “Web accessibility: an introduction 
and 
ethical 
implications”, 
Journal 
of 
Information, 
Communication and Ethics in Society, May 4, 2010. 
 
[5] S. Lewthwaite, “Web accessibility standards and disability: 
developing critical perspectives on accessibility”, Disability and 
Rehabilitation, Aug 1, vol. 36, no. 16, pp.1375 - 83, 2014. 
 
[6] H. Y. Abuaddous, M. Z. Jali, and N. Basir, “Web accessibility 
challenges”, International Journal of Advanced Computer 
Science and Applications (IJACSA), 2016. 
 
[7] S. Linton, “Claiming disability: Knowledge and identity”, NyU 
Press; 1998. 
 
[8] S. Valtolina and D. Fratus, “Local Government Websites 
Accessibility: Evaluation and Findings from Italy”, Digital 
Government Research and Practice, Oct 14, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1 -
6, 2022. 
[9] S. Kanta, “Insights with PowerMapper and R: An exploratory 
data analysis of US Government website accessibility scans,” 
Proceedings of the 2018 ICT Accessibility Testing Symposium: 
Mobile Testing, Nov 7, vol. 508, pp. 65-72, 2018. 
[10] B. A. King and N. E. Youngblood, “E-government in Alabama: 
An analysis of county voting and election website content, 
usability, accessibility, and mobile readiness,” Government 
Information Quarterly, Oct 1, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 715-26, 2016. 
[11] I. N. Sodhar, H. Bhanbhro, and Z. H.  Amur, “Evaluation of web 
accessibility of engineering university websites of Pakistan 
through online tools,” IJCSNS, Dec; vol.19, no.12, pp. 85-90, 
2019. 
[12] S. M. Baule, “Evaluating the accessibility of special education 
cooperative websites for individuals with disabilities,” 
TechTrends, Jan; vol. 64, no. 1, pp.50-6, 2020. 
[13] N. Angraini, M. J. Putra, and N. Hakiem, “Development of an 
Islamic Higher Education Institution Tracer Study Information 
System and It’s Performance Analysis using ISO/IEC 25010,” 
2019 7th International Conference on Cyber and IT Service 
Management (CITSM), Nov 6, vol. 7, pp. 1-6). IEEE, 2019. 
[14] D. Saif, C. H. Lung, and A. Matrawy, “An early benchmark of 
quality of experience between HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 using 
lighthouse,” ICC 2021-IEEE International Conference on 
Communications, Jun 14, pp. 1-6, IEEE, 2021. 
[15] S. Gopinath, V. Senthooran, N. Lojenaa, and T. Kartheeswaran, 
“Usability and accessibility analysis of selected government 
websites in Sri Lanka,” 2016 IEEE Region 10 Symposium 
(TENSYMP), May 9, pp. 394-398, IEEE, 2016. 
[16] M. Bilal, Z. Yu, S. Song, and C. Wang, “Evaluate accessibility 
and usability issues of particular China and Pakistan government 
websites,” 2019 2nd International Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence and Big Data (ICAIBD), May 25, pp. 316-322, 
IEEE, 2019. 
[17] S. Ganapati, “Using mobile apps in government. Washington 
DC,” IBM Center for The Business of Government, 2015. 
[18] K. Roumeliotis and N. D. Tselikas, “Evaluating Progressive Web 
App Accessibility for People with Disabilities,” Network, Jun, 
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 350-69, 2022. 
[19] S. Gibney and T. McCarthy, “Profile of smartphone ownership 
and use in Ireland,” Government of Ireland. 2020. 
[20] Central Statistics Office, “Internet Coverage and Usage in Ireland 
2021,” 2021. 
[21] A. P. Felt, R. Barnes, A. King, C. Palmer, C. Bentzel, and P. 
Tabriz, “Measuring HTTPS adoption on the web,” 26th USENIX 
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 17), pp. 1323-1338, 
2017.  
[22] National Disability Authority, “Ireland’s Monitoring Report for 
the EU Web Accessibility Directive,” 2021. 
[23] Eurostat, “EU regions: how did people use the internet in 2022?” 
2022. 
[24] Eurostat, “EU regions: how did people use the internet in 2021?” 
2022. 
 
TABLE V 
 
GOOGLE LIGHTHOUSE ASSESSMENT SCORES 
 
Metric 
Poor Needs Improvement Good NA 
Total 
Mobile Performance 
16 
12 
1 
2 
31 
Mobile Accessibility 
0 
14 
15 
2 
31 
Mobile Best Practices 
1 
20 
6 
4 
31 
Desktop Performance 
2 
17 
11 
1 
31 
Desktop Accessibility 
0 
17 
13 
1 
31 
Desktop Best Practices 
1 
16 
11 
3 
31 
 
TABLE VI 
 
LOCAL AUTHORITY WEBSITE SEARCH ENGINE VISIBILITY MANUAL 
EVALUATION. 
 
Local Authority 
Robots.tx
t 
Google 
SERP1 
Bing 
SERP1 
Knowledge 
Panel 
Carlow CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Cavan CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Clare CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Cork CiC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
Cork CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Dun Laoghaire-
Rathdown CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Donegal CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Dublin CiC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Fingal CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
Galway CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Galway CiC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
Kerry CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Kildare CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
Kilkenny CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Laois CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Leitrim CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Limerick CCC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
Longford CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Louth CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Mayo CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Meath CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Monaghan CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
Offaly CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Roscommon CC 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Sligo CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
South Dublin CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
Tipperary CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
Waterford CCC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Westmeath CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Claimed 
Wexford CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
Wicklow CC 
N 
Y 
Y 
Unclaimed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes — CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City and County Council. 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

TABLE VII 
 
LOCAL AUTHORITY AUTOMATED SEARCH ENGINE VISIBILITY RATINGS BY WEBSITE 
 
County Council 
Google Lighthouse 
Google Lighthouse 
OnDemand Suite 
 
Mobile SEO 
Desktop SEO 
Mobile SEO 
Desktop SEO 
 
Benchmark 
 
 
 
Carlow CC 
84 
83 
 
 
28 
Better 
 
Cavan CC 
100 
100 
Good 
Good 
347 
Worse 
 
Clare CC 
100 
100 
Good 
Good 
252 
Worse 
 
Cork CiC 
83 
83 
 
 
267 
Worse 
 
Cork CC 
85 
82 
 
 
241 
Worse 
 
 
77 
73 
 
 
191 
Worse 
 
Donegal CC 
88 
90 
 
Good 
NA 
NA 
 
Dublin CiC 
NA 
79 
NA 
 
142 
Worse 
 
Fingal CC 
84 
83 
 
 
228 
Worse 
 
Galway CC 
74 
73 
 
 
43 
Worse 
 
Galway CiC 
75 
73 
 
 
107 
Worse 
 
Kerry CC 
87 
92 
 
Good 
299 
Worse 
 
Kildare CC 
89 
90 
 
Good 
43 
Better 
 
Kilkenny CC 
88 
91 
 
Good 
312 
Worse 
 
Laois CC 
75 
73 
 
 
107 
Worse 
 
Leitrim CC 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
330 
Worse 
 
Limerick CCC 
93 
92 
Good 
Good 
151 
Worse 
 
Longford CC 
97 
100 
Good 
Good 
117 
Worse 
 
Louth CC 
81 
82 
 
 
258 
Worse 
 
Mayo CC 
92 
92 
Good 
Good 
373 
Worse 
 
Meath CC 
92 
92 
Good 
Good 
336 
Worse 
 
Monaghan CC 
69 
67 
 
 
441 
Worse 
 
Offaly CC 
82 
82 
 
 
189 
Worse 
 
Roscommon CC 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
 
Sligo CC 
83 
80 
 
 
266 
Worse 
 
South Dublin CC 
89 
91 
 
Good 
454 
Worse 
 
Tipperary CC 
66 
64 
 
 
201 
Worse 
 
Waterford CCC 
87 
90 
 
Good 
282 
Worse 
 
Westmeath CC 
100 
100 
Good 
Good 
348 
Worse 
 
Wexford CC 
84 
83 
 
 
318 
Worse 
 
Wicklow CC 
82 
73 
 
 
472 
Worse 
 
Notes — CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City and County Council 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
TABLE VIII 
 
SOCIAL MEDIA PRESENCE ON LOCAL AUTHORITY WEBSITE HOMEPAGE. 
 
County Council 
 
Twitter 
Facebook 
LinkedIn 
Instagram 
Youtube 
 
Flickr 
 
Carlow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cavan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cork CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Donegal CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dublin CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fingal CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Galway CiC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kerry CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kildare CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kilkenny CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laois CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leitrim CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limerick CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Longford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Louth CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mayo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mo0ghan CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Offaly CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roscommon CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South Dublin CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sligo CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tipperary CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waterford CCC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westmeath CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wexford CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wicklow CC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Frequency 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 Notes — CC: County Council; CiC: City Council; CCC: City and County Council 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

The Coloniality of Accessibility Links 
From Universal Design to a Decolonial Model of (Dis)ability 
 
Lorenzo Dalvit 
School of Journalism and Media Studies 
Rhodes University 
Makhanda, South Africa 
e-mail: l.dalvit@ru.ac.za 
 
 
Abstract—Accessibility links are an established tool for the 
digital inclusion of users with disabilities. In this paper, the 
theoretical lens of coloniality is employed to problematise the 
role of accessibility links as potentially contributing to 
entrenching offline classifications and hierarchies, leading to a 
separate and sometimes inferior user experience. Practical 
examples are used to highlight three key issues. In conclusion, 
there is an argument for the need for a decolonial model, to be 
developed in a dedicated future publication. 
Keywords- 
coloniality; 
(dis)ability; 
accessibility 
links; 
universal design; digital inclusion. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Within decolonial scholarship, the term coloniality refers 
to the persistent legacy of marginalisation, oppression and 
exploitation of former colonial subjects long after the end of 
historical colonialism. Originally coined by Peruvian 
Sociologist Annibal Quijano to problematise global power 
relationships [1], uses of the term have been extended to 
explore issues of race [2], gender [3], citizenship  [4] and 
others, including disability [5][6]. It should be noted that, 
unlike other terms, the latter does not refer to a dimension of 
diversity encompassing both privileged and disadvantaged 
categories (e.g., males and females with regard to gender), 
but rather signal a deviation from the "norm" [7]. For this 
reason, wordings such as (dis)ability are preferable. In this 
paper, I reflect on accessibility links to highlight how 
coloniality of (dis)ability is reproduced in the online domain. 
While extensive literature in the field of Human-Computer 
Interactions exists concerning the inclusion of people with 
disabilities [8], questions remain as to how such users are 
included. In advancing a decolonial perspective, I highlight 
the persistent legacy of accessibility as an afterthought, best 
effort and accommodation rather than truly empowering and 
liberating. In this paper, I discuss the link between 
accessibility and coloniality and highlight three key issues.   
 
II. 
ACCESSIBILITY LINKS AND COLONIALITY 
Accessibility links are links, often found at the very top 
of a Web page, which redirect a user with a disability to a 
specific section, to additional information or to a more 
accessible version of the page. If not explicitly mandated, 
they are strongly recommended as an expression of 
adherence to sound and inclusive design principles [8]. 
Accessibility 
links 
reflect 
established 
theoretical 
understandings of disability [9]. In terms of the medical 
model, they can be understood as a remedial strategy to 
provide impaired users with a minimal level of functionality. 
In terms of the social model, they can be understood as an 
attempt to remove barriers to access and enable digital 
inclusion. The latter approach is informed by the principle of 
universal access by design, i.e., as is the case with new 
buildings in many western countries [10],  Web pages should 
be conceptualised keeping the needs of a wide range of 
diverse users in mind and avoid reproducing social forms of 
discrimination. Both models fail to tackle the existence of 
(dis)ability as a discrete category or, for that matter, a 
hierarchical relationship between able and (dis)abled 
persons, key concerns in decolonial scholarship [11]. 
Consistent with a critique of the rights-based approach as a 
form of coloniality [12],  formal compliance with 
accessibility principles does not ensure and may in fact 
hamper an equitable user experience. Accessibility links 
represent an example of how artefacts often designed by and 
for able bodies remain the product of oversimplifications 
based on formalised users and use scenarios which cannot 
capture the complexity and nuances of the disability 
experience in real life. Focusing on a set of purposively 
selected Web pages, I advocate for a decolonial model of 
disability by highlighting three issues inherent to current 
approaches. 
 
III. 
ISSUES WITH ACCESSIBILITY   
The first issue explored in this study is that accessibility 
links do not always work. Whether this is due to technical 
problems (e.g., browser compatibility) or human factors 
(e.g., 
oversight 
or 
non-implementation), 
accessibility 
solutions need to be reliable in order to be effective. Taking 
[13] as an example, even an association with a progressive 
and inclusive digital media focus can feature a broken “skip 
to main content” link as tested with Firefox on Ubuntu Linux 
20.04. 
The second issue concerns quality of experience. 
Reduced functionality or lack of some key features seems to 
be considered an acceptable trade-off in the case of users 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

with disabilities. While the provision of alternative and 
simplified versions of inaccessible webpages seems 
somewhat dated [14][15], even a health-focused website 
such as [16] admits to some parts of its site being 
inaccessible.   
The third issue is that accessibility features often entail 
additional work on the part of the user, e.g., familiarising 
oneself with page or service-specific features like shortcuts, 
screen readers, navigation strategies etc., or providing 
feedback and suggestions for improvement. The most 
popular website in the world, Google.com, provides an 
example. Apart from a (functioning) "skip to main content", 
the other two accessibility links point to separate 
"accessibility help" and "accessibility feedback" pages. A 
very rough but conservative estimate based on the number of 
unique users and percentage of screen reader users in the US, 
Walsh and Steele [17][18] suggest that potential users could 
spend a combined 3 million hours or more just to read the 
help page. Waste of time is recognised as one of the main 
sources of frustration for screen reader users [19]. While 
Fuchs [20] recognises free digital labour as a form of 
capitalist exploitation, Couldry and Mejias [21] highlight the 
asymmetric and coercive character of digital power 
relationships as a new form of colonialism.    
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In summary, though no doubt useful and informed by 
noble intentions, in some cases, accessibility links reflect 
power relationships and world views shaped by coloniality in 
three fundamental ways. Firstly, decisions remain firmly in 
the hands of people without disabilities with relatively little 
recourse. Secondly, inclusion is achieved through a separate 
and often inferior experience. Thirdly, an additional burden 
in terms of limited features, frustration and extra learning is 
normalised for people with disabilities. While an exhaustive 
articulation of a decolonial model of digital inclusion goes 
beyond the scope of the present paper, it is important to 
problematise accessibility links as potential contributors to 
users with disabilities' permanent state of dependency, 
ghettoisation and suffering, which are the hallmarks of the 
Global South as a shared subaltern condition rather than a 
geographical entity. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work is based on the research supported by the 
National Research Foundation of South Africa (Grant 
Numbers: 137986) 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Quijano, “Coloniality and modernity/rationality,” vol. 21, 
no. 2–3, pp. 168–178, 2007. 
[2] N. Maldonado-Torres, “On the coloniality of being: 
Contributions to the development of a concept,” vol. 21, no. 
2–3, pp. 240–270, 2007. 
[3] M. Lugones, The coloniality of gender. Springer, 2016. 
[4] M. Boatcă and J. Roth, “Unequal and gendered: Notes on the 
coloniality of citizenship,” vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 191–212, 2016. 
[5] S. Grech, “Disability and the majority world: A neocolonial 
approach,” pp. 52–69, 2012. 
[6] T. P. Dirth and G. A. Adams, “Decolonial theory and 
disability studies: On the modernity/coloniality of ability.,” 
2019. 
[7] S. Schalk, Resisting erasure: Reading (dis) ability and race in 
speculative media. Routledge, 2019, pp. 137–146. 
[8] J. Abascal and C. Nicolle, “Moving towards inclusive design 
guidelines for socially and ethically aware HCI,” vol. 17, no. 
5, pp. 484–505, 2005. 
[9] C. Barnes, Understanding the social model of disability: Past, 
present and future. Routledge, 2019, pp. 14–31. 
[10] J. Boys, Doing disability differently: An alternative handbook 
on architecture, dis/ability and designing for everyday life. 
Routledge, 2014. 
[11] B. de Sousa Santos, “Public sphere and epistemologies of the 
South,” vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 43–67, 2012. 
[12] N. Maldonado-Torres, “On the coloniality of human rights,” 
no. 114, pp. 117–136, 2017. 
[13] International Association for Media and Communication 
Research 
(IAMCR), 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://iamcr.org/#main-content. Accessed on 28 March 2023. 
[14] D. Sloan, M. Rowan, P. Booth, and P. Gregor, “Ensuring the 
provision of accessible digital resources,” vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 
203–216, 2000. 
[15] F. Pühretmair, “It’s time to make eTourism accessible,” 2004, 
pp. 272–279. 
[16] National Health Service (NHS), “Accessibility statement.” 
[Online]. Available from: https://www.nhs.uk/accessibility-
statement/. Accessed on 28 March 2023. 
[17] S. Walsh, “50 Google Search Statistics & Facts,” [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.semrush.com/blog/google-
search-statistics/. Accessed on 28 March 2023. 
[18] N. Steele, “Percentage of screen readers users in USA?” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://ux.stackexchange.com/questions/57340/percentage-of-
screen-readers-users-in-usa . Accessed on 28 March 2023. 
[19] J. Lazar, A. Allen, J. Kleinman, and C. Malarkey, “What 
frustrates screen reader users on the web: A study of 100 
blind users,” vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 247–269, 2007. 
[20] C. Fuchs, Digital labour and Karl Marx. Routledge, 2014. 
[21] N. Couldry and U. A. Mejias, “Data colonialism: Rethinking 
big data’s relation to the contemporary subject,” vol. 20, no. 
4, pp. 336–349, 2019. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

Wine Live Label: A Consumer-Oriented Augmented Reality Design for Wine 
Labeling 
 
Georgios Lappas 
Communication and Digital Media Department,  
University of Western Macedonia 
Kastoria, Greece 
Email: glappas@uowm.gr 
Michalis Vrigkas 
Communication and Digital Media Department,  
University of Western Macedonia 
Kastoria, Greece 
Email: mvrigkas@uowm.gr 
 
Alexandros Kleftodimos 
Communication and Digital Media Department,  
University of Western Macedonia 
Kastoria, Greece 
Email: akleftodimos@uowm.gr 
Amalia Triantafyllidou 
Communication and Digital Media Department,  
University of Western Macedonia 
Kastoria, Greece 
Email: atriantafylidou@uowm.gr
 
 
Abstract— Augmented Reality (AR) technologies are emerging 
technologies that may develop new consumer-oriented devices 
and services to provide new types of economic activities and 
business models. In this work, AR technology is used in the 
marketing sector of the wine industry by creating innovative 
consumer-oriented experience with augmented “live” wine 
labels. Starting from the idea of creating an AR experience for 
wine products, an AR expert designs the AR experience, 
develops the AR application and the application is distributed 
to the users with the use of various platforms where the user 
can interact with the wine label on a whole new level by 
creating new digital products of wine “live” labels. The 
purpose of the present study is to examine the impact of AR 
smartphone applications embedded in wine labels on 
consumers’ experience and their subsequent perceptions and 
intentions A consumer-oriented approach is used to evaluate 
the wine-label AR mobile application by examining its impact 
on consumer experience dimensions, satisfaction, and re-usage 
intentions towards the application, as well as attitude and 
purchase intentions towards the wine product. Results found 
the increase of respondents’ satisfaction with the application 
and in turn help them form positive attitudes and purchase 
intentions for the wine. This indicates that AR technologies 
may provide new business models in the marketing sector of 
food and beverages to enhance user experience, develop 
positive attitude of costumers to the products and increase 
purchase intentions towards the products. 
Keywords: 
Augmented 
Reality; 
Wine 
labels; 
Digital 
Marketing; Consumer experience. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Augmented Reality (AR) technologies as well as Virtual 
Reality (VR) and Mixed Reality (MR) technologies are 
constantly gaining ground today in various fields of 
communication 
such 
as 
entertainment, 
education, 
information, marketing, and advertising but also in other 
fields such as industrial product design and medicine. These 
technologies could not leave the food and drink industry 
unaffected, where a system of augmented reality can be used 
to enable the combination or enhancement of the real world 
with digital objects or digital information for extending print 
information with interactive digital objects. Wine companies 
nowadays are increasingly utilizing AR technologies to 
promote their products. With the help of augmented-reality 
technology, wineries are able to provide rich digital content 
to their customers through videos, 2D/3D animations, 
photos, and text to enhance their experience [1].  
AR technologies can support marketing and promotional 
activities of companies and in turn foster the relationships of 
consumers with the brands [2]. Marketers are utilizing these 
technologies to provide augmented and immersive content 
for a product/service using a physical background [3]. AR 
technologies can offer exceptional experiences to consumers 
since they aim at enhancing consumers’ interactions with the 
product/service [4]. Herein, consumer experience is a 
multidimensional construct [5] that encapsulates various 
dimensions such as hedonism-entertainment, flow, escapism, 
learning, challenge, socialization, and communitas [6].  
In this work, we present an AR technology used to create 
augmented “live” wine labels (section II) and to evaluate its 
impact on consumer experience dimensions, satisfaction, and 
re-usage intentions towards the application, as well as 
attitude and purchase intentions towards the wine product 
(section III). Section IV provides the conclusion of the study. 
II. 
AUGMENTED REALITY DESIGN FOR LIVE WINE LABEL 
An AR wine label application was developed using Unity 
2018.4.31f1 and Vuforia Engine 10.2. The underlying 
application was implemented for Android mobile devices. 
The wine “live” label application is launched to the user 
mobile device, as follows: users are prompt to target their 
mobile camera to the front bottle label; once the camera 
recognizes the target image, the AR application generates the 
augmented multimedia content which is then shown on the 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

users’ smartphone (Figure 1). Specifically, the AR content of 
the application includes: 
• 
Videos of the winery's production procedures such 
as harvesting and crushing grapes, fermenting, maturing, and 
bottling. 
• 
Interactive and 360o videos of the infrastructure of 
the winery. 
• 
Videos and animation narratives about wine 
products. 
• 
Information about the wine ingredients and calories 
in text format and short animated clips. 
 
 
 
Figure1. Wine Live Label. 
 
The user can interact with the AR content by selecting 
the proper action from the application menu and the 
corresponding information pops up. Furthermore, once the 
user presses the info button that is located on the bottom 
right side of the application, a 2D animation character 
appears on the screen providing additional information in 
both text and audio form such as wine ingredients, calories, 
and storage temperature.  designations. 
III. 
USER EXPERIENCE AND EVALUATION OF THE AR 
APPLICATION  
To evaluate the AR application and test the study’s 
objectives, a survey was conducted with a self-administered 
questionnaire through a convenience sam-pling approach. 
More specifically, the questionnaires were delivered during 
the Hotelia exhibition in Thessaloniki, Greece (November 
18-20, 2022) that was directed to professionals in the field of 
hotel equipment, as well as catering and coffee services.  
Seven university students approached attendees of the 
exhibition and asked them to participate in the survey. 
Participants that agreed to take part in the survey, were first 
shown the application by scanning the label of the wine 
bottle. Then, they completed the questionnaire. In total, 325 
questionnaires were completed, whereas 306 were used in 
subsequent analysis due to incomplete data. Scales 
developed regarding user experience and user attitude for the 
wine.  All scales exhibited satisfactory internal reliability 
(Cronbach’s alpha exhibited the 0.70 threshold). Mean 
Scores (M) of factors that affect respondents experience with 
the AR wine label application revealed that respondents rated 
the AR experience as highly educational (M=3.82) and 
entertaining experience (M=3.68). Flow was experienced in 
a moderate level by participants (M=3.37) while escapism 
was experienced to a lesser extent (M=2.80). The AR 
experience was also able 
to 
increase respondents’ 
satisfaction with the application and in turn enable them to 
form positive attitudes (M=4.06) and purchase intentions 
(M=3.97) for the wine. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
AR wine live label application induced the entertainment 
and educational dimensions of consumer experience, while 
feelings of flow and escapism were triggered by the AR 
application to a lesser extent to respondents. Thus, positive 
feelings and new knowledge can be generated through wine 
AR label applications. Results also found the increase of 
respondents’ satisfaction with the application and in turn 
help them form positive attitudes and purchase intentions for 
the wine. This indicates that AR may provide new business 
models in the marketing sector of food and beverages to 
enhance user experience, develop positive attitude of 
costumers to the products and increase purchase intentions 
towards the products. Future work will explore further 
analysis of AR usage in the food and beverages sector. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been co-funded by the European Union 
and Greek national funds through the operational program 
competitiveness, entrepreneurship, and innovation, under the 
call research-create-innovate (project code: T2EDK-03856). 
All statements of fact, opinion or conclusions contained 
herein are those of the authors and should not be construed 
as representing the official views or policies of the sponsors. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. 
Vrigkas, 
G. 
Lappas, 
A. 
Kleftodimos 
and 
A. 
Triantafillidou, “Augmented reality for wine industry: Past, 
Present, and Future”, in SHS Web of Conferences, Vol. 102, 
https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202110204006, 2021.  
[2] A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, and H. Treiblmaier, “How augmented 
reality impacts retail marketing: A state-of-the-art review 
from a consumer perspective”, Journal of Strategic Marketing 
DOI: 10.1080/0965254X.2021.1972439, 2021. 
[3] S. H. Y. Hsu, H. T., Tsou and J. S. Chen, “Yes, we do. Why 
not use augmented reality? customer responses to experiential 
presentations of AR-based applications”. Journal of Retailing 
and Consumer Services, vol. 62, 2021 
[4] N. Vaidyanathan and S. Henningsson, “Designing augmented 
reality services for enhanced customer experiences in retail”, 
Journal of Service Management, Vol. 34, o. 1, pp. 78-99, 
2022. 
[5] C. Gentile, N. Spiller and G. Noci, “How to sustain the 
customer experience: An overview of experience components 
that 
co-create 
value 
with 
the 
customer”, 
European 
Management Journal, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 395-410, 2007. 
[6] A. Triantafillidou and G. Siomkos, “Consumption experience 
outcomes: satisfaction, nostalgia intensity, word-of-mouth 
communication and behavioural intentions”, Journal of 
Consumer Marketing, vol. 31, no. 6/7, pp. 526-540, 2014.  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

The Aggregator as a Trust Builder in a Renewable Energy System 
Lasse Berntzen 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail: lasse.berntzen@usn.no 
Marius Rohde Johannessen 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail: marius.johannessen@usn.no 
Qian Meng 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail: qian.meng@usn.no 
 
 
Abstract—This paper focuses on the role of the aggregator as a 
trust builder in a smart grid with consumers and prosumers. An 
aggregator plays a new role in the energy market and represents 
a group of consumers and prosumers toward the market. The 
aggregator can negotiate prices and trade flexibility for its 
consumers and prosumers. Trading flexibility is vital to shave 
peaks in energy consumption. A survey among early adopters of 
renewable energy in households revealed a lack of trust in 
transferring control of electric vehicle charging, heating, and 
household appliances to an aggregator. The paper proposes 
measures to improve trust in the energy market, focusing on the 
aggregator role. Three categories of measures are suggested:  
regulatory, technical, and organizational, combined with a plain 
language policy.  
Keywords-smart grid; flexibility; trust; prosumer; aggregator; 
ecosystem; plain language. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
A prosumer is both a producer and a consumer. In the 
electricity market, a prosumer produces electric energy from 
renewable sources, such as solar panels. Excess energy can 
be sold to the grid. An aggregator plays a new role in the 
energy market and represents a group of consumers and 
prosumers toward the market. The aggregator can negotiate 
prices and trade flexibility for its consumers and prosumers. 
A recent survey by the authors among early adopters of 
smart home technologies and renewable energy production in 
households relieved a significant lack of trust in the energy 
market [1]. Trust has decreased even more as energy costs 
have soared throughout 2022. In Norway, the Facebook 
group demanding lower electricity prices has 620.000 
members, and the media presents new stories about the 
consequences of soaring prices every day. Polls show that 
government support is at an all-time low, and commentators 
go a long way in pointing to the energy crisis as a reason for 
this lack of support. It seems that trust is at an all-time low, 
at least where energy is concerned, yet trust is perhaps the 
most critical factor for conducting effective transactions and 
making things happen smoothly. A low level of trust in 
government and institutions increases the risk of direct action 
by citizens [2]. It is even said that trust is the key to 
understanding the dynamics of social relations, to the extent 
that it is often viewed as the glue that holds society together 
[3].  
The current energy crisis emphasizes the consequences of 
falling trust levels. The electricity market seems to be part of 
the problem since pricing mechanisms are complex and 
challenging to understand for the average citizen. For 
example, the algorithm "Euphemia" predicts future prices 
and is complicated and hard to explain. The whitepaper 
describing the algorithm's work is 53 pages long and very 
technical [4]. This complexity is likely part of why people 
distrust the energy market. When market experts talk to the 
media and try to explain why prices are high, explanations 
tend to vary between different factors, such as hydro basin 
water levels, the cost of natural gas or CO2, and this leads to 
confused public thinking that the real reason simply is that 
"someone" wants prices to remain high.  
Based on the above, it seems that communication, or 
rather a lack of clear communication, is part of the problem. 
We know from other fields, such as health, that plain and 
understandable communication is essential for trust [5].  
In this paper, we propose three classes of measures: 
regulatory, technical, and organizational, combined with a 
plain language policy to alleviate the current situation and 
contribute to a higher level of trust in energy market 
institutions, which can aid the transition towards green 
energy. The measures are shown in Fig. 1. 
Fig. 2 illustrates how traditional power grids transfer 
electricity from producers to consumers. The generated 
electricity by the power plants goes through the transmission 
network operated by the Transmission System Operator 
(TSO) and the regional network operated by the Distribution 
System Operator (DSO), then to the end user. The transfer is 
one-way; the end user must pay for electricity based on a 
tariff. 
 
Figure 1.  Measures to obtain trust 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Figure 2.  Traditional power grid. 
With the development of renewable energy sources, 
consumers can produce electricity from solar panels, 
windmills, and geothermal power. This new role is often 
called prosumer. Smart grids enable a two-way energy 
transfer, allowing prosumers to produce and sell energy.  A 
smart meter records the amount of energy transferred in the 
power ecosystem.   
 
 
Figure 3.  Power grid with prosumers and aggregators. 
The aggregator is a separate entity representing several 
prosumers. An independent aggregator is defined in the EU 
Clean Energy Package (CEP) in Art. 2 (19) of the Directive 
(EU) 2019/944 [6] as "a market participant engaged in 
aggregation who is not affiliated to the customer's supplier." 
Aggregation is "a function performed by a natural or legal 
person who combines multiple customer loads or generated 
electricity for sale, purchase or auction in any electricity 
market." The traditional suppliers can provide aggregator 
services like demand response, but they haven't taken this 
responsibility since their main business is selling energy. 
Therefore, the role of independent aggregators has emerged 
[7][8].  
The aggregator may negotiate terms with consumers and 
prosumers and handle transactions internally between 
consumers and prosumers. The aggregator may also provide 
electricity storage and offer electricity storage as a service to 
customers without storage capability. The aggregator plays an 
essential role in achieving flexibility. Grid flexibility refers to 
the ability of a power system to maintain a balance between 
generation and load during uncertainty, resulting in increased 
grid efficiency, resiliency, and the integration of variable 
renewables into the grid [9]. The gain from such flexibility is 
savings for the prosumer since electricity is cheaper in off-
peak periods. Flexibility can postpone infrastructure upgrades 
and investments due to better grid utilization for the TSO and 
the DSO. 
The authors were part of the ERA-NET+ Smart-MLA 
project [10] that designed and developed a cloud-based 
aggregator solution to optimize demand response and increase 
grid flexibility for renewable energy usage. Smart-MLA 
aimed to raise consumer and community awareness of 
demand response aggregating mechanisms. The project 
created user-friendly interfaces accessible through web pages 
and web services, allowing consumers to configure, control 
and monitor their appliances. Aggregators could also access 
these web services to securely analyze, plan, and forecast 
energy consumption and generation without the need for own 
infrastructure. 
In the summer of 2021, the authors surveyed early 
adopters of home automation technology as part of the Smart-
MLA project. The respondents were approached using 
Norwegian Facebook groups relevant to smart homes.  The 
survey asked about demographic information, existing 
household installations, and the sentiments towards 
transferring control of electric vehicle charging, heating, and 
household appliances to an aggregator.  The survey was open 
for five days and attracted 209 respondents.  Fifty-two 
respondents used the opportunity to answer open-ended 
questions [1]. 
One clear result was a lack of trust in the energy market 
and its actors. Generally, the respondents expressed a low 
willingness 
to 
hand 
over 
control 
unless 
highly 
compensated.  A large majority were positive about flexibility 
but wanted to remain in control. 
One response was: "Energy companies will never be 
allowed to control anything in my house. With their hidden 
terms and conditions, they have repeatedly shown that they 
can't be trusted." 
 Another was: "The DSOs…have neglected to invest in the 
grid for the past 25 years while paying out hundreds of 
millions to shareholders. It's time they step up without shoving 
the [financial] burden onto consumers." 
 And a third was: "I don't trust them. What if something 
goes wrong?... and if the system is able to cut costs, that won't 
get back to consumers." 
These are three representative responses from the survey. 
There may be many reasons for the lack of trust, but the most 
important is a long-lasting competition with incomprehensible 
and incomparable terms. 
The results from the survey were the inspiration to 
investigate possible ways for aggregators to build trust with 
consumers and prosumers. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
discusses flexibility and trust, followed by Section III, 
proposing measures for prosumers to trust an aggregator. 
Section IV concludes the paper. 
II. 
FLEXIBILITY AND TRUST 
The electricity demand varies throughout the day. The 
price of electricity follows the demand. Shifting some of the 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

load to periods with less demand is advantageous for all 
parties. The consumers will reduce their electricity bills, while 
the grid operator can delay investments in new grid 
infrastructure.  
Flexibility happens when consumers and prosumers offer 
to shift their loads. A single household will not contribute 
much, but if hundreds or thousands of consumers and 
prosumers provide flexibility, the impact will be high. The 
peaks will be shaved by shifting some load to periods with less 
demand. 
A flexible consumer or prosumer can decide to postpone 
consumption of energy, e.g., for electric car charging or 
heating, until the total demand for energy becomes lower.  The 
distribution system operator or an aggregator can handle 
flexibility. A typical example of flexibility is to render control 
of electric car charging, with the constraint that the car should 
be fully charged at 7 am in the morning. 
Flexibility depends on trust. A consumer or prosumer 
must trust that the aggregator or distribution system operator 
fulfills their obligations, e.g., that the car is fully charged at 7 
am. A consumer or prosumer that lacks trust will not transfer 
control to a not trustworthy entity. 
In the energy market, the aggregators, prosumers, and 
other actors must deal with the complexity of interacting with 
organizations and thus face the necessity to reduce this 
complexity before participating. According to the complexity 
reduction mechanism suggested by Luhmann [11], familiarity 
and trust address essential aspects of the complexity within 
organizations. Familiarity and information sharing inside 
organizations and crossing the organizations are fundamental 
for building trust. 
Piderit and Flowerday [12] observe two different views of 
trust: The first is based on confidence or risk in the 
predictability of the other party's actions, and in this instance, 
parties hedge themselves against uncertain events through 
guarantees, insurance, or law. The second view is based on 
confidence in the other party's goodwill, which relies on faith 
in the other party's integrity. 
The first view relies on regulations, while the second relies 
on the parties' relationship. 
During the work for the project SMART-MLA, the 
aggregators will plan and forecast the consumption and 
generation from the customers and prosumers (wind power, 
solar power) in a community. The aggregators and prosumers 
trust each other in the common concern for climate change, 
interest in new technologies, and environmental contribution. 
In contrast, the prosumers don't trust the aggregators for the 
issues of security of energy supply, immature technologies 
and business models, and expensive investments. The 
challenge is more prominent for renewable energy sources 
since photovoltaic and wind power must be produced instantly 
when sunshine or wind is present. The energy created from 
the sun and wind varies with weather conditions and is hence 
more challenging to integrate [13]. Therefore, strengthening 
the trust between the prosumers and the aggregators becomes 
a significant issue.  
III. 
MEASURES TO CREATE TRUST 
As we have demonstrated above, there is a strong link 
between grid flexibility and trust among aggregators, 
consumers, and prosumers. We propose to make efforts within 
the four categories below to build trust for the actors and 
reduce the risk of misbehavior: Regulatory measures, 
technical measures, and organizational transformations 
combined with a plain language policy. 
A. Regulatory Frameworks 
Without trusting others in the electric energy market, 
people would be confronted with the incomprehensible 
complexity of considering every possible eventuality of every 
person around before deciding what to do. Such complexity 
would be so overwhelming that, in many cases, people would 
refrain from acting. Trust is not the only complexity reduction 
method; rules are powerful techniques for reducing 
complexity. However, even when there are rules, trust is 
essential because there is no guarantee that other people will 
fully abide by them [14].  
Therefore, regulatory measures are one of the pillars of 
building trust so that participants behave within a specific 
framework 
and 
non-compliance 
can 
be 
punished. 
Parliamentary acts, government regulations, and the energy 
sector, through self-regulation, may establish regulatory 
measures. Regulatory measures, such as EU and Norwegian 
national regulations, may instruct the market actors to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
1) 
EU Energy Regulations  
According to the EU Clean Energy Package (CEP), 
Member States shall enable demand response through 
independent aggregation. Directive (EU) 2019/944 Art. 17 
contains the principles the national regulatory frameworks 
must respect [6]. Regulation (EU) 2019/943 Art. 59 1(e) states 
that a new network code can be developed in the area of 
demand response, including rules on aggregation, energy 
storage, and demand curtailment rules [15]. Network codes 
are typically used to harmonize the regulatory frameworks at 
the national level [16]. 
Under European frameworks, the energy participants have 
confidence in their clear expectations of what other actors will 
do, based on EU regulations and previous interactions. 
The regulations reduce the need for extensive 
negotiations, detail resolution, tight transaction control, etc. 
These EU regulations aim at long-term orientation, then 
increase the acceptance of interdependence and create 
commitment among energy actors. Furthermore, trust built on 
the common EU energy frameworks also reduces risk and 
transaction costs since these frameworks are essential in 
almost every contractual agreement. Therefore, EU energy 
regulations enable trust among the participants as well as the 
quality of business relationships. Without EU energy 
regulations, the lack of trust creates control-oriented and 
defensive communication that degrades communication and 
then cuts off the energy transaction across the countries. 
 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

2) 
Norwegian National Regulations  
The Norwegian electrical energy market opened for 
competition when the Energy Act entered into force in 1991 
[17]. The Norwegian Energy Regulatory Authority (NVE-
RME) ensures the regulatory activities. NVE-RME has played 
an active role as an energy market regulator in developing 
network regulation besides EU regulations, real market access 
for all customers, simplified supplier switching procedures, 
securing security and quality of supply, and efficient 
regulation of the energy system operation in Norway. In 2018, 
NVE suggested a mandatory structure for the grid tariff to 
incentivize lower peak loads [18].  
For the prosumers and other participants in the power 
market, official regulations can standardize contract terms, 
establish a common tariff structure, promote competition, and 
make it easier for customers to change electric power 
suppliers and connected services. According to the Norwegian 
official regulator NVE, all consumers have a right to produce 
and sell surplus electricity. The network companies are 
obliged to connect prosumers and receive their production. 
Prosumers feeding in less than 100 kW are not charged the 
fixed component for generation. Prosumers can choose their 
own electricity supplier that supplies their need for electricity 
and buy surplus electricity from the prosumer. In 2020 there 
were about 6 800 prosumers in Norway [19]. 
 
3) 
Self-regulation 
The energy sector can take responsibility through self-
regulation. In 2020, Renewables Norway [20] and 
Distriktsenergi established "Safe Energy Trading" to make the 
industry more transparent and customer friendly. The 
certification scheme allows energy companies to prove they 
follow best practices and commit themselves to improve 
customer relations. Self-regulation is a market-driven 
approach to tackle industry challenges and implement 
regulations by adjusting marketing and enhancing customer 
dialogue in line with requirements. 
B. Technical Measures 
Albinson, Balaji, and Chu [21] argue that technology can 
help build trust among stakeholders and create benefits for 
society.   They suggest four pillars of trust, shown in Table I.  
Their use of technology focuses on information handling. 
In the energy market context, two specific technologies may 
be particularly relevant: (1) Advanced Metering Systems 
(AMS) to give consumers and prosumers more insight into 
electricity use and production, and (2) Blockchain technology, 
sometimes referred to as Distributed Ledger Technology 
(DLT), which makes energy transactions unalterable and 
transparent through decentralization and cryptographic 
hashing. 
 
1) 
Advanced Metering System (AMS) 
For customers in the distribution grid, AMS with smart 
meters can offer the technology for new grid tariffs based on 
hourly metering consumption, which will incentivize the 
flexibility of consumers and prosumers. 
 
TABLE I.  
FOUR PILLARS OF TRUST [21] 
Transparency and accessibility 
• 
Enabling customers to easily evaluate the company 
and its offerings. 
• 
Making business terms, such as additional fees, 
privacy policies, and terms of service readily 
accessible and easily understandable. 
• 
Clarifying how self-learning algorithms operate. 
• 
Providing line of sight into supply chains. 
Ethics and responsibility 
• 
Ironing out complaints in a sensitive and timely 
manner. 
• 
Stopping misinformation in its tracks. 
• 
Encouraging inclusion with tools that test fairness and 
detect biases. 
• 
Implementing safeguards to promote stakeholder 
welfare along with digital controls that prevent 
unethical or inappropriate use of technology. 
Privacy and control 
• 
Putting control of personal data in users' hands. 
• 
Improving accuracy of consumer data. 
• 
Being frugal with personally identifiable information. 
Security and reliability 
• 
Verifying the identity of people claiming to be 
customers or providers to reduce impersonation and 
fraud. 
• 
Using automation and AI to reduce errors and fraud. 
• 
Proactively alerting users in the event of suspicious 
account activity. 
 
According to the Norwegian regulations, the smart meters 
should have standardized interfaces that allow for 
communication with external equipment; be able to connect 
different types of meters (e.g., gas, heat, water); secure data 
storage in cases of voltage outage; send and receive price 
information (from energy contracts and network tariffs) and 
signals for load control and earth fault detection [22].  
The smart meters are designed to meter the power flow in 
both directions, to and from the customer, enabling customers 
to invest in renewable energy sources to become prosumers. 
 
2) 
Blockchain Technology 
Transparency and accountability are essential for building 
trust. A blockchain allows the actors to store transaction data 
in an immutable, distributed ledger. Smart contracts that can 
be executed on the blockchain can replace intermediaries in 
the transaction process [23]. 
The Smart-MLA project developed a blockchain-based 
solution for handling settlements between an aggregator and 
its prosumers [24]. A private blockchain was chosen since the 
costs of registering a transaction on the blockchain was many 
times higher than the actual amount of the transaction. 
Smart contracts on the blockchain are self-executing when 
agreed conditions are met. It is possible to use smart contracts 
to set constraints on selling and buying prices. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

C. Organizational Transformations 
Ahmad and Huvila studied the relationship between 
organizational change and information sharing. They found 
that if organizational changes are perceived positively, trust 
between employees and in management will increase, which 
consequently will enhance information sharing [25]. We 
believe that trust between prosumers and aggregators will also 
increase if the organizational changes are perceived 
positively. 
More 
information 
sharing 
means 
more 
transparency.  
Trust can be seen as a cornerstone of work relationships 
and a key component of organizational effectiveness between 
the prosumers and aggregators. The "cooperative" model can 
be the organizational measure for the aggregator to build trust 
[26]. 
The International Cooperative Alliance (ICA) defines the 
term "cooperative" as "an autonomous association of persons 
united voluntarily to meet their common economic, social, 
and cultural needs and aspirations through jointly owned and 
democratically controlled enterprise" [27].  
ICA has set out the collaboration principles: self-help, 
self-responsibility, democracy, equality, equity, and solidarity 
[27]. The company and the partner must also reflect four 
ethical values: honesty, openness, social responsibility, and 
caring for others. In addition, both parties need to be 
communication-based, multilevel, culturally rooted, and 
dynamic. In the smart grid ecosystem, the aggregators and 
prosumers must reflect these cooperative values when they 
want to build trust in each other [28]. Trust and sharing 
information will enhance each other's commitment and 
motivation to achieve grid flexibility. 
D. Plain Language 
Plain language initiatives emerged from the public sector's 
need to communicate better with citizens. Studies of public 
services found that many services and communications from 
the government were difficult for citizens to understand [29]. 
Language can be an instrument of inclusion but can also 
exclude, discriminate, and reinforce existing and unwanted 
power structures [30]. Plain language initiatives have sprung 
up to address this in several countries. Plain language is 
defined as "correct, clear and user-centered language in texts 
from government" [31]. It involves helping readers 
understand the text through the organization and structure, 
breaking up of complex information, simple language, and 
clear definitions of technical terms.  
As there is a clear connection between language, 
understanding and trust [5], we argue that using plain 
language is essential for the other three measures to have an 
effect. There are several approaches to developing plain 
language, and a plain language strategy should probably 
involve several of these. One example is readability indexes, 
algorithms that measure the readability of texts through word 
recognition, string lengths, etc. [32]. In addition, those 
responsible for communication with customers' need training 
in plain language writing techniques, such as guidelines for 
structuring text, and which words to choose for a given 
audience. 
There are several case studies on the effect of plain 
language, some of which are presented in [33], showing how 
different actors in the public sector have worked 
systematically and strategically to implement plain language 
in their communication with the outside world. These 
measures have led to fewer complaints and more satisfied 
service users simply because they understand the 
communication they receive. Given the confusion related to 
electricity pricing mentioned in the introduction, we argue 
that a plain language strategy from the actors in the energy 
market can be an essential factor in increasing trust.   
Further, in addition to the language in the form of words, 
visualization could also help explain complex issues and 
ideas in a business context [34]. Thus, we would also argue 
for using data-driven dashboards and visualizations to help 
users understand their energy bills and how prices are set. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper focuses on the lack of trust among consumers 
and prosumers in the energy market. The aggregator/prosumer 
model presented in Fig. 3 can become essential to the 
transition to renewable energy. Flexibility can help balance 
the grid and flatten demand curves at peak hours.  Trust is 
crucial for implementing flexibility, where an aggregator can 
take control over household consumption.  
A survey among early adopters of smart home technology 
shows that actors will meet strong barriers when getting 
consumers and prosumers on board. The lack of trust has been 
present since the deregulation of the Norwegian power market 
in 1971. The common opinion is that energy actors are more 
interested in earning money than creating the best situation for 
consumers and prosumers. Several measures need to be put in 
place to gain the trust of consumers and prosumers.  We point 
to four essential pillars of trust: regulatory measures, technical 
measures, and organizational transformations combined with 
adopting a plain language policy. These measures may help 
build the necessary trust to make flexibility work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Manu Net scheme Grant 
number MNET20/NMCS-3779 and funded through the 
Research Council of Norway Grant number 322500 with the 
project title "Cloud-based analysis and diagnosis platform for 
photovoltaic (PV) prosumers." 
 REFERENCES 
[1] M. R. Johannessen, L. Berntzen, Q. Meng, B. Vesin, T. Brekke, 
and I. Laur, "User Sentiments Towards  Smart Grid Flexibility 
- A survey of early adopters' attitude towards allowing third 
parties to control electricity use in households" 14th 
International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and 
Personalized 
Mechanisms, 
Technologies 
and 
Services 
(CENTRIC), IARIA, pp. 41-46, 2021. 
[2] M. Kaase, "Interpersonal trust, political trust and non-
institutionalised political participation in Western Europe," 
West European Politics, vol. 22(3), pp. 1–21, 1999. 
[3] O. Schilke, M. Reimann, and K. S. Cook, "Trust in Social 
Relations," Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 47, pp. 239-259, 
2021. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

[4] Nordpool Group. Euphemia public description. Single price 
coupling 
algorithm. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/globalassets/download-
center/single-day-ahead-coupling/euphemia-public-
description.pdf 2023.03.01 
[5] P. A. Paprica, K. McGrail, and M. J. Schull, Plain language 
about health data is essential for transparency and trust. The 
Conversation. October 10th 2019 [Online]. Available from: 
https://theconversation.com/plain-language-about-health-data-
is-essential-for-transparency-and-trust-123319, 2023.03.01. 
[6] European Commission. Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on 
common rules for the internal market for electricity and 
amending directive 2012/27/EU. [Online]. Available from: 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2019/944 2023.03.01. 
[7] R. Bray and B. Woodman, "Barriers to independent 
aggregators in Europe," EPG Working Paper 1901, 2019. 
[8] S. Burger, J.P. Chaves-ávila, C. Batlle, and I. Pérez-Arriaga, 
"The Value of Aggregators in Electricity Systems," Renewable 
Sustainable Energy Review, vol. 77, pp. 395–405, 2017.  
[9] Cleantech Group. Smart Grid Flexibility Markets – Entering 
an Era of Localization. April 14th, 2020. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.cleantech.com/smart-grid-flexibility-
markets-entering-an-era-of-localization/ 2023.03.01. 
[10] Smart-MLA Consortium. Project fact sheet. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://smart-mla.stimasoft.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/02/ERANetSES_SMART_MLA.docx 
2023.03.01 
[11] N. Luhman, Trust and Power, Wiley, 2017. 
[12] R. Piderit and S. Flowerday, "The risk relationship between 
trust and information sharing in automotive supply chains," 
World Congress on Internet Security (WorldCIS 2014), IEEE, 
pp. 80-85, 2014 
[13] C. Skar, S. Jaehnert, A. Tomasgard, K.T. Midthun, and M. 
Fodstad, "Norway's role as a flexibility provider in a renewable 
Europe", Centre for Sustainable Energy Studies (CenSES), 
2013. 
[14] F.  Fukuyama, Trust: the social virtues and the creation of 
prosperity. New York: The Free Press, 1995. 
[15] European Commission. Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the 
internal market for electricity. [Online]. Available from: 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2019/943 2023.03.01 
[16] T. Schittekatte, V. Deschamps, and L. Meeus, "The regulatory 
framework for independent aggregators", EUI Working Paper 
RSC 2021/53, the European University Institute, May 2021 
[17] Norwegian Ministry of Petroleum and Energy. Act no. 50 of 29 
June 1990: Act relating to the generation, conversion, 
transmission, trading, distribution and use of energy etc. (The 
Energy Act). [Online]. Available from: https://www.climate-
laws.org/geographies/norway/laws/the-energy-act-no-50-of-
1990 2023.03.01. 
[18] NVE. Høring - forslag til endringer i forskrift om kontroll av 
nettvirksomhet – tariffer 2018. (Hearing – proposal for changes 
in regulations on control of network activities – tariffs 2018)  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nve.no/om-
nve/regelverk/forskriftsendringer-pa-horing/horingforslag-til-
endringer-i-forskrift-om-kontroll-av-nettvirksomhet-tariffer-
avsluttet/ 2023.03.01 
[19] T. Langset and H. H. Nielsen. RME Rapport Nr. 6/2021 – 
National Report 2021. Norwegian Energy Regulatory 
Authority 
(NVE-RME). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://publikasjoner.nve.no/rme_rapport/2021/rme_rapport20
21_06.pdf 2023.03.01. 
[20] Fornybar Norge. 24 strømleverandører sertifisert for Trygg 
strømhandel. (24 energy providers certified for Safe electricity 
trading) 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.energinorge.no/nyheter/2021/24-
stromleverandorer-sertifisert-for-trygg-stromhandel/ 
2023.03.01. 
[21] N. Albinson, S. Balaji, and Y. Chu, "Building digital trust: 
Technology can lead the way," Deloitte Insights, 2019. 
[Online]. Available from: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/us/articles/63
20_Building-digital-trust/DI_Building-digital-trust.pdf 
2023.03.01 
[22] Olje- og energidepartementet. Forskrift om måling, avregning, 
fakturering av nett tjenester og elektrisk energi, nettselskapets 
nøytralitet mv. 1999 (Regulations on measurement, settlement, 
invoicing of network services and electrical energy, neutrality 
of the network company, etc. 1999) ( [Online] Available from: 
https://lovdata.no/dokument/SF/forskrift/1999-03-11-301 
2023.03.01 
[23] M. Lotfi, C. Monteiro, M. Shafie-khah, and J. P. S. Catalão, 
"Transition toward blockchain-based electricity trading 
markets," in Blockchain-based Smart Grids, M. Shafie-khah, 
Ed. Academic Press, pp. 43-59, 2020. 
[24] Q. Meng, L. Berntzen, B. Vesin, M. R. Johannessen, S. Opera, 
and A. Bara, "Blockchain Applications in Smart Grid – A 
Review and a Case Study" 18th European, Mediterranean, and 
Middle Eastern Conference on Information Systems (EMCIS), 
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing 437, 
Springer, pp. 130-149, 2022. 
[25] F. Ahmad and I. Huvila "Organizational changes, trust and 
information sharing: an empirical study", Aslib Journal of 
Information Management, Vol. 71(5), pp. 677-692. 2019. 
[26] UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, A Guide 
to Mutual Ownership Models. November 2011. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/s
ystem/uploads/attachment_data/file/31678/11-1401-guide-
mutual-ownership-models.pdf 2023.03.01. 
[27] International Cooperative Alliance, Cooperative identity, 
values 
& 
principles. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ica.coop/en/cooperatives/cooperative-identity 
2023.01.03 
[28] K. D. Paine. Guidelines for Measuring Trust in 
Organizations. Institute for Public Relations [Online]. 
Available from: https://instituteforpr.org/guidelines-for-
measuring-trust-in-organizations-2/, 2023.03. 
[29] B. Lutz, "Plain Language: An Important Basis of E-Democracy 
and Open Government",  Proceedings Conference for E-
democracy and Open Government, (CEDEM) 2016, Danube 
University: Krems, Austria, 2016. 
[30] S. K. Sonntag and L. Cardinal, "State traditions and Language 
Regimes: Conceptualizing Language Policy Choices," in State 
Traditions and Language regimes, S.K. Sonntag and L. 
Cardinal, Eds. McGill-Queen's University Press: Montreal & 
Kingston, pp. 3-28, 2015. 
[31] M. Kvarenes, T. Reksten, I. Stranger-Thorsen, and L Aarønæs, 
"Klar, men aldri ferdig. En praktisk veileder i klarspråksarbeid,  
(Ready, but never finished. A practical guide in plain language 
work),” Språkrådet, 2011. 
[32] M. Shardlow, "A survey of automated text simplification," 
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and 
Applications, Special Issue on Natural Language Processing, 
pp. 58-70, 2014. 
[33] M. R. Johannessen, L.  Berntzen, and A. Ødegård, "A review 
of the Norwegian plain language policy," Proceedings 16th IFIP 
WG 8.5 International Conference on Electronic Government 
(EGOV), pp. 187-198,  Springer, Cham., 2017.  
[34] H. Haapio and T. D. Barton, "Business-friendly contracting: 
how simplification and visualization can help bring it to 
practice, "Liquid Legal, pp. 371-396, Springer, Cham., 2017. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

