BIOTECHNO 2019
The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational
Systems and Biotechnologies
ISBN: 978-1-61208-717-7
June 2 - 6, 2019
Athens, Greece
BIOTECHNO 2019 Editors
Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany

BIOTECHNO 2019
Forward
The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and
Biotechnologies (BIOTECHNO 2019), held between June 02, 2019 to June 06, 2019 - Athens,
Greece, covered these three main areas: bioinformatics, biomedical technologies, and
biocomputing.
Bioinformatics deals with the system-level study of complex interactions in biosystems
providing a quantitative systemic approach to understand them and appropriate tool support
and concepts to model them. Understanding and modeling biosystems requires simulation of
biological behaviors and functions. Bioinformatics itself constitutes a vast area of research and
specialization, as many classical domains such as databases, modeling, and regular expressions
are used to represent, store, retrieve and process a huge volume of knowledge. There are
challenging aspects concerning biocomputation technologies, bioinformatics mechanisms
dealing with chemoinformatics, bioimaging, and neuroinformatics.
Biotechnology is defined as the industrial use of living organisms or biological techniques
developed through basic research. Bio-oriented technologies became very popular in various
research topics and industrial market segments. Current human mechanisms seem to offer
significant ways for improving theories, algorithms, technologies, products and systems. The
focus is driven by fundamentals in approaching and applying biotechnologies in terms of
engineering methods, special electronics, and special materials and systems. Borrowing
simplicity and performance from the real life, biodevices cover a large spectrum of areas, from
sensors, chips, and biometry to computing. One of the chief domains is represented by the
biomedical biotechnologies, from instrumentation to monitoring, from simple sensors to
integrated systems, including image processing and visualization systems. As the state-of-the-
art in all the domains enumerated in the conference topics evolve with high velocity, new
biotechnologes and biosystems become available. Their rapid integration in the real life
becomes a challenge.
Brain-computing, biocomputing, and computation biology and microbiology represent
advanced methodologies and mechanisms in approaching and understanding the challenging
behavior of life mechanisms. Using bio-ontologies, biosemantics and special processing
concepts, progress was achieved in dealing with genomics, biopharmaceutical and molecular
intelligence, in the biology and microbiology domains. The area brings a rich spectrum of
informatics paradigms, such as epidemic models, pattern classification, graph theory, or
stochastic models, to support special biocomputing applications in biomedical, genetics,
molecular and cellular biology and microbiology. While progress is achieved with a high speed,
challenges must be overcome for large-scale bio-subsystems, special genomics cases,
bionanotechnologies, drugs, or microbial propagation and immunity.

We welcomed academic, research and industry contributions. The conference had the
following tracks:

Biomedical technologies

Bioinformatics

Bioenvironment
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the BIOTECHNO 2019
technical program committee, as well as all the reviewers. The creation of such a high quality
conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also kindly
thank all the authors who dedicated much of their time and effort to contribute to BIOTECHNO
2019. We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program consisted
of top quality contributions.
We also thank the members of the BIOTECHNO 2019 organizing committee for their help in
handling the logistics and for their work that made this professional meeting a success.
We hope that BIOTECHNO 2019 was a successful international forum for the exchange of
ideas and results between academia and industry and to promote further progress in the areas
of bioinformatics, biocomputational systems and biotechnologies. We also hope that Athens,
Greece provided a pleasant environment during the conference and everyone saved some time
to enjoy the historic charm of the city.
BIOTECHNO 2019 Chairs
BIOTECHNO Steering Committee
Gilles Bernot, University Nice Sophia Antipolis, France
Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany
Hesham H. Ali, University of Nebraska at Omaha, USA
Erliang Zeng, University of Iowa, USA
Y-h. Taguchi, Chuo University, Japan
Hunter Moseley, University of Kentucky, USA
Magnus Bordewich, Durham University, UK
BIOTECHNO Industry/Research Advisory Committee
Steffen Heber, North Carolina State University, USA
Alexandru Floares, SAIA Institute, Romania

BIOTECHNO 2019
Committee
BIOTECHNO Steering Committee
Gilles Bernot, University Nice Sophia Antipolis, France
Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany
Hesham H. Ali, University of Nebraska at Omaha, USA
Erliang Zeng, University of Iowa, USA
Y-h. Taguchi, Chuo University, Japan
Hunter Moseley, University of Kentucky, USA
Magnus Bordewich, Durham University, UK
BIOTECHNO Industry/Research Advisory Committee
Steffen Heber, North Carolina State University, USA
Alexandru Floares, SAIA Institute, Romania
BIOTECHNO 2019 Technical Program Committee
Antonino Abbruzzo, Università degli Studi di Palermo, Italy
Hesham H. Ali, University of Nebraska at Omaha, USA
Joel P. Arrais, University of Coimbra, Portugal
Erich J. Baker, Baylor University, USA
Yoseph Bar-Cohen, Electroactive Technologies / NDEAA Lab - Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL),
USA
Andrés Becerra Sandoval, Independent researcher, Colombia
Vincenzo Belcastro, Philip Morris International, Neuchatel, Switzerland
Kais Belwafi, King Saud University, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Boubaker Ben Ali, University of Bordeaux, France / University of Manouba, Tunisia
Gilles Bernot, University Nice Sophia Antipolis, France
Razvan Bocu, Transilvania University of Brasov, Romania
Magnus Bordewich, Durham University, UK
Klaus Brinker, Hamm-Lippstadt University of Applied Sciences, Germany
Rita Casadio, University of Bologna, Italy
Matthias Chung, Virginia Tech, USA
Peter Clote, Boston College, USA
Jean-Paul Comet, University Nice Sophia Antipolis, France
Maria Evelina Fantacci, University of Pisa, Italy
Alexandru Floares, SAIA Institute, Romania
Sebastian Fudickar, University of Oldenburg, Germany
Said Gaci, Sonatrach, Algeria
Xin Gao, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia
Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany
Hamed Ghaffari, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA

Radu Grosu, Vienna University of Technology, Austria
Steffen Heber, North Carolina State University, USA
Asier Ibeas, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain
Sohei Ito, National Fisheries University, Japan
Filip Jagodzinski, Western Washington University, USA
Xiaoqian Jiang, UC San Diego, USA
Nicolas Kemper Valverde, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico
Attila Kertesz-Farkas, National Research University - Higher School of Economics (HSE),
Moscow, Russia
Valentinas Klevas, Lithuanian Energy Institute, Lithuania
Jan Kubicek, VSB-Technical University of Ostrava, Czech Republic
Man-Kee Lam, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS, Malaysia
Antonio LaTorre, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
Cedric Lhoussaine, lab CRIStAL | University Lille 1, France
Chen Li, Monash University - Melbourne, Australia
Yiheng Liang, Bridgewater State University, USA
Giancarlo Mauri, University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy
Chilukuri K. Mohan, Syracuse University, USA
José Manuel Molina López, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain
Hunter Moseley, University of Kentucky, USA
Constantin Paleologu, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania
Marco Pellegrini, Institute of Informatics and Telematics of CNR, Italy
Marianna Pensky, University of Central Florida, USA
Leif Peterson, Houston Methodist Research Institute, USA
Jürgen Pilz, Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt | Institut für Statistik, Austria
Yann Ponty, CNRS Ecole Polytechnique / Inria Saclay, France
Bhanu Rekepalli, BioTeam, USA
Vincent Rodin, University of Brest (UBO), France
Ulrich Rueckert, Bielefeld University, Germany
J. Cristian Salgado Herrera, University of Chile, Chile
Thomas Schmid, Universität Leipzig, Germany
Andrew Schumann, University of Information Technology and Management in Rzeszow, Poland
Jaime Seguel, University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez, Puerto Rico
Patrick Siarry, Université Paris-Est Créteil, France
Christine Sinoquet, University of Nantes, France
Piotr Szczepaniak, Lodz University of Technology, Poland
Y-h. Taguchi, Chuo University, Japan
Bensellak Taoufik, ENSA of Tangier, System and Data Engineering Team (SDET), Morocco / IIB,
UoL, Liverpool, UK
Arkadiusz Tomczyk, Lodz University of Technology | Institute of Information Technology, Poland
Sophia Tsoka, King's College London, UK
Marcel Turcotte, School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS), Ottawa, Canada
Bing Wang, Anhui University of Technology, China
Yanshan Wang, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, USA

Yiwen Wang, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
Bin Xue, University of South Florida, USA
Gökçen Firdevs Yücel, Istanbul Aydin University, Turkey
Vera Zasúlich, Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana, Colombia
Erliang Zeng, University of Iowa, USA
Qiang Zhu, The University of Michigan, Dearborn, USA

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Nichrome Electrode Technology for Cell Culture Monitoring
Andrzej Kociubinski, Dawid Zarzeczny, Maciej Szypulski, Tomasz Lizak, Krzysztof Muzyka, Monika Prendecka,
Dominika Pigon, and Teresa Malecka-Massalska
1
Combination of Tsallis Entropy and Higutch Fractal Dimension for Quantifying Changes in EEG signals in
Alzheimer’s Disease
Apostolos C. Tsolakis, Olga Kapetanou, George Petsos, Ioannis Nikolaidis, and Elias C. Aifantis
3
Parallel Signal Acquisition by an Embedded System for Monitoring and Analysing Multimodal Signals of
Aliveness and Non-aliveness of Biological Objects
Oliver Czepulowski, Stefan Weidemann, and Anett Bailleu
8
Using Data Mining to Investigate Correlation between Traditional Chinese Medicine Body Constitution and
Postnatal Problems
Winnie W. M. Lam, Rebecca W. Y. Lee, and Regina W. S. Sit
13
Multiclass Disease Predictions Based on Integrated Clinical and Genomics Datasets
Moeez Masroor Subhani and Ashiq Anjum
20
A Mathematical Model for Predator–Prey Ecosystems Facing Climate Changes
Katsumi Sakata, Toshiyuki Saito, Hajime Ohyanagi, and Setsuko Komatsu
28
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Nichrome Electrode Technology for Cell Culture Monitoring 
 
Andrzej Kociubiński, Dawid Zarzeczny,  
Maciej Szypulski, Tomasz Lizak, Krzysztof Muzyka 
Institute of Electronics and Information Technology 
Lublin University of Technology 
Lublin, Poland 
e-mail: akociub@semiconductor.pl, 
dawid.adrian.zarzeczny@gmail.com, 
szypulski.maciej@gmail.com, tomasz@lizak.pl, 
krzysztof.muzyka.1990@gmail.com 
Monika Prendecka, Dominika Pigoń,  
Teresa Małecka-Massalska 
Chair and Department of Human Physiology 
Medical University of Lublin 
Lublin, Poland 
e-mail: monika.prendecka@umlub.pl, 
dominika.pigon@umlub.pl,  
teresa.malecka-massalska@umlub.pl
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this work was to present a method of 
tissue culture research by measuring the impedance of cells 
cultured in the presence of nichrome. For this purpose, the 
Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS) system was 
used with the substrate consisting of nichrome electrode 
arrays. The electrodes were made using a thin film magnetron 
sputtering. In the experimental part, the culture of cells of 
mouse fibroblasts on the prepared substrate was performed. 
Keywords-BioMEMS; ECIS; nichrome (NiCr); thin film. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A local heating of biological substances in Biomedical  
MicroElectroMechanical Systems (BioMEMS) devices can 
be performed using a contact or noncontact method. For the 
contact method, the heating element is mainly fabricated 
using 
thin 
film 
deposition 
techniques 
(e.g., thermal 
evaporation or magnetron sputtering). The selected material 
should be biocompatible and should not react with the active 
substance. Due to the ability to withstand high temperatures, 
good chemical stability and biocompatibility, platinum is the 
most commonly used material for contact heating [1]. 
However, alternative metals are used for many biomedical 
applications, in particular for disposable structures, or for 
short-term applications. Some other metals offer different 
chemical, physical and electrical properties than platinum, 
which is also an expensive material. In biomedical 
microdevices, the heaters are also made of nickel, aluminum, 
tungsten, silver alloys, aluminum alloys and Indium-Tin 
Oxide (ITO) [2]. However, one of the most interesting 
materials is nichrome (Ni-Cr 80/20 wt. %), due to its high 
stability of electrical properties, high resistivity, low 
Temperature Coefficient of Resistance (TCR), adequate 
price and technological simplicity [3][4].  
The main problem of the choice of material for the heater 
in biomedical applications is the assessment of the influence 
of its presence on the cells or substances tested [5]. The aim 
of this work is the presentation of the extension of the 
Electric 
Cell-substrate 
Impedance 
Sensing 
(ECIS) 
method [6] to study the activities of cells grown in tissue 
culture in the presence of nichrome. 
The paper consists of 4 sections. Section II describes the 
fabrication approach of the nichrome electrode array. The 
results of monitoring the cells behavior in tissue culture are 
presented in Section III. We conclude the work in Section 
IV. 
II. 
TECHNOLOGY OF NICHROME ELECTRODE ARRAY 
The original ECIS method was used for the first time in 
1984 by competing with microscopic methods. This 
impedance-based cell monitoring technology uses sterile, 
disposable arrays of gold electrodes placed on a 
biocompatible substrate [7][8]. Based on standard 8 well 
arrays, a mask was designed with eight electrodes located on 
a single substrate to work with ECIS instruments. Single 
electrodes were designed as comb capacitors in which the 
width of a single finger was 200μm. 
A 2mm thick polycarbonate was used as the substrate. The 
key step in the sequence of technological processes was the 
fabrication of the metallization layer by magnetron 
sputtering using the Kurt J. Lesker NANO 36™ deposition 
tool. The next step was to obtain shapes in the lithography 
process and to etch the nichrome layer. Special polystyrene 
wells were placed on the electrodes and fixed using 
biocompatible silicone (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  Polycarbonate substrate with 8 wells and electrodes made of 
nichrome 
Each of the 8 wells with a volume of 600μL and a 
substrate area of 0.8cm2 contains a single comb active 
electrode. For the whole setup to be sterile, ready-made 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

substrates with attached wells are subjected to bactericidal 
ultraviolet radiation. 
In the experiment, cells of mouse fibroblast cell line, - 
NCTC clone 929 [L cell, L-929, derivative of Strain L] 
(ATCC® CCL-1™) derived from ATCC organization were 
cultured according to the instruction manual in complete 
Eagle MEM medium (Sigma Aldrich) supplemented with 
10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) Good HI, in an Galaxy 
170R incubator, under controlled growth conditions, 
constant humidity and air saturation of 5% CO2. After 
(approx. 7–14 days) the culture reached at least 75% 
confluence, the next stage was culturing the cells on the 
tested nichrome electrode array. Inoculation of arrays was 
carried out by 300 microliters per well of cell (L929) 
suspension at ~1.2×105cell/ml. Every cell type has its 
characteristic adhesion and growth curve that can be 
manipulated by, e.g., varying seeding density or other stimuli 
like concentration of substances in the medium [9]. 
III. 
RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT 
During the experiment, it was found that the resistance 
increased, reaching 4750 ohms, during the initial 10 hours of 
cells culturing (Figure 2). This indicates good cell viability 
and proliferative potential. The following drop in resistance 
indicates that the nichrome electrode used in the system 
makes it difficult to achieve stabilization in culture. After the 
time of 20 hours, resistance begins to fall, which should be 
interpreted as a progressive cell death. However, it should be 
noted that despite the difficulties, the fibroblast cells used in 
the study, as a result, maintain the growth and proliferation 
process (as evidenced by a stable resistance value of over 
2500 ohms) in the environment of the nichrome electrode.  
 
Figure 2.  Resistance response measured by an ECIS sensor array at 4kHz. 
 
Figure 3.  Capacitance response measured by an ECIS sensor array at 
64kHz. 
Similar fluctuation was observed for the high-frequency 
capacitance. The resistance represents the quality and 
function of the cell barrier and therefore takes into 
consideration the resistance towards para- and trans-cellular 
current flow. Capacitance provides an overall measure of 
electrode coverage [10]. The decrease in capacitance (Figure 
3) reached during the initial 10 hours indicates fibroblast cell 
proliferation while the increase in the resistance should be 
interpreted as cell proliferation and for that matter both 
values complement each other and should be analyzed in 
parallel as a standard. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, we demonstrated that the nichrome 
electrode had a significant effect on the resistance and 
capacitance of L929 cell line but did not kill them, that 
indicates the possibility to use the examined medium. 
However, as the studies have been carried out on cells 
characterized by stable growth, it is necessary to test the 
nichrome electrode for other types of cells, including 
cancerous ones. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Trau et al., “Genotyping on a Complementary Metal Oxide 
Semiconductor Silicon Polymerase Chain Reaction Chip with 
Integrated DNA Microarray,” Analytical Chemistry, 2002, 
vol. 74, pp. 3168–3173. 
[2] K. Scholten and E. Meng, “Materials for microfabricated 
implantable devices: a review,” Lab on a Chip, 2015, vol. 15, 
pp. 4256–4272. 
[3] J. Rölke, “Nichrome Thin Film Technology and its 
Application,” ElectroComponent Science and Technology, 
1981, vol. 9, pp. 51–57. 
[4] R. Kilaru, Z. Celik-Butler, D. P. Butler, and I. E. Gonenli, 
“NiCr MEMS Tactile Sensors Embedded in Polyimide 
Toward Smart Skin,” Journal of Microelectromechanical 
Systems, 2013, vol. 22, pp. 349–355. 
[5] S. S. Stensaas and L. J. Stensaas, “Histopathological 
evaluation of materials implanted in the cerebral cortex,” Acta 
Neuropathologica, 1978, vol. 41, pp. 145–155. 
[6] I. Giaever and C. R. Keese, “A morphological biosensor for 
mammalian cells,” Nature, 1993, vol. 366, pp. 591–592. 
[7] I. Giaever and C. R. Keese, “Monitoring fibroblast behavior 
in tissue culture with an applied electric field,” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 1984, vol. 81, pp. 3761–3764. 
[8] ECIS Cell-based Assays from Applied BioPhysics. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.biophysics.com 
[retrieved: 
04.2019]. 
[9] M. Prendecka et al. “Effect of exopolysaccharide from 
Ganoderma applanatum on the electrical properties of mouse 
fibroblast cells line L929 culture using an electric cell-
substrate impedance sensing (ECIS) – Preliminary study,” 
Annals of Agricultural and Environmental Medicine, 2016, 
vol. 23, pp. 280–284. 
[10] R. Szulcek, H. J. Bogaard, and G. P. van Nieuw Amerongen, 
“Electric 
Cell-substrate 
Impedance 
Sensing 
for 
the 
Quantification of Endothelial Proliferation, Barrier Function, 
and Motility,” Journal of Visualized Experiments, 2014, 
vol. 85, pp. e51300-1–e51300-12. 
 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Combination of Tsallis Entropy and Higutchi Fractal Dimension for Quantifying
Changes in EEG signals in Alzheimer’s Disease
Apostolos C. Tsolakis2, Olga Kapetanou1, George Petsos1, Ioannis Nikolaidis1, Elias C. Aifantis1
1Laboratory of Mechanics and Materials, School of Civil Engineering
2Laboratory of Materials for Electrotechnics, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Faculty of Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Thessaloniki, Greece
email: aptsolak@gmail.com, olgasemfe@hotmail.com, gpetsos@physics.auth.gr, iwavvns@gmail.com,
mom@mom.gen.auth.gr
Abstract—Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is one of the challenges of
modern medicine since no cure has been found yet, the
scientific community still does not fully understand the
pathogenesis behind it, and any interventions found can delay
the progress for only a limited amount of time. Over the years,
research has shifted from curing the disease to understanding
the mechanisms behind it as well as finding tools that will
speed up diagnosis many years before its clinical manifestation,
when the decline begins. One of the many promising tools that
have
been
explored
towards
that
direction
is
the
electroencephalogram (EEG), which holds many different
measures that can be used as biomarkers for early diagnosis
and differentiation from other neurodegenerative disorders by
exploiting various bio-informatics techniques. Literature has
presented
a
high correlation
between EEG signals and
structural abnormalities in AD. However, there is no analysis
that can provide a clear result that binds the two and leads to
early diagnosis, and very few studies have explored early stages
of AD, such as Mild Cognitive Impairment. Moreover, most of
the
approaches
applied
do
not
adopt
a
multimodal
methodology that combines different analysis methods. To that
end, the present work proposes the combination of Tsallis
Entropy and Higuchi Fractal Dimension, in a common
framework for either the entire EEG or on each frequency
separately, to examine the performance in Mild Cognitive
Impairment (MCI) and AD subjects.
Keywords- Alzheimer’s Disease; Mild Cognitive Impairment,
EEG; Tsallis Entropy; Higuchi Fractal Dimension.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As stated by the International Alzheimer’s Association
[1], Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is the most common form of
dementia. With 60% to 80% of dementia cases being
diagnosed as AD, which practically means that one out of ten
people over 65 has AD, it is one of the most severe diseases
that affect mainly elderly people and is expected to affect
roughly 131 million people by 2050. Although medicine and
technology breakthroughs follow one after another, the
mortality of AD keeps rising. From 2000 to 2014, an
increase of 89% has been observed. To that end, an
enormous amount of resources have been employed not only
to postpone the progression of AD (which is still currently
the only successful course of action) but to understand and
thoroughly analyse the processes responsible for the brain
degradation. As depicted in Figure 1, brain degradation
originating from AD has severe effects both in terms of
quality and volume.
As research has failed so far to grasp a cure for AD and
solutions available only target symptoms and not the cause
of
the
disease
[2],
effort
has
shifted
towards
better
understating of the initial mechanisms that cause cognitive
decline that could lead to an early diagnosis, especially at
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) level, which is considered
a precursor stage of AD [3]. An early diagnosis may
contribute not only to develop more effective interventions
that could delay the progress or even inhibit it entirely but
could also prevent some of the symptoms to evolve when
dealt with at an early stage.
Towards the direction of early diagnosis, a handful of
different methodologies have been proposed, some of which
are invasive (i.e., blood) and dangerous (i.e., Cerebrospinal
Fluid – CSF), others are expensive (i.e., Magnetic Resonance
Imaging
–
MRI,
Single-Photon
Emission
Computed
Tomography – SPECT, or Positron Emission Tomography -
PET), and with some still eluding significant results [4]. In
contrast with these, a non-invasive, low-cost and with high
resolution
in
terms
of
brain
activity
tool
is
the
electroencephalogram (EEG).
A.
EEG and AD
With research going back a few decades [5][6],
many
studies have been focused on researching the use of EEG in
AD, revealing certain commonly agreed features and some
other somewhat controversial [7]. Τhe most interesting 
features that are commonly agreed upon in the literature
regarding EEG and AD can be summarized as follows [8]-
[11]: a) Overall retardation of specific rhythms, in particular,
the observations so far present an increase in delta (0.1 - 4
Hz) and theta (4 – 8 Hz) activities and decrease in alpha (8 –
13 Hz) and beta (13 – 30 Hz) activities. Earliest changes are
an increase in theta and a decrease in beta activities,
followed by a decrease in alpha, while delta increases later
during the progress of the disease. This is supported by the
fact that patients with severe dementia exhibit a decrease in
alpha and an increase in delta activity, whereas patients with
mild dementia show a decrease in beta and an increase in
theta activity, b) decreased complexity, and c) decreased
coherence in general and among different brain regions.
From a topographic perspective, observations indicate that
slow activity is prominent in the left temporal area of AD
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

patients, whereas differences between pre-senile patients and
healthy controls are detected in the right posterior temporal
area. Most significant differences between senile patients and
the controls are found in the midfrontal and anterior frontal
lobes bilaterally.
When evaluating complexity, significant effort has been
focused on non-linear dynamics [12], under the assumption
that EEG signals are generated by nonlinear deterministic
processes with nonlinear coupling interactions between
neurons. Studies employing such measures have found that
AD
patients
have
reduced
values
of
the
correlation
dimension (D2) in the occipital EEG compared with those of
healthy subjects, and with probable AD subjects [13]-[16]. In
addition, it has been highlighted that AD patients exhibit
reduced spatiotemporal brain activity in comparison with
that in healthy controls [17], and in some cases, the former
subjects are characterized by specific patterns of dysfunction
in dementia [18].
Investing in the analysis of EEG complexity, a lot of
novel biomarkers have been extracted from non-linear
approaches (e.g., entropies, fractality, lacunarity) towards
providing the necessary methods for accurate and early
diagnosis of AD. This study is focused on two of them that
hold promising potential and intends to combine them into a
single biomarker for the intended purpose.
The manuscript is structured as follows: Section I
summarizes the related work on the subjects discussed,
whereas Section II presents the methodology designed to
address the identified challenges. Section III describes in
detail the dataset selected, and finally Section IV concludes
this work with some initial findings.
II.
METHODOLOGY
There are a lot of different complexity measures that
have been employed in EEG signal analysis for many
diseases including AD [19][20]. Two of them that have been
found to hold much potential when used individually [21] are
the Tsallis Entropy and the Higuchi Fractal Dimension.
A.
Tsallis Entropy
The Tsallis Entropy (TE) [22] has been widely used in
the analysis of EEG signals for over two decades now [23],
with work on AD starting somewhere in between [24]. In
multiple occasions, TE has been introduced as a possible
biomarker for differentiating AD from Healthy and even
MCI subjects [21][25][26].
Given a discrete set of probabilities {pi} with the
condition ∑pi =1, and q any real number, then the Tsallis
Entropy is defined as:

)1
(
)
(
1


 


q
p
p
k
i
q
i
i
q


B.
Higuchi Fractal Dimension
The Fractal Dimension (FD) as a nonlinear approach for
analyzing EEG signal complexity in AD was introduced
around the same time as the introduction of the TE [27]. By
using it as an index of irregularity of a time series, thus
evaluating time series with non-periodic and turbulent
behavior [28], FD becomes a very suitable tool for EEG
waveforms.
Specifically
in
AD,
FD
has
been
found
significantly lower in AD subjects when compared with
healthy individuals [14][29][30]. As the basic FD can be
quite processing-intense, the Higuchi Fractal Dimension
(HFD) [31] has been introduced as a fast and efficient
computational method that is able to successfully and
accurately estimate the dimension also for segments shorter
than 250 ms, thus enabling the study of brief EEG events and
the identification of behavioral variations with a good
temporal resolution [32][33].
For a ܰ-sample EEG data sequence (1), (2), . . . ,ݔ(ܰ),
the data is first divided into a ݇-length sub data set as:

] )
[
2 ),..., (
), (
), (
(
:
k
k
m
N
x m
k
x m
k
m x m
x
xm
k




 
where [ ] is Gauss’ notation, ݇ is constant, and
݉=1,2,…,݇. The length (݇) for each sub data set is then
computed as:





















]
/)
[(
1
)
/)
(
1
(
|]
)1
(
(
)
(
|
[
)
(
k
m
N
i
m
k
k
m
N
N
k
i
x m
ik
m
x
k
L


The mean of Lm(k) is then computed to find the HFD for
the data as:





K
M
Lm k
K
1
m
( )
1
L (k)


In order to calculate the HFD, a least-squares linear best-
fitting procedure as the angular coefficient of the linear
regression of the log-log graph of <Lm(k)> ~ k−HFD is
applied.
C.
Complexity Measures Combination
As both of these measures have been tried individually in
the analysis of EEG signals for AD diagnosis and are
presenting
rather
promising
results
(sensitivity
and
specificity more than 90% when comparing only AD and
normal subjects), the purpose of this study is to present an
approach that will also focus on MCI stage, exploring not
only the effect of these complexity measures individually but
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 1.
Whole EEG probability density functions: (a) Normal, (b) MCI and (c) probable AD subjects.
also combine them in formulating a new biomarker that is
based on both for the indented purposes, as similarly
suggested by [34] for depression. By employing Support
Vector Machine algorithms after extracting features from
applying TE and HFD on both the entire EEG bandwidth and
each channel separately, we hypothesize that it will lead to
enhanced performance in diagnosing and differentiating
normal, MCI, and probable AD subjects.
As most of the literature suggests changes of EEG signals
on the frontal and temporal brain regions, initially only
specific channels have been examined, namely Fp1, Fp2, F3,
F4, F7, F8, T3, T4, T5, T6, C3, and T4. Since it is suggested
that both MCI and AD have a different effect on the four
main rhythms (delta, theta, alpha, and beta), these are also
evaluated separately to identify any distinguished alterations
on the proposed metrics.
The analysis of the EEG signals was performed using
Python language and various open source libraries with the
main ones being MNE (Minimum Norm Estimates) [35] and
SciPy.
III.
DATASET
This study is currently performed on EEG samples
collected from a 10-20 electrode system placement [34], over
100 subjects (30 healthy, 16 probable AD, and 54 MCI) from
an EEG setup with 21 electrodes, and in particular a NIHON
KOHDEN Neurofax JE-921A, digitized and analysed with
Neurofax EEG-1200.
Based on the available signals, the study aims to explore
the potential of diagnosing and differentiating AD, starting
from the initial stages of MCI.
All of the subjects were examined and diagnosed by
experts at the Greek Association of AD and Related
Disorders. A battery of neuro-psychometric tests has also
been provided to evaluate future findings better.
The EEG signals were collected following the 10-20
placement system (Fp1, Fp2, F3, F4, C3, C4, P3, P4, O1, O2,
F7, F8, T3, T4, T5, T6, Fz, Cz, Pz, A1, A2) [36] at 500Hz.
The input impedance was set to Z < 10kΩ. The protocol used 
for the acquisition of the EEG signals refers to resting stage
and lasts for 10 minutes with 5 minutes eyes closed and 5
minutes eyes open. An one minute window was used during
eyes closed for the analysis of the EEG signals.
Low and high band pass filters have been applied to
remove any artifacts prior to analysis, including a filter on
50Hz for noise from electrical equipment, whereas specific
zone band filters were applied to retrieve the different EEG
rhythms.
Finally, for calculating Tsallis Entropy, the probability
density function was found and normalised for every
examined signal.
IV.
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
Initial findings of a first uniform sample from all three
groups/classes (Healthy/Normal, MCI and probable AD)
indicate significant changes between Healthy Vs. (probable)
AD, and MCI Vs. AD, but only mild ones between Healthy
Vs. MCI, even from the fundamental comparison of the
Probability Density Functions (PDF), as can be observed in
Figure 1.
By calculating the TE and HFD for each electrode and
the different basic bands, for all three classes we have so far
identified that it is extremely difficult for TEq and HFD
(with the configuration parameters explored) individually to
provide valuable insight for the differentiation between
Normal/Healthy, MCI and AD subjects (Figures 2 and 3).
Nevertheless, certain characteristics are in line with the
literature, and thus more elaborated research is required.
Figure 2.
EEG Tsallis Entropy
Figure 3.
EEG Higuchi Fractal Dimension
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

As the presented work is an ongoing research endeavour,
current and future steps involve the complete analysis of the
subjects’ pool with SVM and the extraction of the proper
features (electrodes and bands) for maximising the accuracy
of the suggested methodology.
Additional analysis of the signals is required in order to
be able to provide more clear results, as well as applying
additional machine learning algorithms towards evaluating
the fusion of TE and HFD in a common biomarker for early
diagnosis of both MCI and AD. Currently, a set of 8 subjects
from each class have been used to train the models and its
accuracy is being evaluated to the remaining subjects. To
further enhance the reach of the analysis, the presented work
will also be used for evaluating signals from a 256 electrodes
set up that has many additional capabilities [14].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study is co-financed by the European Union and
Greek
national
funds
through
the
National
Strategic
Reference Framework (NSRF) 2014-2020, under the call
Researchers' Support with Emphasis on Young Researchers
“ΕΔΒΜ34”. We would also like to show our gratitude to the 
Greek Association of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related
Disorders (Alzheimer Hellas) [37] for providing us with the
EEG samples and the neuro-psychometric tests.
REFERENCES
[1]
International Alzheimer’s Association. [Online]. Available
from: https://www.alz.org/. Last Accessed 2019.04.06.
[2]
A. Kumar and A. Singh, “A review on Alzheimer's disease
pathophysiology
and
its
management:
an
update,”
Pharmacological Reports, vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 195-203, 2015,
doi: 10.1016/j.pharep.2014.09.004.
[3]
R. C. Petersen et al., “Practice guideline update summary:
Mild
cognitive
impairment:
Report
of
the
Guideline
Development,
Dissemination,
and
Implementation
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology,”
Neurology,
vol.
90,
no.
3,
pp.
126-135,
2018,
doi:
10.1212/WNL.0000000000004826.
[4]
Κ. Blennow and H. Zetterberg, “Biomarkers for Alzheimer's 
disease: current status and prospects for the future,” Journal of
internal medicine, vol. 284, no. 6, pp. 643-663, 2018, doi:
10.1111/joim.12816.
[5]
H. Berger, “On the electroencephalogram of man,” Twelfth
report, Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr, vol. 106, pp.165-187, 1937.
[6]
H. Wiener and D. B. Schuster, “The electroencephalogram in
dementia: some preliminary observations and correlations,”
Electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 479-488, 1956, doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(56)90014-
1.
[7]
J. Jeong, “EEG dynamics in patients with Alzheimer's
disease,” Clinical neurophysiology, vol. 115, no. 7, pp. 1490-
1505, 2004, doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2004.01.001.
[8]
J. Dauwels, F. Vialatte, and A. Cichocki, "Diagnosis of
Alzheimer's disease
from EEG signals:
where are we
standing?," Current Alzheimer Research, vol.
7, no. 6, pp.
487-505, 2010, doi: 10.2174/156720510792231720.
[9]
A. Alberdi, A. Aztiria, and A. Basarab, "On the early
diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease from multimodal signals: A
survey," Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 71, pp. 1-29,
2016, doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2016.06.003.
[10] N. Houmani et al., “Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease with
Electroencephalography in a differential framework,” PloS
one,
vol.
13,
no.
3,
p.e0193607,
2018,
doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0193607.
[11] A. Tsolaki, D. Kazis, I. Kompatsiaris, V. Kosmidou, and M.
Tsolaki, “Electroencephalogram and Alzheimer’s disease:
clinical and research approaches,” International Journal of
Alzheimer’s Disease, 2014, doi: 10.1155/2014/349249.
[12] J. Jeong, “Nonlinear dynamics of EEG in Alzheimer’s
disease,” Drug development research, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 57-
66, 2002, doi: 10.1002/ddr.10061.
[13] M. J. Woyshville and J. R. Calabrese, “Quantification of
occipital EEG changes in Alzheimer’s disease utilizing a new
metric: the fractal dimension,” Biological Psychiatry, vol.35,
no.6, pp. 381–7, 1994, doi: 10.1016/0006-3223(94)90004-3.
[14] C. Besthorn et al., “Discrimination of Alzheimer’s disease
and normal aging by EEG data,” Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 241–8, 1997,
doi: 10.1016/S0013-4694(97)96562-7.
[15] J. Jeong, S. Y. Kim, and S. H. Han, “Non-linear dynamical
analysis of the EEG in Alzheimer’s disease with optimal
embedding dimension,” Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, vol. 106,
no.3, pp. 220-8, 1998, doi:
10.1016/S0013-4694(97)00079-5.
[16] B. Jelles, J. H. Van Birgelen, J. P. J. Slaets, R. E. M. Hekster,
E. J. Jonkman, and C. J. Stam, “Decrease of non-linear
structure in the EEG of Alzheimer patients compared to
healthy controls,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 110, no. 7,
pp. 1159-1167, 1999, doi: 10.1016/S1388-2457(99)00013-9.
[17] T.
Yagyu
et
al.,
“Global
dimensional
complexity
of
multichannel EEG in mild Alzheimer’s disease and age-
matched cohorts,” Dementia and geriatric cognitive disorders,
vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 343-7, 1997, doi: 10.1159/000106653
[18] C. J. Stam, B. Jelles, H. A. Achtereekte, S. A. Rombouts, J. P.
Slaets, and R.W. Keunen, “Investigation of EEG non-linearity
in
dementia
and
Parkinson’s
disease,”
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, vol.
95,
no.
5,
pp.
309-317,
1995,
doi:
10.1016/0013-
4694(95)00147-Q.
[19] Ν. Kulkarni and V. Bairagi, “EEG-based Diagnosis of 
Alzheimer Disease: A Review and Novel Approaches for
Feature Extraction and Classification Techniques,” Academic
Press, 2018, doi: 10.1016/C2017-0-00543-8.
[20] A. Horvath, A. Szucs, G. Csukly, A. Sakovics, G. Stefanics,
and A. Kamondi, “EEG and ERP biomarkers of Alzheimer’s
disease: a critical review,” Front Biosci (Landmark Ed), vol.
23, pp. 183-220, 2018.
[21] A. H. H. Al-Nuaimi, E. Jammeh, L. Sun, and E. Ifeachor,
“Complexity
Measures
for
Quantifying
Changes
in
Electroencephalogram in Alzheimer’s Disease,” Complexity,
2018, doi: 10.1155/2018/8915079.
[22] C. Tsallis, “Possible generalization of Boltzmann-Gibbs
statistics,” Journal of statistical physics, vol. 52, no. 1-2, pp.
479-487, 1988, doi: 10.1007/BF01016429.
[23] L. G. Gamero, A. Plastino, and M. E. Torres, “Wavelet
analysis and nonlinear dynamics in a nonextensive setting,”
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol.
246, no. 3-4, pp. 487-509, 1997, doi: 10.1016/S0378-
4371(97)00367-1.
[24] N. V. Thakor and S. Tong, “Advances in quantitative
electroencephalogram analysis methods,” Annual Review of
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 6, pp. 453-495, 2004, doi:
10.1146/annurev.bioeng.5.040202.121601.
[25] P.
Zhao,
P. Van-Eetvelt, C.
Goh,
N.
Hudson, S.
Wimalaratna, and E. C. Ifeachor, "Characterization of EEGs
in Alzheimer's disease using information theoretic methods,"
In Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 29th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE (EMBS 2007), pp.
5127-5131, 2007, IEEE, doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4353494.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

[26] T. J. De Bock et al., “Early detection of Alzheimer's disease
using nonlinear analysis of EEG via Tsallis entropy,” In
Biomedical Sciences and Engineering Conference (BSEC),
pp. 1-4, 2010, IEEE, doi: 10.1109/BSEC.2010.5510813.
[27] M. J. Woyshville and J. R. Calabrese, “Quantification of
occipital EEG changes in Alzheimer's disease utilizing a new
metric: the fractal dimension,” Biological Psychiatry, vol. 35,
no. 6, pp.381-387, 1994, doi: 10.1016/0006-3223(94)90004-3.
[28] B. B. Mandelbrot, “Fractals: Form, Chance and Dimension,”
New York: WH Freeman, 1979.
[29] G. Henderson et al., “Development and assessment of
methods
for
detecting
dementia
using
the
human
electroencephalogram,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1557-1568, 2006, doi:
10.1109/TBME.2006.878067.
[30] T. Staudinger and R. Polikar, “Analysis of complexity based
EEG features for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease,” In
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC, 2011
Annual International Conference of the IEEE pp. 2033-2036,
2011, IEEE, doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6090374.
[31] T. Higuchi, “Approach to an irregular time series on the basis
of the fractal theory,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, vol.
31,
no.
2,
pp.
277-283,
1988,
doi:
10.1016/0167-
2789(88)90081-4.
[32] A. Accardo, M. Affinito, M. Carrozzi, and F. Bouquet, “Use
of
the
fractal
dimension
for
the
analysis
of
electroencephalographic time series,” Biological Cybernetics,
vol.
77,
no.
5,
pp.
339-350,
1997,
doi:
10.1007/s004220050394.
[33] F.
M.
Smits
et
al.,
“Electroencephalographic
fractal
dimension in healthy ageing and Alzheimer’s disease,” PloS
one,
vol. 11,
no.
2,
pp. 1-16,
e0149587,
2016, doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0149587.
[34] M. Cukic et al., “EEG machine learning with Higuchi fractal
dimension and Sample Entropy as features for successful
detection
of
depression,”
[Online].
Available
from:
https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1803/1803.05985.pdf.
Last
Accessed: 2019.04.20.
[35] A. Gramfort et al., “MEG and EEG data analysis with MNE-
Python”, Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 7, 2013, ISSN 1662-
453X
[36] H. H. Jasper, “The ten-twenty electrode system of the
International
Federation”,
Electroencephalography
and
clinical neurophysiology, vol. 10, pp. 371-375, 1958, doi:
10.1016/0013-4694(58)90053-1.
[37] Greek Association of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related
Disorders (Alzheimer Hellas). [Online]. Available from:
http://www.alzheimer-hellas.gr. Last Accessed: 2019.04.20.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Parallel Signal Acquisition by an Embedded System for Monitoring and Analysing 
Multimodal Signals of Aliveness and Non-aliveness of Biological Objects 
 
Oliver Czepulowski, Stefan Weidemann, Anett Bailleu 
 
Department I – Energy and Information 
HTW Berlin, University of Applied Sciences 
12459 Berlin, Germany 
 e-mail: Czepul@htw-berlin.de, Stefan.Weidemann@htw-berlin.de, Anett.Bailleu@htw-berlin.de
 
 
Abstract—The multimodal sensor system that is presented in 
this paper has been developed to measure and analyze typical 
information of biological objects. The heart of the system 
consists of a field of light emitting diodes combined with 
photodiodes. The light emitting diodes are characterized by 
several peak wavelengths in the visible and in the near infrared 
range. Primarily, these optoelectronic components have the 
function to measure the heart rate and the oxygen saturation of 
a person’s finger. Furthermore, the special arrangement of the 
optoelectronic components is implemented to measure the 
remission of diffuse reflectance from the depth of a few 
millimeters of the measurement object. A hardware fusion 
with ancillary sensors to measure the temperature, the bio-
impedance and the humidity of the measurement object is 
realized, too. All sensor signals are measured with a high 
sample rate in the presented system. 
Keywords-Multimodal sensor system; hardware fusion; 
additional tool for biometric application. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With smart devices, watches and fitness tracker, there is a 
variety of utensils for the acquisition of individual data of 
personal health condition. Most devices use only a limited 
number of sensors and estimate from these data the actual 
variables of interest (e.g., fitness activity by pulse and Global 
Positioning System (GPS) coordinates; quality of sleep by 
the heart frequency). Often these devices only communicate 
online with a server, or send the resulting final value via an 
App to a mobile phone. Thereby, it is not possible to get a 
detailed insight of the original acquired data, not to mention 
a deeper and comprehensive analysis of these data. 
In this work, we present the development of a bio-
monitoring system, which makes it possible to make 
statements about the heart rate, the variability of the heart 
rate and the bio impedance, the ElectroDermal Activity 
(EDA) and other bio and vital parameters. Even other, non-
human, biological objects, for example food, can be analyzed 
by this combined sensor system, so a rating about the aging, 
the decomposition level and a consumption recommendation 
could be created. Here again, other approaches use only 
optical analysis methods. 
In Section II, we show the concept of the measurement 
system in principle and describe the details of the built-in 
hardware like the used sensors and other components of the 
embedded system. In Section III, we explain some features 
of the measurement system and sketch possible areas of 
application. In the end, in Section IV, we summarise the 
central points and give an outlook for further development 
and the future use. 
II. 
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT 
A. Sytem concept 
We developed a multifunctional measurement device for 
monitoring different parameters of biological objects. This 
device is used for acquisition, digital storage and for time-
series visualization of the measured parameters.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Block diagram of the device with the communication channels 
from the sensors/elements, via the microcontroller through to the data 
output/storage. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
We designed the device as an embedded system (Figure 1).   
It consists of parallel channels to measure the remission, the 
bio-impedance, the humidity and the temperature of objects 
almost simultaneously.  
By using a battery and an Secure Digital Memory Card 
(SD-card), the device operates as a stand-alone system in 
most cases. It can also operate as a PC-controlled unit.  
B. Details of  realising the sensitive hardware  
The size of the measurement device should be kept small 
so the device is still handy (Figure 2). It contains a small 
chamber to measure the humidity, the temperature and the 
bio-impedance of a biological object, for instance a living 
person’s finger. Furthermore, there are Light Emitting 
Diodes (LEDs) and an area of photo diodes on the contact 
area of this chamber (Figure 3).  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Design of the measurement device, useable as an about fist-
sized, stand-alone, mobile monitoring and analysing system. Exploded 
view showing, top to bottom, the display and control elements, the 
measurement chamber and the electronic components, microcontroller-
board, SD-card slot and USB port.  
For some applications, e.g., for liveness detection in 
biometric applications, it is very important to get all the 
information of the object from a measurement of a small, 
spot-sized area [1]-[3]. That is why all sensors of the system 
are placed relatively close to each other, like illustrated in 
Figure 3. 
The heart of the system is an optical field (upper part of 
Figure 3.(a)) consisting of three LEDs and five photo diodes. 
The LEDs are located in the center of this field, whereas the 
photo diodes are arranged around the center. Therefore, it is 
possible to detect phenomena of intrinsic absorption of the 
objects, in the lateral dimension and into the depth of the 
object [4][5].  
To get information of the depth of biological objects, it is 
important to emit wavelengths of the so-called tissue-optical 
window in the range of approximately 650 – 950 nm [6][7]. 
We 
choose 
a 
660 
nm 
RED-LED 
(type: 
SML-
LXFM0603SRC) 
and 
a 
940 
nm 
NIR-LED 
(type: 
VSMB1940X01) for this. 
Furthermore, 
we 
integrated 
a 
RGB-LED 
(type: 
SMLVN6RGB) in the optical field. Hence, the user of the 
measurement system gets the possibility to tune an emitting 
wavelength of the visual light range by the software control 
of the RGB-LED. Optionally, an UV-LED can be placed 
instead of this, if it seems to be more advantageous for 
samples and special objects [8].  
To detect the diffuse remission from the biological 
objects, high-sensitive photo diodes (type: ADPD2211) are 
used. Each of them has an integrated current-amplifier, so a 
separate transimpedance amplifier is not necessary.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The heart of the measurement device. (a) measurement chamber 
with the optical field (three LEDs and five photo diodes), two electrodes 
with superimposed contact springs and a combined sensor for measuring 
the temperature, pressure and humidity (the grey square). (b) Finger 
superimposed on the contact area.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Near the optical field, two electrodes in the form of two 
broad metal strips can be seen (Figure 3.(a)), which are 
added with superimposed contact springs for a better contact 
to an applied finger, or sample. These electrodes are there to 
measure the bio-impedance [5][9]. In dependency of the 
distance of the electrodes on one hand and in dependency of 
the stimuli-voltages respective currents on the other hand, it 
is possible to get electrical impedance information of 
different depths of the biological measurement object 
[4][10]. 
In 
our 
case, 
the 
realized 
bio-impedance 
measurement works by using a constant current source. 
While injecting a constant current into the skin the system 
measures the voltage drop and the phase shift in relation to 
the current. Next, the system calculates the impedance from 
the measured values. 
Finally, you find on the contact area (at the bottom of 
Figure 3 (b)) a combined sensor (type: BME280) to measure 
the humidity and the temperature of a presented 
measurement object (This combined sensor is able to 
measure the pressure, too. However, we do not use this 
functionality in our applications). 
C. Details of the embedded system hardware 
The measurement device, which is about fist-sized, 
consists of an embedded system hardware. The developed 
measurement device is based on a 32-bit ARM-processor, 
the 
NXP/Freescale 
MK64FX512VMD12Cortex-M4F 
processor with 120 MHz, 512 kB flash memory and 192 kB 
RAM. As microcontroller-board a Teensy 3.5 is used. This 
microcontroller is compatible to Arduino and its firmware 
was designed in the Arduino IDE. 
The measurement device is equipped with an SD-card 
unit and is powered by a rechargeable battery. Therefore, this 
design enables a stand-alone use as a small mobile device.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Graphical User Interface (GUI) of the LabVIEW-software-PC 
monitoring results of exemplary measuring signal courses of the reflections 
of the different LED wavelengths. Here, three pulse curves are shown. In 
addition other biological parameters, like, for instance, amplitude and 
phase shift of the bio impedance measurement can be displayed 
additionally. Also, the PC control elements are available in this LabVIEW 
GUI. 
An USB port allows the measurement device to 
communicate to a PC and thereby the data export from the 
microcontroller to a PC is possible. So, the measurement 
signals can be visualized and analyzed directly and, at the 
same time, it is possible to store them as a base for the 
further development of multimodal analysis routines for 
various issues. 
The PC Software is implemented with LabVIEW and the 
PC graphical user interface is shown in Figure 4. The signals 
of the photo diodes are shown for the three different LEDs 
and the DC- and AC-parts are presented separately. 
III. 
ADVANTAGE AND BENEFIT OF THE          
MEASUREMENT DEVICE 
In contrast to conventional pulse oximeters [1][6], which 
typically output averaged values of the heart rate and the 
oxygen saturation, our measurement device provides much 
more information about the status of the probed persons. For 
instance, the information received includes the time-resolved 
heart rate (and out of this the heart rate variability is 
identifiable), changes of the respiratory rate, the temperature 
and investigation of tonic and phasic EDA (variability of the 
bio-impedance). 
In 
addition, 
information 
about 
the 
transpiration and the peripheral blood flow through a 
person’s finger pad are also available. Different time regimes 
can be useful depending on the investigation purpose. Figure 
5 shows the results of two different measurement 
options/variants. 
The 
figure 
shows 
the 
heart 
rate 
measurement 
results 
obtained 
with 
two 
different 
wavelengths. Through the respective pulse curves, it is 
possible to calculate the oxygenation of the blood in a 
noninvasive method [8]. Two alternatives to get the blood 
oxygenation level are presented as a function of time. 
For the first method, shown in Figure 5 (a), one needs the 
acquisition of multiple, at least five, periods of the heart beat 
obtained by infrared radiation (940 nm) and save the AC and 
DC parts. Then one irradiate the tissue with red light (660 
nm), again for at least five periods of heart beat and then 
calculate the oxygenation of the blood [7][8]. 
In the second method, shown in Figure 5(b), the system 
is alternating switching on and off the red (660 nm) and 
infrared (940 nm) LED with a high frequency, for example 
with 1 kHz, in equally spaced time intervals. By doing this, 
one can calculate the oxygenation of the blood again 
(theoretically after two periods of the heart beat) [6]. For 
both methods of oxygenation level determination, a low-pass 
filtering of the signals is necessary. Furthermore, the second 
method has the advantage to reduce the potential negative 
influence of environmental light/ambient light. 
An additional operational scenario for this measurement 
device is the inspection and evaluation of food, e.g.[11]. 
Through the multimodal analysis of the measured signals, it 
is possible to obtain a lot more information about inherent 
material properties of biological measurement objects. For 
instance, it is possible to get insights about the freshness, 
respectively about the age of food. It is commonly known 
that the aging of meat, fish, cheese, eggs, vegetables and so 
on, causes generally the drying and colour change of these 
food products. Both can be measured by our device. In 
addition, a qualitative evaluation with respect of the 
composition of processed food products (ingredients, inferior 
food 
additives, 
preservatives, 
artificial 
colours 
and 
flavourings) can be possible. Through this analysis, a 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 5.  Two options of monitoring results- measurement graphs for different timescales of the measurement procedure. 
consumption recommendation could be made, which is 
independent of the best-before-date or other manufacturer's 
specifications. 
Within our department, the developed measurement 
device is used as a multifaceted measuring platform for the 
education of students of the "health electronics" study 
program, as well. Additionally, it will be used for the further 
development of intelligent algorithms for multimodal signal 
analysis, which aim to find yet unknown correlations of 
metabolic processes that could be useful for therapy-
supporting or diagnostic procedures. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
We presented the development of a bio-monitoring 
system measurement device for the acquisition of a variety 
of information of human tissue or other biological objects. 
This measurement device detects the pulsatile and non-
pulsatile parts by quasi-simultaneous, subsequent one after 
another, irradiation with light of three different wavelengths 
and both parts are measured and recorded quasi-parallel. 
Even without the pulsatile (dynamic) part, the static part of 
the light reflection is detected. Compared to a conventional 
pulse oximeter [1][6] our system is extended by electrodes 
for measuring the bio impedance (a constant current power 
supply is applied and the voltage drop and the phase shift is 
measured). A third essential measurement component is a 
combined sensor for measuring the relative humidity and 
the temperature on the surface of a measurement object. The 
bio-monitoring system is designed as a mobile, stand-alone 
device and therefore, it is equipped with a SD-card slot and 
a rechargeable battery. Data transfer is also possible via 
serial communication by a USB port to a PC for further 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

analysis. We intend the development of analysis algorithms 
for detecting new correlations of the measured parameters 
on biological objects. A further development is focused to a 
miniaturization toward a Lab-on-a-chip design [12]. 
Hereby, a simple use for personal health data acquisition 
and/or a clinical use is thinkable. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the "Center for 
biomedical image and information processing (CBMI)", 
which enables joint research and development as a platform 
and promotes professional, interdisciplinary exchange and 
productive discussions. The project “Innovation Hub Digital 
Health” (IHDH), funded by the European Union (EFRE), 
aims at bringing together research groups of the HTW and 
companies in the health sector for creation, evaluation and 
assessment of digital data. It is linking highly specific 
competencies 
concerning 
medicine 
and 
health 
with 
information technology. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Kaniusas, “Biomedical Signals and Sensors I - Linking 
Physiological Phenomena and Biosignals”, Springer -Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, ISBN 978-3-642-24842-9; DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-642-24843-6 
[2] E. Kaniusas, “Biomedical Signals and Sensors II - Linking 
Acoustic and Optic Biosignals and Biomedical Sensors”, 
Springer -Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2015, ISBN 978-3-662-
45105-2; DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-45106-9 
[3] A. Kumar, “Fingerprint spoof detection using blood flow 
analysis”, 
SPIE 
Newsroom, 
2009, 
DOI:10.1117/2.1200909.1794 
[4] S. Grimnes and Ø. G. Martinsen, "Bioimpedance", Wiley 
Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering, 2006; DOI: 
10.1002/9780471740360.ebs0128 
[5] S. Grimnes and Ø. G. Martinsen, "Bioimpedance and 
Bioelectricity Basics", 3rd Ed., Academic Press, ISBN: 
9780124114708, 2014 
[6] J. Webster (Ed.). ”Design of Pulse Oximeters”. Boca Raton: 
CRC Press, (1997) https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420050790 
[7] E. Rabe et al.,: "Praktische Phlebologie", 2006, DOI: 
10.1055/b-0034-8814 
[8] E. Kochs and K. Zacharowski (Ed.): “anesthesia preparation 
and perioperative monitoring“ (“Anästhesievorbereitung und 
perioperatives Monitoring“), Stuttgart: Georg Thieme Verlag, 
pp. 113 - 115, 2015, DOI: 10.1055/b-0034-101489 
[9] Data Input GmbH: "Das BIA-Kompendium", III. Ausg.; 
http://www.data-input.de/media/pdf-
deutsch/Kompendium_III_Ausgabe_2009.pdf; 
Darmstadt, 
Germany, 2009, 2019.04.20 
[10] Ø. G. Martinsen and S. Grimnes, „“Volume specific 
charcterization of human skin by electrical immitance“, 
International Patent Application WO03094724, 2003 
[11] Ø. G. Martinsen, S. Grimnes, and P. Mirtaheri, “Non-invasive 
measurements of post mortem changes in dielectric properties 
of haddock muscles – a pilot study“, J. Food Eng., 43(3), pp. 
189-192, 2000 
[12] EP 
2 
435 
993 
B1, 
“Mikrosystem 
zur 
Erkennung 
vorbestimmter 
Merkmale 
von 
Wertpapieren, 
Sicherheitsdokumenten 
oder 
sonstigen 
Produkten” 
[In 
English: “microsystem for identification of predetermined 
features of securities, security documents and other products“] 
in 
Patentblatt 
2016/27, 
06.07.2016
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Using Data Mining to Investigate Correlation between Traditional Chinese 
Medicine Body Constitution and Postnatal Problems 
 
Winnie W. M. Lam  
Department of Mathematics and 
Information Technology 
The Education University of Hong 
Kong 
Hong Kong 
email: winnielam@eduhk.hk 
Rebecca W. Y. Lee 
Traditional Chinese Medicine (Private 
Practice) 
Hong Kong 
 email: novembrelee@gmail.com 
 
 
Regina W. S. Sit  
The Jockey Club School of Public 
Health and Primary Care   
The Chinese University of Hong Kong  
Hong Kong  
email: reginasit@cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract – Many mothers experience maternal physical and 
mental health problems a few weeks after childbirth with 
unknown causes. To investigate this problem, Traditional 
Chinese Medicine (TCM) theory is applied to define 
individuals’ body constitution. As constitution refers to the 
relatively 
consistent 
characteristics 
of 
individual 
body 
structure and body function which affect the susceptibility 
towards different causing factors and the tendency of disease 
development, it is useful to predict the postnatal problems with 
body constitutions. The objective of this paper is to investigate 
the correlation between prenatal conditions (particularly TCM 
body constitution) and postnatal health problems with data 
mining approaches. Data was collected from pregnant women 
aged 21 to 45 through a standardized Constitution in Chinese 
Medicine Questionnaire (CCMQ) before childbirth and a face-
to-face assessment that was conducted by the TCM 
practitioner after childbirth. The collected data was analyzed 
by Pearson’s Chi-square test and three benchmark data 
mining models to discover significant correlation. This study 
confirms a strong correlation between imbalanced TCM body 
constitution 
and 
postnatal 
problems. 
The 
discovered 
correlation can help to provide personalized TCM treatment to 
prevent the potential postnatal problems through an early 
TCM intervention during pregnancy to regulate the imbalance 
condition of pregnant women. 
Keywords—TCM body constitution; postnatal problems; data 
mining; chi-square test; correlation. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Almost 
every 
mother 
experiences 
physical 
and 
psychological sicknesses after childbirth. Even though the 
results of prenatal check-up and tests, including ultrasound 
exams, blood tests, glucose challenge screening, etc., are 
normal, many women are still suffering from postnatal 
problems such as prolonged lochia, depression, tiredness, 
sleep disturbance, headache, constipation, etc. [2]-[4], while 
the reasons are unknown [6][7]. To ensure both mothers and 
babies are provided with the best care and protection, in 
addition to the Western medical check-up and tests, many 
mothers in Asian countries [8] adopt Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (TCM) as complementary maternal healthcare 
during their prenatal period, or even before becoming 
pregnant. They believe that TCM treatment before childbirth 
could help them to prevent miscarriage and sicknesses. 
TCM is widely used in maternal healthcare in both Asian 
[8] and Western countries [9] nowadays. TCM practitioners 
perform predictive, preventive and personalized diagnosis 
[10][11] to individuals. Treatments could be different for 
individuals with the same symptom, but the different 
diagnosis of TCM syndrome differentiation is due to their 
different body constitution types. TCM body constitution 
[12] could be divided into nine types: gentleness, qi-
deficiency, yang-deficiency, yin-deficiency, phlegm-damp, 
damp-heat, blood-stagnation, qi-stagnation and special 
diathesis, according to Q. Wang [18].  
In the theory of body constitution in TCM, every 
individual has his/her body constitution. Balanced body 
constitution (i.e., gentleness type) is considered as the most 
desirable constitution which represents good health [22].  A 
person with balanced status is the least susceptible to illness 
[13] because the body can maintain homeostasis physically 
and psychologically, and people with imbalanced status are 
considered as unhealthy and prone to sickness or diseases 
[23] [31]. The imbalanced health status can be caused by the 
deficiency of “qi” (vital energy), “yang” (masculine or 
positive principle that is characterized by light/warmth/ 
dryness/activity) or “yin” (feminine or negative principle that 
characterized by dark/wetness/cold/passivity/disintegration), 
the build-up of dampness, phlegm or heat, stagnation of “qi” 
and blood, or special diathesis (sensitive to external 
stimulants such as drugs, food, smells or seasonal triggers) 
[24].  
Prevention of disease is part of maintaining good health. 
The aim of this study is to discover the significant correlation 
between 
prenatal 
conditions 
(especially 
TCM 
body 
constitution) and postnatal problems from the personal 
profile for each pregnant woman from prenatal to postnatal 
period, so that postnatal problems can be predicted at an 
earlier stage. By matching the discovered correlation patterns 
with the prenatal conditions of pregnant women, it would be 
possible to predict if a mother will develop particular 
postpartum diseases or symptoms. This will allow TCM 
practitioners to provide an intervention procedure to adjust 
the imbalanced condition to prevent certain postnatal 
problems.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the methods of the data collection, preparation and 
modelling. Section III presents the experimental results. 
Finally, Sections IV and V are the discussion and conclusion.   
II. METHODS 
A. Selection of Participants 
The recruitment of participants was started in May, 2013 
in community TCM clinics in Hong Kong. The selection 
criteria were women who are over 18 years old and living in 
Hong Kong for more than 10 years. To avoid outliers or 
external factors, women with serious health problems 
including HIV/AIDS, cancer, viral infections (e.g., Ebola, 
Zika virus, etc.) within a year were excluded.  
B. Building Health Profiles 
Data was collected from 1) prenatal period (i.e., the time 
between conception and childbirth) and 2) postnatal period 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

(i.e., six weeks after childbirth) to build the health profiles 
that include the maternal health conditions of participants. 
1) Prenatal Profile 
In general medical practice, the TCM practitioner can 
determine the body constitution of patients by four 
diagnostic methods including observation (face, body form, 
tongue, etc.), smelling and hearing (odours from mouth/ 
body, loudness of speaking voice), inquiry (symptoms) and 
palpitation (pulse) [17]. To classify each participant into one 
or multiple body constitutions systematically, each patient 
needs to complete a standardized Constitution in Chinese 
Medicine Questionnaire (CCMQ) that was developed by Q. 
Wang [18] and China Association of Chinese Medicine [19] 
with the diagnosis and validation of the TCM practitioner. 
The CCMQ is a self-rating scale questionnaire that includes 
60 questions related to a variety of prenatal conditions (e.g., 
cold/warm hands and feet, anxiety level, dark circles around 
the eyes, dry mouth, etc.). The participants should complete 
the questionnaire in Google Forms according to their 
physical and mental health condition in the prenatal period.  
a) CCMQ Score 
 
A set of CCMQ scores S = {s1, s2, s3, …, s9} that are 
corresponding to the nine types of TCM body constitution 
(c1: gentleness, c2: qi-deficiency, c3: yang-deficiency, c4: yin-
deficiency, c5: phlegm-damp, c6: damp-heat, c7: blood-
stagnation, c8: qi-stagnation and c9: special diathesis) 
respectively are calculated from the CCMQ by following the 
equations in [20].  After calculating the scores, all 
participants are classified into one or multiple TCM body 
constitution types based on Table I . 
TABLE I.  CLASSIFICATION OF TCM BODY CONSTITUTION TYPES 
TCM body 
constitution 
Conditions a 
Results a 
Balanced  
(c1: gentleness) 
s1 ≥ 60 and sn < 30  
c1 
s1 ≥ 60 and sn < 40  
Marginal c1  
sn ≥ 40  
Not c1 
Imbalanced 
(c2: qi-deficiency 
c3: yang-deficiency 
c4: yin-deficiency 
c5: phlegm-damp 
c6: damp-heat 
c7: blood-stagnation 
c8: qi-stagnation 
c9: special diathesis) 
sn ≥ 40  
cn 
30 ≤ sn ≤ 39 
Tends to cn 
sn < 30 
Not cn 
a. where n = 2 to 9 
b) Classification of TCM Body Constitution 
 
In the classification of TCM body constitution types, we 
can identify the likelihood (in terms of CCMQ score) of each 
body constitution type of each participant according to Table 
I. Each participant may have one or more dominant body 
constitution types, or even have a conflict between balanced 
and imbalanced body constitutions. Here are three sample 
cases: 
Case 1: Given a participant P1 with CCMQ scores S1 = {75, 
56, 27, 25, 12, 15, 20, 18, 10}. s1 is higher than 60, but s2 is 
also higher than 40. Hence, P1 is classified as c2 instead of c1. 
Case 2: Given a participant P2 with CCMQ scores S2 = {75, 
16, 27, 25, 32, 25, 10, 18, 10}. As s1 is higher than 60, s5 is 
higher than 30, and sn is less than 40 where n = 2 to 9, P2 is 
classified as c1 marginally. Also, s5 is between 30 and 39, so 
P2 has a mixture of two body constitution types: marginal c1 
and tends to c5. 
Case 3: Given a participant P3 with CCMQ scores S3 = {59, 
16, 27, 25, 12, 15, 20, 18, 10}. s1 is less than 60, and sn is less 
than 30 where n = 2 to 9, P3 is classified as undefined body 
constitution. 
2) Postnatal Profile 
All participants who completed the CCMQ in the first 
stage should arrange a face-to-face assessment with a 
registered TCM practitioner after childbirth. The TCM 
practitioner needs to complete the postnatal profile that 
includes two parts: a) demographics and maternal health 
information, and b) physical and mental postnatal health 
problems within six weeks after childbirth.  
a) Demographics and Maternal Health Information 
In the first part, the basic demographic data, such as age, 
occupation and blood type, are collected, and the other 
questions are related to the menses cycle and volume, 
ovulation, delivery method, and the number of fetuses of the 
participants.  
b) Physical and Mental Postnatal Health Problems 
In the second part, postnatal health problems including 
prolonged lochia (i.e., vaginal discharge after giving birth 
containing blood, mucus, and uterine tissue over 21 days), 
tiredness, abnormal sweating, etc. are examined. Since all the 
questions are TCM-specific, some factors, such as tongue 
appearance and pulse patterns, should be examined face-to-
face by a TCM practitioner.  
C. Data Preparation 
Firstly, the data of the prenatal and postnatal profiles was 
merged and stored into a database, which includes 132 rows 
(i.e., records) and 210 columns (i.e., attributes).  Secondly, 
incorrect and inconsistent data was identified by the TCM 
practitioner, and the identified fields and records were either 
corrected or removed from the data set. Lastly, the 
continuous data, such as age, age of first menses, period 
cycle and week of childbirth, were discretized into intervals, 
as advised by the TCM practitioner. 
D. Identify Dependent and Independent Attributes 
Dependent and independent attributes [21] were 
identified from our collected data, as shown in Table II. The 
dependent attributes represent the outcome that we want to 
predict (i.e., postnatal problems), and the independent 
attributes represent the input of potential causes (e.g., 
demographics, prenatal conditions, TCM body constitution, 
etc.).  
E. Data Modeling 
The correlation between prenatal health conditions 
(especially TCM body constitution) and postnatal problems 
can be discovered by supervised data mining models. We 
used an open-source data mining tool named Orange, which 
includes these three supervised data mining models: decision 
tree [26], Support Vector Machine (SVM) [27] and Artificial 
Neural Networks (ANN) [28][29] for discovering significant 
patterns from the collected maternal data and comparing the 
effectiveness of different data mining models on TCM data 
analysis. The Orange version 3.14 was installed. To obtain 
the best accuracy and results, the parameters of the decision 
tree, SVM and ANN were set as described below. 
In the decision tree modelling, the “Tree” widget was 
used. The parameters of the minimum number of instances in 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

leaves, the smallest number of instance of splitting subsets 
and maximal tree depth were set to 2, 5 and 100, respectively. 
In the SVM modelling, Radial basis function (RBF) kernel 
was used, and the parameters of C and ε were set to 1.00 and 
0.1, respectively to obtain the best accuracy. In the ANN 
modelling, the number of neurons per hidden layer was set to 
100, and the parameters of activation, solver and alpha were 
set to ReLu (rectified linear unit function), Adam (stochastic 
gradient-based optimizer) and 0.0001 respectively. 
TABLE II.  DEPENDENT AND INDEPENDENT ATTRIBUTES 
Dependent attributes 
(postnatal problems) 
Independent  
attributes 
Remarks 
1. 
Tiredness 
1. 
Age 
 
2. 
Unhealthy 
face 
colour 
2. 
Occupation 
 
3. 
Prolonged lochia 
3. 
Living environment 
 
4. 
Excessive sweating 
4. 
Blood type 
 
5. 
Dry mouth 
5. 
Genetic/ congenital 
disease 
 
6. 
Feeling annoyed 
6. 
Chronic disease 
 
7. 
Joint pain 
7. 
Gynecological 
disease 
 
8. 
Feeling of anger 
8. 
Age of first menses 
Related to 
menses 
9. 
Feeling hot/ Hot flash 
9. 
Regular period 
10. Emotional depression 
10. Days of period 
cycle 
11. Fear of cold/ wind 
11. Days of 
menustration 
12. Excessive dreaming 
12. Menses volume 
13. Body pain 
13. Menses colour 
14. Shortness of breath 
14. Menses with blood 
clot 
15. Dizziness 
15. Dysmenorrhea 
16. Headache 
16. Number of 
pregnancy 
Related to 
pregnancy 
and delivery 
17. Flat feeling in mouth 
17. Number of abortion  
18. Bright yellow urine 
18. Number of 
miscarriage 
19. General fatigue 
19. Number of fetuses  
20. Tinnitus 
20. Expected date of 
delivery (EDD) 
21. Dry/ hard stool 
21. Date of childbirth 
22. Insatiable hunger 
22. Week of childbirth 
23. Constipation 
23. Way of delivery 
24. Excessive urine 
24. Curettage 
25. Excessive belching 
25. Medication 
Taken 
during 
pregnancy 
26. Loose stool 
26. Supplement 
27. Poor appetite 
27. Number of days in 
hospital 
After 
childbirth 
28. Fever 
28. Follow traditional 
rituals 
29. Palpitation  
29. Breastfeeding 
30. Insomnia 
30. TCM body 
constitution types 
Obtained 
from 
CCMQ 
31. Bitter taste in mouth 
 
 
32. Epigastric distemison 
 
 
33. Rectal tenesmus 
 
 
34. Stomachache 
 
 
35. Gastric 
excretion 
(from mouth) 
 
 
36. Frequent 
nighttime 
urination 
 
 
 
To prevent over fitting, the validation was carried out 
with 5-fold cross validation due to the small sample size. The 
data was split into a training set (80%) for building the model 
and test set (20%) for validating the built model. The data 
mining steps are summarized here: 
Step 1: Import the collected data with the “File” widget. 
Step 2: Define the input and output attributes by the “Select 
Columns” widget.  
Step 3: Feed the selected data to different data mining 
models: “Tree” (i.e., decision tree), “SVM” and “Neural 
Network” (i.e., ANN). 
Step 4: Perform cross-validation accuracy estimation with 
the “Test & Score” widget. 
Step 5: Predict the unknown output with the “Predictions” 
widget. 
Step 6: Repeat Step 2 to remove the outliers and adjust the 
parameter settings to obtain better accuracy. 
III. RESULTS 
A. Distributions  
1) Demographics 
A total of 132 pregnant women aged 21 to 45 were 
recruited from May, 2013 to May, 2017. Participants aged 31 
to 35 was the majority group (55.30%), followed by the age 
groups 26 to 30 (16.67%) and 36 to 40 (18.18%). Around 
half of the participants (56.8%) were working indoors, and 
some of them were not working (16.67%).  
2) Maternal Health Information 
According to the pregnancy information, 59.09% of the 
participants were at their first pregnancy, and over 90% of 
them had one fetus. Although most of the mothers were 
reported as healthy and had regular menses cycle and normal 
menses volume, there were 69.70% of them who mentioned 
that they were suffering from different kinds of discomforts 
during pregnancy. To reduce the risk of miscarriage or 
discomfort during pregnancy, most participants (88.64%) 
took Western supplements such as folic acid, Materna, and a 
few of them (37.12%) also took Chinese medicine. When 
they were sick, half of them did not take either Western or 
Chinese medicine because they were afraid the medicine 
would influence the health of their fetuses.  
3) Delivery Information 
The delivery dates of most of our participants (39.39%) 
were in winter, while the others who delivered in summer 
were the least (13.64%). Over 90% of them had full-term 
pregnancy (i.e., delivered within 37 to 42 weeks), and natural 
childbirth was the main type (61.36%) of delivery. Most of 
them (78.79%) were able to leave the hospital after childbirth 
within 4 days, and only a few (4.55%) were staying in the 
hospital for more than 6 days. After the delivery, 72.73% of 
the participants followed the traditional rituals of TCM (e.g., 
no hair wash, use TCM or ginger for body wash, avoid all 
cold and raw food and drinks, etc.) during their postnatal 
period.  
4) Physical and Mental Postnatal Health Problems 
Within the postnatal period, our participants were 
suffering from different postnatal health problems. We found 
that 92.42% of them suffered from four or more different 
health problems after childbirth, and the occurrence of 16 
common postnatal TCM symptoms are shown in Table III 
(in descending order).  
5) TCM Body Constitution 
In the prenatal profile, participants were classified into 
nine types of TCM body constitution: gentleness, qi-
deficiency, yang-deficiency, yin-deficiency, phlegm-damp, 
damp-heat, blood-stagnation, qi-stagnation and special 
diathesis according to the equations in Table I. Except for the 
gentleness type that is considered as balanced body 
constitution, the other types are considered as imbalanced. In 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

our data, 100 women were classified as imbalanced body 
constitution, 28 were balanced, and 4 were unclassified.   
By considering the participants who were belonging to a 
certain body constitution type obviously (i.e., cn is “Yes”), 
the top three TCM body constitution types are Yin-
deficiency (37.12%), Yang-deficiency (35.61%) and blood-
stagnation (35.61%). 
It is important to note that not all individuals would have 
a single body constitution type; it is common to have a mixed 
body constitution (i.e., two or more body constitution types). 
Among 104 participants who were considered as having 
imbalanced body constitution, 30.77% participants had 
single body constitution type, 65.38% of them had two or 
more, and only a small proportion (3.85%) were unclassified.  
TABLE III.  
COMMON POSTNATAL TCM SYMPTOMS 
Postnatal symptoms 
% 
Postnatal symptoms 
% 
Tiredness 
80.30 
Feeling hot/ Hot flash 
44.70 
Unhealthy face colour 
68.18 
Emotional depression 
44.70 
Prolonged lochia a 
66.67 
Fear of cold/ wind 
43.94 
Excessive sweating 
60.61 
Excessive dreaming 
43.94 
Dry mouth 
59.09 
Body pain 
34.85 
Feeling annoyed 
59.09 
Shortness of breath 
31.82 
Joint pain 
53.79 
Dizziness 
31.82 
Feeling of anger 
48.48 
Headache 
31.06 
a. The number of days of lochia clearance is more than 21 days 
B. Correlation between TCM Body Constitution and 
Postnatal Problems 
1) Statistical Test for Independence 
Pearson’s Chi-square test [30] was used to measure the 
correlations between TCM body constitution types and 
postnatal TCM symptoms, and the null hypothesis was 
applied to prove whether the occurrence of these two 
attributes was statistically independent. After carrying out 
the test in a statistical software package SPSS, we discovered 
that some postnatal symptoms from Table IV did not occur 
by chance, but were statistically dependent on certain TCM 
body constitution types. The significant pairs of attributes 
with a 95% confidence interval (i.e., p-value < 0.05) were 
listed in Table IV with the results of Cramer’s V that 
indicates the strength statistic. The coefficient of Cramer’s V 
ranges from 0 (no association) to 1 (strongest association). 
With the degree of freedom df = 2, the strength is considered 
as small, medium and large for the values 0.07, 0.21 and 
0.35, respectively [32]. 
Within the 45 significant pairs of attributes, 16 pairs were 
statistically significant (i.e., significance level < 0.01) with 
medium/ strong strength in Cramer’s V. However, the Chi-
square test with Cramer’s V can only determine the statistical 
significance between two attributes, but how exactly they are 
related to each other is unknown (e.g., Is qi-deficiency/ tends 
to qi-deficiency/ non-qi-deficiency related to emotional 
depression or not?). Thus, we need to use decision tree 
modelling to discover detailed relationships. 
2) Decision Tree Modeling 
From the results of Pearson’s Chi-square test in Table IV, 
we observed that some TCM body constitution types are 
highly correlated to certain postnatal symptoms. To further 
investigate the detailed relationships between these two 
attributes, we selected a significant pair of attributes (qi-
deficiency and dizziness) with 99% confidence interval (i.e., 
p-value is less than 0.01) to demonstrate how the decision 
tree is used to discover the correlations in the form of tree 
and rules.  
First, the collected data was imported into Orange. Next, 
it was connected to the other widgets (i.e., Select Columns, 
Tree, Test & Score and Tree Viewer). In the “Select 
Columns” widget, the TCM body constitution “qi-
deficiency” and the postnatal symptom “dizziness” were set 
as input and output, respectively. Finally, we obtained the 
decision tree model (in Figure 1) with an overall 
classification accuracy of 72.7%.  
TABLE IV.  
SIGNIFICANT RESULTS OF PEARSON’S CHI-SQUARE TEST 
Attributes 
Significance 
level 
(< 0.01) 
Cramer’s V 
Result 
(> 0.35) 
TCM body 
constitutio
n types 
Postnatal symptoms 
gentleness 
Excessive sweating 
0.045 
 
qi-
deficiency 
Tiredness 
0.026 
 
 
Shortness of breath 
0.013 
 
 
Feeling hot/ Hot flash 
0.036 
 
 
Headache 
0.004 
0.292 
 
Dizziness 
0.000065 
0.382 
 
Emotional depression 
0.002 
0.309 
 
Excessive urine 
0.011 
 
 
General fatigue 
0.04 
 
 
Joint pain 
0.012 
 
 
Body pain 
0.009 
0.267 
Yang-
deficiency 
Dizziness 
0.041 
 
 
Fear of cold/wind 
0.000245 
0.355 
 
Stomachache 
0.044 
 
Yin-
deficiency 
Bitter taste in mouth 
0.031 
 
 
Dry mouth 
0.002 
0.301 
 
Dry/hard stool 
0.035 
 
phlegm-
damp 
Dizziness 
0.013 
 
 
Bitter taste in mouth 
0.000011 
0.345 
 
Flat feeling in mouth 
0.012 
 
 
Feeling annoyed 
0.03 
 
 
Bright yellow urine 
0.043 
 
 
Frequent nighttime 
urination  
0.00004 
0.392 
damp-heat 
Dizziness 
0.024 
 
 
Bitter taste in mouth 
0.00004 
0.345 
 
Emotional depression 
0.042 
 
 
Frequent nighttime 
urination  
0.01 
 
blood-
stagnation 
Shortness of breath 
0.035 
 
 
Dizziness 
0.003 
0.299 
 
Bitter taste in mouth 
0.033 
 
 
Dry mouth 
0.027 
 
 
Flat feeling in mouth 
0.006 
0.276 
 
Feeling annoyed 
0.001 
0.317 
 
Feeling of anger 
0.013 
 
 
Face colour 
0.049 
 
qi-
stagnation 
Fever 
0.001 
0.325 
 
Dizziness 
0.001 
0.337 
 
Excessive belching 
0.014 
 
 
Bright yellow urine 
0.025 
 
 
Body pain 
0.04 
 
special 
diathesis 
Dizziness 
0.005 
0.283 
 
Bitter taste in mouth 
0.012 
 
 
Feeling annoyed 
0.033 
 
 
Rectal tenesmus 
0.024 
 
 
Prolonged lochia  
0.003 
0.295 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

 
Figure 1.  Relationships between qi-deficiency and dizziness in the 
decision tree 
In this output of the decision tree model, we discovered 
three relationships between qi-deficiency and dizziness by 
following the paths from the root node to the leaf nodes. 
These paths are represented in the form of IF-THEN rules, 
where n refers to the number of participants who matched the  
following rules:  
Rule 1: IF qi-deficiency = “tends to Yes” THEN 
dizziness = “No” (n = 31, accuracy = 83.8%) 
Rule 2: IF qi-deficiency = “No” THEN dizziness = 
“No” (n = 40, accuracy = 78.4%) 
Rule 3: IF qi-deficiency = “Yes” THEN dizziness = 
“Yes” (n = 25, accuracy = 56.8%) 
In addition to the one-to-one correlation between qi-
deficiency and dizziness discovered by Pearson’s Chi-square 
test, a decision tree can define multiple inputs to find 
whether the output attribute (i.e., dizziness) is correlated to 
one or more input attributes. From Table IV, we found that 
dizziness is not only strongly correlated to qi-deficiency, but 
it is also correlated to the other six imbalanced TCM body 
constitution types. Instead of setting one input attribute in the 
decision tree, we set all eight imbalanced TCM body 
constitution types as input to predict the postnatal dizziness. 
Among the eight imbalanced TCM body constitution 
types, qi-deficiency was selected as the root node (i.e., best 
predictor) with the highest information gain. The leaf node 
with the highest classification accuracy and number of 
samples was extracted from the rightmost part of the tree and 
shown in Figure 2. The leaf node shows that all women with 
multiple TCM body constitution types: qi-deficiency, special 
diathesis and tends to phlegm-damp were suffering from 
dizziness in the postnatal period. This proved that dizziness 
is related to multiple TCM body constitution types instead of 
one only. Since there were over 60% of women with 
multiple body constitution types and different prenatal 
conditions, a decision tree with multiple input attributes is 
the better way to predict postnatal problems.  
In order to discover more possible prenatal factors that 
cause the postnatal problems, a decision tree and two other 
supervised data mining algorithms were applied to our data, 
including the attributes of TCM body constitution, 
demographics, maternal health information and delivery 
information, collected from the prenatal period to predict the 
postnatal problems. The independent (i.e., input) and 
dependent (i.e., output) attributes are listed in Table II. 
C. Significant Patterns with Data Mining Algorithms 
Supervised data mining was used to discover significant 
patterns from prenatal and postnatal data. The classification 
accuracies of predicting 36 postnatal problems, as shown in 
Table II, are reported in Figure 3. The classification accuracy 
of each postnatal problem (target attribute) in the decision 
tree, SVM and ANN are indicated by blue triangle dot, red 
circle dot and grey cross, respectively. 
Half of the postnatal problems can be predicted with 
classification accuracy over 70%, and the postnatal problem 
no. 36 (i.e., frequent nighttime urination) has the highest 
classification accuracy of 92.27%. Overall, the average 
accuracies of the three supervised data mining algorithms are 
above 64%, and SVM has the highest average accuracy of 
73.07%. 
To predict the postnatal problem of frequent nighttime 
urination, the ROC curves of the decision tree, SVM and 
neural network are given in Figure 4. It shows the 
performance of neural network is the best among three with 
higher AUC, followed by decision tree, and lastly SVM. 
 
Figure 2.  Leaf node with the highest accuracy rate to predict dizziness  
 
Figure 3.  Classification accuracies of 36 postnatal problems  
 
Figure 4.  ROC curves of decision tree, SVM and neural network 
After consulting the TCM practitioner, four postnatal 
problems, including dizziness, prolonged lochia, tiredness, 
and emotional depression, were identifisssed as important to 
clinical care after pregnancy. We used a decision tree to 
discover the correlations between these postnatal problems 
and prenatal factors because it can show the results in terms 
of readable rules which are understandable by TCM 
practitioners. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

1) Classification Rules of Dizziness 
As mentioned earlier, dizziness is highly correlated to 
multiple TCM body constitution types. From Rule 1.1 to 
Rule 1.4, we can predict if a woman will suffer from 
dizziness after pregnancy related to five prenatal factors: 1) 
the number of TCM body constitution type, 2) TCM body 
constitution types (including qi-stagnation, Yang-deficiency, 
Yi-deficiency and special diathesis), 3) blood type, 4) living 
environment, and 5) number of days of menstruation before 
pregnancy.  
Rule 1.1: IF the number of TCM body constitution types 
> 5 THEN postnatal problem = “dizziness” (n = 13, 
accuracy = 86.7%) 
Rule 1.2: IF the number of TCM body constitution types 
≤ 5 AND blood type = “AB, O or unknown” AND living 
environment = “Above the hill” THEN postnatal problem 
= “dizziness” (n = 5, accuracy = 100%) 
Rule 1.3: IF the number of TCM body constitution types 
≤ 5 AND days of menstruation ≤ 7 AND living 
environment ≠ “above the hill”, THEN postnatal problem 
≠ “dizziness” (n = 85, accuracy = 80.2%) 
Rule 1.4: IF the number of TCM body constitution types 
≤ 5 AND TCM body constitution type = “qi-stagnation, 
Yang-deficiency, Yi-deficiency or special diathesis” 
AND days of menstruation ≤ 7 AND living environment 
≠ “above the hill”, THEN postnatal problem ≠ 
“dizziness” (n = 18, accuracy = 100%) 
By comparing Rule 1.3 and Rule 1.4, we observed that 
when the additional factor, TCM body constitution, is 
considered when predicting dizziness, it can yield higher 
accuracy. Hence, the TCM body constitution is an important 
factor that can affect the accuracy of predicting dizziness.  
2) Classification Rules of Prolonged Lochia 
Prolonged lochia is the third most common postnatal 
problem in this study, and the abnormal duration of bleeding 
can be suspected as infection. According to Rule 2.1 to Rule 
2.4, we can detect this problem in the prenatal period by 
observing seven prenatal factors: 1) TCM body constitution 
type (special diathesis and qi-stagnation), 2) days of period 
cycle, 3) traditional rituals (avoid all cold/raw food), 4) 
tongue coating, 5) EDD, 6) blood type and 7) dysmenorrhea 
before or after menstruation.  
Rule 2.1: IF TCM body constitution type (special 
diathesis) ≠ “tends to Yes” AND avoid all cold/raw food 
= “No” THEN postnatal problem = “prolonged lochia” (n 
= 53, accuracy = 81.5%) 
Rule 2.2: IF TCM body constitution types ≠ “qi-
stagnation or special diathesis” AND avoid all cold/raw 
food = “No” AND days of period cycle > 31 THEN 
postnatal problem = “prolonged lochia” (n = 25, accuracy 
= 100%) 
Rule 2.3: IF TCM body constitution type (special 
diathesis) = “tends to yes” AND EDD = “spring or 
summer” THEN postnatal problem ≠ “prolonged lochia” 
(n = 7, accuracy = 100%) 
Rule 2.4: IF TCM body constitution (special diathesis) ≠ 
“tends to yes” AND avoid all cold/raw food = “Yes” 
AND blood type = “O or unknown” AND dysmenorrhea 
= “occurred before or after menstruation” THEN 
postnatal problem ≠ “prolonged lochia” (n = 7, accuracy 
= 100%) 
3) Classification Rules of Emotional Depression 
Emotional depression is one of the top 10 postnatal 
problems, and it is a type of mood disorder associated with 
childbirth. It can negatively affect the mother, her family and 
newborn child. This problem can be detected by monitoring 
five factors: 1) TCM body constitution type, 2) blood vessel 
under the tongue, 3) days of menstruation, 4) menses, and 5) 
dysmenorrhea based on Rule 4.1 to Rule 4.4: 
Rule 4.1: IF days of menstruation > 4 AND age of the 
first menses ≠ “11–12” AND TCM body constitution 
type (qi-deficiency) = “yes or tends to yes” THEN 
postnatal problem = “Emotional depression” (n = 31, 
accuracy = 81.6%)  
Rule 4.2: IF menses with blood clot = “no” AND 
menses colour ≠ “bright red or pale red” AND age of first 
menses = “11-12” AND TCM body constitution type (qi-
deficiency) = “yes or tends to yes” THEN postnatal 
problem = “Emotional depression” (n = 7, accuracy = 
87.5%) 
Rule 4.3: IF TCM body constitution type = “complex, 
unclassified, Yang-deficiency or Yi-deficiency” AND qi-
deficiency = “no” THEN postnatal problem ≠ “Emotional 
depression” (n = 29, accuracy = 90.6%) 
Rule 4.4: IF Menses colour = “bright red or pale red” 
AND Age of first menses = “11–12” AND TCM body 
constitution type (qi-deficiency) = “yes or tends to yes” 
THEN postnatal problem ≠ “Emotional depression” (n = 
5, accuracy = 100%) 
IV. DISCUSSION 
In this study, we found that 92.42% of the women 
suffered from four or more different health problems after 
childbirth. Women with “gentleness” body constitution type 
tended to have less postnatal discomfort; the finding was 
consistent with the TCM theory that individuals with 
balanced body constitution are more likely to stay healthy 
even in the stressful postnatal period. Contrarily, women 
with imbalanced TCM body constitution were found to have 
more postnatal problems, among which qi-deficiency and 
blood stagnation had the worse postnatal profiles.  
In our analysis, several factors were found to predict the 
outcome of dizziness. However, some factors, such as the 
week of childbirth, duration of period cycle and menses 
volume, were unmodifiable. Other factors, namely traditional 
rituals and the intake of calcium supplements could be 
changed easily through prenatal education and advice. 
Additionally, although TCM body constitution is constant 
and not easily changed at once, it can be adjusted in the long 
run through lifestyle modification, nutrition, exercise and 
herbal medications. Therefore, we believe that by knowing 
individuals’ body constitution and their prenatal habits could 
potentially improve women’s postnatal health. 
There are several limitations to our study. First, the study 
was conducted in Hong Kong, and only women with Chinese 
ethnicity were invited; therefore, the findings may not be 
generalizable. Second, the correlations between TCM body 
constitution and postnatal problems were not one-to-one 
relationships; in both Pearson’s Chi-square test and the three 
supervised data mining algorithms (SVM, decision tree and 
artificial neural networks), we can only set one attribute (one 
of the postnatal problems) as output at one time. Third, TCM 
body constitution is potentially adjustable before pregnancy; 
a future study can be conducted on the prediction of the other 
disease entities [13][14], especially emotional depression. 
Additional factors can be collected from Western medical 
records for building a better predictive model.  
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

V. CONCLUSION 
In this study, we discovered that women with imbalanced 
TCM body constitution were more likely to suffer from 
postnatal health problems. Some body constitution types and 
prenatal habits were predictive of certain common and 
important postnatal symptoms, which were believed to be 
modifiable. Supervised data mining has been demonstrated 
as a useful way to discover correlations between multiple 
prenatal conditions (especially body constitutions) and 
postnatal problems. After discovering the significant 
correlations in terms of classification rules, the future step is 
to predict postnatal problems before childbirth. By using the 
associations between body constitution and postnatal 
problems in Table IV and the classification rules in Section 
III C), the TCM practitioners can apply early interventions, 
such as medicine, acupuncture, suggesting nutrition or 
supplements, to adjust individuals’ body constitution and 
prevent the postnatal problems during the prenatal period, or 
even before pregnancy.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Neagos, R. Cretu, R. C. Sfetea and L. C. Bohiltea, “The 
Importance of Screening and Prenatal Diagnosis in the Identification 
of the Numerical Chromosomal Abnormalities,” Mædica, 6(3), pp. 
179-184, 2011.  
[2] S. Brown and J. Lumley, “Maternal health after childbirth: results of 
an Australian population based survey,” An International Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, vol. 105 (2), pp. 156-161, February 
1998. 
[3] J. Y. Lee and J. Y. Hwang, “A study on postpartum symptoms and 
their related factors in Korea,” Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, vol. 54 (4), pp. 355-363, August 2015. 
[4] S. Aksu, F. G. Varol and N. H. Sahin, “Long-term postpartum health 
problems in Turkish women: prevalence and associations with self-
rated health,”, Contemporary Nurse, 53:2, pp. 167-181, 2017. 
[5] A. Rudman and U. Waldenström, “Critical views on postpartum care 
expressed by new mothers,” BMC Health Services Research, 7, pp. 
178, 2007. 
[6] N. T. Hatfield, “Introductory Maternity and Pediatric Nursing,” 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp. 405, Nov 2013. 
[7] L. I. Alasoom and M. R. Koura, “Predictors of Postpartum 
Depression in the Eastern Province Capital of Saudi Arabia,” Journal 
of Family Medicine and Primary Care, vol. 3(2), pp. 146-150, 2014. 
[8] Q. Y. Jiang, J. Li, L. Zheng, G. H.Wang, and J. Wang, “Constitution 
of traditional chinese medicine and related factors in women of 
childbearing age,” Journal of the Chinese Medical Association, 81(4), 
pp. 358-365, 2018. 
[9] S. Lukman, Y. He, and S. C. Hui, “Computational methods for 
traditional Chinese medicine: a survey,” Computer methods and 
programs in biomedicine, 88(3), pp. 283-294, 2007. 
[10] W. Wang, A. Russell, Y. Yan, “Traditional Chinese medicine and 
new concepts of predictive, preventive and personalized medicine in 
diagnosis and treatment of suboptimal health,” EPMA Journal, 5(1), 
pp. 12, 2014. 
[11] Y. Wang, Y. Dai, F. Guo, S. Li, “Sensitivity-based data selection for 
predicting individual's sub-health on TCM doctors' diagnosis,” IEEE 
International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 
Anchorage, AK, pp. 896-901, 2011. 
[12] Y. B. Zhu, Q. Wang, H. Origasa, “Evaluation on reliability and 
validity of the constitution in chinese medicine questionnaire 
(CCMQ),” Chinese Journal of Behavioral Medical Science, 16(7), pp. 
651–654, 2007. 
[13] H. You, T. Zhang, W. Feng, and Y. Gai, “Association of TCM body 
constitution with insulin resistance and risk of diabetes in impaired 
glucose regulation patients,” BMC complementary and alternative 
medicine, 17(1), pp. 459, 2017. 
[14] Y. Zhu, et al., “Association between nine types of TCM constitution 
and five chronic diseases: a correspondence analysis based on a 
sample of 2,660 participants,” Evidence-Based Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine, 9439682, 2017. 
[15] C. I. Tsai, Y. C. Su, S. Y. Lin, I. T. Lee, C. H. Lee & T. C. Li, 
“Reduced health-related quality of life in body constitutions of Yin-
Xu, and Yang-Xu, stasis in patients with type 2 diabetes: taichung 
diabetic body constitution study,” Evidence-Based Complementary 
and Alternative Medicine, 309403, 2014. 
[16] J. Iavindrasana, G. Cohen, A. Depeursinge, H. Müller, R. Meyer & A. 
Geissbuhler, “Clinical Data Mining: a Review,” Methods of 
Information in Medicine, pp. 121-133, 2009. 
[17] L. Zhang, “A TCM Way to be Healthy, Inside and Out,”  FriesenPress, 
2017. 
[18] Q. Wang, “Classification and diagnosis basis of nine basic 
constitutions in chinese medicine,” Journal of Beijing University of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, 28(4), pp. 1-8, 2005. 
[19] M. Li, S. Mo, Y. Lv, Z. Tang and J. Dong, “A Study of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine Body Constitution Associated with Overweight, 
Obesity, and Underweight,” Evidence-Based Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine, 7361896, 2017. 
[20] W. Wong, C. L. K. Lam, V. T. Wong, Z. M. Yang, E. T. C. Ziea & A. 
K. L. Kwan, “Validation of the Constitution in Chinese Medicine 
Questionnaire: Does the Traditional Chinese Medicine Concept of 
Body Constitution Exist?,” Evidence-Based Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine, 481491, 2013. 
[21] I. Kononenko, “Estimating attributes: Analysis and extensions of 
RELIEF,” European Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 171-182, 
1994 
[22] A. Al-Shura, “Integrative Cardiovascular Chinese Medicine: A 
Prevention and Personalized Medicine Perspective,” Academic Press, 
pp. 39-56, 2014 
[23] R. Y. Chan, and W. T. Chien, “Concepts of body constitution, health 
and sub-health from traditional Chinese medicine perspective,” World 
J Transl Med, 2(3), pp. 56-66, 2013. 
[24] G. Maciocia, “The Practice of Chinese Medicine,” New York, 
Churchill Livingstone, 1994. 
[25] J. Han, J. Pei and M. Kamber, “Data mining: concepts and 
techniques,” Elsevier, 2011. 
[26] S. R. Safavian and D. Landgrebe, “A survey of decision tree classifier 
methodology,” IEEE Transactions on System, Man, and Cybernetics, 
21(3), pp. 660-674, 1991. 
[27] H. Bhavsar and M. H. Panchal, “A review on support vector machine 
for data classification,” International Journal of Advanced Research 
in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET), 1(10), pp. 185, 
2012. 
[28] F. Rossi and N. Villa, “Support vector machine for functional data 
classification,” Neurocomputing, 69(7-9), pp. 730-742, 2006. 
[29] R. J. Schalkoff, “Artificial Neural Networks,” McGraw-Hill, 1997. 
[30] H. Scheffé, “The Relation of Control Charts to Analysis of Variance 
and Chi-Square Tests,” Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 42(239) pp. 425-431, 1947. 
[31] R.Y. Chan and W.T. Chien, “Concepts of body constitution, health 
and sub-health from traditional Chinese medicine perspective,” World 
J Transl Med, 2, pp. 56-66, 2013. 
[32] J. Cohen, “Statistical power and analysis for the behavioral sciences,” 
2nd ed. Hisdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 79-80, 1988. 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Multiclass Disease Predictions Based on Integrated Clinical and Genomics Datasets
Moeez M. Subhani
College of Engineering and Technology
University of Derby
Derby, England
Email: m.subhani@derby.ac.uk
Ashiq Anjum
College of Engineering and Technology
University of Derby
Derby, England
Email: a.anjum@derby.ac.uk
Abstract—Clinical predictions using clinical data by computa-
tional methods are common in bioinformatics. However, clinical
predictions using information from genomics datasets as well is
not a frequently observed phenomenon in research. Precision
medicine research requires information from all available datasets
to provide intelligent clinical solutions. In this paper, we have
attempted to create a prediction model which uses information
from both clinical and genomics datasets. We have demonstrated
multiclass disease predictions based on combined clinical and
genomics datasets using machine learning methods. We have
created an integrated dataset, using a clinical (ClinVar) and a
genomics (gene expression) dataset, and trained it using instance-
based learner to predict clinical diseases. We have used an
innovative but simple way for multiclass classiﬁcation, where the
number of output classes is as high as 75. We have used Principal
Component Analysis for feature selection. The classiﬁer predicted
diseases with 73% accuracy on the integrated dataset. The
results were consistent and competent when compared with other
classiﬁcation models. The results show that genomics information
can be reliably included in datasets for clinical predictions and
it can prove to be valuable in clinical diagnostics and precision
medicine.
Keywords–Clinical;
Genomics;
Data
Integration;
Machine
Learning; Disease Prediction; Classiﬁcation; Bioinformatics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The medical science is rich with various types of datasets
ranging from clinical to genomics datasets. The clinical
datasets are diverse in terms of their nature, format and the
information they contain. On the other hand, genomics datasets
are intrinsically enormous in size and dimensions, and so is the
information contained in them [1]. The genomic information
can be considered as the backbone of clinical information since
the genomic structure derives the physical characteristics of
any organism. If the two pieces of information are connected,
it may help to improve the overall medical research by ﬁnding
more accurate and advanced clinical diagnostic solutions. The
connection essentially means to integrate clinical and genomics
datasets. This is also a way forward in precision medicine
studies, where medical practitioners want to make clinical
decisions based on both clinical and genomics parameters and
not just one of them [2][3].
However, the research to establish or explore this con-
nection is not very commonly sought in the state-of-the-art
[1][4]–[6]. The datasets from clinical and genomics sources
are mainly used independently in their respective research
domains. From literature review, it has been observed that
most clinical prediction studies have been limited to either
clinical datasets [7]–[13] or genomics datasets [14]–[20]. One
common factor among these studies is that almost all of them
are prediction studies, which establishes the fact that the trend
for clinical predictions has long prevailed in research.
Although there are some studies which have attempted
towards the inter-domain research, the trend does not seem
to be very progressive. For example, [21] used decision trees
to predict breast cancer outcomes. Similarly, [22] employed
multiple regression and statistical methods to infer associa-
tions, and [3] used a graph-based approach to predict cancer
clinical outcomes from multi-omics data. All these studies used
integrated datasets for prediction or association studies using
various approaches. However, most of these approaches are
now outdated due to limitations in terms of their performance
or accuracy [21][22]. The approach in [3] (combination of
regression, Bayesian networks, and evolutionary neural net-
works) is more advanced and promising but this study is
limited to binary classiﬁcations and multi-omics data only
[23][24].
The research work mentioned above show that prediction
based studies are common in the literature. The most popular
or commonly sought predicting factors are survival rate and
disease recurrence rate. However, we could not ﬁnd any disease
prediction model in the literature based on combined clinical
and genomics data information. A typical disease prediction
model, as we deﬁne, takes information from both clinical and
genomics datasets and predicts disease(s) in a patient. This can
be achieved when we have both clinical and genomics datasets
available for a variety of diseases. Hence, we are attempting
to design a disease prediction model which aims to predict
possible medical condition(s) in a patient using information
from both clinical and genomics datasets.
From ClinVar and Expression Atlas databases, we have
been able to construct such dataset which contains both clinical
parameters as well as gene expression values in a single
dataset for several patients. Since the data retrieved from these
databases is in eXtensible Markup Language (XML) format,
we can create a very ﬂexible schema for this dataset. Using
this dataset, we can train a model to learn the diseases in
various subjects. As an initial attempt to prove the concept,
we have used the k-Nearest Neighbours (kNN) algorithm for
the learning model, which is an instance based learner [25].
Considering the size and complexity of the dataset, kNN
appears to be a reasonable choice of learning method since
it learns the classiﬁcation function only locally.
Genomics based clinical diagnosis does not exist in clinical
environments. Traditionally, disease predictions are made using
regular clinical practices only. Our disease prediction model
can provide a genomic signature to verify the disease existence
or possible occurrence. Hence, this model not only will help
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

TABLE I. CLINVAR DATASET.
GENE
CONDITION
CLINICAL SIG-
NIFICANCE
CHROMOSOME
NO.
LOCATION
VARIATION ID
ALLELE ID
AKAP
LONG QT SYN-
DROME
BENIGN/LIKELY
BENIGN
7
92001306
136347
140050
AKT2
COLORECTAL
NEOPLASMS
LIKELY
PATHOGENIC
19
40236313
376039
362918
APC
HEREDITARY
CANCER-
PREDISPOSING
SYNDROME
PATHOGENIC
5
N/A
181836
181126
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
the medical practitioners to gain another step of conﬁdence in
terms of clinical diagnosis, but also help advance the precision
medicine research.
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. Section
II discusses the challenges for data integration. Section III
explains the data integration model. Section IV gives details
of the prediction model and the algorithm along with the im-
plementation details. Section V presents the results, followed
by discussion in Section VI and conclusion in Section VII.
II.
CLINICAL AND GENOMICS DATA INTEGRATION
CHALLENGES
The integration of clinical and genomics datasets is crucial
to move towards precision medicine. The medical conditions
of each person are transcribed from the underlying genomics
structure. Hence, it is critical to bring forward the genomic
information to play part in the clinical diagnostics [2][3]. The
main challenge is to ﬁnd a way to integrate datasets which are
completely different from each other in terms of their nature,
size, and properties.
Most biological databases have standardised the data stor-
age in XML formats. European Molecular Biology Laboratory
(EMBL) took an initiative in 2000 to provide access of all
the ﬂat ﬁles data in XML format [26]. XML provides more
ﬂexibility in terms of storage, transport and integration of
complex biological datasets [27]. The format also provides
the advantage that the schema of datasets is extensible and
multiple datasets can be mapped together. Our datasets from
both sources, ClinVar and Expression Atlas, are accessed in
XML formats.
The scope of data integration models is vast, as mentioned
in the literature review in the previous section. Various data
integration models have been discussed by various authors
including [1], [4] and [6]. For our study, we have adopted
a meta-dimensional approach model, which refers to using
multiple datasets simultaneously in the analysis [6]. This
involves building a model on top of multiple datasets, which
are combined or integrated either before or after building
the data model. The approach facilitates the advantage of
fetching information from multiple datasets and including it
in the analysis model. However, the integration may also yield
complex datasets resulting in less robust models.
There are multiple methods within the meta-dimensional
approach as mentioned by [1] and [6]. We have adopted a
concatenation-based integration method, where different ma-
trices are combined into a large single matrix before building
a model. One advantage of this method is that once it is
determined how to concatenate the variables from different
datasets into a single matrix, it is relatively easier to build any
statistical analysis model on it. For example, on a combination
of genomics datasets, [8] used a Bayesian model to predict
phenotypes, and [28] used Cox Lasso model to predict time
to recurrence.
It may be important to mention here that the integration
attempt in this paper is only at the data level. Since the data
being retrieved from public repositories is in XML format,
we do not need to pre-build a structure to store data, and we
are not dealing with databases either. Therefore, this method
provides the advantage to avoid the data structure and storage
issues. Hence, the data integration here must not be confused
with the traditional database level data integration.
TABLE II. GENE EXPRESSION DATASET.
GENE
GSM452573
GSM452571
GSM452642
...
AKAP9
3.563587736
3.45243272
3.535150355
...
AKT1
10.8863402
10.34918494
9.129441853
...
AKT2
5.005896122
4.463927997
4.993673626
...
III.
DATA INTEGRATION MODEL
We have used completely anonymised clinical and ge-
nomics datasets obtained from public sources. The clinical
dataset (ds1) has been obtained from ClinVar [29], which is
an open source database that contains information about the
genomic variation and links it with phenotype information. For
each gene, it provides the diseases it causes and their clinical
signiﬁcance. In addition, it also includes the whereabouts of the
gene, such as, chromosome number, location, variation ID etc.
A snapshot of the data is illustrated in Table I. The database
was searched for ’colorectal cancer’, and all the search results
were downloaded and saved as XML ﬁles.
The genomics dataset (ds2) is a Gene Expression dataset of
primary colorectal tumours (E-GEOD-18105), obtained from
the Expression Atlas of European Bioinformatics Institute
(EBI), which is a public resource for gene expression datasets
[30]. Gene expression data, as the name indicates, contains
information for the expression of gene(s) in a particular biolog-
ical sample(s). The expression data is obtained via microarray
technology, which provides parallel processing and monitoring
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

TABLE III. INTEGRATED DATASET.
DISEASE
CLINICAL
SIGNIFI-
CANCE
CHROMOSOME
NO.
LOCATION
VARIATION
ID
ALLELE
ID
GENE
GSM452573
GSM452571
LONG
QT
SYNDROME
BENIGN/
LIKELY
BENIGN
7
92001306
136347
140050
AKAP
3.563587736
3.45243272
COLORECTAL
NEO-
PLASMS
LIKELY
PATHOGENIC
19
40236313
376039
362918
AKT2
5.005896122
4.463927997
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
of tens and thousands of genes, producing tons of valuable
data [31]. A typical gene expression dataset contains a matrix
with genes in rows and samples in columns. The number in
each cell of the matrix characterises the expression level of
a speciﬁc gene in the given sample [32]. Table II shows an
example of how gene expression data looks like. After the ﬁrst
column, which is gene name, the rest of the columns represents
samples, and the values represent the expression levels.
The primary reason for selecting these two datasets was
that they fulﬁll the information requirement for this study. The
ClinVar data provides the information about clinical condition
against each gene present in the dataset. It also provides
the clinical signiﬁcance of these conditions [33]. The gene
expression data brings the information about the activity of
those genes in different samples. Hence, the two datasets
provide the required information to create an integrated dataset
for this model.
TABLE IV. STATISTICS OF INTEGRATED DATASET.
Output Classes
I
II
Unique Classes
80
76
Feature set
117
117
Training Examples
258
281
As mentioned previously, we are using a meta-dimensional
approach based integration, and speciﬁcally the concatenation
method. The datasets were concatenated via gene names. It has
to be noted that there were multiple examples for each gene
in both datasets. The examples in the ds1 with no feature sets
available in ds2 were removed. On the contrary, the examples
in the ds2 for which there were no feature sets in ds1, the
data was extrapolated in ds1 so that the examples for that
gene can be increased. Since each parameter in the feature set
is independent, therefore, extrapolating some points does not
affect the accuracy.
Table III shows an example of the integrated dataset, where
the clinical and genomics parameters are concatenated via gene
names. The statistics of the dataset is shown in Table IV. The
data was trained with two different output classes: genes (class-
I) and diseases (class-II). There are 80 unique genes, and 76
unique diseases in the dataset after removing the outliers.
It can be argued that predicting genes as output class does
not provide much meaning. Predicting disease has a more
clinical value since this information is not available in the
gene expression data. The reason behind this selection is only
to provide an example that the classiﬁer can be used to predict
any feature from an integrated dataset without any restriction.
The resulting schema includes clinical and genomics pa-
rameters in columns, while each row represents a gene. Hence,
each row tells the possible medical condition for a gene if it
is active in a sample. This schema is completely ﬂexible and
scalable. It can be expanded by adding data from different
sources, as long as the new data can be mapped to existing
schema. More data brings more information that will only help
to improve the performance of the classiﬁer by increasing the
feature set and the training examples.
IV.
PREDICTION MODEL
In this section, we will talk about the multiclass classi-
ﬁcation challenges, followed by the details of our prediction
model, comprising the algorithm and the experimental envi-
ronment.
A. Multiclass Classiﬁcation
When we talk about disease classiﬁcation, we are talking
about a complicated multiclass classiﬁcation problem. From
classiﬁcation perspective, it is relatively easier to classify
binary problems or even few classes, but with increasing
number of classes, the complexity of the dataset gets very high
[34]. The data under consideration in this study contains more
than 75 different classes. When the number of output classes
is that high, the variance in the data is very high as well. In
such a case, it is best to have as much data as possible so
that every class has a sufﬁcient representation in training data.
This is a minor limitation in our study because of the limited
number of examples available from public datasets.
There is no single classiﬁcation method that can be sug-
gested to be best suited for multiclass classiﬁcation [34].
Any algorithm can perform better than the rest based on the
characteristics and properties of the data. In this study we have
used the k-Nearest Neighbours (kNN) algorithm. The reason
for selecting the kNN instead of Support Vector Machines
(SVM), which is a more popular classiﬁcation algorithm, is
our large number of output classes and the random distribution
of data (Figure 1). Unlike SVM, which uses kernels for
optimization, kNN determines the label for a given data point
based on nearest data points on the distance metric. Since
kNN is a non-parametric algorithm, it does not assume any
explicit functions for the input data (such as Gaussian) [25].
This works well in our case when the data has no particular
distribution and is widespread (Figure 1). Hence, we can avoid
the algorithmic complexity by using an algorithm which uses
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

local optimization only. Also, kNN performs well on small to
medium sized datasets [25].
B. Classiﬁcation Algorithm
The kNN is a non-parametric supervised learning algorithm
[25]. For a given dataset X, with labels Y , the algorithm
calculates the distances between a new data point z and all
data points in X to create a distance matrix. Euclidean distance
is the most common method for calculating this distance.
Euclidean distance between point xi and yi can be calculated
by:
D(x, y) =
k
X
i=1
(xi − yi)2
(1)
Let R = (Xi, Yi), where i = 1, 2...N, be the training
set, where Xi is the p ∗ q feature vector, and Yi is the q-
dimensional vector which represents m output class labels,
as we are considering multiclass classiﬁcation problem. We
presume that the training data has random numeric variables
with unknown distribution.
From the training set R, the kNN algorithm narrows down
to a local sub-region r(x) of the input space, which is centered
on an estimation point x. This predicting sub-region r(x)
contains the training points (x′) nearest to x, which can be
expressed as:
r(x) = {x′ | D(x, x′) ≤ d(k)}
(2)
where, D(x, x′) is the distance metric between x′ and x,
and d(k) is the kth order statistic. k[y] denotes the k samples in
the sub-region r(x), which are labelled y. The kNN algorithm
estimates the posterior probability p(y | x) of the estimation
point x:
p(y | x) = p(x | y)p(y)
p(x)
∼= k[y]
k
(3)
Generally, when the kNN is used for binary classiﬁcation,
the label assignment is relatively easier since the algorithm has
to select between two classes only, such as :
g(x) = { 1 , k[y = 1] ≥ k[y = −1] − 1, k[y = 1] ≤ k[y = −1]
(4)
We have improvised this functionality for our study, where
the output class is non-binary. In this case, for any estimation
point x, the decision g(x) for a given label y is estimated by:
gk(x) = yk | minDk
(5)
where, Dk is represented by 1 Hence, the decision that
will maximise the posterior probability will be assigned for
the output label. For a multiclass classiﬁcation problem, where
y ∈ {1 . . . k}, the kNN algorithm uses the following decision
rule:
F(x) = argmax[gk(x)]
(6)
Thus, for the selected nearest k neighbours, the algorithm
calculates the posterior probability for each class, and the class
with highest probability is assigned to x. Euclidean distance
is the most common method, but there are other distance
calculation methods as well, such as seuclidean, mahalanobis,
spearman, etc [25].
Figure 1. Distribution of variance in the integrated dataset.
C. Performance Measurement
Generally, the performance of machine learning classiﬁers
is measured using various parameters, such as, accuracy,
sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and Receiver Operator Curve (ROC).
These parameters are calculated based on the true positives,
true negatives, false positives and false negatives of classiﬁer.
For binary classes, these parameters are easier to calculate
because there is only one positive and one negative class.
However, for multicalss classiﬁcation, the problem is more
complicated and it is not easy to calculate each parameter for
each class. Especially ROC, which is a standard measure to
represent performance of a classiﬁer, is very complicated to
calculate for a very large multiclass problem. This problem
has been discussed in further detail by Fawcett in [35].
Therefore, calculating each parameter for every class will
not only be laborious, but will also produce loads of results
that will be difﬁcult to ensemble and explain. To simplify
that, we have only used confusion matrices to represent the
performance of the classiﬁer and used the accuracy for each
classiﬁer to compare the results for the two classes.
D. Experimental Environment
We have used Matlab (R2018a) for all the experiments,
which provides built-in libraries for machine learning clas-
siﬁers. We used the machine learning toolbox to train the
classiﬁcation model using kNN. The toolbox takes the data
as input and process the classiﬁcation itself using the built-
in library functions and selected features. The classiﬁcation
toolbox uses the Euclidean distance by default to compute the
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

distance metrics. The tool box can be used to reproduce the
results.
At ﬁrst, we perform the Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) for dimensionality reduction. Since, our data is multi-
variate, ranging from gene expression data to phenotypic data,
the data points are widespread in the data space. Figure 1
shows the standard deviation distribution of the ﬁrst 20 data
variables from the integrated dataset. It can be seen that the
data distribution is very random and does not follow any
standard distribution function. Therefore, it is important to
reduce the dimension of the integrated dataset. We performed
PCA to explain 95% variance in the data.
Figure 2. Confusion matrix for class-I.
The results of classiﬁcation depend highly on the dimen-
sions of the dataset. The correlation between the number of
examples and feature sets is very critical in this case to avoid
over-ﬁtting [36][37]. The clinical dataset has only 5 features,
which is not a large enough set to be used stand-alone for
prediction model. With a feature set of 5, the prediction
is neither reliable nor comparable with other datasets. The
genomics dataset is large enough in this respect, but it does not
contain the class-II so we cannot predict diseases. Therefore,
we have only used the integrated dataset to train with the
prediction model explained in the previous section (IV), and
then compared it with other classiﬁers.
The results are validated using 10-fold cross-validation.
This means, the dataset is divided into 10 parts; one part is
held out as a test data and the rest of the 9 parts are used as
training data. This step is repeated 10 times using a different
part every time to holdout as a test data. This way every
example from data is used both as training and test data. The
resulting accuracy is an average of the 10-fold process.
V.
RESULTS
The performance of a classiﬁcation model is analysed using
a confusion matrix. Figure 2 shows a confusion matrix for
class-I prediction. The rows in a confusion matrix represent
the true output class, and the columns represent the predicted
class. The diagonal cells indicate the true positives (green)
and the false negatives; and the off-diagonal cells indicate the
false positives and the true negatives (red). The bottom right
cell shows the overall accuracy and the loss of the classiﬁer.
A. Classiﬁcation with our Classiﬁer
The number of neighbours (NN) is a variable in the
algorithm, which can be tuned to change the performance of
the algorithm. We tested the performance of the algorithm over
10 different neighbours, from 1 to 10.
As mentioned previously, we trained the integrated dataset
for two different classes: genes (class-I) and diseases (class-
II). The results are shown in Figure 3. At NN=1, the trained
model predicts class-I with 86% accuracy, and class-II with
73% accuracy.
Figure 3. Accuracy of classiﬁcation model for both classes.
Initially, the accuracy drops almost linearly with the in-
creasing number of neighbours. The drop in accuracy can be
attributed to the variation in data. As the algorithm considers
more number of neighbours, each neighbour brings more
variation that affects the prediction accuracy. However, as it
can be seen in Figure 3, accuracy remains above 50% for
up to 3 neighbours for both classes which can be regarded
as a good accuracy considering a multivariate training data.
Following NN=4, the accuracy drops almost exponentially.
This variation over neighbours may be avoided by intro-
ducing a weighted parameter in the algorithm. This parameter
weighs the contribution of each neighbour under consideration
based on its distance. The nearest neighbours gets higher
weights than the distant ones. Matlab’s classiﬁcation tool uses
the squared inverse method to calculate the weights, which can
be expressed as:
wn =
1
d(xn − xi)2
(7)
where, xn is the neighbour to point xi. To accommodate
this weight parameter, the eq1 is adjusted as follows:
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

D(x, y) =
k
X
i=1
wi(xi − yi)2
(8)
We tested this updated version by training the integrated
dataset, and we observed that the accuracy was raised to
the maximum (86.1% for class-I and 73.7% for class-II)
for all NN’s. The results are shown in Figure 4. This is
perhaps because the weighted version predicts based on the
neighbour with the highest weight. Since the nearest neighbour
is most likely to have highest weight out of all neighbours, the
classiﬁcation result is the same every time. This result seems
to be not very helpful for our dataset.
Figure 4. Accuracy for both classes with weighted kNN.
However, our model has predicted the diseases with up
to 73% accuracy. The accuracy is not as good as for the
class-I (86%). There can be multiple reasons behind this. The
representation of each class label in the data varies, which
affects the prediction accuracy. Some classes have sufﬁcient
examples in the data, while others have only few examples.
The higher the representation of a class label in the training
data, the better is the prediction accuracy for that class. The
distribution of class-I labels in dataset is comparatively more
uniform than class-II; hence, higher accuracy. Still, achieving
73% accuracy for class-II is a very good result considering the
size, shape, and multivariate nature of the dataset.
B. Comparing with other Classiﬁers
We trained the same integrated dataset with other classiﬁers
in order to compare the performance. Using PCA of 95%, we
trained all the classiﬁers available on Matlab’s classiﬁcation
toolbox, and then selected bluethe top 10 models (out of 22)
to compare the classiﬁcation accuracy for both classes. NN=1
for all the models in the classiﬁcation toolbox. 10-fold cross-
validation was used to avoid over-ﬁtting. The results are shown
in Figure 5.
For class-I, the kNN models provided the highest accuracy
of 96.9%. kNN was followed by the Tree and SVM models. As
Figure 5. Performance of other classiﬁcation models for class-I
predictions.
we can see, the top three models are all kNN models providing
accuracy of above 95%. The accuracy of the SVM models
(Quadratic and Cubic) is almost in the same range (95-96%),
however, the training time for the SVM models is 200 times
higher than the kNN models. This is because the SVM uses
the cost minimization functions, such as gradient descent or
kernel functions, which take much longer to converge. Since
kNN does not use any of those functions, it is more robust and
provides with the same, rather better accuracy. To summarise,
although both kNN and SVM models have predicted about the
same accuracy, the kNN models are much more robust than
the SVM models in terms of performance.
The tree models, except for bagged trees, performed poorly
providing accuracy of about 50% or under. The training time
of the tree models is as good as that of kNN models (few
seconds), but the accuracy is poor. Bagged trees, which is
a bootstrapping method, performed quite well. On the other
hand, boosted trees provides an accuracy of just about 51%.
Although both of them are ensemble methods, which means
they provide an average of multiple models trained on a subset
of data, bagged trees provided much better result.
The accuracy of these kNN models (Fine kNN, Subspace
kNN, and Weighted kNN) is slightly higher than our prediction
model (Figure 3). The reason for this is that the models in the
toolbox are set on different defaults and use different functions
than the ones we used. The classiﬁcation function that we
used is primarily for multiclass classiﬁcation problems. On
the other hand, the function used by the toolbox models are
mainly designed for binary problems, hence, the difference of
accuracy.
Similar results are seen for class-II. The results are shown
in Figure 6. The top 10 models selected here are slightly
different than those for class-I, but majority are the same.
The highest accuracy achieved for class-II is 73.3%, which is
just about the same as achieved by our model (Figure 3). The
top 3 models are all kNN models, with bagged trees standing
at 4th position with 73% accuracy. All SVM models provide
accuracy of less than 50% with training times as high as over
200 times of the kNN models. The same is the case for tree
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

Figure 6. Performance of other classiﬁcation models for class-II
predictions.
models except for bagged trees; same result as for class-I. A
plausible explanation for good performance of bagged trees
could be that they perform better on high dimensional data.
VI.
DISCUSSION
We have demonstrated a novel way for multiclass classi-
ﬁcation based on integrated clinical and genomics datasets.
We have used concatenation-based data integration model for
this purpose, which has been discussed by various researchers
before ([1][6]), but not implemented in the area of health care.
Hence, this is the ﬁrst time that we have attempted to use this
meta-dimensional approach to integrate datasets.
In the past, people have used various other methods for data
integration such as tree-based models [21], statistical models
[22], and graph based models [3][18][20]. All these models
require considerable amount of effort and time to build the
data models ﬁrst, before creating the data analysis model, such
as building the binary trees, or creating graphs models from
datasets. Our method does not involve any of those complex
models; it only requires concatenation of all the datasets into
a single matrix. Once concatenated, the model transfers the
dataset directly to the analysis model and starts training the
learning algorithm. Hence, it is way more efﬁcient in terms of
time and computational costs as compared to other methods.
In terms of analysis, from our knowledge, none of the
previous models have been used for multiclass disease classi-
ﬁcation problems in health care. They have only been demon-
strated for binary classiﬁcations; and, therefore, their results
cannot be compared with our model, which is a multiclass
classiﬁcation model.
In terms of data models, it will be very difﬁcult to perform
multiclass classiﬁcation based on the previously mentioned
models because they will require to build a separate data model
(trees of graphs) for each output class before the analysis
model. Having multiple output classes, the analysis models
will get extremely complicated with several input data models.
With our proposed model, as there is only single concatenated
dataset, the multiclass classiﬁcation is less complicated and
manageable because the dataset has only one data model with
a single schema.
Since, we could not compare our results with any other
previous results from other researchers, we have demonstrated
comparison with other classiﬁcation models. The results shown
in Figures 5 and 6 demonstrate that the kNN models can
outperform the rest of the classiﬁcation models in terms of
prediction accuracy and performance.
Our proposed approach provides a very ﬂexible and scal-
able model, along the lines of our previous work as reported
in [38]–[41], which can be scaled to adjust any new dataset
and accommodate any analysis model. As long as there is a
relational dataset, it can be concatenated to the existing dataset
within the same data model and schema. Any analysis model
or algorithm, including prediction, classiﬁcation, regression
models, can be built on top of the dataset. This ﬂexibility
enables this approach to be adapted for any research purpose
in any domain.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The way forward in precision medicine is to use all
available data from clinical and genomics domains in order
to provide the best clinical solutions. The datasets need to be
intelligently integrated for this purpose. In this paper, we have
performed clinical predictions based on clinical and genomics
information. We have attempted to integrate a clinical (Clin-
Var) and a genomic (gene expression) dataset, and performed
classiﬁcation for disease predictions. We have designed a
multiclass classiﬁcation model that predicts diseases from
integrated datasets. The model, which is validated by 10-
fold cross-validation, has predicted diseases with up to 73%
accuracy. We also predicted genes as an extra variable, from
the same dataset, and achieved up to 86% accuracy. We have
compared the results with other classiﬁcation models and
demonstrated that our model outperforms the rest. We can
conclude that constructing the learning classiﬁers on top of
large-scale inter-domain integrated datasets can provide very
good clinical predictions. This can prove to be very beneﬁcial
and a stepping-stone towards the precision medicine.
This research study shows that diseases can be predicted
with good accuracy from a patient’s dataset if it has both
clinical and genomics parameters present. The accuracy will
further improve if we train the model with a much larger
size of training data. The reliability and conﬁdence in results
will increase by incorporating more clinical and genomics
information. We have demonstrated with a gene prediction
example, that, when the dataset is more uniformly distributed
among different classes, the prediction accuracy goes high even
on a multiclass classiﬁcation task.
This study has great potential to expand including achiev-
ing analysis provenance [13]. The more information a dataset
will contain, higher the accuracy can be achieved. The dataset
can be expanded to include more multivariate clinical and
genomics datasets, such as clinical trials and multi-omics
datasets, respectively. Including clinical information from clin-
ical trials or laboratory tests will have a signiﬁcant impact in
the clinical prediction studies.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank and acknowledge the help
and support received from Usman Yaseen, Sanna Aizad, Bilal
Arshad and Craig Bower in the successful completion of this
study.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. M. Subhani, A. Anjum, A. Koop, and N. Antonopoulos, “Clinical
and genomics data integration using meta-dimensional approach,” in
2016 IEEE/ACM 9th International Conference on Utility and Cloud
Computing (UCC).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 416–421.
[2]
R. Higdon et al., “The promise of multi-omics and clinical data
integration to identify and target personalized healthcare approaches
in autism spectrum disorders,” Omics: a journal of integrative biology,
vol. 19, no. 4, 2015, pp. 197–208.
[3]
D. Kim et al., “Knowledge boosting: a graph-based integration approach
with multi-omics data and genomic knowledge for cancer clinical
outcome prediction,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, vol. 22, no. 1, 2014, pp. 109–120.
[4]
J. S. Hamid, P. Hu, N. M. Roslin, V. Ling, C. M. Greenwood, and
J. Beyene, “Data integration in genetics and genomics: methods and
challenges,” Human genomics and proteomics: HGP, vol. 2009, 2009.
[5]
B. Louie, P. Mork, F. Martin-Sanchez, A. Halevy, and P. Tarczy-
Hornoch, “Data integration and genomic medicine,” Journal of biomed-
ical informatics, vol. 40, no. 1, 2007, pp. 5–16.
[6]
M. D. Ritchie, E. R. Holzinger, R. Li, S. A. Pendergrass, and D. Kim,
“Methods of integrating data to uncover genotype–phenotype interac-
tions,” Nature Reviews Genetics, vol. 16, no. 2, 2015, p. 85.
[7]
D. Delen, G. Walker, and A. Kadam, “Predicting breast cancer sur-
vivability: a comparison of three data mining methods,” Artiﬁcial
intelligence in medicine, vol. 34, no. 2, 2005, pp. 113–127.
[8]
B. L. Fridley, S. Lund, G. D. Jenkins, and L. Wang, “A bayesian
integrative genomic model for pathway analysis of complex traits,”
Genetic epidemiology, vol. 36, no. 4, 2012, pp. 352–359.
[9]
D. Kim, R. Li, S. M. Dudek, and M. D. Ritchie, “Athena: Identifying
interactions between different levels of genomic data associated with
cancer clinical outcomes using grammatical evolution neural network,”
BioData mining, vol. 6, no. 1, 2013, p. 23.
[10]
T. A. Lasko, J. C. Denny, and M. A. Levy, “Computational phenotype
discovery using unsupervised feature learning over noisy, sparse, and
irregular clinical data,” PloS one, vol. 8, no. 6, 2013, p. e66341.
[11]
R. Palaniappan, K. Sundaraj, and S. Sundaraj, “A comparative study
of the svm and k-nn machine learning algorithms for the diagnosis
of respiratory pathologies using pulmonary acoustic signals,” BMC
bioinformatics, vol. 15, no. 1, 2014, p. 223.
[12]
J. Raikwal and K. Saxena, “Performance evaluation of svm and k-
nearest neighbor algorithm over medical data set,” International Journal
of Computer Applications, vol. 50, no. 14, 2012.
[13]
R. McClatchey et al., “Providing traceability for neuroimaging analy-
ses,” International journal of medical informatics, vol. 82, no. 9, 2013,
pp. 882–894.
[14]
U. D. Akavia et al., “An integrated approach to uncover drivers of
cancer,” Cell, vol. 143, no. 6, 2010, pp. 1005–1017.
[15]
M. P. Brown et al., “Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene
expression data by using support vector machines,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, vol. 97, no. 1, 2000, pp. 262–267.
[16]
D. Kim, H. Shin, Y. S. Song, and J. H. Kim, “Synergistic effect of
different levels of genomic data for cancer clinical outcome prediction,”
Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 45, no. 6, 2012, pp. 1191–1198.
[17]
L. J. Lu, Y. Xia, A. Paccanaro, H. Yu, and M. Gerstein, “Assessing
the limits of genomic data integration for predicting protein networks,”
Genome research, vol. 15, no. 7, 2005, pp. 945–953.
[18]
E. E. Schadt et al., “An integrative genomics approach to infer causal
associations between gene expression and disease,” Nature genetics,
vol. 37, no. 7, 2005, p. 710.
[19]
J. Zhu et al., “Integrating large-scale functional genomic data to dissect
the complexity of yeast regulatory networks,” Nature genetics, vol. 40,
no. 7, 2008, p. 854.
[20]
X. Yang et al., “A network based method for analysis of lncrna-disease
associations and prediction of lncrnas implicated in diseases,” PloS one,
vol. 9, no. 1, 2014, p. e87797.
[21]
J. R. Nevins, E. S. Huang, H. Dressman, J. Pittman, A. T. Huang, and
M. West, “Towards integrated clinico-genomic models for personalized
medicine: combining gene expression signatures and clinical factors in
breast cancer outcomes prediction,” Human molecular genetics, vol. 12,
no. suppl 2, 2003, pp. R153–R157.
[22]
E. Lee, S. Cho, K. Kim, and T. Park, “An integrated approach to
infer causal associations among gene expression, genotype variation,
and disease,” Genomics, vol. 94, no. 4, 2009, pp. 269–277.
[23]
D. Kim, R. Li, S. M. Dudek, and M. D. Ritchie, “Predicting censored
survival data based on the interactions between meta-dimensional omics
data in breast cancer,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 56, 2015,
pp. 220–228.
[24]
S. S. Verma, D. Kim, M. D. Ritchie, A. Lucas, R. Li, and S. M.
Dudek, “Using knowledge-driven genomic interactions for multi-omics
data analysis: metadimensional models for predicting clinical outcomes
in ovarian carcinoma,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, vol. 24, no. 3, 2016, pp. 577–587.
[25]
R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G. Stork, Pattern classiﬁcation and scene
analysis.
Wiley New York, 1973, vol. 3.
[26]
A. Robinson, J.-J. Riethoven, and L. Wang, “XEMBL: distributing
EMBL data in XML format,” Bioinformatics, vol. 18, no. 8, 2002, pp.
1147–1148.
[27]
Z. Lacroix, “Biological data integration: wrapping data and tools,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 6, no. 2,
2002, pp. 123 – 128.
[28]
P. K. Mankoo, R. Shen, N. Schultz, D. A. Levine, and C. Sander,
“Time to recurrence and survival in serous ovarian tumors predicted
from integrated genomic proﬁles,” PLOS ONE, vol. 6, no. 11, 2011,
pp. 1–12.
[29]
“NCBI ClinVar Database,” URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar
[accessed: January 2018].
[30]
“Gene Expression Atlas,” URL: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/
experiments/E-GEOD-18105/?query=E-GEOD-18105 A-AFFY-44
[accessed: January 2018].
[31]
N. Raghavachari, “Microarray technology: basic methodology and
application in clinical research for biomarker discovery in vascular
diseases,” in Lipoproteins and Cardiovascular Disease. Springer, 2013,
pp. 47–84.
[32]
A. Brazma and J. Vilo, “Gene expression data analysis,” FEBS Letters,
vol. 480, no. 1, 2000, pp. 17–24.
[33]
M. J. Landrum et al., “Clinvar: public archive of relationships among
sequence variation and human phenotype,” Nucleic acids research,
vol. 42, no. D1, 2013, pp. D980–D985.
[34]
C. Zhang, M. Ogihara, and T. Li, “A comparative study of feature
selection and multiclass classiﬁcation methods for tissue classiﬁcation
based on gene expression,” Bioinformatics, vol. 20, no. 15, 2004, pp.
2429–2437.
[35]
T. Fawcett, “An introduction to roc analysis,” Pattern recognition letters,
vol. 27, no. 8, 2006, pp. 861–874.
[36]
J. Hua, Z. Xiong, J. Lowey, E. Suh, and E. R. Dougherty, “Optimal
number of features as a function of sample size for various classiﬁcation
rules,” Bioinformatics, vol. 21, no. 8, 2004, pp. 1509–1515.
[37]
A. K. Jain and W. G. Waller, “On the optimal number of features in the
classiﬁcation of multivariate gaussian data,” Pattern recognition, vol. 10,
no. 5-6, 1978, pp. 365–374.
[38]
A. Anjum, R. McClatchey, A. Ali, and I. Willers, “Bulk scheduling with
the diana scheduler,” IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 53,
no. 6, 2006, pp. 3818–3829.
[39]
F. van Lingen et al., “The clarens web service framework for distributed
scientiﬁc analysis in grid projects,” in 2005 International Conference on
Parallel Processing Workshops (ICPPW’05).
IEEE, 2005, pp. 45–52.
[40]
F. Van Lingen et al., “Grid enabled analysis: architecture, prototype and
status,” 2005.
[41]
S. L. Kiani, A. Anjum, M. Knappmeyer, N. Bessis, and N. Antonopou-
los, “Federated broker system for pervasive context provisioning,”
Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 86, no. 4, 2013, pp. 1107–1123.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

A Mathematical Model for Predator–Prey Ecosystems Facing Climate Changes 
Katsumi Sakata 
Department of Life Science and Informatics 
Maebashi Institute of Technology 
Maebashi, Japan 
e-mail: ksakata@maebashi-it.ac.jp 
Toshiyuki Saito 
Department of Radiation Effects Research 
National Institute of Radiological Sciences 
Chiba, Japan  
e-mail: saito.toshiyuki@qst.go.jp 
 
Hajime Ohyanagi 
Computational Bioscience Research Center 
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 
Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia  
e-mail: hajime.ohyanagi@kaust.edu.sa 
 
Setsuko Komatsu 
Department of Environmental and Food Sciences 
Fukui University of Technology 
Fukui, Japan  
e-mail: skomatsu@fukui-ut.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—We developed a mathematical model for predator–
prey ecosystems undergoing climate-related changes. The 
model introduces the amount of information transferred 
between the number of individuals of the predator and prey 
categories, and the regulation performance in a predator–prey 
ecosystem is measured by a reduction of Shannon entropy, 
which is achieved by predation events and decay in the 
ecosystem. We examine the model with a computer simulation 
for a well-studied bass–crayfish predator–prey ecosystem in a 
closed lake. 
Keywords-mathematical model; predator–prey ecosystem; 
climate change. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Over the last three decades, environmental changes, such 
as global warming, desertification, and air pollution have 
worsened, and their effects on life systems is a serious 
concern [1]. Previous studies on the environmental responses 
of life systems have been conducted for specific networks, 
including genetic regulatory networks and ecological 
networks [2][3]. 
Schrödinger suggested that a life system takes orderliness 
from its environment and sustains itself at a fairly high level 
of orderliness, or at a fairly low level of thermodynamic 
entropy [4]. Kauffman investigated how the dynamic 
behavior of a Boolean network suddenly becomes orderly. 
He made the analogy that the behavior approximates cell fate 
which is characterized by expression patterns of multiple 
genes in an organism [5][6]. Barabási and Albert found that 
generic mechanisms form an ordered network structure with 
a scale-free property [7]. However, we could not find a 
mathematical model that clarifies the varying orderliness of 
biological systems undergoing environmental changes.  
In this study, we quantify the environmental stimuli and 
orderliness achieved in state variables in life systems with 
Shannon entropy based on their probability distributions. 
The state variables represent the state of the system, such as 
expression levels in a genetic network. We then hypothesize 
a 
relationship 
between 
environmental 
changes 
and 
orderliness in the life systems. We validate the hypothesis on 
an 
ecosystem 
using 
numerical 
experiments 
on 
a 
computational model of differential equations for the 
ecosystem with the climate-shift model [8]. In the model, a 
climate-attribute change is modeled as a shift in the 
probability distribution of the climate attribute. We evaluate 
control performance by a difference of Shannon entropy as 
ΔH≡H(X)−H(X′), where X and X′ represent the state variable 
X at t0 and at t1 (unit time after t0), respectively [9]. The 
Shannon entropy H(X) indicates the uncertainty of X [10]. 
Section II includes our results and discussion, and Section III 
states our conclusion and future work. 
II. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
We consider a predator–prey ecosystem in a closed lake 
(Figure 1a). The probability distribution of the number of 
viable predators, which we call “capacity”, varies according 
to the climate shift of a climate attribute against a range of 
climate attributes (survival region) in which the predator is 
viable. The predator capacity decreases with an increase in 
climate shift (Figure 1b). We derived (1), which shows that 
the Shannon entropy (H(Y)) of the number of predators 
decreases with an increase in the climate shift (Figure 1c):  
 
 ( )
( )
e
e
e
H Y
H Y
+δ
≤
, 
(1) 
where e and δe indicate the level of the climate attribute and 
its increment. Generally, I(X;Y)≤min{H(X),H(Y)}, thus  
 
 (
; )
(
; )
U
U
e
e
e
I X Y
I X Y
+δ
≤
, 
(2) 
where I(X;Y)U(≡H(Y)) denotes an upper bound of the mutual 
information between X and Y. We merged (2) with an 
information–theoretic limit for general control systems [9], 
and thus obtained (3):  
 
 
U
U
e
e
e
H
H
+δ
∆
≤ ∆
, 
(3) 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies

where ΔH is the Shannon entropy reduction of the state 
variable X (the number of prey individuals) over the 
transition X→X´ between t0 and t1 (unit time after t0). It 
represents the control performance of the predator–prey 
ecosystem. Equations (2) and (3) suggest that the mutual 
information between the number of prey individuals (X) and 
predators (Y), as well as the control performance of the 
predator–prey ecosystem, decreases with an increase in 
climate shift. Furthermore, the control performance of the 
predator–prey ecosystem appears to degrade from the level 
of a closed-loop control system to an open-loop control 
system, based on the information–theoretic limits of control 
[9]. 
Numerical experiments on a well-studied bass–crayfish 
predator–prey ecosystem in a closed lake [11] validate the 
degradation of the control performance suggested by the 
model mentioned above.  
The derived inequalities, (1), (2) and (3), are independent 
of the dynamics of the target ecosystem. Thus, our model 
can be applied to analyses of ecosystems in which the 
dynamics are unknown. Furthermore, our model and the 
numerical experiment results suggest that the maintenance of 
predator numbers is effective for protecting predator–prey 
ecosystems against climate-related changes.   
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We developed an information–theoretic predator–prey 
ecosystem model that is independent of the dynamics of the 
ecosystem, and validated the model through numerical 
experiments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported by the Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research 
(Grant No. 16K00399). We thank Natalie Kim, PhD, from 
Edanz Group (www.edanzediting.com/ac) for editing a draft 
of this extended abstract. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Stocker et al. “The Physical Science Basis – Summary for 
Policymakers,” IPCC WGI AR5 (Report), p. 4, 2013. 
[2] G. Cramer, K. Urano, S. Delrot, M. Pezzotti, and K. 
Shinozaki, “Effects of Abiotic Stress on Plants: A Systems 
Biology Perspective,” BMC Plant Biol., vol. 11, p. 163, 2011, 
doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-11-163. 
[3] R. Horan, E. Fenichel, K. Drury, and D. Lodge, “Managing 
Ecological Thresholds in Coupled Environmental-Human 
Systems,” PNAS, vol. 108, pp. 7333–7338, May 2011, doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1005431108. 
[4] E. Schrödinger, “What is Life?: With Mind and Matter and 
Autobiographical Sketches,” Cambridge University Press, 
1992. 
[5] S. Kauffman, “The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and 
Selection in Evolution,” Oxford University Press, June 1993. 
[6] F. H. Westhoff, B. Yarbrough, and R. Yarbrough, 
“Complexity, Organization, and Stuart Kauffman’s the 
Origins of Order,” J. Econ. Behav. Organ., vol. 29, pp. 1–25, 
1996, doi: 10.1016/0167-2681(95)00049-6. 
[7] A. Barabási and R. Albert, “Emergence of Scaling in Random 
Networks,” Science, vol. 286, pp. 509–512, Oct. 1999, doi: 
10.1126/science.286.5439.509. 
[8] Q. Schiermeier, “Climate and Weather: Extreme Measures,” 
Nature, vol. 477, pp. 148–149, 2011, doi:10.1038/477148a. 
[9] H. Touchette and S. Lloyd, “Information-Theoretic Limits of 
Control,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 84, pp. 1156–1159, 2000, doi: 
10.1103/PhysRevLett.84.1156. 
[10] D. Robinson, “Entropy and Uncertainty” Entropy, vol. 10, pp. 
493–506, 2008, doi: 10.3390/e10040493. 
[11] K. Drury and D. Lodge, “Using Mean First Passage Times to 
Quantify Equilibrium Resilience in Perturbed Intraguild 
Predation Systems,” Theor. Ecol., vol. 2, pp. 41–51, 2009, 
doi: 10.1007/s12080-008-0027-z.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                         
Figure 1. An ecosystem model: (a) Predator–prey ecosystem in a closed lake. The arrow denotes feeding relationship. (b) Number of viable predators and 
climate shift. (c) Probability distribution of the number of predators before (upper panel) and after (lower panel) an increase in climate shift byδe. 
Climate attribute
Climate shift
Number of 
viable 
individuals 
(predator)
Survival region 
of predator
Capacity
x
y
(a)
ythr
p(Y)
δy
Capacity (E=e)
Y
Y
Capacity (E=e+δe)
(b)
(c)
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-717-7
BIOTECHNO 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Bioinformatics, Biocomputational Systems and Biotechnologies
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

