COLLA 2021
The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks,
Systems and Applications
ISBN: 978-1-61208-881-5
July 18 – 22, 2021
Nice, France
COLLA 2021 Editors
Alvaro Liebana, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

COLLA 2021
Forward
The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and
Applications (COLLA 2021) continued a series of events aiming to gather an interdisciplinary spectrum of
researchers around collaboration technologies.
Collaborative systems have raised to become an inherent part of our lives, supported by global
infrastructures, technological advancements and growing needs for coordination and cooperation.
While organizations and individuals relied on collaboration for decades, the advent of new technologies
(e.g. from wikis to real-time collaboration, groupware to social computing, service-oriented architecture
to distributed collaboration) for inter- and intra- organization collaboration enabled an environment for
advanced collaboration. As a consequence, new developments are expected from current networking
and interacting technologies (protocols, interfaces, services, tools) to support the design and
deployment of scalable collaborative environments. Current trends include innovations in distributed
collaboration, collaborative robots, autonomous systems, online communities or real-time collaboration
protocols.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the COLLA 2021 technical
program committee, as well as all the reviewers. We also kindly thank all the authors who dedicated
much of their time and effort to contribute to COLLA 2021. We truly believe that, thanks to all these
efforts, the final conference program consisted of top quality contributions. We also thank the members
of the COLLA 2021 organizing committee for their help in handling the logistics of this event.
COLLA 2021 Chairs
COLLA 2021 Steering Committee
Mudasser F. Wyne, National University, USA
Yiannis Koumpouros, University of West Attica, Greece
Bruno Vallespir, Université de Bordeaux, France
COLLA 2021 Industry/Research Advisory Committee
Jingjing Wang, Google, USA
Niyati Chhaya, Adobe Research, India
Lasse Berntzen, University of South-Eastern Norway, Norway
Thomas Schuster, University of Applied Sciences Pforzheim, Germany
Wolfgang Mauerer, Technical University of Applied Sciences Regensburg / Siemens AG Corporate
Research, Germany
Hassan A. Karimi, University of Pittsburgh, USA
Atsuo Hazeyama, Tokyo Gakugei University, Japan
Yung-Ting Chuang, National Chung Cheng University, Taiwan
COLLA 2021 Publicity Chair
Mar Parra, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Alvaro Liebana, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

COLLA 2021
Committee
COLLA 2021 Steering Committee
Mudasser F. Wyne, National University, USA
Yiannis Koumpouros, University of West Attica, Greece
Bruno Vallespir, Université de Bordeaux, France
COLLA 2021 Industry/Research Advisory Committee
Jingjing Wang, Google, USA
Niyati Chhaya, Adobe Research, India
Lasse Berntzen, University of South-Eastern Norway, Norway
Thomas Schuster, University of Applied Sciences Pforzheim, Germany
Wolfgang Mauerer, Technical University of Applied Sciences Regensburg / Siemens AG Corporate
Research, Germany
Hassan A. Karimi, University of Pittsburgh, USA
Atsuo Hazeyama, Tokyo Gakugei University, Japan
Yung-Ting Chuang, National Chung Cheng University, Taiwan
COLLA 2021 Publicity Chair
Mar Parra, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Alvaro Liebana, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
COLLA 2021 Technical Program Committee
Jameela Al-Jaroodi, Robert Morris University, USA
Siva Ariram, University of Oulu, Finland
Benjamin Aziz, University of Portsmouth, UK
Samia Ben Rajeb, University of Brussels, Belgium
Lasse Berntzen, University of South-Eastern Norway, Norway
Ramon Chaves, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Richard Chbeir, Université de Pau et des Pays de l'Adour (UPPA), France
Ioannis Chrysakis, FORTH-ICS, Greece / Ghent University, IDLab, imec, Belgium
António Correia, University of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro | INESC TEC, Portugal
Arianna D'Ulizia, National Research Council - IRPPS, Italy
Antonio De Nicola, ENEA, Italy
Christian Esposito, University of Napoli Federico II, Italy
Michael Fuchs, Wilhelm Büchner University of Applied Sciences, Germany
António Guilherme Correia, INESC TEC, Portugal
Atsuo Hazeyama, Tokyo Gakugei University, Japan
Takeshi Ikenaga, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan
Ilias Karasavvidis, School of the Humanities Argonafton & Filellinon, Greece
Hassan A. Karimi, University of Pittsburgh, USA Yiannis Koumpouros, University of West Attica, Greece
Basel Katt, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway
Yiannis Koumpouros, University of West Attica, Greece
Thomas Lampoltshammer, Danube University Krems, Austria
Dhruv Mehta, Aument, Austria

Michele Melchiori, Università degli Studi di Brescia, Italy
Fernando Moreira, Universidade Portucalense, Portugal
Mariela Morveli Espinoza, Federal University of Technology - Paraná, Brazil
Mahmoud Nassar, ENSIAS | Mohammed V University in Rabat, Morocco
Nikolay Nikolov, SINTEF Digital, Norway
Luis Magdiel Oliva-Córdova, University of San Carlos de Guatemala, Guatemala
Klinge Orlando Villalba-Condori, Universidad Nacional de San Agustín - Universidad Católica de Santa
María, Arequipa, Perú
Barbara Pes, University of Cagliari, Italy
Agostino Poggi, Università degli Studi di Parma, Italy
Elaheh Pourabbas, National Research Council of Italy, Italy
Armanda Rodrigues, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Portugal
Sergio J. Rodríguez M., The Australian National University (ANU), Australia
Marcello Sarini, University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy
Deepanjal Shrestha, Pokhara University - School of Business, Nepal
Xiaoyu Song, Portland State University, Oregon, USA
Hussein Suleman, University of Cape Town, South Africa
Ilias Tachmazidis, University of Huddersfield, UK
Oscar Tamburis, University of Naples Federico II, Italy
GeorgiosLappas, UniversityofWesternMacedonia, Greece
Bruno Vallespir, Université de Bordeaux, France
Ismini Vasileiou, De Montfort University, UK
Eva Villegas, La Salle Campus Barcelona - Universitat Ramon Llull, Spain
Abderrahim Ait Wakrime, Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco
Rina R. Wehbe, University of Waterloo, Canada
Mudasser F. Wyne, National University, USA
Liqi Xu, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign (UIUC), USA
Hongbo Zhang, Virginia Military Institute, USA

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
An Idea for Software Enabling and Utilising Personnel Participation in the Development of Well-being at Work
Seppo Vayrynen and Heli Kiema-Junes
1
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

An Idea for Software Enabling and Utilising Personnel Participation in the 
Development of Well-being at Work  
 
Seppo Väyrynen  
Faculty of Technology  
University of Oulu  
Oulu, Finland  
e-mail: seppo.vayrynen@oulu.fi 
Heli Kiema-Junes  
Faculty of Education 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail:heli.kiema@oulu.fi
 
 
Abstract—This study aims to discover ideas for computer or 
mobile device software promoting the participation of 
employees in assessing and developing key well-being aspects 
of their own work. By analysing literature dealing with 
maturity models of organisations, we formed a list of essential 
words describing the main psychosocial, cultural job and 
leadership characteristics. The 10 words we discovered as 
central aspects of one’s work conditions are utilised in the 
software idea, called PEPADE (PErsonnel’s PArticipation in 
DEvelopment 
(of 
well-being 
and 
efficacy 
at 
work 
organisations)). PEPADE shows the evaluating employee a 
multimedia presentation of their workstation in their own 
workplace(s), a visualisation of the tangible real features of the 
Work System (WS) in question. In this way, we believe that 
intangible organisational maturity features will be a much 
more realistic and valid way to conduct an assessment. 
PEPADE is helping organisations identify the needs and ways 
for improvements by designing better details for the current 
real WS and its leadership practices. New solutions can be 
presented, rated, and ranked in many ways. The possibilities of 
PEPADE also increase the interests of personnel and the 
possibilities of promoting innovations related simultaneously to 
current and future  well-being and efficacy in goods or services 
production. 
Keyword - organisation: maturity; psychosocial; leadership; 
concepts; work systems; ergonomics; multimedia; assessment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
      We find a European project’s definition of well-being at 
work as one we can predominantly agree with: ‘well-being 
at work means safe, healthy, and productive work in a well-
led 
organisation 
by 
competent 
workers 
and 
work 
communities who see their job as meaningful and rewarding 
and see work as a factor that supports their life 
management’ [1]. The role of leadership is an important 
issue that must be emphasised. We will see that well-being 
at work is closely and holistically connected to a mature 
organisational culture. This connection is the first key focus 
of this article. The article outlines the background of this 
culture that is being proposed to operationalise within a new 
computer-aided 
tool, 
namely 
PEPADE 
(PErsonnel’s 
PArticipation in DEvelopment (of well-being and efficacy at 
work organisations)).    
     Another key topic partly researched to develop it for 
many types of workplaces, and one that the authors 
themselves have utilised earlier, is well-being in the Work 
System (WS) of the human, technology, task, organisation, 
and work environment elements [2]-[4]. In our former 
papers, WS is described as a framework to achieve 
simultaneously desired—and preventing non-desired—
outcomes, factors and various deviations within the work 
processes run by both blue- and white-collar personnel of an 
organisation or its contractors [4], [5]. These cases remind 
us about the connections between quality managing systems 
that often measures the mostly intangible maturity [3] and 
the more tangible wholeness of the WS. Maturity level 
describes the holistic level of quality of the assessed 
production or servicing facility. In quality assessments, the 
term ‘deviation’ is frequently utilised to show the 
inconsistency in practical work situations, particularly, the 
type and number of details that the organisation observed in 
real situations that differ from ideal, optimal, planned 
functions. This style of assessment, auditing, should include 
the positive and negative essentials of the terms 
‘organisational’, ‘management’, ‘leadership’, ‘HR’, ‘safety 
and health’ and ‘well-being’ in addition to pure 
productivity, technology, technical and effectiveness issues.  
     Social skills play a significant role in working places 
because of many positive outcomes [6] - [8]. They can be 
defined as the ability to behave according to the 
environments of the social context [9], integrate feelings and 
thoughts and behave according to one’s environmental 
circumstances and personal goals [10]. Social skills are 
linked to higher well-being at work [10]. Additionally, 
social skills are linked to perceived social support [11], 
which forms one of the job resources [12] that enables well-
being at work and work engagement [12]-[14]. Social 
support mediates the association between psychosocial well-
being and work safety [12]. It can be defined as social 
relationships that improve health and decrease the amount 
of stress [13] and is closely linked to job performance, 
effective stress coping and well-being [15]-[20]. Dialogic 
leadership emphasises supervisory social support and the 
relationship between supervisor and subordinate [21]-[23]. 
Previously, we found that collegial support is associated 
with higher work engagement and supervisory support [24], 
[25]. Organisational maturity assessment and the terms and 
words utilised in it are in focus of this article. These 
terminological words linked with mainly psychosocial 
contexts and conditions at work are presented with 
utilisation of the pictures and other descriptions of 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-881-5
COLLA 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

employee’s own WS at her / his employer’s premises. Thus, 
we think personnel should be able to analyse and assess 
every 
responding 
employee’s 
own 
intangible 
work 
organisation and organisational environment. We will also 
deal with the discipline of Human Factors and Ergonomics 
(HF/E) [26] and its mainstream terminology like WS as well 
(cf., Appendix 1), including some views on the correlation 
between the terminologies ‘organisational maturity’ and 
‘HF/E’. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II gives a quite short description of the methods and 
materials for participation within assessing, based on 
combining the general maturity words and utilisation of 
pictures of assessing employee’s own workplace. The 
methodological results are presented in Section III under the 
title findings and proposal. Next Sections comprise of IV 
discussion and V conclusions.  
II. 
 METHODS AND MATERIALS 
A. General Approach 
We outline an application and/or software that will 
function as a multidisciplinary, multimedia description tool 
that assesses the central aspects of every employee’s own 
psychosocially emphasised organisational work conditions. 
At the same time, employees can give their own opinions, 
characterisations and developmental needs related to these 
aspects. Intangible leadership-related organisational maturity 
words are mainly presented for assessing together with the 
more tangible WS as a whole and its elements. Multimedia 
enables the use of both written and spoken texts, photos, 
pictures, animations, and videos for description. 
B. Presentation of Assessment Setting 
We decided to use 10 words/terms as intangible maturity 
descriptors. To find and determine these descriptors, a list of 
essential word(s) (Appendix 1) was collected based on the 
organisational and leadership maturity assessing documents 
(Appendix 
2) 
of 
three 
internationally 
well-known 
researchers’ articles [27]-[31] focused on safety culture and 
just culture within work organisations. Appendix 1 shows the 
relative amounts (% of total ‘culture word’ findings (N = 
1103)) in the (maturity) culture documents. Additionally, a 
comparison was made with the use of the key terminology of 
ergonomics in the maturity assessment documents. The 
ergonomics terminology was chosen according to its 
definition document of 1018 words. The description in the 
document is given by the globally leading HF/E (Human 
Factors / Ergonomics) society, International Ergonomics 
Association (IEA) [26]. We chose our list of the most 
essential HF/E words from the abovementioned IEA 
document as follows: 1) human (people, employee), 2) 
(socio)techn(olog)ical, 3) system, 4) interaction, 5) physical, 
6) cognitive, 7) organisation, 8) optimal, 9) well-being and 
10) performance.  Appendix 2 includes the proportion (%) of 
each one of the chosen key terms in the IEA terminology 
found in the organisational culture maturity assessing 
documents. It seems that IEA very rarely uses most of the 
culture terms. On the contrary, the IEA words, plus the 
phrases closely related to those main themes, were frequently 
mentioned (N = 3270) in the culture documents. ‘Human’ 
was the most often used and was mentioned 5 times, 
‘organisation’ 4 times and ‘performance’ 1 time. ‘System’ 
was the second one in terms of popularity, being mentioned 
in 5 of the 10 documents. 
For the practical assessment by employees, a table that 
includes first the dimensions describing the WS and its 
elements separately, i.e., a total of the six columns, and 
secondly, the 10 rows for dimensions of organisational 
maturity words, is needed. Therefore, that table will 
comprise a total number of 60 cells. Of course, the number 
of aspects assessed by employees can be smaller. For 
instance, a pre-study can be made to define the cells with 
high enough importance. 
III. 
FINDINGS AND PROPOSAL  
The mission of design science is to build innovations, 
such as new constructions like software applications or 
improvements to existing designs and assess their usefulness 
[32]. In addition to building new artefacts, an essential part 
of design science research is evaluation [32], [33]. In both 
phases, emphasis on the participation of personnel has been 
increasing. Usability engineering is said to comprise user and 
usability studies, as its essential processes [34], [35]; it has 
an important role for ordinary people, lay people as users and 
knowhow servicing professional product developers. The 
need to embed usability engineering in technology is 
increasing more and more, whether in the WS or in the user 
interface of products or machinery. 
As far as innovations go, there is at present a lively 
discussion about employee-driven ones. Owing to its tight 
links with the users/employees, PEPADE with for instance 
VIDAR (A video-based method for ergonomic evaluation 
[36]) might be regarded as an instrument through which 
personnel can become promoters or even producers of 
innovations within their own sector of industry [c.f., 36]. We 
conclude that if we very briefly—but very specifically—
mention only a couple of essential issues related to 
organisational culture as well as know humans as ‘users’ of 
the WS context (user study), we can secure the ‘usability’ of 
the system (usability study) in all phases during innovation 
and make design decisions. Both of the abovementioned 
studies can be aided by all the ‘words’ in this study. 
    Both defencing and empowering functions have to be 
included in contemporary systems and contexts where 
people are working. Defencing is more related to the 
prevention of accidents, diseases and errors, risks in general, 
while empowerment of the people in processes is more 
related to high performance and psychosocial well-being, 
with pleasure as a part of it. At its best, ergonomic 
development—including its tools like PEPADE, with the 
help of the abovementioned VIDAR [36]—provides double 
utility: firstly, it shows how personnel could use today’s 
existing artefacts and intangible issues in a better way and, 
secondly, how to develop better artefacts for WSs and 
leadership for future work organisations. Our proposed 
software or application designed for computers or mobile 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-881-5
COLLA 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

phone and pad-style devices (i.e., PEPADE) can utilise 
VIDAR or other kinds of similar tools or systems. As far as 
innovations go, there is at present a lively discussion about 
employee-driven ones. Owing to its tight links with the 
users/employees, PEPADE with VIDAR might be regarded 
as an instrument through which users can become promoters 
or even producers of innovations, or at least improvements, 
for their own workplace. VIDAR, which provides videos 
showing people working in their own workplace, is a good 
example of how to visualise a WS and the humans working 
within it for use in the context of a PEPADE evaluation. 
Specifically, it shows the good and bad features of current 
work conditions and gives details of assessments, scoring 
properties, ranking of importance, expression satisfaction on 
some scale, listing details causing errors or slow progress 
within tasks and so forth. Different kinds of illustrative 
visualisations and descriptions, enriched by the key 
terminology listed in this article, enable improvements and 
innovations. We see that organisational culture maturity, 
WS and HF/E are resources of PEPADE, together with its 
visualisation and description features.  
     We see that the results of Glendon, Clarke and McKenna 
[37], who were going through numerous issues regarding 
successful (safety) training, clearly support our approach, 
though it is aimed for a wider application than only safety 
issues. The authors [37] concluded that the trainee is two, 
three or even five times more likely to remember the 
presented material if they are looking at pictures or 
watching a demonstration than if they were in a situation 
where they only hear words or read relevant materials. This 
boost can also be increased significantly by active 
participation, simulation and performing [37]. Additionally, 
we believe that contemporary developments with regard to 
software, the Internet and computer and hand-held device 
technologies offer entire time-improving possibilities.   
     We see and propose to expand the usability criteria of 
and within a WS, similar to how the IEA [26] defines 
human factors. We propose wider criteria than what people 
and experts generally consider. IEA speaks about 
physically, 
cognitively, 
and 
organisationally 
(psychosocially) optimal conditions for the well-being of 
people at work and during leisure. A WS with its elements 
defined by its tangible features, bylaws and managerial 
actions shall be enlarged by views presented within and 
included in the mainstream of key organisational aspects. 
We find that these mainly intangible aspects comprise 
predominantly the 10 ones we found in the selection of 
organisational maturity capability documents. We hope that 
our relatively short outline related to the intangible aspects 
and the WS as the context for the aspects could be continued 
with more detailed next steps. The properties of PEPADE 
should be designed and confirmed with a user study that has 
wider and sufficient coverage. Moreover, PEPADE’s own 
usability shall be at a very high level according to the best 
knowledge, practical experiences and examples, and further 
trials and tests must be utilised.  
 
IV. 
 DISCUSSION 
    We recommend that all organisations collaborate with all 
their employees in their attempts to manage and construct a 
culture that involves all personnel, subordinates, and 
supervisors, as much as possible in the development and 
changes for a better WS and organisational culture. Doing 
so will bring into use powerful driving forces of potential 
benefits due to people’s participation, involvement in 
processes and motivation, competence, and confidence, all 
of which are created by participation [c.f., 38]. One new 
emphasis for the improved utilisation of collaboration with 
regard to achieving innovative organisation is presented by 
Gloor [39], who stated that consciousness is a key added-
value factor for further boosting teamwork by utilising the 
so-called swarm leadership thinking: ‘The future of business 
is swarm business. Whether it is at … Tesla, or Apple…, it 
is not about being a fearless leader, but creating a swarm 
that works together in collective consciousness to build 
great things and generate successes. Swarm is probably one 
example of new terms being needed in the context of 
organisational maturity. New ways of management, 
leadership and collaboration within a work organisation are 
also needed for new ways of working in many distributed 
sites (e.g., if all or part of the personnel are working 
remotely). Utilisation of teleworking via the Internet is 
enabling this new working mode, most often from home. 
Used as a tool, a normal computer can most often connect 
remotely working people with individual colleagues or 
management via voice and video, such as at the office where 
most or some of the personnel are working. If a more 
academically emphasised approach is applicable, we 
recommend that an organisation become acquainted with the 
connections of design science and innovation management 
[40] approaches. Järvinen [32], similar to Hevner et al. [33], 
briefly defines design science as building innovations and 
evaluating them. Svensson and Nilsson [41] emphasised that 
innovation is an intentional change and, further, that one 
form of innovation is a social one. One good idea is to speak 
about micro-innovations to emphasise the importance of 
every person’s own experiences with them as well as the 
roles of the organisation and its people in promoting new 
positive issues in their own and other persons’ living 
context [42].  
    We think and hope that the main lines of the PEPADE-
style software, at least the further development of its 
application, would be regarded as promoting participatory 
creativity 
towards 
continuously 
improving 
work 
organisations and their leadership by emphasising a 
sufficiently deep, psychosocial approach. PEPADE is a tool 
for ‘traditional-style’ workplaces, but ones where people are 
working remotely can be evaluated as well. However, the 
last-mentioned situation may mean that issues like social 
support or work engagement, as mentioned in the 
Introduction, require more recognition. Furthermore, we see 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-881-5
COLLA 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

that PEPADE as an aid is usable in the context of outlining 
a totally new, or totally new kind of, workplace or station. 
Organisational maturity words, often intangible and 
abstract, can be concretised with visualisation. Utilisation of 
the physical ergonomics-oriented development of the whole 
WS with its tangible characteristics can be focused on 
simultaneously. 
    Ergonomics 
analysis 
or 
safety 
analysis 
assesses 
improvement needs for general well-being and innovates or 
designs new solutions for production or servicing by, for 
example, taking a holistic view of the maturity of one’s own 
organisation. All these, along with many others, can realise 
new possibilities through the ideas and their background, 
presented here as the PEPADE approach. We find that our 
tool is an effective enabler for supporting the essential core 
values of HF/E [24]: ‘humans as assets, technology as a tool 
to assist humans, promotion of quality of life, respect for 
individual 
differences, 
and 
responsibility 
to 
all 
stakeholders’. As researchers, we have likewise collaborated 
in a project called Frictionless Communication (FriCo) [43], 
[44]. We now see that both FriCo and PEPADE could get 
and give, thereby enriching each other’s added value. The 
former 
study 
excels 
in 
focusing 
on 
the 
useful 
communication within all people at work, and the latter 
provides a description with miscellaneous visualisation and 
through essential words that remind us all about responsible 
and psychosocial organisation. Additional proven, valid 
words that are usable in the context of this process are 
provided by IEA [26]. Ideas, experiences, and the whole 
approach of FriCo combined with the vision of PEPADE 
would be worthy of field experiments within companies and 
other work organisations and, of course, with the close deep 
participation of their personnel, whether blue or white collar 
[4], superior or subordinate. The People Capability Maturity 
Model (P-CMM) is a special, wide, and widely used tool 
that helps successfully address the critical people issues in 
an organisation of software companies [45]. It has a long 
and successful history in this field. PEPADE comprises less 
maturity aspects and is focused to be used by all employees, 
compared with P-CMM that is utilised by organisational 
experts and managers. Additionally, we have to consider 
that well-being at work and productivity there, are 
depending not only on issues and factors being within the 
space of the own workplace. Home, family, friends are 
especially psychosocially of utmost importance [c.f., [24], 
[25]], and increasing importance has to be focused on social, 
environmental, and economic sustainability [c.f., [5]]. 
V. 
 CONCLUSIONS 
    To conclude, the two last sentences of the discussion 
show more and more significant points in the working life 
and context of every employee. Our paper is dealing with a 
total of 26 concepts of tangible and intangible factors 
affecting at each workplace where individuals her- or 
himself are contributing for production, as an essential part 
of it. We find that the ten organisational maturity concepts, 
together with six WS and ten HF/E ones comprise quite a 
good toolbox for describing most of workplaces quite 
holistically. 
The 
high-quality 
knowhow, 
skills 
and 
continuous development means of the 26 concepts, 
combined into PEPADE software with contemporary 
technological abilities like multimedia, offer an approach 
for new kind participatory assessment and development with 
multidisciplinary background. The need of that kind tool at 
work, useable with all people there, is not decreasing. The 
idea might be quite ready for preliminary field trials that we 
recommend being carried out hopefully as well by many 
other researchers than us as the authors of this paper.  We 
have a lot of experiences of many study projects that have 
opened quite directly possibilities to apply the new 
methodology at workplaces or utilise it there as a tool for 
consultancy provided by outer experts.   PEPADE might be 
able to follow for instance the successful path of HSEQ AP 
or FriCo as a service product. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Anttonen and T. Räsänen (Eds.), ”Well-being at work – 
New Innovations and Good Practices, ” Helsinki: Finnish 
Instute of Occupational Health, 2008.  
[2] P. Carayon, “The Balance Theory and the Work System 
Model … Twenty Years Later,” International Journal of 
Human-Computer Interaction, 25(5), pp. 313–327, 2009. 
doi:10.1080/10447310902864928. 
[3] S. Väyrynen and H. Kiema-Junes, “Assessing Management 
and Leadership of Work Communities. Related Concepts, 
Views and ICT-tools,” in Proceedings of  The Twelfth 
International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and 
Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services, S. 
Böhm, L. Berntzen, and S. Sendra, Eds. (CENTRIC 2019), 
IARIA, Nov. 2019, pp. 55-60. 
[4] S. Väyrynen and H. Kiema-Junes, “Exploring blue- and 
white-collar employees’  well-being 
at 
work 
system: 
Differences in indicators of physical and psychosocial 
conditions of occupational groups,” International Journal of 
Sociotechnology and Knowledge Development, vol. 10(2), 
pp. 14-34, 2018. 
[5] S. Väyrynen and H. Kiema-Junes, “Information for managers 
and   experts or communication with all employees within 
organisations and networks – case HSEQ,” in Engineering 
Assets and Public Infrastructures in the Age of Digitalization, 
J. P. Liyanage et al., Eds. LNME, Proceedings of the 13th 
World Congress on Engineering Asset Management. Springer 
International 
Publishing, 
Lecture 
Notes 
Mechanical 
Engineering. (plus eBook), pp. 439–446, 2020, ISBN 978-3-
030-48021-9. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-48021-9. 
[6] L. Hayase, Internal communication in organizations and 
employee engagement,. Las Vegas: University Libraries, 
University of Nevada, 2009. 
[7] W. King, “Communications and information processing as a 
critical 
success 
factor 
in 
the 
effective 
knowledge 
organisation”, International Journal of Business Information 
Systems, 10(5), pp. 31–52, 2005. 
[8] W. Schaufeli and A. Bakker. “Job demands, job resources, 
and their relationship with burnout and engagement: A multi-
sample study”, Journal of Organisational Behavior, vol 25, 
pp. 293–315, 2004. 
[9] A. A. Bakx, J. M. Van Der Sanden, K. K. Sijitsima, M. 
Vermetten, “The role of Students’ Personality Charasteristics, 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-881-5
COLLA 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Self-Perceived Competence and Learning Conceptions in the 
social Communicative Competence: A Longitunidal Study, 
“Higher Education 51: 1, pp. 71 – 104, 2006. 
[10] M. E. Ford, “Social Cognition and Social Competence in 
Adolescence,” Developmental Psychology 18: 3, pp. 323–
340, 1982. 
[11] R. Riggio, N. Throckmorton, and S. DePaola, “Social Skills 
and Self-Esteem,” Personality and Individual Differences, 11, 
8, pp. 799–804, 1990. 
[12] A. B. Bakker and E. Demerouti, “The job demands-resources 
model: State of the art,” Journal of Managerial Psychology, 
vol. 22, pp. 309–328, 2007. 
[13] A. M., Nasurdin, T.C. Ling, and S.N. Khan, “Linking social 
support, work engagement and job performance in nursing,” 
International Journal of Business and Society 19: 2, pp. 363-
386, 2018. 
[14] S. Taipale, K. Selander, T. Anttila,  and J. Nätti,  “Work 
engagement in eight European countries,” International 
Journal of Sociology and Social Policy, vol. 31: 7-8, pp. 486-
504. DOI:10.1108/01443331111149905. [retrieved: April 
2021]. 
[15] J. S. House and R. L. Kahn, “Measures and concepts of social 
support,” in Social support and health, S. Cohen and L. Syme, 
Eds., San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 83–108,  1985. 
[16] A. B. Bakker and D. Xanthopoulou, “Creativity and charisma 
among female leaders: The role of resources and work 
engagement,” International Journal of Human Resource 
Management, vol 24: pp. 2760–2779, 2013. 
[17] B. R. Sarason, G. R. Pierce, and I. G. Sarason, Social support: 
The sense of acceptance and the role of relationships. in 
Social Support, Sarason, B.R., Sarason, I.G., and Pierce, G.R. 
Eds. An Interactional View, New York: Wiley, pp. 97-128, 
1990. 
[18] G. M. Kauffmann and T. A. Beehr, “Interactions between job 
stressors and social support: some counterintuitive results,” 
Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 71:3, pp. 522-526, 1986. 
[19] D. D. Dawley, M. C. Andrews, and N. S. Buckley, 
“Mentoring, 
supervisor 
support, 
and 
perceived 
organizational support: what matters most?,” Leadership & 
Organization Development Journal, vol. 29:3, pp. 235- 
247, DOI:org/10.1108/01437730810861290. 
[retrieved: 
March 2021] 
[20] R. A. Karasek and T. Theorell,  Healthy work: stress 
productivity and the reconstruction of working life. New 
York: Basic Books, 1990. 
[21] P. Hersey and K. Blanchard, “Situational leadership, 
perception, and the impact of power,” Group and Organisation 
Management, vol. 4, pp. 418–428, 1979. 
[22] W. Isaacs, “Dialogic leadership,” The Systems Thinker, vol. 
10(1), pp. 1–5, 1999. 
[23] G. Yukl, Leadership in organisations. 5th edition. Upper 
Saddle River: Prentice-Hall, 2002. 
[24] H. Kiema-Junes, Associations of social skills and social 
support with well-being related outcomes at work and in 
higher education: heart rate variability, engagement, and 
burnout. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Oulu). Acta 
Universitatis Ouluensis E.Scientiae Rerum Socialium, 195, 
2020. 
[25] H. Kiema-Junes, A. Saarinen, H. Muukkonen, S. Väyrynen, L 
Ala-Mursula, and M. Hintsanen, “Dimensions of social 
support in the experience of work engagement in middle age: 
A Northern Finland Birth Cohort 1966 Study,” Scandinavian 
Journal of Psychology, 11 p. DOI: 10.1111/sjop.12640, 2020. 
[26] IEA 
(International 
Ergonomics 
Association). 
Human 
Factors/Ergonomic (HF/E) – Defitinion and Applications 
http://iea.ccc/what-is-ergonomics/ [Retrieced: April, 2021] 
[27] S. Dekker, Patient Safety: A Human Factors Approach, 1st 
Edition. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis 
Group, 2011. 
[28] S. Dekker, Just culture. Balancing safety and accountability, 
2nd edition. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate Publishing Ltd., 2012. 
[29] P. Hudson, Safety Management and Safety Culture The Long, 
Hard 
and 
Winding 
Road. 
http://www.caa.lv/upload/userfiles/files/SMS/Read%20first%
20quick%20overviewHudson%20Long%20Hard%20sinding
%20Road.pdf, pp. 1-24 [retrieved April 2021] 
[30] J. Reason, “Heroic compensations: The benign face of the 
human factor,” Flight Safety Australia, January-February, 
2001. pp. 28-31, 2001. 
[31] J. Reason, Managing the Risks of Organizational Accidents. 
Ashgate: Aldershot, 2004. 
[32] P. Järvinen, On research methods. Tampere, Finland: 
Opinpajan kirja, 2004. 
[33] R. Hevner,  S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science 
in information systems research,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 28 (1), 
pp. 75-105, 2004. 
[34] M. Wiklund, Medical device and equipment design: Usability 
engineering and ergonomics. Buffalo Grove, IL: Interpharm 
Press Inc., 1995. 
[35] S. Väyrynen, J. Röning, and I. Alakärppä, “User-Centered 
Development of Video  Telephony for Servicing Mainly 
Older Users: Review and Evaluation of an Approach Applied 
for 10 Years,” Human Technology, vol 2 (1), pp. 8-37, 2006. 
[36] S. Väyrynen and P. Saaranen, Video-assisted analysis of 
physical and   psychosocial strain on nurses in a hospital-at-
home - a pilot study utilising the VIDAR method, in 
Proceedings of NES 2006. Promotion of  Well-Being in 
Modern Society, K. L Saarela, C-H. Nygård, and  S. Lusa, 
Eds., 38th Annual Congress of the Nordic  
Ergonomics 
Society, Sep. 2006, Hämeenlinna, Finland: Pk-paino Oy, pp. 
192-196, 2006. 
[37] A. I. Glendon, S. Clarke, and E. F. McKenna, Human Safety 
and Risk Management, 2nd ed., CRC Press, Taylor & Francis 
Group, 2006. 
[38] J. Wilson and  H. Haines, Participatory Ergonomics, in 
International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human 
Factors, Karwowski, W.Ed.. London: Taylor & Francis. Vol. 
2, pp. 1282-1286, 2000. 
[39] P. A. Gloor, Swarm Leadership and the Collective Mind: 
Using Collaborative Innovation Networks to Build a Better 
Business. Bingley, UK: Emerald Publishing Limited, 2017. 
[40] K. Goffin and R. Mitchell, Innovation Management: Effective 
Strategy and Implementation. 3rd Revised edition, UK: 
London, Palgrave Macmillan,  2017. ISBN 978-1137373434. 
[41] L. Svensson and B. Nilsson  (Eds.). Partnership as A Strategy 
for Social Innovation and Sustainable Change. Stockholm, 
Sweden: Santerus Academic Press, 2008. 
[42] P. Saariluoma, A. Hautamäki, S. Väyrynen, M. Pärttö, and E. 
Kannisto,  “Microinnovations among the paradigms of 
innovation research - what are the common ground issues,” 
Global Journal of Computer Science and Technology, vol 
11(12), pp. 12-23, 2011. 
[43] H. Kiema, M. Mäenpää, T. Leinonen, and H. Soini, “Peer 
Group Counseling as a tool for promoting managers’ 
communication 
skills 
in 
industrial 
and 
planning 
organisations,” in Proceedings the Fourth International 
Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems 
and Applications. P.Lorenz and P. Dini, Eds.  (COLLA 2014) 
IARIA, June 2014, pp. 28-33, ISSN: 2308-4227 ISBN: 978-1-
61208-351-3. 
[44] S. Väyrynen, K. Kisko, H. Filppa, and M. Väänänen, 
“Enablers of Optimal Work Systems in Industry: Review, 
Framework and Likert-scale Survey for Improving Intra-
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-881-5
COLLA 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Organisational Communication of Finnish Case Companies,” 
in Proceedings of  the Fourth International Conference on 
Advanced 
Collaborative 
Networks, 
Systems 
and 
Applications, P. Lorenz and P. Dini, Eds. (COLLA 2014), 
IARIA, June 2014, pp. 12-20, ISSN: 2308-4227 ISBN: 978-1-
61208-351-3. 
[45] B. Curtis, W. E. Hefley, and  S.A. Miller, The People 
Capability Maturity Model: Guidelines for Improving the 
Workforce, 
Boston: 
Addison-Wesley, 
2002. 
ISBN 
9780201604450.  
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-881-5
COLLA 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Appendix 1. The 10 concepts, culture maturity words, found in the organisational culture assessing documents, with their 
relative frequency increasing clockwise. As well, the relative frequency of the maturity terms found in the HF/E document 
[26] is presented. The HF/E document describes the essential characteristics of ergonomics as follows: ‘Work systems are 
made up of humans, the tools, processes, and technologies they use, and the work environment. HF/E contributes to the 
creation of safe and sustainable work systems by considering the interrelatedness of human, technical, and environmental 
components and the potential effects of work system design changes on all parts of the system.’ [26]. ‘HF/E uses a holistic, 
systems approach to apply theory, principles, and data from many relevant disciplines to the design and evaluation of tasks, 
jobs, products, environments, and systems.’  [26]. 
Culture 
maturity 
words found 
in the 
documents
Report(ed, -ing)
4% of HF/E doc words
% :;.= of org. culture docs words
Change
==% of HF/E doc words
:?.@% of org. culture docs words
Just, fair
4% of HF/E doc words
4.A% of org. culture docs words
Inform(ed,-ing,-ation)
4% of HF/E doc words
=?.@% of org. culture docs words
Safety culture (S climate)
4%  of HF/E doc words
@.B% of org. culture docs words
Learn(ing), 
train(ing), 
instruct(ion)
4% of HF/E doc words
:.?% of org. culture docs words
Flexib(ility, 
-le), 
resilien(ce, -t)
4% of HF/E doc words
4.?% of org. culture docs words
Meet(ing), talk(s), 
discuss(ion), 
involve(d), 
participat(ive, 
-tory -ion)
C;% of HF/E doc words
=C.?% of org. culture docs words
Satisfact(ory, 
-tion)
4% of HF/E doc words
?.B% of org. culture docs words
Trust, 
conﬁden(ce,-t)
4% of HF/E doc words
=.@% of org. culture docs words
 
 
 
Appendix 2. The ten organisational culture maturity assessment documents analysed. 
 
1 
NOSACQ  
 
DK, FI, IS, 
N, S 
2 
Safety 
culture 
maturity 
model 
UK 
3 
ESPO 
Green 
Guide 
EU 
4 
RISQS 
Audit 
Protocol 
RSSB 
Railways 
UK 
5 
Score Your 
Safety 
Culture, 
Institutional. 
Resilience, 
Sustainability 
(J. Reason) 
CA, AU 
6 
Safety, 
Health & 
Environment 
Checklist for 
Contractors  
NL 
7 
Recommended 
Practices; 
S&H Programs 
in 
Construction  
US 
8 
Workplace 
Safety & 
Health 
Manual 
for Marine 
Industries  
SG 
9 
Vendor 
Checklist 
AkzoNobel,  
H&S, 
Sustainability,  
NL 
10 
Risk 
Management 
Maturity 
Model 
(RM3), Road 
& Rail 
UK 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-881-5
COLLA 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

