eTELEMED 2014
The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
ISBN: 978-1-61208-327-8
March 23 - 27, 2014
Barcelona, Spain
eTELEMED 2014 Editors
Lisette Van Gemert-Pijnen, University of Twente - Enschede, The Netherlands
Marike Hettinga, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands
Åsa Smedberg, Stockholm University/The Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden

eTELEMED 2014
Foreword
The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED
2014), held between March 23-27, 2014 in Barcelona, Spain, continued a series of events related to
advances in techniques, services, and applications dedicated to a global approach of eHealth, including a
regard on federated aspects considering the mobility of population, the cross-nations agreements, and
the new information technology tools.
We are facing the generalization of digital society across multiple social areas. The globalization
imposes the revision of the health costs a society can support. The progress in difference domains, such
as image processing, wireless communications, computer vision, cardiology, and information storage
and management assure a virtual team to access online to the latest achievements.
Processing medical data now benefits from advanced techniques for color imaging, visualization
of multi-dimensional projections, Internet imaging localization archiving as well as from a higher
resolution of medical devices.
Collecting, storing, and handling patient data requires robust processing systems, safe
communications and storage, and easy and authenticated online access.
We assist to an unprecedented and rapid deployment of use of electronic imagery, navigation
portals, positive attitude on telemedicine, distributed surgery teams, tele-cardiology, and remote
medicine. Development of wireless homecare, of special types of communications with patient data, of
videoconferencing and tele-presence, and the progress in image processing and data protection
increased the eHealth applications and services, and extended Internet-based patient coverage areas.
Social and economic aspects, as well as the integration of classical systems with the telemedicine
systems, are still challenging issues.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the eTELEMED 2014
Technical Program Committee, as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a broad and
high quality conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also
kindly thank all the authors who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to eTELEMED
2014. We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program consisted of top
quality contributions.
Also, this event could not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the eTELEMED 2014 organizing
committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this professional meeting a
success.
We hope that eTELEMED 2014 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas
and results between academia and industry and for the promotion of progress in the areas of eHealth,
Telemedicine, and social medicine.
We are convinced that the participants found the event useful and communications very open.
We hope that Barcelona, Spain, provided a pleasant environment during the conference and everyone
saved some time to enjoy the charm of the city.
eTELEMED 2014 Chairs:
Lisette Van Gemert-Pijnen, University of Twente - Enschede, The Netherlands
Hans C. Ossebaard, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment - Bilthoven, The

Netherlands
Amir Hajjam-El-Hassani, University of Technology of Belfort-Montbéliard, France
Päivi Hämäläinen, The National Institute for Health and Welfare - Helsinki, Finland
Frank Lievens, Med-e-Tel, Belgium
Åsa Smedberg, Stockholm University/The Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
Piero Giacomelli, SPAC SPA -Arzignano (Vicenza), Italia
Shunji Shimizu, Tokyo University of Science, Suwa, Japan
Marike Hettinga, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands

eTELEMED 2014
COMMITTEE
eTELEMED Advisory Committee
Lisette Van Gemert-Pijnen, University of Twente - Enschede, The Netherlands
Hans C. Ossebaard, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment - Bilthoven, The
Netherlands
Amir Hajjam-El-Hassani, University of Technology of Belfort-Montbéliard, France
Päivi Hämäläinen, The National Institute for Health and Welfare - Helsinki, Finland
Frank Lievens, Med-e-Tel, Belgium
Åsa Smedberg, Stockholm University/The Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
Piero Giacomelli, SPAC SPA -Arzignano (Vicenza), Italia
Shunji Shimizu, Tokyo University of Science, Suwa, Japan
Marike Hettinga, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands
eTELEMED 2014 Technical Program Committee
Sasan Adibi, Research In Motion (RIM), Canada
Hussain Al-Rizzo, University of Arkansas at Little Rock, USA
Giner Alor Hernández, Instituto Tecnológico de Orizaba - Veracruz, México
Tomaz Amon, Center for Scientific Visualization - Ljubljana, Slovenia
Ennio Amori, Parma University Hospital, Italy
Adriano Andrade, Federal University of Uberlandia, Brazil
Theodoros N. Arvanitis, University of Warwick, UK
Adina Astilean, Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Bruno Azevedo, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Brazil
Luigi Benedicenti, University of Regina, Canada
Kazi S. Bennoor , National Institute of Diseases of Chest & Hospital - Mohakhali, Bangladesh
Trine Bergmo, Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine, Norway
Ateet Bhalla. Oriental Institute of Science & Technology - Bhopal, India
Eileen Brebner, Royal Society of Medicine - London, UK
Diana Bri, Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Maria Christopoulou, University of Patras / National Technical University of Athens, Greece
Jane Clemensen, MedCom, Denmark
Jacek Czernuszenko, COTIS - Health Informatics, Poland
Paolo Dario, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Italy
Udi Davidovich, Amsterdam Health Service - GGD Amsterdam, The Netherlands
El-Sayed M. El-Horbaty, Ain Shams University - Cairo, Egypt
Lamia Elloumi, University of Twente, Netherlands
Jesko Elsner, RWTH Aachen University, Germany
Pedro Pablo Escobar, Universidad Nacional del Centro (UNCPBA)- Buenos Aires, Argentina
Ivan Evgeniev, Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria
Lu Fan, Edinburgh Napier University, UK
Elisabetta Farella, DEIS - University of Bologna, Italy
Karla Felix Navarro, University of Technology - Sydney, Australia

Joseph Finkelstein, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, USA
Stanley M. Finkelstein, University of Minnesota - Minneapolis, USA
Catherine Garbay, Laboratoire d'Informatique de Grenoble, France
Hassan Ghazal, Moroccan Society for Telemedicine and eHealth, Morocco
Piero Giacomelli, SPAC SPA -Arzignano (Vicenza), Italia
Anthony P. Glascock, Drexel University, USA
Wojciech Glinkowski, Polish Telemedicine Society / Center of Excellence "TeleOrto", Poland
Lisa Gualtieri, Tufts University School of Medicine – Boston, USA
Vesselin Gueorguiev, Technical University of Sofia, Bulgaria
Güney Gürsel, Gülhane Military Medical Academy, Turkey
Johan Gustav Bellika, University of Tromsø | University Hospital of North Norway, Norway
Amir Hajjam-El-Hassani, University of Technology of Belfort-Montbéliard, France
Päivi Hämäläinen, National Institute for Health and Welfare - Helsinki, Finland
Hermie Hermens, University of Twente, Netherlands
Marike Hettinga, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, Netherlands
Stefan Hey, Karlsruher Institut für Technologie (KIT), Germany
Arto Holopainen, Finnish National Health and Wellbeing cluster, Finland
Valentina Isetta, Unitat de Biofísica i Bioenginyeria | Facultat de Medicina - Universitat de Barcelona,
Spain
Dragan Ivetic, University of Novi Sad, Serbia
Sundaresan Jayaraman, Georgia Institute of Technology - Atlanta, USA
Malina Jordanova, Academy G. Bonchev - Sofia, Bulgaria
Ashish Joshi, University of Nebraska | Medical Center College of Public Health, USA
Irene S. Karanasiou, University of Athens, Greece
Sarah N. Lim Choi Keung, University of Warwick, UK
Haider Khaleel, Sonoma State University, USA
Vassiliki Koufi, University of Piraeus, Greece
Sajeesh Kumar, UT Health Science Center | University of Tennessee - Memphis, USA
Athina Lazakidou, University of Peloponnese - Sparti, Greece
Frederic Lievens, Med-e-Tel, an International Society for Telemedicine & eHealth (ISfTeH), Belgium
Marius George Linguraru, Sheikh Zayed Institute for Pediatric Surgical Innovation | Children's National
Medical Center - Washington DC, USA
Peter Lucas, Radboud University Nijmegen, Netherlands
Line Lundvoll Warth, Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine (NST) - University Hospital
of North Norway, Norway
Ilias Maglogiannis, University of Piraeus, Greece
Asta Maknickaite, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark
Flora Malamateniou, University of Piraeus, Greece, Digital Health Services Laboratory (DHSL), Greece
Salah H. Mandil, eStrategies & eHealth for WHO and ITU - Geneva, Switzerland
Roque Marin Morales, Universidad de Murcia, Spain
Cezary Mazurek, Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Center, Poland
Teresa Meneu, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Spain
Jelena Mirkovic, Oslo University Hospital, Norway
Ani Nahapetian, California State University - Northridge, USA
Stuart J. Nelson, US National Library of Medicine - Bethesda, USA
Lambert Nieuwenhuis, University of Twente, The Netherlands
Harm op den Akker, Roessingh Research and Development - Telemedicine group Enschede, Netherlands
Hans C. Ossebaard, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment - Bilthoven, The

Netherlands
Eiring Øystein, Norwegian Knowledge Center for the Health Services, Norway
Oscar Peters, University of Twente, The Netherlands
Vitor Pinheiro de Almeida, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Brazil
Isabel Pirillo, Università di Camerino, Italy
Rainer Planinc, Vienna University of Technology, Austria
Andriana Prentza, University of Piraeus, Greece
Markela Psymarnou, VIDAVO SA - Thessaloniki, Greece
Juha Puustjärvi, Univerity of Helsinki, Finland
Elisabeth Rakus-Andersson, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden
Robert J. Rosati, Center for Home Care Policy and Research - New York, USA
David Russell, Center for Home Care Policy & Research - New York, USA
Sanna Salanterä, University of Turku, Finland
Abdel-Badeeh M. Salem, Ain Shams University - Cairo, Egypt
Hélène Sandmark, Mälardalen University Västerås / RAMAZZINI Research Institute, Sweden
Majid Sarrafzadeh, University of California - Los Angeles, USA
Matthieu-Patrick Schapranow, Hasso Plattner Institute, Germany
Christos N. Schizas, University of Cyprus, Cyprus
Michael Ignaz Schumacher,University of Applied Sciences Western Switzerland, Switzerland
Sandra Sendra, Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Clauirton Siebra, Federal University of Paraiba, Brazil
Åsa Smedberg, Stockholm University/The Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
Terje Solvoll, University hospital of North Norway - Tromsø, Norway
Chitsutha Soomlek, Khon Kaen University, Thailand
Lübomira Spassova, Luxembourg's Public Research Centre Henri Tudor - SANTEC, Luxembourg
Hrvoje Stancic, University of Zagreb, Croatia
Frederick Steinke, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Germany
Maciej Stroinski, Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Center, Poland
Toshiyo Tamura, Osaka Electro-communication University, Japan
Svetlana Taneva, Healthcare Human Factors, Canada
Víctor Torres Padrosa, Polytechnic School / Faculty of Medicine | Universitat de Girona, Spain
Vicente Traver Salcedo, ITACA - Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain
Masatsugu Tsuji, University of Hyogo, Japan
Liezl van Dyk, Stellenbosch University, South Africa
Lisette Van Gemert-Pijnen, University of Twente - Enschede, The Netherlands
Sofie Van Hoecke, University College West-Flanders - Courtray, Belgium
Lex van Velsen, Roessingh Research and Development, Netherlands
Arlette van Wissen, VU University Amsterdam, Netherlands
Dimitrios D. Vergados, University of Piraeus, Greece
Renée Verwey, Department of Health Services Research | Maastricht University, The Netherlands
Miriam Vollenbroek Hutten, University of Twente – Enschede, The Netherlands
Dongwen Wang, University of Rochester, USA
Xiaohong Wang Gao, Middlesex University - London, UK
Jobke Wentzel, University of Twente - Enschede, The Netherlands

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Wearable Recognition System for Sports Activities
Ali Mehmood Khan and Michael Lawo
1
Towards Unified Tooling for Easing the Qualification of Medical Normed Environments
Anthony Gelibert, Sebastien Jean, Denis Genon-Catalot, Gerard Santailler, and Ioannis Parissis
6
Emergency Web App for Accessing the Medical Emergency Services
Beatriz Gomez and Carlos Juiz
10
A Quantitative Survey About the Interest of Digital Natives in Second Opinion and Quality/Trust in Online Health
Information
Rene Baranyi, Dennis Matthias Binder, Nadja Lederer, and Thomas Grechenig
17
Field Testing of Remote Teledentistry Technology
Rodrigo Marino, Parul Marwaha, Richard Collmann, Matthew Hopcraft, David Manton, Michael McCullough,
Andrew Stranieri, Ken Clarke, Elizabeth Ozanne, and Irene Blackberry
23
Organising Videoconferencing for Collaborative Medical Diagnosis: Pre-Planned and Acute Practice
Line Lundvoll Warth
29
Effects of Telemonitoring on Heart Failure Patients’ Quality of Life and Depression Scores: a Randomised
Controlled Trial
Josiane J.J. Boyne, Anton P.M. Gorgels, Marieke Spreeuwenberg, and Hubertus J.M. Vrijhoef
35
Play for Health 2.0: Evolving P4H to a Web Environment Using HTML5 and JavaScript
Pedro Ferriol Monserrat, Francisco Tous Llull, Miguel Angel Alcalde Velado, Marc Melia Aguilo, Jaume Sastre
Terrassa, Maria Angels Farreny Balcells, Eva Ponce Martinez, Begona Llano de la Pena, and Ramon Mas Sanso
44
The Eve of 3D Printing in Telemedicine: State of the Art and Future Challenges
Piero Giacomelli and Asa Smedberg
49
Digital WHO Hemoglobin Color Scale: Analysis and Performance
Rajendra Kumar M., Hemant Misra, Sujit Hiwale, and Manjunath Ramachandra
53
Remote Camera-based Pulse Oximetry
Ubiratan S. Freitas
59
Telememonitoring in Cystic Fibrosis: Treatment’s Adherence and Economical Evaluation in a Period of Three
Years
Sergio Bella, Fabrizio Murgia, Irene Tagliente, Paola Romano, Benedetta Corona, Elisabetta Renzetti, and
Mirella Cilli
64

Implementing Transnational Telemedicine Solutions
Leila Eadie, David Heaney, Lee Dowie, Liam Glynn, Monica Casey, Patrick Hayes, Matti Matero, Undine
Knarvik, Soo Hun, and Kate Alrutz
68
Videoconferencing Solution: Through Innovation Extension to Attain and Support Pre-Alzheimer Patients in Their
Daily Activities
Zamikhaya Mapundu, Potjie Van Der walt, Thierry Simonnet, and Solly Phatle Maswikaneng
74
Ontology- and Model-Based Quality Indicators Designing Framework
Osamu Takaki, Izumi Takeuti, and Noriaki Izumi
80
Towards Patient-Centered Telemedicine
Juha Puustjarvi and Leena Puustjarvi
88
Prescient Profiling – AI driven Volunteer Selection within a Volunteer Notification System
Jesko Elsner, Philipp Meisen, Daniel Ewert, Daniel Schilberg, and Sabina Jeschke
94
A Health Virtual Community Model: A Bottom Up Approach
Christo El Morr, Shadi Saleh, Walid Ammar, Nabil Natafgi, and Karen Kazandjian
99
Experiences of the Elderly, their Relatives, and Volunteers of a Social Media Application in Monitoring of
Wellbeing
Ismo Alakarppa, Elisa Jaakkola, Kirsi Paykkonen, and Jaana Vantanen
105
Protecting the Privacy with Human-Readable Pseudonyms: One-Way Pseudonym Calculation on Base of
Primitive Roots
Uwe Roth
111
If They Designed It, Why Don't They Want It: The Lack of Acceptance of an ehealth Data Records System
Anthony Glascock
116
Security Analysis and Performance Evaluation of the Linkable Access Protocol of the Electronic Patient Records
Rima Addas and Ning Zhang
123
An Ontology-Driven Information Model for Interoperability of Personal and Electronic Health Records
Panagiotis Plastiras, Dympna O'Sullivan, and Peter Weller
130
Medical Images Enhancement with Pseudo-HDR Method
Vesselin Gueorguiev, Ivan Ivanov, and Desislava Georgieva
134
Patient's Rationale: Patient Knowledge Retrieval From Health Forums
Soumia Melzi, Amine Abdaoui, Jerome Aze, Sandra Bringay, Pascal Poncelet, and Florence Galtier
140

Context-Oriented Data Processing for Homecare Application
Mirvat Makssoud
146
User-Centered and Persuasive Design of a Web-Based Registration and Monitoring System for Healthcare-
Associated Infections in Nursing Homes
Nienke de Jong, Andrea Eikelenboom-Boskamp, Andreas Voss, and Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen
152
Fuzzified Clustering and Point Set Continuous Approximation in Prognosticating Gastric Cancer Surgery
Elisabeth Rakus-Andersson and Hang Zettervall
158
Reduced Elective Surgery Cancellations Through Patient Involvement In Pre-Operative Planning In Norway
Conceicao Granja, Kari Dyb, Stein Roald Bolle, and Gunnar Hartvingsen
164
The Uptake and Impact of a Personal Health Record for Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus in Primary Care:
A Research Protocol for a Backward and Forward Evaluation
Floor Sieverink, Saskia Kelders, Louise Braakman-Jansen, and Julia Van Gemert-Pijnen
170
Antibiotic Information App for Nurses
Jobke Wentzel and Julia van Gemert-Pijnen
174
Interruption Management for Hospital Communications Systems
Bernd Talsma, Terje Solvoll, and Gunnar Hartvigsen
180
Nursing Professionals' Roles in Terms of Communication with Patients Using Electronic Devices
Marita Koivunen, Anne Niemi, and Maija Hupli
186
Intravenous Drip Infusion Monitoring System with Body Area Communication Tag
Yoshitoshi Murata and Kazuhiro Yoshida
191
Are Mobile Devices Ready for Telementoring? A Protocol Design for Randomized Controlled Trials
Andrius Budrionis, Gunnar Hartvigsen, and Johan Gustav Bellika
197
Can Assessment of Health on an ICT-platform Improve Optimal Functionality and Lead to Participatory Care
Among Older Adults?
Samal Algilani, Ann Langius-Eklof, Annica Kihlgren, and Karin Blomberg
201
Lifestyle Log Based Blood Glucose Level Prediction for Outpatient Care
Istvan Szabo, Peter Gyuk, and Istvan Vassanyi
205
Let us Get Real! An Integrated Approach for Virtual Coaching and Real-time Activity Monitoring in Lifestyle
Change Support Systems
Olga Kulyk, Rieks op den Akker, Randy Klaassen, and Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen
211

Critical Success Factors for Inter-Organizational Process Collaboration in eHealth
Niels Frederik Garmann-Johnsen and Tom Roar Eikebrokk
217
Does Telecare have an Economic Effect when Used by Patients with Chronic Diseases in the Long Run?
Masatsugu Tsuji and Yuji Akematsu
224
Using Models and Simulation for Predicting Efficiency as a Measure of Success of Different Telemedicine
Deployments
Cristina Adriana Alexandru
230
Security Challenges and Solutions for Telemedicine over EPON
Ying Yan and Lars Dittmann
236
Expectations of Middle-aged and Elderly Persons Towards Using Telecare Technologies and eHealth Applications
in Primary Care
Martine Huygens, Joan Vermeulen, and Luc de Witte
241
Real-world Gyroscope-based Gait Event Detection and Gait Feature Extraction
Paolo Fraccaro, Lorcan Walsh, Julie Doyle, and Dympna O'Sullivan
247
Developing a Supportive Tool to Facilitate Shared Decision Making in Dementia Involvement of end users in the
design phase
Marijke Span, Marike Hettinga, Carolien Smits, Leontine Groen-van de Ven, Jan Jukema, Myrra Vernooij-
Dassen, and Jan Eefsting
253
Preliminary Cost-Benefit Analysis of a Real-Time Telemedicine System
Francesca Frexia, Riccardo Triunfo, Francesco Cabras, Cecilia Mascia, Gianluigi Zanetti, Sabrina Montis, and
Roberto Tumbarello
257
The Assessment of Differences in Acceptance of e-Health Applications Between Physicians and Patients with
Chronic Diseases
Mariusz Duplaga
263
Open Source Home Care Technology, Technical Design and Development, User Research, Cost-Benefit Analysis,
and Business Modeling
Marike Hettinga, Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis, Ander de Keijzer, Jan M. Nauta, Rens Balkenende, Niels Donninger, and
Guido van Alphen
267
Approaching 2014: Is Telemedicine Assessed from The Social Perspective? A Brief 2013 Systematic Review
Francesco Fusco, Leopoldo Trieste, and Giuseppe Turchetti
271
The Future of e-Health
Isabel Pirillo, Giovanna Ricci, and Francesco Amenta
280

Economic Impact of Remote Specialist Consultations Using Videoconferencing: an Economic Model Based on
Data From Randomised Controlled Trials
Trine S Bergmo
285
An eHealth Innovation Map for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
Ruud Janssen, Marike Hettinga, Sikke Visser, Robbert Menko, Hilco Prins, Irene Krediet, Timber Haaker, and
Lianne Bodenstaff
292
Assembling Goal Attainment and Collaboration - Videoconference in Clinical Practice
Anne Granstrom Ekeland
302
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Wearable Recognition System for Sports Activities
Ali Mehmood Khan, Michael Lawo
Universität Bremen
TZi
Bremen, Germany
{akhan, mlawo}@tzi.de
Abstract— Physical activity is a major part of a user's context 
for wearable computing applications. The system should be 
able to acquire the user's physical activities by using body 
worn  sensors.  We  want  to  develop  a  sports  activities 
recognition system that is practical, reliable, and can be used 
for health-care related applications. We propose to use the 
axivity device which is a readymade, light weight, small and 
easy  to  use  device  for  identifying  basic  physical  training 
activities (i.e., using elliptical trainer, butterfly, bench-press 
and pull down ) and different swimming styles (i.e., dolphin, 
back-stroke, breast-stroke and free-style) using decision tree 
classifier, Averaged one-dependence estimators (AODE) and 
Neural networks. In this paper, we present an approach to 
build  a  system  that  exhibits  this  property  and  provides 
evidence based on data for 8 different activities collected from 
20 different subjects. Our results indicate that the system has a 
good rate of accuracy. 
Keywords- Physical activities; accelerometer sensor; 
classifier.
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
Human activity recognition by using body worn sensors 
has received attention in recent years. An activity recognition 
system in health care support, especially in elder care, long-
term  health/fitness  monitoring,  and  assisting  those  with 
cognitive  disorders  is  demanded.  Therefore,  recognizing 
human physical activities with body worn sensors is not a 
new research field; most research has already been done in 
this area. We can identify users' physical movements using a 
body movement suit [2]; we also have other research projects 
where researchers identify the users' physical activities using 
some sensors like [3][4][5][6][7][8].
With  some  diseases  like  diabetes,  heart  problems, 
mentally disabled persons, elderly patients are required to 
perform  some physical  activities  or training  exercises  in 
order to make them physically fit. Similarly, in some cases, 
patients need to be monitored by nurses/trainers which is 
very time consuming and expensive.
Modern day lifestyle has lead to various physical and 
mental  diseases  such  as  diabetes,  depression  and  heart 
diseases  as  well.  According  to  the  World  Health 
Organization, there are at least 1.9 million people annually 
dying as a result of physical inactivity [10].
Although people are aware of the importance of exercise, 
there is a lack of motivation due to their busy schedules. 
People  need  to  be  urged  and  reminded  about  physical 
training  exercises.  Probably  automatic  and  personal 
reminders can be very helpful if they can monitor one’s 
physical training exercises and persuade people to perform 
them regularly.
Activity recognition technology can tackle this problem 
as it is able to monitor an individual’s physical training 
exercises and their duration in order to estimate how much 
calories are being consumed on a daily basis. Those systems 
can also provide recommendation when they fail to complete 
enough exercise and it also encourages people to conduct 
more activities [12][13][14].
In  some  cases,  especially  in  heart  diseases,  physical 
activities  are  also  required  along  with  the  physiological 
information for doctors in order to examine their patient's 
conditions when he is away from the doctor's clinic [19].
We want to develop an activity recognition system using 
a minimum amount of sensors which should be able in 
identifying  different  physical  exercises(using  elliptical 
trainer, butterfly, bench-press and pull down) and different 
swimming  styles  (i.e.,  dolphin,  back-stroke,  breast-stroke 
and free-style). 
In our research, we want to prove that it is possible to 
identify  the  aforementioned  activities  by  using  a  3D 
accelerometer.  In  next  section,  the  related  work  will  be 
discussed.  Hypothesis  and  research  question  will  be 
discussed in the section III. Experimental methodology will 
be discussed in the section IV. Evaluation will be discussed 
in the section V, and conclusion and future work will be in 
the last.
II.
RELATED WORK
There are several ways to recognize a person’s physical 
activities.  One  way  is  using  cameras  to  visually  detect 
people’s motion [15][16].
The drawback of this solution is that a large number of 
cameras would be required in order to monitor a moving 
person.  This  system  would  also  need  to  be  designed  to 
compute information from each camera and deal with other 
factors such as light, distance and angle, which make the 
system impractical.
Researchers  already  have  identified  various  physical 
activities  using wearable  sensors  like sitting  [3][6][7][8], 
standing [3][6][7][8], lying [6], walking [3][4][5][6][7][8], 
climbing stairs [3][4][6][7][8], running [5][7][8], cycling [5]
[8], strength training [8], etc. However, for their recognition 
system, they have used more than one sensor. For example, 
some  researchers  identified  around  20  activities  using  5 
sensor boards [8]. They identified walking, walking carrying 
items, sitting & relaxing, working on computer, standing 
still,  eating  or  drinking,  watching  TV,  reading,  running, 
bicycling,  stretching,  strength-training,  scrubbing, 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

vacuuming,  folding  laundry,  lying  down  &  relaxing, 
brushing teeth, climbing stairs, riding elevator and riding 
escalator, by using Decision Table, Instance-based learning 
(IBL),  C4.5 and Naive Bayes  algorithms [26]. Similarly, 
researchers identified 12 activities using 3 sensor boards [3]. 
Researchers  identified  3  activities  i.e.,  walking,  climbing 
stairs and descending stairs using 9 tilt switches, by using K-
means clustering and brute force algorithms; these sensors 
were worn just above the right knee [4]. Researchers also 
identified  a  few  physical  activities  and  strength-training 
techniques using a 3D accelerometer sensor [9][20][21]. 
Researchers  also  have  identified  different  swimming 
styles by using wearable devices [22][23][24][25]. 
In our work, we want to develop a single system for 
recognizing  few  physical  training  exercises  (i.e.,  using 
elliptical trainer, butterfly, bench-press and pull down) and 
different swimming styles (i.e., dolphin, back-stroke, breast-
stroke and free-style).
Physical training exercises are already identified by using 
a 3D accelerometer [21], but we found following drawbacks:
- Data were not preprocessed before applying machine 
learning algorithms.
- Only two machine learning algorithms were used.
- It is stated that "For every user, the system needs to be 
trained with the sensor data so that it would be able to predict 
physical training exercises using the axivity device" [21].
In this work, we want to pre-process our data before 
applying any machine learning algorithms. Additionally, we 
want to use Neural networks [26] because it is known for 
pattern  recognition.  We  also  want  to  develop  a  generic 
system for both physical training activities and swimming 
styles.
III.
HYPOTHESIS AND RESEARCH QUESTION
The acceleration  measured  by a 3 axis accelerometer 
(X,Y,Z)  at  a  specific  point  (upper-arm),  indicates  which 
activity  a  person  is  performing  (using  elliptical  trainer, 
butterfly,  bench-press,  pull  down,  dolphin,  back-stroke, 
breast-stroke and free-style), by using J48 [26], AODE [26] 
and Neural Networks [26].
In  this  paper,  we  investigate  the practical  aspects  of 
creating an automatic, personal activity recognition system. 
Through our experiments, we want to find the answer of the 
following question: Is it possible to identify which activity 
the person is performing (using elliptical trainer, butterfly, 
bench-press, pull down, dolphin, back-stroke, breast-stroke 
and free-style) by using a 3D wearable accelerometer sensor 
on participants' arm?
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY
We  used  AX3  data  logger  [1]  in  order  to  identify 
physical activities which is also a water proof device (as 
shown in Figure: 1).
Figure 1: Axivity device
It was worn on the participants' arm and they wore it on the 
right hands’ upper arm (as shown in Figure: 2).
Figure 2:  Location for axivity device
The AX3 data logger contains 3-axis of accelerometer with 
flash memory and clock. This device is small and easy to 
use, its dimensions are 6x21.5x31.5 mm and its weight is 9 
grams. The device comes with pre-installed software with 
the possibility to configure its settings. For example, we can 
configure sample rate,  gravity, etc. It  continuously logs 
contextual information (time; hh:mm:ss and axis; X, Y, Z) 
to its internal memory. We can also set the duration for 
logging  this  information.  There  is  also  a  possibility  to 
export the logged data from the device to a computer in 
comma-separated values (CSV) format.
 We implemented an application for ‘Pocket PC’, where we 
can state the starting and ending time for each physical 
activity during experiments. This application generates text 
files with this information for each physical activity for 
training  data.  It  also  stores  the  participants’  personal 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

information  i.e.,  age,  gender,  height,  and  weight.  We 
implemented another application in Java for analysis. This 
application requires two input files: time stamp for physical 
activities from ‘Pocket PC’, as well as the CSV file from 
the axivity device. Firstly, it filters needed data from the 
CSV file based on the time stamp from the files from the 
‘Pocket PC for each physical activity and generates training 
data files in ARFF format. Later, it pre processes the data 
(which is described below) and then we applied machine 
learning algorithms (J48, AODE and Neural Networks) on 
training data in order to get  results from all mentioned 
algorithms (as shown in Figure 3).
Figure 3: Architecture
A.
Data collection from Axivity device
We  conducted  two  user  studies  in  order  to  prove  our 
hypothesis.  One  was  for  identifying  physical  training 
exercises  and  other  one  was  for  identifying  different 
swimming styles.
For identifying physical training exercises, we recruited 14 
participants (9 males, 5 females) for our experiment setup 
as shown in Figure 3. The range of participants' age was 
from 20 to 41 (mean 29.14, SD 10.11) and ranged in BMI 
(body mass index) [10] from 19.6 to 27.8 (mean 23.03, SD 
2.39).  They  performed  each  physical  training  exercises 
(using  elliptical  trainer,  butterfly,  bench-press  and  pull 
down) for a minute.
For identifying different swimming styles, we recruited 6 
participants (5 males, 1 female) for our experiment setup as 
shown in Figure 3. The range of participants' age was from 
19 to 42 (mean 29.17, SD 19.58) and ranged in BMI (body 
mass index) [10] from 19 to 24.8 (mean 21.48, SD 2.16). 
They were required to swim 30 meters in each swimming 
style  (dolphin, back-stroke,  breast-stroke and free-style). 
Our participants had different swimming levels, some of 
them were beginners and some of them were expert in 
swimming. Some participants were not able to swim in 
dolphin style.
In order to attach this device on the participants’ back, we 
used sticky tape which was directly placed on the skin. We 
logged continuous data with 8G and the sample rate was 
100 Hz. At the end, we collected data from 20 participants 
out  of  both  studies  (physical  exercise  activities  and 
swimming styles).
B.
Ground truth
Participants'  were  continuously  observed  during 
experiments. An observer was stating starting/ending time 
of each activity.
C.
Pre-processing
Each window represents a data of 5 seconds and it contains 
correlation of (X, Y), correlation of (Y, X), correlation of 
(Z, X), average of X, average of Y and average of Z.
D.
Classifications
The 10-fold cross-validation is used to evaluate the J48, 
AODE  and  Neural  networks  (Multilayer  perceptron) 
models. We used WEKA toolkit [17] for evaluating our 
results.
V.
EVALUATION
Our results (Table 1) show that “Using elliptical trainer” 
activity was predicted with an accuracy of 90.64% by the 
J48. J48 was also able to predict other activities with better 
accuracy  than other classifiers except “Back-stroke”  and 
“Breast-stroke” activities. “Back-stroke” activity was better 
recognized by AODE classifier and “Breast-stroke” activity 
was better recognized by Neural Networks. “Free-style” was 
recognized by all classifiers with same accuracy.
TABLE I. 
COMPARISON WITH OTHER CLASSIFIERS 
J48
AODE
Neural 
networks
Using elliptical 
trainer 
90.64%
68.98%
89.84%
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Butterfly
74.42%
47.09%
66.86%
Pull down
83.15%
79.35%
76.63%
Bench-press
77.66%
45.74%
68.09%
Dolphin
80.00%
80.00
26.67%
Back-stroke
64.52%
70.37%
68.97%
Breast-stroke
77.78%
59.26%
81.48%
Free-style
52.38%
52.38%
52.38%
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Our system is able to recognize a high percentage of the 
aforementioned activities with the help of the J48 (decision 
tree) classifier. These preliminary results have shown that 
one 3D accelerometer sensor may be enough for identifying 
a few physical activities (using elliptical trainer, butterfly, 
bench-press, pull down, dolphin, back-stroke, breast-stroke 
and free-style). We may get different results when we use 
another 40 or more samples, this prototype is only a "proof 
of  concept"  and  our  results  show  that  a  single  3D 
accelerometer  sensor  can  identify  the  above  mentioned 
physical activities independent of BMI (body mass index) 
and age group. The accelerometer sensor has to be fixed 
properly on the participants' backbone in order to predict the 
participants'  activities  successfully.  We  will  put  the 
accelerometer sensor on other parts of the body in order to 
identify some other physical activities and we will use it for 
online machine learning. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded by USEFIL [27].
REFERENCES
[1] Axivity - 
http://axivity.com/v2/index.php?
page=product.php&product=index.php?
page=product.php&product=ax3 (01/04/2014)
[2] Xsens MVN - http://www.xsens.com/en/general/mvn
(01/04/2014)
[3]  J.  Lester,  T.  Choudhury,  and  G.  Borriello,  “A  practical 
approach  to  recognizing  physical  activities,”  Lecture  Notes  in 
Computer Science 3968 (2006): 1–16.
[4] K. Laerhoven and A. K. Aronsen, “Memorizing what you did 
last week: Towards detailed actigraphy with a wearable sensor,” in 
Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, 2007. ICDCSW'07, 
27th International Conference
[5]  T.  Choudhury  et  al.,  “The  mobile  sensing  platform:  An 
embedded  activity  recognition  system,”  IEEE  Pervasive 
Computing (2008): 32–41.
[6] N. Kern, B. Schiele and A. Schmidt, “Multi-sensor activity 
context  detection  for  wearable  computing,”  Lecture  Notes  in 
Computer Science (2003): 220–234.
[7]  U.  Maurer,  A.  Rowe,  A.  Smailagic  and  D.  Siewiorek, 
“Location and Activity Recognition Using eWatch: A Wearable 
Sensor Platform,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science3864 (2006): 
86.
[8]  L.  Bao  and  S.  S.  Intille,  “Activity  recognition  from 
userannotated  acceleration  data,”  Lecture  Notes  in  Computer 
Science (2004): 1–17
[9] A. M. Khan 2011, "Recognizing Physical Activities using Wii 
remote", ICIKM 2011; Haikou, China.
[10]  World  Health  Organization:  Move  for  Health, 
http://www.who.int/moveforhealth/en (01/04/2014)
[11] J. E. Manson, P. J. Skerrett, Philip and B. Theodore, “The 
Escalating Pandemics of Obesity and Sedentary Lifestyle: A Call 
to Action for Clinicians”, Arch. Intern.  Med. 164(3), 249–258 
(2004)
[12] S. Consolvo et al, “Activity Sensing in the Wild: A Field Trial 
of UbiFit Garden”, CHI 2008 (2008)
[13] J. J. Lin, L. Mamykina, S. Lindtner, G. Delajoux and H. B. 
Strub, “Fish’n’Steps: Encouraging Activitiy with  an Interactive 
Computer Game”, Dourish, P., Friday, A. (eds.) UbiComp 2006. 
LNCS, vol. 4206, pp. 261–278. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
[14] I.  Anderson,  J.  Maitland,  S.  Sherwood,  L.  Barkhuus, M. 
Chalmers, M. Hall, B. Brown and H. Muller, “Shakra: Tracking 
and  Sharing  Daily  Activity  Levels  with  Unaugmented  Mobile 
Phones”, Mobile Networks and Applications, 185–199 (2007).
[15] P. Turaga, R. Chellappa, V. S. Subrahmanian and O. Udrea, 
“Machine  Recognition  of  Human  Activities:  A  survey”,  IEEE 
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology
18(11) (2008) 
[16] W. Hu, T. Tan, L. Wang and S. Maybank, “A survey on 
Visual  Surveillance  of  Object  Motion  and  Behaviors”,  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics.  Part  C: 
Applications and Reviews 34(3) (2004).
[17] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann 
and I. H. Witten, “The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update”, 
SIGKDD Explorations, Volume 11, Issue 1.
[18]  Body  Mass  Index  -  http://www.nhlbisupport.com/bmi/ 
(01/04/2014)
[19] A.  M.  Khan,  “Personal state and emotion  monitoring  by 
wearable  computing  and  machine  learning”,  BCS-HCI  2012, 
Newcastle, UK
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[20]  A. M.  Khan, "Recognizing  Physical  Activities  Using  the 
Axivity Device", eTELEMED 2013; Nice, France. IARIA, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-252-3 : 147-152.
[21] A.M. Khan, G. Kalkbrenner, M. Lawo, "Recognizing Physical 
Training  Exercises  Using  the  Axivity  Device",  ICT  meets 
Medicine and Health 2013; Bremen, Germany.
[22] P. Siirtola, P. Laurinen, J. Röning and H. Kinnunen, "Efficient 
Accelerometer-Based Swimming Exercise", Paris, CIDM 2011.
[23]  M.  Bächlin,  K.  Förster  and  G.  Tröster,  "SwimMaster:  a 
wearable assistant for swimmer", Florida, UbiComp 2009.
[24] M. Bächlin and G.  Tröster, "Swimming  performance  and 
technique  evaluation  with  wearable  acceleration  sensors", 
Pervasive and Mobile Computing 8 (2012), 68–81.
[25] J. Pansiot, B. Lo and G. Yang, "Swimming Stroke Kinematic 
Analysis  with  BSN",  BSN  '10  Proceedings  of  the  2010 
International Conference on Body Sensor Networks.
[26] R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell and T. M. Mitchell, Machine 
learning, 1986, Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
[27] www.usefil.eu (01/04/2014)
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Towards uniﬁed tooling for easing the qualiﬁcation
of medical normed environments
Anthony Gelibert∗†, S´ebastien Jean∗, Denis Genon-Catalot∗, G´erard Santailler† and Ioannis Parissis∗
∗LCIS
Grenoble Institute of Technology
Valence, France
{anthony.gelibert}{sebastien.jean}{denis.genon}{ioannis.parissis}@lcis.grenoble-inp.fr
†Nocosium SAS
2 rue Stalingrad
Vaulx-en-Velin, France
{a.gelibert}{g.santailler}@nocosium.com
Abstract—Medical conﬁned environments are characterized
by a very stringent set of standards and regulations, depending
on a wide range of parameters. These are very difﬁcult to
handle because of the lack of appropriate tools to qualify before
use, monitor during use and audit after use. Providing these
tools requires to tackle the complexity of gathering all the
different elements of the environment proﬁle (building topology,
standards and rules, instrumentation) in a single model which
could be statically validated and dynamically checked against
events. This article both focuses on introducing the context of
medical conﬁned environment regulation and issues faced when
trying to design and implement qualiﬁcation and monitoring
tools, and on presenting the approach and work in progress.
Index Terms—Requirements Engineering; Model-Driven Engi-
neering; Medical conﬁned environment; Qualiﬁcation
I. CONTEXT
Conﬁned environments can be deﬁned as space-limited areas,
hosting a product or process, in which all uncontrolled transfers
between the inside and the outside world are forbidden. In
some cases, motivation is to protect the process against outside
contaminations (such as in surgery). In other cases, it is much
more to protect the outside against contaminations by the
process itself (such as in virology).
Conﬁned environment characteristics (such as use, manufac-
turing, high attendance, location...) imply strong constraints
and, therefore are ruled by several design methods and use
guides. These regulations lead to the deﬁnition of “normative
layouts”, consisting in a set of standards a given environment
has to comply with. Moreover, the norms are not all opposable,
some are only good practice or advice (such as the World
Health Organization (WHO) documents [1]).
To illustrate the needs and issues related to our work, we
will use a simpliﬁed “Centralized Reconstitution of Cytotoxic
Drugs Unit (CRCDU)” (Fig. 1) all along the article. In these
environments, users are expected to prepare drugs, under
chemical hoods in a dedicated room, which will be used for
antineoplastic treatments. Here, conﬁnement protects prepa-
rations from external contamination by a gradual asepsis [2].
Inter alia, it consists in several pressure stages as well as by
the rooms’ conformance to several (and gradual) ISO levels
(ISO 14644-1 [3] standard deﬁnes the allowed concentration of
particles of various sizes). In France, depending on the context
of implementation, a different set of laws, best practices [4]–[6]
and norms [3], [7], [8] regulate these units.
The ﬁrst room is a clearance room, remaining in a particular
pressure level in order to protect itself from outdoor atmosphere
(whose pressure is considered as a reference). An airlock allows
users to dress, and thus acts as a ﬁrst decontamination stage.
Finally, users reach the preparation room with the highest
pressure level and the lowest ISO class.
Preparing room
( +++ )
Clearance room
( + )
Airlock
( ++ )
Outside
( = ) 
ISO 8
ISO 7
Figure 1. Illustration case: simpliﬁed CRCDU
II. MOTIVATIONS AND ISSUES
Human and ﬁnancial risks related to the design, or the use,
of noncompliant environments lead to the need for qualiﬁcation
of such environments before commissioning, but also for their
monitoring and auditing after the operation. To support this
assertion, it is enlightening to remember that in France, there
are more deaths each year by nosocomial infections than
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

by road accidents. There is a strong need for an integrated
toolset, presented in Fig. 2, operating cooperatively all along
the conﬁned environment lifecycle (design, commissioning and
use).
To summarize:
• upstream of any project checking (0), an analysis is
required to proceed with the next two steps ;
• for each project:
– during the design (1), it should be possible to qualify
a conﬁned environment by using only its technical
data, to determinate, a priori, its conformance ;
– during the usage (2), the need is to trace usage in order
to follow the evolution of the conﬁned environment
and to keep its history for audit purposes.
“Qualiﬁcation”
report
1
2
Normative 
analysis
Events
“Dashboard”
“Audit” 
report
Time
Preliminary 
analysis
0
Design
Building / Use
Qualiﬁcation
Traceability
Figure 2. Required process
This section details the required features.
A. Analysis (0)
This is the entry point of the toolset, its preamble, the basis
of all the process. The objective is to constitute the normative
layout of a kind of medical conﬁned environment and process it
to extract the elements required by the qualiﬁcation (II-B) and
the monitoring (II-C). This operation will be done according
to the type of environment or according to the “version” of
the normative layout, evolving in the same manner.
In the chosen example, it is the analysis of the documents
composing the normative layout of a CRCDCU (among which
the documents [3]–[8]).
B. Qualiﬁcation (1)
During the design phase (next section), it should be possible
to qualify a conﬁned environment by using only its technical
data, to determinate, a priori, its conformance with its targeted
usage. It is a typical case of Requirements Engineering (RE) [9].
To simplify, it is an engineering domain, targeting the checking
of a product against its requirements ; all the process is
considered from the requirements elicitation up to the product
conformity checking. In this step, the objective is to produce
a “qualiﬁcation” report, which will provide the decision aids
allowing to enhance and maximize the conformity of the project
with its normative layout.
In our use case, considering the foreseen use of the unit,
rooms (size, volume, relative layout. . . ) and their instrumenta-
tion (sensors, actuators, external systems. . . ), the qualiﬁcation
would consist in checking all required systems are present
(“Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning (HVAC)”, access
control...) and that they are properly conﬁgured.
C. Monitoring and traceability (2)
After commissioning, it is necessary to trace usage in order
to follow the evolution of the conﬁned environment and to
keep its history for audit purposes. Monitoring then aims at
delivering a “specialist-oriented” feedback, giving a clear and
cohesive view of running operations to various users rather
than trying to automate a complete normative usage analysis.
Thus, a customizable “dashboard”, displaying only the relevant
information, could perfectly embody this feature.
In our example, this could consist in recording the evolution
of the pressure in the various rooms, in checking that airlock
system is properly running as air velocity and throughput are
compliant to requirements...
III. APPROACH AND WORK IN PROGRESS
Our work focuses on the design of a uniﬁed process (called
the “methology” in this section) to answer the need presented
in Fig. 2. We drew the sketch of the process architecture in a
previous paper [10] and conduced additional research to reﬁne
its operating and set its technical details. Figure 3 presents this
enhanced version, based on model design and transformation,
for which we are addressing steps 0 to 2.
The qualiﬁcation tool (0 & 1) has to take some abstract
representations as inputs, in other words, models of both
technical data and applying standards. This leads to tackle an
RE problem using “Model-Driven Engineering (MDE) [11]” ;
an approach called “Model-Driven Requirements Engineering
(MoDRE)”. The realization of these models could be uniﬁed
in a megamodel [12], interconnecting the metamodels of
each component with the required weaving models and so
on. As most of the time the normative layout also induces
alternatives that lead to several solutions (i.e. building and
instrumentation that conforms to it), a notion of “prominence”
in the qualiﬁcation process consequently has to be taken into
account. These models (and the linked constraints) represent
the abstract syntax and semantic of our modeling language for
conﬁned medical environments, the last point is the concrete
syntax. As a reminder, this is the syntax (graphic or textual)
that the user will manipulate and use to model their project. The
challenge is to design metamodels ﬂexible enough to support
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the whole targeted domain while providing a framework strict
enough to automate checking and data extraction operations.
This means a trade-off between the ability to easily model
the target and the expressivity required for the transformations
generating the “qualiﬁcation” report and the next step.
About the applied proﬁle (2), its presence is required by
the need to reengineer “high-level” model of the targeted envi-
ronment and its “normative layout”. Indeed, the environment
proﬁle used during qualiﬁcation is too abstract to be used
directly by the monitoring platform. A strict rule such as “two
doors of an airlock cannot be opened simultaneously” has
little concrete links within the “computer world”: what is an
airlock? What is a door? How should its state be read? The
model produced by the user to assess their project should
partially or completely be automatically reiﬁed in an easily
manageable version by the monitoring platform. In our example
(Fig. 1), this could lead to explicit constraint deﬁnitions like
“P1 pressure sensor value should always be greater than
P2 one”, “opening indicators cannot be active at the same
time”. . . Obviously, required information should be introduced
in models, to identify P1, P2 and opening indicators. Proﬁle
generation is a requirements reengineering problem, consisting
in automatically extracting relevant parameters from the abstract
proﬁle in order to conﬁgure the monitoring platform.
Concerning the traceability platform (3), among the complete
set of exploitation constraints, the most important are: the
qualiﬁcation as “Medical Device” [13] ; the data use in legal
cases which requires integrity-guaranteed data [14] ; the support
of all the legacy systems already deployed in the targeted
conﬁned environment and the adaptability to a proﬁle and an
environment which will evolve over time. Here, the challenge
is thus as much in the design of the tools themselves as in this
speciﬁc context of deployment.
We are currently setting up the methodology on real
cases. We are working on the analysis step (0). The design
of the metamodels enabling to model the building and its
instrumentation was the ﬁrst step and now, we are handling the
normative processing. The production of the normative layout
and its analysis is a manual process, leading to extract a relevant
megamodel which will be the core behind the modeling work-
shop. It is specialist-oriented work, requiring great knowledge
of the concerned domain, provided by Nocosium. As stated
in the previous section, we do not aim at a very sharpened
concrete syntax and we work more on the methodology than
on the user experience. The concrete syntax (presented in the
Section II-B) is more an “engineering” problem which would
be better tackled later by engineers because there are no real
research locks. These further works should investigate the
current business processes and determine how to integrate the
modeling part in their workﬂow.
Our ﬁrst application scenario is the CRCDU presented all
along this article. This work enables us to achieve a kind of
typology of the normative constraints. Indeed, we can discern
several types of constraints depending on the veriﬁcations
required to conform with. For example, the constraints based
on the presence of a speciﬁc element (e.g. pressure sensor to
Veriﬁcation
“Qualiﬁcation”
report
Modeled environment
Transformation
1
2
3
Modeling workshop
Valid environment
Targeted environment
Normative analysis
Traceability platform
Events
“Dashboard”
“Audit” 
report
“Applied” proﬁle
Time
Norms
Preliminary 
analysis
0
Design
Building / Use
produce
Figure 3. Proposed approach
ensure pressure monitoring) differ from constraints based on
the conﬁguration of a sensor (e.g. frequency of the pressure
monitoring) or from functioning constraints (e.g. the calibration
of pressure sensors). The means to check them are different.
So, we are currently analyzing the CRCDU “normative
layout”. For each norm, we classify the constraints and report
them into the megamodel or later in the methodology. The
produced metamodels are Nocosium’s property and will not
be presented in this publication.
IV. DISCUSSION
Requirements engineering is a transversal thematic spanning
over several scientiﬁc ﬁelds, not necessarily technical, like
in contributions examining the adequacy of a process of
requirement validation with a company’s workﬂow. In this
thesis, we adopt a fully technical stance and we assess its
feasibility, efﬁciency and limits. Hence, we have to compare our
contribution to the other technical approaches for requirement
engineering.
The contribution presented in this paper is downstream of
typical IT approaches for requirements engineering, like the
“Knowledge Acquisition in automated Speciﬁcation (KAOS)”
method [15]. These works aim at identifying the inconsistencies
and the conﬂicts in the targeted requirements for a given project.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

This is not our case: we adopt the point of view of the “maitrise
d’ouvrage” for which the normative layout cannot be altered.
We aim at checking the project against the normative layout.
In the same search area, we can also quote the PhD work
of Nicolas Sannier [16], on the coherency analysis and the
conﬂict detection, between the various versions of the same
norm. Once more, this work is upstream our own objectives.
We can also quote the PhD thesis of Panesar-Walawege [17]
aiming at analyzing the conformity of safety-critical systems
with the relevant IEC norm, by the UML modeling of the
norm to extract the list and calendar of the artefacts to produce.
However, we handle different (although complementary) as-
pects. We will not check if the “maitrise d’ouvrage” produces
the required elements but if the project is conform. To put
it shortly, it is almost, an opposition between syntactic and
semantic analysis.
To conclude, there is not much research on global approaches
of requirements engineering (from conception to audit) target-
ing normed environments.
V. CONCLUSION
Conﬁned environments are controlled working zones where
all unmanaged transfers between the inside and the outside are
forbidden. We intend to deﬁne a methodology to qualify the
normative conformity of an environment, then checking the
durability of such compliance over time. The ﬁrst steps of this
process will be validated at the end of the engaged PhD thesis.
Environment qualiﬁcation should be done only using its
technical data. We suggest to address this requirements engi-
neering problem by allowing the deﬁnition of an integrated
environment proﬁle merging three components: “building”,
“instrumentation” and “requirements”.
Environment monitoring should allow to trace use and to
give immediate feedback to practitioners via a dashboard,
but also to collect data for further audits. We propose to
address monitoring platform implementation issues by the
use of service-oriented architectures, particularly to sustain
environment changes (building, requirements, instrumentation).
There is not much research on global approaches of require-
ments engineering (from conception to audit) targeting normed
environments. It is this lack that we aim at tackling and in this
thesis we validate the ﬁrst steps of our proposition.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is funded by the Nocosium company under a
French “Convention Industrielle de Formation par la REcherche
(CIFRE)” Doctoral Convention.
REFERENCES
[1] Intermittent Preventive Treatment in Infants, “WHO Policy recom-
mendation on Intermittent Preventive Treatment during infancy with
sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP-IPTi) for Plasmodium falciparum
malaria control in Africa,” World Health Organization, WHO Policy
Recommendation, Mar 2010.
[2] T. Hoet, “Le concept de l’asepsie progressive et son impact sur le
comportement dans le bloc op´eratoire,” Inter Bloc, pp. 24–27, 1994.
[3] International Organization for Standardization, “Cleanrooms and associ-
ated controlled environments — Part 1: Classiﬁcation of air cleanliness,”
International Organization for Standardization, ISO 14644-1, 1999.
[4] Agence Franc¸aise de S´ecurit´e Sanitaire des Produits de Sant´e, “Bonnes
Pratiques de Pr´eparation,” Minist`ere du travail, de l’emploi et de la sant´e,
Tech. Rep., Dec 2007.
[5] ——, “Bonnes Pratiques de Fabrication,” Minist`ere du travail, de l’emploi
et de la sant´e, Fascicule sp´ecial 2011/8 bis, Jul 2011.
[6] Direction de l’Hospitalisation et de l’Organisation des Soins, “Bonnes
Pratiques de Pharmacie Hospitali`ere,” Minist`ere de l’Emploi et de la
Solidarit´e – Minist`ere d´el´egu´e `a la sant´e, Tech. Rep., Jun 2001.
[7] Agence Franc¸aise de NORmalisation, “´Etablissements de sant´e - Zones
`a environnement maˆıtris´e - Exigences relatives `a la maˆıtrise de la
contamination a´eroport´ee,” Agence Franc¸aise de NORmalisation, Tech.
Rep. NF S90-351, Apr 2013.
[8] International Organization for Standardization, “Cleanrooms and associ-
ated controlled environments — Part 4: Design, construction and start-up,”
International Organization for Standardization, ISO 14644-4, 2001.
[9] P. Zave, “Classiﬁcation of research efforts in requirements engineering,”
ACM Comput. Surv., 1997.
[10] A. Gelibert, S. Jean, and D. Genon-Catalot, “Plateforme Ouverte de
Supervision et de Trac¸abilit´e pour les Environnements Conﬁn´es,” in
Actes de la conf´erence MajecSTIC 2012, Oct 2012.
[11] D. C. Schmidt, “Model-Driven Engineering,” IEEE Computer, vol. 39,
no. 2, Feb 2006.
[12] J. Bezivin, F. Jouault, and P. Valduriez, “On the need for Megamodels,”
in Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages,
and Applications, 2004.
[13] European Parliament and Council, “Directive 2007/47/EC,” European
Union, Directive 2007/47/CE, Sep 2007.
[14] Food US, “Drug Administration, 21 CFR Part 11 Electronic Records,”
Electronic Signatures (Final Rule), 1997.
[15] A. van Lamsweerde, A. Dardenne, B. Delcourt, and F. Dubisy, “The
KAOS Project: Knowledge Acquisition in Automated Speciﬁcation of
Software,” in AAAI Spring Symp. Series, ser. Track: ”Design of Composite
Systems”.
Stanford University, Mar 1991, pp. 59–62.
[16] N. Sannier, B. Baudry, and T. Nguyen, “Formalizing standards and
regulations variability in longlife projects. a challenge for model-
driven engineering,” in Proceedings of the Model-Driven Requirements
Engineering workshop (MoDRE’11) at RE’11, Trento, Italy, Aug 2011.
[17] R. Panesar-Walawege, “Using Model-Driven Engineering to Support the
Certiﬁcation of Safety-Critical Systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Oslo, Jul 2012.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Emergency Web App for Accessing the Medical Emergency Services
Beatriz Gómez, Carlos Juiz
Cátedra Telefónica-UIB
Computer Science Department
Universitat de les Illes Balears – UIB
Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 07122
{b.gomez, cjuiz}@uib.es
Abstract-Nowadays,
accessing
emergency
services
and
customer healthcare, in Spain, is done only by traditional phone
calls to the number 061. In order to facilitate interaction between
the emergency users and the emergency service system, we are
improving
and
expanding
new
channels
of
personal
communication. Given that the use of smart mobile devices is
widespread in our society, we are developing a mobile application
for emergency management, providing the same assistance as
phone calls and adding some brand new features. We have
developed requirements design and a functional specification of
our new mobile application aimed at improving user interaction
with the traditional emergency systems. The functionalities of the
Web
application
are
focused
on
providing
a
direct
communication service, complete and effective, allowing quick
and accurate intervention of the emergency services. Our
purpose is to define a platform fully accessible to all users,
regardless of their language and/or technological knowledge.
Thus, the focus of this paper is mainly devoted to explain how to
extend traditional applications based on emergency phone calls,
to
modern
mobile
applications
considering
not
only
web
technologies, but also social networking behavior.
Keywords-Healthcare
Emergency
System;
User
Interaction;
Mobile Devices; Web Applications.
I. INTRODUCTION
Before the decision of the European Union (EU), in 1991,
to have a single phone number for European emergency calls,
accessing healthcare emergencies and medical urgencies is
Spain was performed by dialing 061. The EU decision,
legislated in Directive 91/396/EEC of the Council of the
International Association of Emergency Managers (IAEM)
Spain from July 29, 1991, defined the dialing number 112 for
these European emergency calls and added, in cases where it is
considered appropriate, this number will be introduced in
parallel with any other emergency number that existed before.
The Medical Emergency Services (SEMs for its acronym in
Spain) belong to any public health system integrally. Its main
function is to provide medical care in all emergency situations,
including disasters. Medical emergencies have two main
assistance scopes: hospitable, through emergency services of
the
hospitals;
and
extra-hospitable,
which
can
integrate
different resources and types of assistance depending on the
health model of the country in terms of integration or not
integration of specialized primary assistance into a single
health service and the type of the provision of services.
Therefore, extra-hospitable emergency health services are
defined like a functional organization that performs a set of
sequential human and material activities with fixed and mobile
devices, with appropriate resources, coordinated, initiated from
the moment in which the medical emergency is found. Thus,
after consideration of the needs, it is assigned a response
without mobilizing any resource or moves their devices to act
in situ, perform medical transport if necessary and transfer the
patient to the appropriate facility for definitive treatment.
The
protocol
of
Emergencies
Service
and
Medical
Emergencies indicates that the incident or accident and the
corresponding emergency assistance are done in a different
intervention chain, as it is shown in Figure 1. Thus, the first
people to intervene may be the patient, witness or designated
first responders (firemen, police). This is the weakest link, as a
few Spanish citizens are trained in first aid. Neither the
personal of some services and institutions which expected
higher occurrence of people or a greater probability of
emergency are trained in these first aids. However, this reality
increases the results in terms of survival, as witnesses and first
involved people apply basic life support and defibrillation,
while the first health equipment arrives, remain essential for
the survival in cardiac arrest cases. The second link is a call
initiation done by the first involved people through 112 or 061,
and received by the Coordination Center, which serves the
emergency phone, and according to its characteristics or
severity, it is decided to follow action: resolution of the phone
call, resource mobilization, or referral of the patient on their
own to a given health center. So, as third link, the Coordination
Center has the quest to obtain the appropriate resources for
appropriate patients in appropriate timeframes.
Fig. 1 Emergency Service Flowchart [1]
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Early care services, transportation services and
hospital
emergency are not the scope of this paper. Within this response
chain, the appropriate Emergency Services chain begins with
the receipt to the call at the Coordination Center for following
coordination of no health emergency devices.
In the specific area of the Autonomous Community of the
Balearic Islands, where our university is also located, SAMU
061 (Emergency Medical Service 061) is a public Emergency
Medical Service under the Health Service of the Balearic
Islands that has the responsibility for healthcare emergencies
and outpatient emergency in the territory of the islands [2].
Nowadays, the user who needs to access SAMU services
should make a phone call by dialing 061 (link 2), based on the
Protocol of Emergencies Service and Medical Emergencies
described before, which will be run by an operator (link 3) who
will manage the incidence and will organize the needed
resources based on the information described by the user, as
detailed above.
Such an approach would generate a list of services focused
on assessing and responding to any emergency; thus, our new
Emergency Web Application includes, among other features,
the
following
functions:
collecting
user's
personal
data,
emergency
registration
through
a
set
of
questions
and
emergency registration in state of panic, with the aim to
improve the first customer assistance. In terms of interactivity,
it will also be essential to make a detailed study of user in with
the platform. Our purpose is to define a platform fully
accessible to all users, regardless of their language and/or
technological knowledge.
The paper is structured as follows: in Section II, research
and implemented development related to this work is depicted.
In Section III, the current technological environment of SAMU
for the control and management of emergencies is overviewed.
Section IV will present the solution we designed to provide
new channels of communication between the user and SAMU.
We conclude with some final comments and open problems in
Section V and final observations in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Several functionalities have been studied and designed to
improve access
to
healthcare
emergency assistance and
medical emergencies, so that they generate social benefit of
these services and content, in particular to improve the
interaction between the healthcare emergency system and their
users. In fact, Alcalde [3] already anticipated the trend of
access not only by telephone, but also
through social
networking, IP telephony, messaging and mobile applications,
as well as video and image distribution. The authors propose
new VoIP
phone
technologies
and
flexible
architecture
between different emergency centers.
The Fire Department at San Ramon Valley (California,
U.S.A.) has developed an application that offers continued
connection with 911 emergencies service by mobile phone [4].
The application takes advantage of their phone location, so that
users that indicated they have been trained in Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation (CPR) and would be willing to help in an
emergency can be messaged to do it. Therefore, the 911
dispatch center receiving a call for an emergency that is
occurring near the trained user, will send a notification telling
his/her help is needed in the surrounding area.
Other researchers from University of Texas [5] reveal next-
generation emergency response technology related to mobile
phones. Specifically, the smartphones can be placed directly on
the chest to monitor breathing, heart rate, blood pressure and
transmit this information directly to the operator of the call.
Besides, previous
introduction
to
the
study of user
interaction is explained by Gómez and Juiz [6]; we explained
the importance of adding a new channel of communication
between emergency services and the user. Similar to the Fire
Department App, the application communicates with the user
via the mobile device (Fire App by notifications, our app by
chat). Our application also intends to use a system similar to
his personal data record. On the contrary, they have already
integrated the location by GPS; however we will incorporate it
in the future.
These are only a few examples from an increasing
application list [7] that could include “SOS First Aid”,
“PocketCPR”, “iRescue”, among others, all of them taking
advantage of social impact of mobile devices and trying to
improve healthcare.
III. TECHNOLOGICAL SCOPE: THE SENECA PLATFORM
SAMU061 uses the product for emergency management
services developed by Telefónica [8], known as SENECA
platform.
Telefónica is an integrated operator of telecommunications,
leader in Spain. Its activity is basically focused on fixed and
mobile telephony business. However, in terms of health,
Telefónica has been betting strongly for the development of
innovative services in eHealth and telecare areas, especially for
the elderly and patients with chronic diseases. It is important to
add that Telefónica is a European Emergency Number
Association (EENA) Advisory Board Member. EENA is a
Brussels-based NGO set up in 1999 dedicated to promoting
high-quality emergency services reached by the number 112
throughout the EU. So, Telefónica has registered its SENECA
platform in EENA, supporting, giving and sharing eHealth
solutions.
Specifically,
SENECA
is
suite
that
includes
four
operational products available in the SENECA Emergency Suite
(SES). SAMU 061 works through the second one, i.e.
SENECA Health. The technological infrastructure of the whole
SENECA platform is based on market standards and industry.
They integrate in the process of implementation of Emergency
Centers helping their customers in issues like operations
analysis based on service needs and the current situation,
definition and planning of change management activities,
cooperation with the agencies, in an effort to stipulate protocol
and methodology and management of the complete incident
cycle, taking into account citizens, management operatives or
intervention.
SENECA Platform includes a client-server architecture for
Local Area Network (LAN) used by the management database
server processes to communicate with incidences users. The
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

operating environment of the SENECA shown in Figure 2 is
based, in general terms, on the sharing of a common database
between
communications
processes,
management
(CAD),
geographic information systems (GIS) and its corresponding
exploitation.
Fig. 2 SENECA Platform Data Base [9]
In terms of system, SENECA provides an integration of
communications services and incident management based on a
design addressed to the user. It provides an operator interface
that clearly presents all necessary information and simplifying
the decision-making for trained operators at call centers.
A. General Description
The SENECA emergency platform is comprised of a series
of functional modules which can be divided into two groups:
Core Services [9]: Among its features are the following:
voice
integration,
mapping
information
system,
demand
management (attention, location, dispatch, monitoring), basic
alarm system, asynchronous event distribution bus, and storage
of configuration data. The Core is also comprised of the
following modules:
-
Data Base: SENECA Data Base is based in the Oracle
10G R2 Data Base Management System. The data base
stores information about SENECA Platform configuration,
Business Data, Mapping Information, and system register
messages.
-
PABX: Private Automatic Branch Exchange is the voice
commutation central used by the telephony system. It is
possible to integrate itself with different manufacturers,
included those based in VoIP technology.
-
ACD:
Automatic
Call
Distributor
is
a
device
that
automatically distributes calls that access the PABX
among agents.
-
CTI:
Computer
Telephony
Integration
intended
for
interaction between a telephone call and actions taken by a
computer system in an integrated and coordinated way.
Client modules: Contain functionalities of management and
dispatching, where one can find the platform modules residing
in the operating positions thereof. These are the graphic
interface modules, which provide the functionality to users, and
background modules serving the core.
-
COMS:
Communication
Window
that
provides
communication services of the operating station platform
while maintaining control of telephony, phonebook, radios
management, and recorders.
-
GIS–Maps: Cartographic Viewer and positioning.
-
CADM: Care and Dispatch Window, incidents control,
authority and resources.
-
COSE: Tracking Window of several information such as
call letters, files, resources, information search, operator-
definable filters, refreshment in real-time through the
distribution bus events, among others.
B. Additional Modules
SENECA Platform has several additional modules related
to Core Services and Client modules. Although they are not
strictly necessary for its use in relation to management
emergencies, it does offer a number of features and benefits to
support the management mentioned. Thus, one can find:
-
Mobile location: responsible for determining the position
of the mobile phone calling to the emergency center that is
managed and stored by the platform.
-
Dispatching and integration of emergency calls made by
deaf people is also provided.
-
Integration with radio communication solutions.
C. Operating Environment
SENECA Platform is mainly aimed at emergency and
medical
emergencies
centers,
among
which
are
112
Coordination Centers, Health Care and Emergency Medical
Services, Fire Corps and Rescue Services, Police Forces and
Security Services and Civil Protection.
Telefónica
leads
the
Spanish
Emergency
Centers,
specifically 112 Coordination Centers in nine communities, as
well as Health Care Services in six of them. In terms of safety,
National Policy Force belonging to Ministry of the Interior, and
Civil Guard are also lead.
IV. EMERGENCY WEB APP
To improve the interaction between the user and the
emergency center, we integrate a new communication channel
taking advantage of the increased use of mobile devices
accessing to the Internet. Our proposed solution consists on a
cross-platform web application, easily adaptable to any mobile,
and multi-language, making it accessible to all users, regardless
of their technical knowledge and/or language. This last feature
is really a requirement in several territories in Spain, e.g. the
Balearic Islands, due to the huge number of foreign visitors per
year. According to the Tourism Strategy Institute (INESTUR),
in the Balearic Islands on 2009, shown in Table 1, more than
11.5 million tourists visited the islands through aerial and
maritime ways, which means a special careful interest in the
diversity of the idiom.
TABLE I.
FOREIGN VISITORS PER YEAR
Foreign
Spanish
Total
Aerial way
8.917.460
2.311.535
11.228.995
Maritime way
62.526
317.641
380.167
Total Balearic Islands
8.979.986
2.629.176
11.609.162
Thus, we have prioritized the multi-language feature and
designed our application such that, once started, the application
requests the language in which you want to be attended to.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Following, there is a form to fill a small number of fields about
the user's personal data such as your name, address, telephone
number, and more. This is followed by triage questionnaire to
determine the type of emergency that the user suffers. Finally,
the user gets in touch with an operator through chat system, or
if the severity level requires it, it starts communicating via
traditional phone call.
In technological terms, the mobile web application is
developed in two main blocks: Graphical User Interface (GUI)
Module and SENECA Integration Module.
A. GUI Module
In the Web Application GUI, the user interaction has been
developed by Sencha Architect [10], the HTML5 visual app
builder. Sencha has a code editor that guides to build any
application using Model View Controller (MVC), thus both
components that represent information and components that
interact with user are easily identifiable, improving the
development and subsequent maintenance.
Sencha Architect is mainly based on JavaScript language,
and the visual part is edited with HTML5 and Cascading Style
Sheets (CSS) to make it more attractive. One might add that
configuration of visualization files, event files or data model
files are structured following the JSON (JavaScript Object
Notation) [11] syntax. However, developers may use their own
IDE because there are no file dependencies, and Architect
produces regular JavaScript files that can be edited with any
IDE.
The GUI Module is structured according to MVC. In the
Models information, the language model, the user data model
and the triage model with relevant variables are included. To
access these latest models, Sencha configuration Stores are
accessed through a Proxy Ajax that contains the structure of the
models described in Json files. In Views information, the
application Emergency Web App is divided in several panels.
The main TabPanel welcomes the user to the application and
the language requested by a Select field. With the Tab Bar, it is
possible to change to the form which asks for data to the user.
Once this information is sent via Submit button, the user
accesses the second form, where triage is performed based on
the emergency class. After that, the application gives access to
chat. The controller section is made from SENECA Integration
Module.
B. SENECA Integration Module
We have used Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) [12] to
establish the communication between our Web App and
SENECA Emergency system. SOA is a software design and
software architecture design pattern based on discrete pieces of
software providing application functionality as services to
other applications. To communicate, these services are based
on a formal definition with platform and programming
language independence. The definition of the interface [12]
encapsulates the characteristics of an implementation, making
it independent of the manufacturer, the programming language
or the technology development. With this architecture, it is
intended that developed software components are very reusable
because the interface is defined according to a standard, so a
C# service could be used by a Java application. In this sense,
Mascaró defines SOA as a Super-abstraction [13].
One of the greatest economic and technological problems
of the applications is scalability, either the ability to react and
adapt without losing quality, or to be prepared to get bigger
without losing quality in the offered services. SOA ensures the
scalability thanks to its easy assembly of several systems which
facilitates the interaction between different own systems or
third parties. SOA is like a producer-consumer system based in
services and messages, where there is almost a server provider,
a consumer and a service repository.
As one can see in Figure 3, the service is a single and
independent logical piece of a business process, integrated
inside of the service, and interacts with the external world
using an interface. Each service can have its own logic
business rules easily accessible and modifiable at any time. The
server provider starts when someone invokes the service. It
drives the business logic and sends a response if it is necessary.
Therefore, the service consumer sends a message to the
provider to access the service.
SOA lets us develope global systems that interact with each
individual business system. In fact, each system is a Web
Service integrated in the WWW. In this case, SENECA
Telefónica has created the Global System and the Emergency
Web App is an individual system that interacts with Global,
both being Web Services.
Web Services is a technology that uses a set of protocols
and standards used for exchanging data between applications.
Different
software
applications
developed
in
different
programming languages and executed on any platform, can use
web services to exchange data. Interoperability is achieved by
adopting
open
standards.
OASIS
(Organization
for
the
Advancement of Structured Information Standards) and W3C
(World
Wide
Web
Consortium)
organizations
are
the
responsible committees for the Web Services architecture and
regulation. Thus, Web services allow software and services
from different companies located in different geographic
locations can be easily combined to provide integrated
services. Thanks to the great independence between the
application that uses the Web Service and the service itself,
changes in one of them over time should not affect the other, as
long as the established agreements are maintained in the
protocol.
Fig. 3 SOA & Web Services [13]
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The information exchanged between services is performed
using messages. In our case the standard protocol to send these
messages is SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) and the
description format is WSDL (Web Services Description
Language) format.
SOAP [14] is an XML based protocol for exchanging
structured information in the implementation of Web Services
in computer networks. SOAP offers a basic messaging
framework upon which web services can be built. This
protocol consists of three parts: an envelope, which defines
what the message contains and how to process it, a set of
encoding rules for expressing instances of data types, and a
convention for representing procedure calls and responses.
SOAP
protocol
has
three
main
features:
extensibility,
neutrality, as SOAP can be used over any transport protocol,
such as HTML, SMTP, TCP or JMS, and independency,
because SOAP supports any programming model.
WSDL is an XML [15] which is used for describing Web
services. WSDL describes how communication, i.e. the
requirements of the protocol and message formats required to
interact with the services listed in its catalog. Operations and
messages supported are described abstractly and linked to
concrete network protocol and message format.
The client program (our Emergency Web App) that
connects to the Global Web service, can read the WSDL to
determine what functions are available on the server. The
special data types are included in the WSDL file in the form of
XML Schema. The client uses SOAP to make the call to one of
the functions listed in the WSDL. The WSDL gives us a
description of a web service. Specifies the abstract interface
through which a customer can access the service and the details
of how to use.
The structure of any WSDL file always contains at least the
tags type that defines the data type used by the Web Service,
message for the type of messages, portType which includes the
type of messages that define a communication, binding to see
how the Web Service is implemented with SOAP, and service
that indicates the Web Service location.
In the Emergency App, WSDL is used in several key roles.
One of them indicates the logging mode to the Global Web
service. The request asks user name and password in the format
specified in the WSDL and the response returns the token
logged. This information is required to the application, not to
the user, to give it access to the Global Web service. By this
token, Emergency App can access all functions provided by the
Global Web services. The number and language format is also
set by a WSDL, as well as the fields required to obtain user
data and triage in emergency basis. The token must be included
in all of the mentioned functions. When user changes the
language, the whole application is reflected in the selected
language. Global Web service is responsible for providing
access and support to the chat service, once required fields are
correctly filled in and sent. Another WSDL-based application
closes the session thus releasing the token.
The
selected
technology
to
perform
this
SENECA
Integration Module was Java through NetBeans IDE [16]. The
integrated development environment has several complements
that easily automate the consumer client creation. NetBeans
interprets WSDL files; both in local and remote place, getting
necessary functions and data types for generate objects and
Java classes accessing the consumer server. Automatically
generation of code based on WSDL interpretation gives as a
result two objects and a service class, among others. Objects
represent the requested message and the response message. At
the beginning of the object one can see a WSDL fragment in
XML
according
to
the
expected
values.
Service
class
encapsulates the messages, receives and sends it and shares
information between those and Java objects. Thus, application
is structured in a simple and easy way.
C. GUI Module next to SENECA Integration Module
Module GUI has been easily integrated in SENECA
Integration Module on a single IDE, also NetBeans, which
generates Web Service client that communicates with the
Global Service. As we have mentioned before, Sencha has not
any file dependence, so we only had to import this JavaScript
files and JSON files that contain the data model. The response
of the server, in JSON format, has been processed by a data
treatment function, thus GUI Module can represent language
and required camps of the questionnaire.
It is not the intention of the authors of this paper to describe
the details of the Global Service, in parallel developed by
Telefónica
Sevilla
Development
Group.
Therefore,
the
interoperability of both blocks with the SENECA platform is
guaranteed regardless of language, platform and configuration.
V. RESULTS
Emergency Web App is a mobile application, even though
its name induces confusion. We decided to use HTML5 in the
development of this project to be independent of any platform
(Android, IOS, WPhone, and Blackberry). We evaluated the
use of Google GWT or some derivate (GXT, SmartGWT) that
allow traditional Java programming, but the result of the
compilation would have been an AJAX web application.
As a second option, we could write HTML5 code directly
using some sort of framework or JavaScript framework. At this
point, we evaluate two
possible ways: jQuery Mobile,
compatible with several devices and a powerful visual editor
that facilitates development in HTML5; and Sencha Touch 2,
developed by the same group as GXT Library, fully oriented to
mobile devices.
At this point, we can say that the final choice was to use
Sencha Touch 2 for the development of the client. As described
above,
Sencha
has
a
programming
environment,
very
comfortable and complete, known as Architect. Also, because
it is practically based on HTML5, Sencha not only ensures the
independence of the mobile device that the user could use, but,
in fact, the application is accessible from any web browser.
Hence, the final name has been chosen to be Emergency Web
App.
The final result of the application, in terms of the graphics,
has been extremely positive. Being based on JavaScript,
integration with Web Service has been direct and without
mishaps. In addition, the display emulates any mobile device,
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

using a similar complements, whether buttons, bars, selectors
and even sliding screen even visible from the web browser.
The left side of Figure 4 shows the running application
emulating a web browser on an iPhone. Therein welcomes the
application allowing modifying the language from the selector
below. It starts in Spanish by default (Telefónica is who
provides us the languages). By the bottom menu of the
application, one can access the form that the user must
complete before allowing access to chat. It lists the required
fields to be filled. Once completed, the user does not have to
re-fill again. Personal data will be registered for future access
to the platform. As one can see in the right side of Figure 4, the
sliding
screen
maintains
the
same
visual
effect
when
performing it with one’s finger on a touch screen of the latest
mobile. The graphical interface is not bounded to a specific
size, but, on the contrary, is adapted to the size of the device
that has been executed, so that it keeps its visual appeal
whether it is a small mobile device, as if is in a tablet, a laptop
or a personal computer.
Fig. 4 Welcome to the application [6]
Regarding integration modules with Seneca Platform,
creating a Web Server Client was the best option considering
parallel work in specific modules
would
perform with
Telefónica Technology Department in Sevilla. Apart from that,
this application is an integrated module in the Platform Seneca,
an existing service, functional, and for this project, unknown
and without needing to know in depth its functionalities.
Therefore, we can say that the two features that should meet
Emergency Web App about multiplatform and multi-language
have been successfully achieved.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
According to the conclusions of the round table "Apps
health, are we ready?" [17], it is expected that the number of
mobile medical Apps and users that use them, are going to
increase
exponentially
over
the
next
two
years.
This
conclusions stressed the importance of offering creative
solutions adapted to the needs of users as patients are willing to
pay for Apps "useful and effective" for the benefit of their
health. On this basis, it is estimated that, in two years, there
will be over 500 million people using medical Apps from
mobile.
These expectation figures show the positive reception of
the Apps related to medical emergencies by users. Even
Telefónica
company
wishes
to
initiate
and
integrate
communication through fax, SMS and internet/email and our
work is to include this new functionalities in the Emergency
Services chain.
The collection and storage of personal information of the
caller is a valuable feature because of the possibility of making
mistakes due to the poor quality of the call or the caller's state
of nervousness or panicking. Through Emergency App, the
time for obtaining user data is reduced because he completes
the questionnaire in addition to the exact location of the
emergency. If it is necessary to access the chat, according to
the severity of the emergency determined by the triage, it must
have the same priority as common call which ensures real-time
attention.
In this paper, we briefly explained our development project
in Cátedra Telefónica – UIB, which is not only for business
interest based on a new product to offer through SENECA
platform, but also for emergency systems, government entities
and especially users want ease of access and communication in
an area, where time reducing performance, reliability and
security are vital in healthcare emergencies and medical
emergencies.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
research
and
development
project
is
partially
supported by Cátedra Telefónica – UIB: Digital Health and
Sustainable Tourism and also is partially supported by the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness under
Grant TIN2011-23889.
REFERENCES
[1]
Health Emergencies, “Setting emergency services and medical
emergency (Spanish),” Ministry of Health and Social Welfare,
Andalucía, 2011, pp. 58–70.
[2]
Health Service in Balearic Islands, “SAMU 061, Servicio de
Atención Médica Urgente 061,” Palma de Mallorca, 2011, pp.
2–6.
[3]
M.
A.
Alcalde,
“New
Challenges
in
the
Emergency
Coordination Centers (Spanish),” Dintel Foundation, 2011,
pp.14–25.
[4]
Fire Department San Ramon Valley, “San Ramon Valley Fire
Protection District to dispatch citizens to cardiac emergencies,”
California, April, 2011, pp. 3–10.
[5]
National
Science
Foundation,
“Researchers
Reveal
Next-
Generation Emergency Response Technology,” University of
Texas, 2013, pp. 3–5.
[6]
B. Gómez, C. Juiz, “Integration of Emergency Web App for
accessing
the
emergency
services
by
mobile
phones,”
Universitat de les Illes Balears, September, 2013, pp. 2–4.
[7]
L. Serrano, “11 essential apps for emergencies (Spanish),”
December, 2012, pp. 8–10.
[8]
European Emergency Number Association, “Global Service and
Communications Operator: SENECA Telefónica,” Brussels,
1995, pp. 12–15.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[9]
C. Badenes, “Detailed Description of SENECA Platform
(Spanish),” Ayuntamiento de Castellón, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–13.
[10] Sencha
Architect
website,
(2014)
M.
Mullany
“Sencha
Architect, The Ultimate HTML5 App Builder,” [Online].
Available: https://www.sencha.com/products/architect/.
[11] General
Assembly
Ecma
International,
“The
JSON
Data
Interchange Format,” ECMA International, Oct. 2013, pp. 2–5.
[12] C. Matthew, K. Laskey, F. McCabe, P. F. Brown, R. Metz,
“Reference Model for Service Oriented Architecture 1.0,”
OASIS Standard, 2006, pp. 4–24.
[13] M.
Mascaró,
“Web
tourist
applications
development,”
Universitat de les Illes Balears, October, 2012, pp. 6–41.
[14] W3C website, (2007) N. Mitra, Y. Lafon “SOAP Version 1.2
Part
0:
Primer
(Second
Edition),”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/soap12-part0/.
[15] W3C website, (March, 2001) E. Christensen, F. Curbera, G.
Meredith,
S.
Weerawarana,
“Web
Services
Description
Language
(WSDL)
1.1,”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl.
[16] NetBeans IDE website, (2013) Oracle Corporation “The Smarter
and
Faster
Way
to
Code,”
[Online].
Available:
https://netbeans.org/.
[17] CIO Spain website, (2013) “500 million people will use mobile
medical
apps
in
2015
(Spanish),”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ciospain.es/sanidad/500-millones-de-personas-
usaran-apps-medicas-moviles-en-2015#.UTiJM0GXwb0.gmail
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A Quantitative Survey About the Interest of Digital Natives in Second Opinion and 
Quality/Trust in Online Health Information 
René Baranyi, Dennis Matthias Binder, Nadja Lederer, Thomas Grechenig 
Research Group For Industrial Software 
Vienna University of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
{ rene.baranyi, dennis.binder, nadja.lederer, thomas.grechenig }@inso.tuwien.ac.at 
 
Abstract— Growing access to qualified medical information 
triggers interest and helps patients with their medical conditions, 
get second opinions, or just share some experience with others. 
To explore the thoughts of digital natives - what information is 
accepted and sought after and what information is considered 
irrelevant or unnecessary - in health information systems, a 
quantitative survey, from the end users’ point of view, with 56 
people was conducted. The sample consisted of semi-digital 
natives aged between 18 and 35. The main results show that a 
large number of people (78.6%) do an online research after a 
doctor’s consultation. In terms of second opinion, only 33.9% 
would in principle consider taking a second opinion from online 
health consulting. 
 
Keywords-survey; second opinion; user opinion; information 
system; quality of information.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the Internet and modern media are constantly 
integrated into our daily lives. Web 2.0 and social networking 
services in general have been experiencing a boost during 
recent years. 67% of Internet users (n=860) are on Facebook, 
Pinterest accounts for 15% of Internet users (n=1,802), the 
percentage of people using Twitter is twice as high as in 
November 2010 [1]. The primary purpose of these sites ranges 
from social to professional networking, content production and 
sharing, to making recommendations and/or location-based 
services [2]. Sharing information with friends or peers in one’s 
community has seemingly become a societal “norm”. 
A. Health-related information seeking 
The dissemination of health-related data and usage of online 
support groups in the medical sector, however, remains rather 
unobtrusive. Survey participants were found to be quite 
reluctant when it comes to sharing information about their 
health [3]. Difference in means showed that people who work 
in a technical field are more likely to share data about a disease 
(t-test: T=2.071; df=46; p=0.044; 1 - β=0.90). However, users 
overall do acknowledge benefits by other people’s health 
disclosure. This ambivalence in opinion is mainly attributed to 
awareness of data security and privacy [3]. 
B. Social media for health 
Only 3.8% of Internet users (n=3,244) reported to use 
online support groups dealing with similar diagnoses or 
medical 
conditions 
in 
2005 
[4]. 
PatientsLikeMe, 
CureTogether, TuDiabetes, CaringBridge are a few examples 
of such social networks that provide support by and for 
patients [5][6]. In fact, a much higher percentage of 58.5% of 
Internet users explored the Web for information about their 
health [4]. Other reported uses of social media in healthcare 
are professional education, patient - doctor communication [2], 
patient education [7] or even behavior change. The options 
available are ample, at least in theory. Social media is 
perceived positively in the health sector [3], especially cancer 
patients are actively educating themselves [2]. Nonetheless, 
security aspects, data privacy and access remain crucial in 
deciding whether or not to disclose health-related information. 
On the bright side, investigating and sharing health data 
paves its way for obtaining, respectively, providing second 
opinions. A recent report on social media in healthcare 
revealed that 45% of the participants in a survey (n=1,060 
adults altogether) denoted social media to “affect their 
decisions to seek a second opinion” [5]. Commonly referred to 
as the process of consulting another person about a matter of 
interest, the authors add the aspect of looking up health-related 
information to the definition of second opinions. These are, in 
general, not limited to a specific field. In here, we focus on 
second opinions in medicine.  
C. Second opinions in healthcare 
Underlying motives why people want to get a second 
opinion are differing. Anxiety disposition, dissatisfaction with 
the first specialist, desire to have a say in the decision, need for 
more information, hopes and expectations that the second 
opinion differs from the first one were revealed as key factors 
that drove the need to consult a second physician among 
patients in the Netherlands [8].  
A survey among the six US states Florida, Indiana, 
Louisiana, Missouri, New Hampshire and New York revealed 
that one out of five patients consulted a second specialist after 
having visited a doctor the year prior to the study [9]. 
Perception of being treated badly, affiliation with ethnical 
groups, among others, were identified as motives to get 
consults. It was, however, not investigated which disease was 
the driving force one wanted to get a second opinion on.  
Regarding the way these are provided, literature even 
reports that remote second opinions exist [10]. One example is 
the Johns Hopkins University [11]. 
It seems that second opinion is not that widely spread 
among medical professionals. Hence, the authors’ approach is 
to investigate quality and trust of digital natives in online 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

health information as a starting point before such systems get 
implemented. 
Presumably, 
more 
general 
topics 
like 
recording/administration and processing of data intertwined 
with social media may have an impact on one’s viewpoint 
regarding second opinion (or how it may be delivered) as well. 
The authors strongly believe that the perspective of digital 
natives thereupon may reveal certain trends and help figure out 
key aspects to consider when building an information system 
handling second opinion. To the authors’ knowledge no such 
study targeting digital natives has been conducted. 
This paper starts with a description of related work (Section 
II), followed by the methodology used from acquiring to 
analyzing the data (Section III). Afterwards, the results are 
presented (Section IV). Section V, then discusses results and 
contributions. Finally, a conclusion is given in Section VI and 
some future work is presented. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Related work dealing with online health information and 
social media is manifold. The authors are well aware that each 
diagnosis yields different treatment options. We acknowledge 
that one’s medical history or background also affects the 
attitude towards second opinion and online health information. 
However, covering all types of diagnoses is impossible. Also, 
to the authors’ knowledge, publications handling results as 
they are outlined in such detail in this paper are not existent. 
Related work presented in this section makes no claim to be 
complete and aims to look at a broad perspective in online 
health information and second opinions. Research is divided 
into three general categories (which have been defined and 
explained in the introduction): health-related information 
seeking, social media for health and second opinions in 
healthcare. Then, our approach in this paper is to build on and 
to enrich the literature presented here. 
A. Health-related information seeking 
KHRESMOI, which is a project of the European Union, 
undertook a survey about health search among the general 
public [12]. Participants (n=385) answered a questionnaire 
about their Internet use in relation to health information. Most 
contributions were recorded in France, Spain, and the USA 
with 23%, 14%, and 10%. They found that 24% of the sample 
population look for health-related information at least once a 
day, whereas the largest focus (68%) was attributed to general 
information about health issues. The second most important 
topics for health search were long-term chronic diseases 
(59%), directly followed by healthy lifestyle and nutrition 
(50%).  
A study among Swiss citizens (n=1,075) found that during 
the previous 12 months the primary sources for health-related 
matters were newspapers and magazines (70%), followed by 
talking to family and friends (47%) [13]. The Internet was 
consulted by 41% of the respondents. Another question related 
to the kind of information sought upon in general (n>=4,049). 
The four top candidates mentioned were treatments, 
illnesses/diseases, alternative therapeutic approaches and 
measures for health protection. 
On the downside, Gualtieri argues that using “Dr. Google” 
as one’s proxy for a medical first opinion may likely yield 
serious (negative) consequences [14]. Especially, if people are 
not adequately equipped with health literacy skills and do not 
disclose information found on the Internet with their health 
care provider. Hence, she proposes to strengthen the doctor-
patient relationship to possibly reduce non-disclosure and rule 
out misleading information. This could be done by directing 
patients to appropriate health websites or specifically asking 
about a patient’s Internet search prior to the appointment. 
B. Social media for health  
A social network targeting people suffering from 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) - a neurodegenerative 
disease - is specifically designed to enable health information 
sharing and support by peers [7]. That is, current treatment 
information is shared with others, as well as diagnoses and 
alike. One of the study’s main findings was that the revelation 
of symptoms, treatment and health, respectively, disease 
progress triggered targeted messaging, like recommendations 
to others, requests for advice, or simply building relationships 
with patients sharing similar experience. Among 123 postings 
that were selected for analysis 23% (n=29) referred to 
treatment, whereas 7% (n=9) referred to symptoms or 
outcomes. 
A study among Australian health professionals (n=935) 
investigated 
trends 
of 
social 
media 
adoption 
for 
healthcare [15]. It was found that 9.5% used social media for 
(professional) health purposes, whereas 19.1% reported 
personal usage only. The majority (71.3%) reported to not use 
social media at all. Not comprehending how social media can 
be used for the health sector was the most common reason for 
non-adoption of social media (83%), followed by face-to-face 
communication preferences (53.1%). Other factors were 
attributed to lack of time (50.9%) and reasoning that social 
media fosters addiction (49.6%). 
C. Second opinions in healthcare 
Vashitz et al. [17] found out that, in a survey with 332 
participants (orthopedic surgeons: n=172; neurologists: n=160) 
surgeons were more likely to be affected by a primary opinion 
than neurologists. The study group was given the information 
about the opinion itself, the control group had only revealed 
that the patient already had an opinion, without saying what it 
was. It was shown that interventional scores for study group 
surgeons were significantly higher than for control group 
surgeons (2.25 vs 1.97; p = 0.03). Also, significant difference 
was 
identified 
comparing 
study 
group 
surgeons 
in 
interventional scores in relation to their baseline interventional 
score. No significant differences were found among 
neurologists. 
The possibility of obtaining a second opinion is listed as a 
reason to collect medical data at home by Austrian and 
German citizens [16]. Among a sample of 151 Austrians and 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

137 Germans, 13% versus 6% reported to do so. Much more 
common reasons were insurance issues (36% versus 17%) and 
understanding one’s treatment (25% versus 23%). 
A study at the Sydney Cancer Centre revealed that 123 out 
of 1,892 outpatients sought a second opinion [10]. Those 
whose motives were dissatisfaction (compared to others) 
reported that the second specialist helped with their concerns 
(92% vs 37%, χ2
1 = 11.92, P = 0.001). Other findings were that 
younger, more educated, female cancer patients are more 
likely to seek second opinions, maybe because they want to 
obtain more detailed information. 
III. 
METHODS 
The study design was divided into the three stages: 
research, construction, and realization (see Figure 1). First of 
all, a literature review was conducted to identify current 
research about content and functions of an information system 
in the health sector and second opinions in the context of 
telemedicine applications. After doing some brainstorming, the 
study setting was defined. The target population included 
individuals being older than 18 years of age, whose profession 
is not a medical one. In a next step, a questionnaire was 
developed, which was in turn evaluated and refined after 
having performed a pretest on it with 15 participants. 
Questions asked were of both open-ended and closed nature. 
Additionally, questions with four-level-based items were 
included to avoid a central tendency bias. A fifth point was 
provided in case a question was not applicable to a participant. 
The questionnaire was then administered to a sample 
population of the target group in different courses at the 
Vienna UT. 56 people returned it. To analyze the results, four-
level-based question items were subsumed and transformed to 
yes/no, respectively, positive/negative answers.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The questions asked can be looked up in Table I. Specific 
questions are represented as “Q <XX>” within all figures. Due 
to limited space, the percentage and actual number of people 
who indicated a specific answer is not depicted in the 
graphical charts, if it is less than 5%. Instead, the exact 
numbers 
are 
given 
in 
the 
textual 
description. 
The 
categorization of the question was done afterwards to have a 
better overview.  
The participants were separated into four age groups: age 
18-25 (61%, n=34), age 26-35 (29%, n=16), age 36 – 49 (5%, 
n=3), 50 and older (5%, n=3). To check if a person is used to a 
PC or not, a control question was asked. The threshold was 
two hours daily in front of the PC. Only 16.1% spend less than 
two hours working with it, so most of the participants are 
computer affine.  
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONS 
Nr 
Question 
01 
What’s your age? 
02 
How much time do you spend in front of the PC? 
03 
What do you associate with the term health? 
04 
How important are the above stated points? 
05 
How important is healthcare for you? 
06 
How important is the security of medical data for you? 
07 
Would you use electronic devices to measure your sport 
activities? (mp3 player, cell phone, pulse monitor, software 
etc.)? 
08 
If "yes" - which devices and appropriate programs? If "no" - 
why not? 
09 
Would you like to administrate and collect your complete 
training progression online? 
10 
Do you look up possible diseases before a consultation? 
11 
Do you look up possible treatments before a consultation? 
12 
Do you inform yourself about diagnosed illnesses after a 
consultation? 
13 
Do you inform yourself about diagnosed treatments after a 
consultation? 
14 
Would you inform yourself about a disease and its treatment on 
a website? 
15 
Imagine you need a nonacute appointment with your doctor, 
how would you like to arrange it?  
16 
Would you prefer to use an information system (website) to 
make a nonacute appointment regarding your last answer? 
17 
Could you imagine to schedule appointments via a website? 
18 
Do you keep old diagnostic findings? 
19 
Would you use a website, where you can securely administrate 
old diagnostic findings? 
20 
A second opinion is an independent diagnosis of a different 
doctor. Have you ever had a second opinion? 
21 
How would you like to get a second opinion? (in person from a 
different doctor, internet research, etc.) 
22 
Would you use the opportunity to get a second opinion over the 
PC? 
23 
Would you do a whole medical consultation virtually over the 
PC, if possible? 
24 
Would you like to get a second opinion in the course of a 
consultation over the PC? 
25 
Would you transmit medical data for the use of an online 
consultation? 
26 
What would you like to have online via PC from a doctor? 
Please choose at most 3 answers. 
27 
Which of the following functions within an information system 
(website) would you use? Please choose at most 5 answers. 
28 
What should an information system have or which functions 
should it cover for you to use it? You can also choose functions 
stated above, if they are true. 
 
Figure 1. Methodology 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. General Information 
Obtaining general information from respondents is covered 
by questions 1, 2, 26, 27 and 28. 
For question 26 the participants had the possibility to 
choose up to three answers. The majority of the asked 
participants wants information about diseases (n=28) and food 
(n=28) from an online doctor. The answer with the highest 
credit was giving a prescription (n=29) via PC. A significant 
number of people  (8 out of 56) do not want anything from an 
online doctor. See Table II and Table III for all answers. 
Only 25 people addressed the question of what an 
information system should cover (Q 28). Six out of 25 people 
(24%) stated that security of their (medical) data is very 
important and that they want to be in full control of the data. 
Four people (16%) only desired a personal doctor’s 
consultation. One person wrote that the system should not 
require user’s personal data. Another one fancied a translation 
of medical data in case of emergency while being in a foreign 
country. Further answers noted were allergy information, 
administration of old diagnostic findings, information/rating of 
a doctor, reservation system, easy access, reminder of 
upcoming consults, having more than one online profile, 
newsfeeds about medical/sports innovations/knowledge, and a 
friend finder to get in contact with people who share the same 
disease.  
B. Diagnostics and Security 
One of the most important questions is one about data 
security (Figure 2). For more than half (60%) of the 
respondents security of medical data is very important, for 
21% it is important and only for 17% it is less or not important 
(Q 6). Unsurprisingly, 76% of the asked participants keep their 
old diagnostic findings (Q 18). Only 40% would store their old 
diagnostic findings online on a secure website (Q 19). 
C. Health-Related Questions  
One of the first questions was about participants’ 
associations with the term health (Q 3). More than one item 
could be chosen from a list of answers. In addition, 
respondents could frame their own answers. 
TABLE II.  
ANSWERS FOR Q 26 
Answers 
Count 
Issue a prescription 
29 
Dietary information 
28 
Information about different diseases 
28 
Establish a training schedule 
20 
Nothing 
8 
Do online consults 
7 
Diagnose someone based on virtual consults 
6 
Diagnose someone based on previously transferred health record 
6 
Sign someone off sick/healthy 
1 
 
Healthy food and sports activities are topmost chosen answers 
that are associated with health. A great number of 37 people 
think that drug abuse, too much smoking and alcohol 
consumption are not healthy. 28 times people mentioned that 
preventive medical check-ups are also related to the term 
health. 
 
TABLE III.  
ANSWERS FOR Q 27 
Answers 
Count 
Consultation on refreshing vaccinations 
28 
Schedule appointment with any doctor 
28 
Evaluating a doctor and their performance 
23 
Archive/manage old diagnostic findings 
22 
Dietary consults 
19 
Consultation on different diseases 
16 
Consultation on treating a disease using home remedies 
13 
Consultation on pollen flight regarding allergy sufferers 
13 
Consultation on treatment/therapy of specific diseases 
12 
Graphically represent training success with charts 
12 
Manage allergies and antibiotics intolerance 
11 
Establish a training schedule 
11 
Online transfer of medically relevant data to one’s respective 
doctor 
6 
Documentation of performance/achievements in sports 
6 
Archive/manage one’s health record respectively one’s 
relatives’ health records 
6 
Nothing at all 
6 
* check for antibiotics intolerance 
1 
In question 5, the importance of health protection is shown. 
14% (n=8) thought of it as very important, while 66% (n=37) 
said it is important. 13% (n=7) felt it as being less important, 
while 7% (n=4) indicated it is not at all important for them. 
D. Sports activities 
The majority (73%) wants to use or still use a device to 
measure their sports activities. Only 14% do not want to use a 
device and the last 12% gave no answer to this question 
(Figure 3 Q 7). Looking at the number of people who want to 
use a device to measure their sports activities, only 14% 
strongly agree and 23% agree that they want to administrate 
and manage their complete training progress online. 30% do 
not want this and 26% of the asked people strongly disagreed 
on that. Furthermore, 5% (n=3) were not sure what to answer 
 
Figure 2. Diagnostics and security 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to this question (Figure 3 Q 9). 
E. Consultation and Diseases 
Prior to seeing a medical professional, potential treatment 
options are investigated by 23%, who agree and 16%, who 
strongly agree, compare Figure 4 Q 11. 41% do not agree to 
inform themselves before a doctoral visit, 20% indicate strong 
disagreement. Similar but more positive feedback is given for 
question 10. 16% (n=9) strongly and 25% (n=14) still agreed 
on that question, whereas 23% (n=13) strongly and 35% 
(n=20) disagreed which is shown in Figure 4 Q 10. 
Furtheron, 41% reported strong agreement towards 
informing themselves about their diagnosis after they had seen 
a medical professional, whereas 38% agreed to doing so, 
compare 
Figure 
4 
Q 12. 
Disagreement 
and 
strong 
disagreement was found in 19% respectively 2% (n=1) of the 
total number of respondents.  
A similar tendency can be observed once asking about 
suggested treatment by medical professionals and if patients 
educate themselves after their doctoral visits (see Figure 4 
Q 13). The majority of the respondents indicated to do inform 
themselves about treatment options. 15 people strongly agreed 
(26.79%), 24 people agreed to doing so (42.86%). 14 people 
disagreed (25%) upon answering this question and 3 people 
strongly disagreed (5.36%). Conform to the findings above, 
nobody chose the neutral answer of being unsure.  
Looking up information about one’s conditions and 
available treatments at designated websites was perceived 
rather positively by respondents, compare Figure 4 Q 14. 19 
persons strongly agreed to educating themselves (33.93%), 
whereas 18 people agreed (32.14%). Only 19 people disagreed 
to taking responsibility as in informing themselves about their 
options (28.57%), whereas three of them strongly disagreed 
(5.36%). Nobody indicated to not being sure about this topic. 
F. Doctoral Appointment 
Questions 15-17 focus on different ways to schedule 
appointments with one’s doctor. Answers for question 15 were 
cell phone (66.04%, n=35), face-to-face (13.21%, n=7), email 
(11.32%, n=6), online web form (1.89%, n=1), online 
reservation system (1.89%, n=1), online calendar of doctor 
(1.89%, n=1) and online website (1.89%, n=1). Questions 15 
and 16 show that most people will use their cell phone for 
contacting a doctor for a nonacute appointment rather than an 
online platform (39%). One person gave no answer to this 
question.  
In general, 36% would strongly agree and 30% agree to 
schedule an appointment via a website. A number of 32% 
would not do this and only one person was not sure what to 
answer. All values regarding question 16 and 17 are in 
Figure 5. 
G. Second Opinion and Virtual Consultation 
Exactly 50% of the sample population indicated they had 
obtained a second opinion before. 43% had never done so and 
7% could not remember or were not sure (question 20). Upon 
responding to question 20 the participants were asked how 
they want to get a second opinion (Q 21). It was possible to 
choose more than one answer. Most people (n=40) obtain their 
second opinion from another doctor in person. The second 
most common answer was the web research and only three 
people would get a second opinion from a friend. A great 
number of 13 people (23%) gave no answer to this question. 
Answers for question 21 were personally (n=40), web 
research (n=10), friends (n=3) and no answer (n=13). To 
follow up, respondents were asked if they would use the 
opportunity to obtain a second opinion via their PC (question 
22), see Figure 6 Q 22. 30% agreed and 5% strongly agreed. 
Among the majority of 33 people who disagreed, 21% had a 
strong disapproval regarding this topic. 5% indicated to not 
being sure about electronically consulting a doctor other than 
one’s primary choice. 61% strongly denied using an 
opportunity to do an entire medical consultation virtually over 
the PC, compare Figure 6 Q 23. Only 9% were in favor of 
such an opportunity and 25% disagreed to use it. 5% felt 
unsure about their answer to this question and no one would 
strongly agree. 
 
Figure 4. Consultation and diseases 
 
 
Figure 3. Using device during sport  
 
Figure 5. Doctor appointment  
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Respondents were asked if they would obtain a second 
opinion by the use of online, i.e., virtual, consultation hours 
via the PC, see Figure 6 Q 24. Results show a tendency 
towards disagreement: 27% versus 43% disagreed respectively 
strongly disagreed. 25% seemed rather positive towards this 
topic, whereas 4% (n=2) strongly agreed. Only one person 
(1.79%) indicated to be not sure about what they would do.  
Although most people would not use a second opinion via 
PC and would not store their diagnostic findings online 
(question 19), 47% would forward their medical data during 
an online consultation. This is shown in Figure 6 Q 25. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The work presented here gathers information about second 
opinion and the usage of modern media for health-related 
topics. Although the sample size of 56 is not the biggest, it can 
be seen as a good starting point for further research. The results 
show that security is very important when it comes to health-
related data. In terms of health and diet, people want to have 
more information about diseases regarding nutrition, which 
might be associated with the wish of a healthy lifestyle and the 
support of the doctor to help them. Another interesting aspect is 
that the skepticism for a virtual doctor consultation is very 
high. This might also be associated with security issues, but 
needs to be clarified within further research. Another bias of 
this research is that the majority of returned questionnaires was 
answered by younger people (age <35), only a few came from 
people older than 35. But the authors consider younger people 
as a target group for second opinion and the usage of modern 
media, which makes this age group very important. Further 
research should include a larger sample size as well as a 
quantitative study and a comparison between different 
countries and different educational aspects, which were also 
not taken into consideration within this work.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As a final result, people do want to have additional 
information through other channels rather than from the 
doctors themselves. The results suggest that a virtual 
consultation or second opinion without direct patient contact 
will never be a full alternative to the normal doctor’s visit. To 
prove this, additional data must be acquired. Follow-up studies 
are necessary to support the trends presented here. A study with 
a larger sample size as well as more heterogeneous age 
distribution is taken into consideration. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank everybody who took the 
time and answered the questionnaire.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Pew Research Center, “The Demographics of Social Media Users - 
2012.” 
[2] 
D. S. Dizon, D. Graham, M. A. Thompson, L. J. Johnson, C. Johnston, 
M. J. Fisch, and R. Miller, “Practical guidance: the use of social media 
in oncology practice,” J. Oncol. Pract., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. e114–124, 
Sep. 2012. 
[3] 
A. Schaar, A. Valdez, and M. Ziefle, “Social Media for the eHealth 
Context. A Requirement Assessment,” in Advances of Human Aspects 
of Healthcare, Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis Group, 2013. 
[4] 
N. L. Atkinson, S. L. Saperstein, and J. Pleis, “Using the Internet for 
Health-Related Activities: Findings From a National Probability 
Sample,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. e4, 
Feb. 2009. 
[5] 
“Social media ‘likes’ healthcare: From marketing to social business,” 
PwC. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.pwc.com/us/en/health-
industries/publications/health-care-social-media.jhtml. [Accessed: 19-
Jul-2013]. 
[6] 
“Your Choice: Your Privacy or Your Life?,” Dose of Digital. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.doseofdigital.com/2010/04/your-choice-your-
privacy-your-life/. [Accessed: 19-Jul-2013]. 
[7] 
J. H. Frost and M. P. Massagli, “Social Uses of Personal Health 
Information Within PatientsLikeMe, an Online Patient Community: 
What Can Happen When Patients Have Access to One Another’s 
Data,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. e15, 
May 2008. 
[8] 
W. A. M. Mellink, A. M. V. Dulmen, T. Wiggers, P. M. M. 
Spreeuwenberg, A. M. M. Eggermont, and J. M. Bensing, “Cancer 
patients seeking a second surgical opinion: results of a study on 
motives, needs, and expectations,” J. Clin. Oncol., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 
1492–1497, Apr. 2003. 
[9] 
T. H. Wagner and L. S. Wagner, “Who gets second opinions?,” Health 
Aff. (Millwood), vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 137–145, Oct. 1999. 
[10] M. H. N. Tattersall, R. F. Dear, J. Jansen, H. L. Shepherd, R. J. Devine, 
L. G. Horvath, and M. L. Boyer, “Second opinions in oncology: the 
experiences of patients attending the Sydney Cancer Centre,” Med. J. 
Aust., vol. 191, no. 4, pp. 209–212, Aug. 2009. 
[11] Johns Hopkins University, “Remote Medical Second Opinions,” 2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/international/ 
patients/second_opinions.html. [Accessed: 10-Oct-2013]. 
[12] N. Pletneva, A. Vargas, and C. Boyer, “KHRESMOI - D8.1.1 
Requirements for the general public health search,” General public 
survey report version 2, May 2011. 
[13] G. Marstedt, “Auf der Suche nach gesundheitlicher Information und 
Beratung: Befunde zum Wandel der Patientenrolle,” 2013. [Online]. 
Available: http://forum-gesundheitspolitik.de/dossier/PDF/Informierte-
Patient.pdf. [Accessed: 11-Nov-2013]. 
[14] L. N. Gualtieri, “The doctor as the second opinion and the internet as 
the first,” in CHI ’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 2489–2498. 
[15] W. T. Usher, “Australian health professionals’ social media (Web 2.0) 
adoption trends: early 21st century health care delivery and practice 
promotion,” Aust. J. Prim. Health, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 31–41, 2012. 
[16] A. Hoerbst, C. D. Kohl, P. Knaup, and E. Ammenwerth, “Attitudes and 
behaviors related to the introduction of electronic health records among 
Austrian and German citizens,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 
81–89, Feb. 2010. 
 [17] G. Vashitz, J. S. Pliskin, Y. Parmet, Y. Kosashvili, G. Ifergane, S. 
Wientroub, and N. Davidovitch, “Do first opinions affect second 
opinions?,” J. Gen. Intern. Med., vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 1265–1271, Oct. 
2012. 
 
Figure 6. Second opinion and virtual consultation  
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Field Testing of Remote Teledentistry Technology 
Rodrigo Mariño 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
rmarino@unimelb.edu.au 
 Parul Marwaha 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
pmarwaha@unimelb.edu.au 
Richard Collmann 
Victorian eResearch Strategic Initiative 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
rcollmann@unimelb.edu.au 
Matthew Hopcraft 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
m.hopcraft@unimelb.edu.au 
David Manton 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
djmanton@unimelb.edu.au 
Michael McCullough 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
m.mccullough@unimelb.edu.au 
Andrew Stranieri 
Centre for Informatics and Applied Optimisation, 
University of Ballarat 
Ballarat, Australia 
a.stranieri@ballarat.edu.au 
Ken Clarke 
Institute for a Broadband-Enabled Society 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
clak@unimelb.edu.au 
Elizabeth Ozanne  
Department of Social Work 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
eao@unimelb.edu.au 
Irene Blackberry 
National Ageing Research Institute 
Melbourne, Australia 
 i.blackberry@unimelb.edu.au
 
Abstract—In the Australian state of Victoria, only 11% 
of nursing home residents have seen a dentist in the past 
12 months. This study tested whether the use of intraoral 
cameras by oral health professionals located at remote 
facilities improved access to appropriate oral health care 
services for nursing home residents. The support 
program and instructional kit for camera operators, 
including the structure, content and delivery of the 
program, was developed and evaluated. Residents’ views 
about the structure, content and delivery of the program 
were also evaluated. The intraoral camera was operated 
by trained teledentistry assistants with the aim of 
screening residents for oral diseases and pathological 
conditions. Treatment plans were then developed by 
remote 
oral 
health 
professionals 
based 
on 
the 
information collected.  The remote assessments were 
compared with those done via traditional face-to-face 
oral examinations. Results indicate that the proposed 
teledentistry approach for oral health screening is 
feasible and reliable as an alternative to traditional oral 
health examination. Residents expressed high levels of 
satisfaction with the teledentistry service. This study 
provides an innovative solution towards closing the gap 
in the provision of sustainable oral health care services 
to underserviced populations (e.g., nursing homes, rural 
areas). 
Keywords; oral health, teledentistry, intraoral camera, 
nursing homes 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Improvements in oral health in Australia over the past 50 
years have translated into a greater proportion of elderly 
individuals retaining more of their natural teeth, increasing 
the prevalence of caries and periodontal disease. Older 
people living in residential aged care facilities (RACFs) 
have been identified as a significant risk group for oral 
diseases in Australia, and the changing demography and oral 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

health needs of older Australians will present many 
challenges for the dental profession over coming decades.  
In 2005 more than 41,000 Victorians lived in high or low-
care residential facilities on a permanent basis; with just 
over half being dentate and having high dental treatment 
needs [1,2]. Significant barriers accessing dental services 
exist. Residents are often physically and cognitively 
impaired, medically compromised and dependent on others 
to maintain their oral hygiene.  
Face-to-face patient examinations are regarded as the 
most accurate method for correct oral health diagnosis. 
However in Victoria only 11% of aged care facility 
residents have seen a dentist in the past 12 months, as there 
are few dentists available to provide dental care for residents 
[3,4]. In fact, only half of Victorian dentists reported 
providing care to residents of RACFs, and those dentists 
spent on average only one hour per month providing care in 
this setting [4]. 
As the capability of information and communication 
technology (ICT) has risen, the use of ICT for data 
collection has increased.  Expanded use of ICT provided 
clinicians with alternatives to the traditional face-to-face 
oral examinations. This shift in focus has resulted in a vast 
increase in the number of published articles that include 
some form of either synchronous or asynchronous, 
teleconsultation/ telediagnosis [5]. 
A three-stage study was designed to address priorities 
established by Australia's National Oral Health Plan 2004-
2013 for ‘Older People’ targeting older people living in 
RACFs, (an underserviced, high-risk population and one 
with major oral health needs) [6]. This project was 
conceived in an effort to promote affordable, timely oral 
health care and to test an oral health care model in which 
ICT is used with the aim of extending clinical care to 
residents who are physically separated from the examining 
oral health professional. This study is also a response to 
serious dental workforce shortages in caring for this group 
and provides opportunities to supplement traditional 
methods of oral diagnosis, care delivery and health 
promotion. 
Potentially, this project could benefit an expanding 
segment of the population in relative and absolute terms; 
namely, older people living in RACFs and older people 
living in rural areas. According to the 2006 Australian 
Census [7], 55-64 year-olds made up 11.8% and those 65 
years and over 13.7% of the total Victorian population.  
However, older people are proportionately over-
represented in rural and regional Australian communities 
and these communities are ageing more rapidly than their 
metropolitan 
counterparts. 
Therefore, 
the 
present 
intervention potentially targets a rapidly expanding segment 
of the population with special oral health needs. Other parts 
of the world have similar demographic and geographical 
problems making this study equally relevant to them. 
This project builds on a University of Melbourne 
Institute for a Broadband Enhanced Society (IBES), Project 
Seed Grant, which tested the technology under laboratory 
conditions 
(proof 
of 
concept) 
and 
developed 
the 
instructional material for non-oral health professional 
operators [8]. The results demonstrated that the proposed 
teledentistry approach for oral health screening using an 
intraoral camera was feasible and reliable as an alternative 
to traditional oral health examination. Stage 2 of this three-
stage study involved the field testing of this teledentistry 
technology and is the subject of this article.   
II. 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
The long-term goal of the project is to test whether 
improvements in accessibility and appropriateness of oral 
health services can be achieved by utilizing advanced ICT 
techniques to screen for oral disease in older people living 
in RACFs. This paper outlines the results of the second 
stage of this project, which aimed to assess, on a small 
scale, but under real conditions, the safety of the procedures, 
their feasibility, as well as patients’ and health practitioners’ 
experiences with the technology. A comparison was 
conducted between face-to-face-examinations and remote 
examinations using an intraoral camera. 
Three RACFs within the state of Victoria, Australia, 
were successfully approached to participate in this stage; 
two in metropolitan Melbourne and one in rural Victoria. 
Five non-oral health professional teledental assistants (e.g., 
registered nurses) in these facilities were trained to 
manipulate an intraoral camera and use existing and 
introduced ICT infrastructure to transmit video images for 
remote examination and diagnosis. An oral health 
professional at the Melbourne Dental School performed a 
‘virtual dental examination’, recorded findings and 
developed a treatment plan for a group of selected residents.   
This Stage had four main objectives: 
1) assess the feasibility of using teledentistry to screen for 
oral diseases and conditions and to develop treatment 
plans  for older people living  in RACFs; 
2) identify barriers to the adoption of a teledental 
approach. These included: a) general staff workload; b) 
professional culture and acceptance (e.g., morale, 
motivation, resistance to change, etc.); and c) 
availability of appropriate equipment, 
3) test the utility of an instructional training kit  
4) assess the residents’ views of their experiences during 
delivery of the program, as well as feedback and 
information 
provided 
during 
the 
teledentistry 
consultation. 
III. 
METHODS 
Although sample size calculations are not strictly 
necessary for a pilot study [9], a sample size of 50 residents 
was considered to be adequate to meet the general aims of 
this study. A 20% attrition rate was expected over the six 
months duration of the field component of this study - 62 
residents were recruited initially.  
To participate in this teledentistry study, the resident was 
required to have the ability to understand and to provide 
independent informed consent, the ability to communicate 
with the health professional and to undergo a 15-20 minute 
oral examination. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A SOPROLIFE® intra-oral camera was used to capture 
video via a custom video streaming software platform 
designed for the project [10]. Simulations were conducted in 
the Institute for Broadband Enabled Society (IBES 
http://broadband.unimelb.edu.au/) test-bed facility. The 
intra-oral camera was connected via a USB cable to a laptop 
or mobile tablet used for bed side evaluations, containing 
the software that compressed and encoded the 25 frame-per-
second video into an mpeg4 video stream of at least 
3Mbit/sec bandwidth, and preferably a 5Mbit/s stream if 
network conditions allowed. This bandwidth was found to 
give the clinician sufficient quality to interpret the images 
received and removed blurring due to the motion of the 
camera [8]. The clinician viewed the incoming video via a 
PC connected to a large monitor. A large screen facilitated 
simultaneous viewing of both the intra-oral camera video as 
well as that from a second web-cam, a high definition 
Logitech model C920 model, capturing the overall 
interaction between patient and the intra-oral camera 
operator. This was also streamed as an mpeg4 video of 
minimum 3Mbit/sec bandwidth. Mpeg4 audio was also 
transmitted at 128kbit/s along with the images via the use of 
Clear One Chat 50 model microphone/speaker units also 
connected via USB cables. This allowed excellent quality 
audio communications between patient and clinician 
ends.  For test sites that could not accommodate a 3Mbits/s 
stream reliably a Store and Forward version was developed 
that enabled the mpeg4 file to be stored on a central server 
for asynchronous download by the dentists. Each 
examination lasted approximately 15 minutes and each 
minute of video created a file of approximately 1GB.  Thus, 
the video files were large (i.e., 15 minutes produces a 15 GB 
file).  
Using a teledentistry installation each participant 
received a ‘virtual’ oral examination, including dental and 
oral mucosal assessments conducted with the assistance of a 
trained registered nurse (RN) at the RACF’s facility using 
an intraoral camera operated in communication with a 
remotely located oral health professional.  Training of the 
intraoral camera operator involved three hours of direct 
contact, a sixty-six page training manual including diagrams 
with content organized in five modules, and up to ten hours 
of practice examinations. 
The oral health professional was able to communicate in 
real-time with both the resident and the intraoral camera 
operator (i.e., the RN) via a video link to assist in taking a 
history, and to direct the RN where necessary in the use of 
the intraoral camera. To have communication in real time 
we used Skype® and Vidyo®.  However, there were several 
problems with Vidyo due to firewall settings.  
The information obtained from this examination was 
recorded and transmitted to a server for review of the 
‘virtual dental examination’ to be performed remotely at a 
later time. Information was registered on a conventional 
Dental Health Services Victoria’s chart for the generation of 
treatment plans by qualified clinicians at the Melbourne 
Dental School, University of Melbourne.   
On completing the virtual oral examination the resident 
was asked to complete a seven-item teledentistry assessment 
questionnaire to assess his/her views on the approach. As 
further verification of the approach, the interaction, the 
clarity and facility to understand communication between 
the oral health professional and the resident was examined 
for 
the 
conventional 
face-to-face 
and 
remote 
communications. 
Ten residents received a second oral examination by a 
different oral health clinician. This was a traditional real-
time examination (the clinician present in front of the 
patient) with findings recorded on a conventional chart.  
RNs who collected the information for this project 
completed a questionnaire to assess their initial attitude to, 
and acceptance of the practice, and their overall experience 
with the teledentistry approach. The utility of the 
instructional training kit and any other issues associated 
with the project were also assessed. 
Data was collected extended between October 2012 and 
June 2013. 
Descriptive analysis was used to illustrate the 
participants’ views about the format, content and delivery of 
the teledentistry program. The level of inter-examination 
reliability for the degree of consistency of the two sets of 
examinations has been assessed using the kappa statistic. 
Ethical approvals to conduct this study were sought and 
obtained from the University of Melbourne 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Fifty residents from three RACFs participated in the trial 
from the 62 initially recruited; with 58% being female. A 
teledentistry installation enabled five trained intra-oral 
camera operators (registered nurses) to record, use and 
transmit video images for the generation of treatment plans 
by qualified clinicians at the Melbourne Dental School, 
University of Melbourne. Information from the remote 
examination was compared with a real-life dental 
examination. The intra-examiner agreements for dental 
examination 
parameters 
were 
reported 
as 
excellent 
(Kappa=0.83). 
When residents were asked about their level of 
satisfaction with the examination, the majority of the 
residents were either very satisfied: (46%) or slightly 
satisfied (38%) with the format of the remote dental 
examination. The majority would also recommend (strongly: 
46%; or slightly: 46%) a remote dental examination to other 
people of their age and background. When asked about the 
reason for not recommending this assessment, the comments 
were related to the lack of provision of oral health services, 
in particular preventive care (See Table I). 
The majority of the residents considered the format of the 
remote dental examination to be either highly appropriate 
(46%) or slightly appropriate (46%). On the other hand, three 
residents (6%) were neutral about its format and one resident 
(2%) considered remote dental examination to be slightly 
inappropriate. No reason was provided for that view. 
When asked about how satisfied they were with the 
review of oral health needs, although the majority was either 
satisfied (46%) or slightly satisfied (32%), three residents  
(6%) were neutral and, more importantly, 16% were slightly 
dissatisfied. Asked about the reason for this dissatisfaction, 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

most residents’ comments were related to the lack of 
immediate feedback on the examination.  
On comparing residents’ opinions on the clarity of the 
communications received with the face-to-face examiner 
(i.e., the RN), 86% of the respondents found it “Very easy”, 
and another 12% “Easy” to understand. On the other hand, 
residents found it generally easy to understand remote 
communications (46% “Very easy” and 46% “Easy”), and 
another 4% were neutral about it. Nonetheless, the remainder 
4% found it “Difficult” or “Very difficult” to understand 
remote communications. Residents who found it difficult to 
understand indicated that the comments were related to the 
foreign accent of the oral health professional that provided 
feedback on the examination, rather than the technology 
used. 
TABLE I.  
RESIDENTS’ RESPONSES TO TELEDENTISTRY ASSESSMENT 
QUESTIONNAIRE (%) 
1. How satisfied were you with the remote dental examination? 
Strongly 
satisfied 
Slightly 
satisfied 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Dissatisfied 
Strongly 
dissatisfied 
46.0 
38.0 
14.0 
2.0 
- 
2. If remote examinations were available for patients, would you 
recommend them to other people? 
Strongly 
recommend 
Slightly 
recommend 
Neutral 
Slightly not 
Recommen
d 
Strongly not 
recommend 
46.0 
46.0 
4.0 
2.0 
2.0 
3. How appropriate was the format of the remote dental examinations? 
Very 
appropriate 
Slightly 
appropriate 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Inappropriate 
Strongly 
inappropriate 
46.0 
46.0 
6.0 
2.0 
- 
4. How satisfied were you with the review of your dental needs by the 
remote dentist? 
Strongly 
satisfied 
Slightly 
satisfied 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Dissatisfied 
Strongly 
dissatisfied 
46.0 
32.0 
6.0 
16.0 
- 
5. Were instructions from the examiner in the face-to-face exam clear 
and easy to understand? 
Very easy 
Slightly 
easy 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Difficult 
Very 
difficult 
86.0 
12.0 
2.0 
- 
- 
6. Were instructions from the examiner in the remote examination 
clear and easy to understand? 
Very easy 
Slightly 
easy 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Difficult 
Very 
difficult 
46.0 
46.0 
4.0 
2.0 
2.0 
Over one quarter of the residents (28%) commented that 
the most valuable element of the remote dental examination 
was its convenience. For example, by taking video images in 
the RACF, residents could avoid the disruption, difficulty 
and cost of arranging travel to visit a dentist.   
Three of the five RNs that had been recruited and trained 
conducted intraoral examinations with the RACF’s residents.  
Nonetheless, most of the exams (n=28) were conducted by 
an oral health professional. In another eight examinations, 
RNs were assisted, either remotely or at the RACF, by an 
oral health professional on how to properly manipulate the 
intraoral camera and transmit video images. The RN 
performed the examination and could transmit the videos by 
themselves without supervision in 14 examinations (See 
Table II). 
These three nurses provided feedback on the training 
material presented (i.e., a hard-copy, on-line manual and 
demonstrations). There was general agreement that the 
material presented was clear and relevant to the purposes of 
this project. RNs also agreed that the length of the material 
was right. The information about oral health in older adults 
was considered too long and less relevant to their work.   
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF TELEDENTAL EXAMINATIONS COMPLETED BY 
INTRAORAL CAMMERA OPERATOR 
 
RACFa 
Location 
Examinations 
Nurse no 
supervision 
Nurse under 
supervision 
Oral health 
professional 
 
Total 
Urban 1 
6 
4 
11 
21 
Urban 2 
4 
0 
3 
7 
Rural 
4 
4 
14 
22 
a. 
Residential aged care facility 
However, when asked about the relevance of the 
teledentistry model in their workplace, they were neutral 
with some indicating that teledentistry might only be relevant 
to low-care residents, as the model may not be practical in 
high-care due to dementia and decreased physical capability.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The present study tested the technical feasibilty and 
acceptance, by both users and residents, of an alternative 
model to the traditional face-to-face oral health examination 
using a teledentistry installation. The results provided 
evidence that the proposed approach for oral health screening 
proved to be feasible and reliable as an alternative to 
traditional oral health examinations. On one side, the 
observed concordance of remote and face-to-face exams was 
high. On the other hand, residents expressed acceptable 
levels of satisfaction with the teledentistry model.  
The ‘virtual dental examination’ can provide general and 
specialist oral health care support to local aged care facilities. 
It can assist in providing regular and timely oral health 
checks using trained non-oral health professional assistants 
in the first instance.  
Additionally, there is anecdotal evidence from RACF 
staff that the stress imposed by travel to a dental surgery can 
lead to complete non-compliance with the dental examiner, 
to the point where attempts at oral examination are 
abandoned. This leads to further travel and dentist re-
booking costs and often reluctance on the part of resident and 
practitioner to repeat the process. By using the teledentistry 
approach, RACF avoids the disruption and difficulty of 
arranging travel for the patients for dental treatment. A 
successful translation of this technology into clinical practice 
would extend the provision of health care/oral health care to 
remote and difficult-to-serve locations, and improve access 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for care to additional patient populations at a reasonable cost, 
as well as easing the shortage of oral health professionals. 
The ability to view examination results at their desktop 
will enable oral health professionals to see and screen more 
residents per time unit in their catchment area. Further 
development of the procedures is warranted to allow for 
high-care resident assessment.  Specialist dental services can 
subsequently be provided when the required treatment is 
identified. 
Oral health professionals will also be able to triage and 
prioritize appointments, rather than travelling to each home 
without knowing beforehand what treatment each resident 
will require. Visiting domiciliary oral health professionals 
will be aware of the exact nature of the oral problem before 
they arrive. The oral health professional will also be able to 
plan a visit to treat other residents in the area, improving 
efficiency and meaning that more residents are able to be 
treated over the course of the year. The oral health 
professional will also be provided with better means of 
identifying 
older 
adults 
who 
require 
a 
diagnostic 
examination by a dental specialist.  
Furthermore, by performing an in-RACF examination, 
the confidence that both the residents and the residents’ 
families have in the RACF will increase.  From the health 
care system and societal perspective, a key impact will be in 
the satisfaction of knowing that residents have been well 
looked after, and that scarce resources are being well 
utilized. Additionally, the case for extension of funding 
would be bolstered. It will improve oral health for 
underserviced communities through education, diagnosis, 
treatment, health promotion and disease prevention.  
Data collected from this project could also be useful as a 
starting point for a large oral health record repository, which 
would combine a digital record with 2D and 3D stills and 
video images, as well as radiographs.  
Additional research should explore and address some 
technical and training aspects of this study, as means of 
further verification of this approach. Firstly, when the 
interaction during the conventional face-to-face exam and 
remote 
communications 
was 
examined, 
there 
were 
significant differences between remote and face-to-face 
consultation. The face-to-face, provided a more effective 
mean 
to 
achieve 
clarity 
and 
easy 
to 
understand 
communication between the oral health professional and the 
resident.  In the present study it appears that this was due to 
language and not technical aspects, but this was not 
explored. However, King and his collaborators [11] reported 
diminished 
quality 
of 
communication 
with 
videoconferencing. Secondly, although adequate training and 
material compensation to the RACFs for the RNs time was 
provided, some still failed to fully engage with the study 
despite the successful use of RNs in other areas of dentistry 
[12,13].  The perception that this technology is of limited use 
in RACFs could explain, at least in part, the willingness to 
take up this new technology [14].  In any case, it seems that 
barriers to implementation are mostly human factors.  
Further training and analyses of how different types of 
constraints operate to support or undermine the adoption of a 
teledentistry model need to be explored and addressed.   
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Findings for this field trial indicate that using a 
teledentistry installation is an appropriate alternative to 
traditional oral health consultation, and could provide 
benefits to an expanding segment of the population in 
relative and absolute terms. This population comprises older 
people living in RACFs and older people living in regional, 
rural, and even outer-metropolitan areas. 
An increasing proportion of older people are living in 
rural and regional Australia and these communities are 
demographically ageing more rapidly than their metropolitan 
counterparts. Intervention projects such as the present one 
have the potential to target the rapidly expanding aged 
segment of the population with special oral health needs. 
There is also potential for wider scale application for the 
provision of sustainable oral health care in rural areas.  
Nonetheless, involvement of a wider range of stakeholders 
might be necessary, as they all influence adoption.  Recently, 
a review of factors influencing the implementation of 
teledentistry, highlighted some challenges at different levels 
[14]. These challenges need to be specifically targeted. 
This study will lead to a multi-State, community-based 
trial of the technology. This will require further research into 
the acceptability of teledentistry by participants, including 
the format, content and delivery of the program, as well as 
the relevance and appropriateness of the information 
provided. 
Further research will also be required to undertake 
economic analysis and modeling to determine the 
interventions productivity compared to the traditional model 
of oral health examination. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This project was funded by a grant from Dental Health 
Services Victoria’s Research and Innovation Scheme and 
the Victorian Department of Business and Innovation BEIP 
program. We would also like to acknowledge the RACFs, 
residents and nurses involved in this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. National Survey of 
Adult Oral Health 2004-2006. AIHW cat.no.DEN 165. 
[2] M. Hopcraft, M. Morgan, J. Satur, and FAC. Wright, 
Edentulism and dental caries in Victorian residential aged 
care facilities. Gerodont 2012;29:E512-519 
[3] M. Hopcraft, M. Morgan, J. Satur, FAC. Wright, and I. 
Darby, “Oral hygiene and periodontal disease in Victorian 
residential aged care facilities”. Gerodont 2012;29:220-228.  
[4] M. Hopcraft, M. Morgan, J. Satur, and FAC. Wright, “Dental 
service provision in Victorian residential aged care facilities,” 
Aust Dent J 2008;53:239-245. 
[5] R. Mariño, and A. Ghanim A, “Teledentistry: a systematic 
review of the literature. J Telemed Telecare. 2013;19:189-
194. 
[6] Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council, Healthy 
mouths healthy lives. Australia’s National Oral Health Plan 
2004-2013. South Australian Department of Health, 2004.  
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[7] Australian Bureau of Statistics.  2006 Census QuickStats: 
Victoria. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.multiculturalaustralia.edu.au/doc/2006cens
us-quickstats-victoria.pdf (Accessed 26-8-2013). 
[8] R. Mariño, M. Hopcraft, R. Collmann, D. Manton, M. 
McCullough, K. Clarke, E. Ozanne, and I. Blackberry. A 
teledentistry approach for oral health screening in nursing 
homes. Available at: http://www.slideshare.net/ifa2012/3-
mariooral-health-if-apresentation29may2012 . (Accessed 2-9-
2013). 
[9] L. Thabane, J. Ma, R. Chu, J. Cheng, A. Ismaila, LP. Rios, R. 
Robson, M. Thabane, L. Giangregorio, and CH. Goldsmith, 
“A tutorial on pilot studies: the what, why and how” BMC 
Med Res Methodol. 2010 Jan 6;10:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-
2288-10-1. 
[10] SOPROLIFE: 
Light 
Induced 
Fluorescence 
Evaluator. 
http://www.soprolife.com/ (Accessed 23-1-2014). 
[11] G. King, H. Richards, and D. Godden, “Adoption of 
telemedicine in Scottish remote and rural general practices: a 
qualitative study’ J Telemed Telecare. 2007;13:382-386. 
[12] J.M. Chalmers, and A. Pearson A, “A systematic review of 
oral health assessment by nurses and carers for residents with 
dementia in residential care facilities” Special Care in 
Dentistry, 2005;25: 227-233. 
[13] L.J. Walsh, G. Hill, G. Seymour, and A. Roberts, “A scoring 
system for the quantitative evaluation of oral mucositis during 
bone 
marrow 
transplantation” 
Spec 
Care 
Dentist. 
1990;10:190-195. 
[14] RN. Patel, and R.N. Antonarakis, “Factors influencing the 
adoption and implementation of teledentistry in the UK, with 
a focus on orthodontics.’ Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 
2013;41:424-431. doi: 10.1111/cdoe.12029. 
 
 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Organising Videoconferencing for Collaborative Medical Diagnosis 
Pre-Planned and Acute Practice 
 
Line Lundvoll Warth 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
line.lundvoll.warth@telemed.no 
 
Abstract— How videoconferences (VCs) as a tool for real-time 
collaborative medical diagnosis are organised affects the 
content of collaborative work. The objective of this paper is to 
outline how the organisation of VCs for pre-planned and acute 
situations affects content in collaboration. Forty-seven VCs 
were observed and videotaped, and twenty semi-structured 
interviews were conducted in two studies, representing three 
contexts, reflecting pre-planned and acute medical problem 
solving. Regularly pre-planned meetings differ from others, 
creating a practice that includes consultations about general 
medical problems, the opportunity to discuss specialised 
problems, and information sharing between levels of care. 
Regularity and thus knowledge of each other and of the patient 
support the sharing of information about patients previously 
discussed. Acute use of VC is organised as a restricted service, 
offered during a specific timeslot during the day. The 
consultation is specialised (i.e., stroke), in which professional(s) 
with specific specialised knowledge meet. Non-planned, 24/7 
acute use of VC is still left to be explored in its context. What is 
known is that acute knowledge is knowledge in the moment, 
requiring unplanned access to VC as a tool for sharing 
knowledge resources twenty-four hours a day. These factors 
should 
be 
considered when 
VC 
is 
implemented 
for 
collaborative medical diagnosis. The paper is relevant as it is 
concerned with tools to enhance collaboration online, i.e., VC, 
and how VC improves the value of distributed knowledge 
among virtual teams. 
Keywords—videoconference; 
Collaborative 
medical 
diagnosis; context; pre-planned; acute 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Videoconferencing (VC) is a well-known technological 
tool for collaborative work. Through the use of VC, 
professionals can share information and knowledge jointly, 
producing real-time collaborative medical diagnosis. In 
previous work, the results illustrate that how the VC is 
organised in pre-planned meetings affects the content of 
collaborative work [1, 2]. Continuing work with VC in 
unplanned acute situations [3] led to an interest in how the 
organising of the VC as a tool affects content in the 
collaboration between the professionals. How the use is 
organised is important for the content of collaborative work. 
The objective in this article is therefore to explore how 
different ways of organising the use of VCs affect the 
content of the collaboration and to outline how successful 
VC for collaborative medical diagnosis can be organised. 
This paper expands previous work by connecting the two 
contexts, to illuminate the differences to be considered when 
implementing VC in practice.   
Studies on the organisation of VC have treated the tool as 
a technology disconnected from the context it is a part of, 
e.g., creating ten simple rules for organising VC anywhere 
[4] or a step-by-step guide to VC [5]. Several factors 
influence the VC practice, the context in one main factor. 
The effect of context is often related to a medical illness, i.e., 
VC between specialists and general practitioners (GPs) 
aimed at improving the quality of diabetes care [6], 
addressing administrative and clinical issues using VC in 
delivering psychiatric care [7], and using VC as an effective 
diagnostic tool for, e.g., skin lessons in dermatology [8]. In 
workplace settings, studies have, in many situations, been 
more focused on the technology used during the interaction 
than on the interplay with remote colleagues [9]. This work 
merges two different contexts, to illuminate how medical 
situations are unequal, demanding a different organisation. 
This is often overlooked when implementing new 
technology, as one solution is developed to cover, i.e., all 
acute medical situations, even all collaborative work. This 
expands novel knowledge to the field. 
The paper focuses on collaborative work between 
distributed resources. The theoretical approach constitutes 
the framework for the studies and the paper, as the 
perspectives create premises for understanding collaboration 
in VC practice. The tree contexts, two pre-planned and one 
acute, are accounted for. Video-recorded observations and 
interviews are described as the methods for revealing the 
organisation of VCs and how the context affects the content 
in collaboration. Based on the amount of and the content in 
the VC meetings, the results report how collaborative work 
is shaped by the context. The discussion illuminates pre-
planned and acute practice, and what kind of practice and 
problem solving to arrange for. The paper concludes with 
suggestions for future work. 
II. 
FRAMEWORK 
The interplay among remote colleagues and the emphasis 
on the context of knowledge sharing is used as a framework 
for understanding how the content of medical work and the 
organisation of the VC are mutually shaped. In workplace 
settings, the situated approach notes that problem solving 
often occurs in group settings [10]. This situated approach 
emphasizes a Cultural Historical Activity Perspective 
(CHAT), which focuses on the connection between the 
culture, the arteacts, objects, and tools as a social activity 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[11]. Knowledge is situated within the social activity, context 
and culture and it is an interplay between the institutional 
context and the organisational structure. The studies do not 
frame the use of VC nor the collaborative work itself as a 
transmission of knowledge from one individual to another. 
The collaborative work is shaped by the context it is used 
and developed in, e.g., the medical culture. That i the tools 
the professionals use in their work, the rules they follow, the 
division of labour, and the community they practice in. It is 
the social activity in the group that develops the practice. 
Collaborative medical diagnoses are culturally and 
historically situated [12], and the contradictions among 
different professionals might change the traditional treatment 
of patients. When knowledge from medical professionals is 
transferred between them by collaboration, it might change 
their treatment methods. Changing methods for the specific 
treatment or the tools they use is a change in the historical 
way of performing treatment. Performing medical treatment 
is connected to the context in which the VC is the tool that 
mediates the interactions and activities [13] [14] between the 
participants. It provides collaborative work and ensures that 
the meanings are socially shared. The knowledge is 
distributed as a result of sharing their competence and 
experience as individuals and as a part of their institutional 
practice. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Both studies were designed with the purpose of exploring 
the use of VC, the content for the collaborative work, and 
distributed knowledge sharing. The VC equipment was 
implemented independent of the studies explored in this 
paper. All the participants who used the VC in daily practice 
were recruited for these two studies. No payment was 
received for the professionals, since the collaborative work 
was voluntary as a part of their daily work practice. 
There are three contexts in this study: contexts a and b 
represent hospitals with pre-planned use, and c represents 
VC in unplanned/acute situations. Figure 1 illustrates how 
one hospital with one or several general practitioners (GPs) 
or specialists (coloured faces), with or without patient 
participation (transparent face), is connected to another 
hospital using VC as a tool for collaborative medical 
diagnosis. Traditionally, the professionals in these local 
hospitals seek a second opinion from the larger specialist 
hospital over the telephone. VC replaces or supplements the 
use of the telephone for these activities. 
 
A. Abbreviations and Acronyms 
Define abbreviations and acronyms the first time they a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Two hospitals connected using VC as a tool. 
 
Figure 2.  Organisation of the VC in all contexts. 
A. Hospitals with pre-planned use 
The pre-planned use of VC was organised differently in 
contexts a and b: In context a, the VC is scheduled for a 
specific time slot once a week and happens ‘when needed’. 
The GP identifies the cases to discuss and makes 
arrangements the day before with the hospital, which 
arranges for the appropriate specialist. In context b, the VC 
meetings are held routinely four times a week, organised as 
part of the ordinary daily meetings at the hospital. They take 
place regardless of whether there are predefined medical 
problems to discuss. This service is still running. 
In both contexts a and b, the VC equipment is located in 
the office of one of the GPs. At hospital A, the VC 
equipment is located in a smaller meeting and consulting 
room at the medical department. At hospital B, the VC 
equipment is located in the morning meeting room in the 
medical department. 
B. Hospitals connecting in acute situations 
In context c, the VC was connected during restricted 
times during the day, excluding nights and weekends. This 
context was associated with the condition of stroke, an acute 
medical problem. The professionals in the emergency ward 
assessed the patient and connected to VC from the local 
hospital’s emergency room. At the specialist hospital, the 
VC equipment is located in a dedicated room used only for 
this purpose. When they are called by telephone and asked 
for a VC meeting, the specialist on duty immediately moves 
to this room (Figure 2 illustrates the physical placement of 
the VC equipment in all contexts.) 
 
C. Qualitative methods 
The main data of interest in all three contexts were the 
social interaction and the content in the VCs, requiring 
qualitative research methods. For the pre-planned VCs, it 
was possible to observe the interaction [15]. Forty-seven 
VCs (five in context a and forty two in context b) were 
observed and videotaped during the first half of 2007. This 
constituted all meetings conducted during the five-month 
period. The purpose of the observations was to illustrate the 
social interaction, the content of the collaboration, and how 
the organising affected the content. All the video recordings 
were transcribed, analysed, and categorised to facilitate an 
understanding of the content in the VCs. 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Eight interviews with GPs and several of the specialists 
participating in the VCs, from both contexts, were conducted 
to evaluate the use of VCs in pre-planned collaborative work. 
The interviews were semi-structured, recorded, and then 
transcribed. The interviews lasted from twenty to seventy 
minutes and were conducted from August to December of 
2007. 
In the acute situation, context c, observations of the 
unplanned VCs were difficult. Therefore, all the activity 
using VC was automatically logged and used as a basis for 
conducting interviews. Thirteen professionals, nurses, 
physicians, and specialists from both hospitals were 
interviewed through twelve semi-structured interviews in the 
autumn of 2011. Each interview lasted from twenty minutes 
to two hours. All interviews were audio-recorded and then 
transcribed. All transcriptions were categorised according to 
utterances that seemed to be repeated by the practitioners. 
The purpose of the interviews was to reflect acute medical 
problem solving and the organising and use of VC.  
D. Ethical considerations 
The 
North 
Norwegian 
Regional 
Medical 
Ethics 
Committee (REK) approved the design of the study and how 
the data were collected, handled, analysed, used, and kept in 
contexts a and b. Context c has been registered and evaluated 
as a non-report obliged by the REK. The personal data are 
handled according to the personal information rules in 
Norway. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
In each context (a, b and c), two hospitals are connected 
(hospital A and B). Hospital A (A) and hospital B (B) use 
VCs as a tool for practicing collaborative work in diagnosis 
(Figure 1). Table 1 illustrates the use of VC in all three 
contexts. The content was categorised according to 
consultations and information exchange. A consultation 
consists of discussions about and exchanges related to 
medical problems, diagnoses and follow-ups. Information 
exchange consists of updating the conditions of patients 
treated previously and information about patients transferred 
between levels of care. 
In context a, VC was used five times in two months 
before they stopped using the service. Four times, the 
participants reported and discussed a medical problem and 
once they met to exchange information about a patient 
discussed earlier. 
TABLE I. 
THE TOTAL NUMBER OF VC IN THE CONTEXTS 
 
* The total also includes the category ‘practical organising’ used 17 times in the same period. 
In context b, the VC is routinely held four times a week. 
During a five-month period, there were forty-two VC 
meetings. The service is still running today. During this 
period, twelve meetings were consultations and thirteen 
involved an exchange of information. In context c, eighteen 
months passed between the first time and the last time the 
VC service was used for acute treatments. During this 
period, they consulted four times regarding four different 
stroke patients. The service is now locally disconnected. 
In Figure 3, the results illustrate how the organisation of 
VCs for pre-planned and acute situations affects the content 
of collaboration. Collaborative medical diagnosis is 
organised in both pre-planned and acute practice. The pre-
planned use of VCs is organised as regularly held meetings, 
in this context four times a week at a specific hour, or 
reserved for a specific day when a meeting is held when 
needed. Regularly held meetings offer all knowledge 
resources available at the time during the morning meeting. 
The GP can present patient problems more generally and 
specific medical problems. In pre-planned meetings held 
when needed, the GP must define a medical problem and 
report it to the hospital the day before. These meetings are 
only scheduled one day a week (Wednesdays), so the GP 
must wait for Tuesdays to report the medical problem to be 
discussed. Then, the specialist on duty in the hospital 
prepares and meets to offer a second opinion. 
The acute use of VC is organised as a restricted service, 
offered during a specific timeslot during the day. As the 
specialist hospital has less experienced staff on duty during 
the nights, the service is only offered weekdays from 07.30 
to 19.30 and Saturdays from 09.00 to 13.00. In between 
these hours, the local practitioners in the emergency unit 
determine whether they need to discuss an acute patient with 
the specialist hospital. 
As the purpose of collaborating is to discuss medical 
diagnoses, the content at all sites involves consultation. In 
acute situations, the consultation is specialised (i.e., stroke). 
Here, connecting using VCs is about collaboration 
concerning 
a 
specific 
acute 
situation, 
in 
which 
professional(s) with specific specialised knowledge meet. In 
a pre-planned VC, general (e.g., reviewing a medical 
record) and more specialised knowledge (e.g., diabetes) 
issues are examined. The problems might be of the same 
character, but consultations when needed, only once a week, 
involve insignificant problems. If it does not appear the day 
before the report time (i.e., Mondays) the problem must be 
of a more general character. 
However, pre-planned meetings (when needed), held if 
there are problems to discuss, and in restricted acute 
situations, 
involve 
professionals 
with 
this 
specific 
knowledge. It might be the same or different professionals 
participating each time (Figure 3, symbols  = ≠). Regularly 
held meetings may also include different professionals, but 
this is rare, as, e.g., during summer holiday among the 
practitioners, when stand-ins are practicing. Only regularly  
 
Context 
Period and purpose of use 
Period 
Consultation 
Information 
exchange 
Number 
a 
2 months 
4 
1 
5 
b 
5 months 
12 
13 
42* 
c 
18 months 
4 
0 
4 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 3.  The organisation of VCs for pre-planned and acute situations and the content. 
held meetings, where the same professionals (Figure 3, 
symbols  ≠ =) meet regularly, result in both consultation 
and information exchange. The regularity and therefore the 
professionals’ knowledge of each other and of the patient 
support the sharing of information about patients who have 
been previously discussed.  
Regularly pre-planned meetings differ from others, 
creating a practice that includes consultations about general 
medical problems and the opportunity to discuss specialised 
problems 
and 
exchange 
information 
about 
patients 
previously discussed. It also allows the sharing of resources 
among the same professionals over time, which provides 
opportunities to expand treatment activity together. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Based on three contexts, the results show how the 
organisation of VCs for pre-planned, as-needed, and regular 
and restricted acute situations affects the content of 
collaboration. This paper focuses on collaborative work 
between distributed resources and how the context affects 
the content and the medical work using VC as a tool for 
collaboration. 
As context b illustrates, VC is well-suited for 
consultations and medical problem solving. It is the medical 
condition that determines whether the situation can be pre-
planned or is acute. Regularly held meetings, as a part of 
established activities such as morning meetings, offer an 
adequate way to organise the use of VC if the aim is a two-
way commitment to collaborative work. Over time, the 
same professionals meet, discussing medical problems of 
diverse character and both general and more specialised 
problem solving. Through connecting with the same 
professionals over time, often discussing the progress of the 
same patients over days, they are able to follow up on the 
treatment. Discussing patient flow between levels of care 
and giving feedback on previously discussed patients also 
provides the specialists with feedback on their second 
opinions. Organising VCs as pre-planned meetings allows 
for situated knowledge, knowledge of the patient, and the 
opportunity to expand the treatment activity together. This 
might change the direction of the object so that the 
practitioners start to use treatment methods and previous 
knowledge connected to the culture of the specialists. 
Acute situations demand general biomedical knowledge 
according to a specific medical problem in time. The 
specialist does not have knowledge of the patient in advance 
or access to other information than what is shared. Here, the 
use of VC is only available during specific times. This gives 
an extra hampering factor (as in the context of conformity 
with pre-planned meetings reported the day before) for use. 
The medical problem must be evaluated against the ability 
to wait until the VC connecting time. If it is easier to 
connect by telephone, the traditional method of discussing 
medical problems is used. As acute situations cannot be 
foreseen and cannot wait, the activity is not restricted. Here, 
it is possible to suggest an alternative for organising VC to 
discuss acute medical diagnosis. Figure 4 includes a 
suggestion for organising VC in acute collaborative medical 
diagnosis as ‘unplanned’. 
Non-planned acute collaborative work benefits from 
being organised as a non-planned, 24/7 service. Acute, 
unplanned collaborative work often brings together different 
professionals periodically (Figure 4, symbols  ≠), because  
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4.  The organisation of VCs for pre-planned and acute situations 
the consultations demand different knowledge. Over time, 
this activity might change the traditional practice, creating 
this new activity, where the same professionals are able to 
meet more often. However, it is still not likely that the 
activity will include, i.e., information exchange, as acute 
situations demand specialised knowledge and an immediate 
start of treatment. 
VC must be seen as a tool in connection with the context 
it is a part of. In spontaneous situations, which typically 
involve discussing the patient only once, the physicians do 
not have experience with the patient in advance. The 
organisation and the type of knowledge exchanged (the 
medical problem) are mutually attached. Connecting using 
VC regularly allows medical discussions of a more general 
character, i.e., regularly held meetings including both 
specialised and more general medical discussions. More 
general discussions can also be included in pre-planned, as-
needed meetings if the same professionals meet over time. 
As shown in the framework, knowledge is situated within 
the activity, context and culture, and it is an interplay 
between institutional context and organisational structure. 
How knowledge in daily work practice is structured is 
established over years, how the practitioners divide their 
work tasks, the rules for treatment, and the community they 
locally are a part of this interplay. Introducing VC for 
collaboration across levels of care calls for awareness of the 
fact that how the VC is organised and the resources shared 
must be seen as mutually connected. Neither the use of VC 
nor the collaborative work itself can be viewed as a 
transmission of de-contextualized knowledge from one 
individual to another. A medical diagnosis is the result of a 
social process through which professionals share a type of 
knowledge that often includes a treatment method practiced 
by other practitioners. Therefore, the use of VC also affects 
the traditional division of labour in health care. 
Sharing knowledge leading to changes in working 
methods and division of labour, creates the contradictions 
between traditional treatment methods (i.e., referring the 
patient) and the new work practice. If the purpose of VC is to 
retain knowledge sharing, the service needs to account for 
practice as situated knowing so the practitioners know how 
to continue the activity. Regular collaborative work, 
including both second opinions and follow-up feedback to 
those sharing knowledge for treatment advice, should be kept 
going. This also supports successful use of VC. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The objective of this paper was to outline how the 
organisation of VCs for pre-planned and acute situations 
affects the content in collaboration. Medical situations are 
unequal, because the participants who interact in them 
occupy specialised and situated knowing of the patient and 
the local contexts. This is often overlooked when 
implementing new technology, as one solution is developed 
to cover, i.e., all acute medical situations. Situated knowing 
of local context demand for adjustment of how VC is 
organised and how VC is used.  
Regularly pre-planned meetings create a practice that 
includes consultations about general medical problems, 
specialised problems, and information sharing. Regularity 
and knowledge of each other and the patient support the 
sharing of information about patients, as previously 
discussed. Acute use of VC is organised as a restricted 
service, offered during a specific timeslot during the day. 
The consultation is specialised, in which professional(s) 
with specific specialised knowledge meet. The acute service 
needs to be a twenty-four-hour service to support the 
context it appears in, as acute treatment is demanded 
regardless of time of the day. Restricted time collides with 
how acute care is organized, as a twenty-four-hour service. 
VC ‘when needed’, which need to be reported in advance, 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

also collides with traditional medical practice, i.e., medical 
problems need to be solved in the moment. Hence, regular 
knowledge sharing supports high-frequency use of VC. 
Based on this, the paper does not suggest using a 
universal guideline for how to organise the use of VC. VC is 
a situated practice, calling for awareness of the fact that how 
VC is organised affects the frequency of use and the 
knowledge shared. Even though experience from other 
similar cases might be used as a normative guideline, the 
context in which the VC is going to be implemented must 
be taken into account. As context b illustrates, VCs that fit 
into the local context (as a part of existing morning 
meetings) support successful collaborative work. 
Unplanned, 24/7 acute use of VC is still left to be 
explored in the future. The total number of acute medical 
situations will be affected if the same professionals meet 
over time and if they are going to follow up on previously 
treated patients. What is known about the context is that 
acute knowledge is knowledge in the moment, requiring 
unplanned access to VC as a tool for sharing knowledge 
resources twenty-four hours a day.  
As time passes, technology improves, while the contexts 
in which professionals practice continue to be important to 
its successful use. Also the most advanced technology with 
the greatest number of applications benefits fitting into daily 
medical practice to succeed. Today, the availability of 
electronic health records (EHR) for patients has opened up 
the sharing of information in consulting with professionals 
in other areas. Unfortunately, not all hospitals and general 
practitioners have access to the same systems, and so are not 
able to access the same EHR at the same time (as in context 
c in this paper). In contexts a and b, practitioners had access 
to the same EHR. In context a, pre-checking in the EHR 
seemed to create more hassle in preparing for the 
discussions than in context b, where the specialists only 
relied on the general practitioners to present patient records, 
without looking them up by themselves. The traditional 
approach of orally presenting medical cases when 
discussing them (for example in morning meetings) seems 
to be fundamental to discussions. Access to pictures and 
other non-text-based tools in the EHR might enrich 
discussions, and is an interesting approach to the use of VC 
that can be explored in future work. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to the Northern Regional Health Authority for 
funding the research projects (HST-1021-11-5126 and TFP-
506-06) and to all the informants participating in the studies. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Nilsen, L.L. and A. Moen, Teleconsultation: Collaborative work and 
opportunities for learning across organizational boundaries. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, 2008. 14(7): pp. 377-380. 
[2] Nilsen, L.L., Læring og utvikling av kunnskap i medisinske samtaler. 
Bruk av videokonferanse mellom allmennleger og spesialister 
[Learning and development of knowledge in medical talk. The use of 
videoconferencing between GPs and specialists], in Fakultet for 
humaniora, samfunnsvitenskap og lærerutdanning. Institutt for 
lærerutdanning og pedagogikk [Faculty of Humanities, Social Sciences 
and Education, Department of Education]. 2011, Universitetet i 
Tromsø [University of Tromsø]: Tromsø. pp. 107. 
[3] Nilsen, L.L. The work practice of videoconferencing in acute stroke 
treatment, in The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, eTELEMED. 2013. Nice, France: 
IARIA. 
[4] Gichora, N.N., et al., Ten simple rules for organizing a virtual 
conference—anywhere. PLoS Comput Biol, 2010. 6(2): pp. e1000650. 
[5] Telles, C., A step-by-step guide to videoconferencing. Nurse Educ, 
2008. 33(4): pp. 168-71. 
[6] Abrahamian, H., et al., Transfer of knowledge from specialist to the 
generalist by videoconferencing: effect on diabetes care. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, 2002. 8(6): pp. 350-355. 
[7] Shore, J.H., Telepsychiatry: videoconferencing in the delivery of 
psychiatric care. Am J Psychiatry, 2013. 170(3): pp. 256-62. 
[8] Senel, E., History of teledermatology: a technique of the future in 
dermatology. Skinmed, 2010. 8(3): pp. 167-70. 
[9] Nardi, B.A., ed. Context and Consciousness: Activity and Human-
Computer Interaction. 1996, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. 
[10]Greeno, J.J., Learning in activity, in Handbook of the Learning 
Sciences K. Sawyer, Editor. 2006, Cambridge University Press: 
Cambridge, MA. pp. 79-96. 
[11]Engeström, 
Y., 
Activity 
theory 
and 
individual 
and 
social 
transformation, in Perspectives on Activity Theory, Y. Engeström, R. 
Miettinen, and R.-L. Punamäki, Editors. 1999, Cambridge University 
Press: New York, NY. pp. 19-38. 
[12]Engeström, Y., R. Engeström, and H. Kerosuo, The Discursive 
Construction of Collaborative Care. Applied Linguistics, 2003. 24(3): 
pp. 286-315. 
[13]Wertsch, J.V., Mind as Action. 1998, New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
[14]Vygotsky, L.S., Mind in Society: The Development of Higher 
Psychological Processes. 1978, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
[15]Jordan, B. and K. Henderson, Interaction analysis: Foundation and 
practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1995. 4(1) :pp. 39-103. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Effects of Telemonitoring on Heart Failure Patients’ Quality of Life and Depression
Scores: a Randomised Controlled Trial
Josiane J.J. Boyne
Department of Patient & Care
Maastricht University Medical Centre
Maastricht, The Netherlands
j.boyne@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Anton P.M. Gorgels
Department of Cardiology
Maastricht University Medical Centre
Maastricht, The Netherlands
t.gorgels@mumc.nl
Marieke D. Spreeuwenberg
CAPHRI, Department of Health Services Research
Maastricht University
Maastricht, The Netherlands
m.spreeuwenberg@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Hubertus J.M. Vrijhoef
Saw Swee Hoch School of Public Health
National University Singapore, Malaysia
Scientific Center for Care and Welfare
Tilburg University
Tilburg, the Netherlands
ephvhjm@nus.edu.sg
Abstract — Telemonitoring positively influences some
aspects of quality of life. Furthermore it
reduces
patients’ depression and anxiety scores on the short run.
The current article presents the results of a one year
follow-up
study
regarding
the
impact
of
a
first
generation telemonitoring system on depression and
Quality of Life scores in patients with heart failure.
Keywords - heart failure; telemonitoring; quality of life; anxiety;
depression; type-D personality.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Depression and impaired quality of life (QoL) are major
problems in patients with heart failure, and exposure to
these factors is much higher compared with a community
dwelling or age-matched population [1][2][3]. Depression
due to a general medical condition is defined as a patient’s
clinical presentation, which is dominated by a persisting
mood disorder, characterized by either or both depressed
mood or considerably decreased interest or pleasure in
nearly all activities, or a mood that is elevated, expansive or
irritable [4]. Also, other cardiac conditions, such as atrial
fibrillation, are known to show elevated levels of depression
and anxiety [5]. QoL is multidimensional and integrates
objective and subjective indicators, a broad range of life
domains,
and
individual
values.
Dimensions
may
be
categorized in physical, material, social and emotional well
being, and activity [6]. Both, depression and poor emotional
QoL, can be predicted by Type-D [7][8][9]. Type-D
personality
is
defined
as
‘the
tendency
to
suppress
emotional distress’, and is a predictor of long-term mortality
in
Chronic
Heart
Disease
(CHD),
independently
of
established biomedical risk factors [10].
With the increased application of telemonitoring in heart
failure, knowledge about its effects on QoL, and depression
becomes highly important. Several telemonitoring studies
reported about the impact of telemonitoring on QoL
[11][12][13][14], yet limited studies reported about the
impact of telemonitoring on depression in patients with
heart failure [15][16]. Preliminary results, about the impact
on depression, during the first 3 months of the randomized
multicentre study discussed in this article (TEHAF-study),
showed a tendency to a decreased level of depression [17].
The TEHAF-study primarily focuses on the effects of
telemonitoring on heart failure (re)admissions and mortality
[18], and cost-effectiveness [19]. Secondary outcomes are:
disease
specific
knowledge,
self-care,
self-efficacy,
adherence, [20] depression, and QoL. It was hypothesized
that an intensive follow-up by means of telemonitoring (i.e.
the Health Buddy®) improves disease specific knowledge,
self-care
and
self-efficacy,
which
in
turn,
positively
influences QoL and reduces depression and anxiety.
Several generations of telemonitoring (TM) are known.
The Health Buddy® system, used in this study, is a first
generation telehealth device, meaning a non-reactive data
collection and analysis system. Measurements of interest are
collected,
and
transferred
to
the
care
provider
asynchronously. It is not a full telemedicine system, and the
provider cannot respond immediately to patient data.
Second generation systems have a non-immediate analytical
or decision-making structure. Data transfer is synchronous,
meaning there is some real time processing of patient data.
Care providers can recognise important changes in essential
measurements, but delays can occur if the systems are only
active during office hours. Third generation systems provide
constantly analytical and decision-making support. Such
systems are used by physician led centers, staffed by
specialist nurses, and have full therapeutic authority 24 h
per day, seven days per week [21].
The current article presents longitudinal one-year follow-
up
results
regarding
the
impact
of
first
generation
telemonitoring on depression and QoL scores, including the
presence of Type-D in patients with heart failure. In the
methods section the population, study design, measurement
instruments, sample size and data analysis are described.
Baseline patient characteristics, prevalence of type D,
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

effects on QoL, anxiety and depression, and the relation
between QoL, and anxiety and depression are presented in
the results part, followed by the discussion, including study
limitations, practical implications and conclusion.
II. METHODS
A. Population
To
compare
telemonitoring
with
usual
care,
870
consecutive patients with heart failure New York Heart
Association (NYHA) class II-IV were invited to participate
in the TEHAF-study, during their visit at the outpatient
clinic of either of three hospitals in the South of the
Netherlands, of whom 488 refused or were ineligible (figure
1) flowchart). Patients were asked to fill out several
questionnaires during study time [22], and were informed
that refusing participation had no consequences for their
further treatment. Heart failure was defined as at least, one
episode of fluid retention requiring diuretics, either with an
echocardiographic left ventricular ejection fraction ≤40% or
a preserved ejection fraction with diastolic dysfunction.
Further inclusion criteria were age ≥18 years, capable of
providing informed consent, and being treated by a heart-
failure nurse together with a cardiologist. Patients were
excluded if, operating the telemonitoring device i.e., the
Health-Buddy®, was physically or cognitively impracticable;
if suffering from Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
(COPD)
Gold-classification
3
or
4;
if
receiving
hemodialysis, or in case of a disease with an expectedly
shortened life span [22]. Approval was obtained from the
Medical Ethical Committee of the participating centers,
according to the declaration of Helsinki [23] and written
informed consent was obtained before randomization. The
TEHAF-study
is
registered
as
a
clinical
randomized
controlled trial [24].
B.
Study design
From October 2007 until December 2008, 382 patients
were enrolled and assigned to a study arm, usual care (UC
group) or usual care plus telemonitoring (TM group), using
a
computer-generated
randomization
procedure,
with
stratification per center. Patients of both groups received
treatment according to
the
European guidelines [25],
identical oral and written information, and had an easy
access to the heart failure nurse. Patients of the UC group
four, and patients of the TM group had two planned
outpatient clinic visits during follow-up.
Moreover, the
latter group received a telemonitoring device. The Health
Buddy® has a liquid crystal display and four keys and was
connected to a landline phone. Every day, a preset dialogue
was
communicated
about
symptoms,
knowledge
and
behavior, being answered by touching one of the keys.
Patients’ answers were sent via a protected server to the
nurses’ desktop. Incorrect answers to a knowledge or
behavior issue were automatically corrected by the device
and visualized in the display, aiming that patients’ disease
knowledge would increase. Responses were transferred into
risk profiles, (low, medium, high) [21] allowing the nurse to
quickly identify high-risk patients. A heart failure nurse and
a nurse assistant led the process. Positive answers for
symptoms triggered immediate responses by the heart
failure nurse. The nurse assistant was responsible for
educational and general high risks, such as symptoms of
depression [21]. To meet with personal specific needs on
treatment or education, patients could be allocated to one of
the four sets of dialogues with variable emphasis on
symptoms or knowledge and behavior [20]. All patients
started with the same initial set of dialogues, which was
evenly balanced for symptoms and education. After three
months the first evaluation of symptoms and education level
occurred, with the intention to continue with the best fitting
next set of dialogues. Evaluation was based on the number
of high-risk alerts during the last 30 days before the end of a
program. Beside this, re-allocation to maintain with the best
fitting dialogues set was possible at any moment [21].
Following an admission for heart failure, patients were
always re-allocated to an intensive symptom monitoring set
of dialogues. Monitoring of vital signs was not part of the
system.
C.
Measurement instruments
Demographic variables (age, gender, race, living situa-
tion) and clinical variables NYHA functional class, left
ventricular ejection fraction, ischemic heart disease, atrium
fibrillation (AF), type-D personality) were measured. This
article reports effects on QoL scores, measured by the
Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ)[26],
and depression scores, measured by the Hospital Anxiety
and Depression Scale (HADS) [27]. The DS-14 consists of
14 questions, measuring negative affectivity and social
inhibition. Scores ranged on a Likert scale from 0-4 points.
Type D personality was indicated if both scores were equal
or more than 10 points [28]. QoL was measured by the
Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ). This
is
a
23-item
questionnaire
that
quantifies
physical
limitations (question 1), symptoms (frequency [questions 3,
5, 7 and 9], severity [questions 4, 6 and 8] and recent change
over
time
[question
2]),
self-efficacy and
knowledge
(questions 11, 12), social interference (question 16) and
QoL (questions 13–15). To facilitate interpretability, two
summary scores were developed, the overall summary score
(OVS) and clinical summary score (CSS), which are built
up from different (sub) scores [25]. The OVS exists of the
physical limitation score, total symptom score, quality of
life score and the social limitation score; the CSS exists of
physical limitation score and the total symptom score. The
HADS, measuring anxiety and depression, is a 14 items
questionnaire consisting of 7 questions for both, depression
and anxiety. Scores are ranged on a 4-points Likert scale,
with a total score range between 0-21 points [27]. Cut-off
point for anxiety or depression disorder is 10 points and
higher.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D.
Sample size
The sample size of the TEHAF-study was built on the
number of hospitalizations for heart failure. Expected was a
50% reduction in heart failure admissions [22].
E.
Data analysis
Demographic
interval
and
ratio
variables
were
investigated for normality of distribution with the Shapiro-
Wilk Normality Test. If normally distributed, means and
standard deviations are given. Student-t and Mann-Whitney
test is used to estimate differences of baseline variables.
Student-t test is also used to assess differences between AF
and anxiety and depression scores, and AF and QoL.
Categorical variables are presented as frequencies and
percentages.
Correlations between type-D, and anxiety and depression
scores or QoL, and between anxiety and depression scores
and quality of life, were tested by the Pearson correlation
test. Chi-square is used to assess differences for type-D
personality between the usual care and telemonitoring
groups. Student-t test is used to assess differences between
type-D personality and QoL and depression. The effects
between groups on QoL, and anxiety and depression scores
in time (baseline, T3, T6, T12) were assessed with
generalized estimating equations analysis (GEE).
GEE was used to correct for the dependency of the
observations in time and for the difference of the time
periods between the follow-up measurements. A structured
covariance matrix was used in the GEE analysis.
TABLE I.
BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Variable
N
TM group (197)
UC group (185)
p-value
Age (years)
382
71.0 ± 11.9
71.9 ±10.5
0.621
Range*
32-72-91
37-74-93
≥ 75
88 (45)
85 (46)
0.199
Caucasian race
197
185
Gender
382
0.747
Male
115 (58)
111 (60)
Married / partner (yes)
379
122 (62)
123 (66)
0.265
Education
363
0.589
Primary school
63 (33)
59 (34)
Secondary school /Low vocational
training
91 (48)
71 (41)
Middle Vocational training
19 (10)
23 (13)
High vocational / university
17 (9)
20 (11)
History of HF (months)
382
32 ±38
29 ±38
0.413
NYHA-classification / no (%)
382
0.404
NYHA II
110 (56)
109 (59)
NYHA III
79 (40)
74 (40)
NYHA IV
8 (4)
2 (1)
Blood pressure (mmHg)
382
Systolic
125 ±21.9
128 ±24.0
0.156
Diastolic
72 ±12.5
74 ±12.2
0.193
Heart rate (BPM)
382
77 ±15.1
75 ±13.8
0.252
Left Bundle Branch Block
382
20 (10.2)
22 (11.9)
0.587
Heart rhythm at baseline
382
Sinus rhythm
96 (48.7)
113 (61.1)
0.015
Atrial fibrillation
62 (31.5)
35 (18.9)
0.007
Pacemaker rhythm
36 (18.3)
35 (18.9)
0.817
Type-D personality
360
67 (36.4)
68 (39.8)
0.358
Charlson index
382
2.6 (±1.5)
2.4 (±1.4)
0.358
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

As independent variables three dummy variables for
time, group (usual care versus intervention), and interaction
effects between group and the dummy variables of time
were included. The method of GEE is often used to analyze
longitudinal and other correlated response data [29]. GEE
takes into account the correlational nature of repeated
measures data within subjects, and securing minimal loss of
patients due to incomplete data. Data imputation is not
executed because when using GEE to analyze a longitudinal
dataset, imputation of missing data has no value above non-
imputation [29]. Analyses were corrected for baseline
differences. To analyze within group effects between
baseline and after 12 months regarding QoL, anxiety and
depression scores, Wilcoxon non-parametric test was used.
SPSS version 18 was used for all data analyses. P-values <
0.05 were considered statistically significant.
III. RESULTS
A.
Baseline characterisctics
Three hundred eighty two patients met the criteria, and
were allocated to the TM group (197) or to the UC group
(185). Patients’ mean age was 72 (±11), and 46% were ≥75
years old; 59% were male, 65 % lived with a partner; 57%
were in functional class II, 40% in Class III 3% in class IV.
Mean left ventricular ejection fraction was 0.38 and 61%
were ≤ 0.45; 50% had ischemic heart disease. Study arms
were well balanced regarding baseline characteristics (table
1), except for AF. No differences were found for anxiety
and depression, or QoL among patients with AF or other
heart rhythm. Follow up was incomplete in 81 (21%), 43 in
the usual-care and 38 in the intervention arm, due to death
(7.8%), increasing physical impairment (6.0%), stress or
losing motivation (5%), other (1%) or lost to follow-up
(1.2%).
B.
Prevalance of type-D personality
Respectively 184 and 176 patients answered the DS-14
questionnaire for the type-D personality. No difference in
prevalence of type-D personality was found between the
groups. In the TM group 67 (36.4%) and in the UC group 68
(39.8%) of the patients belongs to the category with type-D
personality. Overall, no correlation was found between type-
D-personality and anxiety (p=0.681, Pearson= -.022) or
depression (p=0.443, Pearson=0.041) scores, whereas all
dimensions of QoL (p<0.001) were negatively affected by
type-D without differences between study groups.
C.
Effects on anxiety and depression scores
No
difference
was
found
regarding
depression
prevalence at baseline, with a registration of 42% (79
on186) in the TM group and 41% (69 on 167) in the UC
group. A significant difference for anxiety in favour of the
TM group was found after 3 and 6 months, irrespective of
correction for baseline values (Table 2). However, this
effect disappeared after 12 months. For depression a
significant different effect was found only after six months
in favour of the TM group. After correction for the baseline
values, a favourable effect was found during whole follow-
up.
Also for anxiety and depression scores, within group
differences were calculated among patients completing
questionnaires at baseline and after 12 months. After 12
months anxiety was significantly lower in the TM group
(p=0.041, Z=2.043), whereas no difference was found for
and no difference for anxiety (p=0.229, Z= -1.203).
D.
Effects on quality of life
Uncorrected for baseline value, the OVS and the CSS
tend to differ between the TM group and the UC group after
one year, yet no difference remained after correction for
From
patients
completing
the
KCCQ-questionnaire
at
baseline and after 12 months (272) within group differences
were calculated. No within group difference was found for
the
CSS.
For
OVS
significantly
higher
score
was
demonstrated in the TM group (p=0.022, Z= -2. 290),
whereas no difference was found for the UC group
(p=0.790, Z=-.267). QoL, being a sub score of the OVS,
showed similar changes, with p= 0.002 (Z= -3.149)
compared to p=0.239 (Z= -1.178), respectively for the TM
group and the UC group. For the sub-score self-efficacy a
significant improvement was found for both groups with
p<0.001 and p=0.028, respectively for the TM group and the
UC group.
E.
Quality of life and depression
For both groups, a negative correlation was found
between the sub-score of QoL and depression (p=0.025,
Pearson - 115) and QoL and anxiety (p=0.036, Pearson -
.107), meaning that the presence of anxiety as well as
depression
is
related
to
lower
QoL.
No
significant
correlation between anxiety and depression scores and OVS
or CSS was found.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this study it was found that telemonitoring positively
influences depression and anxiety scores, meaning that
telemonitored patients were less depressed during whole
follow-up, and less anxious at 3 and 6 months after the start
of the study. The difference in depression indicates that
telemonitoring seems to slightly decrease patients’ moods.
Our finding of 42% depressed patients was comparable
with the prevalence range of 9% to 54% in a Caucasian
population as reported in a recent meta-analysis [3]. Mean
depression level of all patients at baseline was slightly
higher compared to the preliminary results in 101 patients
investigated at 3 months after start of the study. However,
the same course is demonstrated for the results after 3
months, being a slight decrease of depression scores in the
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TM group and stable level of depression scores in the UC
group [17]. Initially, positive results were found for QoL,
yet after correction for baseline differences disappeared.
The effects on the self-efficacy were congruent with the
self-efficacy
findings
described
elsewhere
[20].
Telemonitoring
improves
the
communication
between
patient and health care professional; this may result in an
increased
self-efficacy.
The
TEHAF-study
primarily
focused on the effects of telemonitoring on heart failure
(re)admissions,
mortality,
and
cost-effectiveness.
No
significant differences were found for hospitalizations and
mortality, yet the number of contacts with the heart failure
nurse
was
significantly
lower
for
patients
using
telemonitoring. Sub-analysis showed differences for some
sub-groups, as living with partner and heart failure duration
less than 18 months [18]. No difference between groups was
found for costs, however sub-group analyses showed that
telemonitoring is more effective in patients with heart
failure duration less than 18 months [19]. Also, a significant
improvement was found for knowledge and self-care, and
for some domains of adherence [20].
Myers [12] performed a non-randomised study with a
follow-up time of 2 months and compared the results of 83
telemonitored patients with historical patients receiving
usual care. Reported results included pre- and post-test
results of the telemonitoring group, measured by the Short
Form 36 item health survey (SF-36). They found an
improved QoL in seven of the parameters, yet could not
determine whether the change was directly related to
telemonitoring. The results of the current study may
considered
to
be
due
to
telemonitoring
because
characteristics
of
patients
were
comparable,
type-D
personality included, and correction for baseline values was
performed. Noteworthy in the study of Myers [12] was the
relative high number of patients (n=19) not completing the
short study in 2 months. Seven patients (37%) withdrew
while they were anxious and upset, which is in contrast with
our study with a withdrawal rate of 18% during the follow-
up of one year. Benatar [11] followed patients for 3 months
and compared the outcomes of 216 patients receiving home
nurse
visits
versus
nurse
telemanagement.
QoL
was
measured with the Minnesota Living with Heart Failure
Questionnaire (MLHFQ) and depression with the HADS.
They found improved QoL for both groups when compared
pre- en post-intervention, yet no differences between
groups. This finding implies that telemonitoring has the
same effect on QoL as face-to-face contacts between patient
and care professional.
Depression scores showed an improvement between
groups in favour of the telemonitoring group comparable
with our study results. Goldberg e.a. [30] provided 138
patients, with a mean age of 59 years (unpublished standard
deviation), for 6 months with a telemonitoring system of the
second generation, existing of an electronic scale and
individualised questions about symptoms; almost 75% of
the patients were in NYHA class III. No significant effects
in QoL were measured within groups, however in the
telemonitoring group QoL trended towards improvement.
No difference between groups was described. Within 48
hours post discharge, Woodend et al. [31] equipped 121
patients with heart failure with a telemonitoring system.
Mean age was 66 (±11) years and most patients were in
NYHA class III. The intervention consisted of 3 months
video conferencing with a nurse, daily transmission of
weight and blood pressure, and periodic transmission of 12-
lead electrocardiogram. Measurements were performed at
baseline, after 3 and 12 months. Conferences between nurse
and patient were more frequent in the first few weeks after
discharge. QoL was measured with the SF-36. For both
groups QoL improved significantly after one year. Between
groups
a
significant
difference
in
favor
of
the
videoconference
group
was
found
after
3
months,
disappearing after one year. This may be interpreted as
telemonitoring having effects during the monitoring time,
yet effects were disappearing on the longer term. This may
suggest that patients may continuously need the system to
retain the effects on QoL. Unfortunately, authors did not
report which care was delivered after the 3 months of
videoconference, which in this context is an important issue.
The most principal differences with our study were the
post discharge inclusion and the six-year younger mean age
which both independently may have influenced the results.
Another multi-centre randomised trial is studied [13] with a
follow-up of 6 months in 315 patients. Mean age was 76.5
(±7) years and 60% were female. QoL was measured by the
SF-36 and the KCCQ. No differences between groups were
found for SF-36 neither for the KCCQ. Koehler [32] et al.
provided 354 patients, mean age 67 (±10.7) years, with a
telemonitoring device of the third generation telehealth and
followed them for 24 months. They investigated QoL with
the SF-36 questionnaire and depression with the Patient
Health Questionnaire 9-item (PHQ9). No effects were found
for depression, and an overall benefit was found for one of
the QoL subscales, the first being in contrast with our
effects on depression. The Whole System Demonstrator
telehealth trial [33] included 1,650 patients with COPD,
diabetes or heart failure in 365 general practices, in four
primary care trusts in the United Kingdom. Patients were
followed
with
second-generation
telehealth
devices.
Measurements were performed at baseline, after 4 and 12
months. QoL was measured by the SF-12 and EQ-5D
questionnaires, anxiety by the brief state-trait anxiety
inventory
(STAI)
and
depression
by
the
center
for
epidemiological
studies-depression
scale
CESD-10.
Analysing the data, no disease specific distinctions were
made. No differences were found for QoL, neither for
anxiety or depression scores.
As mentioned earlier, the Health Buddy® system is a
telemonitoring system from the first generation. Several
devices belonging to the first, second and third generations
are discussed above. No structurally improved effects on
QoL or depression have been found in studies using higher
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

generation devices. Despite this is not the focus of our
study, one may remark that the increased possibilities due to
the evolution of telemonitoring systems has shown to lack
influence regarding the effects on QoL and depression. At
the other hand, underutilization of telemonitoring may occur
due to a lacking clarity about the best fitting program for
individual patients and equally so that the caregivers are
lacking experience in using telemonitoring [34].
V. LIMITATIONS
The power of this study was calculated on a reduction of
hospitalizations. Therefore, this study may be insufficiently
powered to detect differences in QoL. Besides, 21% of our
study population did not finish the study. The follow-up
time
of
12
months
may
be
insufficient
to
realize
improvements in QoL and depression scores. This study
was performed to detect differences between groups. If
within-group differences were found without significant
different
between
groups,
they
are
not
necessarily
attributable to the kind of care delivery. The use of standard
questions by researchers can lead to "structural bias" and
false representation, where the data actually reflect the view
of the researcher instead of the participating subject
[35][36][37]. Preset answers will not necessarily reflect how
people really feel about a subject and in some cases might
just be the closest match to preconceived hypotheses. As a
consequence, the results of a quantitative questionnaire
design may be statistically significant but at risk to be
practically insignificant and their clinical relevance may be
unclear, especially in aspects as quality of life and
depression [35][36][37].
VI. PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE STUDY
The Health Buddy® system has shown to reduce anxiety
for a short term and to control depression. Therefore, it may
be useful to apply telemonitoring to anxious patients to
reduce
anxiety and
to
control
depression.
This
may
particularly be meaningful for patients waiting for a referral
to a professional or a mental health caregiver.
The finding that type-D personality influences QoL
resonates the need of defining personality in order to detect
it as a risk factor for diminished QoL [13][14][16].
Telemonitoring systems should be improved in their
ability to pay attention for anxiety and depression, and
integrate in depth dialogues or guidance how to deal with
depressive symptoms or anxiety. This may easily enhance
the positive effects of telemonitoring and alleviate the
burden on patients and their environment, on health care
resources and costs.
VII. CONCLUSION
The
Health
Buddy®
system
focusing
on
patients’
experiences has proven to be suitable to positively influence
some aspects of QoL, to reduce patients’ depression and to
reduce
patients’
anxiety
scores
in
the
short
run.
Furthermore, it was found that QoL is negatively affected
by the presence of Type-D personality, and that depression
and
anxiety
negatively
affect
the
sub
score
QoL.
TABLE II.
ANXIETY AND DEPRESSION SCORES
Baseline
3m
6m
12m
Anxiety*
UC group (n= 167)
8.26
8.27
8.19
8.04
TM group (n= 186 )
7.93
7.49
7.43
7.63
P-value
.344
.028
.028
.226
BL-correct
.041
.053
.65
Depression*
UC group (n= 167)
7.11
7.12
7.28
7.66
TM group (n=186 )
6.96
6.44
6.23
6.78
P-value
.725
.128
.030
.074
BL-correct
.047
.011
.028
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE III.
QUALITY OF LIFE SCORES
Baseline
3 m
6 m
12 m
Physical limitation (PLS)
UC-group
(n=186)
53.9
53.7
53.6
52.4
TM-group
(n=167)
55.8
57.9
57.1
56.5
P-value
0.533
0.148
0.230
0.189
BL-correct
0.080
0.187
0.306
Symptom burden score (SBS)
UC-group
66.0
68.9
68.2
66.9
TM-group
69.0
74.6
72.2
71.8
P-value
0.233
0.019
0.130
0.076
BL-correct
0.107
0.314
0.542
Symptom Frequency Score (SFS)
UC-group
64.5
66.6
67.7
66.0
TM-group
66.5
72.7
69.5
69.3
P-value
0.460
0.019
0.511
0.253
BL-correct
0.007
0.923
0.789
Self-efficacy score (SES)
UC-group
75.7
80.5
79.5
79.1
TM-group
80.9
85.6
86.3
85.0
P-value
0.018
0.015
0.001
0.010
BL-correct
0.320
0.122
0.255
Quality of life (QOL)
UC-group
58.6
64.3
63.0
60.9
TM-group
62.8
67.6
68.5
67.8
P-value
0.142
0.255
0.059
0.028
BL-correct
0.997
0.247
0.177
Total symptom score (TST)
UC-group
65.2
67.1
67.9
66.4
TM-group
67.8
73.6
70.9
70.4
P-value
0.314
0.014
0.250
0.136
BL-correct
0.020
0.542
0.619
Social limitation score (SLS)
UC-group
52.7
57.7
55.8
53.7
TM-group
57.1
62.0
63.1
61.0
P-value
0.171
0.169
0.025
0.030
BL-correct
0.685
.0109
0.181
Overall summary score (OVS)
UC-group
57.6
60.7
60.0
58.2
TM-group
61.0
65.2
64.7
63.8
P-value
0.174
0.071
0.061
0.037
BL-correct
0.238
0.164
0.208
Clinical summary score (CSS)
UC-group
59.7
61.7
62.8
62.1
TM-group
61.9
66.8
66.3
67.4
P-value
0.365
0.053
0.149
0.057
BL-correct
0.015
0.303
0.394
OVS=PLS & TST & QOL & SLS
CSS = PLS & TST
TST = SFS & SBS
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

REFERENCES
[1]
I.
Lesman-Leegte,
T.
Jaarsma,
J.C.
Coyne,
H.L
Hillege,D.J. Van Veldhuisen, R. Sanderman. Quality of
life
and
depressive
symptoms
in
the
elderly:
A
comparison between patients with heart failure and age-
and gender-matched community. Journal of cardiac
failure 2009; 15: 17-23.
[2]
I. Lesman-Leegte , T. Jaarsma, R. Sanderman , G.
Linssen, D.J. Van Veldhuisen. Depressive symptoms
are prominent among elderly hospitalised heart failure
patients. The European Journal of Heart Failure 2006;
8: 634-40.
[3]
T. Rutledge, V.A. Reis, S.E. Linke, B.H. Greenberg,
P.J. Mills. Depression in Heart Failure: A Meta-
Analytic review of prevalence, intervention effects, and
associations with clinical outcomes. Journal of the
American College of Cardiology 2006; 48 (8).
[4]
American Psychiatric Association KE. Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders. Fourth Edition,
Text revision. Washington DC’ American Psychiatric
Association; 2000.
[5]
G. Thrall, G.Y. Lip, D. Carroll, D. Lane. Depression,
Anxiety, and Quality of Life in Patients With Atrial
Fibrillation. Chest 2007; 132(4): 1259-1264.
[6]
D. Felce, J. Perry. Quality of life: Its definition and
measurement: Research in Developmental Disabilities
1995; 16(1): 51–74
[7]
S.S. Pedersen, C. Herrmann-Lingen , P. de Jonge, M.
Scherer. Type D personality is a predictor of poor
emotional quality of life in primary care heart failure
patients independent of depressive symptoms and New
York Heart Association functional class. Journal of
Behavioral Medicine 2010 Feb; 33(1): 72-80.
[8]
S.S. Pedersen, J. Denollet. Type D personality, cardiac
events, and impaired quality of life: a review. European
Journal
of
Cardiovascular
Prevention
and
Rehabilitation 2003; 10: 241–248.
[9]
A.H. Starrenburg, K. Kraaier, S.S. Pedersen, M. van
Hout,
M. Scholten, J. van der Palen. Association of
Psychiatric History and Type D Personality with
Symptoms of Anxiety, Depression, and Health Status
Prior to ICD Implantation. International Journal of
Behavioral Medicine 2012; DOI 10.1007/s12529-012-
9244-3.
[10] J. Denollet, S.U. Sys, N. Stroobant, H. Rombouts, T.C.
Gillebert, D.L. Brutsaert. Personality as independent
predictor of long term mortality in patients with
coronary heart disease. Lancet 1996; 347 (8999): 417-
421.
[11] D. Benatar, M. Bondmass, J. Ghitelman, B. Avitall.
Outcomes of chronic heart failure. Archives of Internal
Medicine 2003; 163: 347-352.
[12] S. Myers, R.W. Grant, N.E. Lugn, B. Holbert, J.C.
Kvedar. Impact of home-based telemonitoring on the
care of patients with heart congestive failure. Home
Health Care Management & Practice 2006; 18: 444-
451.
[13] O.Z. Soran, I.L. Piňa, G.A. Lamas, S.F. Kelsey, F.
Selzer,
J.
Pilotte,
J.R.
Lave,
A.M.
Feldman.
A
randomised clinical trial of the clinical effects of
enhanced heart failure monitoring using a computer-
based telephonic monitoring system in older minorities
and women. Journal of Cardiac Failure 2008; 14: 711-
717.
[14] S. Scalvini, S. Capomolla, E. Zanelli, M. Benigno, D.
Domenighini, L. Paletta, F. Glisenti, A. Giordano.
Effect of home-based telecardiology on chronic heart
failure: costs and outcomes. Journal of telemedicine and
telecare 2005; 11(suppl.1): S1:16-18.
[15] K.A. Schwarz, L.C. Mion, D. Hudock, G. Litman.
Telemonitoring of heart failure patients and their
caregivers: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Progress
of Cardiovascular Nursing 2008; 23(1): 18-26.
[16] C.
Delaney,
B.
Apostolidis.
Pilot
testing
of
a
multicomponent home care intervention for older adults
with heart failure: an academic clinical partnership.
Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing 2010; 25(5): E27-40.
[17] B.L.
Ramaekers,
J.J.
Boyne,
A.P.
Gorgels,
H.J.
Vrijhoef. Adherence among telemonitored patients with
heart
failure
to
pharmacological
and
nonpharmacological recommendations. Telemedicine
and e-health 2009: 15; 517-524.
[18] J.J Boyne, H.J. Vrijhoef, R. Wit, G. De Weerd, J.
Kragten, A.P. Gorgels. Tailored telemonitoring in
patients with heart failure: results of a multicentre
randomized controlled trial. The European Journal of
Heart Failure 2012; 14: 791-801.
[19] J.J Boyne, A.D. Asselt, H.J. Vrijhoef, G. De Weerd,
J.Kragten, A.P.Gorgels. Cost-Effectiveness of
telemonitoring versus usual care in patients with heart
failure. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 2013;
19(5):242-8.
[20] J.J Boyne, H.J. Vrijhoef, M.Spreeuwenberg, G. De
Weerd, J.Kragten, A.P.Gorgels. Effects of telemoni-
toring on heart failure patients’knowledge, self-care,
self-efficacy and adherence: a randomized controlled
trial. Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing 2013; online 29
April 2013;DOI10.1177/147451513487464
[21] Anker SD, Koehler F, Abraham WT. Telemedicine and
remote management of patients with heart failure.
Lancet 2011; 378:731-9.
[22] J.J. Boyne, H.J. Vrijhoef, R. Wit, A.P. Gorgels.
Telemonitoring in patients with heart failure, the
TEHAF
study:
Study
protocol
of
an
ongoing
prospective randomised trial. International Journal of
Nursing Studies 2011; 48: 94-9.
[23] World Medical Association. Declaration of Helsinki:
ethical principle for medical research involving human
subjects. 59th WMA General Assembly, Seoul 2008;
(last access 07-01-2014)
http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/
[24] Clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00502255). (last access 07-01-
2014)
[25] K. Dickstein, et al. ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis
and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure.
European Journal of Heart Failure 2008; 933–989.
[26] C.P.Green, C.B.Porter, D.R Bresnahan, J.A.Spertus.
Development
and
evaluation
of
the
Kansas
City
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire: a new health status
measure for heart failure. Journal of the American
College of Cardiology2000;35(5):1245-55
[27] A.S. Zigmond, R.P. Snaith. The Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale. Acta psychiatrica Scandinavica 1983;
67: 361-370.
[28] J.Denollet. DS14: Standard assesment of negatively
affectivity, social inhibition, and type D personality.
Psychosomatic Medicine 2005; 67: 89-97.
[29] J. Twisk, W. de Vente. Attrition in longitudinal studies:
How to deal with missing data. Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology 2002; 55: 329–337.
[30] L.R. Goldberg, J.D. Piette, M.N. Walsh, T.A. Frank,
B.E. Jaski, A.L. Smith, R. Rodriguez, D.M. Mancini M,
L.A. Hopton, E.J. Orav EJ, E. Loh E. Randomized trial
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

of a daily electronic home monitoring system in
patients with advanced heart failure: The Weight
Monitoring in Heart Failure (WHARF) trial. American
Heart Journal 2003; 146: 705–12.
[31] K. Woodend, H. Sherrard, M. Fraser, L. Stuewe, T.
Cheung, C. Struthers. Telehome monitoring in patients
with
cardiac
disease
who
are
at
high
risk
of
readmission. Heart & Lung 2008; January/february.
[32] Koehler, S. Winkler, M. Schieber, U. Sechtem, K.
Stangl, M. Böhm, H. Boll, G.Baumann, M. Honold, K.
Koehler, G. Gelbrich, B.A. Kirwan, S. Anker. Impact of
Remote Telemedical Management on Mortality and
Hospitalizations in Ambulatory Patients With Chronic
Heart
Failure:
The
Telemedical
Interventional
Monitoring
in
Heart
Failure
Study.
DOI:10.1161/circulationaha.111.01847329.
[33] M. Cartwright, S.P. Hirani, R. Lorna, L. Rixon, M.
Beynon, H. Doll, P. Bower, M. Bardsley, A. Steventon,
M. Knapp, C. Henderson, A. Rogers, C. Sanders, R.
Fitzpatrick, J. Barlow, S.P. Newman.
Effect of telehealth on quality of life and psychological
outcomes
over
12
months
(Whole
Systems
Demonstrator telehealth questionnaire study): nested
study of patient reported outcomes in a pragmatic,
cluster randomised controlled trial. British Medical
Journal 2013; 346: 653.
[34] J.J.Boyne, H.J.Vrijhoef. Implementing telemonitoring
in Heart Failure Care: Barriers from the perspectives of
Patients,
Healthcare
Professionals
and
Healthcare
Organizations. Current heart failure reporst 2013;
10(3):254-61
[35] Brians, L. Craig et al. Empirical Political Analysis:
Quantitative and Qualitative Research Methods. 8th ed.
Boston, MA: Longman, 2011.
[36] McNabb, E. David. Research Methods in Public
Administration
and
Nonprofit
Management:
Quantitative and
Qualitative Approaches. 2nd
ed.
Armonk,
NY:
M.E.
Sharpe,
2008.Singh,
Kultar.
Quantitative Social Research Methods. Los Angeles,
CA: Sage, 2007.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Play for Health 2.0: Evolving P4H to a Web Environment Using HTML5 and 
JavaScript
Pedro Ferriol Monserrat, Francisco Tous Llull, 
Miguel Ángel Alcalde Velado, Marc Melià Aguiló, 
Jaume Sastre Terrassa 
Health Department  
Fundació Bit 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain 
pferriol@ibit.org, xtous@ibit.org, malcalde@ibit.org, 
mmelia@ibit.org, jsastre@ibit.org 
Maria Àngels Farreny Balcells, Eva Ponce Martínez, 
Begoña Llano de la Peña 
Department of Rehabilitation 
Hospital Son Llàtzer 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain 
mfarreny@hsll.es, eponce@hsll.es, bllano@hsll.es 
Ramón Mas Sansó 
Mathematics and Computer Science Department  
University of the Balearic Islands 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain 
ramon.mas@uib.es
 
Abstract— Play for Health (P4H) is a telemedicine service 
consisting of a telerehabilitation platform to improve cognitive 
and physical deficits through the use of “serious games” and 
various videogames controllers. P4H is based on a client-server 
architecture. Its client-side application was developed in C++ 
using Ogre3D graphic engine and runs on GNU/Linux. The use 
of these technologies posed some hardware and software 
restrictions that were a threat to the continuity of the platform. 
The birth of HTML5 meant a revolution in the way of creating 
web applications due to its suitability to develop dynamic and 
multi-platform applications. The incorporation of HTML5 and 
JavaScript to P4H supposed a new client-side application that 
takes advantage of HTML5 features to overcome the 
limitations and functionalities that P4H had at that moment. 
Keywords - Telerehabilitation; serious gaming; videogame 
controllers; HTML5; JavaScript. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Play for Health (P4H) is an integrated telerehabilitation 
system offering motor and cognitive training through serious 
games and multiple interaction devices [1]. P4H was 
presented at this congress in 2011. It is designed to be 
deployed at home or in clinical centers, and its philosophy is 
to rely on commonly available commercial off-the shelf 
videogame interaction devices (e.g., Kinect, WiiMote, dance 
mats). 
P4H is based on a client-server architecture consisting of 
a distributed application structure that partitions workload 
among a provider of the service, called server, and the 
requesters of this service, called clients. P4H server is 
remotely accessed by clinicians through a web browser to 
program customized therapies for patients, assess their 
progress and adjust training parameters according to the 
evolution of each patient. P4H client is the application used 
by the patients to perform their therapies in an easy and 
intuitive way. The client manages therapies, captures 
different parameters during the execution of the exercises 
and sends them to the server. 
Before its evolution, P4H client was a standalone 
application developed with the compiled object-oriented 
C++ programming language, and used the scene-oriented 
graphic rendering engine Ogre3D [2]. This standalone 
application only ran on computers with GNU/Linux Kubuntu 
distribution installed and presented important limitations. 
P4H is a continuously evolving technology and its 
functionality is constantly being increased in order to cover a 
wider range of pathologies. Technological advances that 
allow to reduce deployment costs, to overcome limitations or 
to help the clinicians in making their decisions are 
incorporated to P4H. 
HTML5 [3] is the fifth revision of the HTML markup 
language used for structuring and presenting content for the 
World Wide Web (WWW) and it is a core technology of the 
Internet. Its emergence has revolutionized web development 
due to its new tools and capabilities for creating dynamic 
web applications. 
JavaScript [4] is an interpreted computer programming 
language that is directly executed on a computer without 
being previously compiled. JavaScript can be inserted into 
HTML pages and can be executed by all modern web 
browsers. JavaScript capabilities allow to interact with users, 
control the browser, communicate asynchronously with a 
server and alter the document content displayed. 
The combination of HTML5 and JavaScript allows 
creating powerful multi-platform web applications, capable 
to run in a browser regardless of the hardware and software 
on the computer where they are executed. The incorporation 
of these technologies to P4H resulted on P4H 2.0. This is an 
evolution of P4H which maintains and expands its 
functionalities and solves many of its limitations. 
In this document, P4H is described with special emphasis 
on the limitations of the client application that jeopardize 
their survival. Next, P4H 2.0 is presented and how the 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

inclusion of HTML5 and JavaScript on the client overcame 
these limitations. Finally, the conclusion and future work are 
presented. 
II. 
P4H: STANDALONE MODE 
P4H development started in January 2009 under the 
framework of the strategy designed by Fundació iBit (former 
name for Fundació Bit) to carry out health processes in the 
context of rehabilitation using an open and scalable platform 
based on ICTs. 
As 
a 
result, 
it 
was 
obtained 
a 
client-server 
telerehabilitation system that provides the services and 
resources needed to carry out at-home personalized 
rehabilitation programs, their adaptation to patient’s 
evolution, and their supervision by the therapeutic team. 
The client application is a standalone C++ compiled 
program with an architecture based on plugins in order to be 
easily extensible to new games and interaction devices. The 
communication among these plugins is done across a 
message-oriented bus. The main components of this 
application are: 
• 
Core: Responsible for managing the essential 
procedures of the system and organizing the 
execution of plugins through services. 
• 
Content plugins: They implement multimedia 
videogames developed jointly by clinical and 
technical partners, following the “Serious Gaming“ 
[5] philosophy to work on the cognitive component 
of the rehabilitation process and on patient 
motivation. Fig. 1 shows a screenshot of one of the 
videogames included in this client. It consists of 
doing a puzzle selecting the pieces with the 
movement of a limb. 
• 
Interaction Method plugins: They allow the patients 
to interact with the videogames and to work on the 
physical component of the rehabilitation process. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Puzzle videogame’s screenshot 
The P4H platform also provides a SDK (Software 
Development Kit), which includes an API (Application 
Program Interface) for the development of new plugins. 
So far, P4H was evaluated in Hospital Son Llàtzer in 
Mallorca (Spain) [6]. It is also used as a technological base 
for the exergaming system developed in the project CuPiD 
(Closed-loop 
system 
for 
personalized 
and 
at-home 
rehabilitation of people with Parkinson’s disease) financed 
by European Union - Seventh Framework Programme [7]. 
And, for more than 2 years, it has been used in several health 
centers in Mallorca by more than 100 patients with different 
pathologies among which stand out Stroke (53 patients), 
Parkinson Disease (11 patients) and Multiple Sclerosis (9 
patients). 
With P4H, the intended goal was achieved and it was 
obtained a low-cost open telerehabilitation system based on 
the use of videogames, fully developed using open-source 
software, and capable of interacting with most popular 
videogame devices. 
Despite the good acceptance by the patients and the 
clinicians, the client application of P4H has some technical 
limitations that make it difficult to maintain and expand the 
whole platform: 
A. Dependence on Linux community 
It was decided to work with a stable and widely used 
Linux distribution, which was easy-to-use and familiar to 
Microsoft Windows users. Kubuntu, from Canonical Ltd [8], 
was the distribution that best fitted the project’s 
requirements. 
The release every 6 months of a new Kubuntu version 
became a handicap. It forced us to periodically upgrade the 
client application, in order to prevent it to become obsolete 
and keep the system compatible with new hardware 
products. Every upgrade has required to: 
• 
Upgrade Ogre 3D graphic engine. 
• 
Update dependences with external code libraries. 
• 
Update scripts and internal code. 
• 
Recompile code libraries and troubleshooting. 
Kubuntu 12.04 LTS version, with 5 years of support and 
security updates, is the operating system currently used in 
order to minimize the impact of these upgrades. 
Besides, using code developed by the GNU/Linux 
community allowed us to reduce the development times, but 
it increased the time and resources we had to spend 
correcting errors and adapting that code to the project’s 
needs. These efforts were even greater when we had to 
update these libraries, replace them because their project was 
canceled, or upgrade the operating system. 
B. High dependence on hardware 
Ogre3D is a software framework which offers tools that 
help the developers in tasks such as design, development and 
representation of videogames providing services as 2D and 
3D rendering, sound, artificial intelligence or scenes 
management, among others. Using this engine has been a 
key factor to the development of P4H, while it also limited it 
with its hardware restrictions. 
Ogre3D requires a dedicated graphic card NVIDIA 
Geforce 2, 4 or higher; or an ATI Radeon 7500, 9600 or 
higher. The lack of manufacturer drivers compatible with the 
operating system used to run the client application forced us 
to use non-official drivers. These drivers were sometimes 
difficult to install, and they turned out not to be fully 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

compatible with the graphic cards used, or, sometimes, they 
did not achieve the required performance from the cards. 
Because of that, as well as hardware evolution and the 
appearance of new technologies (i.e., NVIDIA® Optimus™ 
for laptops), it was necessary to invest a considerable amount 
of resources to adapt P4H to these technologies. 
Besides, that situation got worse because of the lack of 
ATI Radeon drivers for Kubuntu 12.04. 
Therefore, the range of computers compatible with P4H 
was severely reduced. That often means an increase of the 
deployment costs because of the purchase of new computers 
by the patients. 
C. Use of compiled code 
When it came to plan and design P4H, compiled 
programming languages were the ones that best suited the 
project’s requirements. The choice of C++ was determined 
by Ogre3D engine requirements. 
Although the development of P4H would not have been 
possible without using a compiled language, during the last 
years, some limitations became evident. 
C++ programming language has a slow learning curve, 
which makes it difficult for new programmers to join the 
development team. 
Once the application is developed, or a new featured is 
added to it, the debugging, correction, and improvement 
process is not flexible, and it is time consuming, because of 
the code complexity and the need of recompiling and 
reinstalling the application every time. 
To make the installation and updating processes faster 
and more flexible, it was necessary to implement a Debian 
packages repository. This way, these processes became faster 
and simpler, and it made it possible to remotely control them. 
However, the installation and the update of the application 
can still be too complex for some users, especially when it 
comes to the installation in patients' homes. 
 
All these technical limitations represent significant costs 
of development and maintenance that make the system not 
competitive, and they hinder its growth potential. After 
analyzing and comparing the costs of continuing with the 
current client application or shifting to a web environment, 
we concluded it was more efficient and economical, at 
medium and long term, to change the technology used in the 
client application and invest efforts in the development of a 
new client.   
III. 
P4H 2.0: WEB MODE 
P4H 2.0 has been developed throughout year 2013 with 
the aim of overcoming the limitations of P4H, and making it 
evolve to a more competitive and transferable system. In 
particular, they have been pursued the following goals: 
• 
Lower down the deployment costs: In P4H, these 
costs went from 1500€ to 2000€ per kit depending 
on the plugins it had to include. Most of the 
investing was due to the purchase of a TV screen 
and a computer that met all the hardware 
requirements. On the other hand, P4H 2.0 runs on a 
web browser independently of the hardware. This 
makes the access easier to a greater number of users, 
and it reduces installation costs, because it can run 
on patient's own computer. 
• 
Increase the number of pathologies treated: This 
depends on the number of videogames and 
interaction methods available in the platform. As 
mentioned before, in P4H the development of a new 
videogame or a new interaction method plugin was a 
tough and resource consuming task. In P4H 2.0, they 
are used programming and support tools with much 
less complexity. 
• 
Improve usability: In global terms, the usability of 
P4H was good and well accepted by a large number 
of users. However, the installation and updating 
processes on the client application had some 
technical difficulties that required a technician to be 
carried out. On the other hand, P4H 2.0 only needs a 
web browser. 
From a technical point of view, P4H 2.0 keeps the server-
side application to manage patients and therapies as well as 
the plugin-based architecture in the client application to carry 
out the therapy as in P4H. 
Thus, the main difference between both modes is the 
technology used in the client application. P4H 2.0, instead of 
a compiled programming language and Ogre3D engine, has 
been developed using a scripting language such as JavaScript 
and Cocos2d-HTML5 engine [9]. 
Cocos2d-HTML5 is the HTML5 version of Cocos2d-x 
engine [10]. The main reasons to use this engine were:  
• 
It uses JavaScript, HTML5 and Cascading Style 
Sheets (CSS). This speeds up the development of 
web applications and eases its maintenance. The use 
of 
these 
technologies 
allows 
developing 
multiplatform applications that only require a 
compatible web browser. 
• 
It is an active project, well documented and with a 
wide community of users. 
• 
It is open source under MIT License [11]. 
A. Content plugins 
Resulting of the experience acquired with P4H and the 
analysis carried out with the medical team, the following 
videogames classification was established for P4H 2.0: 
1) Sequencing: These are games in which the patient has 
to plan and execute a sequence of tasks to reach a goal. For 
instance, doing constructions or daily living activities. 
2) Memory: In memory games, the patient has to 
remember sequences of images, sounds or elements positions 
in order to achieve a goal. For instance, pairing images or 
repeating a melody. 
3) Attention: In these games, the patient has to choose 
certain elements on the screen according to a selection 
criterion. For instance, choosing elements depending on their 
morphology or applying interferences as Stroop effect. 
4)  Puzzles: When playing these games, the patient has 
to build a figure by correctly combining their pieces in which 
it has been split. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

At the moment of writing this paper, 2 videogames have 
already been developed according to this classification:  
• 
Images: It consists in finding pairs in a board of 
cards. Fig. 2 shows a game’s screenshot with some 
pairs already matched. 
• 
Colours: It consists in touching objects in a scenario 
depending on certain selection criteria. Fig. 3 shows 
a game’s screenshot in Go/No-go game mode where 
the user has to touch the green spots. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Images videogame’s screenshot 
 
Figure 3.  Colurs videogame’s screenshot 
Although each videogame has its own gameplay, they 
have some points in common: 
• 
Difficulty-level-based configuration: Each level 
consists of a set of parameters with pre-established 
values. They reduce the amount of time needed to 
program the therapies, and they allow implementing 
an automatic level change. Levels have been set after 
analyzing patients performing the games. 
• 
Reward-based system: These rewards are given to 
the patient, as he achieves certain goals related to 
speed, skill or fidelity. The aim of this reward 
system is to encourage patient's motivation and 
adhesion to the system 
• 
Parameter recording: During the execution of the 
therapy activities, a lot of data relating to times, 
successes, and errors is collected. This data is 
processed at the client application and sent to the 
server where it will be stored and delivered to the 
clinicians in the form of charts. 
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) is used to store the 
configuration values for the difficulty levels and rewards, as 
well as to store the recorded parameters and exchange this 
data with the server. 
B. Interaction Method plugins 
The key feature of P4H was its capability to integrate and 
combine different interaction methods and videogames. This 
allowed for working with the therapies cognitive and physic 
components independently. Keeping this feature in P4H 2.0 
has been a fundamental requisite. 
3 different interaction methods have been developed: 
• 
Kinect: For body movements and postures detection 
using the Microsoft XBox console 3D camera. 
• 
Dance pad: For lower limbs movement detection by 
detecting the pressure made on the sensitive areas of 
a dance mat. 
• 
Mouse: For fine movement detection of the upper 
limbs using a computer mouse. 
The main technical difficulty found in P4H 2.0 was the 
integration of these devices with the videogames that run on 
a web browser. Especially in the case of the Kinect camera.  
To integrate the Kinect camera to the client application, 
the Zigfu Development Kit (ZDK) [12] has been used to 
develop the plugin which accesses to OpenNI API [13] 
through JavaScript calls. 
OpenNI (Open Natural Interaction) is an open source 
framework that provides APIs to develop applications that 
interacts with the user in a natural way. This framework 
makes it easier to communicate with devices sensors, such as 
those of Kinect or ASUS Xtion, and the perception 
middleware in charge of analyzing and understanding the 
data collected from the scene through the use of computer 
vision algorithms. 
At low level, all interaction methods must work with 
native code to be able to communicate with the videogames 
controllers. This implies the installation of a driver for each 
of the interaction methods, and it is the only connection 
between P4H 2.0 and the operating system which it is 
running on. Drivers for all the developed interaction methods 
are available for Microsoft Windows 7 or higher.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The main result of this work is an HTML5, CSS and 
JavaScript application that allows patients to carry out their 
rehabilitation therapies at home playing videogames on a 
web browser using different interaction methods. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Compared to P4H, P4H 2.0 achieved the following goals: 
• 
Make the client application independent of the 
hardware on which it runs. This has significantly 
reduced the compatibility restriction of P4H, which 
implies a considerable decrease of the installation 
costs and allows more patients to use the application 
with the computer they already had at home. In these 
cases the cost of acquisition of the system has been 
reduced to the cost of the videogame controllers 
used. 
• 
Open the platform to other operating systems. The 
execution of the therapies on a web browser makes 
the application independent of the operating system. 
This means that we can reach a larger number of 
users, and that the portability costs to other operating 
systems are eliminated. 
• 
Simplify videogames and interaction methods 
development and maintenance. This means a 
considerable decrease of implementation costs and 
response times to incidences and modifications. 
• 
Eliminate installation and update processes for the 
client application. Now the updates are made on the 
server, and patients only need to access it through 
their browsers. The only installation the user needs 
to carry out is the installation of the interaction 
methods drivers. This installation process is very 
simple, and it is done once and through a setup 
assistant. Thus, the installation and update costs have 
been reduced because it is not required a technician 
to carry it out at patients homes. 
Even though P4H 2.0 is completely developed and 
operative, it is planned to increase its added value with new 
games and interaction methods. 
At the moment, it is been developed a plan to deploy the 
system in some health centers of ib-Salut (Public Health 
Service of the Balearic Islands) as a previous step before its 
deployment at patients’ homes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been funded by the Direcció General 
d'Innovació i Desenvolupament Tecnològic del Govern de 
les Illes Balears, a Balearic Islands (Spain) regional 
government area for promotion of R+D+i. 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Tous et al., “Play for Health: Videogame Platform for 
Motor and Cognitive Telerehabilitation of Patients,” The 
Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine and 
Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2011), IARIA, Feb. 2011, pp 
59-63. 
[2] http://www.ogre3d.org/ 10.03.2014 
[3] http://www.w3.org/html/wg/drafts/html/master/ 08.11.2013 
[4] https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/ 
22.01.2014 
[5] M. Zyda, "From Visual Simulation to Virtual Reality to 
Games," Computer, vol. 38, no. 9, Sept. 2005, pp. 25-32, 
doi:10.1109/MC.2005.297. 
[6] M. A. Farreny et al., “Play for Health (P4H): a new tool for 
telerehabilitation,” Rehabilitación, vol. 46, no. 2, Apr. 2012, 
pp. 135-140, doi: 10.1016/j.rh.2012.01.001. 
[7] F. Tous et al., “Incorporating Rehabilitation of Parkinson's in 
the P4H Platform using a BAN,” XIII Mediterranean 
Conference on Medical and Biological Engineering and 
Computing (MEDICON 2013), IFMBE Proceedings, vol. 41, 
2014, pp. 1481-84, 10.1007/978-3-319-00846-2_366. 
[8] http://www.canonical.com/ 10.03.2014 
[9] http://www.cocos2d-x.org/wiki/Cocos2d-html5 08.11.2013 
[10] http://www.cocos2d-x.org/ 08.11.2013 
[11] http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT 15.01.2014 
[12] http://zigfu.com/en/zdk/overview/ 08.11.2013 
[13] http://www.openni.org/ 08.11.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Eve of 3D Printing in Telemedicine: State of the
Art and Future Challenges
Piero Giacomelli
IT Department
Spac S.p.A.
36071 Arzignano Italy
Email: giacomellip@spac-spa.it
˚Asa Smedberg
The Department of Computer and Systems Sciences
Stockholm University
Kista, Sweden
Email: asasmed@dsv.su.se
Abstract—3D printing has raised a lot of attention from ﬁelds
outside the manufacturing one in the last years. In this paper, we
will illustrate some recent advances of 3D printing technology,
applied to the ﬁeld of telemedicine and remote patient care.
The potentiality of this technology will be detailed without lab
examples. Some crucial aspect such as the regulation of these
devices and the need of some standards will also be discussed.
The purpose of this paper is to present some of the most promising
applications of such technology.
Keywords—
3D printing; telemedicine; manufacturing indus-
try; surgery.
I.
INTRODUCTION
3D printing technology is changing manufacturing models
so fast that traditional industrial processes are chasing this new
wave in a way very similar to the paradox described by the
”Red Queen effect” [1]. The ﬁrst 3D printer was designed as
early as in 1984 by Charles W. Hull (see Fig. 1).
Fig. 1: Early version of a 3D printer
However, it is only in the last ten years that the use of 3D
printing technology outside the traditional manufacturing en-
vironment has started to revolutionize the way we traditionally
turn raw materials into functional devices. The growing wave
of 3D printing technology has been possible because of two
important factors:
•
3D printing technology raised the critical mass that
was needed to make manufacturers willing to sell
their product to individuals and not solely to private
companies.
•
the technology started to become available on the
World Wide Web making it possible for users to share
with one another their recipes to build 3D printings.
Obviously, the two factors are strictly connected in a
closed loop: the more new users share their knowledge on
building and using 3D printers, the more 3D printers’ price will
decrease of a magnitude’s order. The phenomenon can be seen
right now. Following the historical trend, nowadays the mean
cost for a home 3D printer is around 3,500 USD while the ﬁrst
ones were of one or two order of magnitude more expensive.
Originally built for the manufacturing industry, 3D printers
are raising attention also in the biomedical ﬁeld as a tool for
producing biomedical membranes, pills and surgery devices
remotely. In particular, the application of such technology
is forcing new ways to approach the treatment of a patient
both in hospitalization contexts in a laboratory as in home
caring. In these notes, we will survey the currently most
promising applications of 3D printers with an eye focused
on the potentiality of these technologies for the telemedicine
applications. The paper is organized as follows: Section II is
dedicated to a brief description on how a 3D printer works.
Section III will describe some of the most promising use of
the 3D printers in the medical ﬁeld. Section IV will brieﬂy
describe the 3D printers communities. The last section will
describe some barriers that need to be addressed before a large
acceptance of 3D printers in telemedicine could become reality.
Some issues related to regulation will be addressed as well.
II.
HOW 3D PRINTER WORKS
It is not easy to collect in one single deﬁnition all of the
technologies involved in the so called 3D print wave. Probably
the largest part of the commercial 3D printers can be described
as black-box home devices able to create solid objects made
from powderer material. The sufﬁx ”printers” in ”3D printers”
relies on the fact that, from the user interface perspective,
such devices work as common printers in a normal ofﬁce.
The device is connected (using USB) to a PC that codes a
design into a series of processes that are sent to the device that
outputs the object. The main types of 3D printing processes
can be summarized as follows:
1)
Extrusion: uses plastic segment of a metal wire that
is wound on a coil and unreeled to supply material
to an extrusion nozzle.
2)
Granular: uses selective fusion of materials in a
granular bed. The granules are fused layer by layer
until the object is built.
3)
Laminated: Laminates objects using layers of thin
plastic, paper or metal sheets
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

4)
Light polymerized: Vat of liquid polymer is repeat-
edly exposed to light. The exposed liquid polymer
hardens in small increments until the model has been
built. The remaining liquid polymer is drained from
the vat, leaving the solid model. Another system
sprays photopolymer materials in ultra-thin layers
until the model is completed.
Nevertheless, considering the application ﬁled, this is a
very poor deﬁnition. Recently, 3D printing was applied to
produce highly specialized electronic [2], microﬂuidic [3] and
pneumatic devices [4], [5]. But these are still manufacturing
related use of 3D printing technology, where the process
involved is basically of physical type meaning that physical
know processes are wired into a home usable device. Some
major breakthroughs have been presented with the seminal
paper by Symes et al. [6] that use a 3D printer for controlling
chemical synthesis. They use the Rhino3D package and a low-
cost (200 USD) Fab@home robocasting platform to create
and control the synthesises and crystallization of two different
polyoxometalates using a camera to control the reaction. The
most common 3D printers are the ones that use extrusion to
create plastic manufactured objects.
III.
USE OF 3D PRINTERS IN TELEMEDICINE:RECENT
TRENDS
Probably the most interesting use of classical 3D printer
in telemedicine application has been enlightened in a recent
study [7] presented in the New England Journal of Medicine.
This study is particularly interesting because it was the ﬁrst
out-of-the-lab use of a 3D printer in a surgical context. A
newborn was diagnosed with Tracheobronchomalacia [8]
which is hard to treat and rapidly conduce to airway collapse
and respiratory insufﬁciency. At the age of 20 weeks the
baby’s trachea was patched with a trachea splint, to allow
normal ﬂow ventilation. The splint was created from a
biopolymer called polycaprolactone using a 3D printer. The
device was created directly from a CT scan of the baby’s
trachea/bronchus, integrating an image-based computer model
with laser-based 3D printing to produce the splint (see Fig 2).
Fig. 2: Tracheal splint and the patched trachea [7] (p. 2044)
This ﬁrst remote surgery splint creation using 3D printer
can be seen as an astonishing potentially new use of 3D
printers particularly in development countries where due to
the lack of infrastructure for delivery medical prosthesis it
is sometime more easy to have Global System for Mobile
Communications
(GSM)
networks
availability
than
fast
medical device deliveries. For a strange paradox there are
for example African countries where the mobile availability
is
greater
than
the
available
driveways
[9],
and
even
countries where telemedicine applications have been delivered
successfully, for example in malaria monitoring [10].
One of the most interesting cases has been described by
Tam et al. [11]. The surgery involved a 6 year-old girl with
a large scapular osteochondroma complicating congenital
diaphyseal aclasia. Osteochondroma is a type of benign
tumor that consists of cartilage and bone. It is a benign
cartilage-capped outgrowth, connected to bone by a stalk. It is
the most frequently observed neoplasm of the skeleton. They
generally occur at the end of the growth plates of long bones,
often at joints. They most commonly form at the shoulder or
the knee but have been known to occur in the long bones of
the forearm (i.e. the radius and ulna). In this case, the girl
had also a congenital diaphyseal aclasia that is a relatively
rare abnormal condition that affects the skeletal system.
Characterized by multiple exostoses or bony protrusions, it is
inherited as a dominant trait. To help clinician visualize a 3D
model of the tumor before going in vivo with the patient, a
3D model of the scapula was created by post-processing the
Digital Imaging and COmmunications in Medicine (DICOM)
image [11]. Nowadays, DICOM ﬁles are a well established
standard way of manipulating high resolution images of the
human body as output of computed tomography or computed
radiography [12]. In this case, the 3D printer was used to
create a 1:1 3D model of the girl’s tumor to help the clinician
visualize it and test the procedure to adopt before entering
into the operating room (see Fig 3.).
Fig. 3: 3D model of scapula [11] (p. 35)
This ﬁrst step clearly leads to the other still promising
use of this technology, that is, the 3D printing of human
tissue for implantation purpose. A living organ, such as a liver
or the heart itself, is too complex to reproduce as a single
piece outside its connection to the other organs. However, one
promising line for 3D printing is the production of human
bones [13]. Even if the human bones are a living structure,
the fact that some bones replacements like hip replacement are
becoming part of the standard surgery methodology for well
known clinical protocols in ageing related pathologies [14] has
driven research in the area of 3D printers.
In 2011, Anthony Atala [15] took to the stage at the
Technology, Entertainment, Design (TED) conference [16] and
showed the world a 3D printed kidney. Atala’s original 3D
printed kidneys were made with a bio-ink that perfectly repli-
cated kidney tissues, the problem was that these tissues were
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

not vital (living). Without entering too much into details, the
process involved stem cells that have the ability to transform
themselves into other cells like nephrons, neurons and cardio
muscles’ cells. This pluri-potential cells are cultivated in a
solution with a structure as support to allow them to aggregate
in a structured way. As done in other contexts, the cells were
forced to mutate to the desired ones and forced to aggregate
in a structured way. The networking relations that exist in a
human living kidney were lost. Without the ability to create
living organs, 3D printed transplants would remain impossible,
even if this step was a great breakthrough, for the potential
implications of this technology in everyday life. Even more
surprisingly, in 2013 Manoor et al. [17] uses a 3D print to
aggregate cells over the geometry of a human ear. The result
is quite impressive (see Fig 4.).
Fig. 4: 3D printed bionic ear [17] (p. 7)
So, even if creating from scratch a fully functional living
organ to be used for transplantation purpose is far away from
being realized, this ﬁrst step is quite astonishing. Outside the
lab, a goal easier to reach would be the remote creation of
prosthesis made by atossic polymer material. Last but not least,
another promising approach to the use of 3D printer technology
remotely involves the ﬁeld of pharmacy production. With
his seminal paper [6] professor Leroy Cronin demonstrates
the possibility to create complex chemical reactions using a
modiﬁed 3D printer. It was one of the ﬁrst tries to initiate
chemical reactions by printing (i.e. producing) the reagents
directly into a 3D reactionwave matrix. Using this approach it
is possible to control, with a software, the reactionware design,
construction and operation. Another interesting fact is that the
whole proof of concept was created using a low-cost 3D printer
(approx. 2,000 USD) and open-source design software (see Fig
5).
IV.
ONLINE 3D PRINTERS COMMUNITY
In the last section, we have seen some of the recent trends
in using advanced 3D printing techniques. Obviously, some of
them are too complicated and they build materials so difﬁcult
to manage that it is not possible to think of them outside
a controlled lab environment. Despite this, standardized 3D
printing methods using granular plastic material and estrusors
to create plastic manufactured object are right now a reality.
This technology is so well established that entire web sites
like Thinkverse [18] have been created to share the design
for the objects to be printed. So, one user can download
the design schema for a speciﬁc model of 3D printer to
build a plastic made object. The community itself in this
case follows up the line of the open-source so that every
member of the community is supported to share his/her own
design with the other community members. Every member
Fig. 5: Open-source design 3D printer
can upload the instruction and design to be downloaded by
other users who want to build the object. The revenue for
this process is based on the fact that every new recipe and
built object is immediately shared between site surfers without
any need of registration. This means that every newcomer can
build objects without the need of a registration; this step is
required only if he/she has new/modiﬁed recipes to share.
Such communities themselves are now starting to be the object
of research [19]. The interaction on these communities is
driven in some ways by a hacking spirit.The next step in
the area of 3D printer communities will be to go from the
pure technical issues to applications in the medical area. These
communities will attract researchers, designers and clinicians
who want to exchange ideas and experiences from their
everyday situations. It becomes clear from the development
of 3D printing in the health care that it is vital to keep a
viable conversation about hygiene factors, including critical
thinking of existing processes, how to handle materials, and so
on. Online communities-of-practice for collaborative learning
could be about how to produce 3D objects in a safe and
hygienic way, according to standardized routines.
V.
FUTURE POSSIBILITIES AND THE REGULATION
As usual, when technology is running so fast in a way
that has been deﬁned as garage-science, the legislature is
in trouble chasing the different fast changes. If one may
dream, for example, of a 3D printer for building prothesis for
human livings, according to most strict interpretation of the
international law, we need not only to guarantee the safeness
of the whole production process, but also to ensure sanitary
standards that we normally ﬁnd in hospitals and biomedical
manufacturing environments. In the case presented by Zopf et
al. [7], we notice also that, before doing the surgery, the clini-
cians need to have an emergency clearance from the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), being that the polycaprolactone
biopolymer does not have consensus to be used by the FDA.
The production of medical device inside the US is strictly
regulated by the FDA. So, before entering the marketing stage,
one medical device needs to be certiﬁed by the FDA. However,
for a medical device that does not appear in the FDA medical
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

device database [20] the use is possible in particular situations
[21]. In one case, even though the procedure and the material
was not intended to be used on human being, the surgery could
take place because it was considered as compassionate cure.
Outside this context that is somehow a life risk situation, in
normal medical device manufacturing there is both in EU and
US a strict regulation that assures the safeness of the product
itself both for the patient and for the clinician. In the particular
cited case the problem was somehow bypassed by the fact
that the nursing process took place in the US territory under
the auspices of the same agreed regulation. This leads to a
potential interesting law problem, as usual when dealing with
remote assistance. If we imagine a remote extrusion 3D printer
that uses a polymer to build a splint in a region outside the US,
what should be the best way to assure the patient the safeness
of the process and to reduce at minimum the risk of rejection
by the patient? And upon this, in case something goes wrong,
who is the actor being responsible and for what is he/she
responsible? As in most of the latest technology breakthroughs,
for the moment, the technology wave innovation is leading us
to new and unseen possibilities, and not only for the western
countries. Once the tide will lower a little, a regulation should
be introduced to manage the issues arising from the adoption
of this new technology. The time is approaching, because in
February 2014, key patents that currently prevent competition
in the market for the most advanced and functional 3D printers
will expire. When this will happen, when the key patents
on 3D printing via laser sintering will expire, we will most
likely see a huge drop in the price of these devices. This just
happened, when the key patents expired on a more primitive
form of 3D printing, known as fused deposition modelling
(FDM). The result was an explosion of open-source FDM
printers that eventually led to iconic home and hobbyist 3D
printer manufacturers. When the medical use of 3D printers
becomes widely spread, it is time to initiate conversations
about the practitioner’s work with 3D printers. Also, systematic
evaluations of the use of 3D printers will be beneﬁcial to the
area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The ﬁrst author would like to thank Giuseppe Dalla Motta
for his precious discussions on the chemical tasks involved in
the industrial 3D printing process.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. J. Robson, “Complex evolutionary systems and the red queen*,” The
Economic Journal, vol. 115, no. 504, pp. F211–F224, 2005.
[2]
B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, M. J. Motala, X. Guo, S.-I. Park, Y. Xiong,
J. Yoon, R. G. Nuzzo, J. A. Rogers, and J. A. Lewis, “Omnidirectional
printing of ﬂexible, stretchable, and spanning silver microelectrodes,”
Science, vol. 323, no. 5921, pp. 1590–1593, 2009.
[3]
D. Therriault, S. R. White, and J. A. Lewis, “Chaotic mixing in
three-dimensional microvascular networks fabricated by direct-write
assembly,” Nature Materials, vol. 2, pp. 265–271, 2003.
[4]
F. Ilievski, A. D. Mazzeo, R. F. Shepherd, X. Chen, and G. M. White-
sides, “Soft robotics for chemists,” Angewandte Chemie International
Edition, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1890–1895, 2011.
[5]
T. Hasegawa, K. Nakashima, F. Omatsu, and K. Ikuta, “Multi-
directional micro-switching valve chip with rotary mechanism,” Sensors
and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 143, no. 2, pp. 390 – 398, 2008.
[6]
M. Symes, P. Kitson, J. Yan, C. Richmond, G. Cooper, R. Bowman,
T. Vilbrandt, and L. Cronin, “Integrated 3d-printed reactionware for
chemical synthesis and analysis,” Nature Chemistry, vol. 4, pp. 349–
354, 2012.
[7]
D. A. Zopf, S. J. Hollister, M. E. Nelson, R. G. Ohye, and G. E. Green,
“Bioresorbable airway splint created with a three-dimensional printer,”
New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 368, no. 21, pp. 2043–2045,
2013.
[8]
K. A. Carden, P. M. Boiselle, D. A. Waltz, and A. Ernst, “Tracheo-
malacia and tracheobronchomalacia in children and adultsan in-depth
review,” CHEST Journal, vol. 127, no. 3, pp. 984–1005, 2005.
[9]
P. Buys, S. Dasgupta, T. S. Thomas, and D. Wheeler, “Determinants of
a digital divide in sub-saharan africa: A spatial econometric analysis of
cell phone coverage,” World Development, vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1494 –
1505, 2009.
[10]
D. Zurovac, A. Talisuna, and R. Snow, “Mobile Phone Text Messaging:
Tool for Malaria Control in Africa,” vol. 9, no. 2, 2012. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001176
[11]
M. Tam, S. Laycock, D. Bell, and A. Chojnowski, “3-d printout of a
dicom ﬁle to aid surgical planning in a 6 year old patient with a large
scapular osteochondroma complicating congenital diaphyseal aclasia,”
Journal of Radiology Case Reports, vol. 6, no. 1, 2012.
[12]
W. D. Bidgood, S. C. Horii, F. W. Prior, and D. E. Van Syckle,
“Understanding and Using DICOM, the Data Interchange Standard for
Biomedical Imaging,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 199–212, May 1997.
[13]
N. E. Fedorovich, J. Alblas, W. E. Hennink, F. C. ner, and W. J.
Dhert, “Organ printing: the future of bone regeneration?” Trends in
Biotechnology, vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 601 – 606, 2011.
[14]
A. F. Brooker, J. W. Bowerman, R. A. Robinson, and L. h. Rileyjr.,
“Ectopic ossiﬁcation following total hip replacement incidence and
a method of classiﬁcation,” The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery,
vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1629–1632, 1973.
[15]
G. Orlando, P. Baptista, M. Birchall, P. De Coppi, A. Farney, N. K.
Guimaraes-Souza, E. Opara, J. Rogers, D. Seliktar, K. Shapira-
Schweitzer, R. J. Stratta, A. Atala, K. J. Wood, and S. Soker, “Re-
generative medicine as applied to solid organ transplantation: current
status and future challenges,” Transplant International, vol. 24, no. 3,
pp. 223–232, 2011.
[16]
TED. (2012, Nov.) Tedtalks ofﬁcial web site. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ted.com/
[17]
M. S. Mannoor, Z. Jiang, T. James, Y. L. Kong, K. A. Malatesta, W. O.
Soboyejo, N. Verma, D. H. Gracias, and M. C. McAlpine, “3d printed
bionic ears,” Nano Letters, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 2634–2639, 2013.
[18]
thingiverse.
(2013,
Oct.)
Thingiverse
ofﬁcial
web-site.
[Online].
Available: http://www.thingiverse.com/
[19]
C. Mota, “The rise of personal fabrication,” in Proceedings of the 8th
ACM conference on Creativity and cognition, ser. C&C ’11.
ACM,
2011, pp. 279–288.
[20]
FDA. (2013, Sep.) Fda medical device database. [Online]. Available:
http://goo.gl/wmEMxH
[21]
——. (2013, Aug.) Fda compassionate and emergency use. [Online].
Available: http://www.fda.gov/Training/CDRHLearn/ucm180876.htm
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Digital WHO Hemoglobin Color Scale: Analysis and Performance   
Rajendra Kumar M. 1,2, Hemant Misra 2, Sujit Hiwale 2, Manjunath Ramachandra 2 
1) 
School of Medical Science and Technology, IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India 
2) 
Philips Research -Bangalore, India 
e-mail: rajendrak@smst.iitkgp.ernet.in, {hemant.misra, sujit.hiwale, manjunath.ramachandra}@philips.com 
 
Abstract—Anemia is a public health problem that affects 
populations in both rich and poor countries. The World Health 
Organization recommends hemoglobin (Hb) color scale (HCS) 
to estimate the level of Hb in low resource settings where lab 
facilities are not available. Our aim is to investigate if the 
subjectivity associated with the use of HCS in estimating Hb 
level can be reduced by image processing techniques. It is 
proposed to take an image of a drop of blood under controlled 
conditions and then estimate the Hb value of the blood using 
an image processing algorithm trained on HCS. In the first 
part of the paper, the protocol for taking the images by a 
camera is standardized and established. In the second part of 
the paper, on a set of 20 healthy volunteers, the Hb value of 
their blood is estimated by the proposed method and compared 
with their reference Hb value. The correlation between the 
estimated Hb values and reference Hb values is 0.8. This result 
on a small dataset is encouraging and shows that color image 
analysis of blood can be used to estimate Hb. 
Keywords - hemoglobin estimation; color image analysis; 
WHO HCS; nearest neighbor. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Anemia is a condition characterized by inadequate red 
blood cell volume and a low concentration of hemoglobin 
(Hb) in the blood.  Anemia, which has multiple causes, such 
as iron deficiency, chronic blood loss, and hemolysis, is a 
prevalent health problem affecting an estimated 2 billion 
people, or approximately 30% of the world’s population. The 
most common cause of anemia worldwide is iron deficiency, 
which is often exacerbated by parasitic infections [1]. 
In most developing countries, anemia in pregnancy 
makes a very high contribution to maternal mortality and 
morbidity. An Hb concentration of < 11.0 g/dl is commonly 
taken as an indication of anemia in pregnancy. Successful 
management of anemia in pregnancy depends on accurate 
and acceptable methods of detecting anemia, assessing its 
severity and monitoring response to treatment. In pregnant 
women with mild-to-moderate anemia, timely treatment is 
likely to prevent the development of more severe anemia and 
thus reducing the need for blood transfusion which has its 
own associated risks. Moreover, prevention of severe anemia 
has direct benefits for both mother and child [2]. 
A few of the adverse effects of anemia in pregnant 
women include substantial reduced working capacity, 
increased susceptibility to infections and prolonged recovery, 
cardiac complication, respiratory complications, premature 
births, still births, low birth weight babies and high perinatal  
mortality. Anemia in children leads to reduced exercise 
capability, slower growth, impaired neurological and 
cognitive development, delayed wound healing and 
increased risk of dying [3]. 
In absence of lab facilities in a clinical setup, following 
are the two most common methods for Hb estimation: a) for 
invasive Hb estimation, the World Health Organization 
(WHO) Hemoglobin Color Scale (HCS) is a standard tool 
recommended by the WHO to estimate Hb [4], and b)for the 
non-invasive Hb estimation, clinicians usually examine the 
pallor to categorize the level of anemia into three broad 
categories, viz, mild, moderate and severe [5]. Both 
approaches require prior training, and suffer from 
subjectivity associated with the estimation. 
Color analysis by digital photography of blood for 
estimating Hb value has been tried before. Ranganathan and 
Gunasekaran [6] used a sample of blood, then smeared it on 
a glass plate to prepare a slide and used color analysis to 
estimate Hb value using artificial neural networks. They used 
a standard method designed by them to capture the smeared 
images. AlZahir and Donker [7] used a novel regression 
based model for detecting anemia using color microscopic 
blood images and showed good results in classification of 
anemia but did not estimate Hb. In this paper, we have 
extensively studied the behavior of WHOHCS and tried to 
come up with an algorithm to estimate Hb based on the 
digital photograph of WHO HCS. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 
II, the WHO HCS and its usage is described. The basic 
characteristics of HCS when digitized by taking a digital 
photograph are explained in Section III. The important 
protocols for taking an image of HCS and a blood sample are 
established through experimental analysis in Section IV. In 
Section V, the database and the results of Hb estimation (by 
the proposed method) on a set of 20 volunteers are discussed. 
The conclusions of this study, its limitations and the future 
directions are discussed in Section VI. 
II. 
WHO HCS 
WHO’s HCS is a simple and effective medical device for 
accurate estimation of hemoglobin levels at 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 
and 14 g/dl, respectively (Figure 1). WHO HCS has already 
been validated in a few studies [8][9][10]. The device is 
simple to use, and the usage process is as follows: 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Place a drop of blood on the test strip provided. 
 
Wait for about 30 seconds. 
 
Immediately match the color of the stain against all 
the hues on the scale. The closest match is 
estimated as the Hb value of the blood. 
As shown in Table I, this estimation process indicates 
whether the patient is anemic, and if so, the severity of 
anemia in clinical terms. This method of estimating Hb value 
cannot track minor changes in Hb during treatment, but 
rather assist in the management of any patient with suspected 
anemia, for example, to decide whether a patient may require 
a blood transfusion, a blood count, be referred for laboratory 
tests or to a hospital or clinic for treatment. 
 
TABLE I. WHO HCS IN CLINICAL TERMS. 
Severity of anemia in clinical terms by WHO HCS 
Hb value (gm/dl) 
Severity of anemia 
14 
Healthy 
12 or more 
Not anemic 
8-11 
Mild 
to 
moderate 
anemia 
6-7 
Marked anemia 
4-5 
Severe anemia 
Less than 4 
Critical 
 
In this paper, we have made an attempt to digitize the 
WHO HCS, and used it with a digital photograph of a drop 
of blood to estimate the Hb value of the blood using an 
image processing algorithm.  
III. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF HCS 
Each Hb level image from a scanned image of WHO 
HCS was cropped to understand whether the clusters of each 
Hb value are distinct and can be used for predicting the Hb 
value (of the blood) from an image of a drop of blood taken 
by a camera. 
Figure 2 reveals that Red is most discriminatory at higher 
Hb levels (14 and 12) whereas Green does a better job in 
distinguishing lower Hb levels. The histograms of Blue are 
similar to that of the Green but are less discriminating. RGB 
color space was considered for image analysis. We also tried 
HSI (Hue, Saturation, Intensity), YCbCr (Y is luma 
component, Cb and Cr are the blue-difference and red-
difference chroma components), Lab (L is lightness, a and b 
are the color opponent dimensions) and I1I2I3 (Ohta’s color 
space) color spaces [11] for initial analysis and found that 
RGB color space gives monotonicity in the Hb levels of 
WHO HCS.  The RGB cube of a scanned image of the HCS 
is shown in Figure 3. It is clear from the figure that each Hb 
level forms a distinct cluster and the clusters are orderly 
arranged such that monotonicity is maintained, that is, 
clusters of 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 14 are arranged such that 
cluster of 4 is followed by 6, 6 is followed by 8, and so on in 
the RGB space. The aim was to compute the Euclidean 
distance between the cluster of blood and cluster of each Hb 
value, with the assumption that the nearest cluster would be 
closest to the actual Hb value of the blood. 
In the subsequent experiments, we found out that the 
following factors are responsible for displacement of the 
clusters obtained from WHO HCS. 
 
Distance: With the variation of distance between the 
camera and the HCS, the clusters move such that the 
monotonicity gets disturbed.  
 
Resolution: The change in the resolution of the 
camera from 2 Megapixel (MP) to 14 MP also 
changes the placement of the clusters. 
 
Illumination: The monotonicity is disturbed with the 
variation in illumination. 
 
Angle: The angle at which the photograph is taken 
also changes the distance between each cluster and 
the monotonicity of clusters. 
IV. 
STANDARDISATION OF PROTOCOL 
After conducting various experiments with the HCS, we 
designed a standard protocol where the factors responsible 
for the movement of the clusters mentioned above are 
controlled to an extent. We have tried to come up with a 
standard where the inter cluster distance (ICD) is high and 
the monotonicity between the different clusters of HCS is 
maintained. 
A. Effect of distance between HCS and camera and 
resolution of the camera 
Images of the HCS were captured from 10 cm, 20 cm, 
and 30 cm and at a distance from where the camera screen is 
spanned by the preview of the HCS (approximately 7.5 cm).  
The megapixels settings of the camera were 2 MP and 5 MP. 
All the images were captured in natural light. The clusters 
are plotted in RGB color space (Figure 3) and mean to mean 
ICD is calculated (Table II). It is observed that the distance 
of the camera for a linear distribution of the clusters of Hb 
values should be less than 10 cm. Even at 10 cm, camera 
with 2 MP fails to maintain the linearity of clusters whereas 
5 MP camera just about maintains the linearity with the ICD 
between Hb values of 8 and 10 being very small. Therefore, 
a good setting would be a camera distance of around 7.5 cm 
and the camera’s megapixel setting of 5 MP where linearity 
is maintained and ICD is high. 
 
 
Figure 1. Camera photograph of WHO HCS with blood sample. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
B. Effect of Illumination 
In the following experiments, images of HCS were 
captured by the camera placed at a distance of 7.5 cm and the 
camera’s megapixel setting at 5 MP. All the images were 
captured in natural light. When taking the photograph, the 
lux value near the scale was measured. It needs to be noted 
that it is an adhoc setting where the lux value was not 
controlled, that is, whatever value was there, it was just 
recorded. The clusters were plotted in RGB color space and 
mean to mean ICD is calculated (Table III). Detailed 
experimentation for different types of light under controlled 
condition was not conducted. The experiments revealed that 
in low light conditions (low lux value), the clusters of 
different Hb values overlap. 
Moreover, in low light conditions, the clusters are not 
ordered according to their Hb values. For example, cluster of 
Hb value 14 is between the clusters of Hb value 4 and 6. 
Similarly, the cluster of Hb value 12 is between clusters of 
Hb value 6 and 8. This change in cluster position is highly 
undesirable 
for 
Hb 
estimation 
using 
WHO 
HCS. 
Illumination above 500 lux in natural outdoor light gave high 
ICD between the clusters of different Hb values of the HCS. 
 
Figure 2. Histogram of RGB features for different values of Hb from HCS. 
Figure 3.  Distance between the camera and the HCS is approximately 7.5 
cm (camera screen spans the preview of the HCS). Camera’s MP settings 
are 2 MP and 5 MP. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE II. ICD WITH VARIATION IN CAMERA SETTINGS. 
ICD 
Resolution – 2 MP and Distance - 7.5 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
11.43 
31.79 
75.16 
111.79 
170.09 
6 
11.43 
0 
34.45 
79.35 
117.51 
177.98 
8 
31.79 
34.45 
0 
45.04 
83.86 
147.07 
10 
75.16 
79.35 
45.04 
0 
40.04 
107.24 
12 
111.79 
117.51 
83.86 
40.04 
0 
69.09 
14 
170.09 
177.98 
147.07 
107.24 
69.09 
0 
ICD 
Resolution – 2 MP and Distance – 10 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
62.43 
131.54 
119.55 
165.54 
204.95 
6 
62.43 
0 
69.63a 
58.77 
104.19 
146.46 
8 
131.54 
69.63 
0 
16.95 
38.43 
88.92 
10 
119.55 
58.77 
16.95 
0 
54.88 
105.69 
12 
165.54 
104.19 
38.43 
54.88 
0 
52.37 
14 
204.95 
146.46 
88.92 
105.69 
52.37 
0 
ICD 
Resolution – 2 MP and Distance – 20 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
41.49 
112.31 
109.2 
138.98 
139.9 
6 
41.49 
0 
72.02 
68.82 
99.47 
102.09 
8 
112.31 
72.02 
0 
6.19 
28.04 
34.61 
10 
109.2 
68.82 
6.19 
0 
31.83 
38.77 
12 
138.98 
99.47 
28.04 
31.83 
0 
14.1 
14 
139.9 
102.09 
34.61 
38.77 
14.1 
0 
ICD 
Resolution – 5 MP and Distance - 7.5 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
27.49 
54.57 
87.41 
134.85 
151.21 
6 
27.49 
0 
27.42 
60.20 
108.21 
125.04 
8 
54.57 
27.42 
0 
33.18 
82.39 
99.91 
10 
87.41 
60.20 
33.18 
0 
50.11 
68.29 
12 
134.85 
108.21 
82.39 
50.11 
0 
18.72 
14 
151.21 
125.04 
99.91 
68.29 
18.72 
0 
ICD 
Resolution – 5 MP and Distance – 10 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
33.81 
124.63 
134.57 
168.39 
211.36 
6 
33.81 
0 
92.13 
101.98 
136.89 
182 
8 
124.63 
92.13 
0 
10.72 
46.38 
97.44 
10 
134.57 
101.98 
10.72 
0 
39.03 
91.88 
12 
168.39 
136.89 
46.38 
39.03 
0 
53.75 
14 
211.36 
182 
97.44 
91.88 
53.75 
0 
ICD 
Resolution – 5 MP and Distance – 20 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
25.95 
88.06 
101.14 
129.93 
159.42 
6 
25.95 
0 
64.26 
77.3 
107.39 
138.21 
8 
88.06 
64.26 
0 
13.28 
43.84 
76.4 
10 
101.14 
77.3 
13.28 
0 
32.12 
65.59 
12 
129.93 
107.39 
43.84 
32.12 
0 
33.81 
14 
159.42 
138.21 
76.4 
65.59 
33.81 
0 
a. Note that ICD is a symmetric matrix. The second element of the matrix is the distance from mean 
of the Hb level cluster ‘4’ to the mean of Hb level cluster ‘6’ and so on. The entries underlined in red 
show change in monotonicity which is reflected in ICD. 
C. Angle 
For all the above experiments, the HCS was kept right 
below the camera. So, the angle was fixed at nearly 90°.  In 
order to understand the effect of angle, the images of HCS 
were captured in the outdoor light at an angle of 60° and 90°. 
In both the cases, 5 MP camera setting was used and distance 
for image taken at 90° angle was 7.5 cm. So, the distance 
between the HCS and the camera would have changed 
slightly for image taken at 60°.The clusters were plotted in 
RGB color space and mean to mean ICD is calculated (Table 
IV).  There is a change in linearity between Hb value 8 and 
Hb value 10 when the HCS is captured at an angle of 60°.  
Even the ICD has decreased significantly.  
TABLE III. ICD WITH VARIATION IN LUX. 
ICD 
Lux - 136, Resolution – 5 MP and Distance - 7.5 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
12.49 
22.56 
23.41 
12.01 
23.05 
6 
12.49 
0 
14.20 
17.25 
16.48 
32.40 
8 
22.56 
14.20 
0 
4.60 
21.70 
41.70 
10 
23.41 
17.25 
4.60 
0 
21.79 
42.02 
12 
12.01 
16.48 
21.70 
21.79 
0 
20.48 
14 
23.05 
32.40 
41.70 
42.02 
20.48 
0 
ICD 
Lux - 271, Resolution – 5 MP and Distance - 7.5 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
11.74 
25.25 
23.26 
36.10 
49.84 
6 
11.74 
0 
15.65 
12.87 
38.68 
55.23 
8 
25.25 
15.65 
0 
6.31 
51.41 
69.12 
10 
23.26 
12.87 
6.31 
0 
45.73 
63.84 
12 
36.10 
38.68 
51.41 
45.73 
0 
19.38 
14 
49.84 
55.23 
69.12 
63.84 
19.38 
0 
ICD 
Lux - 469, Resolution – 5 MP and Distance - 7.5 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
12.86 
29.14 
52.90 
88.11 
104.69 
6 
12.86 
0 
17.65 
43.68 
83.01 
101.98 
8 
29.14 
17.65 
0 
27.94 
71.27 
92.95 
10 
52.90 
43.68 
27.94 
0 
45.94 
70.21 
12 
88.11 
83.01 
71.27 
45.94 
0 
26.28 
14 
104.69 
101.98 
92.95 
70.21 
26.28 
0 
ICD 
Lux - 534, Resolution – 5 MP and Distance - 7.5 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
17.88 
37.14 
69.21 
110.32 
131.41 
6 
17.88 
0 
20.36 
54.76 
99.59 
124.07 
8 
37.14 
20.36 
0 
36.44 
84.33 
112.14 
10 
69.21 
54.76 
36.44 
0 
49.85 
81.32 
12 
110.32 
99.59 
84.33 
49.85 
0 
35.01 
14 
131.41 
124.07 
112.14 
81.32 
35.01 
0 
TABLE IV. ICD WITH VARIATION IN ANGLE OF TAKING 
PHOTOGRAPH. 
ICD 
Angle - 60°, Resolution – 5 MP and Distance - 7.5 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
34.57 
88.58 
85.99 
112.46 
114.96 
6 
34.57 
0 
54.77 
52.37 
79.78 
83.48 
8 
88.58 
54.77 
0 
4.17 
27.26 
34.38 
10 
85.99 
52.37 
4.17 
0 
30.23 
37.14 
12 
112.46 
79.78 
27.26 
30.23 
0 
10.21 
14 
114.96 
83.48 
34.38 
37.14 
10.21 
0 
ICD 
Angle - 90°, Resolution – 5 MP and Distance - 7.5 cm 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
4 
0 
27.49 
54.57 
87.41 
134.85 
151.21 
6 
27.49 
0 
27.42 
60.20 
108.21 
125.04 
8 
54.57 
27.42 
0 
33.18 
82.39 
99.91 
10 
87.41 
60.20 
33.18 
0 
50.11 
68.29 
12 
134.85 
108.21 
82.39 
50.11 
0 
18.72 
14 
151.21 
125.04 
99.91 
68.29 
18.72 
0 
D. Timing Significance 
To understand the importance of time difference between 
the instance when a blood drop is placed on the strip and the 
instance when the photo of the blood drop is taken, we did a 
few experiments directly with the blood. To study whether 
the RGB values of the blood change with time, the 
photographs of a blood sample (placed on the filter strip) 
were taken at 20s, 30s, 40s and 60s after being placed on the 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

filter strip. The variation in RGB values of blood with time 
(30s-60s) was found to be less than 5%. 
V. 
DATABASE AND RESULTS 
In a volunteer study, with 5 MP camera setting and 
distance between HCS and camera being 7.5 cm and HCS 
right below the camera (Angle - 90°), the image of the blood 
with the HCS was taken in outdoor light, as shown in Figure 
1. The timing of taking photograph was delayed since as per 
the WHO HCS protocol, the Hb had to be estimated by 2 
physicians using WHO HCS after waiting for 30s. The 
timing of the photograph was kept constant around 60s after 
the prick (as mentioned in Section Timing Significance, the 
difference in RGB values between an image taken at 30s and 
60s is less than 5%). 20 samples were collected in this 
volunteer study.  
As this was a volunteer study in an office setting, the 
volunteers had typically high reference Hb values. The Hb 
value was measured through Sahli’s method. The estimation 
of the Hb value using WHO HCS was done by two 
physicians and these Hb values were also noted down. It is 
worth mentioning that HemoCue AB is used as a reference 
in many Hb studies. However, we could not procure 
HemoCue AB due to its conflict of interest with Philips. We 
compared our results with Sahli’s method which is widely 
used in India and many other developing countries such as 
Indonesia. 
A portion of each Hb level and blood sample is cropped 
from the image for each volunteer. As the scale behavior 
might have changed for each volunteer due to illumination 
change, for each image the WHO HCS levels and blood 
sample were taken for analysis. A part of the database with 
results is shown in Table V. 
TABLE V. THE DATABASE AND RESULTS. THE LAST TWO 
COLUMNS ARE THE ESTIMATED HB USING OUR APPROACH. 
Sahli’s 
method 
Physicians judgment 
using WHO HCS 
Average 
Hb 
EucRG
B 
EucRGB(inte
rpolated) 
1 
2 
12.5 
12 
12 
12.17 
12 
12.95 
10.8 
12 
10 
10.93 
10 
10.95 
10.0 
9 
11 
10.00 
12 
11.24 
9.8 
8 
9 
8.93 
10 
10.37 
12.0 
13 
12 
12.33 
12 
12.96 
9.6 
10 
11 
10.20 
10 
10.93 
9.8 
8 
10 
9.27 
10 
10.43 
 
In Table V, ‘Average Hb’ is the average of Hb values by 
Sahli’s and physicians’ interpretation of blood sample while 
using WHO HCS. Since Sahli’s method also suffers from 
subjectivity of human vision and interpretation, we 
considered the ‘Average Hb’ for reference; this is expected 
to reduce the bias and give better estimate as compared to 
estimate by any of the individual reference method. The last 
two columns show the results of our approach. The means of 
the Hb level and blood were plotted in RGB color space, and 
Euclidean distance measure was used to find the nearest 
neighbor. The nearest neighbor Hb value in RGB color space 
for each sample is documented in the column ‘EucRGB’ of 
Table V. ‘EucRGB(interpolated)’ is calculated using the 
distance of the mean of blood with the Hb values. For 
example, if the Hb value of blood falls between clusters of 
Hb value 12 and 14, Euclidean distance between “cluster of 
Hb value 12 and blood” and “cluster of Hb value 14 and 
blood” is calculated, and these distances are used for linear 
interpolation.  
‘Average Hb’ value of each subject and means of red and 
green channels from the cropped blood sample of each 
subject (from the image of blood) are plotted in Figure 4. 
The Hb value for each subject is on the X-axis with mean of 
Red and Green channels in the Y-axis and Z-axis 
respectively. Two strong natural clusters are observed 
suggesting that the Hb value above 12.5 can be easily 
distinguished from the Hb values below 12.5 by the 
information present in the red and green channels.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Mean of Red, Green values of only the blood sample images 
with Hb value( by taking ‘Average Hb’). It clearly shows two natural 
clusters. 
 
Pearson’s 
product-moment 
correlation 
coefficient 
between various methods used in this study to estimate Hb is 
shown in Table VI. It is observed that the estimation from 
the algorithm (‘EucRGB (interpolated)’) has a correlation 
coefficient of 0.80 with the average Hb value. This is the 
highest correlation between any of the two methods studied 
in this paper (the correlation of 0.85 between ‘Average Hb’ 
and other methods which were used to derive ‘Average Hb’ 
needs to be discounted since it is going to be high by design). 
Bland-Altman plots [12] comparing ‘Average Hb’ value 
and estimation of algorithm (‘EucRGB (interpolated)’) is 
shown in Fig. 5. It shows that the algorithm overestimates 
the Hb values near 12-13 Hb levels and 10-11 Hb levels, 
whereas in 10-11 Hb levels the algorithm underestimates Hb 
values.  
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE VI. CORRELATION BETWEEN VARIOUS METHODS OF 
ESTIMATION AND OUR APPROACH. 
Method 
 
Pearson's product-moment correlation coefficient 
 
Sahli’
s 
Physic
ian 1 
Physic
ian 2 
Average 
Hb 
EucR
GB 
EucR
GB 
(interp
olated) 
Sahli’s 
1 
0.54 
0.64 
0.85 
0.46 
0.55 
Physician 1 
0.54 
1 
0.59 
0.85 
0.61 
0.76 
Physician 2 
0.64 
0.59 
1 
0.85 
0.74 
0.73 
Average Hb 
0.85 
0.85 
0.85 
1 
0.70 
0.80 
EucRGB 
0.46 
0.61 
0.74 
0.70 
1 
0.73 
EucRGB(inte
rpolated) 
0.55 
0.76 
0.73 
0.80 
0.73 
1 
 
 
Figure 5. Bland-Altman plots for comparison of 'Average Hb' value and 
estimation from algorithm ('EucRGB interpolated'). 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS, 
LIMITATIONS 
AND 
FUTURE 
DIRECTIONS 
In this paper, the important protocols for taking an image 
of HCS and a blood sample for estimating Hb value of the 
blood are established through experiments. The results show 
that there is a high correlation (0.8) between color of blood 
and its Hb value. Though the results are encouraging, the 
database is limited and has typically high values of Hb.  
The three methods (Sahli’s and judgment of physicians 
using WHO HCS) which were used for comparison with the 
estimate of the algorithm (Tables V and Table VI) have high 
subjectivity associated with them. So there is a need for an 
objective measure. In addition, this whole study was 
conducted in the natural light and there was no control on 
illumination conditions. Though the results presented in this 
paper on a small dataset are encouraging, the same results 
need to be replicated in controlled artificial light to make the 
system usable anytime and anywhere. One of the methods to 
achieve this is to mimic natural light using artificial lights.  
Despite all attempts to standardize the protocol of data 
collection, there were illumination changes in the outdoor 
condition. This might have affected the RGB values of the 
blood samples. Gray balancing and various other color 
constancy algorithms in computer vision can be applied to 
improve the performance of the algorithm. 
Fig. 4 suggests that the image of the blood sample on the 
filter strip (without validation of observation through WHO 
HCS) is enough and can be used to estimate the Hb value by 
using machine learning algorithms. However, we need a 
much larger dataset to develop this data driven approach. 
REFERENCES 
[1] DeMaeyer E. and Adiels-Tegman M.,“The prevalence of anaemia in the 
world”, World Health Stat Quarterly, vol.38,1985,pp. 302–316. 
[2]van den Broek N.R., Ntonya C., Mhango E. and White S.A., 
“Diagnosing anemia in pregnancy in rural clinics: assessing the potential of 
the HemoglobinColor Scale”, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 
vol. 77, 1999, pp. 15-21. 
[3] Kalaivani K., "Prevalence & consequences of anaemia in 
pregnancy", Indian J Med Res, vol.130, Nov. 2009, pp. 627-633. 
[4] Stott G. J. and Lewis S. M., “A simple and reliable method for 
estimating hemoglobin”, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, vol. 
73, pp. 369-373, 1995. 
[5] Sheth T. N., Choudhry N. K., Bowes M., andDetsky A. S., “The 
relation of conjunctival pallor to the presence of anemia”, J Gen Intern 
Med, vol.12, 2001,pp. 102-106. 
[6] Ranganathan H.  andGunasekaran N., “Simple method for estimation of 
hemoglobin using color analysis”, IEEE Trans. on Information Technology 
in Biomedicine, vol. 10, Oct. 2006,  pp. 657 – 662. 
[7] AlZahir S.and Donker H., "A Novel Regression Based Model for 
Detecting Anemia Using Color Microscopic Blood Images”, Journal of 
Software Engineering and Applications, vol. 3, no. 8, 2010, pp. 756-760. 
[8] Aldridge  C., Foster H. M., Albonico M., Ame S. M., and Montresor A., 
“Evaluation of the diagnostic accuracy of the Haemoglobin Colour Scale to 
detect anaemia in young children attending primary healthcare clinics in 
Zanzibar”. Tropical Medicine & International Health, vol. 17, Apr. 2012, 
pp. 423-429. 
[9] Critchley J. and Bates I., “Haemoglobin colour scale for anaemia 
diagnosis where there is no laboratory: A systematic review”, International 
Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 34, Sep. 2005, pp. 1425-1434. 
[10] Montresor A., Ramsan M., Khalfan N., Albonico M., Stoltzfus R. J., 
Tielsch J. M., and Savioli L., “Performance of the Haemoglobin Colour 
Scale in diagnosing severe and very severe anaemia”, Tropical Medicine & 
International Health, vol. 8 , July 2003, pp.  619-624. 
[11] Andreas K. and Mongi A., “Color spaces and color distances”, in 
Digital Color Image Processing, Hoboken,NJ: Wiley, 2008,  ch. 3, pp. 44-
64. 
[12] Dewitte K., Fierens C., Stocld D., and Theinpont L. M., “Application 
of the Bland–Altman plot for interpretation of method—comparison 
studies: A critical investigation of its practice”,  Clinical Chemistry, vol. 
48, no. 5,  2002, pp. 799–801. 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Remote Camera-based Pulse Oximetry
Ubiratan S. Freitas
GRHV EA3830
ADIR Association
Rouen, France
freitas@coria.fr
Abstract—The oxygen concentration in the blood is a very
important physiological parameter. This variable is ordinarily
monitored using a pulse oximeter, a device that measures the
proportion of Hemoglobin that carries oxygen. Although noninva-
sive, this device needs constant contact with the patient’s skin. The
possibility of performing the same measurement without contact
using a color camera and ambient light is investigated in this
work. Particularly, the presence of signals necessary to oximetry
measurement on recorded videos is evaluated. It was found that
photo-plethysmographic signals are present at two color channels
simultaneously, depending on the analyzed region of the videos.
Thus, remote camera-based oximetry is possible in principle. Such
a device could ﬁnd numerous applications for patient monitoring,
either at the hospital or at home.
Keywords-pulse oximetry; contactless; camera; SpO2.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Among the physiological parameters of interest for pa-
tient monitoring, blood gases’ concentration is of particular
importance. Patient’s oxygenation status is a key factor and
should be followed closely by the physician in several cases.
This parameter is ordinarily measured by a pulse oximeter
[1]. This device is a low-cost, noninvasive instrument that
measures the peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) and provides
an approximation to the arterial oxygen saturation. The later is
the ratio between the amount of oxygen-carrying hemoglobin
(oxyhemoglobin, HbO2) and the total hemoglobin content,
which includes HbO2 and oxygen-free hemoglobin (deoxyhe-
moglobin, Hb), in the arterial blood. Although reliable and
small, the pulse oximeter needs constant contact with the
patient’s skin, usually on the ﬁnger tip or the ear lobe, and
is prone to movement artifacts [1].
One interesting alternative method to perform pulse oxime-
try, if possible, would be the use of a simple camera remotely
ﬁlming the patient. Such a method would greatly simplify the
monitoring of SpO2 at the hospital, and could be used to reduce
patient discomfort due to the use of sensors in applications
that require data acquisition during sleep, such as screening
for Sleep Apnea Syndrome [2] and automatic sleep staging
[3].
Recent literature provides some insight on whether such ap-
proach is possible. First, some results show that the acquisition
of photo-plethysmography, one of the key ingredients of pulse
oximetry, is possible via simple cameras. In [4], consumer
level digital cameras were used to record facial-area videos
of human subjects trying to maintain static positions under
ambient light. A signal with a strong component corresponding
to the subject’s heart rate was reliably recovered by using
spatial averaging over selected regions of interest (ROIs),
usually on the green channel. The authors conclude that this
signal is mostly due to a variation in volume of sub-cutaneous
blood vessels and thus a real photo-plethysmography (PPG).
Similar results were found in [5]. In [6], automatic face
tracking was used to provide a ROI on each video frame to
take care of subject movement. To further improve the response
to movement artifacts, the authors used a technique of blind
source separation to extract a heart related signal.
Another type of result regarding the second necessary
ingredient to pulse oximetry — multi-wavelength measure-
ment — has also been reported. In [7], a camera was used in a
special illumination setup where all ambient light was blocked
and the subject’s arm was illuminated with monochromatic
light. Up to three different wavelengths were used, however
not simultaneously, and videos were recorded. Oscillations at
the heart rate were observed at all tested wavelengths. Simul-
taneous PPG measurement in two wavelengths was obtained in
[8], although with a controlled light source synchronized with
the camera. In [9], a mobile phone camera was used to actually
estimate SpO2, but the camera needed to stay in contact with
the subject’s skin.
For the oximetry camera to be possible, two conditions
must be attained at the same time: remote PPG measurement
and multiple wavelength measurement, both under normal
ambient light. The aim of present study is to verify whether
these are possible. This work in progress, once completed
will, hopefully, construct a pulse oximetry camera or show
its feasibility.
This contribution is organized as follows. Section II sum-
marizes the theory behind pulse oximetry and shows how a
camera could be used to acquire the necessary data. Section III
describes the experimental setup used and the ﬁrst results
obtained. Finally, Section IV discusses the results and presents
some perspectives.
II.
PULSE OXIMETRY
A good review of the theory of pulse oximetry is provided
in [1]. The interested reader is referred to that work, and
references therein, should he or she desire a more detailed
explanation. Here a short summary is included for sake of
completeness.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Variable absorption due to 
pulse-added arterial blood
Absorption due to arterial blood
Absorption due to venous blood
Absorption due to tissue
Time
Absorption
Figure 1.
Light absorption in living tissue. Adapted from [1].
The physical principle used in oximetry is the different
optical absorption spectra of Hb and HbO2. This is responsible
for the difference in color between oxygenated and deoxy-
genated blood. The absorption of light passing by a solution
at a speciﬁc wavelength depends on the path length of the
light, the concentration of the solute and a characteristic of
the later called molar absorptivity. Under a few assumptions,
the proportion of the concentration of one solute with respect
to another in a two-solute solution can be determined by
absorption measurements in two wavelengths. The wavelengths
usually used correspond the red and infrared lights. However,
any two wavelengths for which HB and HbO2 have different
absorptivity can in principle be used. This method can be used
to measure the oxygen saturation of a blood sample. However,
when such method is applied to measure oxygen saturation
noninvasively in a patient, for instance by shining light through
some part of the patient’s body and measuring the transmitted
or the reﬂected light, the unknown optical characteristics of the
patient’s tissues make the calibration of the instrument very
difﬁcult.
An interesting approach was proposed by [10] and [11].
The light traveling through live human tissue have a time-
varying component in its absorbance signal. This time-varying
signal is called photo-plethysmography (PPG) and is caused
by the change of volume of the blood vessels related to the
cardiac contraction. The higher pressure during cardiac systole
corresponds to a larger volume of the arteries and, hence, to
a greater absorption due to the increased volume of blood.
The situation is reversed during diastole. This is depicted in
Figure 1.
The optical characteristics of tissue are represented by the
lower part of the graphic. Albeit unknown, the tissue’s ab-
sorption can be considered constant during short periods. The
same is valid for the venous blood’s absorption. The variable
part of the signal is due mostly to the change in volume of
arterial blood. If the absorption is considered additive, one can
use the variable signal to perform a normalization and take
into account only the contribution of the arterial blood. This
provides two advantages. First, only arterial blood saturation
is measured, which is the physiological parameter of interest.
Second, calibration is easier since only the blood’s optical
characteristics impact the measure, instead of the subject’s
tissue.
The normalization is usually performed by dividing the
pulsating part of the PPG signal (commonly referred as the
AC part) by the non pulsating part (the DC part). The nor-
malization is performed for each wavelength, yielding two
normalized measurement signals, one for the red light and
one for the infrared. The ratio between these signals is then
used to compute the oxygen saturation. In this later step, an
empirical calibration table is used in order to compute the
actual saturation.
The pulse oximetry requires, therefore, two “ingredients”.
First, at least two distinct wavelengths have to be used where
Hb and HbO2 have different absorptivities. Second, an oscil-
latory signal corresponding to the change in volume of the
arteries must be present at both wavelengths.
A. Camera-based pulse oximetry
Color cameras, even simple webcams, are devices capable
of acquiring a large amount of data. For instance, an webcam
with a resolution of 640x480 pixels recording at 30 frames per
second will measure light at 307200 different locations (each
pixel) at 3 different wavelengths (red, green and blue) 30 times
each second.
A camera-based pulse oximeter would use a camera to
measure the light that comes from the subject in a similar
manner that a regular pulse oximeter uses discrete phototran-
sistors or photodiodes as photodetectors. A camera pointed at
a subject from some distance away in a place where enough
normal ambient light is present is comparable to a reﬂectance
pulse oximeter. The hardware of the later consists of at least
two light emitting diodes (LEDs), one for red and one for
infrared, and one or more photodetectors. Both LEDs and
photodetectors are packed together in a way that their active
sides point at the same direction. When the device is placed
in contact with the subject, the LEDs illuminate the subject’s
skin and the photodetectors measure the reﬂected light. The
camera’s pixels play the role of the photodetectors and the
broad-spectrum ambient light combined with the color ﬁlters in
the camera provide the measurement at different wavelengths.
In order for such a camera-based oximeter to be feasible, it
remains to be veriﬁed that both “ingredients” for pulse oxime-
try are present. Multi-wavelength measurement is already a
feature of color cameras. What remains to be veriﬁed is that
a reasonably clear PPG signal can be acquired in at least two
color channels simultaneously. That is the objective of this
work.
III.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND INITIAL RESULTS
The experimental setup carried out was as simple as
possible. Videos of human adult subjects were recorded, one
subject per video. During recording, the subject was in a sitting
position facing the camera, while trying to remain static. The
camera imaged the frontal part of the subject’s face from about
40cm away. The illumination was composed of natural daylight
and the regular ﬂuorescent ceiling lamps already present at
the ofﬁce. The camera used was an of-the-shelf consumer
webcam (HD Webcam Citrine WC064, Sweex Europe B.V.,
Netherlands). It can record color videos at 640x480 pixels
resolution and at 30 frames per second.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

This setup mimics what would be a possible arrangement
for a future camera-based pulse oximeter. For instance, a
patient would be lying on a hospital bed in a illuminated
room. The camera of the pulse oximeter would be pointed
to the patient’s face, as this part is likely to present uncovered
skin. The oximeter would be at some distance away from the
patient, possibly at the ceiling, and would measure the SpO2
without encumbering the patient with a contact sensor. The
actual distance from the camera to the patient should not be
critical provided adequate optics are used, as a longer distance
from the camera to the patient can be compensated with a
longer focal length. What is important is that a sufﬁciently
large part of patient’s skin is visible from the camera’s point
of view.
Several videos of about one minute in length were
recorded. In order to avoid any disturbance, each video was
stored in raw format (YUV422)[12] in an AVI[13] container
ﬁle. This is important because most video compression tech-
niques lose information. Since the PPG signal is not usually
seen with the naked eye, a video compression algorithm
could, in theory, cause an important damage to the acquired
PPG signal while maintaining the perceived quality of the
compressed video. The drawback of recording raw video is the
large size of the video ﬁle. An one-minute raw video ﬁle has a
size of about 1.2 GiB. However, this difﬁculty is particular of
the experimental protocol used and is should not be present in
the ﬁnal device since the later should process the video signal
in real time and will have no need to record the video.
Video recording was done with MPlayer[14] in a PC
running GNU/Linux.
Video processing was made in Python[15] using the
OpenCV library[16] and custom made code. The Python
language was chosen due to its simplicity that allowed a fast
application development. As in [4], spatial averaging was used
to improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Each color of
each pixel has a relatively low amplitude resolution of 8 bits,
which leads to a poor SNR. This can be partially overcome by
averaging together neighboring pixels in a region of a frame. In
this work, each frame was divided in 20x20 pixel regions that
where averaged together in each color channel. This provided a
single value per region, per channel and per frame. The channel
time series of the regions were later analyzed looking for the
presence of PPG signals.
A. Results
Figure 2 shows parts of two videos. These images where
created by averaging the green channel over the entire video
for illustration purposes. The subject on the left shows consid-
erable movement while the one on the right was able to keep
a more static position. Superimposed on the images are the
grids formed by the 20x20-pixel regions.
Three regions in Figure 2 are indicated by letters, two
on the left image and one on the right image. The time
series corresponding to the region “A” are shown in Figure 3.
All time series show an increasing trend, probably related to
the subject’s movement during the recording. On the green
channel, two oscillatory components are visible, one with a
low frequency and one with a relatively higher frequency. The
low frequency component is possibly related with the subject’s
Figure 2.
Images formed by averaging the green channel of all frames
together. Overlaid are grids of 20x20 pixels. Units shown are in pixels.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
Red
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
138
140
142
144
146
148
150
152
154
156
Green
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time (s)
140
145
150
155
160
165
170
175
Blue
Figure 3.
Time series corresponding to the region “A” in Figure 2.
respiration. The high frequency component is the PPG signal.
Its presence on the green channel is in according to what was
found in [4]. The red channel, on the other hand, shows what
appears to be a PPG signal, although with a lower SNR. The
blue channel does not seem to have a PPG signal.
In order to better evaluate the possible presence of the
PPG signal, the time series were band-pass ﬁltered with a
FIR ﬁlter with cut-off frequencies at 0.7 Hz and 2.5 Hz. The
ﬁltered signals are shown in Figure 4. The PPG signal is easily
seen on the green channel. Even a slight amplitude modulation
is present, also possibly related with respiration. On the red
channel, the PPG signal can also be seen, particularly between
15 s and 40 s and around the 60 s mark. The signal quality is,
nevertheless, worse.
The presence of a PPG signal in multiple channels is very
dependent on the particular region chosen. As an example,
the band-pass ﬁltered time series of region “B” are shown in
Figure 5. Although clearly seen on the green channel, the PPG
signal is absent from the other channels.
Finally, different subjects may have different “optimal”
face regions where the presence of PPG is concerned. The
ﬁltered time-series of region “C” on the second subject are
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Red
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Green
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time (s)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Blue
Figure 4.
Band-pass ﬁltered time series of region “A”.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Red
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Green
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time (s)
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Blue
Figure 5.
Band-pass ﬁltered time series of region “B”.
shown in Figure 6. A strong PPG signal is present on both red
and green channels.
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The possibility of remote oximetry measurement via color
camera and ambient light was investigated in this work. It was
found that a necessary condition for pulse oximetry, namely
the acquisition of PPG signals simultaneously in more than
one wavelength, was present in the recorded videos with at
least two different human subjects. The simultaneous presence
of PPG signals in multiple wavelengths was not veriﬁed in
previous publications under the conditions of this work (non-
contact camera, ambient light). This positive result means that
remote, camera-based pulse oximetry is in principle possible.
However, a lot of work remains to be done before such
a device is constructed. First, systematic measurement of the
recovered PPG amplitude for all face regions must be made.
This will help with the development of the next necessary
step that is an automatic and reliable way to detect and extract
the PPG signals. To this end, tools from the computer vision
domain may prove invaluable. After such extraction tool is
devised, a further step would be to create an experimental
protocol where different subjects are recorded while using
standard pulse oximeters and breathing at different oxygen
concentrations to provide a data base that would allow for
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Red
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Green
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time (s)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Blue
Figure 6.
Band-pass ﬁltered time series of region “C”.
calibration of the camera oximetry.
The possible applications of camera-based remote pulse
oximetry are numerous. At one end, long-term hospital and
home monitoring could replace contact oximeters in order
to decrease patient discomfort. On the other end, novel and
disruptive applications may become possible. For instance, a
simple software application could transform a smartphone into
a medical device capable to measure an important physiolog-
ical parameter without any hardware modiﬁcation and allow
for screening or monitoring of several diseases at home.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank ADIR Association for its
support in this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Mendelson, “Pulse oximetry: theory and applications for noninvasive
monitoring.” Clinical Chemistry, vol. 38, no. 9, Jan. 1992, pp. 1601–
1607.
[2]
E. Chiner, J. Signes-Costa, J. M. Arriero, J. Marco, I. Fuentes, and
A. Sergado, “Nocturnal oximetry for the diagnosis of the sleep apnoea
hypopnoea syndrome: a method to reduce the number of polysomno-
graphies?” Thorax, vol. 54, no. 11, Jan. 1999, pp. 968–971.
[3]
C. C. Sady, U. S. Freitas, A. Portmann, J.-F. Muir, C. Letellier, and
L. A. Aguirre, “Automatic sleep staging from ventilator signals in non-
invasive ventilation,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 43,
no. 7, Aug. 2013, pp. 833–839.
[4]
W. Verkruysse, L. O. Svaasand, and J. S. Nelson, “Remote plethysmo-
graphic imaging using ambient light,” Optics Express, vol. 16, no. 26,
Dec. 2008, pp. 21 434–21 445.
[5]
C. Takano and Y. Ohta, “Heart rate measurement based on a time-lapse
image,” Medical Engineering & Physics, vol. 29, no. 8, Oct. 2007, p.
853857.
[6]
M.-Z. Poh, D. J. McDuff, and R. W. Picard, “Non-contact, automated
cardiac pulse measurements using video imaging and blind source
separation,” Optics Express, vol. 18, no. 10, May 2010, pp. 10 762–
10 774.
[7]
F. P. Wieringa, F. Mastik, and A. F. W. v. d. Steen, “Contactless multiple
wavelength photoplethysmographic imaging: A ﬁrst step toward SpO2
camera technology,” Annals of Biomedical Engineering, vol. 33, no. 8,
Aug. 2005, pp. 1034–1041.
[8]
K. Humphreys, T. Ward, and C. Markham, “Noncontact simultaneous
dual wavelength photoplethysmography: A further step toward noncon-
tact pulse oximetry,” Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, vol. 78, no. 4,
Apr. 2007, pp. 044 304–044 306.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[9]
C. Scully, J. Lee, J. Meyer, A. Gorbach, D. Granquist-Fraser, Y. Mendel-
son, and K. Chon, “Physiological parameter monitoring from optical
recordings with a mobile phone,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 59, no. 2, 2012, pp. 303–306.
[10]
T. Aoyagi, M. Kishi, K. Yamaguchi, and S. Watanabe, “Improvement of
the earpiece oximeter,” in Abstracts of the Japanese Society of Medical
Electronics and Biological Engineering, 1974, pp. 90–91.
[11]
I. Yoshiya, Y. Shimada, and K. Tanaka, “Spectrophotometric monitoring
of arterial oxygen saturation in the ﬁngertip,” Med Biol Eng Comput,
vol. 18, 1980, pp. 27–32.
[12]
Wikimedia
Foundation,
Inc.
Yuv.
[Online].
Available:
http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/YUV [retrieved: March, 2014]
[13]
——. Audio video interleave. [Online]. Available: http://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Audio Video Interleave [retrieved: December, 2013]
[14]
MPlayer
-
The
movie
player.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.
mplayerhq.hu [retrieved: March, 2014]
[15]
A. B. Downey, Think Python: How to Think Like a Computer Scientist.
O’Reilly, August 2012.
[16]
G. Bradski, “The OpenCV library,” Dr. Dobb’s Journal os Software
Tools, Nov. 1st 2000, Library homepage: www.opencv.org.
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Telememonitoring in Cystic Fibrosis: Treatment’s Adherence and Economical
Evaluation in a Period of Three Years
Sergio Bella , Fabrizio Murgia, Irene Tagliente,
Paola Romano, Benedetta Corona, Elisabetta
Renzetti
Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital- IRCCS
Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy
telemedicina@opbg.net
Mirella Cilli
II Medical Clinic
“La Sapienza” University of Rome
mirella.cilli@ uniroma1.it
Abstract—We
examined
data
related
to
Adherence
to
telemonitoring in our Cystic Fibrosis patients followed at home
for a period of 3 years. We tested the possible presence of a
saving for Italian National Health Service. We kept electronic
records of transmissions, in spreadsheet format. For each
transmission, the main parameters and any action taken were
collected. A summary of the activities was carried out
automatically. A monthly average percentage of Adherence to
prescribed frequency of
transmissions is calculated. We
performed an economic analysis of the costs for patients
followed at home by telemonitoring, recalled under suspicion
of acute pulmonary recurrence. We received, from February,
15 2010 to May, 31 2013, 2097 data transmissions overall. The
average compliance in the reporting period was 28,86%, with
increasing
trend.
We
calculated
a
saving
compared
to
traditional home care of € 5.320,33 /year/patient. We conclude
that the improvement of outcome in FC necessarily passes
through an improvement of the Adherence to treatment. The
presence of an economic advantage is once again, although not
significant. More controlled psychological and behavioral
studies are needed to establish the real long-term effectiveness
of the use of Telehomecare in CF.
Keywords-telemedicine;
telemonitoring;
cystic
fibrosis;
economic evaluation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In
Cystic
Fibrosis
(CF),
the
natural
history
is
characterized by recurrent episodes of respiratory infection
that causes a progressive pulmonary damage, with decay of
long-term lung function leading to death [1].
Spirometry shows over time in these subjects a reduction
in forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1), and
then also a reduction in Current Volume (FVC), which is
around 2% of the expected value every year [2].
In case of pulmonary exacerbation, an early initiation of
antibiotic treatment helps to prevent the development of
more serious complications limiting consequently also the
pulmonary damage in the long term. Early interventions also
allow us to use advantageously less invasive antibiotic
therapies, even using the oral route of administration [3].
Since 2001, in the CF Centre of the Pediatric Hospital
Bambino Gesù in Rome, we started to use Telehomecare
(THC) in the follow-up of our patients at home. The first
results of this work have been encouraging. We found a
statistically significant reduction in hospital admissions and a
tendency over time towards a better stability of the
respiratory function [4].
It is known that, from a psychological point of view,
telemedicine can help to improve the outcome through the
acquisition of a better awareness of the disease and of the
therapeutic program by the patient [5]. In our experience, the
outcome improvement in the follow-up in CF necessarily
passes through improving adherence to treatment [6].
Regarding the economic aspect, definitive studies on a
possible positive role of telemedicine in the rationalization of
hospitalization related to long-term follow-up in CF are
lacking to date.
We have attempted to quantify the costs of telemedicine
in the follow-up of our patients. In an initial feasibility study
[7], we calculated a possible annual saving of € 5241 for
each CF patient.
In a subsequent study, conducted "in the field" [8], we
performed an economic analysis of the costs for 19 CF
patients followed at home with remote monitoring for a
period of 2 years. We analyzed the actual costs incurred by
Italian National Health Service (INHS) every time they have
been called to the hospital for suspicion of a respiratory
exacerbation. We calculated a total saving, compared to the
traditional method without telehomecare, of € 132,144.91 in
24 months, corresponding to € 3,303.62 / year / patient. The
presence of an economic advantage for INHS is then also
confirmed, although the amount of the saving is not large,
relatively to the total costs. Data from the study encourage a
possible role of telemedicine in the organization of home
care of patients with CF. In the present study, we examined
the clinical and economic data related to the activities of
telemonitoring on behalf of our CF patients followed at
home for a period of 3 years, in order to better understand
the evolution of clinical trends and the evolution of the
economic in time.
The paper is structured as follows. Section II discusses
the methods used for our approach. Section III presents the
results, followed by a discussion, in Section IV. We end with
a conclusion and ideas for future work.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II.
METHODS
This is a case feasibility study on using telehomecare for
cystic fibrosis follow-up.
24 patients are currently included in the THC program.
A clinical diagnosis of CF was given in all subjects,
confirmed by study of the CFTR gene and the sweat test.
Patients included in THC program are still followed and
treated with the usual protocols of follow-up, similar to those
who do not practice [9].
We used Spirotel ™ instrumentation, which provides and
transmits remotely data from Spirometry and overnight pulse
oximetry. The working method was described and discussed
in a previous study [10].
Since February 2010, we started keeping an electronic
register, in spreadsheet format. For each transmission, the
main parameters and the measures are recorded. A monthly
statement of assets and the calculation of the average
percentage of Adherence to the recommended frequency of
transmissions (defined as the ratio transmissions / total
patient days) is automatically done.
We also quantified the actual costs associated with the
use of telehomecare in the follow-up of patients. We have
considered as costs all the hospital admissions (Day and
Ordinary), the cycles of therapy at home and the rent for the
telemedicine equipments. We have considered as revenues
the incomings from the use of the available beds and the
working days retrieved.
We
formulated
the
hypothesis
that,
without
telehomecare,
each
recall
would
have
resulted
in
hospitalization for the necessary clinical test and any
treatment. To evaluate the possibility of an economic benefit
from the use of THC, in order to rationalize hospital
admissions, we compared the actual costs incurred by INHS
with the costs that would be sustained if each recall had
resulted in hospitalization.
III.
RESULTS
The data are related to the activity carried out in the
period from February, 15 2010 to May, 31 2013.
We enrolled in THC a total of 39 patients. 15 dropped
out (38,46%), 9 for poor adherence (60%), 4 because they
died (26,67%), 2 for other causes (13,33%) (Table I).
TABLE I.
BALANCE OF ENROLMENT
Patients
n.
%
enrolled
39
active
24
61,54
drop-out
15
38,46
poor adherence
9
60,00
died
4
26,67
other
2
13,33
We followed an average of 28 patients during this period.
We
received
2,097
transmissions
containing
2766
Spirometry and 706 Pulse Oximetry. Since April 2011 we
received 1031 questionnaires regarding symptoms. We
carried out all over 1803 phone calls, getting immediate
response by the patient or family in about 85% of cases. The
average adherence to treatment during the period was
TABLE II.
SUMMARY OF ACTIVITY
Total
Years
2010
2011
2012
2013
4
patients (mean)
30
29,7
25,5
23,6
28,4
transmissions
536
730
831
357
2097
Adherence %
21,9
24,0
33,7
35,6
28,86%
Spirometry
658
1048
1060
399
2766
Pulse oximetry
183
231
292
104
706
symptoms
322
709
318
1031
phone calls
466
592
745
333
1803
answers
618
285
618
% answers/calls
82,6
85,6
83,7%
inpatients
11
15
54
14
94
28.86%, with increasing trend over time. We carried out,
following the transmissions, 94 recalls in hospital which
affected 24 patients (11 calls in 2010, 15 in 2011, 54 in 2012
and 14 in the first five months of 2013). Regarding the
proceedings run, in 51% of cases the recall was followed by
a Day Hospital and 33% by a hospitalization. In 6% of cases
only a visit was performed (Fig.1).
ambulatory visit
6%
day hospital
51%
recovery
33%
nothing
10%
ambulatory visit
day hospital
recovery
nothing
Fig.1. Measures that have followed the recalls.
Regarding the economic aspect, the long-term follow-up
with telehomecare resulted in a total calculated savings
compared to the traditional method of € 414,985.87 in 39
months corresponding to € 5,320.33 per year per patient
recalled (Table 3).
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Obviously,
the
economic
analysis
refers
to
the
parameters of remuneration of Italian National Health
System, and therefore are only valid in this context.
TABLE III.
COST ANALYSIS
IV.
DISCUSSION
We observed an annual growth in the number of
transmissions despite the decrease of the number of patients
followed. This fact shows an increasing use of the system.
The progressive increase of Adherence to treatment
means a better overall use of the method. Regarding the
frequency of the transmissions, we have recommended to our
patients a variable interval depending on the clinical
condition, generally 2 times a week at least. In this sense, we
expect the optimal adherence to treatment to be 100% for 2
transmissions per week / 5 working days. We got in clinical
practice a constant and progressive increase of treatment's
adherence to achieve in practice a doubling of the values
during the period under review (Table 2). It is also to
consider that CF patients are already burdened with a
continuous load and considerable therapies, both medical
and physiotherapy, and that this result has yet been obtained
without requiring a precise timetable for recording. The
method we have used in daily practice, described and
discussed in a previous study, has remained unchanged. We
report the objective fact that from 2011 we have started to
call via cell phone always patients after a transmission, even
under conditions of clinical stability. It is not possible to
evaluate how much this has contributed to the increase in the
values of adherence to treatment, at the current stage. The
fact remains that this is the only change made in the protocol
of follow-up. The possibility of a link between these data is
interesting and certainly requires further studies to be
defined.
The mobile phone was the medium we used to establish
the contact. The percentage of successful calls appears to
have improved over time, but the mobile phone, in our
opinion, continues to be valuable but not always completely
reliable.
From the economic point of view, the presence of an
economic advantage for the INHS is confirmed, even if not
important. The increase in the calculated savings compared
to our previous study indicates in our opinion a better
efficiency of follow-up.
Some of our patients in telemedicine have never been
recalled. For them it is impossible to carry out an assessment
of the cost-effectiveness of telemonitoring that, in this case,
has resulted only in costs.
There are currently no universally accepted criteria for
inclusion of patients with CF in a telemonitoring program
[11]. In Italy, in particular, telemonitoring is not within the
Essential Levels of Assistance (LEA) provided by our
National Health Service. The viability of telemonitoring still
depends, in individual cases, on voluntarily resources made
available by the local health authorities.
From the perspective of economic and organizational
constraints, it seems necessary to arrive to uniquely define as
soon as possible the criteria for inclusion, both in relation to
the individual clinical situation both at the lowest adherence
to the method that is compatible with a clinical benefit, as
well as economic. In our opinion, the advantage in terms of
quality of life for these patients remains in any case,
resulting from the fact of having at home a tool that allows
them to remain in contact with the CF centre more easily,
which is certainly important, however, and could also be
measured in terms of economy.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The trend of both quantitative and qualitative parameters
of our work is positive. The data are encouraging with regard
to the possible role of telemedicine in the organization of
homecare of chronic diseases. In the current state, however,
reliable data on the long-term effectiveness of the use of
Telehomecare in CF are lacking.
VI.
FUTURE WORKS
Data on the real long-term effectiveness of the use of
Telehomecare in CF can only be obtained through a study of
controlled type, for which appear the time to be ripe to
format.
Unitary costs
hospitalisation
€
4.065,00
Day Hospital
€
266,00
Ambulatory visit
€
32,00
Iv home cycle (21days)
€
2.027,00
Oral home cycle (21 gg)
€
283,00
SpirotelTM Monthly Loan
€
210,00
Working day
€
147,00
Observation period months
39
Patients involved n.
24
Retrievals n.
94
Telemedicine -
Cost
for
94
admissions
(inpatient
+
outpatient therapy)
€ 580.638,93
Telemedicine +
Cost of the services actually provided
(NHS)
€ 235.304,06
Instrumentation rental for 24 patients
€ 187.530,00
Total costs
€ 422.834,06
Income for further utilization of beds
€ 239.835,00
Revenue for recovery of working days
€ 17.346,00
Total savings
€ 257.181,00
Effective cost of Telemedicine+ (cost -
savings)
€ 165.653,06
Balance
Saving (Telemedicine- - Telemedicine+)
€ 414.985,87
Annual saving per patient
€
5.320,33
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

REFERENCES
[1]
A.P.
Flume et al., “Cystic Fibrosis Pulmonary Guidelines:
chronic medication for maintenance of lung health” Am. J.
Respir. Crit. Care, vol.176(10), 2007, pp. 957-69.
[2]
P.B. Davis, P.J. Byard, and M.W. Konstan, “ Identifying
treatments that halt progression of pulmonary disease in cystic
fibrosis” Pediatr. Res., vol. 41(2), Feb 1997, pp. 161-165.
[3]
C. Que, P. Cullinan, and D. Geddes, “Improving rate of
decline of FEV1 in young adults with cystic Fibrosis” Thorax,
vol.61, 2006, pp. 155-157.
[4]
S. Bella, F. Murgia, A. E. Tozzi, C. Cotognini, and V. Lucidi,
“Five years of telemedicine in Cystic Fibrosis disease” Clin.
Ter., vol. 160(6), 2009, pp. 457-460.
[5]
J. Abbott, M. Dodd, L. Gee, and K. Webb, “Ways of coping
with cystic fibrosis: implications for treatment adherence”
Disabil. Rehabil., vol. 23(8), May 2001, pp. 315-324.
[6]
F. Murgia et al., “Evaluation of compliance to telehomecare
(THC) in a group of patients with Cystic Fibrosis in a period
of 2 years” Clin. Ter., vol. 163(3), 2012, pp. e111-114.
[7]
F.
Murgia
et
al.
“Economic
evaluation
of
home
telemonitoring in chronic lung disease” Clin. Ter., vol.
162(2), 2010, pp. e43-49.
[8]
S. Bella, F. Murgia, C. Cotognini, F. Alghisi, E. Montemitro,
“Program of home telemonitoring in patients with cystic
fibrosis over a period of 2 years: a contribution to the
rationalization of care” Clin. Ter., vol. 164(4), 2013, pp. 313-
317, doi: 10.7417/CT.2013.1595.2013.
[9]
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Cystic Fibrosis Committee,
“Clinical practice guidelines for cystic fibrosis” Bethesda,
MD: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, 1997.
[10] F. Murgia et al., “Remote Telematic Control in Cystic
Fibrosis” Clin. Ter., vol. 162 (4), pp. 121-124.
[11] G. Paré, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte, “Systematic Review of
Home Telemonitoring for Chronic Diseases: The Evidence
Base” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. vol. 14(3), 2007, pp. 269–
277.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Implementing Transnational Telemedicine Solutions 
Leila Eadie, David Heaney, Lee Dowie 
University of Aberdeen , Centre for Rural Health 
Inverness, UK 
e-mail: {l.eadie; d.heaney; l.a.dowie}@abdn.ac.uk 
Liam Glynn, Monica Casey, Patrick Hayes 
NUI Galway, General Practice 
Galway, Ireland 
e-mail: {liam.glynn; monica.casey; 
patrick.hayes}@nuigalway.ie 
Matti Matero 
Oulu Arc Subregion 
Oulunkaaren, Kuntayhtymä, Finland 
e-mail: matti.matero@oulunkaari.com 
Undine Knarvik 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Norwegian Centre for 
Integrated Healthcare & Telemedicine 
Tromsø, Norway 
 e-mail: undine.knarvik@telemed.no 
Soo Hun 
Centre for Connected Health and Social Care 
Belfast, UK 
e-mail: soo.hun@hscni.net 
Käte Alrutz 
Västerbottens Läns Landsting 
Umeå, Sweden 
e-mail: kate.alrutz@vll.se 
 
Abstract—The 
Implementing 
Transnational 
Telemedicine 
Solutions (ITTS) project aimed to implement transnational 
telemedicine solutions at scale across Europe’s Northern 
Periphery Program area, introducing new telemedicine 
applications to remote and rural areas in order to improve 
healthcare delivery for rural communities. ITTS incorporated 
ten demonstrator projects, which shared knowledge and 
experience between six project partners and clinical teams in 
order to simplify the process of subsequent implementation. 
Across 9 of the 10 demonstrator projects, a total of 25 new 
services in more than 40 sites across the program area have 
now been implemented successfully, and are in use with 
patients. A mixed methods assessment will determine whether 
the projects become effective and sustainable. This paper 
documents 
the 
process 
of 
knowledge 
exchange 
and 
implementation and describes the services now in place. 
Evaluation results will subsequently be reported and published 
as a policy-informing guide. ITTS has shown, to date, that 
transnational 
knowledge 
sharing 
can 
facilitate 
the 
implementation of telemedicine solutions. 
Keywords- 
telemedicine; 
eHealth; 
transnational; 
implementation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Telemedicine and eHealth have been identified as 
important tools in the delivery of health care in the 21st 
century. EU eHealth strategy aims to improve citizens' health 
by making life-saving information available using eHealth 
tools, to increase healthcare quality and access by making 
eHealth part of health policy and coordinating EU countries' 
political, financial and technical strategies, and to make 
eHealth tools more effective, user-friendly and widely 
accepted [1]. Each of the countries involved has developed 
strategy accordingly. The Scottish Government released a 
National Delivery Plan that sets out the vital contributions of 
telehealth and telecare to health and care strategies in 
Scotland until 2015, including enabling services for 300,000 
more people and normalising use of the technology into 
relevant services [2]. In Northern Ireland, the Telemonitoring 
NI service a scalable, mainstream, end-to-end service which 
provides a clinical triage service, was launched in 2011, 
aiming to benefit around 20,000 people over the following 
six years [3]. The Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine [4] is the world's largest centre for research 
and development in telemedicine and e-health and is based in 
Tromsø. It has provided advisory services, plus research and 
development of telemedicine solutions since 1993. 
Delivering healthcare to remote and rural populations is a 
significant challenge, requiring innovative strategies to 
overcome infrastructure deficits, travel difficulties and 
staffing problems. There is an urgent need to reduce 
transport costs and carbon footprint, plus a growing 
acknowledgement that models of long-term care will have to 
evolve to cope with demographic changes and the economic 
downturn. Telemedicine may help to provide equity of health 
service regardless of distance from major centres of care. Yet 
telemedicine is not in common use; while there have been 
numerous pilot studies, on completion technology is often 
withdrawn and the services have not been sustained. The 
disconnected nature of developments has meant similar 
problems 
are 
often 
encountered 
during 
each 
new 
implementation and knowledge is not shared between sites. 
Implementing Transnational Telemedicine Solutions (ITTS) 
proposed transnational knowledge exchange about services 
already proven to work in one country [5], using this 
knowledge to implement services in new settings.  
ITTS was a project partly funded by the EU Northern 
Periphery Program (NPP), which aimed to implement 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

transnational telemedicine solutions in an effective and 
sustainable manner, normalising them into everyday 
practice. The plans for the project have been documented [6]. 
ITTS began in September 2011 and finished in March 2014, 
and built on previous work which mapped telemedicine 
services available in remote and rural areas of Northern 
Europe [7]. Six NPP area countries were actively involved 
and 
ten 
demonstrator 
telemedicine 
projects 
were 
implemented. The project teams were: Scotland (Lead 
Partner): Centre for Rural Health, University of Aberdeen; 
Finland: Oulu Arc Subregion; Ireland: National University of 
Ireland, Galway; Northern Ireland: Centre for Connected 
Health & Social Care; Norway: Norwegian Centre for 
Integrated Care and Telemedicine (NST); and Sweden: 
County Council of Västerbotten. 
The objectives of ITTS were to create sustainable, long-
term projects, enabling the uptake of transnational best 
practice and normalising the use of technology into everyday 
practice, at scale. ITTS aimed to improve accessibility by 
situating services in local communities, or in patients’ 
homes, and reducing unnecessary hospital visits and travel 
for patients and staff. It also aimed to demonstrate cost-
effective service delivery and evaluate the return on 
investment, encouraging the development of eHealth as a 
key business sector in the region. It was hoped this would 
encourage further development of telemedicine in remote 
and rural areas.  
The ten demonstrator projects were classified into three 
themes: videoconferencing consultations; smartphone and 
internet based mobile self-management; and home-based 
health services. While most of the technology used in the 
demonstrator projects is in existence, the implementation 
occurred in new sites, and in a co-ordinated fashion to 
promote sustainability. 
The major benefit of videoconferencing (VC) is to save 
travel time and costs, either for the patient who can contact 
their doctor at a site nearer their home, or for the healthcare 
staff, who need not travel large distances to visit patients. It 
also allows the introduction of services to areas that have 
been previously deemed too remote to allow cost-effective 
access. Because VC can use readily available, relatively 
inexpensive technology with which many people and 
institutions now have experience, it is a simple and economic 
introduction to telemedicine for clinics [8]. 
Smartphones are becoming increasingly popular and can 
provide reminders, symptom or activity tracking facilities, 
and of course, communication with health services, among 
many other features, allowing an inexpensive method of 
interaction with large numbers of patients. Similarly to 
websites, they can support self-management programs, 
providing an exchange of information for various health 
areas and the potential for patients to participate in their 
health care more pro-actively, thereby reducing the burden 
on existing services [9][10].   
Finally, home-based care is of particular interest to 
people living in remote and rural areas, especially those who 
suffer from multiple or complex health and social care needs, 
and those who are restricted in their ability to travel by 
illness or mobility issues. Telemedicine can reduce hospital 
visits and help keep patients in their own communities, 
bringing care into their homes that they would otherwise not 
be able to, or have the opportunity to access [11]. The ten 
demonstrator projects are listed in Figure 1. 
Previous work encouraged the idea that countries with 
experience of specific telemedicine implementations could 
‘export’ their currently existing project to ‘importing’ 
countries which had little or no experience of the application 
[7]. This knowledge allows technology to embed more 
rapidly, anticipating and overcoming obstacles before they 
arise. ITTS had access to a wide range of experts within the 
different partner countries, with a similarly wide range of 
experience. However, the different countries have varying 
health systems and infrastructure capabilities, plus different 
legal situations, and so some ‘translation’ between countries 
is needed. An International Telemedicine Advisory Service 
(ITAS) was created to advise on all elements of the project 
planning, implementation and analysis. ITAS comprised 
telemedicine experts from all of the participating countries. 
Figure 1: The ten demonstrator projects with the participating countries 
Previous work [6] described the plan and proposed methods 
of the ITTS project (summarised briefly in section II). 
Section III presents new results of two years work in the 
implementation of this plan. Conclusions are drawn in 
Section IV. Future assessment will demonstrate whether 
there are travel savings, and whether the services are 
effective, sustainable and improve access to healthcare in 
remote and rural communities.  
II. 
METHODS 
The ITTS project began in September 2011 with projects 
identified from previous work [7]. Each participating country 
identified whether there was any telemedicine activity for the 
subject areas in their region and scoped the potential for its 
introduction. 
Potential 
sites 
were 
assessed 
for 
appropriateness and readiness. Each country identified which 
demonstrator projects they felt able to proceed with. 
Business cases were created to provide details of the clinical 
teams, aims, risks and expected impact of the projects, and 
the financial investments required. The project funding 
allowed for some purchase of telemedicine equipment for the 
demonstrator projects in each country. The business cases 
were reviewed by ITAS, who provided comments on the 
design and implementation strategies. Their feedback was 
addressed before any implementation began. Project 
development workers liaised with the clinical teams, 
organising all aspects of the implementation from assessing 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

requirements to purchasing and installation. Once the 
technology was installed and staff trained in its use, the 
services were offered to patients, followed by the start of 
data collection for the evaluation. 
The evaluation aimed to ascertain whether the 
demonstrator projects worked in each country, the factors 
associated with successful and unsuccessful implementation 
and the cost implications. Assessment examined patients’ 
access to services, changes in hospital visits and travel for 
patients and staff, patient and staff views on their 
experiences of the services, social and cultural factors 
affecting implementation and sustainability and cost savings 
and return on investment from the projects. The 
methodology for this ‘mixed methods’ evaluation of the ten 
demonstrator projects was selected based upon the Model for 
Assessment of Telemedicine (MAST) [11]. It included the e-
Health Implementation Toolkit (e-HIT) [12], to assess 
readiness 
and 
potential 
barriers 
to 
implementation; 
questionnaires and interviews with clinical staff and patients 
using the new services; details of health service and travel 
activity before and after implementation; and a health 
economics analysis including socio-economic scenarios 
modelling the impact of expansion of the new services. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The majority of the demonstrator projects have now been 
successfully 
implemented: 
ITTS 
has 
supported 
the 
development of 25 new services at more than 40 sites in the 
six participating countries. Table 1 provides details of these 
services. 
 
Project 1: VC links for speech therapy services (Ire, NI, 
Scot, Swed) 
Scotland and Sweden had both previously delivered 
speech and language therapy (SLT) services using VC 
systems to link hospitals [5]. VC has the potential to reduce 
travel costs for patients or therapists; for example, in 
Scotland therapists can travel for up to a 6-hour return 
journey to see a patient for an hour-long appointment. 
Reducing travel time releases time for therapists to see other 
patients. VC also facilitates the provision of intensive 
therapy courses requiring shorter but more frequent sessions. 
Various patients benefit from SLT, and ITTS implemented 
services with stroke patients in Northern Ireland, head and 
neck cancer patients in Sweden, and children with speech 
difficulties in Ireland. VC systems were located in patients’ 
homes in Sweden, or within local community hospitals in 
remote or island regions such as the Aran Islands in Ireland 
and the Scottish Highlands. 
Project 2: VC links for renal services (NI, Nor, Scot, 
Swed) 
Existing renal VC services were expanded in Norway 
and Scotland and were exported to Northern Ireland and 
Sweden. Norway supported patients who are undergoing 
haemodialysis in their homes in addition to linking central 
and remote clinics. Scotland expanded their service to offer 
outpatient review appointments between the main hospital in 
Inverness and local renal units in Fort William and the 
Western Isles. Sweden set up links between Umeå hospital 
and local hospitals in Skellefteå and Lycksele to improve 
staff support and access to specialist care. Northern Ireland 
introduced home-based haemodialysis. 
Project 3: VC links for emergency psychiatry services 
(Nor, Scot) 
Emergency services cover out of hours assessments of 
patients in need of acute psychiatric help. VC connections 
with specialists can help prevent the automatic transfer and 
admission of patients by providing an assessment of the 
patient at the initial hospital, wherever that might be located. 
Norwegian studies have demonstrated that both patients and 
professionals reported no differences in quality and 
satisfaction between face to face consultations and VC 
assessments [14]. Reducing patient travel can help prevent 
additional distress and allows patients to remain near to the 
stability of home and carers. Norway had previously 
implemented 24-hour consultant VC cover from Tromsø and 
in ITTS expanded their service to include care for adolescent 
patients in Narvik, Lødingen and Tysfjord, as well as 
exporting it to Lorn and Islands Hospital, Oban, in Scotland. 
VC was also being used in multi-disciplinary team reviews 
to include community teams in ward rounds to help prepare 
for patient discharge and transfer. 
Project 4: VC links for remote diabetes services (NI, 
Scot) 
VC for diabetes services allows local access to specialists 
without the patients having to travel as far, or as often for 
several different appointments. Readings from blood glucose 
meters can be included in the VC link. VC was used in 
Scotland for patients with diabetes for annual or biannual 
review appointments, connecting the Inverness-based 
consultant with patients accompanied by diabetes specialist 
nurses based at community hospitals in Thurso.  ITTS 
expanded the service to include Fort William and Portree on 
the Isle of Skye. Existing services in Orkney were extended 
to include smaller islands, where the VC is also used to 
connect three sites across the islands with the main centre at 
Balfour Hospital, with the option of a 3-way link to 
specialists in Aberdeen. The service was exported to 
Northern Ireland, connecting Ulster Hospital with Bangor 
Hospital. 
Project 5: Smartphones for tracking physical activity 
(Ire, Nor, Scot) 
The combination of the growing problem of obesity and 
the increasing popularity of smartphones motivated this 
project in which the accelerometer sensors in phones were 
used to monitor physical activity. A survey of pedometer 
applications (apps) was made and a suitable program chosen: 
Accupedo by Corusen LLC (Texas, USA). This app runs in 
the background as users go about their daily tasks and 
provides graphs detailing daily step count and progress 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I.  
SERVICES IMPLEMENTED BY COUNTRY
Project 
Finland 
Ireland 
N. Ireland 
Norway 
Scotland 
Sweden 
VC links for speech 
therapy services 
- 
VC between the 
National University 
of Ireland Galway 
and the Aran Islands 
for paediatric 
patients.  
Start: August 2013 
VC connection to 
stroke patients’ 
homes in Newry 
and Mourne, plus 
a local health 
centre. Start: 
November/ 
December 2013 
- 
VC network in 
the northern 
Highlands is 
expanding and 
connecting to 
specialist services 
in Aberdeen and 
London.  
Expanding use to 
head and neck 
cancer patients, 
connecting to 
patients’ homes 
around 
Västerbotten.  
 
VC links for renal 
services 
- 
- 
Home 
haemodialysis 
support and care 
reviews.  
Start: November/ 
December 2013 
Home peritoneal 
dialysis support via 
VC.  
Start: May 2012 
VC consultations 
between 
Inverness, Fort 
William and the 
Western Isles. 
Start May 2013 
VC network 
between hospitals 
in Skellefteå, 
Lycksele and 
Umeå.  
Start: November 
2012 
VC links for 
emergency 
psychiatry services 
- 
- 
- 
Connects Tromsø to 
Narvik, Lødingen 
and Tysfjord for 
assessment of 
paediatric/adolescent 
patients.  
Start: October 2013 
Mobile VC 
connections 
between Lorn and 
Islands Hospital, 
Oban and on-call 
psychiatrists.  
Start: July 2013 
Withdrawn  
VC links for remote 
diabetes services 
- 
- 
VC consultation 
between Ulster 
Hospital and 
Bangor Hospital.  
Start: February 
2013 
- 
Expanding VC 
network between 
Inverness, 
Portree, Fort 
William and 
Thurso, plus links 
between Orkney 
island hospitals 
and Aberdeen.  
- 
Smartphones for 
tracking physical 
activity 
- 
Following a pilot 
trial, four GP clinics 
are ‘prescribing’ the 
app.  
Start: April 2013 
- 
 
App available at a 
Healthy Living 
Centre in Tromso, a 
public activity 
service for 
unemployed people 
and a Weight Loss 
Club.  
Start: May 2013 
One Highland GP 
clinic offering the 
app.  
Start: May 2013 
 
Smartphones for 
inflamatory bowel 
disease 
- 
Consultant at 
National University 
of Ireland, Galway 
offers the app to 
patients.  
Start: September 
2013 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Remote support in 
medical and social 
care emergencies 
Telehealth 
technology 
installed in Oulu 
Arc area nursing 
home.  
Start: May 2013 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Remote exercise 
classes for 
rehabilitation 
Classes delivered 
to elderly 
patients’ homes in 
Oulu Arc area.  
Start: January 
2013 
Classes delivered in 
person and to 
COPD patients’ 
homes in County 
Clare.  
Start: January 2013 
Withdrawn  
- 
Classes delivered 
in person to 
COPD patients at 
Wick and Fort 
William, plus link 
to remote centres 
at Golspie and 
Broadford. Start: 
August – October 
2013 
Classes delivered 
to long-term pain 
patients’ homes in 
Västerbotten.  
Start: May 2013 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I.  
SERVICES IMPLEMENTED BY COUNTRY (CONTINUED) 
Home-based service 
delivery for patients 
with multimorbidity 
VC support for 
Oulu Arc area 
patients with 
multimorbidity 
living at home, 
plus a health 
website providing 
test results and a 
method of 
communicating 
with health staff.  
Start: Oct 2012 
Health room within 
a County Clare GP 
surgery offers 
monitoring 
equipment: BP, 
pulse oximeter, 
respiratory/ peak 
flow, BMI; plus 
exercise quipment:, 
health promotion 
DVD. Start: June 
2013  
- 
- 
- 
Self-measurement 
of blood pressure 
at centres in Malå, 
Sorsele and 
Storuman. ’Check-
up Bag equipment 
for nurses visiting 
patients to 
measure BP and 
calculate INR.  
Start: Nov2012 – 
May 2013 
 
toward daily goals. The partners in Ireland ran a 
randomised controlled trial with the app [15] to determine its 
effectiveness and a suitable protocol for export to the other 
countries. The app was ‘prescribed’ by GPs in Ireland and 
Scotland and used by weight loss groups in Norway. 
Project 6: Smartphones and internet support for 
diabetes 
Diabetes is a condition that has massively increased in 
the past decade and is expected to further grow in the next 
few years [16]. There are already a large number of websites 
and smartphone apps to help users with the disease and 
partly because of this profusion, little is known about which 
are worthwhile recommending to patients. No new services 
were implemented within ITTS in this project; instead an 
international knowledge exchange was organised to tackle 
this complex subject area. Various stakeholders, including 
primary and secondary care clinicians, patients, technology 
developers and other interested parties, contributed to a 
discussion about diabetes telemedicine. Topics of particular 
interest included supporting self-management, providing 
access to integrated information, encouraging lifestyle 
changes, maintaining patient engagement, remote monitoring 
and improving access to care. Information and evidence 
about 
useful 
technology, 
smartphone 
and 
internet 
applications and other resources relevant to diabetes care was 
collated, and a network of expertise and resources created. A 
position paper is being written and future projects planned. 
Project 7: Smartphones for inflammatory bowel disease 
(Ire) 
A smartphone app was developed and trialled in Scotland 
in a collaboration between a surgeon at Raigmore Hospital, 
Inverness, and a technology developer company (Open 
Brolly, Forres, Scotland) to help monitor inflammatory 
bowel disease, and through ITTS this was exported to 
Galway, Ireland. The app allows patients to record and 
transmit their symptoms to a specialist nurse, with details of 
their medication use. The nurse views data on a central 
‘dashboard’ which highlights any changes in patients’ 
conditions, allowing the nurse to contact the patient and 
advise on any management adjustments required. This 
prompt response should help reassure patients, prevent 
unnecessary outpatient appointments and  reduce admissions. 
. 
 
Project 8: Remote support in medical and social care 
emergencies (Fin) 
Northern 
Ireland 
in 
particular 
has 
considerable 
experience with telecare systems to support people with 
health or social care needs and help them to remain 
independent at home. Finland imported this service for frail 
elderly people in nursing homes who are given alarms which 
link to a centre from which help can be sent promptly. 
Project 9: Remote exercise classes for rehabilitation 
(Fin, Ire, Scot, Swed) 
VC rehabilitation classes for people with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or other conditions 
where guided exercise can be useful are particularly 
advantageous because such patients often experience 
difficulty travelling and the ability to take the classes at 
home or at a local hospital is beneficial. Remote patients 
perform the exercises and benefit from the same social, 
educational and clinical interactions as those physically 
present at the clinic. Scotland exported this project to 
Finland, where it is used with the elderly in their homes; in  
Ireland, where COPD patients participate in classes from 
home; and Sweden with patients suffering from long-term 
pain conditions. In Scotland, the service has been 
implemented in new sites using a ‘hub and spoke’ model, 
with physiotherapists in larger COPD clinics in Wick and 
Fort William leading classes for those present while also 
linking to remote community clinics in Golspie and 
Broadford. It is hoped that more clinics can join the links. 
Project 10: Home-based service delivery for patients 
with multimorbidity (Fin, Ire, Swed) 
Based on previous experience of home-based services for 
patients with complex care requirements, this project took 
different forms in different countries. In County Clare, 
Ireland, a self-monitoring station based within a GP clinic 
where patients can check their blood pressure and weight and 
use exercise equipment was implemented. In Sweden, clinic-
based blood pressure 
self-monitoring 
services 
were 
implemented in Malå, Sorsele and Storuman, in addition to a 
second service: a “check-up bag” that nurses used on home 
visits to evaluate blood pressure and calculate the INR blood 
clotting measure. In Finland’s Oulu Arc Subregion, patients 
used a web portal to access laboratory results, monitor their 
health and contact healthcare staff with any questions, plus 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

housebound patients with social and health care needs were 
offered a VC care option. 
At the time of writing, only three projects were not yet 
fully implemented and it was expected that continued effort 
would result in their implementation at a later date. The 
implementation of projects at two sites was cancelled due to 
service and department restructuring or closures. Many 
challenges were overcome, providing significant learning 
points, such as working with hospital IT departments to 
ensure that equipment is correctly installed and determined 
to be safe and secure, especially in projects where systems 
were located in patient homes. Other issues included 
information flow from management to front-line staff, and 
the effects of staff turnover.  
Initial feedback from patients suggested they appreciated 
the time and travel saving that VC allowed. Those using 
home-based services said they enjoyed the social interaction 
the video links offered, as well as the access to services they 
would otherwise not have been able to use. Complaints 
mainly referred to connection quality: intermittent problems 
with the sound or picture on VC, for example. 
ITTS collected and analysed data from the demonstrator 
projects. Results from the evaluation will be reported, and 
recommendations made aiming to help others interested in 
starting 
their 
own 
telemedicine 
services. 
Planned 
dissemination of the project results includes presenting the 
results from the demonstrator projects and cost analysis in 
peer-reviewed journal articles; attendance at various 
conference and policy-informing events; a report collecting 
together all the business cases (“A Case for Telemedicine”); 
and 
a 
guide 
containing 
an 
interactive 
checklist 
(“Telemedicine 
into 
Everyday 
Practice”) 
aimed 
at 
policymakers and service planners, all of which will be 
available on the project website [17]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Historically, telemedicine has rarely moved beyond pilot 
projects. 
The 
reasons 
include 
infrastructure 
issues, 
organisational barriers – both clinical and cultural – 
economic considerations and governance and security 
concerns. ITTS implemented telemedicine services across 
northern Europe, using transnational knowledge exchange to 
facilitate implementation, and encouraging success and 
sustainability. Patients are now using these services as a 
direct result of the project. ITTS has implemented 25 new 
telemedicine services across the six countries, offering 
benefits to patients and staff and showcasing what the 
available technology can achieve. Assessment will provide 
evidence about effectiveness and sustainability, but the 
achievement of implementing this number of telemedicine 
applications, from the initial planning stage [6], to the stage 
where they are operational should not be underestimated. 
This is the stage where many pilots fail, without attention to 
organisational issues.  
The challenges of implementing solutions that are 
sustainable, transnational, and that bring telemedicine into 
everyday practice are considerable, but this project has 
demonstrated the impact of strategic investment. The goal of 
the project was to implement transnational telemedicine 
solutions, 
in an 
effective 
and 
sustainable 
manner. 
Effectiveness and sustainability are as yet to be measured, 
but ITTS has created expert networks which will hopefully 
continue beyond the project timeline. This contribution will 
form a foundation for further work as those services which 
are successful mature and expand, and new applications are 
developed. ITTS has provided a demonstration of what can 
be achieved with transnational collaboration and efforts to 
ensure knowledge and experience is shared in practical ways. 
REFERENCES 
[1] European Commission. Public health eHealth policy. 
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ehealth/policy/index_en.htm  
[2] A national telehealth and telecare delivery plan for Scotland 
to 2015. Driving improvement, integration and innovation. 
Edinburgh: The Scottish Government, 2012. 
[3] www.telemonitoringni.info available 05/02/2014 
[4] www.telemed.no available 05/02/2014 
[5] D. F. Robinson, G. T. Savage, and K. S. Campbell. 
“Organizational learning, diffusion of innovation, and 
international collaboration in telemedicine,” Health Care 
Manage Rev. vol. 28(1), 2003, pp. 68–78.  
[6] M. Casey, P. Hayes, D. Heaney, L. Dowie, G. Ólaighin, M. 
Matero, et al. “Implementing transnational telemedicine 
solutions: a connected health project in rural and remote areas 
of six Northern Periphery countries. Series on European 
collaborative projects,” Eur J Gen Pract. 19(1),2013, 52–58. 
[7] Competitive health services in sparsely populated areas - 
eHealth applications across the urban-rural dimension. 
http://www.northernperiphery.eu/en/projects/show/&tid=11  
[8] W. R. Hersh, D. H. Hickam, S. M. Severance, T. L. Dana, K. 
Pyle Krages, and M. Helfand. “Diagnosis, access and 
outcomes: Update of a systematic review of telemedicine 
services,” J Telemed Telecare. 12(Suppl 2), 2006, pp. S3–31. 
[9] A. S. Mosa, I. Yoo, and L. Sheets. “A systematic review of 
healthcare applications for smartphones,” BMC Med Inform 
Decis Mak. vol. 12, 2012, pp. 67. 
[10] E.Ozdalga, A.Ozdalga, N. Ahuja.“The smartphone in 
medicine:a review of current and potential use among 
physicians and students,”J Med Internet Res14(5),2012, e128. 
[11] G. Paré, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte. “Systematic review of 
home telemonitoring for chronic diseases: the evidence base,” 
J Am Med Inform Assoc. vol. 14(3), 2007, pp. 269–277. 
[12] K. Kidholm, A. G. Ekeland, L. K. Jensen, J. Rasmussen, C. 
D. Pedersen, A. Bowes, et al. “A model for assessment of 
telemedicine applications: MAST,” Int J Technol Assess 
Health Care. vol. 28, 2012, pp. 44–51. 
[13] E. Murray, C. May, F. Mair. “Development and formative 
evaluation of the e-Health Implementation Toolkit (e-HIT),” 
BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. vol. 10, 2010, pp.61. 
[14] D. Gammon, S. Bergvik, T. Bergmo, S. Pedersen. 
“Videoconferencing in psychiatry: a survey of use in northern 
Norway,” J Telemed Telecare. vol. 2(4), 1996, pp. 192–198. 
[15] L. G. Glynn, P. S. Hayes, M. Casey, F. Glynn, A. Alvarez-
Iglesias, J. Newell, et al. “SMART MOVE - a smartphone-
based intervention to promote physical activity in primary 
care: study protocol for a randomized controlled trial,” Trials. 
vol. 14, 2013, pp. 157. 
[16] World Health Organisation. Diabetes data and statistics. 
http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/noncommunicable-
diseases/diabetes/data-and-statistics 26.11.2013 
[17]  www.transnational-telemedicine.eu 10.03.2013 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Videoconferencing Solution: Through Innovation Extension to Attain and Support
Pre-Alzheimer Patients in Their Daily Activities
Mapundu Zamikhaya
Department of Information Technology
Tshwane University of Technology
Pretoria, South Africa
mapunduz@tut.ac.za
Potjie Van Der Walt
Faculty of ICT
Tshwane University of Technology
Pretoria, South Africa
VanDerWaltJS@tut.ac.za
Simonnet Thierry
Department of Informatics
ESIEE-Paris University
Noisy le Grand Cedec, France
t.simonnet@esiee.fr
Maswikaneng Solly Phatle
Department of Information Technology
Tshwane University of Technology
Pretoria, South Africa
MaswikanengPS@tut.ac.za
Abstract—The main objective of this paper is to come up with a
practical Voice over Internet Protocol approach to support
elderly patients affected by Alzheimer disease in their daily
activities. This is done by enhancing and integrating the
existing
Open
Source
features.
The
whole
development
embroiled the integration possibilities of voice, video and
instant messaging services in order to improve communication
processes between local Session Initial Protocol servers and
clients. Part of the proposed work is the remote control tab
feature that will be used to control the robot machine and the
Living lab framework for knowledge creation and sharing. The
preliminary tests and developments have verified that Ekiga
softphone running on robot machine can accept and direct
orders from Asterisks server in a form of audio and video. The
information was gathered through literature review and this
was conducted through the use of case studies, white papers,
peer-reviewed conference papers and journals.
Keywords-Ekiga; Videoconferencing; Leaving-Lab.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There is a correlation behaviour that elderly patients
leave hospital early because of medical expenses, yet they
still need additional care at their home to recover from their
illness. It is believed that treating a patient at home is less
expensive than treating them in hospitals. In this context,
there is a need for technological tools that will support and
help to deploy the integrated care for elderly and chronic
patients. According to Mapundu and Simonnet [6], there are
widely
acknowledged
imperatives
for
helping
elderly
patients living at home (semi)-independently for as long as
possible. The purpose of this study is to integrate and test
the existing Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) tools that
will help elderly people to have trust relationships and be
able to communicate with their family members and
caregivers as to avoid loneliness.
One of the tools that will be implemented is a good
video quality of Videoconferencing Service that will act as a
main communication channel between elderly people, robot
companion, family caregivers and medical professionals.
An Asterisk Private Branch eXchange (PBX) server solution
is
implemented
and
tested
in
order
to
manage
the
communication process between local SIP servers and SIP
clients. Session Initial Protocol (SIP) is an application layer
signalling protocol for creating, modifying and terminating
multimedia session among one or more participants [10].
This paper addresses Videoconferencing Service through
identifying different problems concerning the existing VoIP
tools and new developments that will be needed, with the
aim to accomplish the following objectives : Analyse
codec’s functions whether problems are resulting from
Session Initial Protocol (SIP) servers (Asterisk/ Kamailio),
Testing and making new working version of Ekiga that
support H261, H263, H263+ and H264, this involves
integration and cross-compilation processes for Microsoft
Operating Systems and Open Source Operating Systems,
Integration possibilities of an Internet Protocol (IP) cameras
that will support Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP)
whereby voice orders can be assigned or dialled to an IP
camera and access it using RTSP services and A proposed
remote control for the robot machine that will use a 3rd
channel support for sending and receiving orders (audio,
video, S-command channels data streams).
The intention was to come up with a practical VoIP
approach which could be accomplished by integrating and
testing the various open source tools that are available as a
way forward to achieve the above objectives. The review of
Research Questions gave us an understanding of the
Research problem as a whole and it gave us a clear
reflection
of
knowing
which
VoIP
tools
should
be
implemented and integrated. The follow section summarises
some research questions that we looked at. Does the
problem of codec’s compression and decompression result
from
softphone
clients,
and
which
tools
must
be
implemented to address such?, Can the IP cameras accept
orders from PBX SIP server in a form of audio and videos
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

using RTSP services, if possible are there any delays?, For
auto-negotiation of 3rd channel support, would it be possible
for robot operator to utilize send and receive data streams
either in a form video, sound, s-command from private,
public SIP servers to the robot machine?, Does Real-time
Transport Protocol (RTP) transmits and encapsulates the
voice data streams between endpoints for more than one call
in a single packet, if possible does it reduce the IP overheard
without increases the latency? Do Session Initial Protocol
(SIP) servers have a commitment to support latest version of
Ekiga clients with modification for Graphical User Interface
(GUI) implementation, if so are there more specific
technical requirements that might be needed?
The content of this work follows a simplified strategic
planning process; it was conducted as a literature review
which starts by introducing the current state of VoIP
technologies and its interconnection based on articles and
continues to research the existing literature in order to
discover theories behind interconnections. The experimental
scientific research approach with VoIP supporting tools
were conducted and applied in order to address the main
objectives. This paper starts by describing the overall
research background, VoIP establishment, and research
results and concludes with some future work.
II.
RESEARCH BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
European Scientists have found three new major genetic
links to pre-Alzheimer, affecting up to 20% of people with
brain-wasting disease. It was the most significant such
discovery in 15 years. Alzheimer disease affects more than
26 million people globally and it has no cure with any good
treatment. The need for effective remedies is pressing on,
with the number of cases estimated to go beyond 100
million by 2050 [5]. According to Matos [11], many
European projects have focused on support of technologies
for elderly are on process, CompanionAble is one of the
projects. In response to the problem, Roceries and Simonnet
[8], developed, operate and
maintain a Telemedicine
platform that offers communication and assistance services
to patients, especially for elderly people. This platform has
two main components, namely a Central Server and Local
Equipment for Domestic Internet Gateway (DIG). Both
these components use a secured Internet Protocol Network
over Internet (Virtual Private Networks). This platform is
easy to deploy because all functions and related virtualized
servers can be held on one physical server [8]. Actually, the
platform is operating at Ecole Supèrieure d'lngènieurs en
Èlectronique et Electrotechnique Paris University but the
aim is to install it in any hospital that might need it. Each
patient at home will have a DIG that provides Internet
service and records operational data such as agendas and
monitor data to mitigate temporary internet access failure.
This platform must integrate the communication process for
elderly patients to keep a strong social link with their
families
or
caregivers
and
doctors,
thus
a
good
videoconferencing services will be implemented to provide
a high quality of video output with low latency and jitter.
Integration and evaluation have to be conducted in
regard to embedded Voice over Internet Protocol solutions
by testing the latest developed codec’s and diagnose the
performance because there are challenges about the quality
of the video output. We need to develop and conduct
preliminary tests to assess the possibilities of adding a new
that will be used to pilot or direct robot machine and it can
be replaced by the joystick in future. The choice of the
softphone and codec’s is critical because the Asterisk does
not allow codec translation. This needs that all clients must
be compatible. An interface is hard to design due to dialling
and meeting process; therefore, it will be difficult to use the
same
communication
channel
[8].
The
integration
procedures on how to stream data (video, audio) in IP
Cameras using RTSP services and this communication
channel will need to support specific delays.
Healthcare systems face a number of challenges in the
coming years. These relate to confidentiality of data,
changing demographics and economics of European society
[3]. Effective delivery of healthcare in the future is therefore
likely to depend on a combination of technological solutions
[7]. Human needs are complex and are not necessarily easily
met through simple technological fixes, provision of human
services (social and health) involving many ingredients, thus
some can be supported by the types of functionality
provided
by
technology.
According
to
European
Commission Final ICT and Ageing Report [12], there is a
risk that too much ‘technology’ push might result in
inappropriate
application
and
negative
outcomes,
to
detriment of those immediately concerned as well as to the
longer-term prospects for the community or market. On the
other hand, application of technology in human service,
delaying or blocking innovations that can provide truly
positive benefits for elderly people and their care-givers.
However, the potential offered by technology also extends
to other domains; this comprises the general social inclusion
of elderly people in everyday social life and support for
ageing in the context of employment or daily activities [12].
Currently
the
European
Commission
is
dedicated
in
providing the health-care support for elderly patients to all
European
citizens.
Not
as
an
advantage,
but
as
a
fundamental right for many citizens who lacks the most
basic services [11]. To accomplish this goal, both private
and
public
health
care
sectors
have
identified
Videoconferencing as a strategic tool to improve the health-
care delivery and instructive services to elderly patients with
the aim of reducing medical care costs. As seen in Figure 1,
this is research work collaboration and the collaboration
involves academics, private and public sectors with the aim
to support elderly patients in their daily activities. Number 8
in Figure 1 is ESIEE Paris University, where the proposed
Videoconference solution is being developed.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1.
Research Collaboration.
III.
ESTABLISHING VOIP CONNECTION WITH SIP CLIENTS
AND SIP SERVERS
According to Bley [1], the process of compiling and
running Ekiga with its sources normally require tools like a
working of C/ C++ compiling environment and it depends
on three dependencies that are developed together for
compilation process for instance: Ptlib, Opal and Ekiga.
According to Boundy [2], the above dependencies are
attributes that can be defined in the package stanza files.
They
allows
for
defining
hardware
and
software
prerequisites
and
restrictions
to
be
evaluated
when
executing the compiled, remove, and undo commands on
the package [2]. If users want to compile and install a new
working version of Ekiga, they should make sure that they
don’t have dependencies or packages that are already
installed in their machines. We managed to follow the
relevant steps to compile the Ekiga client on Debian and
Ubuntu machine (Open Source OS) and this involve
downloading, save the Ekiga packages and compiled them.
For Windows Operating Systems (OS), currently it is not
possible to build Ekiga for Windows on Windows machine.
The current process to build Ekiga for Windows is to
generate a 32 bit program (win32) through cross-building on
a GNU/Linux system.
The powerful SIP client-server application supports user
mobility with two operating modes: Proxy and Redirect.
Figure 2 shows a SIP Proxy mode, whereby SIP clients send
requests to the proxy server and the proxy server either
handles the requests or forwards them to other SIP servers.
On the other side of users in VoIP network, the signalling
invitations look as if they are coming from the proxy SIP
server [3].
Figure 2.
SIP Architecture [7].
The minimal set of modules needed for various Asterisk
and Kamailio functions was determined based on the
minimum requirements and using the requirements makes it
possible to develop tests for the target functionalities of these
two PBX systems. We managed to configure and install
certain services and modules for SIP servers (Asterisk and
Kamailio). Primary, we took consideration of minimal
requirements thus two sets of requirements, each describing
a set of abilities necessary for the project. The first set of
requirements pertains to support for SIP based phone calls;
we call a minimal Asterisk, Kamailio PBX system meeting
the voice call and video requirements. The next set of
minimum requirements includes some additional support for
voice mail PBX system. Before selecting the packages
required, firstly install a database that will store users and
generally MySQL is recommended for testing procedures.
After the file system has been formatted, the user will be
presented with the option to select packages or to use default
packages and we followed all the relevant installation steps
to configure and setup both Destar Asterisk 1.6.1.0 and
Kamailio 3.0.0. Primary for database creation, inside the file
/etc/kamailio/kamctlrc the following lines were inserted in
the following format:
SIP_DOMAIN=soult.esiee.fr
DBENGINE=MYSQL
DBRWUSER=openser
DBRWPW="openserrw"
DBROUSER=openserro
DBROPW=openserro
DBROOTUSER="root"
One of the objectives was to activate the RTSP services
for an IP camera (SIP client) and Asterisk PBX (SIP server),
whereby a call in a form of video and audio (orders) can be
dialled and accepted to it and this will provide a means for
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

choosing delivery channels such as UDP, TCP, RTP
mechanisms and etcetera. The AXIS 207W was chosen as an
IP camera for this Videoconferencing platform and for
installation purposes, we connected the AXIS207W IP
camera according to the installation guide then configured
the IP address for AXIS 207W camera (the default IP
address for this camera was 192.168.0.90 and the SIP client
machine was set to 192.168.0.1) and again we configured the
Password for AXIS207 camera (when accessing this camera
for the first time, the “Configure Root Password” dialog will
appear, then we entered a password and re-enter it to
confirm. The default user name was ‘root’, thus it cannot be
changed and the password for AXIS 207W camera was set to
‘1E492’. After the process of compiling and making a
working 3.2.6 version of Ekiga, the next step was to modify
the Graphical User Interface (GUI) of Ekiga and all the GUI
test modification were undertaken in Ubuntu Jaunty 9.0.4,
the same machine that Ekiga softphone was compiled.
Preliminary tests were conducted by creating and adding two
Ekiga tabs, namely, First Tab and robot Control Tab using C,
C++ and by editing XML codes with text editor.
IV.
RSEARCH OUTCOMES
A.
SIP Clients Running on Windows and Open Source
Platform
The processing of compiling and making a new working
version of Ekiga running on Linux and Windows platform is
part of our research objectives. The Ekiga softphone was
selected as a SIP client for this project, because it’s an Open
Source application that allows easy modification, unlike
other softphones it supports many audio and video codec’s
selection and is supported both in Open Source & Windows
platform [4]. A number of tests were performed for both
platforms, and, as seen in Figure 3 and Figure 4, are Ekiga
SIP clients that were created.
Figure 3.
Registering Ekiga client to soult.esiee.fr SIP domain.
Figure 4.
Ekiga SIP client with modified tabs.
Mapundu and Simonnet [6], used Glade interface
designer to create the proposed remote control prototype as
seen in Figure 5. The intension was to test the possibilities
of modifying the GUI of Ekiga with the aim of adding the
proposed Remote Control to direct the robot machine and in
future it can be replaced by the joystick.
Command output
Robot Control
via Camera
Call
Volume Adjustment
Dial Pad
ALT Button
(changing function)
Schedule
Emergence Call
Time, Power, Robot
Status Display
Command Line
Figure 5.
Proposed remote control prototype [6].
After successfully integrating the RTSP services for an
IP camera, then the image captured by the camera was
displayed as seen on Figure 6, this is an image that was
captured by AXIS207W (selected IP camera) at ESIEE
Paris test lab environment. Practically you can display the
live view page on separate window by issuing the following
command: FFplay (in the web link) and you should be on
Linux terminal.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 6.
Proposed remote control prototype.
As seen in Figure 7, is DeStar/Asterisk and, in Figure 8,
is Kamailio SIP domain, Mapundu and Simonnet [6],
managed to configure and install both SIP servers. Before
starting Ekiga clients, they need to have a SIP registrar
server for communication connectivity of which in this
scenario we configured: soult.esiee.fr acting as a Registrar
Server and it is possible to issue SIP calls.
Figure 7.
Soult.esiee.fr SIP domain..
Figure 8.
Soult.esiee.fr SIP domain..
After successfully installing the SIP servers, as seen in
Table 1, summaries both Kamailio and Asterisk PBX
comparison findings.
TABLE I.
DESTAR/ASTERISK SIP SERVER VS KAMAILIO SIP SERVER
Function/Specification
Support
Asterisk SIP Server
Supported Status
( Yes or No)
Kamailio SIP Server
Supported Status
(Yes or No)
Modelling and Integration
Yes
Yes
SIP support
Yes
Yes
PSTN function
Yes
Yes
Voicemail
Yes
Not Yet
IVR (interactive Voice
Response)
Yes
Not Yet
Database Support
Yes
Yes
IP authentication and security
Yes
Yes
Presence Message
Not Yet
Yes
Text Message
Yes
Yes
Interface Management
Yes, AGI
Yes, MI
NAT Support
Yes
Yes
Packet Route
Not yet, some challenges
when working with multi-
domains
Yes, more used for load
balancing and multi-
domain support
Multi-domain
Not yet
Yes
V.
FUTURE WORK
According to Conklin et al. [13], the development of
assisted living and Tele-Health applications requires domain
oriented interdisciplinary research as a result there will be a
prerequisite for a Living Lab. A Living Lab is an innovative
approach to deal with community driven in real life
improvement context and it is motivated by knowledge
creation, sharing, collaboration and experimenting in open
real environments [9]. This approach offers its client group
with an opportunity to expand much deeper perceptive of
how various mechanisms in their useful locations function
and interconnect. According to Jacobus and Zaaiman [9]
define living labs as “The Living Lab is a system and
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

environment for building a future economy in which real-life
user centric innovation will be the normal co-creation
technique
for
new products,
services
and
community
infrastructure”. The impression at the starting point of a
Living Lab is to turn clients from being considered as merely
subjects to whom new products or services are simple
proposed into dynamic players contributing to the co-
creation
and
experimentation
of
emerging
ideas,
breakthrough scenarios and innovative concepts [13]. Part of
our recommendation in devising a plan of action for Europe,
is to pursue the development of Tele-health Living Lab
Framework. As seen in Figure 9, this is a Community Living
Lab Factory Framework that is developed by [9] and it can
be utilised for resource sharing as well as creative and
innovation thinking.
Figure 9.
Community Living Lab Framework [9].
In addition to future work in devising action plan for
European Countries is to come up with Knowledge Brokers
(KBs). The implementation of Knowledge Brokers will
promote
mutual
understanding
that
gives
Researchers,
Decision makers and Caregivers a better understanding of
each other’s environments and this will help to spread the
awareness together with adoption of innovations [13]. It
should be noted however that the trade off between audio,
video
quality
and
throughput
performance
of
this
Videoconferencing tool is still ongoing issues.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Integrate and test the existing VoIP tools that will help
elderly people to have trust relationships with their family or
caregivers and one of the tools that was proposed is the
implementation of Videoconferencing service (VoIP Tool)
that will act as a main communication channel between
elderly people, robot Companion, family caregivers and
medical professionals. Both assessments from SIP client and
SIP server side has been conducted successful but there are
still some limitations in regard to some communication
services, hence there are some developments with latest
versions of Ekiga soft phones and Asterisk PBX systems that
are currently examined by VoIP engineers. All this work
should be done through The Living Lab approach umbrella;
this is an approach that will provide its user group
(researchers, community, students, industry, academics and
etcetera) with an opportunity to develop much deeper
understanding of how various components in their functional
environment operate and interrelate [3].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Some research leading to these results has received
funding from European Community’s seventh Framework
Programme
(FP7/2007-2013,
under
grant
agreement
nº216487), French National Research Association through
QuaVADis Project.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Bley, “Integrating service robots into ICT solution for
technology supporting ageing,” FP7 on CompanianAble
Project. France, vol. A247, pp. 183–195, April 2008.
[2]
J. Boundy, “ Telemedicine for elderly patient at home”,
International
conference
on
Smart
Homes
and
Health
Telematics, Germany, pp. 65–80, May 2010.
[3]
C. Callegari and M. Pagano, “Security and delay issues in SIP
systems,”
Wiley
InterScience
International
Journal
on
Communication Systems, London, pp. 1023–1044, July 2009.
[4]
G.
Clinton,
E.
Mativo
and
N.
Thai,
“Robotics-based
curriculum development for an immigration course into
computer
system
engineering,”
In
SpringlerLink
on
Technological Developments in Education and Automation,
pp. 165-171, April 2010.
[5]
A. Coute and T. Simonnet, “Enhanved visiophony to operate
a robot companion,” In SpringlerLink on Computer Science,
Italy, pp. 305-315, May 2009.
[6]
Z. Mapundu and T. Simonnet, “Enhanced VoIP solution for
controlling a robot-companion,” In
IADIS
International
Conference in Aplied Computing, Romania, vol. 2, pp. 237–
245, March 2010.
[7]
Z. Mapundu, T. Simonnet, and JS van der Walt, “A
Videoconfrencing Tool Acting as a Home-Based Healthcare
Monitoring
robot
for
Elderly
Patients,”
In
IOS
Press
International
Global
Tele-health
Conference
in
Aplied
Computing, Sydney, vol. 3, pp. 180–218, November 2012.
[8]
F. Rocaries and T. Simonnet, “Collaborative tools for
telemedicine
platform:
monitoring,
communication
and
storage,” In IADIS International Conference Journal on
Informatics, Brazil, pp. 193-205, July 2009.
[9]
SW. Jacobus and JJ. Zaaiman, , “Community Living Lab as a
Collaborative Innnovation Environment,” Informing Science
Issues in Information Science and Information Technology,
vol. 6, Dec. 2009, pp. 422-435.
[10] L. Madsen and M. Spencer, “Asterisk: The Future of
Telephony,” 2nd ed United States of America, O’Reilly
Media, Inc. ISBN 978-0-596-51048-0. Safari Oreilly.
[11] LM.
Matos,
“TeleCARE:
Collaborative
Virtual
Elderly
Support Communities,” ICEIS Library 1st Workshop on Tele-
Care, Spain, pp. 6-17, April 2004.
[12] European Commision Final ICT and Ageing Report, “ICT
and
Ageing:
European
study
on
users,
markets
and
technologies,” France Portal, pp. 128-145, March 2010.
[13] J. Conklin, E. Lusk, M. Harris, and P. Stolee, “Knowledge
brokerrs in a knowledge network: the case of seniors health
research
transfere network
knolwdge brokers,” BioMed
Central Hournal in Implementation Science, vol.2, Jan. 2013,
pp. 1-10,doi:11.1026/implementationscience.1110476l.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Ontology- and Model-Based Quality Indicators Designing Framework 
 
Osamu Takaki 
Gunma University Hospital 
Gunma University 
Maebashi, Japan 
takaki@gunma-u.ac.jp 
Izumi Takeuti 
Research Institute for Secure Systems 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology 
Tsukuba, Japan 
takeuti@ni.aist.go.jp 
Noriaki Izumi 
Intelligent Systems Research Institute 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology 
Tsukuba, Japan 
n.izumi@aist.go.jp 
 
Abstract—Though quality indicators play an important role in 
assessment of medical service quality of hospitals, there still 
exists no universal framework to collect or select adequate 
quality indicators for certain assessment of medical service 
quality. This paper provides a set of models called "Medical 
Service Assessment Models (MSAM)" that help collect 
adequate quality indicators to assess medical service quality 
from the patients’ viewpoint. To this end, we focus on a set of 
semantic patterns of medical service quality assessment and 
develop an ontology called "Medical Service Assessment 
Ontology (MSAO)", which is a vocabulary to construct MSAM 
based on the patterns. The framework consisting of MSAM 
and MSAO plays a role in guidelines for collecting adequate 
quality indicators to assess medial service quality from the 
patients' viewpoint, and helps explain the basis for the 
collection of quality indicators. 
Keywords-quality indicator; medical service assessment; 
ontology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Quality indicators play an important role in assessment of 
medical service quality of hospitals. Recently, medical 
assessment organizations such as the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality (AHRQ) [1], the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) [11] and the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) [12] have provided a 
lot of quality indicators to hospitals and toolkits to calculate 
values of their indicators based on data in medical databases 
in hospitals. Moreover, they have compared the values above 
on the international scale. Such comparisons will expand in 
the future. 
However, there still exists no universal framework to 
collect or select adequate quality indicators for certain 
assessment of medical service quality, and hence, each 
medical assessment organization provides a series of quality 
indicators in its own and it is not easy to fairly compare 
medical service qualities based on quality indicators.  
This paper provides a set of models that help collect 
adequate quality indicators to assess medical service quality 
from the patients' viewpoint. The models are called "Medical 
Service Assessment Models (MSAMs)". To this end, we 
focus on a set of semantic patterns of medical service quality 
assessment and develop an ontology that is a vocabulary to 
construct MSAM based on the patterns. The patterns and 
ontology 
are 
called 
“Medical 
Service 
Assessment 
Description Patterns (MSADPs)” and "Medical Service 
Assessment Ontology (MSAO)", respectively. MSAMs are 
constructed with instances of concepts and properties in 
MSAO. MSAO is developed by an ontology developing tool 
“Semantic Editor” [5]. 
The framework consisting of MSAO and MSAMs plays 
a role in a guideline for collecting adequate quality indicators 
to assess medial service quality from the patients' viewpoint, 
and helps explain the basis for the collection of quality 
indicators. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 explains MSADP. Section 3 introduces MSAO 
based on MSADPs, and Section 4 introduces MSAMs based 
on MSAO. Section 5 explains how to design quality 
indicators based on MSAMs. Sections 6 and 7 explain 
related works and the conclusion. 
II. 
MEDICAL SERVICE ASSESSMENT 
DESCRIPTION PATTERNS 
Medical Service Assessment Description Patterns 
(MSADPs) are semantic patterns of medical service quality 
assessment, which are obtained from organizing assessors’ 
thinking how to assess medical services of medical staff in 
hospitals. 
MSADPs consist of the following patterns.  
1. 
What types of medical staff and instruments are 
there in the hospital? 
2. 
What types of patients have been accepted by the 
hospital? 
3. 
What treatments have been executed to the 
patients? 
4. 
What results have the patients obtained after the 
treatments? 
5. 
In the 4th phase above, how do the results differ 
from estimates? 
MSADPs can be considered to be semantic or description 
patterns of Donabedian's assessment of medical service 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

quality based on the aspects of "constructions, processes and 
outcomes" of medical services [4] plus acceptance situations 
of patients. One can also consider that MSADPs are 
organized from the patients’ viewpoints. Therefore, the 
viewpoint of medical service quality assessments based on 
MSADPs might be limited more than Donabedian's 
viewpoint. However, by limiting the scope of the assessment, 
the way to design quality indicators based on MSADPs can 
be more systematic than Donabedian's method. 
III. 
MEDICAL SERVICE ASSESSMENT ONTOLOGY 
The purpose of this paper is to provide a set of models to 
design adequate quality indicators for assessment of medical 
service quality according to MSADPs. To this end, we 
introduce Medical Service Assessment Ontology (MSAO), 
which is a vocabulary to construct the models. 
A. Patients 
In MSAO, a patient denotes a type of people who share 
common problems, and problems are mainly classified into 
problems to be solved by medical services and others called 
background problems (Fig. 1). The former denotes mainly 
diseases, while the latter is classified according to age, 
pregnancy or congenital disorders. 
In Fig. 1, yellow (highly-colored) rotundate rectangles 
describe concepts, while pink (softly-colored) rotundate 
rectangles with dotted lines describe attributes of concepts. 
For example, a concept “patient” has two attributes 
“background” and “target disease”, and “background” has 
the range “background problem”, which is a subclass of 
“problem”, where the range of an attribute denotes the set of 
values of the attribute. 
B. Patients’ Values and Purposes 
A value denotes what a patient wants in solving his/her 
problems (diseases). A value consists of 8 types of value 
components in Fig. 2 on the next page. A purpose is regarded 
as a value plus criteria to attain its value components (Fig. 2). 
 
C. Medical Services 
A medical service denotes what is executed to a patient 
to solve his/her problem(s). Medical services are mainly 
classified into events and activities (Fig. 3 on the next page). 
An event is a set of one or multiple activities or smaller 
events, while an activity is what a medical staff directly 
executes on the spot. For example, a surgery is regarded as a 
medical service, while laparotomy is an activity by an 
operating surgeon in a surgery. 
A service in Fig. 3 has four attributes: “target purpose”, 
“approach”, “tool”, and “then” that indicates the next service 
of the service. A process of a medical service is a path 
consisting of events or activities to attain the medical service.
Figure 1.  Patients and their problems (Partial)
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

One can develop process models of medical services by 
combining instances of medical service concept (cf. Fig. 8 on 
the last page).  
D. Medical staff, instruments and facilities 
Medical service providers consist of medical staff, 
instruments and facilities (Fig. 4). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Values and purposes (Partial). 
 
Figure 3.  Medical services. 
 
Figure 4.  Medical service providers (Partial). 
Medical staff are doers or people in charge of a medical 
service. For example, doctors, anesthetists, radiologists and 
nurses are typical medical staff. On the other hand, 
instruments and facilities are hospitals' resources used by 
medical staff in medical services. In this paper, a medicine is 
regarded to be one of those instruments. For example, MRI 
is an instrument, while an operation room is a facility. 
E. Patient outcome 
A patient outcome denotes a state of a patient that might 
change through an activity (Fig. 5 on the next page). Patient 
outcomes are classified into (i) completion, (ii) completion 
with potential risk, (iii) failure, and (iv) emergency, 
according to degrees of activity attainments, risks that 
patients might have through the activity and costs that 
patients pay for the activity attainments. “Completion” 
denotes a patient outcome that is obtained by a complete 
activity with no problem. “Completion with potential risk” 
denotes a patient outcome from which the next activity is 
feasible but which has some potential risk(s) that might be 
actualized in the future. “Failure” denotes that the doer could 
not complete the activity. Finally, "emergency" denotes that 
the patient falls into critical situations such as the patient's 
death by the activity. An accident denotes a negative 
outcome that a patient conclusively has. Possible outcome 
(or possible accident) is a pair of a patient outcome (or 
accident, respectively) and its possibility. 
 
“Completion 
with 
potential 
risk”, 
“failure” 
and 
“emergency” have attributes “risk outcome” and ”risk 
accident” whose ranges are possible outcome and possible 
accident respectively, which means that, if these types of 
patient outcomes occur, then (negative) patient outcomes or 
accidents might occur in the future. Moreover, “failure” and 
“emergency” have an attribute “result” with range “fatal 
accident”, which denotes a serious accident that might halt 
the medical service including the activity. 
IV. 
MEDICAL SERVICE ASSESSMENT MODELS 
In this section, we explain Medical Service Assessment 
Models (MSAMs). MSAMs show situations related to 
medical services from the viewpoints of the five patterns of 
MSADPs, and they are constructed with instances of 
concepts in MSAO. Thus, we will explain MSAMs 
according to the five patterns above. 
Prior to constructing MSAMs, one has to set a main 
service such as "an open abdominal surgery of stomach 
cancer" that he/she will assess eventually. 
The main service above is called a conclusive service. 
The conclusive service is set by using concepts of patients in 
MSAO, as follows. 
1. 
Set problems of patients to make clear a conclusive 
medical service for stomach cancer patients. 
2. 
Set a type and/or stage of target cancer in order to 
make clear the problem to solve by the medical service. 
3. 
Set background problems of target patients. (As an 
example, we here consider all patients of stomach cancers 
with stage II.) 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 5.  Outcomes of patients (Partial). 
 
4. 
Set values and purposes for the patients according 
to the 8 types of value components in Fig. 2. Then, one can 
also set attainment criteria of patients' satisfaction about the 
values. 
5. 
Finally, set a conclusive medical service as well as 
an approach of the conclusive medical service. 
As an example of a conclusive medical service, we here 
consider an open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer. In 
the following subsections, we construct MSAMs based on 
the conclusive medical service above. 
A. Medical Service Provider Model 
A Medical Service Provider Model (MSPM) is a model 
that shows provisions for a given conclusive medical service. 
The model is employed to design quality indicators in the 
first phase of MSADPs.  
MSPM consists of medical staff, instruments, facilities 
and dependency relationships between them. Here, a 
"dependency relationship" means a relationship between a 
medical service or a thing related to a medical service such 
as an instrument or a facility and what plays an exclusive 
role for the service or the thing. The dependency relationship 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

is a transitive relationship. Therefore, for example, the 
medical staff "operating surgeon" is an exclusive medical 
staff of an event "open abdominal surgery of stomach 
cancer". Fig. 6 defines the dependency relationship by the 
properties "exclusive ...". 
 
Figure 6.  Dependency relationships. 
Fig. 7 shows an example of MSPM that indicates 
exclusive or significant medical services, instruments, 
facilities and medical staff for open abdominal surgery of 
stomach cancer. Since each instance in Fig. 7 is connected by 
dependency relationship labelled by "exclusive ...". All 
instances in Fig. 7 are exclusive or significant for the 
conclusive medical service. 
For example, the small event "diagnosis of the primary 
tumor" is an exclusive component event of the surgery above, 
"MRI" and "CT" are exclusive instruments for the diagnosis 
and "radiologist" is an significant staff who can exclusively 
use the instruments. Therefore, the small event, instruments 
and staff above are all exclusive for the surgery. 
 
Figure 7.  MSPM for open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer (Partial). 
B. Patient Model 
A Patient Model (PM) is an instance of a patient's 
concept of MSAO. Thus, the content is what we already 
have explained in Section 3.1. Here we give an example of a 
PM "patients of stomach cancers". Moreover, as examples of 
patients' purposes we give (1) life extension, (2) recovery of 
life function, (3) recovery of physical function and (4) 
alleviation of physical and mental pain caused by diseases. 
C. Medical Service Process Model 
From a given conclusive medical service such as "open 
abdominal surgery of stomach cancer", some concrete 
approach and constraints of the medical service can be 
decided. According to such an approach and/or constraints, 
one can construct a process model of the medical service, 
which is called a Medical Service Process Model (MSPrM). 
The example of an MSPrM is partially shown in Fig. 8 on 
the last page. 
Fig. 8 shows a process from “diagnosis of primary 
tumor” to “surgery performance”. Each small event or 
activity that constitutes the conclusive medical service is 
assigned to a person in charge or a doer. For example, the 
small event in Fig. 8 "performance of surgery" consists of 
eight activities and the person in charge of the small event is 
a "doctor", while the activity "general anesthesia" in 
"performance of surgery" is assigned to a doer, an 
"anesthesist". Moreover, some small events and activities are 
assigned to instruments and/or facilities. 
D. Patient Outcome Model 
A Patient Outcome Model (POM) shows the status of a 
patient that chances by activities and/or events according to 
the process of the conclusive medical service. A POM is 
expressed as a list that consists of possible statuses of a 
patient through the last small medical service that constitutes 
the conclusive medical service. A status of a patient through 
a small medical service that constitutes the conclusive 
medical service is determined based on the completion 
degree of the service, potential risks and costs caused by the 
service. 
A POM is constructed through the following steps. 
1. 
Given an MSPM, PM, and MSPrM, sort out patient 
outcomes by considering the completion degrees, potential 
risks and costs of the small services that constitutes the 
MSPrM under the assumption that all services above are 
executed acceptably. The patient outcomes above are 
desirable ones. 
2. 
Pick up small events or activities that are not easy 
to complete with no potential risk and no high cost. Thus, 
add the undesirable outcomes that are caused by the failure 
of such small events and/or activities. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In the case of open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer, 
one may obtain undesirable patient outcomes including the 
following outcomes: 
i. 
Tumor excision with a certain level of bleeding,  
ii. 
Tumor excision with surgical site infection,  
iii. 
Tumor excision with light damage to abdominal 
organs,  
iv. 
Excessive tumor excision,  
v. 
Deficient tumor excision and  
vi. 
Failure of tumor excision by severe damage to 
abdominal organs or blood vessel. 
V. 
DESIGN OF QUALITY INDICATORS BASED ON 
MSAMS 
In this section, we explain the way to design quality 
indicators based on given MSAMs that are obtained in the 
previous section. As well as the previous section, we 
consider "open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer" as a 
conclusive medical service. Thus, we will explain how to 
design quality indicators to assess the quality of the 
conclusive medical service above in the following 
subsections. 
A. Design of QIs based on MSPM 
By virtue of the MSPM that is obtained in Section 4.1, 
one can clarify significant medical staff, instruments and 
facilities of the given conclusive medical service. Thus, 
quality indicators can be defined to be what indicate the 
status of the resources above.  
For example, it is valuable for assessment of the 
conclusive medical service quality to calculate quality 
indicators that indicate acceptance situations of medical staff 
"radiologist", 
"cancer 
physician" 
and 
"anesthetist", 
instruments "MRI" and "CT" and a facility "operation room", 
which are shown as exclusive resources in the MSPM (Fig. 
7). 
B. Design of QIs based on PM 
By virtue of the PM obtained in Section 4.2, target 
patients of the given conclusive medical service can be 
figured out. In the case of "stomach cancer patients", quality 
indicators can be defined to be what indicate acceptance 
number of patients who are characterized by instances in the 
PM above. 
C. Design of QIs based on MSPrM and POM 
By virtue of the POM that is obtained in Section 4.4, one 
can clarify remarkable patient outcomes, especially, 
undesirable ones (i, …, vi in Section 4.4). Thus, it is valuable 
to define quality indicators that indicate frequency of the 
undesirable patient outcomes above. 
For example, the number of surgeries that need a certain 
amount of blood transfusion or time-lengths reflects the 
frequency of the undesirable outcomes i and iii. On the other 
hand, the number of surgeries that need certain lengths of 
hospital stays reflects the frequency of the outcome that 
force patients to bear the burden such as the outcomes iii and 
iv. The rate of SSI is directly related to the outcome ii. 
Finally, the rate of hospital readmissions and re-surgeries 
reflect the frequency of the outcomes v and vi. 
Finally, we explain how to design quality indicators that 
correspond to the third step in MSADPs by using MSPrM 
and POM in Sections 4.3 and 4.4. Through the two models 
above, one can associate remarkable undesirable outcomes 
i, ...,vi and small events and/or activities in the MSPrM. Thus, 
quality indicators that indicate level of skill of such services 
are important ones of the third pattern of MSADPs. 
For example, degree of conformance of scales of tumors 
in diagnoses before surgeries to scales of tumors that surgery 
doctors actually excised is related to frequency of the 
outcomes iv and v in Section 4.4. Thus, the degree of the 
conformance above may be an important indicator of surgery 
doctors' skills. 
Moreover, the executing rate of additional activities or 
small events that prevent the outcomes i,...,vi are also 
important quality indicators of the third pattern of MSADPs 
D. Comparison of QID-FW and TDD-FW 
The designing framework of quality indicators explained 
in the previous sections, which we call QI-designing-FW or 
QID-FW, can be regarded as an analogy of a test-driven 
development framework (TDD-FW) of information systems. 
The following table shows correspondence relationships of 
components of QIDFW and TDD-FW. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF QID-FW AND TDD-FW 
 
QID-FW 
TDD-FW 
1 
Medical staff 
System users 
2 
Patients 
Data 
3 
Medical instruments and 
facilities 
Information systems 
4 
Medical services 
Accumulation of data 
through information 
systems 
5 
Medical service 
provider models 
Use case diagrams 
6 
Patient models 
Data models 
7 
Medical service 
process models 
Business process models 
8 
Patient outcome models 
Models obtained by 
integration of use case 
scenarios 
9 
The model constituting a 
patient outcome models 
Use case scenarios 
10 
Quality indicators 
Tests 
 
The 1st to 3rd items in Table 1 are components that exist 
initially in working places, while the 5th to 9th items are 
models or specifications. From the viewpoint of medical 
informatics, medical services can be regarded as creation 
and/or modification of patients' data. Thus, the 1st to 3rd 
components of QID-FW can be regarded as the same 
components of TDD-FW in Table 1. Therefore, medical 
service provider models in QID-FW correspond to use case 
diagrams in TDD-FW, which show relationships between 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

users and information systems. Moreover, patient models can 
be considered to be data models (more properly, master data 
models), while medical service process models can be 
considered to be business process models that shows 
workflows with information systems. Though there do not 
exist well-known models in TDD-FW that directly 
correspond to patient outcome models, components of a 
POM, which show outcomes of activities in a medical 
service, can be represented by use case scenarios. 
On the other hand, a test in the TDD-FW plays the role of 
a criterion of an information system or a service with the 
system. So, quality indicators can be regarded as tests in the 
TDD-FW. 
In TDD-FW, developers create efficient tests (or test 
cases) systematically based on requirement specifications 
that consists of the 5th to 9th models of TDD-FW in Table 1. 
Thus, the methodology in QID-FW to design quality 
indicators, which is based on the idea of tests (test cases) 
designing in TDD-FW, can be considered to be at least 
partially reasonable and systematical way to design a set of 
quality indicators. 
VI. 
RELATED WORK 
The paper [4] is one of the representative researches on 
what quality of medical service is and how to measure 
medical 
service 
quality. 
Moreover, 
one 
can 
take 
representative researchers such as Collopy [2], Copnell [3], 
Mainz [8, 9] and Mainz et al. [10] for development and 
improvement of quality indicators. These results play 
significant roles in researches how to express medical service 
quality as numerical values. This paper introduces a 
framework based on MSAO and MSAM to effectively 
employ the methods that the previous researchers have 
developed in order to obtain ideal standard of medical 
service quality. 
On the other hand, one can take the papers [6] and [7] for 
instances of development frameworks of ontology for 
medical 
information 
systems. 
By 
combining 
these 
frameworks and MSAO, one can establish a framework to 
define ideal quality indicators and to calculate the values of 
the quality indicators based on data in medical information 
systems. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In order to design adequate quality indicators for 
assessment of medial service quality from the patients’ 
viewpoint, and to explain the basis for the design of quality 
indicators above, this paper provides the following products: 
1. 
A set of semantic patterns of medical service 
quality assessment, which is called "Medical Service 
Assessment Description Patterns (MSADPs)". 
2. 
A set of models called "Medical Service 
Assessment Models (MSAMs)" that help collect adequate 
quality indicators to assess medical service quality from the 
patients’ viewpoint. 
3. 
An ontology called "Medical Service Assessment 
Ontology (MSAO)", which is a vocabulary to construct 
MSAM based on MSADPs. 
Moreover, we also briefly explain the way to design 
quality indicators based on the framework consisting of the 
three products above (see Section 5). 
On the other hand, the method of our framework to 
construct patient outcome models is still highly dependent on 
individual skills, and it has not yet been sufficiently 
systematic. Thus, our next subject will be to develop a more 
systematic method to construct patient outcome models. 
Moreover, it is necessary to make our designing 
framework easier for users including medical staff to use. To 
this end, we will be required to develop a tool that assists 
users to make medical service assessment models, and to 
evaluate the acceptability of the framework among medical 
staff. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 24500167. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
AHRQ, 
“Agency 
for 
Healthcare 
Research 
and 
Quality”, 
http://www.ahrq.gov/index.html, [Retrieved: 11, 2013]. 
[2] 
B. T. Collopy, “Clinical indicators in accreditation: An effective 
stimulus to improve patient care”, International Journal for Quality in 
Health Care 12(3), 2000, pp. 211-216. 
[3] 
B. Copnell, V. Hagger, S. G. Wilson, S. M. Evans, P. C. Sprivulis, 
and P. A. Cameron, “Measuring the quality of hospital care: an 
inventory of indicators”, Intern Med J. 39(6), 2009, pp. 352-360. 
[4] 
A. Donabedian, “Explorations in quality assessment and monitoring, 
Vol. 1, the definition of quality and approaches to its assessment”, the 
Foundation of the American College of Healthcare Executives, 1980. 
[5] 
K. 
Hasida, 
“Introduction 
to 
Semantic 
Editor”, 
http://i-
content.org/semauth/intro, (in Japanese), [retrieved: 11, 2013]. 
[6] 
Kaiser, C. Akkaya and S. Miksch, “How can information extraction 
ease formalizing treatment processes in clinical practice guidelines? 
A method and its evaluation”, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 
39(2), 2007, pp. 151-163. 
[7] 
T. Mabotuwana and J. Warren, “An ontology-based approach to 
enhance querying capabilities of general practice medicine for better 
management of hypertension”, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 47 
(2), 2009, pp. 87-103. 
[8] 
J. Mainz, “Defining and classifying clinical indicators for quality 
improvement”, Int J Qual Health Care 15(6), 2003, pp. 523-30. 
[9] 
J. Mainz, “Developing evidence-based clinical indicators: a state of 
the art methods primer”, International Journal for Quality in Health 
Care, 15(1), 2003, pp. i5-i11. 
[10] J. Mainz, A. M. Hansen, T. Palshof, and P. D. Bartels “National 
quality measurement using clinical indicators: The Danish national 
indicator project”, Journal of Surgical Oncology 99(8), 2009, pp. 500-
504. 
[11] NIH (2013) National Institutes of Health (NIH), http://www.nih.gov/,  
[retrieved: 11, 2013]. 
[12] OECD, “OECD Health Data 2013 Definitions, Sources and Methods”, 
http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/Table-of-Content-Metadata-
OECD-Health-Data-2013, [Retrieved: 11, 2013]. 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 8.  MSPrM of open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer (Partial). 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Towards Patient-Centered Telemedicine 
Juha Puustjärvi 
University of Helsinki 
Helsinki, Finland 
juha.puustjarvi@cs.helsinki.fi 
Leena Puustjärvi 
The Pharmacy of Kaivopuisto 
Helsinki, Finland  
leena.puustjarvi@kolumbus.fi
 
 
 
Abstract— Patient-centered care is an emerging healthcare 
model that is changing how people think about health and 
about the patients themselves. It emphasizes the coordination 
and integration of care, and the use of appropriate 
information, communication, and education technologies in 
connecting patients, caregivers, physicians, nurses, and others 
into a healthcare team where the health system supports and 
encourages cooperation among team members. However, in 
spite of the widespread adoption of telemedicine, existing 
telemedicine applications do not support patient centered-care. 
In this paper, we present our designed cloud based 
telemedicine system that supports patient-centered care. It 
exploits Personal Health Records (PHRs) in sharing patient’s 
clinical documents, and it manages medical consultation 
requests by exploiting a Consultation ontology. The system and 
the PHRs may be located anywhere in the Internet, and its 
consulting organizations may include any healthcare provider 
having the ability for consultation.  
Keywords - telemedicine; patient-centered care; personal 
health records; CCD standard, cloud computing; ontologies; 
eHealth ecosystem  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Telemedicine is the use of telecommunication and 
information technologies in order to provide clinical health 
care at a distance [1]. It aims to eliminate distance barriers 
and can improve access to medical services that would often 
not be consistently available in distant rural communities [2]. 
In particular, telemedicine is viewed as a cost-effective 
alternative to the more traditional face-to-face way of 
providing medical care [3].  
At the same time, the introduction of new emerging 
healthcare trends, such as patient-centered care [4], 
pharmaceutical care [5], and personal health records (PHRs) 
[6], are changing how people think about health and about 
the patients themselves.  In addition, many studies have 
demonstrated that the provision of these healthcare models 
can 
increase 
compliance 
with 
treatment 
regimens, 
satisfaction with the health care provider and medical 
facility, and improve the ultimate health outcome for the 
individual [7].  
It is also true that patients who do not understand their 
treatment instructions, disease management, or prescription 
requirements are more likely to mishandle their health, be 
hospitalized more frequently, and have much higher medical 
costs than their more involved counterparts [8]. 
Unfortunately, none of the categories of telemedicine 
support these emerging healthcare trends: Store-and-forward 
telemedicine involves acquiring medical data and then 
transmitting this data to the system that is accessible to 
patient’s physician. Interactive services provide real-time 
interactions between patient and physician. It includes phone 
conversations, online communication and home visits. 
Remote monitoring enables medical professionals to monitor 
a patient remotely using various technological devices. 
Patient-centered care emphasizes the coordination and 
integration of care, and the use of appropriate information, 
communication, and education technologies in connecting 
patients, caregivers, physicians, nurses, and other into a 
healthcare team where health the system supports and 
encourages cooperation among team members [9]. It is based 
on the assumption that physicians, patients and their families 
have the ability to obtain and understand health information 
and services, and make appropriate health decisions.  
Pharmaceutical care emphasizes the movement of 
pharmacy practice away from its original role on drug supply 
towards a more inclusive focus on patient care [10]. It 
emphasizes the responsible provision of drug therapy for the 
purpose of achieving definite outcomes that improve 
patient’s quality of life [11]. 
A PHR is a record of a consumer that includes data 
gathered from different sources such as from health care 
providers, pharmacies, insures and the consumer [12]. It 
includes 
information 
about 
medications, 
allergies, 
vaccinations, illnesses, laboratory and other test results, and 
surgeries and other procedures [13]. PHRs are owned by the 
patients and they can only be accessed by the patient and 
those that are authorized by the patient. 
In our vision PHRs can significantly contribute to the 
introduction of patient-centered care. Further in telemedicine 
they do not only improve the quality of care but also 
significantly increase the efficiency of consulting physicians. 
PHRs also allow individuals to access and coordinate their 
lifelong health information and make appropriate parts of it 
available to those that are authorized by the individual [14].  
Further, cloud computing [15] provides an ideal technical 
infrastructure for a variety of e-health services including 
PHRs. As anyone with a suitable Internet connection and a 
standard browser can access an application in a cloud, 
sharing 
patient’s 
clinical 
documentation 
among 
the 
healthcare team is straightforward to those that are 
authorized by the patient. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In this paper, we describe our work on designing a cloud-
based telemedicine system that captures PHRs and manages 
consultation requests by a software module called 
Consultation server. It changes the traditional telemedicine 
paradigm: its main goal is not only to provide a cost-
effective alternative to the more traditional face-to-face way 
of providing medical care but rather to provide a data 
infrastructure for information sharing among patient’s 
healthcare team.  
Further, our designed telemedicine infrastructure allows 
location independence in the sense that the consultation 
manager, called Consultation Server, and the PHRs may be 
located anywhere in the Internet, and its stakeholders may 
include any healthcare provider having the ability for 
consultation. Further, a patient can be cared in any place 
having an Internet connection. Thus, such a global 
architecture also changes the traditional telemedicine 
ecosystems which only aim to provide clinical health care at 
a distance. 
In the design of the Consultation Server we have 
followed the idea of knowledge oriented organizations [16]. 
Its key idea is to revolve all applications around a shared 
ontology.  The main gain of such architecture is that the 
applications that manage the consultation related data can 
interoperate by accessing the shared ontology, which in our 
architecture is called Consultation ontology. It is specified in 
OWL (Web Ontology Language) [17], and so the 
applications can query the ontology by SPARQL [18]. As 
OWL ontologies and its instances are presented in RDF 
(Resource Description Framework) [19], the ontology is 
updated by inserting RDF-statements in the ontology.   
In our introduced terminology the participants of the 
Consultation Server that agree to work together for 
practicing telemedicine is called as a telemedicine affinity 
domain. Examples of possible telemedicine affinity domains 
include nationwide and regional affinity domains, regional 
federations made up of several local hospitals, healthcare 
providers, and insurance provider supported communities. 
A useful feature of a telemedicine affinity domain is that 
it is global: its components can locate anywhere in the 
Internet, and it can be exploited by patients and consulting 
physicians as far as they have an Internet connection.  
The notion of telemedicine affinity domain has 
similarities with the clinical affinity domain of the IHE XDS 
[20], which studies the problem of patient’s scattered clinical 
documentation. Its key idea is that patient’s clinical 
documents are dynamically retrieved from a clinical affinity 
domain by exploiting relevant registries. This model assumes 
that patients’ clinical documentation follow them as they 
move from one clinical affinity domain to another. Another 
difference between IHE XDS and PHRs is that in the former 
patient’s clinical documentation is managed by healthcare 
authorities while in the latter they are managed by a patient.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, in 
Section 2, we give a motivating scenario of our ideas in 
practice. Then, in Section 3, we consider the structure of 
CCD documents and show how they can be used for 
exchanging clinical information as well as structuring PHRs. 
In Section 4, we present the architecture of the Consultation 
Server and the Consultation Ontology in a graphical way. 
We also give a variety of useful queries that the ontology 
enables. In Section 5, we do not consider the Consultation 
Server from technology point but rather as ecosystems 
having many interconnected parts. Finally, Section 6 
concludes the paper by analyzing potential risks that may 
jeopardize the deployment of our designed telemedicine 
system. We also shortly consider our future work on 
integrating the Consultation Server with other e-health tools 
used by the physicians.  
II. 
MOTIVATING SCENARIO 
Assume that a patient, named Nancy Taylor, has an 
online Web-based free personal PHR, where her health data 
and information related to the care given to her is stored. She 
can access her PHR from any place having an Internet 
connection.   
One day Nancy discovered a rash on her waist, and so 
she decided to visit the nearest general practitioner having a 
contract with a telemedicine affinity domain.  The 
practitioner examines Nancy’s rush but the practitioner does 
not know what kind of treatment or medication should be 
prescribed for Nancy, and so the practitioner decides to 
request medical consultation by his Web browser.  
To carry out the consultation the practitioner first takes a 
photo from Nancy’s waist. Then the practitioner fills the 
request document by describing the symptoms of the rash 
and attaches the photo to the document. The document also 
provides a hierarchical classification (i.e., a taxonomy) of 
diseases.  The practitioner marks the node “skin disease”. In 
addition, authorized by Nancy the practitioner adds a link to 
Nancy’s PHR and authorization for its use (including 
required access rights).    Finally, the practitioner clicks the 
submit button, and so the document is delivered to the 
Consultation Server, which maintains a queue of the pending 
requests.   
Each request includes a set of metadata items such as 
disease(s), source of request, language and possible priority 
of the request. The function of the metadata items is to 
enable automatic matching of the requests and the consulting 
physicians. So the Consultation Server shows for a 
consulting physician only the requests that match with his or 
her profile. Therefore, each consulting physician of the 
affinity domain also has a profile, which has values for the 
metadata items and is stored in the Consultation Server.   
Assume that a physician, named John Smith, is a 
specialist in a hospital of a telemedicine affinity domain. In 
addition his profile matches with the request concerning 
Nancy, and so the request is in the consultation request 
queue shown for him.  
After a few minutes John Smith picks up the consultation 
request document and examines the symptoms described in 
the document as well as the attached photo. Immediately he 
recognizes Nancy’s rash as shingles (herpes zoster), which 
can be treated by a medicinal product named Aciclovir. Then 
he checks from Nancy’s PHR whether Nancy has some 
allergies that would prevent the use of the drug or whether 
she has some ongoing medical treatment that could cause 
mutual negative effects. As there are no such findings the 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

physician updates Nancy’s PHR by the prescribed 
medication and by the diagnosis he made. Finally John 
constructs and signs the prescription electronically, which is 
then electronically delivered to the general practitioner 
visited by Nancy.  
III. 
USING CCD STANDARD IN PHRS 
A. PHRs vs. EHRs 
In medical consultation, as well as in any medical 
treatment, a complete and accurate summary of the health 
and medical history of the patient is of prime importance.  A 
problem here is that as a patient may have lived in various 
places and a patient may have many healthcare providers, 
including primary care physician, specialist, therapists and 
other medical practitioners, patient’s health documentation 
may be distributed over several healthcare providers.  
PHRs provide a simple way for solving the problem of 
patients’ scattered clinical documentation [21]. They differ 
from EHRs (Electronic Health Record) [22] in that they are 
owned by the patients and they can only be accessed by the 
patient and those that are authorized by the patient while 
EHRs assume that the health records are designed only for 
use by health care providers and are owned by medical 
authorities.  
Managing fragmented healthcare documentation by 
EHRs has been successful only in a very few industrialized 
countries, such as in Singapore and Denmark [23]. Instead 
successful results from the use of PHRs are reported from 
many countries and communities. Therefore we have also 
concluded that the use of PHRs instead of national EHR’s in 
managing patients’ health documentation is a more 
appropriate solution in the context of telemedicine.   
B. Web-Based  PHRs 
PHRs can be classified according to the platform by 
which they are delivered. In web-based PHRs health 
information is stored at a remote server, and so the 
information can be shared with health care providers. They 
also have the capacity to import data from other information 
sources such as a hospital laboratory and physician office. 
However, importing data to PHRs from other sources 
requires the standardization of PHR-formats.  
Various standardization efforts on PHRs have been done. 
In particular, the use of the Continuity of Care Record (CCR 
standard) of ASTM [24] and HL7’s [24] Continuity of Care 
Document (CCD standard) [25] has been proposed.  From 
technology point of view CCR and CCD-standards represent 
two different XML schemas designed to store patient clinical 
summaries [23]. However, both schemas are identical in 
their scope in the sense that they contain the same data 
elements. 
Web-based PHRs are core components in our proposed 
ecosystem. However, it does not assume that all patients 
have a PHR, but it encourages patient to acquire a PHR.  
Using a PHR does not require patients to own any personal 
devices for internet connection nor any efforts for managing 
it. Rather it requires patient to authorize healthcare personnel 
to maintain and access their PHR.   
Acquiring a PHR is a tempting opportunity as there are 
many freely available web-based PHRs available, and 
moving personal data between standard-based PHR is 
supported by the vendors. For example, as the support of the 
Google Health was retired on January 2012 Microsoft has 
developed a transfer process for the user of the Google 
Health for moving their health records into Health Vault. 
Similar to Dossia and World Medical Card, it is a web-based 
system to store, maintain and share health and fitness 
information. They support a number of exchange formats 
including industry standards such as the CCR and CCD 
standards.  
C. CCD Standard  
We have given preference to CCD standard (an XML 
schema) as it is nowadays increasingly used for specifying 
the structure of exchanged clinical documents as well as 
specifying the structure of the PHR. This feature simplifies 
the update of the PHR as well as the generation of the 
clinical documents that will be stored in the PHR. 
Further, we have assumed that XML based CCD and 
CCR standards are the most appropriate standards as they are 
commonly used within PHRs.  Their schemas contain the 
same data elements, and thereby transformation between 
these formats can be easily done. 
The CCD standard is a constraint on the HL7 CDA 
standard. The CCD standard has been endorsed by HIMMS 
(Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society 
Though) 
[26] 
and 
HITSP 
(Healthcare 
Information 
Technology Standards Panel) [27] as the recommend 
standard for exchange of electronic exchange of components 
of health information. 
Although the original purpose of the CCD documents 
was to deliver clinical summaries between healthcare 
organizations, nowadays the XML schema of the CDD 
documents is increasingly used for specifying the structure of 
the PHRs.   The same schema can be used in message as all 
its parts are optional, and it is practical to mix and match the 
sections that are needed.  
D. The Structure of a CCD document 
Each CCD document have one primary purpose (which is 
the reason for the generation of the document), such as 
patient admission, transfer, or inpatient discharge. Further, 
each CCD document, as well all HL7 CDA documents, is 
comprised of the Header and the Body.   
A CCD document that includes a header and the 
Medications section from the Body is presented in Fig. 1.  
The content of the document is derived from the scenario 
presented in Section 2, i.e., the document would be inserted 
in Nancy Taylor’s PHR, which is based on the CCD-
standard.  
In a PHR the CCD documents are usually organized into 
hierarchical structures that simplify the search of documents, 
e.g., grouping together the documents by episode, clinical 
specialty or time period. Yet each clinical document is stored 
as a stand-alone artifact, meaning that each document is 
complete and whole in itself. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
<CCDfile> 
    <DocumentID>DOC_123</DocumentID> 
    <Patient> 
        <PatientID>AB-12345></PatientID> 
        <PatientName>Nancy Taylor></PatientName> 
    </Patient> 
    <Medications> 
        <Medication> 
            <MedicationID>Medication.567</MedicationID> 
            <DateTime> 
                <ExactDateTime>2012-03-01TO12:00</ExactDateTime> 
            </DateTime> 
             <Source> 
                <Actor> 
                    <ActorID>Pharmacy of  Health</ActorID> 
                    <ActorRole>Pharmacy</ActorRole> 
               </Actor> 
            </Source> 
            <Description> 
                <Text>Two tablets twice a day</Text> 
            </Description> 
            <Product> 
                <ProductName>Aciclovir </ProductName>  
                <BrandName>Zovirax</BrandName>  
            </Product> 
            <Strenght> 
                <Value>400</Value> 
                <Unit>milligram</Unit> 
            </Strenght> 
            <Quantity> 
                <Value>40</Value> 
                <Unit>Tabs</Unit> 
            </Quantity> 
        </Medication> 
    </Medications> 
 </CCDfile> 
 
Figure 1. A simplified example of a CCD document. 
 
IV. 
CONSULTATION SERVER 
A. The Architecture of the Comsultation Server 
In designing the internal architecture of the Consultation 
Server we have followed the idea of knowledge oriented 
organizations [16, 28], where the key idea is to revolve all 
applications around a shared ontology. As illustrated in Fig. 
2, in our solution all the applications of the Consultation 
Server are revolved around the Consultation Ontology.  
The users access the Consultation Ontology through the 
Consultation Portal, which provides connections to the 
relevant cloud applications. The applications are based on 
the use cases of the various user groups. For example, 
Submit Consultation Request and Pick-up a Consultation 
Request are two typical applications developed for 
physicians.  These applications interoperate through 
accessing the same data items included in the Consultation 
Ontology.  
Note that although the Consultation ontology is specified 
in QWL and queried by SPARQL (i.e., by a RDF-based 
query language), it is stored for the efficiency reasons in a 
relational database [29].  
 
Browser
Browser
Consultation Portal
Consultation Ontology (stored in relations)
Application 1
. . .
…
Browser
Cloud applications
Consultation Server
Patient’s
family members
Consulting 
specialist  
Patient and 
general practitioner
Application 2
Application n
Pharmacist
In a pharmacy
Browser
 
 
Figure 2. The components of the cloud-based Consultation Server. 
 
B. The Structure of the Consultation Ontology 
A portion of the Consultation ontology is graphically 
presented in Fig. 3. In this graphical representation ellipses 
represent classes and rectangles represent data type and 
object properties. Object properties relate objects to other 
objects while data type properties relate objects to datatype 
values. Classes, data type properties and object properties are 
modelling primitives in OWL [17]. 
Note that in Fig. 3 we have presented only a few of 
objects’ datatype properties. For example, in the figure we 
have omitted most of the datatype properties from the classes 
Physician and Organization. Instead all the datatype 
properties of the class Consultation request are presented in 
the figure. The class Speciality and its datatype property 
Class represent a taxonomy. That is, except for the root node 
there is a link from each class instance to its parent.  
The idea behind this taxonomy is that the symptoms and 
the specialities of the physicians are specified by the same 
vocabulary. This feature simplifies the matching of 
consultation requests and physicians’ specialities.  
 
Consultation
request
Consultation
Physician 
Organization
Super Class
Performs
Speciality
Works in
Has
Concerns 
Is classified
Submitting time 
Priority
State
PHR-link
Symptoms
Activation time
State
Physician name
ID
Speciality name
Organization name
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Graphical presentation of a portion of the Consultation 
Ontology. 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Consultation Ontology enables a variety of useful 
queries for physicians such as the followings:  
 
• 
Is there any pending consultation request having 
classification “Skin diseases”. 
• 
Is there (in the affinity domain) any physicians 
having speciality in diabetes.  
• 
Is there any consultation request matching with my 
speciality. 
• 
Is there any pending consultation request that is 
submitted by a physician of the University Hospital.   
• 
Is there any consultation request that has been 
pending over ten minutes. 
• 
Give me the names and specialties of the consulting 
physicians that work in a specific affinity domain. 
 
Note that the Consultation Server can support more than one 
telemedicine affinity domain. Further, as most OWL 
ontologies, such as the Consultation Ontology, are usually 
stored in relational database systems, it is also possible to use 
the triggering mechanism of the SQL [30] in automating the 
management of the consultation requests. For example, a 
request can be automatically allocated to a physician having 
required speciality and having no ongoing consultation.   
C. Cloud Computing and SaaS 
Cloud 
computing 
is 
an 
appropriate 
choice 
for 
telemedicine 
consultation 
management 
as 
it 
allows 
organizations to use applications without installation. 
Moreover, in most cases cloud-based solutions reduces the 
cost of acquiring, delivering, and maintaining computing 
power [15]. However, in our vision the main goal behind 
cloud computing is to achieve synergy through controlled 
sharing of data.   
In particular the Saas (Software as a Service) model of 
cloud computing is appropriate for the Consultation Server. 
It is a software delivery model in which applications are 
hosted by service provider and made available to customers 
over the Internet. It provides access to software and its 
functions remotely as a Web-based service.  
Further, there are various architectural ways for 
implementing the SaaS model. For example, in the case 
where the Consultation Server serves more than one 
telemedicine affinity domain we could use the following 
software architectures:    
 
1. Each telemedicine affinity domain has a customized 
version of the Competence Server that runs as its 
own instance.  
2. Many telemedicine affinity domains use separate 
instances of the same application code. 
3. A single program instance serves all telemedicine 
affinity domains. 
 
In our designed version the Consultation Server supports 
only one clinical affinity domain as so only one version and 
one instance is required.  
V. 
TELEMEDICINE ECOSYSTEM  
To succeed e-health systems should not be considered 
just as a technical infrastructure but rather as ecosystems 
having many interconnected parts [31].  
So far we have considered the technical infrastructure 
and the services of our designed telemedicine oriented cloud-
based ecosystem. The other key parts of the ecosystem are 
governance regulations, financing and stakeholders. For 
now, we shortly consider what kind of new alternatives the 
introduction of cloud-based solutions gives for these parts of 
the ecosystem.  
A. Governance Regulations  
E-health application that maintains patients’ health 
documentation must adhere to national legislated policies 
and regulations, which concerns privacy and security issues. 
One problem is that in many countries that are just beginning 
to investigate on e-health application do not yet have enough 
mature legislation with respect to e-health. Thereby national 
governments have an important role in promoting the 
development of appropriate legislation concerning e-health.   
In our developed telemedicine ecosystem patient’s health 
documentation is not stored in the national archives but 
rather on PHR system, where the patient’s health 
documentation is owned by the patient and only used by the 
physicians, patient’s family members and healthcare 
personnel authored by the patient. As a result, patients’ 
health documentation is not under the control of national 
healthcare authorities, and thus is not so tightly dependent on 
whether there is advanced legislation for e-health.  
B. Financing Cloud-Based E-Health Ecosystems  
In designing an e-health ecosystem it is important to 
ensure that appropriate funding is in place for its 
implementation and operation. Financing can come from a 
variety of sources, such as government or public-private 
partnerships.   
 Financing PHRs is not an actual problem as there are 
many freely available web-based PHRs available. Further 
there are many freely available PHRs for specific 
communities, e.g., for employees of specific organization, 
customers of a specific insurance company or for the 
customers of a specific healthcare provider.  
C. Stakeholders of Global  Ecosystem 
In designing the implementation of an e-health 
ecosystem, it is of prime importance to involve in 
preparation all the key stakeholders, such as governments, 
public and private healthcare providers, patients, as well as 
patient advocacy groups [31].  
As our proposed ecosystem is not nationwide but rather 
“internet-wide”, the system itself as well as its stakeholders 
may span over many countries. For example, governments 
and healthcare providers from a variety of countries may be 
involved in the ecosystem, and each stakeholder has different 
objectives and motivations for participating in the ecosystem.  
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The goal of our work has been to show that cloud-based 
global telemedicine ecosystems that support patient centered 
care can be implemented from technology point of view. Yet 
there are many problems that may jeopardize the success of 
such ecosystems.  In particular, the introduction of new 
technology requires training: the incorrect usage of a new 
telemedicine technology, due to lack of proper training, may 
ruin the whole ecosystem. In addition, a consequence of 
introducing a new telemedicine practice is that it 
significantly changes the daily duties of the healthcare 
personnel, and the role of patient and patient’s family 
members. Therefore one challenging aspect is also the 
changing the mind-set of the involved healthcare personnel.   
The introduction of a new technology in telemedicine is 
also an investment. It includes a variety of costs including 
software, hardware and training costs. Introducing and 
training the staff on new technology is a notable investment, 
and hence many organizations like to cut on this cost as 
much as possible.  
In order to minimize the changes that the introduction of 
the system will cause on healthcare personnel, in our future 
work we will investigate how telemedicine consultation can 
be linked into physicians’ day-to-day work patterns. In 
particular, we will consider how the functionalities of the 
Consultation Portal can be integrated with other e-health 
tools used by the physicians. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D.  M.  Angaran, “Telemedicine and Telepharmacy: current status 
and future implications,” American Journal of Health System 
Pharmacy. 1999 Jul 15; vol. 56: 1405-26 
[2] W. J. Blyth, "Telecommunications, Concepts, Development, and 
Management," 
Second 
Edition, 
Glencoe/McCgraw-Hill 
Company,1990, pp. 280-282. 
[3] G. Kontaxakis, et al. “Integrated telemedicine applications and 
services for oncological positron emission tomography,”  Oncology 
Reports, vol.15: pp. 1091–1100, 2006. 
[4] A. Bauman, H. Fardy, and H. Harris, “Getting it right; why bother 
with patient centred care?,” Medical Journal of Australia, 179(5), pp. 
253-256, 2003. 
[5] K. Wiedenmayer, R. Summers, C. Mackie, A. Gous, M. Everard., D. 
Tromp, “Developing pharmacy practice,” World Health Organization 
and International Pharmaceutical Federation. 2006. 
[6] M. S. Raisinghan and E. Young, “Personal health records: key 
adoption issues and implications for management,” International 
Journal of Electronic Healthcare. vol. 4, No.1 pp. 67-77. 2008. 
[7] J. Puustjärvi and L. Puustjärvi, “Providing Relevant Health 
Information to Patient-Centered Healthcare,” In the Proc of the 12th 
IEEE Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and 
Services. pp.  215-220. 2010. 
[8] P. Little, H. Everitt, and I. Williamson, “ Observational study of 
effect of patient centredness and positive approach on outcomes of 
general practice consultations,” British Medical Journal,”  pp. 908-
911, 2001. 
[9] R. Gillespie, D. Florin, and S. Gillam, “How is patient-centred care 
understood by the clinical, managerial and lay stakeholders 
responsible for promoting this agenda?, ”Health Expectations, vol. 7 
No 2, pp. 142-148, 2004.  
[10] I. Mil, J. Schulz, and M. Tromp, “Pharmaceutical care, European 
developments in concepts, implementation, teaching, and research: a 
review,” Pharm World Sci. Dec 2004; 26(6), pp.303–11. 
[11] C. D. Hepler, “Clinical pharmacy, pharmaceutical care, and the 
quality of drug therapy.” Pharmacotherapy.  2004 ,24(11), pp. 1491–
98. 
[12] D. Lewis, G. Eysenbach, R. Kukafka, P. Stavri, and  H. Jimison, 
“Consumer health informatics: informing consumers and improving 
health care,” New York: Springer. 2005. 
[13] W. S. Tuil, A. J. Hoopen, D. Braat, P. Vries, and J.  Kremer J. 
“Patient-centred care: using online personal medical records in IVF 
practice,” Hum. Reprod., November 1, 21(11). pp. 2955 - 2959. 2006. 
[14] J. Puustjärvi, and L. Puustjärvi, ”Personal Health Ontology: Towards 
the Interoperation of E-health Tools,” International Journal of 
Electronic Healthcare, vol. 6, No.1, pp. 62 – 75. 2011. 
[15] G.Boss, P. Malladi, D. Quan, L. Legregni, and H. Hall, “Cloud 
Computing,” Available at: 
http://download.boulder.ibm.com/ibmdl/pub/software/dw/wes/hipods/
Cloud_computing_wp_final_8Oct.pdf. Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[16] M. Daconta, L. Obrst,  and K. Smith. The semantic web. :A Guide to 
the Future of XML, Web Services, and Knowledge Management, 
John Wiley & Sons. 2003 
[17] OWL 
– 
WEB 
OntologyLanguage. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[18] [1] 
SPARQL 
Query 
Language 
for 
RDF. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/ Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[19] RDF 
– 
Resource 
Description 
Language. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.w3.org/RDF/  Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[20] A. Dogac, B. Gokce, T. Aden, and T.  Laleci, “Eichelberg, M.. 
“Enhancing IHE XDS for Federated Clinical Affinity Domain 
Support,” IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in 
Biomedicine, vol.11, No. 2. 2007. 
[21] J. Puustjärvi, and L. Puustjärvi ”Moving from Remote Patient 
Monitors to Cloud-Based Personal Health Information Systems: a 
Way to Practicing Patient-Centered Chronic Care Model,”  In the 
proc. of the International Conference on Health Informatics. pp. 37-
45. 2012. 
[22] EHR, 
Electronic 
Health 
Record, 
Available 
at: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronic_health_record Last accessed 
2013-5-10. 
[23] Benson, T., Principles of Health Interoperability HL7 and SNOMED. 
Springer. 2010. 
[24] Continuity of Care Record (CCR) Standard. Available at: 
http://www.ccrstandard.com/  Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[25] CCD, What Is the HL7 Continuity of Care Document? Available at: 
http://www.neotool.com/blog/2007/02/15/what-is-hl7-continuity-of-
care-document/  Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[26] HIMMS (Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society, 
http://himms.org/ Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[27] Healthcare Information Technology Standards Panel, http://hitsp.org/ 
Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[28] J. Davies, D. Fensel and F. Harmelen. Towards the semantic web: 
ontology driven knowledge management. West Sussex: John Wiley & 
Sons.2002. 
[29] Introduction to Relational Databases. Available at: 
http://www.databasejournal.com/sqletc/article.php/1469521/Introduct
ion-to-Relational-Databases.htm  Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[30] SQL tutorial. Available at: http://www.w3schools.com/sql/default.asp 
Last accessed 2013-5-10. 
[31] R. Shehadi, W., Tohme, J., Bitar, and S., Kutty, “Anatomy of an E-
Health Ecosystem”, Available at: 
http://www.booz.com/media/__tracked/media/uploads/BoozCo-
Anatomy-of-E-Heatlh-Ecosystem.pdf Last accessed 2013-5-10.
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Prescient Profiling – AI driven Volunteer Selection within a Volunteer Notification 
System 
 
Jesko Elsner, Philipp Meisen, Daniel Ewert, Daniel Schilberg and Sabina Jeschke 
Institute of Information Management in Mechanical Engineering 
IMA/ZLW & IfU - RWTH Aachen University 
Dennewartstr. 27, 52068 Aachen, Germany 
{ Jesko.Elsner, Philipp.Meisen, Daniel.Ewert, Daniel.Schilberg, Sabina.Jeschke }  
@ima-zlw-ifu.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
Abstract—A Volunteer Notification System (VNS) is a 
promising approach to integrate laypersons into emergency 
medical services (EMS). In case of a medical emergency, a VNS 
will alarm those potential helpers who can arrive on scene fast 
enough to provide the most urgent measures until the 
professional helpers arrive at the victim. Whereas the basic 
requirements and criteria of a VNS have been discussed in 
recent publications, this paper will focus on the actual 
volunteer selection process and the underlying concept of 
Prescient Profiling. By using concepts of artificial intelligence, 
the available data is processed in order to generate an abstract 
digital representation of a volunteer and further enhanced to 
produce individual user profiles. These profiles will enable 
predictions on future decisions and the identification of 
behavioral patterns within the pool of volunteers. The goal is to 
provide an efficient algorithm for determining a highly 
sophisticated set of relevant volunteers for an ongoing medical 
emergency. 
Keywords-Volunteer Notification System; First Responder; 
Emergency Medical Services; Profiling; Artificial Intelligence 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As stated within a recent study by the clinical center of 
the university Munich [1], the average arrival time for 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) on scene in Germany is 
about nine minutes. Whereas most medical emergencies do 
not involve an immediate life danger for the victim, during a 
Sudden Cardiac Arrest (SCA) the first minutes are of utter 
importance. The probability of permanent brain damage 
increases with every minute and a time interval of more than 
five minutes without treatment will most likely result in the 
death of the victim [2][3]. The severity of the time deficit 
generally correlates with the infrastructure a country can 
provide, resulting in intensification for less advanced 
countries.  
One possible approach to provide the most urgent 
medical measures before the professional EMS arrive on 
scene is the implementation of a Volunteer Notification 
System (VNS) as discussed in [4]. The basic concept of a 
VNS is the integration of laymen and medical trained 
volunteers into the EMS by notifying those potential helpers 
who are, at the time of incident, “close” to the victim. 
Whereas the term “close” is suitable for describing the 
general idea, the actual process of selecting the relevant 
volunteers within an ongoing medical emergency requires, 
due to possible obstacles as e.g., rivers, traffic jams, or 
alternative transportation means, a sophisticated algorithm in 
order to ensure the best possible set of potential volunteers at 
any given time. Artificial intelligence (AI) offers a variety of 
methods in the area of problem solving [5] and for 
implementing self-learning systems [6] aiming to increase 
the quality of decisions by adaption over time. The 
possibilities of AI driven system within the scope of a VNS 
will be introduced within this paper. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The 
difference between a simple and an intelligent volunteer 
selection will be discussed in Section II, whereas Section III 
will highlight the necessity of an intelligent approach by 
describing some non-trivial decision scenarios in which 
simple selection algorithms will provide flawed or inaccurate 
results. Section IV will therefor introduce the basic concept 
of (prescient) profiling within this domain as a suitable 
approach to enable an AI driven volunteer selection. Further 
research perspectives are discussed in Section V. 
II. 
VOLUNTEER SELECTION 
In case of an incoming emergency call, the responsible 
dispatcher will alert the professional EMS and – in case a 
cardiac arrest or any type of emergency that requires 
immediate treatment is suspected – trigger the forwarding of 
the information into the notification system [4]. The VNS 
will now decide which volunteers are to be alarmed. In order 
to prevent unnecessary notifications – hence, notifications 
that will immediately appear irrelevant to its recipient or 
notifications alarming volunteers without any plausible 
chance of reaching the victim in time – an efficient selection 
algorithm is required [7]. This algorithm has to forecast the 
approximate arrival time of an individual volunteer at the 
scene of the incident. 
A. Simple Volunteer Selection 
A simple solution for selecting volunteers is the 
implementation of a notification radius, defining a maximum 
distance around the place of incident and alarming those 
volunteers who are within this radius. This approach will 
provide a set of helpers who are geographically close to the 
victim, but will they also arrive on scene faster than potential 
helpers outside the notification radius? To forecast an 
individual arrival time, more information is required on both, 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the volunteer and the environmental details affecting her at 
the moment.  
B. Intelligent Volunteer Selection 
Whilst the actual distance is an important parameter to be 
considered when deciding if a volunteer should be notified or 
not, it does not necessarily determine the volunteers’ time of 
arrival at the scene. Due to impassable obstacles (e.g., 
highways or rivers), the beeline calculation does not offer a 
suitable background for estimating the arrival time, but even 
the consideration of up to date map material – like so 
enabling a shortest way calculation – will not provide 
sufficient information without additional assumptions.  
Thus, the type of movement, the physical performance of 
a volunteer and the current traffic situation, all have a direct 
influence on the approximate traveling time and thereby on 
the time of arrival. Furthermore, limiting the relevant 
decision parameters to merely distance or traveling time 
appears inadequate and secondary criteria apply; e.g., the 
potential volunteers’ medical expertise, her individual 
knowledge of the area and the current situation this volunteer 
is involved in. An efficient algorithm hence has to consider a 
broad variety of available information on each individual 
volunteer in order to generate a reliable set of potential 
helpers [7][8]. 
III. 
SCENARIOS 
The necessity of an intelligent volunteer selection is 
demonstrated by multiple non-trivial decision scenarios, as 
illustrated in Fig. 1. The place of incident is close to a 
railway station (the red bar located on the railway tracks). 
Leaving heuristics aside, implying to have only five 
volunteers in total, the most promising of these are to be 
notified. The use of a simple volunteer selection – as 
introduced in Section II – will result in the following set of 
volunteers (as marked within the red area) that will be 
alarmed: 
 
the pedestrian just north of the incident, 
 
the volunteer in the car (on the highway), and 
 
the pedestrian in the park (close to the river). 
An intelligent volunteer selection will demand further 
information on each potential candidate than just her current 
location. The following section gives a short discussion on 
each single volunteer and the required additional information 
to decide reliable if the volunteer should be notified or not: 
1) The pedestrian just north of the incident is 
geographically the closest volunteer. A straight road 
connection and no obvious obstacles result in minimal 
requirements on travel speed or physical performance. This 
candidate appears a solid choice no matter further 
assumptions, but eventual circumstances could prevent her 
from arriving in time, e.g. she might be traveling with her 
children which she picked up a few minutes ago; just like 
she does every day at this hour. 
2) The volunteer in the car is the second closest, but 
should she be alarmed? Depending on the direction the car 
is driving and the distance to the next highway exit, this 
volunteer will most likely have no option to arrive on scene 
in time. 
3) The pedestrian in the park is blocked by a river. This 
volunteer will only arrive in time when the next bridge is 
within reach. Furthermore, with the park being a green zone 
with limited map material available, it might only have a 
single exit that is far away. 
4) The volunteer riding the bicycle is outside the 
notification radius, but due to traveling speed and possible 
short-cuts, she might arrive on scene fast. Parameters like 
one-way roads or uphill/downhill will influence the arrival 
time but generally she appears a good choice for notification 
and compared to a car with the same distance, she will not 
require a parking place and isn’t slowed down by high 
traffic (which occurs more often around stations).  
5) The last volunteer (in the train) appears to be far 
away, but assuming that the train rides in the right direction 
and will also stop at the next railway station, she might 
arrive on scene earlier than any of the other volunteers. 
Within the illustrated scenarios, the notification radius 
resulted in a set of three volunteers, from which probably 
only one has a realistic chance to arrive at the victim in time. 
Moreover, potentially highly valuable volunteers have not 
been considered for notification. The given examples are just 
a small selection of possible scenarios in which no simple 
answer on if to alarm a specific volunteer exists. 
In order to determine the best possible set of volunteers 
for an ongoing medical emergency, an efficient selection 
algorithm is required which postulates the availability of a 
complex knowledge base. A variety of parameters is to be 
collected, processed and evaluated, forming the digital 
profile of an individual volunteer.  
IV. 
PROFILING 
The term profiling has been frequently used over the last 
years in different research areas. Within the field of 
information and computer science it is mainly used in 
conjunction with the terms: program behavior [9][10], (web) 
user [11][12], network [13], or social media [14]. 
Figure 1: Non-trivial volunteer selection 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
A. General usage 
Generally, profiling is defined as “the act or process of 
learning information about someone based on what is 
already known” [15]. This definition is vague concerning the 
act or process used to obtain information and does neither 
define the kind of information retrieved nor its origin. Due to 
this lack of an exact definition, an appropriate assignment of 
methods, techniques or technologies regarding profiling is 
not possible without clearly distinguishing between the 
various implementations and their individual context.   
In order to specifically define the process of profiling that 
will be introduced within this paper, it is necessary to 
present a definition of what profiling describes within the 
scope of an intelligent volunteer selection in correspondence 
to 
aspects 
of 
information 
and 
computer 
science. 
Furthermore, the requirements and outputs that are to be 
expected by the application of profiling have to be defined. 
The term profiling is hereby not to be confused with a 
profile. A profile is commonly defined as “a brief written 
description that provides information about someone or 
something” whereas the verb to profile is defined as the 
action “to give a brief description […]” [15]. This definition 
defines a profile as the result of a process generated to 
describe 
someone 
or 
something, 
i.e., 
an 
abstract 
representation of the profiled subject. 
B. Definition 
Profiling describes the process of generating profiles from 
obtained data, associated to one or multiple subjects. A 
profile itself is a non-empty, finite, ordered tuple with a 
positive number of elements. Each of these elements consists 
of a finite number of values corresponding to its individual 
domain. The process of profiling is divided in multiple sub-
processes, which are illustrated in Fig. 2. The various terms 
describing these sub-processes and the different artifacts 
which are their results, are shortly described as follows: 
1) Subject: A subject describes “what” is actually being 
profiled. Within the VNS, the subject will be a registered 
user (a human being) but in general, anything can be 
profiled; e.g., a life-form, medical symptoms or an abstract 
stream of data. This definition stays in correspondance to 
the term subject as reffered to in [16]. 
2) Archetype Allocation: Due to the generic background 
of the profiled subjects, the system needs an approximate 
“idea” of what kind of subject it will deal with. The 
archetype allocation describes the process of mapping a 
subject to a specific archetype. 
3) Archetype: 
The 
archetype 
is 
an 
abstract 
representation of anything that can possibly be profiled. It 
defines the maximum set of properties that are available on 
a specific subject. Archetypes can consist of other 
archetypes as elements; e.g., a human can have a car or 
children as elements in the archetype, whereas children are 
themselves represented as humans within this set. 
4) Property Selection: After a subject has been mapped 
to an archetype (or a combination of archtypes), it has to be 
decided which of the available properties are of importance 
for the profiling process. While it is theoretically useful to 
support algorithmic selection and re-adjustments in this 
selection process by implementing a suitable learning 
strategy, a simplified approach will only process the 
property selection once, i.e., the properties representing the 
subject are not modified during the profiling process. 
5) Subset Archetype: After the relevant properties have 
been selected from the archetype, the structure of the digital 
representation of the profiled subject is determined. This 
artifact is referred to as subset archetype and constitutes the 
base of the following data representation. 
Figure 2: Sub-processes of Profiling 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

6) Property 
Extraction: 
The 
property 
extraction 
describes the process of collecting the data (e.g., trough 
available sensors or automated systems). The selected 
properties of the subset archetype will be filled with values. 
This process will result in the creation of the data 
representative.  
7) Data 
Representative: 
The 
data 
representative 
conforms to the abstracted, digitalized description of a 
subject. It  consists of the selected properties of its subset 
archetype and holds the raw data from occurred property 
extractions. This term is not the same as a data subject 
introduced in [16] but instead differentiates due to its raw 
data characteristic. 
8) Application: This process is defined by the 
application of different models, processing the data 
representative . The processing will lead to a profile of the 
data representative. Possible models are introduced in the 
upcoming section. 
9) Profile: A profile is a generalized representation of 
the data representative. The degree and direction of the 
generalization is defined by the context of the profiling 
process, i.e. the applied models. 
10) Post-Processing: This step describes the generic 
approach of applying various methods to the existing 
profiles. Examples are clustering, association analyzes, or 
the identification of relations between profiles. 
11) Relation/ Aggregation/ Generalisation: This artifact 
describes the result of the post-processing. Examples for this 
category are sets of profiles which are aggregated by 
associations or relations between them, or group profiles 
representing identified group properties. 
C. Application models 
In the context of behavioral predication, application 
models are generally based on theoretical rational behavior 
[17], bounded rationality (i.e., psychological models) [18], 
or on models that are based on observations which are 
characterized by methods of machine learning algorithms 
[19]. Beside the sole implementation of a single approach, a 
combinatorial aggregation of different types of models is 
possible. Recent research states that especially the use of 
hybrid models which are based on machine learning, but 
add features from psychological models, performed 
significantly better in various domains [20]. An alternative 
process is the sequential application of different models to a 
single data representative in order to retrieve specific 
properties of that profile. 
D. Prescient Profiling 
With the data representative uniting the digitalized 
properties of a subject that were collected over time, a base 
for further processing is available. Applying different models 
(as discussed above) will result in individual profiles that 
enable various operations; e.g., clustering and the evaluation 
regarding specific criteria. This process conforms to the 
definition of profiling as given in Section IV, while prescient 
profiling may be considered “the next step” on top of this 
basic definition, using the profile(s) to generate new insights 
and therefore enable enhanced capabilities. 
Implying a learning system approach, thus, a system that 
uses methods of AI to learn from past observations and 
thereby identifies trends and patterns, will not be limited to 
analyzing the historical values but instead will have the 
ability to make predictions. This states an enhanced 
definition of profiling. The term “Prescient Profiling” 
therefor refers to this special type of profiling, aiming to 
make reliable predictions on both, the value of individual 
properties and on a profile itself. 
E. Profiling within the VNS 
In the context of a VNS, the subject of profiling will be 
the volunteer (i.e., the registered user). The corresponding 
archetype is human with the following, exemplary 
properties to select from: gender, height, weight, age, 
location, number of children, type of car. Within the 
property selection, only the location is selected as property 
that is filled with data during the property extraction 
process. This extraction will occur automatically, i.e., the 
mobile phone will continuously push updated information 
on the volunteer’s location to the VNS server. All incoming 
location updates are stored in the data representative of this 
volunteer and applying specific models will generate 
different types of profiles. One suitable approach is the 
generation of a so called heat map [21] as part of the 
resulting profile. This location heat map, as illustrated in 
Fig. 3, describes the current whereabouts of the volunteer to 
be profiled as probabilities, rather than a single valid 
location; the calculation is based on the available location 
data from within the data representative (i.e., the purple 
dots).  
By generating profiles of different volunteers and 
applying post-processing methods, e.g., clustering or pattern 
recognition, 
aggregated 
profiles 
are 
being 
created, 
representing the relation between different volunteers and 
their corresponding heat maps. In addition, trends and 
progresses in the development of individual heat maps can 
Figure 3: Location heat map 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

be analyzed in order to create group profiles or enable 
various predications. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
Whereas a basic VNS implementation is able to notify 
volunteers in the closer vicinity by using simple selection 
algorithms, various scenarios have been discussed in which 
an efficient volunteer selection will require the consideration 
of additional factors. The concept of profiling has been 
introduced as a suitable solution within this context, aiming 
to generate profiles of individual volunteers. This is achieved 
by creating a data representation of the profiled subject, 
based on specific parameters that are selected from an 
archetype definition within the property selection and filled 
with data during the property extraction process. The 
application of different types of models, integrating various 
concepts of pattern recognition and machine learning in 
order to identify behavioral patterns and coherences between 
volunteers and individual properties, describes an enhanced 
process of profiling that has been introduced as “Prescient 
Profiling”, utilizing the various profiles to enable predictions 
on individual subjects or groups. 
The research focus of the near future will be the actual 
implementation of the machine learning approach and the 
development of corresponding models. The explicit 
application of Prescient Profiling within the context of the 
VNS needs to be analyzed, developed and evaluated. With 
an integration of the VNS system into the emergency 
workflow of regional EMS partners planned for the 
beginning of 2014, promising possibilities for an efficient 
data assessment are being created; enabling benchmarks and 
comparisons of various selection models in different 
emergency scenarios and thereby producing academic results 
on the efficiency of an AI approach for volunteer selection in 
medical emergencies.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is based on work done in the INTERREG IVa 
project EMuRgency (www.emurgency.eu). The project is 
partially 
financed 
through 
the 
European 
Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) and co-financed by several 
regions of the Meuse-Rhine Euroregion and partners of the 
EMuRgency consortium. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Study of the Institute of Emergency Medical Care and 
Medical Management (INM) in Munich, “Untersuchung zum 
Notarztdienst und arztbegleitenden Patiententransport in 
Bayern“, Published by the clinical center of the university 
Munich, April 2010. 
[2] J. Bahr, “Lay resuscitation in the German rescue system. 
Some basic information”, volume 10, issue 3, Notfall Rett. 
Med. 2007, doi:10.1007/s10049-007-0910-y, pp 197-200. 
[3] K. 
Grassl, 
“Herzdruckmassage 
im 
Rahmen 
der 
Laienreanimation: Einsatz eines audiovisuellen Echtzeit-
Rückmeldesystems“. Dissertation, LMU Munich: Faculty of 
Medicine, 2009. 
[4] J. Elsner, M.-T. Schneiders, M. Haberstroh, D. Schilberg, and 
S. Jeschke, “An Introduction to a Transnational Volunteer 
Notification 
System 
Providing 
Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation for Victims Suffering a Sudden Cardiac Arrest”, 
In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on 
eHealth. IARIA, Nice (France) 2013, pp. 59-64. 
[5] S. Russel, P. Norvig, “Artificial Intelligence: A Modern 
Approach”, Third Edition, Prentice Hall Series in Artificial 
Intelligence, Pearson Education 2010. 
[6] C. M. Bishop, “Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning 
(Information Science and Statistics)”, Second Edition, 
Springer Science 2007. 
[7] J. Elsner, M.-T. Schneiders, D. Schilberg, and S. Jeschke, 
“Determination of Relevant First Aiders within a Volunteer 
Notification System“, In: Proceedings of the International 
eHealth, 
Telemedicine 
and 
Health 
ICT 
Forum 
for 
Educational, Networking and Business (Med@Tel 2013). 
Med@Tel, Luxembourg 2013, pp. 245-249. 
[8] J. Elsner, P. Meisen, S. Thelen, D. Schilberg, and S. Jeschke, 
“EMuRgency – A Basic Concept for an AI Driven Volunteer 
Notification 
System 
for 
Integrating 
Laypersons 
into 
Emergency Medical Services”, unpublished.. 
[9] D. W. Wall, "Predicting program behavior using real or 
estimated profiles", In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 
1991 conference on Programming language design and 
implementation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, ACM, 1991, pp. 
59-70. 
[10] T. Ball, J. R. Larus, "Optimally Profiling and Tracing 
Programs", ACM Transactions on Programming Languages 
and Systems, volume 16, 1994, pp. 59-70. 
[11] P. K. Chan, "A non-invasive learning approach to building 
web user profiles", In: WEBKDD'99, Workshop on Web 
Usage Analysis and User Profiling, San Diego, CA, USA, 
1999.  
[12] M. Pazzani, D. Billsus, "Learning and Revising User Profiles: 
The Identification of Interesting Web Sites", Machine 
Learning, volume 27, issue 3, June 1997, p. 313–331.  
[13] K. Xu, Z.-l. Zhang, and S. Bhattacharyya, "Profiling internet 
backbone traffic: Behavior models and applications", In: 
Proceedings of SIGCOMM 2005, conference on Applications, 
technologies, architectures, and protocols for computer 
communications, volume 35, issue 4, 2005, pp. 169-180.  
[14] R. Li, S. Wang, and K. C.-C. Chang, "Multiple Location 
Profiling for Users and Relationships from Social Network 
and Content", In: Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 
(PVLDB), volume 5, issue 11, 2012, pp. 1603-1614. 
[15] www.merriam-webster.com, Online dictionary, Keywords: 
profiling / profile, Available at: http://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/ [Accessed:  08. October 2013]. 
[16] M. Hildebrandt, S. Gutwirth (Eds.), “Profiling the European 
Citizen: Cross-disciplinary perspectives”, Springer Science 
2008. 
[17] N. Giocoli, “Modeling Rational Agents: From Interwar 
Economics to Early Modern Game Theory”, Edward Elgar 
Pub 2003. 
[18] R. Lin, S. Kraus, J. Wilkenfeld, and J. Barry, “Negotiating 
with bounded rational agents in environments with 
incomplete information using an automated agent.”, In: 
Articial Intelligence, volume 172, issues 6-7, April 2008, pp. 
823-851. 
[19] K. P. Murphy, “The Machine Learning: A Probabilistic 
Perspective”, MIT Press 2012. 
[20] A. Rosenfeld, I. Zuckerman, A. Azaria, and S. Kraus, 
“Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning to 
Better Predict People's Decisions”, In: Synthese, volume 189 
issue 1 supplement, Springer Science 2012, pp. 81-93. 
[21] L. Wilkinson, M. Friendly, “The History of the Cluster Heat 
Map”, The American Statistician 2009, volume 63, issue 2, 
pp. 179-184. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A Health Virtual Community Model 
A Bottom Up Approach 
 
Christo El Morr 
School of Health 
Policy and 
Management 
York University 
Toronto, Canada 
elmorr@yorku.ca 
 
Shadi Saleh 
Department of Health 
Management and 
Policy 
American University 
of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon  
ss117@aub.edu.lb 
 
Walid Ammar 
Ministry of Public 
Health 
Beirut, Lebanon 
mphealth@cyberia.ne
t.lb 
 
 
 
Nabil Natafgi 
Department of Health 
Management and 
Policy 
American University 
of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon 
nmn13@aub.edu.lb 
 
Karen Kazandjian 
Department of Health 
Management and 
Policy 
American University 
of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon 
kk03@aub.edu.lb 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a model for Health Virtual 
Communities (Health VCs) based on a case study of a Health 
VC for chronic disease management designed for rural and 
disadvantaged communities in a developing country. It provides 
an analysis of the components needed in the Health VC and the 
necessity of a flexible design. The model provides a list of 
characteristics that a Health VC design should have in order for 
it to provide a viable, value-added experience to users who have 
heterogeneous capacities in terms of access to Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT). It establishes a first 
attempt towards a framework for a Global Health VC analysis 
and design.  
Keywords- Health; Global Health; Online Communities; 
Modeling; developing countries; rural eHealth; LMIC. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since its inception, the Internet provided a great 
opportunity for people to meet online and form the first 
Virtual Communities (VCs). VCs drove a lot of research to 
understand the way people cooperate in them and the 
challenges and opportunities they provide. Researchers 
explored the possibility of use of VCs in identity building [1], 
and looked into the design issues involved in connecting 
people together [2] to drive trust [3-5], and enable reciprocal 
awareness [6].  Besides, the ability of a community to generate 
and use knowledge was investigated [7, 8] and diverse VCs 
were implemented, such as, human rights monitoring [9]. 
Health Virtual Communities (Health VCs) were not late to 
emerge and to carry their own problems and prospects [10, 
11]. 
Global Health Virtual Communities and Challenges have 
recently been investigated and a first attempt towards a model 
for Global Health VCs was proposed by El Morr [12]. In this 
paper, we will start with a background about health virtual 
communities (Section II). We will then introduce a previously 
suggested model (Section III). We will then explain the 
project (Section IV) and describe how we did apply it in global 
health project where the team had to build a health virtual 
community to enhance equity in the supply and demand of 
primary health care services in Lebanon and suggest its 
modification to the model based on experience (Section V). 
We will then conclude the paper (Section VI). 
II. 
HEALTH VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES 
Health Virtual Communities can be defined as a group of 
people using information and communication technologies to 
deliver health care services; they cover a wide range of clinical 
specialties, technologies and stakeholders [13]. The 
stakeholders and participants of Health VCs are health care 
providers, educators, patients, and health professionals (e.g. 
nurses). Health VCs can be divided into three types depending 
on the objectives they aim to achieve; a VC can be (1) 
Professional Centered, (2) Patient Centered, or (3) General 
Public Centered. 
Examples of professional centered VCs include 
knowledge exchange and research teams [14-17]. Members in 
these communities are health professionals that interact and 
work in virtual teams in order to exchange knowledge and 
create new knowledge if possible [7]. Professional-Centered 
VCs provide support for healthcare professionals in their 
activities. 
Patient centered VCs involve usually patients, their family 
members, and a health professional from the community [18-
20]. Patient centered VCs permit professionals-to-patient and 
patient-to-patient communication and support [5, 21-26]. 
Indeed, health care professionals can form virtual teams to 
provide care and support in disease management; besides, 
individuals diagnosed with the same chronic [27] or life 
threatening disease, or undergoing the same treatment, can 
exchange and share health information and personal stories. 
Thus, a patient centered VC ensures continuity of care through 
the exchange of messages and resources. Patient-centered 
VCs facilitate care delivery mechanisms to provide support 
for patients while they are away from the point of care. Patient 
support is paramount; its lack has a serious impact on health 
[28-31]. 
General public centered VCs are open and include 
educational services, discussion forums, and access to health 
information. The aim would be for the patients to be in charge 
of their health care by personal action (i.e., manage their 
disease) [32]. Many research projects demonstrated the 
importance of education in empowering patients [32-39]. 
Some general public VCs are disease specific while others 
target a specific social group (e.g. women) [40-42]. General 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

public VCs aim to disseminate knowledge to the wider 
population, promoting self-management of healthcare and 
empowering patients [32-39, 43] . 
III. 
A VIRTUAL COMMUNITY MODEL 
El Morr has suggested a model for collaborative virtual 
communities [10, 44] and developed it later to encompass 
global health virtual communities [12], and suggested a model 
shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. A Global Health Virtual Community Model 
 
The model stipulates that a global health virtual 
community should have the following fourteen features: 
The degree of mobility specifies if the VC members are 
‘still or ‘mobile’. 
The degree of virtuality specifies if an encounter between 
members is ‘physical’ (members are physically in the same 
place) or ‘virtual’ (members meet online). 
 The degree of cooperation specifies if the members’ 
awareness of each other passes through a simple notification 
mechanism, or if the members ‘collaborate’ dynamically and 
actively on a common aim. 
The degree of uniformity specifies if the members are 
extremely ‘homogeneous’ (the VC is a community of 
practice) or ‘heterogeneous’ (having different occupations). 
It should have an inclusive design that supports diverse 
users, and conduct a participatory approach to encourage 
their participation. The global health VC should be supportive 
to users, workflow adaptive, and should adapt its behavior 
(interface) to the different kinds of users by being profile 
sensitive and therefore personalizable. 
The policy sensitive aspects reflect the need for the VC to 
be able to adopt different security, privacy and trust 
mechanisms.  
A successful global health VC should be culturally 
adaptive and environmentally adaptive reflecting different 
environments’ priorities and contexts. 
One of the challenges is for it to provide infrastructure 
adaptive features by being able to accommodate less 
expensive and advanced technologies. Finally, it should 
provide means to share resources between stakeholders acting 
as a value catalyst tool. 
IV. 
THE PROJECT 
The collaborative research team includes researchers from 
the American University of Beirut, Ministry of Public Health 
(MoPH) in Lebanon, the United Nations Relief and Works 
Agency (UNRWA), York University, and University of 
Toronto.  
In Lebanon, a Low-Middle Income Country (LMIC), 
chronic diseases constitute an important public health problem 
accounting for around 84% of all deaths based on the 2008 
estimates of the World Health Organization (WHO) [45]. 
Specifically, age-standardized death rates from cardiovascular 
diseases (CVDs) and diabetes reached 404.4 and 262.7 per 
100,000 individuals [46]. This burden of chronic diseases is 
further aggravated in the context of disadvantaged populations 
in many of the rural areas and Palestinian refugee camps in 
Lebanon. For instance, residents of underserved rural areas in 
many regions in Lebanon, as well as the Palestinian residents 
in the refugee camps, lack equitable and sustainable access to 
modern care services for chronic illnesses. Non-governmental 
organization (NGO)-run primary health care centers and 
dispensaries are considered the only facilities available in the 
aforementioned underprivileged rural areas and often suffer 
from limited availability of resources [47]. 
This project constitutes an eHealth [48] proactive 
integrated approach that couples community-based and health 
care initiatives to managing chronic diseases. 
Ten Primary Health Care (PHC) centers located in rural 
areas and enrolled in the Lebanese Ministry of Public Health 
(MoPH) PHC National Network (Network) and six United 
Nations for Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) centers will 
comprise the study population. The ten MoPH and six 
UNRWA centers are randomly assigned into the intervention 
and control groups (five MoPH and three UNRWA centers in 
each for eight intervention sites). Each PHC center belonging 
to the Network has a defined catchment area with an average 
of 30,000 inhabitants [49]. The ten participating MoPH 
centers will be chosen from five rural areas in Lebanon (2 
centers from each area – one as control and one as 
intervention). 
A. The Intervention 
The eHealth intervention will have two components:  
1) PHC center-based in which eHealth will target the 
physicians (supply) and patients suffering from 
diabetes and hypertension (demand) treated in these 
centers, and 
2) Community-based.  
 
1) PHC center-based 
Global 
Health 
Virtual 
Community
Degree of 
Mobility
Degree of 
Virtuality
Degree of 
Cooperation
Degree of 
Uniformity
Inclusive 
Design
Participatory 
Approach
Supportivness
Workflow 
Adaptability
Policy 
Sensitivity
Profile 
Sensitivity
Cultural 
Adaptivity
Environmental 
Adaptability
Infrastructure 
Adaptability
Value Catalyst
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

a) Health Provider Side 
The Provider side eHealth intervention will comprise two 
main initiatives:  
(1) Online modules for treating diabetes and hypertension 
focusing on (a) clinical guidelines and (b) physician-patient 
communication strategies (smoking cessation, increasing 
compliance, etc.).  
(2) Online forums and Frequently Asked Questions 
(FAQs) mainly dedicated to peer-to-peer knowledge sharing 
of treatment and communication techniques, as well as a 
database of Questions and Answers (Q&A) on such 
techniques. 
 
b) Patient Side 
 On the other hand, the Patient side eHealth interventions 
will comprise one main level: the current patients will receive 
cell phone text messages or short message services (SMSs) 
that include simple weekly medical information about their 
respective disease and the importance of compliance and 
generic reminders of appointments and regular physician 
follow-up. 
 
2) Community-based 
A community-based intervention will be conducted that 
includes screening for diabetes, hypertension and obesity in 
the catchment area of each of the eight (5 MoPH and 3 
UNRWA) intervention centers. Allied health professionals 
(nurses or medical technologists) will perform household 
screening of individuals using a purposefully designed 
chronic illnesses screening kit that measures the following 
components: (a) blood glucose level, (b) blood pressure, (c) 
waist circumference, and (d) Body Mass Index (BMI). The 
results of the four screening tests will be remotely entered on 
a software application alongside other demographic data 
pertaining to the individual including name, gender, age, and 
others. In the event that the individual is identified to have 
symptoms of one or more of the three screened diseases, the 
individual will be offered an appointment with a primary care 
physician in the PHC intervention center of the corresponding 
catchment area. The appointment will be scheduled remotely 
and during the visit through a specifically designed 
application linked with the PHC intervention center pre-
loaded appointment sheet. In addition, patients will be offered 
an on-the-spot brief Disease Self-Management Education 
(DSME) provided by the allied health professionals. The 
DSME interventions will aim to strengthen the patients’ 
capacity, to enhance their quality of life and to prevent acute 
and chronic complications, while keeping costs acceptable.  
B. The eHealth Solution: Virtual Community 
To ensure an eHealth solution that works for all the centers 
on both the providers’ and the patients’ sides, a health virtual 
community was set in place. The virtual community aimed to 
provide the necessary tools on an already existent physical 
connection between the healthcare community centers and the 
MoPH. The VC design included: 
1- A website that allows the healthcare providers to 
access the FAQs and send their questions to the 
moderator who will reply to the requests by creating 
a new FAQ, if necessary. Moreover, the website 
publishes online modules for treating diabetes and 
hypertension focusing on clinical guidelines and 
physician-patient communication strategies. 
2- A software module that allows the data entry for 
health clinical indicators; the module was integrated 
with the primary health care information system in 
place at the centers. 
3- An SMS messaging system was designed to integrate 
with the module in order to send the patients’ 
appointment reminders and weekly educational 
information (e.g., medications, compliance). 
4- The appointment scheduling system was designed as 
a software application. The software will also run 
educational presentations about the diseases. 
5- The educational system to be delivered to the 
potential patient during screening was designed to be 
delivered on in an electronic format (notepad). 
The overall VC system design is presented in Figure 2:  
 
Figure 2. A Health Virtual Community Model for Chronic Disease 
Management in rural and disadvantaged communities. 
 
V. 
A HEALTH VIRTUAL COMMUNITY FOR EQUITABLE 
CHRONIC DISEASE MANAGMENT 
We launched the health virtual community project in 
September 2013 and we applied the VC characteristics, as 
shown in Figure 1, as a structured tool to explore the high-
level system’s requirements, from a VC standpoint. We 
provide here a summary of the system analysis process as a 
case study to discuss the model and we propose an updated 
version of it. 
Degree of Mobility: Most of the parts of the system need 
not to be mobile. The only mobile part required will be to 
provide the community field workers with a mobile patient 
screening and scheduling system. Thus, we adopted a hybrid 
approach containing a fixed as well as mobile component. 
Therefore, we suggest to update the degree of mobility we 
Chronic 
Disease 
Management 
Health Virtual 
Community
Provider 
Oriented 
Component
• FAQs
• Online Clinical 
Guidelines
• Communication 
Strategies
Patient Oriented 
Component
• Educational 
Material
• SMS Appointment 
reminders
• SMS educational 
information
Health Indicators 
collection
Appointment 
Scheduling
Patient e-
Education
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

have discussed above, to include not only still and mobile 
options but a hybrid option as well. 
Degree of Virtuality: The community is virtual since 
members will have to work remotely. 
Degree of Cooperation: In our project, a tight 
cooperation is required between community members in order 
to ensure the right scheduling and patient care delivery at the 
right time by the right person. Nevertheless, the scheduling 
software present in the health community centers was not able 
to support remote access from the field workers’ laptops; 
consequently, we opted for an off-line solution where field 
workers have to schedule screened patients off-line and then 
to synchronize their appointments once they reach the health 
care center they are affiliated to. In case of conflict, the field 
worker would call the screened patient to reach an alternative 
appointment. 
Degree of Uniformity: The community is heterogeneous 
since it involves doctors, nurses, field workers, researchers, 
data analyst, etc. Each would require special tools to work. 
The model in Figure 2 shows the main aspects of our VC. One 
component is patient oriented and used by patients (SMS 
messages), another one is health provider oriented and used 
by providers (online forum and FAQs). Field workers to 
schedule appointments will use a component; another one will 
be used at the healthcare centers to collect patient indicators. 
Regarding the patient e-education material, even though 
Lebanon has a high penetration of internet (52%) and cell 
phone use (3,350,000 mobile-cellular telephone subscriptions, 
equivalent to 78.65 subscriptions per 100 inhabitants)[50], 
smart phones were not judged to be a good tool in the rural 
communities and therefore we decided that the field worker 
leaves a printed material with the screened patients. That last 
solution makes the material accessible in an easy way known 
to all. 
Inclusive Design: The design was inclusive since its 
inception. The doctors and community field workers will be 
consulted from the beginning of the project to ensure that the 
clinical guidelines conform to their expectations in terms of 
language and presentation. That ensures an inclusive design 
providing better chances for adoption by end-users. 
Participatory Approach: The community of healthcare 
providers will be using the system in their work environment. 
We expect that they will find interest in participating in the 
forum and accessing the FAQs. We will measure the 
participation via embedded software tools that will provide 
some participation indicators (number of hits, number of 
logins, number of questions, etc.). 
Supportive: A coordinator will be supporting the 
members of the VC.  
Workflow Adaptive: The workflow was local, decided 
by the MoPH, and therefore was not an issue in our project. 
Policy Sensitive: The privacy and confidentiality laws and 
regulations were implemented based on the standards set by 
the MoPH. The appointment data are stored locally in each 
community center. The MoPH owns and manages the clinical 
software run in each center and provides remote update on it. 
Culture Adaptive, i.e., culturally sensitive: The 
researchers used English and Arabic and were fluent in both. 
Field workers will use mostly Arabic to communicate with the 
local population in the rural areas. The culture at work was 
framed by the information system in place set by the MoPH. 
No special adaptation will be made to local cultures. 
Environment Adaptive: There is no “environmental” 
issue. The research tackles many diseases that have the same 
prevalence across the country. 
Infrastructure Adaptive: The eHealth research team 
decided on many delivery strategies for the educational 
modules. During the screening, a notepad (e.g., electronic 
pad) will be the delivery means for all patients scheduled for 
appointment. However, since 4G networks have been 
penetrating the market in a rapid pace, a software that delivers 
the same message is also scheduled for development, ensuring 
many delivery channels for potential patents. The SMS 
messaging system will be delivered by a local company; it has 
Application Programming Interface (API) that allows the 
designers to embed the SMS messaging strategy in the VC. 
Value Catalyst: A training session will be designed in 
order to train doctors and field workers on the clinical 
guidelines and their benefit, the value of the screening process 
and the input of the clinical indicators (during the 
intervention). 
Based on our analysis, we find that the model proposed in 
Figure 1 is very useful in capturing the VC requirements; it 
gives an accurate high-level description of our project. 
However, we propose to include a “hybrid” component in the 
description of the degree of mobility; in our case, some 
aspects of the VC are fixed while others are mobile. We 
suggest that we add a “synchronous/asynchronous” aspect in 
the degree of cooperation; in our case, the cooperation is 
neither fully dynamic nor fully based on a messaging 
mechanism; for instance, the scheduling will occur in an 
asynchronous way (synching will occur once the fieldworker 
reaches the community center) without neither involving a 
messaging mechanism nor a dynamic collaboration. 
Profile Sensitivity: Taking into consideration the limited 
use of the VC, there were no disparities in users profiles. 
Different users will access different parts of the VC; 
consequently, the user interface adaptability to user profile 
was not an issue. 
Finally, we found it more useful to classify the different 
features presented in Figure 1 into categories. The result is 
shown in Figure 3. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 3. A Health Virtual Community Model 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a previously established health 
virtual community model and analyzes its components based 
on a research project in a developing country. Through the 
analysis and design phases of our health VC project, the model 
proved to provide a useful way that helped to identify a 
suitable course of action and to describe its different 
components. It finally suggests two important modifications 
to the mode and provides a different, more system design 
friendly, classification of its components.  
In the context of the Lebanese public health, the project is 
expected to enhance the equity in access to the chronic disease 
management in poor and underprivileged areas in the country, 
through the patient-oriented component (e.g. SMS reminders 
and 
educational 
information). 
The 
provider-oriented 
component would enable the caregivers to establish better 
communication strategies with their patients, reduce 
professional isolation and enhance access to updated 
knowledge.   
In the context of research in virtual communities, our 
model establishes a framework for global health teams to ask 
the right questions when they are in the analysis and design 
phases of a Health VC information system. To the best of our 
knowledge this is the first time we have a model for that 
purpose. The model needs to be verified and tuned during the 
next few months. Future research will fine tune the model, 
develop the Health VC and implement it. The Health VC will 
be used in day-to-day activities in the chosen centers and 
indicators will be collected in order to measure its impact on 
chronic disease management in comparison. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was carried out with the aid of a grant from the 
International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, Canada. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Kivimäki, K. Kauppinen, and M. Robinson, "Identity in virtual 
communities," SIGGROUP Bull., vol. 19, no. 3, 1998, pp. 29-33. 
[2] A. Malhotra, S. Gosain, and A. Hars, "Evolution of a virtual 
community: understanding design issues through a longitudinal study," 
presented at the Proceedings of the eighteenth international conference 
on Information systems, Atlanta, Georgia, United States, December 
15-17, 1997, pp. 59-74. 
[3] A. Abdul-Rahman and S. Hailes, "Supporting Trust in Virtual 
Communities," presented at the 33rd Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, Maui, Hawaii, 2000. 
[4] A. Ali Shaikh and R. Omer, "Formalising trust for online 
communities," in Fourth international joint conference on Autonomous 
agents and multiagent systems, The Netherlands, July 25 - 29, 2005, 
pp. 1245-1246. 
[5] W. Ebner, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, "Trust in Virtual 
Healthcare Communities: Design and Implementation of Trust-
Enabling Functionalities," presented at the Proceedings of the 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS'04) - Track 7 - Volume 7, January, 2004, pp. 
1-10. 
[6] D. G. Boyer, M. J. Handel, and J. Herbsleb, "Virtual community 
prescence awareness," SIGGROUP Bull., vol. 19, Dec. 1998, pp. 11-
14. 
[7] Y. Merali and J. Davies, "Knowledge capture and utilization in virtual 
communities," presented at the Proceedings of the 1st international 
conference on Knowledge capture, Victoria, British Columbia, 
Canada, October 21 - 23, 2001, pp. 92-99. 
[8] J. Yu, Z. Jiang, and H. C. Chan, "Knowledge contribution in problem 
solving virtual communities: the mediating role of individual 
motivations," presented at the Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGMIS 
CPR conference on Computer personnel research: The global 
information technology workforce, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, April 19 
- 21, 2007, pp. 144-152. 
[9] C. El Morr, J. Subercaze, P. Maret, and M. Rioux, "A Virtual 
Knowledge Community for Human Rights Monitoring for People with 
Disabilities," presented at the IADIS International Conference on Web 
Based Communities, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 24-26 July, 2008, 
pp. 78-84. 
[10] C. El Morr, "Mobile Virtual Communities in Healthcare The Chronic 
Disease Management Case," in Ubiquitous Health and Medical 
Informatics: The Ubiquity 2.0 Trend and Beyond, ed: IGI Global, 
2010, pp. 258-274. 
[11] C. El Morr, "Health Care Virtual Communities: Challenges and 
Opportunities," in Handbook of Research on Developments in E-
Health and Telemedicine: Technological and Social Perspectives, ed: 
IGI Global, 2010, pp. 278-298. 
[12] C. El Morr, "A Model for Global Health Virtual Communities," in The 
Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges, 
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013, Lisbon, Portugal, November 17 - 22, 2013, 
pp. 33-37. 
[13] G. Demiris, "Virtual Communities in Health Care," in Intelligent 
Paradigms for Healthcare Enterprises. B. Silverman, A. Jain, I. A., and 
L. Jain, Eds., ed: Springer, vol. 184, 2005, pp. 121-137. 
[14] H. Clark, "Formal Knowledge Networks: A Study of Canadian 
Experiences Helping Knowledge Networks Work," International 
Institute for Sustainable Development, Winnipeg, 1998. 
[15] T. Willard, "Helping Knowledge Networks Work," International 
Institute for Sustainable Development, Winnipeg, 2001. 
[16] J. Davies, A. Duke, and Y. Sure, "OntoShare: a knowledge 
management environment for virtual communities of practice," 
presented at the Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on 
Knowledge capture, Sanibel Island, FL, USA, October 23-25, 2003, 
pp. 20-27. 
[17] P. Maret, M. Hammoud, and J. Calmet, "Muti Agent Based Virtual 
Knowledge Communities for Distributed Knowledge Management," in 
International Workshop on Engineering Societies in the Agents World 
(ESAW), Toulouse, France, October 20-24 , 2004, pp. 33-44. 
[18] D. H. Gustafson et al., "CHESS: 10 years of research and development 
in consumer health informatics for broad populations, including the 
Tech. Sensitive
• Degree of Mobility
• Degree of Virtuality
• Degree of Cooperation
Human Sensitive
• Degree of Uniformity
• Inclusive Design
• Participatory 
Approach
• Supportivness
• Workflow 
Adaptability
• Policy Sensitivity
• Profile Sensitivity
• Culturally Sensitive
Context 
Sensitive
• Environmental 
Adaptability
• Infrastructure 
Adaptability
Value Driven
• Value 
Catalyst
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

underserved," in The 10th World Congress on Medical Informatics 
(Medinfo 2001), London,UK, September 2-5, 2001, pp. 1459-1463. 
[19] D. H. Gustafson et al., "CHESS: 10 years of research and development 
in consumer health informatics for broad populations, including the 
underserved," International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 65, 
November 12, 2002, pp. 169-177. 
[20] Z. Temesgen, J. E. Knappe-Langworthy, M. M. S. Marie, B. A. Smith, 
and R. A. Dierkhising, "Comprehensive Health Enhancement Support 
System (CHESS) for People with HIV Infection," AIDS and Behavior, 
vol. 10, January 2006, pp. 35-40. 
[21] Y. Arnold, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Virtual Communities in Health 
Care : Roles, Requirements and Restrictions," presented at the 
Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik (MKWI), Universität Duisburg-
Essen, March 9-11, 2004, pp. 1-8 . 
[22] Y. Arnold, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, "CoPEP: A Development 
Process Model for Community Platforms for Cancer Patients," 
presented at the The XIth European Conference on Information 
Systems (ECIS), 2003. 
[23] H. Krcmar, Y. Arnold, M. Daum, and J. M. Leimeister, "Virtual 
communities in health care: the case of "krebsgemeinschaft.de"," 
SIGGROUP Bull., vol. 23, 2002, pp. 18-23. 
[24] J. M. Leimeister, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Towards m-communities: 
the case of COSMOS healthcare," in The 36th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences(2003), 2003. 
[25] J. M. Leimeister, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Towards mobile 
Communities for cancer patients: the case of Krebsgemeinschaft.de," 
International Journal for Web Based Communities, vol. 1, January 6-9 
, 2004, pp. 58-70,. 
[26] J. M. Leimeister, P. Sidiras, and H. Krcmar, "Success factors of virtual 
communities from the perspective of members and operators: an 
empirical study," in 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, January 5-8, 2004, pp. 1-10. 
[27] W. J. Winkelman and C. W. Choo, "Provider-sponsored virtual 
communities for chronic patients: improving health outcomes through 
organizational patient-centred knowledge management," Health 
Expectations, vol. 6, 2003, pp. 352-358. 
[28] R. M. Heeler, "Social ties and susceptibility to the common cold," 
JAMA, vol. 278 , January 22, 1997, pp. 1231-1232. 
[29] R. B. Case, A. J. Moss, N. Case, M. McDermott, and S. Eberly, "Living 
alone after myocardial infarction. Impact on prognosis," JAMA, vol. 
267, January 22, 1992, pp. 515-519. 
[30] R. B. Williams, et al., "Prognostic importance of social and economic 
resources among medically treated patients with angiographically 
documented coronary artery disease," JAMA, vol. 267, January 22, 
1992, pp. 520-524. 
[31] R. B. Adler, R. F. Proctor, N. Towne, and J. A. Rolls, Looking Out 
Looking In, 3rd ed.: Thomson - Nelson, 2008. 
[32] C. Feste and R. M. Anderson, "Empowerment: from philosophy to 
practice," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 26, 1995, pp. 139-
144. 
[33] E. T. Adolfsson, B. Smide, E. Gregeby, L. Fernström, and K. Wikblad, 
"Implementing empowerment group education in diabetes," Patient 
Education and Counseling, vol. 53, June, 2004, pp. 319-324. 
[34] R. M. Anderson and M. M. Funnell, "Patient empowerment: reflections 
on the challenge of fostering the adoption of a new paradigm," Patient 
Education and Counseling, vol. 57, May, 2005, pp. 153-157. 
[35] I. Aujoulat, W. d'Hoore, and A. Deccache, "Patient empowerment in 
theory and practice: Polysemy or cacophony?," Patient Education and 
Counseling, vol. 66, April, 2007, pp. 13-20. 
[36] N. C. Elder, S. L. Regan, H. Pallerla, L. Levin, D. Post, and D. J. 
Cegela, "Development of an instrument to measure seniors' patient 
safety health beliefs: The Seniors Empowerment and Advocacy in 
Patient Safety (SEAPS) survey," Patient Education and Counseling, 
vol. 69, December, 2007, pp. 100-107. 
[37] P. K. Hansford, "Empowerment through choice - enabling speech to 
flow," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 34, May 1, 1998, pp. 
S76-S76 
[38] K. Johansson, S. Salanterä, J. Katajisto, and H. Leino-Kilpi, "Written 
orthopedic patient education materials from the point of view of 
empowerment by education," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 
52, February, 2004, pp. 175-181. 
[39] B. Luban-Plozza, "Empowerment techniques: from doctor-centered 
(Balint approach) to patient-centred discussion groups," Patient 
Education and Counseling, vol. 26, September, 1995, pp. 257-263. 
[40] The Center for Health Enhancement Systems Studies. Comprehensive 
Health Enhancement Support System. [retrieved: January 2014]. 
Available: https://chess.wisc.edu/ 
[41] Women's Health Matters Network. [retrieved: January, 2014]. 
Available: http://www.womenshealthmatters.ca/ 
[42] @neWorld. A Virtual Community for Kids with Cancer. Available: 
http://1worldonline.org/ [retrieved: January, 2014] 
[43] J. Meuser, T. Bean, J. Goldman, and S. Reeves, "Family health teams: 
A 
new 
Canadian 
interprofessional 
initiative," 
Journal 
of 
Interprofessional Care, vol. 20, 2006, pp. 436-428. 
[44] C. El Morr and J. Kawash, "Mobile Virtual Communities Research: A 
Synthesis of Current Trends and a Look at Future Perspectives," 
International Journal for Web Based Communities, vol. 3, 2007, pp. 
386-403. 
[45] W. H. Organization, "Facing the Facts: The Impact of Chronic 
Diseases in Lebanon," WHO 2012. 
[46] W. H. Organization, "NCD Country Profiles," WHO2011. 
[47] B. Chen and M. Cammett, "Informal politics and inequity of access to 
health care in Lebanon," International Journal for Equity in Health, vol. 
11, No 23, 2012, pp. 1-8. 
[48] A. D. Black et al., "The Impact of eHealth on the Quality and Safety of 
Health Care: A Systematic Overview," PLoS Medicine, vol. 8, 2011, 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000387 
[49] A. W., "Health beyond politics," WHO, Beirut, Lebanon, 2009. 
[50] I. T. Union. ICT Data and Statistics.  [retrieved: January, 2014] 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx 
 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Experiences of the Elderly, their Relatives, and Volunteers of a Social Media 
Application in Monitoring of Wellbeing 
 
Ismo Alakärppä  
Faculty of Art and Design  
University of Lapland  
Rovaniemi, Finland 
ismo.alakarppa@ulapland.fi 
 
Elisa Jaakkola  
Faculty of Art and Design  
University of Lapland  
Rovaniemi, Finland 
elisa.jaakkola@ulapland.fi 
 
Kirsi Päykkönen 
Faculty of Social Sciences  
University of Lapland  
Rovaniemi, Finland 
kirsi.paykkonen@ulapland.fi 
 
Jaana Väntänen 
Faculty of Social Sciences 
University of Lapland  
Rovaniemi, Finland 
jvantane@ulapland.fi 
Abstract— In the spring of 2013, we conducted a qualitative 
field study where elderly people, their relatives, and 
volunteering friends used a new social media application 
(Comcare) that runs in an Android tablet computer, for a 
period of two months. Comcare makes it possible to 
communicate with one's own social circle. In addition, it 
enables relatives to monitor the everyday routines of the 
elderly. The research material consists of five circles, each one 
of which includes an elderly person, his relative, and a 
volunteer friend. The material was gathered in eight group 
interviews before and after the field study, and 15 personal 
interviews during the testing period. This article concentrates 
on results of the evaluation period by reporting experiences of 
using the application, social support and feelings of safety.  
Keywords–elderly; social media; user experience  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Social media has made a breakthrough among the young, 
working age, and partly also among pensioners. Social 
interaction has transferred more and more to the Internet and 
concurrently the time used with a computer has grown 
significantly in the time span 1999–2009 among the age 
group 10–64 [1]. Social media continues to expand its 
popularity among all age groups. Even though young adults 
(18–29 years) remain to be social network mass users, it is 
notable that the rate of usage growth has been faster in older 
age groups in recent years. For example, in the past two 
years, social media use among Internet users age 65 and 
older has grown 150 % between April 2009 and May 2011. 
Also during this same period social media use by 50–64 
year-old Internet users doubled from 25 % to 51 % [2].  
Use of social media can improve the quality of life in 
many ways as the psychological well-being and perceived 
well-being do not necessarily require professional help, it 
also can be achieved through the support given by friends 
and other related parties. Social support is found to have an 
indirect link to the subjective health experience through 
psychological effects. [3]. Sense of community is based on a 
membership i.e. the feeling that one belongs to a group and a 
shared faith that commitment on togetherness is given by the 
group [4]. Social support and connections to the community 
are important as loneliness forms an important health and 
safety risk for the elderly. Thus, interaction with other people 
has an increasing role in preventing loneliness [5].  
Although high degree of acceptance concerning the 
ambient assisted living (AAL) has been found, and the 
system would likely make elderly people feel safer and more 
secure in their homes, the main concern still is how it will 
impact their daily lives [6]. It is suggested that relevant 
factors to the use of in-home monitoring technologies are 
where, when and in which situations user is monitored. Also 
seniors’ perceptions of privacy related to these technologies 
are highly contextual, and influenced by psychosocial 
motivations [7]. There is some evidence that physical spaces 
and environments affect the acceptance of monitoring 
technologies [8][9].  
Motivation for this study are findings of problems caused 
by the loneliness of the elderly, the breakthrough of social 
media, pressure to rise costs of social and health related 
services, and the need to add to collaboration between 
operators in the third sector and public sector, home care 
services. Third sector volunteer work e.g. friend services, 
play a significant role as a support to other home care 
services. In addition, new operational models are needed for 
volunteer work, in order to attract the younger generation, 
spending much of their time with the social media, to act as a 
supporting group for the elderly, and to direct some of the 
time they spend in the social media also towards taking care 
of the elderly.  
Inspired by the aforementioned challenges a social media 
application (Comcare) was developed and tested for a period 
of two months. In this article the attitudes and experiences of 
the elderly of the first test period and user experiences are 
assessed from the perspective of the elderly, their relatives, 
and volunteer support persons. Extra attention is paid to the 
experiencing of benefits, feeling of safety, communality, and 
social support. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
II. 
COMCARE SYSTEM 
The main idea of the Comcare system is to form a bi-
directional and equal care-giving community to take care of 
an elderly person. Comcare is a system and an application of 
social media working in an Android tablet computer [10], 
that is primarily meant for daily contacts and relaying of 
images and for monitoring of everyday routines (Figure 1). 
Figure 1.   Comcare system architecture. 
Comcare mediates updates written by the elderly 
themselves, through sensors by a door of restroom and door 
of bedroom, or members of the circle. Hence, the system 
enables the monitoring of everyday routines through the 
sensor-relayed data and by relatives belonging to the circle. 
The elderly can switch off the sensors at any time by 
pressing a button on user interface kit (Figure 2). The system 
shows all the output information to the elderly in the same 
way it is shown to the recipients. However, the updates are 
shown in different manners to the members of the circle 
depending on if the member belongs to the relative or the 
volunteer’s circle. Relatives are shown the messages the way 
they have been written, but volunteers only receive the 
activity information. The sending rate of activity information 
depends on the setting of the monitoring mode. The settings 
choices are: once a day, four times a day, or continuously in 
real time. All members of the circle are able to send 
messages with the elderly, and also send images through 
private messages. The application did not include talk or 
video connection. 
Figure 2.  Comcare application and user interfacekit for sensors 
III. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
Five elderly people (three females and two males), five 
relatives, and three volunteer friends took part in the study. 
One volunteer was involved in two circles as volunteer 
friend.  Table 1 shows the data of the partaking people. 
Emphasis in the qualitative analysis of the material was put 
on the experiences of the elderly, but also views of the 
relatives and the volunteers have been taken into account. 
The mean age of the elderly was 75.6 years. The elderly 
were volunteered customers of local voluntary friend service. 
The material consists of eight group conversations and 
fifteen 
individual 
interviews. 
The 
five 
first 
group 
conversations were held before the test period with the 
participation of an elderly person, a relative, and a volunteer. 
The three group conversations after the testing gathered 
together the elderly, the relatives and the volunteers, all in 
their own group conversations. The interview material was 
transcribed and the contents were analyzed by grouping the 
findings according to themes. In this article the attitudes 
towards, thoughts and experiences of the Comcare system 
before, during and after the test period are examined. 
TABLE I.  
THE DATA OF PARTICIPANTS 
Comcare 
Circle 
Participants 
Number of 
participants 
Gender 
Age range 
Mean age 
Elderly 
5 
3 women 
2 men 
73–78 
75.6 
Relatives 
5 
3 women 
2 men 
25–52 
35.4 
Volunteers 
3 
3 women 
58–66 
61.3 
All 
13 
9 women 
4 men 
25–78 
60.8 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Stance on technology and social media 
The elderly had little experience of computers and the 
Internet. Social media as a term was familiar to only one 
elderly person. The interview cast light on the term, telling 
them that it means communication through the Internet, 
where people share e.g. the newest everyday goings-on in 
their lives or images etc., and Facebook was mentioned as an 
example. After the description, social media was treated 
somewhat skeptically, and when talking about the pros and 
cons thereof, four elderly people introduced threats in the 
utilization of social media. Data security problems and 
straight scams were causes of concern.  
 
"Remember that there (in social media) can be nothing 
shown about me" (K3H1, 234) 
 
The attitude towards monitoring technologies, such as 
surveillance cameras and movement sensors, ranged from a 
defensive attitude to approval. Especially surveillance 
cameras raised a conversation for and against. The target 
group for safety technologies was estimated to be people 
living alone and who are in a bad condition. The attitude 
towards one's own video monitoring was negative, or 
positive but reserved. Movement sensors and live camera 
with blurred images containing little information were more 
readily approved of than monitoring cameras relaying sharp 
images. Accommodation to the existence of monitoring 
cameras was seen as being possible, but at the same time it 
was emphasized that the location of monitoring technology 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

has meaning in the action of being approved of. Monitoring 
cameras were not desired in e.g. in the bedroom. The overall 
costs of safety technology and services were also considered 
to be a factor in their approval. 
 
“In the beginning it might be a little bit like, that you are 
being stared at, but well you get used everything you 
know, it will go away by time then, from your mind, so 
then you won't mind at all, because it is like for example 
the tolling of the clock on the wall, so if you haven't 
heard it, it takes time to get used to it, and then it fades to 
the background there” (K5H1) 
B. First impressions and trial period experiences  
The participants got the first contact to the Comcare 
system in the initial group conversation where it was 
introduced to them. After the introduction they were asked 
for a first impression, and they ranged from interested and 
excited anticipation, to an attitude of questioning one's own 
abilities of learning. The relatives and the volunteers 
considered Comcare to be at first sight simple and easy to 
use. The elderly were not confident of their own memory, or 
their own learning capabilities. In the preconceived 
evaluations Comcare was seen as beneficial means for 
communicating and bringing change into one's life.  
 
“You have to say that in a way this was such a nice little 
thing and you play ((laughs)) play with these but when it 
comes down to a real situation then I think that you can 
get used to it little by little.” (K3RK1) 
 
At the beginning of the trial period two of the elderly 
people experienced the use of the system as an interesting 
adventure. The technical problems confronted diminished 
this excitement. Comcare also caused extra attention and 
trouble that one did not always want to commit to. On the 
other hand, through visits of friends and relatives the 
interaction was sufficient even without communicating 
through Comcare and for that reason, one of the elderly 
people experienced Comcare as being somewhat useless. 
 
"Well, I wouldn't know, it is, in the beginning it was 
learning and exciting, and then in the end you felt a bit 
annoyed when you could not" (K1H3, 66) 
 
An increase in communication, in addition to phone calls, 
was one of the things experienced as beneficial about 
Comcare. Some felt that communicating was more active 
through Comcare than earlier. Especially those of the elderly 
people, whose relatives did not live close by, and people that 
did not frequently communicate through phone calls, felt that 
Comcare was an easy-going way of communicating and 
share everyday matters. The elderly mentioned that Comcare 
had affected their wellbeing and made them feel good. In 
addition, Comcare was experienced as heightening the 
feelings of closeness and as cheering up everyday life.  
 
“We talked quite a lot after all, in the morning, in the 
daytime and also the in the evening, what it was that 
popped into mind. It was nice tapping them and there it 
went and I for one liked it. It was really this like close 
communication, that you can't be bothered to make a call 
about every little thing.” (K5KRK) 
 
At the end of the trial period the sensors, and user 
experiences thereof, connected with Comcare were discussed 
with the elderly. All the elderly and their relatives and the 
volunteers thought that they enhanced feeling of safety. 
Somewhat surprisingly, none of the elderly partaking in the 
testing period did not feel that sensors were disturbing or 
stressing. Some of the elderly even completely forgot that the 
sensors existed. The elderly thought it was good that they 
could themselves control if the sensors were switched on or 
off. Disregarding this none of the elderly switched the 
sensors off during the testing period. Part of the elderly 
thought that the sensor in the refrigerator was useless, but 
especially sensors the outdoor and the hallway were regarded 
as important locations for the sensors. In the final group 
interview it was discovered that three of the five elderly had 
no notion where the sensor data is going, who deciphers it 
and who reacts, if there is an emergency.  
 
“Well I didn't quite understand, that girl she said it many 
times that where this went when here there goes wires on 
the roof” (K3KRK) 
 
The most active circles experienced most benefit form 
the 
testing 
period. 
Two 
of 
the 
most 
frequently 
communicating elderly-relative pairs told that using the 
system had brought about a refreshed mood and nice 
meaning to everyday life.  
 
"So she might have been a bit more vital at that point ... 
that she wrote things like 'good morning' and 'I have 
eaten this and that' and 'now I'll go for the groceries’. 
But I think that in our family mother kind of liked it. 
(L1H1, 68) 
 
Communicating and sharing everyday matters became an 
integral part of the daily rhythm that the ones using the 
system 
most 
became 
somewhat 
dependent 
on 
the 
application. After the test period this frequent messaging was 
missed. 
 
C. Learning the use and some problems detected 
Only one of the elderly felt that learning was easy 
without problems. The relatives’ and volunteers’ learning 
was quick because of their earlier experience of information 
technology, but the elderly being not used to using 
computers and touch screens, learning was more arduous and 
an ongoing personal support was longed for. Four out of five 
elderly people encountered various problems in learning the 
system. Although the system was designed as easy to use as 
possible, lack of prior information technology experience, 
the unfamiliarity of the Internet world, understanding the 
functioning logic of the system, and using the touch screen, 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

caused a lot of problems. A part of the elderly, however, 
overcame the problems and learned it successfully.  
"As for myself, I can tell you that it was a bit hard at the 
beginning. But when I got to learning or knowing that 
compute, then I thought this is so nice." (K3KRK, 36) 
 
Using Comcare was not an especially positive experience 
to everyone because of sparsity of messages, usability 
problems, and a closed circle. Nevertheless the possibilities 
of social media were recognized and it was felt that a similar 
system could be of use to them. Difficulties in learning the 
use were regarded as being due to, among other things, one's 
own health. Hence, rare messages were sent and the system 
was experienced as useless. 
 
"I feel, that as I am sick, that I'm too tired for that.” 
(K4H3) 
 
The elderly doubted their own ability to learn and 
remember the use of the system, and felt insecure as users. 
Although clarity and big enough texts and icons were tried to 
achieve, some of the elderly people had trouble observing 
some elements in the interface. Inexperienced users were 
puzzled, frustrated, and insecure, when confronted with 
usability problems. Writing with the comparatively small 
keyboard or using the touch screen also caused a lot of 
problems. Finding letters was also difficult, because they had 
no prior experience where they keys are in a standard 
keyboard. 
 
"Now that it has laid there on the table I have felt that I 
should know how to use it too so it has made me nervous 
that no (K4H3, 37) 
  
The elderly had trouble distinguishing public updates and 
private messages. This could have been caused by a lack of 
prior models of this kind of sharing or graphic user interface 
related reasons. 
 
D. Experiencing sense of communality and a feeling of 
safety 
Deterioration of moving ability had restrained everyday 
activities. When getting out of one's home had been 
hindered, many hobbies and keeping up a social network 
were abandoned. For this reason it was seen that Comcare 
offered a new possibility for social interaction. 
 
"It is a form of socializing when you really can't get out 
of here. It is like you're under house arrest. I have to say 
it is like I'm under house arrest here." (K1H3, 19) 
 
The difficulty of learning how the system works and 
technical problems had their influence on the fact that it did 
not add to the sense of safety with everybody. One elderly 
person suffering from recurrent loneliness got relief to his 
loneliness by using the system; another one could not 
overcome the problems in learning the system, and thus was 
not able to benefit from the system. Nevertheless some felt, 
that a communication channel like Comcare adds to the 
feeling of safety. Most of the users were ready to use 
Comcare or a similar system also in the future. 
 
"So that you can contact already right away these ones 
close to you that this computer has connected with, yes 
that gives a certain sense of safety." (K5H3, 294) 
 
Those of the elderly that used the system actively told 
that communicating with it had made them closer to their 
relatives. The relatives had similar experiences. Frequent 
communicating and sharing one's own matters kept up the 
sense of community. According to active users of the system, 
sharing 
small 
matters 
of 
everyday 
life 
increased 
communality. The threshold to write a message seemed to be 
lower than e.g. making a phone call, so even small daily 
matters were shared more. 
 
"So well but it was so nice in the morning when you 
could tap good morning get up to your daughter and then 
again so like I am going for groceries now and now I am 
going out to look for some company though she then 
answered really what she wanted.  (K1KRK, 40) 
 
Only one of the elderly was satisfied with the number of 
people belonging to the circle, others would have more 
members to be involved. Communication possibilities were 
craved towards one's own family and friends, as well as 
being ready to make new acquaintances via the Internet. 
 
"Yes and maybe meet new people. Think about me for 
example, I have been here since 56 and well, most of my 
generation are already there underground, underground. 
(K1H3, 129:130) 
 
In addition to the sense of communality, the elderly who 
actively used the system, felt that they also get social support 
through the system. During the test period also the less active 
participants saw the system as a possible aid in giving and 
receiving social support. 
 
"It would be quite handy for you, too, this kind of a 
gadget and I know, it is me after all who takes these 
gadgets, because I am forced to be alone somewhat much 
(K3KRK, 467) 
 
More frequently contacting participants told of a rise in 
spirits and feeling more cheerful and vital. Although many 
elderly people would want and need to keep in contact 
frequently, many of them told that they do not want to be a 
nuisance. They did not want to bother family, neighbors’ or 
friends with their own troubles or their need for company. 
Although the testing period was short, a part of the relatives 
nevertheless told that they were better informed of the 
everyday situations of their elderly next of kin. A frequent 
contacting rate was assessed to lower the threshold for 
asking for support and help.  
 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

"I would believe that when that, the using, the threshold 
of using, lowers then well, the asking for help or things 
like that, is much more easier and quicker" (L5H1, 134). 
 
E. The amount and nature of communication  
The elderly testing the system actively experienced that 
keeping in contact with relatives and volunteers had been 
facilitated during the test period. The threshold of writing a 
message was lower than that of making a phone call, because 
the sender did not need to fear he was disturbing the 
recipient. You could send a message as quick as a thing to be 
shared sprang to mind. 
  
"I thought it was good in a way that I could be straight 
(in contact) like this with him so I didn't always have to 
take the phone in my hand" (K3KRK, 75) 
 
There was a wide variety in the rate of activity between 
the circles. The three most active circles read and sent 
messages several times a day. Between the other two circles 
the messaging was less frequent (Table 2).  
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF SENT MESSAGES 
Messages 
Circle 1 
Circle 2 
Circle 3 
Circle 4 
Circle 5 
Elderly 
197 
189 
16 
23 
96 
Relatives 
305 
270 
12 
10 
171 
Volunteers 
30 
- 
13 
11 
16 
Total 
532 
459 
41 
44 
283 
 
Reasons for rate of activity were slow learning of the 
system and less interaction and slow answering. Some case 
everyday life was otherwise full of social contacts, so that 
the usage of the gadget was scarce.  Most participants felt 
that the utilization of the system added to the overall amount 
of communicating, because it did not replace other means of 
interaction but supplemented them as an equal means of 
communication. An interesting observation is that problems 
in using the system also added to the amount of 
communication. Problems in use were discussed on the 
telephone of face-to-face with relatives. On the other hand 
Comcare had reduced the number of telephone calls with two 
of the elderly people. 
 
"We were more in contact. Up till then it was only once a 
day he called me". (K1H3, 102) 
 
Most of the participants felt that the usage of the system 
was mutual: messages were sent on both sides just about as 
frequently. Only one elderly person felt that others were 
more passive and slower than him, that it made the use of the 
system less sensible. One of the relatives felt the 
communication to be one-sided, because his elderly next-of-
kin had difficulties in learning to use the system. When 
contemplating about the one-sidedness or mutuality of the 
communication the elderly bore in mind the different day 
rhythms of both the relative and the volunteers: they did not 
even wait answer for a message to be written during the day, 
but only after the working hours. The communication via the 
system was informal in nature. Messages were chat, sharing 
everyday matters, and catching up on things, and taking care 
of small things to be done. 
 
"Well it is like hello, how are you" (K4H3, 73) 
"Couple of times a week no more, when you don't have 
actual business then it's no use just to babble" (K2H3, 
206) 
 
The elderly actively using the system experienced the 
exchange of messages as a nice pastime, which came an 
integral part of daily routines. Some of the elderly people, 
although, got bored waiting for answers to their messages. 
 
“It was a wish in our family, at least sort of on mother's 
side, that when she wrote something, so that I would 
instinctively be behind the computer right there and then 
and answer” (L3LRK) 
 
It was a desire to be able to communicate with more 
people that it was possible during the testing period and, to 
an extent, there was a readiness to make totally new 
acquaintances. Talking was a more known way of 
communicating with the elderly than writing messages on 
the Internet, and writing on the tablet computer was to a part 
of the elderly quite slow, thus voice calls or video calls 
would have been a more quick way of communicating. On 
the other hand many answerers mentioned the down sides of 
video calls. It was not desired to always share one's own 
image with others. Video or voice calls would also be more 
confining than exchanging messages.  
 
"Or on the other hand if you are tired yourself, so you 
really can't be bothered with a video call, because there 
is a good time for a video call, so it is not that it is 
suitable for every situation" (L5H1, 74). 
F. Acceptability  
Comcare was not experienced as being stigmatizing. The 
elderly were fine with introducing Comcare to other people. 
In the end of the testing period the participants were asked of 
their willingness to use the system in the future. Part of the 
elderly felt that the testing period was a positive experience 
and would have gladly continued using Comcare or a similar 
system. The costs of acquisition and maintaining of a similar 
system may, however, form an obstacle for the continuation 
of the utilization of social media. 
 
"I regarded it as a reason to be proud" (K5KRK, 454) 
"If I had the money, I'd surely get a computer straight 
away" (K1KRK, 142) 
 
According to relatives and volunteers, how the elderly 
accept the social media application are influenced by 
easiness of use, and how one is able to grasp how it works, 
as well as full functionality and reliability. Also the price of 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the equipment and the use of the service were believed to be 
factors in accepting the system. Relatives felt it was 
important that in order to be approved of by the elderly 
person, he would have to be totally in control if he wants to 
use the service or not. In addition, it was mentioned, that the 
ability to integrate Comcare as a part of the equipment 
already existing would facilitate its introduction.  
 
“So if it was in your own tablet, so if it was in something 
you already use, then it would be easy to start using” 
(L5H1) 
 
Volunteers were interested and ready to make Comcare a 
part of their everyday work routines. They did, however, 
mention that approval would demand a clear model of action 
in emergency situations, and how the service would be 
integrated to daily work routines. In addition, volunteers 
thought it was important that leisure time and time for 
volunteering work can be clearly defined. 
 
“This was easy because it was a test period, so you could 
count that it was over by a certain date so it was quite 
easy to commit yourself to this. But I don't know, if it 
would be quite, that it would be there all the time... that 
could cause problems.” (A1ARK).  
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The results must be interpreted with caution due to the 
minor research sample. The overall attitude of the elderly 
towards safety technologies and sensor technologies was 
positive and approving of with certain reservations. The 
elderly person himself is to decide as to who, where, when, 
and how he is being monitored and what kind of 
information is received about him. The attitude towards 
Comcare was of initial excited anticipation, which turned 
into annoyance and distrust towards the system, as part of 
the messages did not go through. The functionality of 
systems should be unconditionally secure before being 
introduced, in order not to lose the interest and excitement 
over the new technology. 
The sensors in Comcare were considered to be acceptable 
and giving extra safety, as long as their location is suitable 
and does not interfere with privacy. In general, there is 
readiness to use safety technology if one's own health so 
demands and if it is situated in spaces where privacy is not 
considered being under threat. Social media services 
designed for the elderly would seem to have potential to 
support elderly people experiencing loneliness, and also in 
supporting communality, and in supplying social support. 
The observation that the ones who used the system the most, 
benefited the most, is important. According to this study it is 
not reasonable to offer the application of social media to 
people that are not willing to share small everyday matters 
with others.  
Based on the study it seems that Comcare was more 
considered to be a method of conversation, rather than as a 
safety technology. For these reasons the system was seen as 
to be applicable also for wider use among the elderly, as 
soon as the technical shortcomings are cleared. The elderly, 
who actively used the system, felt that they also get social 
support through the system. However, also the less active 
participants saw the system as a possible aid in giving and 
receiving social support. Although the attitude towards 
technology was quite positive, a shared common view was 
that the safety of the elderly, or anyone else for that matter, 
couldn’t be left only to technology.  
A successful introduction requires of everybody in the 
circle the will, and the desire, to share matters with others, 
because an active communication always calls for at least 
two participants. According to this work there would seem to 
be an order among the elderly for social media applications. 
Extra attention has to be paid for them to be easy enough to 
use, having a reasonable price, secure in functionality, and 
easily learned also to first-comers. The future work must 
concentrate on figuring out challenges of separating public 
status updates and private messages and on exploring of 
those reservations the elderly have toward safety technology 
at home. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Official Statistics of Finland, "Time use survey: Changes 1979 - 
2009," 
Helsinki: 
Statistics 
Finland, 
http://www.stat.fi/til/akay/2009/02/akay_2009_02_2011-02-
17_tie_001_en.html [Assessed 11 November 2013]. 
[2] 
M. Madden and K. Zickuhr, "65% of online adults use social 
networking 
sites," 
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Social-
Networking-Sites.aspx [Accessed 21 December 2011]. 
[3] 
S. Guindon and P. Cappeliez, "Contributions of psychological well-
being and social support to an integrative model of subjective health 
in later adulthood," Ageing International, vol. 35, 2010, pp. 38–60. 
[4] 
D.W.  McMillan and D.M. Chavis, "Sense of community: A 
definition and theory," Journal of Community Psychology," vol. 14, 
1986, pp. 6–23. 
[5] 
T. Mankkinen, "Turvallinen elämä ikääntyneille: Toimintaohjelma 
ikääntyneiden 
turvallisuuden 
parantamiseksi," 
Sisäministeriön 
julkaisuja 19/2011, Helsinki, 2011.  
[6] 
R. Beringer, A. Sixsmith, M. Campo, J. Brown and R. M. 
McCloskey, "The acceptance of ambient assisted living: Developing 
an alternate methodology to this limited research lens," in Toward 
useful services for elderly and people with disabilities, B. 
Abdulrazak, S. Giroux, B. Bouchard, H.Pigot and M.Mokhtari, Eds.  , 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2011, pp. 161–167. 
[7] 
L. Lorenzen-Huber, M. Boutain, L.J. Camp, S. Kalpana and K.H. 
Connelly, "Privacy technology, and aging: a proposed framework," 
Ageing International, vol. 36, 2011, pp. 232–252. 
[8] 
M. Ziefle, S. Himmel and W. Wilkowska, "When your living space 
knows what you do: Acceptance of medical home monitoring by 
different technologies," In Human–Computer Interaction: Information 
Quality in eHealth H. Holzinger & K.-M. Simonic, Eds. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2011, pp. 607–624. 
[9] 
I. Alakärppä, J. Riekki and R. Koukkula, "Pervasive pain monitoring 
system: User experiences and adoption requirements in the hospital 
and home environments," Proceedings of the 3rd conference on 
pervasive computing technologies for healthcare, London, UK, 2009. 
[10] I. Alakärppä, S. Hosio and E. Jaakkola, "SNS as a platform of the 
activity monitoring system for the elderly," International workshop on 
advances in personalized healthcare service (APHS 2012), Paris, 
France, 2012.
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Protecting the Privacy with Human-Readable Pseudonyms: 
One-Way Pseudonym Calculation on Base of Primitive Roots 
 
Uwe Roth 
SANTEC 
CRP Henri Tudor 
Luxembourg, Luxemburg 
uwe.roth@tudor.lu 
 
 
Abstract—Pseudonyms are used in medical data to protect the 
privacy of patients: Demographics like name, gender and age 
are removed from the medical data and are replaced by a 
unique pseudonym. Medical data with the same pseudonym 
belongs to the same person. A pseudonym should be random or 
at least pseudo-random and should not allow drawing 
conclusions about the identity of the patient. Random 
pseudonyms are not always possible and therefore must be 
somehow calculated out of an identifier of the patient, e.g., by 
hashing or encrypting the identifier of the patient. In this 
paper an alternative algorithm is proposed to calculate 
pseudonyms on the base of primitive roots. The algorithm 
guarantees a collision free pseudo-random distribution of the 
pseudonyms, but creates pseudonyms with a bit-depth that 
easily can be transformed to a human readable representation. 
This is important if the pseudonym has to be used (be read, be 
written) in a day-to-day workflow. The pseudonymisation 
algorithm acts as a one-way function if all of the calculation 
parameters are kept secret. 
Keywords-patient privacy-enhancing technologies; secure 
patient data storage; pseudonymisation; one-way function; 
primitive root. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Pseudonymisation is a process where demographics and 
identifier of a person are removed out of an information 
record and replaced by a pseudonym. This step is demanded 
to protect the privacy of patients in cases of secondary usage 
of medical data, e.g., for research or statistical purposes. In 
these cases knowledge about the identity of the person is 
unnecessary and therefore must be protected against 
disclosure. In contrast to anonymisation, a pseudonym 
allows to link data from several sources to the same person, 
which helps to improve the quality of the research or 
statistics. 
An example for the need of pseudonymization is the 
storage of medical data, samples, blood and urine in 
biobanks. Researchers are not interested in the identity of the 
person behind this material. But a pseudonym is needed to 
link the samples from the same person, which have been 
taken at different locations and during different collection 
events. The pseudonym will not only allow the linkage to the 
same person but also allows protecting the identity of the 
patient behind the sensitive data. 
Concepts on how identities of patients and their 
pseudonyms are used and managed (including identity 
matching, identity vigilance, linkage of identifiers from 
different domains) to securely exchange data are discussed in 
many publications (e.g., [1] and [2]). These concepts are not 
in the focus of this paper.  
Assuming, that all the problems of identity matching are 
solved, the pseudonym number or pseudonym string itself 
has to be calculated or determinate at one point.  There are 
several options to create a pseudonym with a given set of 
demographics. Some of these techniques base on hashing or 
encryption of a unique identifying number of the person. 
Others simply chose a random number and link this number 
with the identity.  
Things are getting difficult if the pseudonym must be 
short enough to be human readable and usable, which limits 
the number of effective bits of the pseudonym to approx. 32 
to 40 bits (equivalent 6-8 chars). Current hashing and 
encryption algorithms work with 128 bits minimum. In that 
case, the outcome of the process must be cropped to the 
desired bit-length, which leads to an unpredictable risk for 
pseudonym collisions. 
Adopted solutions that take the small number of bits into 
account (e.g., [3]) still base on techniques that are used in 
symmetric encryption or hashing algorithms like the 
Advanced Encryption Standard AES [4] or the Secure Hash 
Algorithm SHA [5] (permutation, rotation, transformation, 
diffusion). With the small bit-depth of the initial data and the 
missing of deeper cryptanalysis, it is difficult to estimate 
how secure these algorithms finally are and how difficult it is 
to re-compute the person identifier with a given pseudonym.  
The solution described in this paper is based on 
asymmetric encryption techniques as it is used as a one-way 
trapdoor-function. Because the used technique is hard, the 
described pseudonymisation algorithm in total is also hard. 
The paper is structured as follows: 
In Section II – Methods, firstly, a short introduction into 
the mathematical foundations of primitive roots is given. 
Then it is shown that this approach can be used for the 
calculation of pseudonyms. The section ends with 
suggestions how to find a necessary primitive root and how 
the calculations can be implemented fast and efficient. 
In Section III – Results, the bit depth of the secrets that 
are used in the pseudonym calculation is shown especially if 
these secrets are sufficient to protect the original person 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

identifier. A special focus is made on the human readability 
of the pseudonym and the speed to calculate the pseudonym. 
In Section IV – Discussion, potential attacks and re-
identification risks are discussed and an example for the 
applicability is given. 
The paper ends with a conclusion in Section V. 
II. 
METHODS 
The mathematics behind the pseudonym calculation of a 
person ID is based on primitive roots of prime numbers as it 
is used in the Diffie-Hellman protocol to ensure a secure key 
exchange [6]. 
A. Modulo operation (mod) 
a mod b, with a and b being positive integer numbers is 
defined as the remainder of the division of the dividend a 
and the devisor b. The result of the mod operation is an 
integer value in the range from 0 to b-1. 
Example: 112 mod 24 = 16 because 112/24 = 4 with the 
remainder 16. 
B. Discrete logarithm 
Having the equation: 
 
b = ai mod p, with p prime, i ∈ {1..p-1} 
(1) 
Then i is called the discrete logarithm, which is 
equivalent to 
 
i=loga b 
(2) 
The calculation of b is easy but currently there exists no 
efficient way to find the discrete logarithm i with given a, b 
and p. 
This statement is only true if p is big enough to make the 
use of pre-calculated solution tables impossible and if no 
pre-knowledge about i exists that allows reducing the search 
space. 
C. Primitive roots 
The property of a being a primitive root of prime p 
means, that 
 
ai mod p, with i =1..p-1 
(3) 
results in all values of 1..p-1, with no value double or 
missing. This property is relevant to create collision free 
pseudonyms. 
Primitive roots have been used already a long time ago to 
create good random number generators [7]. Our algorithm 
uses this knowledge to introduce pseudo-randomness into the 
series of pseudonyms. 
D. Adaption for the pseudonymisation calculation 
With k bits that are reserved for the pseudonym, a prime 
number p should be chosen that in best case is the highest 
prime number lower than 2k. With the given p, the interval of 
possible person IDs and pseudonyms is 1..p-1. The numbers 
which are invalid in the k-bit number space are 0 and p..2k-1. 
As an example: For k=31, the highest prime lower than 231 is 
231-1. In this case, only 0 and 231-1 cannot be used as person 
IDs or pseudonyms. 
The difficulty to find the discrete logarithm i of the 
equation ai mod p is based on the assumption that i is 
randomly distributed and that no information can be used to 
reduce the number of possible values. This may not be the 
case if the persons ID is used as exponent i. 
Two examples might help to demonstrate the problem. In 
both cases, i equals the person ID id. In the first example the 
exponent i is a continuous number starting with 1, so the nth 
pseudonym belongs to the person ID n. If an attacker is able 
to estimate the number of already pseudonymized persons, 
the number of potential i is heavily reduced. In the second 
case, the person ID is created out of the birthday and a 
running number (e.g. 19850323012 for the 12th person born 
in March 23 of 1985). Knowing that a person was born at a 
certain day, also limits the number of potential i (in the given 
example to 100). 
To avoid the reduction of potential i with prior 
knowledge about the person ID id, two processing-steps are 
performed, including one non-linear step: 
1. XOR: 
The person ID will be XORed with a constant c≠0 of 
k bits 
2. EXPAND: 
The intermediate result is multiplied with an 
expansion factor q mod p,  (1<q<p) 
Step 1 might lead to an invalid results that is out of the 
range of the allowed values (0, p..2k -1). If this happens the 
XOR must be reversed. In case of p be close to 2k, the 
number of invalid values (p.. 2k-1) can be minimized, which 
lowers the risk to revers the XOR step. 
p being prime guarantees that the result of step 2 is still in 
the range of 1..p-1, avoiding any doubles.  
At that point, even with pre-knowledge about the person 
ID, no conclusions about the exponent i of the calculation ai 
mod p can be made, which would allow to reduce the search 
space. Finally, the main calculation step ai mod p can be 
performed. 
Unfortunately, if the prime number p is small, it is 
possible to calculate all possible b=ai mod p to set up a 
solution table b↦i. For a prime smaller than 231, maximal 
8GiB are needed to setup such a table (1GiB = 230 Byte). 
Even for prime smaller than 240, a solution table with 
maximal 5TiB needs to be pre-calculated (1TiB = 240 Byte). 
Tables with that size fit in currently used RAM or hard disks 
and are no burden for potential attackers. A solution to 
t1:= id XOR c 
// XOR with secret c 
if (t1 in [0, p..2^k-1]): 
// If out of range... 
 
t2:= id 
// ...reverse if necessary 
t2:= (t1 * q) mod p 
// Expand with secret p 
i:= t2 
// This is the exponent 
b:= a^i mod p 
// The main calculation 
t3:= b XOR d 
// XOR with secret d 
if (t3 in [0, p.. 2^k-1]): 
// If out of range... 
 
t3:= b 
// ...reverse if necessary 
t4:= t3 << s 
// Shift-left s bits 
while (t4 in [0, p.. 2^k-1]): // If out of range... 
 
t4:= t4 << s 
// ...repeat if necessary 
psdn := t4 
// This is the pseudonym 
Figure 1. Pseudocode of the algorithm 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

overcome this problem is to also keep the primitive root a 
secret. In that case, with given b and p, for each a a different 
i exists that fulfills the equation. 
The entropy of the secrets a, q and c that have been used 
so far might be insufficient to avoid brute force attacks. So a 
final round of confusion is performed: 
3. XOR: 
The intermediate result will be XORed with a 
constant d≠0 of k bits 
4. LEFTSHIFT:  
The intermediate result will be shifted s bits left 
(|s|>0) 
As with step 1, step 3 must be reversed, if the result is 
invalid. If the intermediate result of step 4 leads to an invalid 
value, it must be repeated until the intermediate result is in 
the allowed range. Both strategies do never introduce 
duplicates. 
The calculated pseudonym psdn finally is the outcome of 
step 4. Fig. 1 on the previous page lists the entire algorithm 
as pseudo code. 
The complexity of an attacker to re-identify the person 
ID is based on the secrets a, c, d, q and s and requires 
knowledge about some person ID / pseudonym pairs to proof 
if the secrets are correctly identified. 
E. Example 
Let k=31 and prime p=231-1=2147483647. 
a=572574047 is a primitive root from p. 
The initial value will be XORed with c=1656294509. 
The intermediate result will be XORed with d=913413943. 
The expansion factor is defined as q=41795. 
Finally, an intermediate result will be shifted left with s=11 
bits. 
All calculation steps of the pseudonym for the identifier id= 
300568 are the shown in Fig. 2. 
The pseudonym that has been calculated from this identifier 
is 353489627. 
F. Finding a primitive root 
For a given prime number p it is unnecessary to find all 
primitive roots to select the secret a; only one primitive root 
is needed. The density of primitive roots is quite high so it 
requires approximately four random tries in case of p=231-1 
until a primitive root is found. To proof if a selected a is a 
primitive root, the series of ai mod p (i=1..p-1) has to be 
checked. If ai mod p = 1 with i≠p-1, the series can be stopped 
and a is not a primitive root. In that case we found two 
exponents resulting in the same value: ai+1 mod p = a = a1 
mod p. 
The series can easily be calculated with 
 
a0 mod p = 1 
(4) 
 
ai mod p = a(ai-1 mod p) mod p for i=1..p-1 
(5) 
G. Calculating ai mod p 
For the calculation of ai mod p in the described 
pseudonymisation algorithm, the pre-calculation of ai-1 mod 
p is not available; so, the recursion as mention in the 
previous sub-chapter is inapplicable. Alternatively the 
calculation can be quickened if i is split into its binary 
representation: 
 
𝑖   =   
2! ∙ 𝑖!  
!!!
!!!
  𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ  𝑖! ∈   {0,1}   
(6) 
Then 
 
𝑎!  𝑚𝑜𝑑  𝑝 =   
(7) 
 
𝑎
!!! !!∙!!  
!!!
𝑚𝑜𝑑  𝑝 = 
(8) 
 
𝑎!!∙!!
!!!
!!!
  𝑚𝑜𝑑  𝑝 
(9) 
This calculation is very fast in case of pre-calculated 
𝑎!!  𝑚𝑜𝑑  𝑝 using 
 
𝑎!!  𝑚𝑜𝑑  𝑝 = 𝑎  
(10) 
 
𝑎!!  𝑚𝑜𝑑  𝑝   =   (𝑎!!!!  𝑚𝑜𝑑  𝑝)!  𝑚𝑜𝑑  𝑝 
for j=1..k-1. 
(11) 
III. 
RESULTS 
The algorithm for the calculation of the pseudonym 
would be useless, if the used secrets allow a brute-force 
attack. This is not the case, if the entropy of the used secretes 
is big enough. Furthermore, the size of the pseudonym must 
allow a human-readable representation and the effort to 
calculate the pseudonym must allow the calculation of a high 
number of pseudonyms per time. 
A. Bit-depth of the secrets 
Several secrets to calculate the pseudonym are used: 
• 
The random number c that was used to XOR the 
exponent 
• 
The factor q that was used to expand the exponent 
• 
The primitive root a 
• 
The random number d that was used to XOR the 
intermediate result 
• 
The number of left-shifts of the intermediate result s 
t1   = id XOR c 
     = 300568 XOR 1656294509 = 
     = 1656593013 
t2   = (t1 ∙ q) mod p 
     = (1656593013 ∙ 41795) mod 2147483647 
     = 284715408 
b    = a
t2 mod p 
     = 572574047
284715408 mod 2147483647 
     = 465777933 
t3   = b XOR d 
     = 465777933 XOR 913413943 
     = 766681658 
t4   = t3 <<s 
     = 766681658 <<11 
     = 353489627 
psdn = t4 
     = 353489627 
Figure 2. Example calculation 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

As an example, let us calculate the bit-depth of the 
secrets in case of data types that are usually used to store 
person IDs: 
• 
4-Byte signed integer: 
The number space is sufficient for a third of the 
entire living population on earth or four times the 
number of the living population of the European 
Union. 
• 
2-byte signed short integer 
The number space is only useful for a small set of 
persons, e.g., for persons of a clinical study. 
• 
5 chars of base64-encoded numbers or 6 chars of 
base32-encoded numbers 
(in case of efficient human readability) 
The number space is sufficient for two times of the 
living population of the European Union but 
insufficient for the living population the People's 
Republic of China. 
With the information of Table I, we can calculate the 
entropy of the secrets that are used during the calculation 
(Table II). 
For integer and the encoded char-values, the secret with 
entropy of ≈124 bits is sufficient to avoid effective brute 
force attacks. This is void for short integer. Here the entropy 
of the secrets is only ≈64 bits. In that case, the calculation of 
the pseudonym must be performed in two rounds with 
different primitive root, expansion factor, XOR and shift 
values. This does not fully double the entropy of the secrets 
because the final steps XOR and SHIFTLEFT are directly 
followed by another XOR step of the next round. All three 
steps can be simplified to only one XOR plus SHIFTLEFT. 
However, the entropy of the secret (≈111 bits) is sufficient 
today. 
B. Human readability and usability 
Without going into details, the readability of a 
pseudonym depends on the used character set plus the 
number of chars. Usually eight chars grouped in four chars is 
the maximum that a user in a day-to-day base accepts if the 
pseudonym has to be read and manually typed into a system. 
To represent the living population of the People's Republic 
of China at least 31 bits are needed that have to be encoded 
in the maximal eight chars. This allows either to use reduced 
character set (base32 instead of base64) or to introduce chars 
that are used for error correction or error detection. If a 
smaller population needs to be pseudonymized, the Faldum 
code [3] could be used. This code is able to encode 230 
persons in eight chars, including two chars for error 
detection. 
C. Calculation speed 
There are only a few steps involved in the calculation of 
the pseudonym. The calculation of ai mod p is identified as 
the most time consuming calculation. The calculation is 
straightforward and avoids several rounds until the final 
result is available. Multiplications are always more time 
consuming than XOR or shift operations so it is assumed that 
the pseudonym calculation is slower that the competitive 
approaches. In the known scenarios, the number of 
pseudonymisation calculations per time is sufficient: Tests 
have shown that on average hardware (Intel Core 2 Duo, 
2.66 GHz) 132.5-thousand pseudonyms per second can be 
calculated. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Important for the evaluation of the algorithm is the 
resistance against attacks and the possibility for re-
identification. 
A. Attacks 
It is known that for b = ai mod p (p prime, a primitive 
root of p) it is difficult to calculate the discrete logarithm i, if 
b, a, and p are known and p being big enough to avoid 
solution tables. In our case, also the primitive root a is 
unknown. On the other hand, there might be pre-knowledge 
about i. With the non-linear diffusion steps that base on the 
use of non-trivial secrets (e.g. q≠1, c≠0), the exponent is 
complex enough to make the information of the initial series 
useless. 
Brute force attacks will only be possible if an attacker is 
able to validate the set of parameters with a given set of 
person IDs and their associated pseudonyms. An attacker 
will in worst case only get both sets, not knowing which 
person ID and pseudonym is finally linked. Depending on 
the size of the set it is likely, that several parameter sets lead 
to the same transformation of the set of person IDs to the set 
of pseudonyms. In case of leaked pairs of person ID plus 
pseudonym, this information can only be used to perform a 
brute force attack. A recalculation of the used parameters is 
not possible. 
TABLE II. 
ENTROPY OF THE SECRET 
Secret 
4-byte signed 
integer 
5-char base64 
6-char base32 
2-byte signed 
short integer 
q: primitive roots 
≈ 29 bit 
≈ 29 bit 
≈ 13 bit 
q: expansion factor 
≈ 31 bit 
≈ 30 bit 
≈ 16 bit 
c: XOR exponent 
31 bit 
30 bit 
15 bit 
d: XOR result 
31 bit 
30 bit 
15 bit 
s: shift result 
≈ 5 bit 
≈ 5 bit 
≈ 4 bit 
total 
≈127 bit 
≈ 124 bit 
≈ 63 bit 
 
TABLE I. 
FACTS 
 
4-byte signed 
integer 
5-char base64 
6-char base32 
2-byte signed 
short integer 
Bits 
32 
30 
16 
maximal positive 
value 
231-1 
230-1 
215-1 
highest possible 
prime 
231-1 
230-35 
215-19 
highest possible 
person ID 
2 147 483 646 
1 073 741 789 
32 748 
number of 
invalid values 
2 
36 
20 
number of 
possible 
primitive roots 
of the prime 
534 600 000 
459 950 400 
10 912 
The number of possible primitive roots can be calculated with Eulers φ-function and is 
φ(φ(p))= φ(p-1). 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Re-Identification 
A fast re-calculation of the person identifier is possible if 
all secrets are known. In case of small p and a given a, the 
solution table for b=ai mod p is made fast and every step of 
the entire calculation process can be reversed. 
Only if the solution table cannot be pre-calculated, it is 
quicker to pseudonymise all known person IDs again to find 
the correct person ID. 
C. Applicability 
The concept of pseudonym-creation was implemented in 
a real-life scenario; in a research institute, a database with 
data collected for long-term studies, had to be split up into 
two versions: One version contains all the medical data plus 
the demographics of the patient as usual. The second 
pseudonymized version contains study specific extracts of 
study related data only. 
To simplify the migration and to avoid an adaption of the 
used tools, the data-model in the pseudonymized version was 
kept unchanged. As a consequence, the pseudonym had to be 
in the same number range as the initial person ID. In our case 
both are integer with 231-1 as the highest possible value. 
Additionally, the person IDs is a consecutive running 
number, starting with 1. 
The algorithm that was described in the paper is now 
used to calculate study specific pseudonyms. For each study, 
a different set of secrets is used as the calculation 
parameters. A tool was also provided to identify primitive 
roots. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The described algorithm for the creation provides a 
collision free one-way pseudonymisation technique for a 
small bit-depth of the person identifiers that allows a further 
use to create human readable and usable pseudonym. In 
contrast to other solutions, the algorithm is based on a hard 
problem and therefore is resistant against cryptoanalyis. 
In case of more bits that are used of the person identifier, 
the identification of primitive roots will become more time 
consuming. The current strategy can only be optimized to a 
certain extent. It might be interesting for the future to 
identify the limit. But on the other hand, a pre-calculated 
fixed primitive root could be used for higher bit-depth, if a 
pre-calculation and storage of ai mod p is not possible. In that 
case one could use cloud services to find the fixed primitive 
root. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Alhaqbani and C. Fidge, "Privacy-preserving electronic 
health record linkage using pseudonym identifiers," 10th 
International 
Conference 
on 
e-health 
Networking, 
Applications and Services, HealthCom 2008, pp. 108-117, 
2008 
[2] 
B. Riedl, V. Grascher, S. Fenz, and T. Neubauer, 
"Pseudonymization for improving the Privacy in E-Health 
Applications", Proceedings of the 41st Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, HICSS 2008, 
p. 255, 2008 
[3] 
A. Faldum, and K. Pommerening, “An optimal code for 
patient identifiers,” Computer Methods and Programs in 
Biomedicine, vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 81-88, 2005. 
[4] 
J. Daemen, and V. Rijmen, The Design of Rijndael: Springer-
Verlag New York, Inc., 2002. 
[5] 
D. E. 3rd, and T. Hansen, "US Secure Hash Algorithms 
(SHA and SHA-based HMAC and HKDF)," Request for 
Comments 6234, RFC 6234 (Informational), 2011. 
[6] 
W. 
Diffie, 
and 
M. 
Hellman, 
“New 
directions 
in 
cryptography,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theor., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 
644-654, 2006. 
[7] 
S. K. Park, and K. W. Miller, “Random number generators: 
good ones are hard to find,” Commun. ACM, vol. 31, no. 10, 
pp. 1192-1201, 1988. 
 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

If They Designed It, Why Don’t They Want It? 
The Lack of Acceptance of an ehealth Data Records System 
 
Anthony P. Glascock 
Department of Culture and Communication 
Drexel University 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 
glascock@drexel.edu
 
 
Abstract—Although the design of an ehealth data records system 
was largely driven by carers themselves, ultimately these same 
carers did not want to use the system once a series of pilot studies 
ended. The reasons for this lack of acceptance of the system by 
carers at seven different care organizations in the United States, 
the United Kingdom and the Netherlands are explored. Four 
reasons are put forward to explain this lack of acceptance: 1) the 
ability of the system to be used to evaluate job performance; 2) 
the pilot study model; 3) reluctance on the part of the carers to 
alter work routine; and 4) the system’s introduction is 
premature.  
 
Keywords—ehealth 
data 
records 
systems; 
mobile 
devices; 
acceptance of innovative technologies 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
The adoption of ehealth records systems has been much 
slower in the United States than anticipated as well as in most 
European countries. This is the case even though the United 
States “government set aside $27 billion for an incentive 
program that encourages hospitals and providers to adopt 
electronic records systems” [1]. Although there is some debate 
over the reliability of ehealth records systems [2], there 
appears to be little doubt that the greater the ease of storage, 
access and cost savings will eventually achieve close to 
universal usage within institutions and among physicians [3, 
4]. If the pace of adoption in hospitals and physician practices 
has been slow, the pace of adoption of ehealth data systems 
for use to chronicle care and services in the home has been 
even slower. There is little debate that the delivery of care and 
services in the home has increased significantly and will 
accelerate at an ever more rapid pace over the coming several 
decades because of two basic factors: demography and cost. 
The demographic trends are well known: dramatic increase in 
the number of elderly, especially the oldest-old; a concomitant 
increase in chronic diseases associated with aging; and a 
decline in the number of informal carers who can provide care. 
Cost projections are similarly daunting: increasing cost for 
care delivery within the institutional setting; insufficient 
number of institutions and insufficient funds to build the large 
number of additional institutions; and prohibitive costs to 
government to provide care and services through current care 
delivery models.  
It is generally agreed that the only way to meet the 
increasing needs brought about by the demographic trends, 
while at the same time not bankrupting national treasuries, is 
to provide more care and services in the home [5]. As more 
care and services are being delivered in the home, several 
issues have emerged that raise serious concerns. In the first 
place, the care being delivered had steadily become more 
extensive. Whereas a decade ago rehabilitation after a serious 
illness or accident would have been undertaken in a 
specialized facility, presently many of these services are being 
provided in the home on an outpatient basis. But rehabilitation 
is just one of an escalating number of care services being 
provided in the home: nutritional counseling; wound care; 
psychological therapy; and medication adherence, to name 
several of the major ones. Additionally, the range of products 
and non-care services supplied to individuals in their own 
homes has increased significantly: oxygen; specialized beds; 
monitoring; meals; housekeeping; shopping; companion 
services. As the care and services have multiplied, so have the 
number 
of 
people 
providing 
the 
services. 
These 
companies/agencies are, of course, in addition to any services 
provided by informal carers. Thus, the need for a means of 
recording and tracking the care and services provided in the 
home are essentially the same as for institutions: increased 
reliability; better coordination; appropriate level of care; and 
cost savings.   
As more care and services are delivered by more people 
representing different companies and agencies, just keeping 
track of who is providing what becomes increasingly difficult, 
especially if the individual receiving the care lives alone in her 
home and is experiencing cognitive decline or other 
impairments. Scheduling of visits and deliveries, ensuring the 
correct product or service, avoiding duplication all become 
difficult if records are scattered among various agencies, 
companies and individuals and are rarely, if ever, shared. It is 
also extremely difficult to evaluate if the care and services are 
having the desired impact on the individual if there is no 
systematic way to track the outcomes of the care and services. 
The lack of systematic and comprehensive records also makes 
it difficult for other care providers to make informed care 
decisions, since the reliance on the patient to remember 
specifics about the care and services in the home has proven to 
be suspect at best. In addition, if ehealth records of care and 
services in the home do not exist, it is obvious that they cannot 
be linked with the records that have been created in the 
hospital and the physician practice. Finally, even though 
delivering care and services in the home is more economical 
than in institutions, it still costs money and someone has to 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

pay for it. As a result, from the point of view of the client 
receiving the care and services, as well as the insurance 
company and the government, there is a discernible need to 
track the care and services to ensure that what is paid for is 
provided and that everyone was paid appropriately. 
This paper reports on the development of a wireless 
ehealth data records system: the Home Care Informatics 
System (HCIS) and the problems associated with acceptance 
and use of it. In the next section, the three stages of the 
development of the HCIS are outlined; in section three the 
reasons for the lack of acceptance on the part of the carers are 
analyzed; in section four a comparison is made with another 
electronic records system that has had similar difficulties with 
acceptance; and in the last section future scenarios for such 
records systems are explored.   
II.     THREE STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT 
It is necessary to briefly explain the rationale for allowing 
the end-users (carers) to play a major role in the design 
process of this particular ehealth data records system. Results 
from a previous innovative ehealth project [6] had indicated 
that if end-users did not “buy-in”, then the new technology 
would not be used. Thus, it was decided that in this project as 
much control, as possible, over the design of the system would 
be ceded to those individuals who were actually going to be 
using the system to aid in care delivery. This approach 
appeared to make sense at the time, but given that even after 
ceding control to the users, there was great reluctance on their 
part to employ the system, questions about the wisdom of this 
decision must be raised.   
 
A.    Stage 1—2006-2007 
 
The first iteration of the system was created to 
systematically collect data generated in one of a series of pilot 
studies to test the effectiveness of a behavioral monitoring 
system [7, 8, 9]. This particular pilot study took place at 
Selfhelp Community Services, Inc. in Queens, New York and 
involved eleven geriatric social workers who provided care 
management services to over 200 residents. Twenty-seven of 
these clients agreed to have the system installed for a six 
month period and to have the social workers use the resultant 
data in care management decisions. The problem was that 
there was no way to systematically collect information on the 
care actions that they took in response to an alert. The 
instrument created was labeled the TAO: Trigger, the 
system’s alert; Action, the care action taken by the social 
worker in response to the alert; and Outcome, the health or 
care outcome brought about by the care action. A brief 
example illustrates the initial design of the TAO:  
 
The system sends an alert to the geriatric social 
worker indicating an increase in overnight toileting 
for a particular client—the Trigger;  
The social worker phones the client to inquire about 
the client’s behavior—the Action;   
Finding out that the client was frequently in the 
bathroom because of a stomach flu, the social worker 
contacts the client’s physician to obtain a prescription 
for medication—the health Outcome.  
 
At first, the social workers filled out a paper form with the 
relevant information, which was then entered into a computer 
data base. The carers viewed the paper version of the TAO as 
time-consuming to fill out and redundant with other forms. In 
response to these criticisms, a computerized web-based 
version of the TAO was created and this new version became 
the first design change driven by its users.  
The Web-TAO form took about five minutes to fill out, 
could be easily shared with others and, most importantly, 
could be updated as more actions and outcomes occurred. In 
the short run, this last feature proved beneficial for the social 
workers as they could quickly and almost effortlessly update 
the Web-TAO records for individual clients. In the long run, 
the need to have an update capability proved essential in the 
development of the HCIS. This is because, although the alert 
is a discrete event, care actions and health outcomes are not 
discrete, but instead roll out over time. The previous example 
of the TAO narrative has all three elements as discrete 
events—one Trigger, one Action, one Outcome—and this 
example corresponds to approximately 40% of the TAOs. 
However, a majority of the TAOs corresponded more to the 
following example: 
 
The system sends an alert to the geriatric social worker 
indicating an increase in overnight toileting for a 
particular client—the Trigger;  
The social worker phones the client to inquire about the 
client’s behavior—the Action;  
Finding out that the client was frequently in the 
bathroom because of a stomach flu, the social worker 
contacts the client’s physician to obtain a prescription 
for medication—the health Outcome;  
The social worker phones the client’s daughter to report 
that her mother has the flu—Second Action;  
Daughter visits her mother the next day finding out that 
her mother is no better—Third Action; 
Daughter phones social worker reporting on mother’s 
condition—Fourth Action;  
Social worker visits client, determines that she is 
dehydrated, phones physician—Fifth Action; 
Physician decides to have client admitted to hospital—
Sixth Action, Second Outcome; 
Client is discharged after two days in hospital—
Seventh Action, Third Outcome. 
 
All of the above actions and outcomes were the result of the 
single alert and could now be entered into the Web TAO as 
the events rolled out in real time. As a record of care provided 
and outcomes generated, the Web-TAO proved extremely 
helpful to the geriatric social workers as they could more 
systematically track the progression of care and outcomes. 
However, the realization of how multiple care actions and 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

outcomes could be gathered together in a single record proved 
invaluable for the future development of the informatics 
system that eventually became the HCIS.  
Once this alteration was made, the carers had other 
suggestions: add auto-populated fields; use check-boxes 
whenever possible; allow for easier follow-up entries; and 
allow access to individual records by other social workers and 
supervisors. At the first care review meeting, after these 
changes were made, two issues that would drive much of the 
development of the TAO surfaced. Since the objective for 
these meetings was to review what had happened to each of 
the clients over the previous month in order to assess how the 
monitoring system had impacted the delivery of care, it was 
not surprising that the TAOs were the focus of the discussions 
but it was surprising how the social workers utilized the 
TAOs. They placed the TAOs for each of the clients together 
and then worked their way chronologically through the TAOs. 
By their actions, the social workers were constructing an on-
going record for each of the clients by putting TAOs for the 
particular client together into a single “pile”. This “piling up” 
was the first care record and would drive much of future 
development of the ehealth system. 
The second issue raised by the geriatric social workers 
concerned the ability of the Web-TAO in the evaluation of 
performance. For the supervisors, the Web-TAO provided an 
objective basis on which to evaluate the work performed by 
the social workers; for the social workers, the Web-TAO 
allowed supervisors to question their actions and professional 
conduct using information that had not been available 
previously. These issues were not resolved before the study 
ended, but, as discussed subsequently, it remained a vexing 
problem for the future development of the ehealth system.  
 
B. Stage 2—2007-2008 
 
As the Selfhelp pilot was ending, the pilot in London 
began. Unlike the Selfhelp study in which all clients lived 
independently and had their care managed by a single care 
organization, the London study involved several residential 
types and more than one care organization. All residents lived 
in Southwark, an area of Central London south of the Thames, 
and were provided services from one of three care 
organizations—Southwark Falls, Oasis and Hyde Housing—
all of which operated under the broad umbrella of the 
Southwark Local Authority. Thus, the work undertaken by 
“carers” in these organizations was much more coordinated 
than would be found in three independent organizations in the 
United States.  However, even though these organizations 
were “independent” and served distinct populations, for this 
discussion it makes sense to view them as a single entity, the 
Southwark Study, and to aggregate their 97 clients.  
Based on the development work undertaken at Selfhelp, 
the Southwark Study began with a fully operational Web-TAO 
that had the ability to easily update a report as care actions and 
outcomes rolled out over time. Within the first six weeks of 
the study, it became apparent from the analysis of the material 
being entered into the Web-TAO that the carers were using the 
system much differently than the social workers at Selfhelp. 
This was primarily due to the fact that the culture at 
Southwark was extremely collaborative and, although 
particular carers had primary responsibility for specific clients, 
all carers engaged with all clients in some fashion, and thus, 
the Web-TAO was conceived as a tool to allow for easier 
sharing of information among all carers rather than just a 
record of responses to triggering alerts. Therefore, the ability 
for all members of the care team to not only view the 
information, but to contribute to the information stream 
became paramount. The cultural imperative to share and 
contribute to the information of clients resulted in a 
modification that allowed for much longer narratives to be 
entered into the system which, as a result, took on the 
appearance of “blogs” in which numerous carers listed their 
actions and the subsequent outcomes for particular clients.  
Fig. 1 is an example of a typical “blog” for a single client. 
 
Fig. 1.     Web-TAO blog narrative 
 
On the surface, this change appeared to be trivial, but in 
actuality it altered much of the design of the structure of the 
Web-TAO going forward. The Web-TAO had already mutated 
from a research tool to a care provision tool that tracked 
responses to the system’s alerts, and now it had transformed 
again from a limited record of what transpired when an alert 
occurred, to a more comprehensive ehealth record of all care 
being delivered to a specific client over time. Fig. 1 not only 
shows the comprehensive nature of the information recorded, 
but also illustrates how many carers became involved in 
contributing care for this client. 
The members of the newly formed Smart Team had other 
suggestions for the Web-TAO. One was to be able to send the 
“blog” to a client’s physician prior to an appointment in order 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for the physician to have all relevant care information. This 
required the creation of a new security function that limited 
who could send and what could be sent to individuals outside 
the Southwark Smart Team. A second suggestion was to allow 
the “blogs” to be sorted by alert, particular carer, type of care 
actions and date of entry. Although technically not a complex 
undertaking, the challenge was to understand the use to be 
made of such a sorting feature, before creating it. This change 
took time and the requested feature only became fully 
operational near the end of the study. 
 
C.     Stage 3—2008-2012 
 
Work in the Netherlands began in late 2007 as part of a 
demonstration project to evaluate the role of behavioral 
monitoring in the delivery of care in both a residential and 
institutional setting [10]. During the first stage (2007-2008) of 
the project the behavioral monitoring system was installed in 
the residences of 12 individuals living independently and 13 
individuals living within a sheltered housing facility, while in 
the second stage (2008-2012) the system was installed in the 
residences 
of 
an 
additional 
230 
individuals 
living 
independently throughout the largely rural Limburg Region 
served by two care organizations. Similarly to how the three 
London organizations were combined, it makes sense to view 
these two organizations, as well as the demonstration project 
and larger study, as a single entity and to aggregate the 255 
clients into a single Dutch Study.  
Since the demonstration project in the Netherlands began 
as the London Study was winding down, it was possible to 
provide the Dutch with an enhanced Web-TAO which had the 
ability to produce “blogs”, which we renamed the “Client’s 
Journal”. Of course, the content of the Web-TAO, e.g., check-
boxes, auto-populated fields, instructions, had to be translated 
into Dutch. The care delivery model at the two care 
organizations—Proteion and Zorgroep—required that their 
care workers spend a considerable amount of each day 
traveling to and from clients’ residences. Thus, they spent 
little 
time 
at 
the 
two 
organizations’ 
administrative 
headquarters, limiting their ability to both access the Web-
TAO and to enter information on computers. This problem 
was solved by developing the capability for the Web-TAO, 
renamed the Home Care Informatics System (HCIS), to be 
accessed on any smart mobile device. This change in the 
structure of the HCIS to a wireless mobile service raised 
several design challenges. First, everything had to be 
reformatted so that it could fit the small screen of the mobile 
devices. This led to an even greater reliance on check boxes 
and auto-populated features and to the development of more 
efficient scrolling features. Second, there was the challenge of 
making the HCIS display properly on the different smart 
devices used by the care workers.  
Working directly with the carers during the demonstration 
project allowed for a series of other suggestions to be 
incorporated into the HCIS: 1) the Client’s Journal feature 
allowed entries by any authorized personnel; 2) the Journal 
could be sorted by alert, date, care worker, type of care 
delivered and outcome; 3) there was a new feature that 
allowed additions to a previous entry, but not the elimination 
of the original entry; 4) a series of pop-up prompts helped the 
user navigate through functions and avoid common errors; 5) 
additional security features were developed to ensure that only 
authorized individuals could access and contribute to a client’s 
record; and 6) a read-only feature was added. Even with these 
modifications, two issues remained unresolved. The first issue 
concerned how the HCIS was used during care review 
meetings at which time the care delivered to specific clients 
was discussed and decisions on future care made. These 
meetings included both individuals who had knowledge of and 
access to the HCIS and others who had neither. Since the 
client reviews were more thorough when everyone at the 
meeting had access to the information stored in the HCIS 
record, the question arose as to who should have access, how 
should they obtain access and who was in charge of making 
access happen? Although this issue does not directly concern 
the technical development of the HCIS, it certainly impacts 
the implementation of the HCIS and its long term use. The 
second issue concerned whether the information stored in the 
HCIS could be used by supervisors and administrators in the 
evaluation of work performance. On the surface, the concern 
expressed by the care workers in the Netherlands was similar 
to those raised by the social workers at Selfhelp. It was 
believed that these concerns could be fairly easily resolved by 
discussions of interested parties. This was not the case, and 
this issue remained unresolved at the end of the pilot. 
 
D.    Summary of Changes  
 
Below is a summary of the changes made to the HCIS in 
response to the expressed needs of the people using it. A 
review of these changes brings into focus how much the 
TAO/HCIS changed during the six years studies in response to 
the wishes of the users. 
 
Selfhelp  
1. The TAO was put on the web; 
2. A feature that allowed the sharing of TAOs was 
created; 
3. Check-boxes were added; 
4. Auto-populated fields were added; 
5. A feature that allowed the follow-up entries was 
developed. 
 
Southwark 
 
1. Changes made to conform to British English; 
2. Enhanced sharing capabilities developed; 
3. Security features added to allow sharing of data 
beyond the Smart Team; 
4. A blog structure was created that allowed data to 
be entered by multiple carers; 
5. A feature that allowed the sorting of the blogs by 
alert, carer, care action taken, health outcome 
and date. 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Netherlands 
 
1. It was translated into Dutch; 
2. The blogs became the Clients’ Journals; 
3. The system was made to be operational on any 
mobile device; 
4. A feature that allowed additional carers to enter 
data was developed; 
5. More auto-populated fields and check boxes 
were added; 
6. A feature that allowed entries to be corrected 
without erasing the original was developed; 
7. Additional search features were added to the 
system; 
8. A read-only feature was created.   
III.  
LACK OF ACCEPTANCE  
The most frustrating aspect of the seven pilot studies was 
that even though the vast majority of the modifications made 
to the ehealth data system were in direct response to the 
expressed desires of the carers, ultimately they did not use the 
system. Although perplexing, this result does provide a vivid 
lesson for anyone trying to introduce a “new technology” into 
an existing work culture. In order to assess the reasons for this 
lack of acceptance, questionnaires were administered to all 
eleven social workers at Selfhelp, while individual carers were 
interviewed in the Southwark and Dutch studies. In London, 
70% of the carers were interviewed by phone and in the 
Netherlands approximately a third of the carers were 
interviewed in person. Findings from the questionnaires and 
interviews indicated that there were three reasons for the lack 
of acceptance: 1) fear on the part of the carers that the 
information would be used to evaluate work performance; 2) 
the nature of the pilot study model and its impact on the 
carers’ commitment; and 3) unwillingness of the carers to 
change their work routine. 
 
A.    Evaluation of Performance 
 
 Analysis of the carers’ answers from the seven locations 
showed that the carers in the United States and the 
Netherlands were fearful that the information contained in the 
HCIS would be used by supervisors to evaluate their job 
performance. Two brief examples illustrate this ability of the 
information contained in the HCIS to evaluate the carers’ 
performance. Each alert generated by the monitoring system is 
time stamped, as is every care action taken by a specific carer, 
and as a consequence, there is a concrete record of whether the 
carer responded to the alert and how long it took the carer to 
respond. In addition, the HCIS contains specific information 
on the type of response and the health outcome for each client 
over time, allowing supervisors to compare the work of 
different carers. It is this ability to compare the work of 
different carers which appeared to disturb the carers the most. 
And, it is indisputable that the HCIS allows this type of 
comparison to be made and for performance reviews to be 
based upon the information contained in the system. Not 
surprisingly, supervisors viewed this ability as an advantage 
because it documents performance, whereas, carers viewed it 
as an intrusion into their professional decision making.  
 
B.    Problems with the Pilot Study Model 
 
The deficiencies of the pilot study model employed in the 
testing of the behavioral monitoring system have been detailed 
elsewhere [6], but some of these issues relate directly to the 
lack of acceptance of the HCIS. There appear to be four 
problems with the pilot study model.  First, only a small 
number of carers were involved in the pilots at each of the 
organizations resulting in the studies being marginalized. At 
Selfhelp, only eleven of almost 200 social workers were 
involved in the study; while in London fewer than a dozen 
carers within the entire Southwark Local Authority had any 
role in the study and in the Netherlands, fewer than 5% of 
carers at the two organizations were involved in the study. 
Second, in no case was the HCIS used by the carer for all of 
her clients; instead it was always used for a small fraction of 
clients—on average no more than 20% and in only two cases 
over 50%—meaning that the carer was employing two 
different systems to record care. Third, information derived 
from the questionnaires and interviews showed that, because 
the carers knew when the pilot was to end, many carers put 
little effort into using the HCIS because they knew when it 
would go away. Finally, the HCIS was never part of “normal” 
care, but was always viewed as something that was just being 
“tested”. As a result, the majority of carers responded logically 
by putting less and less effort into its use as the pilot 
progressed. 
 
C.    Unwillingness to Change Routine 
 
Even though information from the questionnaires and 
interviews showed the importance of the previous two factors 
in the lack of acceptance of the HCIS by the carers, an even 
more important reason was their unwillingness to change their 
normal routine that did the most damage. There is no doubt 
that the HCIS required carers, at least initially, to do more 
work and undertake tasks which were unfamiliar. For 
example, in the Netherlands, carers, instead of just writing a 
couple of lines on a piece of paper kept in the client’s 
residence were expected to type in information on their smart 
phones before driving to their next appointment. They were 
also expected to update this information as additional care was 
delivered and even track and record health outcomes over 
time. These tasks were viewed as especially egregious since 
not all of their clients were in the pilot study and, therefore, 
they had to employ two different recording systems. Finally, it 
was difficult for the carers to see the value in this extra effort, 
because the benefits of better and more coordinated care were 
in the future, whereas the extra work had to be done every 
day.   
 
 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D.    Summary 
 
Yet even with the problems outlined above, initially, in 
each of the care organizations, carers entered usable, and in 
some cases extraordinary, information on the care actions 
undertaken and the resultant health outcomes. This was 
especially true for the London studies, but it also occurred, 
albeit in a minority of cases, in New York and the 
Netherlands. The problem was that within four months the 
information the carers, at each of the organizations, were 
entering was increasingly uninformative and by the end of the 
pilots a majority of the carers had stopped using the HCIS 
altogether. This experience, although frustrating, does provide 
some guidance to anyone trying to introduce a “new 
technology” into an existing organization.   
IV.     DISCUSSION 
The last of the pilot studies ended December 31, 2012 and 
currently the HCIS is not being used within any care 
organization. Thus, it would be fair to conclude that the HCIS 
is a failure, even though the HCIS is very clever and its design 
was driven by the desires and stated needs of its users. If it is 
not being used, there must be something fundamentally wrong 
with the concept and its implementation. However, there is 
one mediating factor that may require reevaluating the 
conclusion that the HCIS is a failure: the HCIS is not the only 
such system that has encountered problems of acceptance. 
There has been a second wireless, ehealth records system 
that was developed and tested in Germany [11]. Even more 
interesting than the fact that two researchers independently 
developed such a system is that the problems of acceptance on 
the part of the users in the German study are parallel. The first 
problem that the carers had with the system was its GPS 
feature, which tracked their every movement. Thus, if a carer 
stopped on the way to a client to pick up her dry cleaning, her 
supervisor would know it. Additionally, with the GPS in 
place, supervisors could determine how long a carer spent in 
the residence of a client and could compare productivity of 
different carers. Even after the GPS feature was turned off, 
carers were concerned about the ability of the system to 
monitor their actions.  
Also similar to the problems that were encountered in the 
seven pilot studies, the carers in the German study complained 
about the amount of time it took to type data into their 
wireless device. Responding to these complaints, the German 
researchers enabled a feature that allowed information to be 
entered by voice. Although this change was a direct response 
to the desires of the carers, the carers were still unhappy with 
the time it took to enter data and the need to check the 
accuracy of the information once entered. Finally, similar to 
my experience there were problems with the sharing of 
information among the various carers and the use of the 
information in the provision of care. Once again, there was a 
disconnect between the work of the carers and the benefits to 
their clients.  
Two studies, however independent in conception and 
parallel in findings, do not necessarily contradict the 
conclusion that the HCIS is a failure, but it does suggest 
though, that it is necessary to rethink why the lack of 
acceptance occurred in such varied locations and what this 
means to the future of this type of wireless ehealth data 
system. It does not appear unreasonable to conclude that the 
main reason for the lack of acceptance is that developers, have 
underestimated the reluctance on the part of carers and their 
supervisors to change the way they do their jobs. In other 
words, it is a cultural and not a technological issue. 
 
V.     CONCLUSION 
 
Two main findings are apparent from the material 
presented above: 1) it is possible to create an ehealth data 
system for home care and that such a system can be used 
effectively to coordinate care and services and contribute to 
the maintenance of independent living; and 2) the success of 
such a system is dependent on issues that do not concern 
design and functionality, but instead on its acceptability by the 
people employing the system. Even when much of the 
system’s design was driven by these users, there was a lack of 
acceptance on the part of these very same people. Three 
reasons were put forward as the main factors for this lack of 
acceptance: the potential use of information in the system for 
the evaluation of job performance; the pilot study model; and 
the unwillingness of the carers to alter their normal routine. 
However, there may be an even more fundamental reason for 
the lack of acceptance of this particular wireless home care 
records system: its introduction is premature. 
Many business experts have argued that new ehealth 
technologies, such as the HCIS, will not be widely adopted 
until the traditional care models can no longer meet the needs 
of the burgeoning elderly population [12]. Then, and only 
then, will administrators at care organizations be forced to 
introduce new technologies and compel their workers to use 
new systems. Until this point is reached, care will continue to 
be provided in the usual way, even as it becomes more 
difficult to achieve the goal of providing cost effective and 
timely care. The behavior of the Dutch carers speaks directly 
to this argument. Even with the HCIS readily available on 
their mobile devices, they preferred to write down their 
actions on pieces of paper that remained in the client’s 
residence, even though the paper record could not be easily 
shared, updated or used in care reviews. Why? Because there 
was no compelling need and administrators deferred rather 
than forced them to use the new technology. Adequate care 
could be delivered without the use of the new system, so why 
change what one normally did, especially if it was only part of 
a pilot study that was going to go away in a few months 
anyway? 
The slow pace of the adoption of electronic medical 
records in hospitals and physician practices provides a 
valuable lesson to those of us who are championing the use of 
ehealth systems. The United States government has 
encouraged the use of electronic medical records and even 
mandated their use wherever possible. Insurance companies 
have wholeheartedly endorsed the use of electronic records 
and have attempted to induce their use through economic 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

incentives. Nevertheless, the pace of adoption has been slow 
as individuals complain about the cost in time and money. 
What is largely left unsaid is that, even with the incentives, 
given a choice, most administrators would not adopt the 
systems because currently there is no compelling need to 
adopt them. Are they more efficient? Probably. Is it worth the 
cost? Probably not. Is it worth the cost given the increasing 
expense and growth of the health care system that will stretch 
the system to the breaking point? Absolutely. But, this 
requires change today in anticipation of a future need and this 
is difficult for people to accept, especially when it disrupts 
their daily routine. This same set of questions can be applied 
to the HCIS and other ehealth data systems and the endpoint 
is, not surprisingly, the same: a demonstrative future need that 
requires change before people are ready to compel such a 
change. When will the dynamics change, two years from now, 
five years from now, a decade from now? It is not possible to 
predict with any certainty the exact date, but there will be a 
time when electronic record systems similar to the HCIS are 
part of the normal care model and people will wonder why 
they weren’t in use earlier. 
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] B. Shilling, “The federal government has put billions into 
promoting electronic health record use: How is it going?” 
www.commonwealtfund.org, retrieved January, 2014. 
[2] B. Kaplan and K. Harris-Salamone, “Health IT success and 
failure: recommendations for literature and an AMIA 
workshop”, JAMIA, vol 16, no. 3, pp. 291-299, 2009. 
[3] K. Ashish, C. DesRoches, E. Campbell, K. Doneian, S. Rao, and 
T. Ferris, “Use of electronic health records in U.S. hospitals”, 
NEJM, vol. 360, pp. 1628-1638, 2009. 
[4] D. Ludwick and J. Doucette, “Adopting electronic medical 
records in primary care: Lessons learned from health 
information systems implementation experience in seven 
countries”, International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 78, 
pp. 22-31, 2009. 
[5] National Association for Home Care & Hospice, “Basic 
statistics about home care updated 2010”, http://www.nahc.org, 
retrieved January, 2014. 
[6] A. Glascock, “A conflicted view of telehomecare after a 20 year 
journey”,  Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2012. 
[7] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “A care informatics approach to 
telehomecare applications”, in The Handbook of Research on IT 
Management and Clinical Data Administration in Healthcare, A. 
Dwivedi, Ed., Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing, 2009, pp. 368-382. 
[8] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “The impact of behavioral 
monitoring technology on the provision of health care in the 
home”, JUCS, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 59-79, 2006. 
[9] D. Kutzik and A. Glascock, “An Evidentiary Report of 
QuietCare®: Selfhelp Community Services”, unpublished. 
[10] M. Schapranow, “Personal communication”, during the Fifth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine, Nice, France, February 2013. 
[11] C. Willems, M. Spreeuwenberg, L. van der Heide, A. Glascock, 
D. Kutzik, L. de Witte, and J. Rietman, “Activity monitoring to 
support independent living in Dutch homecare support”, in 
Everyday Technology for Independence and Care, G. 
Gelderblom, M. Soede, L. Adriaens, and K. Miesenberger, Eds., 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2011, pp. 145-151. 
[12] A. Gage, “From personal need to business opportunity: the 
pitfalls of being first to market” in Essential Lessons for the 
Success of Telehomecare, A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, Eds, 
Amsterdam, IOS Press, 2012, pp. 99-108. 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Security Analysis and Performance Evaluation of
the Linkable Access Protocol of the Electronic
Patient Records
Rima Addas
School of Computer Science
University of Manchester
Manchester, UK
addasr@cs.man.ac.uk
Ning Zhang
School of Computer Science
University of Manchester
Manchester, UK
nzhang@cs.man.ac.uk
Abstract—Information security and privacy in the e-health
domain is an issue of growing concern. The adoption of electronic
patient records, increased regulation, provider collaboration and
the increased need for a faster information exchange between
patients, providers and payers, all point to the need for a
better information security. Therefore, the aim of this paper is
to provide secure access to electronic patient records without
compromising performance. To achieve this, we have designed
a secure protocol called the Linkable Access protocol. In this
paper, (1) we formally verify and analyse the Linkble Access
protocol against security properties (e.g., conﬁdentiality) using
the Casper/FDR2 veriﬁcation tool. In addition, (2) we build
a prototype using the Java technology to demonstrate the
performance of the Linkable Access protocol. By doing this, we
prove that the Linkable Access protocol maintains a good balance
between security and performance.
Keywords-e-Health; electronic patient records; privacy; security;
performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Privacy is considered as a key governing principle of the
patient-physician relationship. Patients are required to share
information with their physicians to enable correct diagnosis
and treatment, and to elude adverse drug interactions. Never-
theless, patients may refuse to disclose necessary information
in cases of sensitive medical problems such as psychiatric
behaviour and Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus (HIV), as their
disclosure may lead to social stigma and discrimination [1].
Over time, Electronic Patient Records (EPRs) accumulate im-
portant personal information, including identiﬁcation, history
of medical diagnosis, treatments, medication history, dietary
habits, sexual preference, genetic information, psychological
proﬁles, employment history, income and physicians subjec-
tive assessments of personality and mental state [2].
EPRs offer a wide range of purposes apart from diagnosis
and treatment provision. For example, information could be
used to improve efﬁciency within the healthcare system, drive
public policy development and administration, and in the
conduct of medical research [3]. EPRs can also be shared with
payer organisations (e.g., private insurance) to justify payment
of services rendered. Health Service Providers (HSPs) also
make use of records to manage their operations and improve
service quality.
While the above mentioned technology can help improve
overall quality of health care delivery, the beneﬁts from this
technology must be balanced with the privacy and security
concerns of the patient.
In real-life situations, there are various scenarios, where
authorized users have legitimate reasons to access patients’
EPRs (which could be stored in a single or in multiple
locations). Based on the principle of least privilege, users
should only be granted with access rights that are just sufﬁcient
for them to carry out the tasks assigned to them.
The minimum level of access privilege is to only allow users
to access de-identiﬁed records. De-identiﬁcation means that
patients’ identiﬁable information is removed from the records
[4]. There are three de-identiﬁcation methods, anonymization,
depersonalization and pseudonymization. Anonymization is
the process of hiding (or removing) a patient’s identiﬁcation
data and only make other information (i.e., de-identiﬁed
information) available for access [5]. Depersonalization is a
process similar to anonymization, but it comprises the removal
of as much identiﬁcation information as necessary to protect
patient identity [6]. Pseudonymization, on the other hand, is
the process of adding an identiﬁer (called a pseudonym) into
a patient’s de-identiﬁed record [7].
Yet, in practice, there are times when, for legitimate reasons,
multiple de-identiﬁed records of the same patient may need to
be linked (e.g., when we need to study the history of a patient’s
medical condition) or an anonymised record needs to be re-
identiﬁed at a later date. In such cases, a patient’s pseudonym
should be mapped or reversed to the patient’s identity and two
or more pseudonyms of the same patient should be linkable
and these should be done in a controlled manner.
There are two types of pseudonyms, namely, irreversible
and reversible pseudonyms [8]. Irreversible pseudonyms are
pseudonyms that cannot be reversed back to the patient’s real
identity. Reversible pseudonyms are pseudonyms that can be
reversed back to the original identity (i.e., a patient can be
re-identiﬁed from his/her reversible pseudonyms).
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Most pseudonym generation methods used in supporting
privacy preserving EPR access [9][10][11] , focus on preserv-
ing patient anonymity. They use irreversible pseudonyms to
index de-identiﬁed records. This type of pseudonyms only
supports anonymous data access. Though the pseudonym
generation methods in [8][12], have considered the linka-
bility requirement, they do not support a secondary use of
patient information. That is, they do not allow linking of
multiple pseudonyms of the single patient without revealing
the patient’s identity. A notable method that has addressed
this limitation is LIPA [13]. Yet, LIPA supports this linkablity
requirement, but assuming that patient records managed by
different HSPs are stored in a single repository. The solution
does not support distributed data access. To the authors’ best
knowledge, the works that are most related to our work are
Deng’s method [14] and the PIPE method [15]. Both methods
aim to securely integrate primary and secondary usage of
distributed medical data without compromising the patient’s
identity privacy. We described an alternative method [16] with
the aim of reducing access delays. In other words, our method
proved to be more efﬁcient than Deng’s and PIPE methods.
In detail, to facilitate the minimum access right manage-
ment, we have proposed a new method called 3LI2Pv2 method
to support controlled access to EPRs with three levels of
identity privacy reservations [16]. In this method, we have
identiﬁed three distinctive user groups, each with a deﬁned
level of access. The ﬁrst group of users (called L3 users)
are only given rights to access anonymised data. They are
not allowed to identify the patient (i.e., the identities of the
owners of the data) nor link multiple EPR objects of the same
patient. The second group of users (L2 users) are allowed to
access and link multiple objects of the same patient, but are not
allowed to link the objects to their owner’s (i.e., the patient’s)
identity. In other words, users in this group are allowed to
access the multiple objects of the single patient without being
able to identify the patient. Finally, the third group of users
(L1 users) are allowed to access patients’ records as well as
identify the owners of the records. In other words, we have
three levels of patient identity privacy protection.
* Level-1 (L1)- Linkable access: At this level, multiple data
objects of the same patient can be linked, and this set of objects
can be linked to the patient’s identity. L1 access should be
limited to L1 users, i.e., users with linkable access privilege.
* Level-2 (L2)- Linkable anonymous access: At this level,
multiple data objects of the same patient can be linked, but
this set of objects cannot be linked to the patient’s identity.
L2 access should be limited to L1/L2 users, i.e., users with
linkable anonymous access privilege.
* Level-3 (L3)- Anonymous access: At this level, multiple data
objects of the same patient cannot be linked, nor the patient’s
identity be exposed. L3 access should be limited to L1/L2/L3
users, i.e., users with anonymous access privilege.
The 3LI2Pv2 method made use of cryptographic techniques
to achieve its goals. We have informally analysed the 3LI2Pv2
method against some security requirements, and the result was
positive. For future work, we suggested to include the design
of the access protocol for the three levels. Therefore, in this
paper, we introduce a secure and robust protocol for the Level-
1 (Linkable access), called the Linkable Access (LA) protocol.
This type of access protocol provides the highest level of
access in terms of revealing sensitive patient information, and
only user holding the right type of credentials can perform
this type of access.
Generally, security protocols have been designed and ver-
iﬁed using informal techniques. As a result, it is now well
known that many security protocols, which were previously
proposed have found to be vulnerable afterwards. For example,
the Needham-Schroeder public key protocol [17] succeeded in
the informal analysis, but failed in formal veriﬁcation [18]. To
address this problem, formal methods have been widely used
to specify security protocols and verify security properties,
such as conﬁdentiality, authentication and non-repudiation, to
guarantee correctness [19].
In this paper, the Casper/FDR2 veriﬁcation tool [20][21],
is used to verify the LA protocol. Casper/FDR2 has proven
to be successful for modelling and verifying several se-
curity protocols; it has been used to verify authentication,
secrecy, and other security properties [22][23]. Accordingly,
we consider it also appropriate for the veriﬁcation of the LA
protocol. The Casper/FDR2 model checker is used to verify
the security properties of the protocols. If the protocols do
not satisfy the speciﬁed security properties, then the FDR2
checker shows a counterexample which represents the reason
against vulnerability.
After completing the formal veriﬁcation of the protocol
using Casper/FDR2, we implement the protocol using the Java
technology [24] to test it against performance. Java is selected
because it supports a set of standard security primitives. Exam-
ples of these primitives include the hash functions SHA-256
[25] and MD-5 [26], the symmetric cryptographic algorithms
AES [27] and 3DES [28] and the asymmetric cryptographic
algorithms RSA [29] and DSA [30].
This paper is organized as follows; In Section 2, we in-
troduce possible security threats. In Section 3, we describe,
model and verify the LA protocol. Also, we set the goals that
the LA protocol should meet. After that, we show the result of
the veriﬁcation. In Section 4, we present the implementation
and performance analysis of the LA protocol. In Section 5,
we conclude the paper and discuss future work.
II. POSSIBLE SECURITY THREATS
Access to EPRs is subject to different kinds of security
threats. We will not consider here threats of environmental
origin (e.g., ﬁre, etc.) or accidental ones (e.g., user errors,
software malfunction, etc.). The deliberate threats that we will
consider are categorized into three groups.
A. Conﬁdentiality threats.
B. Integrity threats.
C. Authentication threats (including non-repudiation).
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Conﬁdentiality Threats
In this type of threat, an attacker may gain access to private
information. The attack consists in eavesdropping the commu-
nication links, without interfering with the transmissions, or in
inspecting data stored in the system. Man in the middle attack,
replay attack, credential forgery/theft and impersonation are
examples of this type of threat.
B. Integrity Threats
Here, an attacker may modify the information exchanged
within an e-health service. The attack consists in interfering
with the transmissions, so that the recipient receives data,
which are different from those sent by the originator. Data
tampering is an example of this type of threat.
C. Authentication Threats
In this kind of threat, an attacker may counterfeit false
data and deceive the recipient into believing that they come
from a different originator (which the recipient takes as the
authentic originator). The attack consists in forging the part
of the data where the originator is identiﬁed (usually in the
identity credentials). Spooﬁng is an example of this type of
attack. Repudiation is also a variant of this type of attacks
that consists in denying authorship or the contents of data
previously sent.
III. FORMAL VERIFICATION OF THE LA PROTOCOL
In this section, ﬁrstly, we describe and model the LA secu-
rity protocol with Casper/FDR2 veriﬁcation tool. Secondly, we
identify essential security requirements that the LA protocol
should meet. Finally, we discuss the veriﬁcation result of the
protocol and analyse its security requirements.
A. The LA Protocol Description
The purpose of the LA protocol is to link multiple objects
(under a single or multiple HSPs management) of the same
patient, and to link these objects to the patient’s real identity
(e.g., NHS number). This type of access should be limited to
users with the highest access privileges (i.e., L1 users such
as general practices, GPs). In real-life scenarios, this protocol
can be applied to a GP who wishes to proceed with a patient’s
treatment and needs to have access to the patient’s real identity
from his de-identiﬁed records. The GP will need to get this
patient’s data from the attribute authority (aa). This authority
can retrieve the patient’s real identity on behalf of the HSP.
Assuming in A3 below, this authority is trusted by HSPs and
clients (e.g., GPs). Assuming in A4, all the patient’s records
have been de-identiﬁed. In order to get the data, the GP needs
to prove to aa that he has been granted the right credentials
to perform such type of access. In other words, the GP needs
to, ﬁrstly, show his identity credential to ensure that he is the
person he claims to be. Secondly, he needs to show his access
credential, which conﬁrms that he is allowed to perform this
type of access and learn the patient’s real identity.
Until now, no research has been carried out to analyse the
vulnerability of the LA protocol using a model checking tool.
Table
I shows the basic notation of the LA protocol. Fig 1
shows the message sequences of the LA protocol.
In the LA protocol, the communication channel is based
on the Secure Socket Layer (SSL) protocol [31] to provide
security for data transmission. SSL protocol uses a combina-
tion of public key and symmetric key ciphers to establish a
secure communication channel between a server and a client.
For protocol analysis using Casper/FDR2, we assume the
following.
A1. The underlying cryptographic algorithms used in SSL’s
public key and symmetric key ciphers are secure.
A2. All parties unconditionally trust the certiﬁcation authority
and public keys signed by it. The certiﬁcation authority
certiﬁes the public key for clients.
A3. All parties unconditionally trust the attribute authority
who issues the attribute certiﬁcates for clients.
A4. Patients’ records have already been de-identiﬁed. That is
their identity or NHS number has been replaced with a
pseudonym.
TABLE I
THE LA PROTOCOL NOTATION AND DESCRIPTION
Notation
Description
a
An identiﬁer of an initiator/client
ca
An identiﬁer of a certiﬁcation authority
aa
An identiﬁer of a attribute authority
nx
A random nonce of x
PKx
A public key of x
SKx
A secret Key of x
ts
A timestamp (an expiration time)
h
A hash function
msg
A message of data request
certa
A PK-certiﬁcate of client a generated by ca
attr-certa
An attribute certiﬁcate of client a generated by aa
veri1
An integrity veriﬁcation of certa
ps3l1
An L3 pseudonym Type-I
sigaa
A signature of aa
integ1, integ2
Used in attr-certa integrity veriﬁcation
In the LA protocol, ca is the certiﬁcation authority who
issues public-key (PK) certiﬁcates, and aa is the attribute
authority who issues attribute certiﬁcates to legitimate users.
a is the client or the initiator of the request.
The PK-certiﬁcate includes two parts, {a, Pk(a), 11, ts}
and {h(a, Pk(a), 11, ts}{SK(ca)}. The ﬁrst part, contains
information about the client, such as, identity a, public key of
a PK(a), group membership l1 and timestamp ts. The second
part, is the signature of the ca. Issuer ca signs subject a, public
key of a, PK(a), a group membership l1 and timestamp ts using
its own private key SK(ca), which is only known to the ca.
Since the certiﬁcate is encrypted with the private key of ca,
any other user cannot spoof it. This provides conﬁdence of
the certiﬁcate’s information to a participant. The certiﬁcate
can only be decrypted by the public key of ca, which is
known to legitimate users. To sum up, The design of PK-
certiﬁcate ensures that no one can forge or modify a valid
PK-certiﬁcate. It is important to mention that in this protocol
description scenario, we have also included issuing the PK-
certiﬁcate and attribute certiﬁcate to the client. In real-life
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

scenarios, certiﬁcates are issued once (unless expired and need
renewal) and usually at an earlier stage before submitting a
request to access patient data.
The following describes the message sequence of the LA
protocol depicted in Fig 1.
Fig. 1.
The LA protocol description
Message 1: Certiﬁcate authority ca issues and sends the PK-
certiﬁcate, certa, to client a in order to authenticate client a
and distribute PK(a) safely.
Message 2: Attribute Authority aa issues and sends the
attribute certiﬁcate, attr-certa, to client a. This certiﬁcate
includes the issuer’s name (aa), the client’s name (a), an L3
pseudonym (ps3l1), a timestamp (ts) and the issuer’s signature
on the certiﬁcate. The L3 pseudonym (ps3l1), contains another
pseudonym, a lower-level one called, ps1, which can be used
to recover the patient’s real identity.
Message 3: Client a sends his/her nonce (na) along with a
message of the request encrypted with aa’s pubic key.
Message 4: Client a sends his PK-certiﬁcate (certa) to aa.
This certiﬁcate contains veri1 and veri2. veri1 contains the
plain content of the certiﬁcate. veri2 contains the deciphered
ca’s signature on the certiﬁcate. Using veri1 and veri2 allows
checking the integrity of the certiﬁcate to ensure that the
certiﬁcate has not been modiﬁed during transmission. So ﬁrst,
veriﬁer aa validates the ca’s signature on the certiﬁcate and
then, it veriﬁes the certiﬁcate’s integrity using veri1 and veri2.
Message 5: Veriﬁer aa sends enc1 to client a which contains
the veriﬁer’s identity (aa), user’s nonce (na) and the veriﬁer’s
nonce (naa) encrypted with PK(a). Client a checks if enc1 is
decryptable by SK(a) and contains the right nonce na. This
step is essential to allow client a to authenticate verﬁer aa.
Message 6: Now client a sends encr2 to recipient aa. Variable
encr2 contains the items a and naa encrypted with PK(aa).
Recipient aa checks if enc2 is decryptable by SK(aa) and
contains the right nonce naa. This step is essential to allow
aa to authenticate a. Also in this step, aa checks a’s group
membership to ensure that the client belongs to the right group
and legitimate for this type of access.
Message 7: After successful authentication, a sends to aa
his attr-cert to check his authorisation. Veriﬁer aa checks the
correctness of the certiﬁcate. It completes this by verifying the
signature on the certiﬁcate and checks a’s access credentials.
That is to ensure that the certiﬁcate contains the right type
of L3 pseudonym (ps3l1). After that, it veriﬁes the integrity
of the lower-level pseudonym (ps1) to ensure it has not been
altered during transmission.
Message 8: After successful authorisation, aa forwards int1
and int2 to a. Variable int2 contains the requested patient’s
data (pid), a timestamp (ts), user’s nonce (na) and the user’s
identity (a) all encrypted with the user’ pubic key. Variable
int1 contains same items as in int2 but hashed. Finally, user a
performs the ﬁnal checks. (1) Checking the aa’ signature on
int1 and verifying the integrity of the data using int1 and int2.
(2) Checking the timestamp to ensure data freshness.
B. Modelling the LA protocol Using Casper/FDR2
Based on the LA protocol’s notation in Table I, we model
the LA protocol in Casper’s script, as shown below.
#Protocol description
--ca issues and sends PK-certificate to client a
0. ca -> a : {{a,PK(a),{l1}%ga,ts}%veri1,{{h(a,PK(a),
{l1}%ga,ts)} %veri2}{SK(ca)%skca}%certa}{PK(a)}
--a wants to contact aa
1. -> a : aa
--a sends his original request message with a nonce
2a. a -> aa : {msg, na}{PK(aa)}
--a sends his PK-certificate to be verified by aa
2b. a -> aa :{veri1%{a,PK(a),ga%{l1},ts},{certa
%{veri2% {h(a,PK(a),ga%{l1},ts)}}} {SK(ca)}}{PK(aa)}
[decryptable(certa, PK(ca)) and veri2== h(veri1) and
ts==now or ts+1==now]
--Mutual authentication and check user membership
3. aa -> a : {aa, na, naa}{PK(a)} %enc1
[decryptable (enc1, SK(a))]
4. a -> aa :{a, naa}{PK(aa)} %enc2
[decryptable (enc2, SK(aa)) and ga==l1]
--aa issues and sends attribute certificate to a
5a. aa -> a :{aa,a,{{ps1,l1, aa, nonce}%integrity2,
{h(ps1, l1, aa, nonce)}% integrity1}%ps3l1,ts}{PK(a)}
5b. aa -> a : {h(aa,a,ps3l1,ts)} {SK(aa)} %sigaa
[ts==now or ts+1==now]
--a sends to aa his attribute certificate for
authorisation verification
6a. a -> aa :{aa,a, ps3l1 %{integrity2%{ps1,
l1,aa,nonce},integrity1%{h(ps1,l1,aa,nonce)}}, ts}
6b. a -> aa :sigaa%{h(aa,a,ps3l1,ts)}{skaa%SK(aa)}
[decryptable(sigaa,PK(aa)) and integrity1==
h(integrity2) and decrypt(ps3l1, SK(aa))== (ps1,
l1, aa, nonce) and decrypt(ps1, SK(aa))==pid and
ts==now or ts+1==now]
--aa sends the response to a
7. aa -> a : {{a, na, pid, ts} %int2,
{h(a,na,pid,ts)%int1}{SK(aa)}%sigaa2}{PK(a)}
[decryptable(sigaa2,PK(aa)) and int1== h(int2) and
ts==now or ts+1==now]
C. LA Protocol Goals
In this section, we identify the LA protocol security goals
or properties.
(P1) Data Conﬁdentiality: Conﬁdentiality is a vital require-
ment that provides secrecy and privacy in e-health applica-
tions. It offers protection against attacks such as forgery and
spooﬁng. To support data conﬁdentiality, the communication
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

channel between entities should be secured typically via
encryption. An unauthorised party should not be able to learn
anything about any communication between two entities by
observing or even tampering the communication lines. That
is, one cannot infer the contents of the message, sender and
receiver, the message length, the time they were sent, and not
even the fact that a message was sent in the ﬁrst place.
(P2) Integrity Protection: A strong integrity protection mech-
anism should be deployed to protect against data tampering.
The LA protocol should detect any unauthorised alteration to
data being transmitted between the authorised entities.
(P3) Ensuring Accountability: The protocol should obtain an
undeniable response from entities participating in the protocol.
That is, to ensure that the originator of a communication
cannot deny it later.
(P4) Mutual Authentication: Or two-way authentication,
refers to both entities of the protocol should authenticate each
other to permit the exchange of information there-between.
(P5) Certiﬁcate Manipulation Protection: It should be guar-
anteed that the certiﬁcates (i.e., PK-certiﬁcates) used in the
protocol are valid and have not been corrupted or modiﬁed
during transmission.
(P6) Credential Forgery Protection: It should be assured that
users’ credentials are not stolen or forged. This is because
it can lead to the elevation of privileges attack. This attack
occurs when a user with limited privileges assumes the identity
of a user with higher privileges to gain access to patient
conﬁdential data.
(P7) Data Freshness: There should be a proof that nonces,
generated during protocols, are fresh and the integrity of
the session key is preserved. Both entities should also have
undeniable proof that the other party is in possession of a
valid session key. Any previous compromised key should be
easily detected, and the protocol run should terminate.
(P8) Linkability: A user with L1 access credentials, i.e,
highest access privileges, should be able to link de-identiﬁed
or anonymous objects to the patient’s real identity.
D. Veriﬁcation Result and Security Analysis of The LA Pro-
tocol
The veriﬁcation result using the Casper/FDR2 model check-
ing tool conﬁrms that the LA protocol has fulﬁlled all the prop-
erties identiﬁed in Section III-C. The result of the veriﬁcation
is shown in Fig 2.
(P1) Data Conﬁdentiality: was achieved by deploying crypto-
graphic techniques (symmetric cryptoystem, asymmetric cryp-
toystem, and hash functions).
(P2) Integrity Protection: was met by incorporating digital
signatures and hash functions, which can detect any data
alteration during transmission.
(P3) Ensuring Accountability: was fulﬁlled by using digital
signatures of both entities, the sender and receiver.
(P4) Mutual Authentication: was accomplished by integrat-
ing the challenge response protocol.
(P5) Certiﬁcate Manipulation Protection: this property has
been abided by including a timestamp in the certiﬁcate, which
Fig. 2.
Veriﬁcation result of the LA protocol using Casper/FDR2
can detect any snifﬁng and manipulation by the intruder.
(P6) Credential Forgery Protection: was met by including
the legitimate credential holder identity in both types of
certiﬁcates, the PK-certiﬁcate and the attribute certiﬁcate. So
by checking that both certiﬁcates contain the same credential
holder identity, we can ensure that both credentials have not
been forged.
(P7) Data Freshness: was achieved by including a freshly
random nonce with the transmitted data.
(P8)
Linkability:
was
fulﬁlled
by
integrating
the
L3
pseudonym-Type1 in the L1 user’s access credential. This
pseudonym allows linkable access to patient data as it contains
a lower-level pseudonym that can recover the patient’s real
identity, using the right secret key.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we describe the implementation and perfor-
mance evaluation of the LA security protocol. To achieve this,
we have built a prototype using the Java 2 platform (standard
edition), as it is suitable for e-health applications. It offers
implementations for several cryptographic primitives and key
management services needed for our solution.
Performance is measured by two metrics, minimising access
delay and minimising server computation time. An access
delay is deﬁned as the time elapsed from submitting an access
request to the time when the response to the access request
is received. A server computation time is the time needed for
the server to complete the necessary operations, veriﬁcations
and checks from receiving the request to the time when the
response to the request is sent. Both metrics should be kept
as low as possible.
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

To know the access delay and server computational time
incurred by the LA protocol, we have measured the time taken
to execute (run) the protocol based upon the prototype under
two scenarios.
• In the ﬁrst scenario (L3 Scenario), we run the protocol
without applying an extra security layer to the protocol.
This scenario is based on the principle of least privilege.
This scenario is called the Level-3 access or the anony-
mous access scenario, which has been described in the
introduction section.
• In the second scenario (L1 Scenario), we run the protocol
with applying our additional security mechanism. This
scenario is called the Level-1 access or the linkable
access.
The measurements are taken for 10 execution rounds for each
scenario, and the averages are calculated. The results are
shown in Fig 3 and Fig 4.
A. Implementation Platform
To prototype the LA protocol, the following hardware and
software have been used. We have used a desktop computer
running Windows 8 with a 2.30 GHz Intel Core i3 and 8GB
of RAM. The timing results from the LA protocol execution
presented here are based on this computer speciﬁcation. The
software used to implement the LA protocol is JAVA 2
Platform, Standard Edition (J2SE).
B. Performance Evaluation Parameters and Target
The performance evaluation parameters we rely on are as
follows.
• The patient’s records are distributed in different databases
which are managed by different HSP (e.g., hospitals).
That is we run the simulation on a distributed manner
and test its performance.
• Running the simulation where the database size of each
HSP increases, patient wise and record wise. We ﬁrst,
run the simulation with the parameter 10 objects by 1000
patients and then we increase the object’s size by ten and
the patients’ number by 1000.
• A single patient data request.
As we gave an real-life example in Section III-A, we show in
the following section two things. (1) The time needed for the
GP to obtain the patient’s data. We call this access delay. (2)
The time needed for each hospital to verify and complete the
GP’s request. We call this server computation time.
The target of the performance evaluation is to show that the
LA protocol (Level-1 Scenario) offers a higher security than
the protocol under the least access privilege scenario (Level-3
Scenario) and with a linear increase in performance. In other
words, the LA protocol aims to balance between security and
performance without adding a massive amount of overhead
into the solution.
C. Performance Evaluation Result and Analysis
It can be seen from Fig 3 that the time (Access delay)
taken to execute the LA protocol (L1 Scenario) is 1200
milliseconds in its peak, which is approximately 90% more
than the time taken in the normal case or L3 Scenario, which is
101 milliseconds shown in Fig 4. The server computation time
in L1 Scenario is 1150 milliseconds, which is approximately
91% more than that in L3 Scenario, which is 100 milliseconds.
Fig. 3.
Performance evaluation result of the LA protocol-L1 Scenario
Fig. 4.
Performance evaluation result of the L3 Scenario
The extra cost in the L1 Scenario is caused by the following
reasons.
• The L1 Scenario contains three additional security layers,
which were added on top of the L3 Scenario.
• The extra communications between the client and the
veriﬁer.
• The extra computations in signature veriﬁcations by both
the client and the veriﬁer.
• The extra computation in the attribute certiﬁcate veri-
ﬁcation by the veriﬁer. In the L3 scenario, only PK-
certiﬁcate veriﬁcation is necessarily for completing the
access request. No attribute certiﬁcate veriﬁcation is
involved in the L3 scenario.
• The extra computation in checking the timestamp in the
attribute certiﬁcate.
• The extra computation in validating the pseudonym
(PS3l1) included in the attribute certiﬁcate.
• The extra integrity check of the lower-level pseudonym
(PS1) included in PS3l1.
• The extra computation in the decryption operation to
retrieve or recover the patient’s identity.
• The extra computation in signing the requested data or
the response before sending it to the client.
• Finally, the extra cost in L1 Scenario between the server
computation time and the access delay is due to the
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

distributed patient’s objects, which normally increases the
waiting time. While in L3 Scenario a patient’s objects are
not distributed and are managed by a single HSP.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we focused on two major aspects. Firstly, the
formal veriﬁcation and security analysis of the LA protocol
using Casper/FDR2 tool veriﬁcation. Secondly, the formal
performance evaluation of the LA protocol by building a
prototype using the Java technology.
The result from the veriﬁcation using Casper/FDR2 tool
showed that the LA protocol has fulﬁlled important security
requirements. It supports linkable access to patient data by
integrating signiﬁcant cryptographic techniques. It ensures
conﬁdentiality of patient sensitive data. It provides data fresh-
ness by relying on timestamps and nonces. It is protected
from certiﬁcate manipulation and credential forgery. It ensures
accountability by deploying digital signatures. Mutual authen-
tication is also provided to obtain unforgeable proof of other
participant’s authenticity before it engages in the protocol with
that participant.
In addition to fulﬁlling important security requirements, the
result from the LA protocol implementation showed that the
LA protocol had successfully balanced between security and
performance. That is the increase in performance was linear
with the increase of security. So our analysis proved that the
LA protocol is secure and efﬁcient. It allows a client and a
server to exchange some sensitive patient data in a secure
manner and within a reasonable amount of time. Our future
work is concerned with extending our analysis of the LA
protocol to other security protocols and speciﬁcally, e-health
protocols, taking into account security and performance as
major criteria.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is ﬁnancially sponsored by the Ministry of Higher
Education in Saudi Arabia.
REFERENCES
[1] P. S. Appelbaum, “Privacy in psychiatric treatment: threats and re-
sponses,” FOCUS: The Journal of Lifelong Learning in Psychiatry,
vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 396–406, 2003.
[2] A. Appari, M. E. Johnson, and D. L. Anthony, “Hipaa compliance: An
institutional theory perspective.” in AMCIS, 2009, p. 252.
[3] J. G. Hodge, “Health information privacy and public health,” The Journal
of Law, Medicine & Ethics, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 663–671, 2003.
[4] A. Pﬁtzmann and M. Hansen, “Anonymity, unlinkability, undetectability,
unobservability, pseudonymity, and identity management - a consoli-
dated proposal for terminology,” Tech. Rep., February 2008.
[5] R. Clayton, “Anonymity and traceability in cyberspace,” University of
Cambridge, Computer Laboratory, Darwin College, Tech. Rep., 2005.
[6] J. Rogers, C. Puleston, and A. Rector, “The clef chronicle: Patient histo-
ries derived from electronic health records,” in ICDEW ’06: Proceedings
of the 22nd International Conference on Data Engineering Workshops.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 109+.
[7] B. Alhaqbani and C. Fidge, “Privacy-preserving electronic health record
linkage using pseudonym identiﬁers,” July 2008, pp. 108–117.
[8] B. S. Elger, J. Iavindrasana, L. Lo Iacono, H. M¨uller, N. Roduit,
P. Summers, and J. Wright, “Strategies for health data exchange for
secondary, cross-institutional clinical research.” Computer methods and
programs in biomedicine, vol. 99, no. 3, pp. 230–251, September 2010.
[9] K. Pommerening and M. Reng, “Secondary use of the ehr via
pseudonymisation.” Studies in health technology and informatics, vol.
103, pp. 441–446, 2004.
[10] D. Slamanig and C. Stingl, “Privacy aspects of ehealth,” in ARES ’08:
Proceedings of the 2008 Third International Conference on Availability,
Reliability and Security.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer
Society, March 2008, pp. 1226–1233.
[11] L. Iacono, “Tmulti-centric universal pseudonymisation for secondary use
of the ehr,” In: Proc. of HealthGrid:, pp. 239–247, 2007.
[12] P.
Schartner
and
M.
Schaffer,
“Unique
user-generated
digital
pseudonyms,” in Computer Network Security, ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, V. Gorodetsky, I. Kotenko, and V. Skormin, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2005, vol. 3685, ch. 15,
pp. 194–205.
[13] N. Zhang, A. Rector, I. Buchan, Q. Shi, D. Kalra, J. Rogers, C. Goble,
S. Walker, D. Ingram, and P. Singleton, “A linkable identity privacy
algorithm for healthgrid,” in From Grid to Healthgrid: Proceedings of
Healthgrid 2005, 2005, pp. 234–245.
[14] M. Deng, D. DeCock, and B. Preneel, “Towards a cross-context iden-
tity management framework in e-health,” Online Information Review,
vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 422–442, 2009.
[15] T. Neubauer and J. Heurix, “A methodology for the pseudonymization
of medical data,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 80,
no. 3, pp. 190–204, Mar. 2011.
[16] R. Addas and N. Zhang, “An enhanced approach to supporting controlled
access to eprs with three levels of identity privacy preservations,”
in Information Quality in e-Health, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, A. Holzinger and K.-M. Simonic, Eds., vol. 7058.
Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 547–561.
[17] R. M. Needham and M. D. Schroeder, “Using encryption for authenti-
cation in large networks of computers,” Commun. ACM, vol. 21, no. 12,
pp. 993–999, Dec. 1978.
[18] G. Lowe, “An attack on the needham-schroeder public-key authentica-
tion protocol,” Information Processing Letters, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 131 –
133, 1995.
[19] I.-G. Kim and J.-Y. Choi, “Formal veriﬁcation of pap and eap-md5
protocols in wireless networks: Fdr model checking,” in Advanced
Information Networking and Applications, 2004. AINA 2004. 18th
International Conference on, vol. 2, 2004, pp. 264–269 Vol.2.
[20] G. Lowe, “Casper: a compiler for the analysis of security protocols,”
pp. 18–30, Jun. 1997.
[21] F. S. E. LTD., “Failure-divergences reﬁnement fdr2 manual,” 2010.
[22] I.-G. Kim, H.-S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, and J.-Y. Choi, “Analysis and modiﬁca-
tion of ask mobile security protocol,” in Mobile Commerce and Services,
2005. WMCS ’05. The Second IEEE International Workshop on, 2005,
pp. 79–83.
[23] H.-S. Kim, J.-H. Oh, J.-Y. Choi, and J.-W. Kim, “The vulnerabilities
analysis and design of the security protocol for rﬁd system,” in Computer
and Information Technology, 2006. CIT ’06. The Sixth IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on, 2006, pp. 152–152.
[24] P. Chan, R. Lee, and D. Kramer, The Java Class Libraries, Volume 1:
Supplement for the Java 2 Platform, Standard Edition, V 1.2. Addison-
Wesley Professional, 1999, vol. 1.
[25] H. Gilbert and H. Handschuh, “Security Analysis of SHA-256 and Sis-
ters Selected Areas in Cryptography,” Selected Areas in Cryptography,
vol. 3006, pp. 175–193, 2004.
[26] B. Kaliski and M. Robshaw, “Message authentication with md5,” Cryp-
toBytes (RSA Labs Technical Newsletter), vol. 1, no. 1, 1995.
[27] J. Bl¨omer and J.-P. Seifert, “Fault based cryptanalysis of the advanced
encryption standard (aes),” in Financial Cryptography, R. N. Wright,
Ed.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003, vol. 2742,
ch. 12, pp. 162–181.
[28] Y. Fuping, S. Liyuan, and J. Yuanming, “Design and implementation of
3des encryption system based on dsp [j],” Computer Measurement &
Control, vol. 7, p. 051, 2009.
[29] R. L. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adleman, “A method for obtaining digital
signatures and public-key cryptosystems,” Commun. ACM, vol. 21, pp.
120–126, February 1978.
[30] L. Harn, M. Mehta, and W.-J. Hsin, “Integrating difﬁe-hellman key
exchange into the digital signature algorithm (dsa),” Communications
Letters, IEEE, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 198–200, 2004.
[31] D. Wagner and B. Schneier, “Analysis of the ssl 3.0 protocol,” in In
proceedings of the second Unix Workshop on electronic commerce.
USENIX Association, 1996, pp. 29–40.
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

An Ontology-Driven Information Model for Interoperability of Personal and 
Electronic Health Records 
Panagiotis Plastiras*† 
*Assistant Product Manager 
Cambio Healthcare Systems 
Reading, UK 
Panagiotis.Plastiras@cambiohealthcare.co.uk 
Dympna O’Sullivan, Peter Weller 
†Centre for Health Informatics 
City University London 
London, UK 
{Dympna.O’Sullivan.1, P.R.Weller}@city.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—Personal Health Records allow patients to maintain 
their own health information and are viewed as an important 
tool for patient self-management. However, uptake of these 
systems has been hindered by the large burden placed on 
patients to record information or to arrange for information to 
be transferred from other clinical systems. The favored option 
of transferring information from other systems is hindered by 
a lack of semantic and syntactic interoperability between 
Personal and Electronic Health Record systems. In this 
position paper, we describe the ongoing development of an 
information model that uses an ontology to ensure semantic 
integrity between concepts recorded by both types of record 
systems, and HL7 standards to maintain equivalent structure 
and function.  The information model acts as a middle layer 
between record systems and thus is not tied to any specific 
Personal and Electronic Health Record implementation.     
Keywords - Personal Health Records; Electronic Health 
Records; Information Model; HL7;Ontology; Interoperability.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Personal Health Records (PHRs) provide a summary of 
an individual's medical history and allow patients to view 
and edit their own medical data [1]. The aim of PHRs is to 
encourage patients to become more involved and informed 
as equal partners in their care, making positive choices to 
improve or maintain their health. Further, due to the 
increasing prevalence of long term conditions, patients’ 
involvement in their care is viewed as potentially cost 
saving, and as such PHRs have become a strategic priority. 
For example, in the USA most Americans will have access to 
a PHR by 2014 if present Federal goals are accomplished 
[3], and Australia’s 2011 budget mandated PHRs for all 
Australians to be achieved within 2 years [4]. However, 
despite much investment, adoption rates for PHRs remain 
low with causes such as lack of awareness, interoperability, 
and privacy and security concerns widely cited [5]. Although 
these 
are 
all 
important 
concerns, 
in 
particular, 
interoperability has been identified as a major barrier and in 
this research we focus on proposing a novel solution for 
PHR interoperability. 
There are two prevailing models of PHR - “tethered” 
systems, which are sponsored by an organization and where 
the record is automatically populated without the patient 
needing to enter information, and “untethered” standalone 
systems which are entirely under the control of the patient 
who must enter their own information or arrange for it to be 
transferred from another system. As the majority of PHRs 
are untethered, the success of these systems is determined by 
a person’s willingness to maintain their PHR information or 
on their health providers’ willingness to share data from the 
patient’s Electronic Health Record (EHR) so that it can be 
transferred to the PHR.  
Although the tethered approach places fewer burdens on 
the patient it presents challenges for healthcare providers.  
The development of tethered PHRs usually involves the 
costly process of exposing selected parts of an organization’s 
EHR to the patient by reprogramming or ‘retrofitting’ 
proprietary EHRs for purposes they were not originally 
intended [6]. As a result many tethered PHRs focus on 
providing simpler data to patients, for example, hospital 
visits or prescription drugs dispensed, rather than clinical 
data which requires gathering fragmentary information from 
multiple resources but which is necessary if patients are to be 
encouraged to self-manage in a meaningful way.  
The aim of our research is to develop a framework to 
enable seamless interoperability between PHRs and EHRs in 
order to allow meaningful exchange of clinical data from 
providers to patients and vice versa in order to better 
encourage PHR use and patient self-management. The 
solution is equally applicable to tethered and untethered 
systems as it abstracts away from the specific PHR and EHR 
using an ontology-driven Information Model (IM) based on 
the HL7 Reference Information Model (RIM) that acts as a 
middleware layer between PHR and EHR systems.  In this 
position paper we provide a description of the proposed IM 
for transferring information in a standardized way between 
EHR and PHR systems. In the next section we provide 
describe recent work on PHR interoperability. Section III 
describes the methods used to develop the middleware layer 
between EHR and PHR. Section IV presents a discussion 
and finally in Section V we outline some future work.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Our research proposes the use of an ontology-driven IM 
to address issues of semantic and syntactic interoperability 
between PHR and EHR systems. An IM is a representation 
of concepts and the relationships, constraints, rules, and 
operations that might be applied to these concepts for a 
particular problem space [7]. “An ontology is an explicit 
specification of a conceptualization” [8] and used to formally 
represent domain knowledge. Syntactic interoperability 
refers to the capability of communicating and exchanging 
data whereas semantic interoperability is the ability of 
systems to meaningfully interpret information exchanged.  
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Recent work by Puustjärvi [9] focused on achieving 
semantic interoperability by developing a specific ontology 
for active PHRs. We borrow from this work but extend it to 
include syntactic interoperability using Health Level 7 (HL7) 
standards for data and document exchange [10]. Other 
research using HL7 standards for PHR interoperability has 
focused on messaging rather than full document exchange 
[11, 12]. In order to facilitate full document exchange, we 
have developed a general ontology-driven IM derived 
directly from common PHR data and functions.  In addition, 
the proposed general framework provides a blueprint for 
developing new PHRs interoperable with EHRs. 
III. 
METHODS 
The process of developing the IM involved a number of 
distinct stages including an analysis of data and functionality 
available via common PHRs to determine information to be 
exchanged between PHRs and EHRs, a review of EHR and 
PHR standards, and designing and developing a middleware 
architecture for clinical document exchange. These steps are 
outlined in the following subsections. 
A. Analysis of common PHR functionality 
Initially 81 PHRs were accessed via myPHR web portal 
[13] and another 19 were selected based on a review by 
Carrión Señor et al [14]. By deciding to focus only on easily 
accessible free and web-based systems, 45 PHRs were 
selected. We applied a scoring system developed by [14] 
which assigns a utility score to PHRs based on data and 
access management, privacy and security settings and use of 
recognized standards. This resulted in the following 5 
systems that scored>70% and thus were selected for detailed 
review:  
1) Microsoft Health Vault 
2) Telemedical 
3) NoMoreClipboard 
4) Health Spek 
5) Health Companion 
 Due to the large variation among PHR systems, a 
template including a free text notes section was used to 
manually summarize functionality rather than a formal 
information extraction method. Table 1 summarizes 
extracted PHR information. Functionality has been separated 
into 6 categories which represent natural groupings of 
functionality: i) Patient Demographics and Other Family 
Members, ii) Care Provider Roles, iii) Clinical Record, iv) 
Interoperability, 
v) 
Social 
Aspects, 
and 
vi) 
Other 
Functionality. The last column (“Score”) assigns a score 
reflecting the number of features available in each of the 
outlined categories and the last row of the table summarizes 
the total number of available features for each PHR. 
TABLE I.  
ANALYSIS OF PHR DATA AND FUNCTIONALTY 
Features 
Health 
Vault 
Telemedical 
NoMore 
Clipboard 
Health 
Spek 
Health 
Compa-
nion 
Score 
Patient Demographics and Other Family Members 
Personal 
Information 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Emergency 
Contact 
Y 
Y 
 
Y 
 
3/5 
Emergency Card 
Y 
 
Y 
Y 
 
3/5 
Em. Print-outs 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
3/5 
Add Other Family 
Members 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Friends 
 
 
 
 
Y 
1/5 
Care Providers Roles 
Doctor 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Guarantor 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Insurance 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Pharmacy 
 
Y 
Y 
 
Y 
3/5 
Provider 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Y 
4/5 
Clinical Record 
Allergies 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Condition 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Device 
Y 
 
 
 
Y 
2/5 
Diet 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Exercise  
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Family History 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Imaging 
Y 
 
 
Y 
Y 
3/5 
Immunization 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Labs 
Y 
 
 
Y 
Y 
3/5 
Medication 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Procedures 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Social history 
 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
4/5 
Supplement 
 
 
 
Y 
 
1/5 
Surgery 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Vitals 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
5/5 
Wellbeing 
Considerations 
 
Y 
 
 
Y 
2/5 
Interoperability 
Import 
Y 
Y 
 
 
Y 
3/5 
Export 
Y 
Y 
 
 
Y 
3/5 
Import 
Documents 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Y 
4/5 
Connectivity with 
Devices 
Y 
 
 
 
 
1/5 
 Social Aspects 
Access Control 
Y 
 
Y 
 
 
2/5 
Groups 
 
 
 
 
Y 
1/5 
Posts 
 
 
 
 
Y 
1/5 
Share Medical 
Record 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Y 
4/5 
Other Functionality 
Appointment 
request 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Appointments 
Y 
 
 
 
 
1/5 
Educational 
Information 
 
 
 
Y 
 
1/5 
Health Goals 
Y 
 
 
 
 
1/5 
Lab/Test Results 
Requests 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Manage Expenses 
 
 
 
 
Y 
1/5 
Messaging 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Notifications & 
Reminders 
 
 
 
Y 
Y 
2/5 
Prescription 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Referral Request 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Refill Request 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Refills  
Y 
 
 
Y 
 
2/5 
Renews Request 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Risk Assessment 
 
 
 
 
Y 
1/5 
Sent Payments 
 
Y 
 
 
Y 
2/5 
Visible Clinical 
Codes 
Y 
 
 
 
 
1/5 
Emergency 
profile 
 
 
 
Y 
 
1/5 
Web Visit 
 
Y 
 
 
 
1/5 
Score 
30/53 
34/53 
21/53 
23/53 
31/53 
139 
 
Considering the “Other Functionality” category in Table 
1, the majority of components have a score of 1/5. Many of 
the functions associated with specific PHRs in this section 
are either slightly different to common functionality grouped 
in other categories or represents the same functionality from 
other categories only labelled in a different way.  For 
example, the function of requesting lab results is additional 
functionality in Telemedical that allows users to requests lab 
results from third party applications but not to register results 
in the same way as in the other system (i.e. as part of the 
clinical record). This is an example of how similar 
functionality 
is 
implemented 
(lack 
of 
syntactic 
interoperability) as well as in nomenclature of similar 
concepts (lack of semantic interoperability) among PHRs. 
B. PHR and EHR standards in use 
HL7 RIM, HL7 CDA (Clinical Document Architecture), 
and messaging standards (e.g., HL7 v2.x and v3.0) form the 
backbone of EHR systems. RIM expresses the data content 
needed in a specific clinical context and provides an explicit 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

representation of the semantic and lexical connections that 
exist between the information carried in the fields of HL7 
messages.  CDA is an XML-based standard that specifies the 
encoding, structure and semantics of clinical documents for 
exchange. The v3 messaging standard defines a series of 
electronic messages to support all healthcare workflows [10].  
The most common standards used for PHRs include the 
Continuity of Care Record (CCR) which specifies the 
encoding, structure, and semantics of a patient summary 
document. Furthermore, HL7 Continuity of Care Document 
(CCD) provides a template for representing vital signs, 
family history and plan of care [10]. In the case of the 
selected PHRs, CCD, CCR, and XML are used to import and 
export medical data. In most cases the imported documents 
are not fully embodied or merged with the patient’s medical 
record; rather they can be seen as separate documents using 
Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations (XSLT). 
C. Representing PHR data and relationships 
Our proposed IM, shown in Figure 1, consists of four 
classes to represent PHR data and relationships, namely: i) 
Role (participants), ii) Entity (roles are played by Entities), 
iii) Act (happenings) and iv) Element (data corresponding to 
Acts). The classes Role, Entity and Act have been preserved 
from the HL7 RIM foundation classes, however, both the use 
of each class and their relations have been altered. In RIM 
the class Role is related to the class Act through another 
class named Participation, and to the class Entity. In our IM, 
class Role is related to class Entity and the latter is then 
related directly to class Act. This is due to the fact that Roles 
in PHRs are more limited than in EHRs and thus Entities 
participate directly in Acts.  The class Element has two 
subclasses named “Data” and “Unit” to manipulate 
represented data. These subclasses characterize data input or 
saved by a user as part of an Act.  Sub classing data into its 
constituent Elements allows for finer-grained representation 
of patient data thus allowing the IM to capture variations 
among data stored by various PHR, as well as to adequately 
capture the greater number of data and data types stored by 
PHR when compared to EHR.  
 
Figure 1. Information Model Classes 
Figure 2 provides a sample scenario representing a 
patient monitoring their vital signs. A person (Entity) who is 
the patient (Role), monitors (Act) his vital signs (Element). 
Monitor is a composite Act that involves the measurement of 
different Elements. Moreover, a simple Element may consist 
of Data Elements or/and Units Elements). Data Element 
contains the actual value of a measurement (e.g. 120) and 
Unit Element contains the unit of measurement (mmHg). 
Three of the proposed IM classes are used by HL7 RIM 
which is developed to accommodate any possible act in 
healthcare. Moreover the attributes of each class and the 
class themselves are flexible. Hence, it is expected that the 
proposed four classes can accommodate all relevant 
information for PHRs. 
 
Figure 2. Sample scenario 
D. PHR – EHR  semantic interoperability 
PHRs and EHRs may use different terminology to 
describe the same concept and thus obstruct data exchange 
between applications. To circumvent this obstacle the 
proposed IM uses an ontology developed using Protégé [15] 
and instantiated using Ontology Web Language (OWL) [16] 
as shown in Figure 3. The Ontology defines all classes 
described in the previous subsection along with their 
attributes, data properties (including cardinality and 
multiplicity) and relationships among them. This generic 
ontology may be instantiated for various PHRs. 
 
Figure 3. Information Model as an Ontology 
By utilizing an ontology-based approach, semantic issues 
can be effectively addressed. For example, the declaration of 
equal features “Past Medical History” and “Previous 
Medication”. Moreover, the use of Data Properties that can 
replicate coding schemas is also possible. For instance, the 
SNOMED CT code for past medication is “394829006”. By 
assigning this code to Past Medical History, the meaning of 
these two individuals could also be interpreted as equal.  
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

E. PHR – EHR data syntatic interoperability 
Data exchanged between PHRs and EHRs must conform 
to relevant structure and syntactic rules. In our framework, 
information will be transformed to and transferred as a CDA 
document; therefore the syntactic rules are the actual rules of 
the HL7 CDA standard. The CDA is represented in XML 
and an XML schema has been developed which is 
responsible for encapsulating all relevant syntactic rules. A 
PHP script is used to verify the XML schema.   
F. Proposed Architecute 
Our proposed architecture is shown in Figure 4. Data 
may be either exported from a PHR to an EHR or vice versa 
with the ontology-based IM instantiated as a middle layer 
between the two systems. This is in contrast to the system 
developed in [9] where transformations for exchanging data 
were embedded within the specific PHR and thus any 
updates to the PHR (e.g. addition or deletion of a field) must 
also be propagated through PHR transformations. We 
decided against such a specific solution to ensure greater 
scalability. Our middle layer solution ensures that when 
modifications are made to either a PHR or an EHR, they can 
be encapsulated directly by altering only the middle layer.  
The other prevailing approach (e.g. as in [11, 12]) is to create 
a domain specific IM called a Refined Message Information 
Model (RMIM) using RIM classes. As demonstrated in II.C, 
RIM is composed of pre-defined attributes which are 
difficult to change and generally not flexible enough for the 
wide variety of PHR concepts and associated data. 
Moreover, the use of RMIM emphasizes message exchange 
rather than the exchange of full medical records.  
 
Figure 4. PHR- EHR architecture 
IV. 
DISCUSSION  
Interoperability between PHR and EHR is a major barrier 
to PHR adoption. In this paper we have described ongoing 
development of an ontology-based IM for PHR to EHR 
interoperability. The proposed IM has been derived directly 
by analyzing common features and functionality of current 
PHRs.  It extends HL7 RIM beyond EHR requirements to 
cover 
essential 
PHR requirements. 
Furthermore 
the 
instantiation of the IM as a middle layer between PHR and 
EHR systems insures additional flexibility by not tying the 
solution to any specific system. As well as being applicable 
to existing solutions (both tethered and non-tethered), the 
framework could be used as a blueprint to develop new 
EHR-interoperable PHR by allowing better flexibility both in 
the types and volume of information to be represented. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  
The next stage of our research is to develop a set of 
mapping guidelines for transforming information from the 
ontology-based IM to CDA format. xPath and xQuery will 
be used to parse data exported from PHRs and EHRs and 
PHP scripts will be used to apply the required 
transformations and create the final CDA document. The 
guidelines will be evaluated using scenarios representing 
transformation of PHR data exported from CCR and XML 
format to CDA and vice versa. Longer term we intend to 
analyze PHRs that are not web-based or free of charge - 
primarily tethered systems - and make the required 
alterations to our framework accordingly. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. Kimmel, R. A. Greenes, and E. Liederman, “Personal 
Health 
Records”, 
The 
Journal 
of 
Medical 
Practice 
Management, vol. 21(3), 2005, pp. 147-152. 
[2] J. Cruickshank, C. Packman, and J. Paxman, “Personal Health 
Records Putting patients in control?”, 2020Health Report, 
2012. 
[3] M. O. Leavitt, Testimony before the House Ways and 
Means Committee, Washington, DC, 2007. 
[4] N.Roxon, Personally Controlled Electronic Health Records 
for all Australians, Australian Government, Department of 
Health , 2011. 
[5] K. Day, and Y Gu, “Influencing factors for adopting personal 
health record (PHR)”, Stud Health Technol Inform, vol. 178, 
2012, pp. 39-44. 
[6] L. Beard, R. Schein, D. Morra, K. Wilson, and J. Keelan, 
“The challenges in making electronic health records 
accessible to patients” Am Med Inform Assoc. vol. 19, 2012, 
pp. 116–120. 
[7] Y. Tina Lee, “Information modeling from design to 
implementation” National 
Institute 
of 
Standards 
and 
Technology, 1999. 
[8] T Gruber, “A translation approach to portable ontologies”, 
Knowl Acquis; 1993, pp. 199–220. 
[9] J. Puustjärvi, and L. Puustjärvi, “Designing and Implementing 
an Active Personal Health Record System”, The Third 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, eTELEMED 2011, pp. 102-107. 
[10] Health Level 7, www.hl7.org, [retrieved: November, 2013]. 
[11] M. Brut, D. Al-Kukhun, A. Péninou, M. Canut, and F. Sèdes, 
“APHR: Annotated Personal Health Record for Enabling 
Pervasive Healthcare”, 12th IEEE International Conference 
on Mobile Data Management, vol. 2, 2011, pp. 73-79. 
[12] J. 
Lähteenmäki, 
J. 
Leppänen, 
and 
H. 
Kaijanranta, 
“Interoperability of Personal Health Records”, 31st Annual 
International Conference of IEEE EMBS, 2009, pp. 1726-9.  
[13] MyPHR Portal, www.myphr.com, [retrieved: November, 
2013] 
[14] I. Carrión Señor, J. Fernández-Alemán, and A. Toval, “Are 
Personal Health Records Safe? A Review of Free Web-
Accessible Personal Health Record Privacy Policies”, J Med 
Internet Res, vol. 14,  2012 
[15] Protégé http://protege.stanford.edu, [retrieved: November, 
2013] 
[16] OWL Web Ontology Language http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-
features/ , [retrieved: November, 2013] 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Medical Images Enhancement with Pseudo-HDR Method 
 
Vesselin Evgueniev Gueorguiev 
Ivan Evgeniev Ivanov 
Technical University Sofia, TUS 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: veg@tu-sofia.bg, iei@tu-sofia.bg  
Desislava Valentinova Georgieva 
New Bulgarian University, NBU 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: dvelcheva@nbu.bg
 
Abstract—Medical images are an important part of the 
diagnostic process. In many cases the accuracy of diagnosis 
depends on the quality of the image. Therefore, the image 
quality improvement is an essential part of medical imaging 
techniques. Now the quality enhancement process is divided 
into two parts: pre-processing, whose task is to optimize the 
image quality in the process of its creation by digital devices 
and apparata, and post-processing, whose task is increasing 
the readability and intelligibility of images on the physician’s 
computer display. 
The proposed paper offers a new post-
processing method for X-ray image quality enhancement using 
the theory of High Dynamic Range images (HDR-images). 
Since one could not get real images with different exposures, 
four techniques to simulate various levels of image exposures 
for HDR-image creation are proposed and analysed in the 
presented paper.  
Keywords - medical imaging; X-rays; HDR-images; quality 
enhancement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The investigation and development of new medical 
image processing methods and systems has received great 
attention over the last two decades. This is due to its wide 
range of applications in computer-assisted methods and 
computer-aided methods. Among the many types of image 
processing, image enhancement is one of the vital processes 
– it is one of the preparatory steps and it is applied before 
starting the image analyses. Image enhancement refers to any 
technique that improves or modifies digital images, so the 
resulting image is better suited than the original for a 
particular application. Essential image enhancement includes 
but is not limited to intensity and contrast manipulation, 
noise reduction, background removal, sharpening and 
filtering edges. In this context, 'image enhancement' means 
any method or technique which change digital images, so the 
resulting image is better suited than the original to a 
particular application. Due to this the basic types of image 
enhancement include manipulation of intensity, changing the 
local or global contrast, noise reduction, filtering and 
sharpening edges. During the image enhancement process 
one or more attributes of the image are modified. The choice 
of attributes and the way they are modified is specific to a 
given task. Moreover observer-specific factors such as the 
human visual system and the observer's experience will 
introduce a great deal of subjectivity into the choice of image 
enhancement methods [1]. 
X-ray images are grayscale images with 12-14 bits depth 
and their visual perception depends on the three most 
common image characteristics: brightness, contrast (local 
and global) and sharpness. Apart from these saturation and 
image dynamic range have a significant influence on the 
human perception of the images but they are not directly 
relevant to X-ray images, because images are grayscale (no 
saturation), and the dynamic range of the visualization 
systems (computer displays) is less than human vision 
dynamic range. Therefore, all quality enhancement methods 
change the intensity of pixels so as to provide optimal 
brightness, contrast and sharpness values. While brightness, 
contrast and sharpness may appear to be the simplest of 
image controls on the surface and may appear to be mutually 
exclusive controls, they are related and intertwined in such a 
way that changing any one of them can create quite complex 
effects in post-processed images. This specifies a wide 
variety of methods that have been proposed and are being 
created now – each of these methods seeks to solve the task 
of determining the image characteristics optimal values. A 
sample classification of medical image enhancement 
methods is shown in the Figure 1. [5][6][7][8] 
This paper presents a new image enhancement method 
for X-ray images. The method uses HDR-image creation as a 
technique to increase the image dynamic range. This allows 
after mapping HDR-image to LDR-image (low dynamic 
range image) to get a better distribution of the intensity over 
all pixels in the image.  The result is enhancing brightness, 
contrast and/or sharpness of images without the appearance 
of visible medical artefacts. 
This present paper is structured as follows: 
• Section II looks into the set of methods for HRD 
imaging  
• Section III presents the proposed new enhancement 
method 
• Section IV presents the implementation and analyses of 
the presented method 
• Section IV presents the conclusion.   
II. 
HDR IMAGING 
A set of methods in photography/imaging, supposed to 
capture/create greater dynamic range between the darkest 
and lightest image areas than current standard digital 
imaging methods, is named High Dynamic Range Imaging 
[2][3]. The human eye covers the dynamic range of about 
105:1 at one time and this is bigger than the top dynamic 
range of most real-world scenes. For comparison, computer 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

displays have dynamic range of 103:1 and digital cameras 
have dynamic range of 104:1. In the last two years HDR 
cameras with dynamic range just over normal human vision 
dynamic range and displays with near to human vision 
dynamic range began to appear on the market. 
The human vision can be accommodated to a dynamic 
range of 1014:1 but the iris is simply not as flexible and the 
human perception of intensity changes is logarithmic (the 
Weber law). This is much more than the capabilities of 
modern devices for image creation and visualization. 
Therefore, a non-HDR image device takes pictures at one 
exposure level with a limited contrast range. This leads to the 
loss of details in dark or bright image areas, depending on 
the camera exposure setting. HDR methods compensate 
detail loss by taking multiple pictures at different exposure 
levels and stitching them together to create an image which 
presents the greatest number of details in both dark and 
bright areas. Data stored in HDR-images typically 
corresponds to the physical values of luminance/radiance 
that can be observed in the real world and this presents a 
great difference from classical digital images: classical 
digital images represent intensities and colours that should 
appear on an output device (display, printer, plotter, etc.). 
Therefore, HDR image formats are called scene-referred 
while classical digital images are called device-referred. 
 
Figure 1.  Medical image enhancement methods classification. 
In photography dynamic range is measured in EV 
(Exposure Values) differences between the darkest and 
brightest parts of the image that show detail: an increase of 
1 EV is a doubling of the amount of light.  Using EVs not 
very strict categories of images are [4]: 
 
High Dynamic Range (HDR) images: These have a 
dynamic range of about 14EV and these images 
(they use 32-bit float values without limitation for 
channels bits depth) are usually produced by 
merging multiple 12-14 bit images of different 
exposures (most often these are raw data files). 
 
Medium Dynamic Range (MDR) images: These 
have a dynamic range of [9 EV, 12 EV] and can 
originate from a file with 16-bit depth, or by merging 
3 or more 8-bit images with different exposures. 
 
Low Dynamic Range (LDR) images: These have a 
dynamic range of lover than 8 EV. This means one 
8-bit image. 
III. 
OUR QUALITY ENHANCEMENT METHOD 
X-ray images are 12-14 bit grayscale images and their 
visual perception depends on the three most common image 
characteristics: brightness, contrast (local and global) and 
sharpness. Thus, when the image has no sufficient quality, 
this is the result of some incorrect values. As stored 
information in the grayscale images is the values for 
intensity of the image pixels, then all methods for quality 
enhancement are aimed at changing the pixel intensity as a 
way to change the basics characteristics of the image. This 
limits the opportunities for selection of optimal values, 
because a limited amount of information about the 
luminosity/radiance power stored as pixel intensity is used.  
The method proposed below uses a different approach to 
solve the issue of the optimal intensity distribution over 
image pixels.  Following this approach a model of the 
luminosity distribution is created instead, which has led to 
the current image. This is achieved by creating a HDR-image 
because 
it 
represents 
the 
description 
of 
the 
luminosity/radiance in the nature scene. After a HDR-image 
is created the method allows to determine the optimal 
mapping from a HDR-image to a LDR-image. 
To achieve the correct results, it is necessary to establish 
a correct luminosity model of the simulated scene. For the 
HDR-image this is achieved by correctly selected additional 
images with different exposure. In photography this is 
achieved through capturing a new image with a selected 
exposure. Here this is not applicable and the main problem is 
to obtain an image that is accurate enough to simulate 
changes in the original image after changing the exposure. 
From the image processing point of view increasing or 
decreasing the exposure changes the values of brightness, 
contrast and sharpness. Therefore, if the change of image 
pixels intensity resulting from the exposure change can be 
imitated, it can be used to simulate the image exposure 
change when a HDR-image is created. Our tests and analyses 
of results showed that for simulation a change in intensity a 
few different techniques can be used: using the brightness 
and the contrast control; using the gamma-correction; using 
the brightness and the contrast control followed by a gamma-
correction; using the gamma-correction followed by a 
brightness and contrast correction. 
 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Using the brightness and the contrast control 
One approach to solve the problem is based on the 
understanding that exposure change by 1 EV means doubling 
the amount of light. As the visual result is increasing of the 
pixels intensity for the entire image, the imitation of intensity 
shift requires calculation of brightness shift. Unfairness of 
this approach is that doubling the amount of light does not 
lead to doubling pixels intensity, because graphic devices 
and the characteristics of the created images reflect the 
human vision characteristics (logarithmic law for change of 
the intensity sensibility). Therefore, besides brightness there 
is also a considerable change in contrast.  
Tests to determine brightness and contrast values were 
conducted: X-rays are captured with different exposures 
(from -3 EV to +3 EV by a 0.5 EV step) and the difference 
between the real image and the simulated image is evaluated 
to select values for brightness and contrast – Table 1 shows 
the results obtained for brightness and contrast (values of 
brightness and contrast are between -100 and +100). An 
example of -1.5 EV exposure simulations is shown in 
Figure 2.  
TABLE I.  
EXPOSURE SIMULATION: GAMMA-CORRECTION VALUES 
 
Exposure (EV steps) 
 
-2.5 
-2 
-0.5 
-1 
-0.5 
Brightness 
 
-81 
-70 
-55 
-38 
-21 
Contrast 
 
-35 
-27 
-20 
-11 
-5 
 
Exposure (EV steps) 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
 
Brightness 
22 
40 
56 
71 
83 
 
Contrast 
6 
16 
26 
34 
46 
 
 
Figure 2.  Using brightness and contrast control: a) the original image; 
b) the image with +1.5 EV; c) the simulated image with -1.5 EV; d) the 
difference between images (b) and (c) - the histogram is  
stretched twice in order to see the difference. 
Our experiments show that simulation of exposures 
above 2.5 EV and below -2.5 EV is unrealistic and cannot be 
used for HDR-like image generation – when mapping to a 
LDR-image the result always contains medical artefacts. 
However, for bone X-rays, this approach gives very good 
simulations.  
B. Using the gamma-correction control 
Another way to simulate changing the intensity of pixels 
is by changing the gamma-correction.  
The difference between brightness and gamma-correction 
control is that increasing the value of gamma-correction can 
make the image to look brighter, but it is a non-linear change 
and it only increases brightness of the shadows and mid-
tones in the image without affecting the highlights. Our 
experiments showed that this is particularly useful for 
simulating the overexposed images or the lung X-rays.  
Another significant difference is the ability to simulate 
exposure values in the range [-5 EV, +5 EV]. Figure 3 shows 
an example from Figure 2, and Table 2 shows calculated 
values for gamma-correction. 
TABLE II.  
EXPOSURE SIMULATION: GAMMA-CORRECTION VALUES 
 
Exposure (EV steps) 
-3 
-2.5 
-2 
-0.5 
-1 
-0.5 
gamma-correction 
6.0 
4.9 
3.7 
2.8 
1.9 
1.3 
 
Exposure (EV steps) 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
3 
gamma-correction 
0.81 
0.71 
0.6 
0.52 
0.45 
0.4 
 
Figure 3.  Using gamma-correction control: a) the original image; b) the 
image with +1.5 EV; c) the simulated image with -1.5 EV; d) the difference 
between images (b) and (c) - the histogram is stretched twice. 
a. 
  b. 
 
c. 
  d. 
 
a. 
  b. 
 
c. 
  d. 
 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Using the brightness and the contrast control followed 
by gamma-correction 
The main disadvantage of using brightness and contrast 
control is the incorrect change of local contrast between lung 
structures and ribs. That is why we tested additional image 
correction – the gamma correction. The result is a significant 
improvement of the simulation - Figure 4 shows the example 
from Figure 2, but now with the new way of correction. 
Table 3 shows calculated values for simulation of an 
exposure change. 
 
Figure 4.  Using brightness and contrast control: a) the original image; 
b) the image with +1.5 EV; c) the simulated image with -1.5 EV; d) the 
difference between images (b) and (c) - the histogram is stretched 32 times. 
TABLE III.  
EXPOSURE SIMULATION: BRIGHTNESS AND CONTRAST 
FOLLOWED BY GAMMA-CORRECTION  
 
Exposure (EV steps) 
 
-2.5 
-2 
-0.5 
-1 
-0.5 
brightness 
 
-81 
-70 
-55 
-38 
-21 
contrast 
 
-35 
-27 
-20 
-11 
-5 
gamma-correction 
 
1.55 
1.34 
1.21 
1.12 
1.05 
 
Exposure (EV steps) 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
 
brightness 
22 
40 
56 
71 
83 
 
contrast 
6 
16 
26 
34 
46 
 
gamma-correction 
0.95 
0.87 
0.78 
0.66 
0.53 
 
D. Using the gamma-correction control followed by 
brightness and the contrast correction 
The last approach to create an exposure simulation is 
gamma-correction control followed by brightness and 
contrast correction. This approach differs from the previous 
one, because the operations are not commutative. When 
comparing the result with the second approach, it appears 
that in this case the lighter areas are correctly changed. The 
result is the best simulation of exposure change of an image - 
Figure 4 shows the example from Figure 2. Table 4 shows 
calculated values for simulation of an exposure change. 
Another advantage of the third approach is the possibility 
to simulate a much larger range of exposure values. 
 
Figure 5.  Using brightness and contrast control: a) an original image; 
b) an image with +1.5 EV; c) a simulated image with -1.5 EV; d) the 
difference between images (b) and (c) - the histogram is stretched 32 times. 
TABLE IV.  
EXPOSURE SIMULATION: GAMMA-CORRECTION CONTROL 
FOLLOWED BY BRIGHTNESS AND CONTRAST  CORRECTION 
 
Exposure (EV steps) 
-3 
-2.5 
-2 
-0.5 
-1 
-0.5 
brightness 
-52 
-41 
-26 
-13 
-4 
-2 
contrast 
-55 
-48 
-34 
-23 
-17 
-9 
gamma-correction 
6.0 
4.9 
3.7 
2.8 
1.9 
1.3 
 
Exposure (EV steps) 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
3 
brightness 
6 
14 
18 
22 
25 
27 
contrast 
7 
17 
24 
32 
38 
42 
gamma-correction 
0.81 
0.71 
0.6 
0.52 
0.45 
0.4 
IV. 
METHOD IMPLEMENTATION AND ANALYSIS OF 
RESULTS 
Using this method to enhance the X-ray quality gives a 
significant change even in the exposure values [0 EV, -0.5 
EV, +0.5 EV] but in general this is not the best combination 
of values.  
There are several different options for the number of 
LDR-images and their exposures from which the HDR-
image will be generated – most common are 3 LDR-images 
a. 
  b. 
 
c. 
  d. 
 
a. 
  b. 
 
c. 
  d. 
 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

with exposures [0 EV, -2 EV, +2 EV]. Our tests have shown 
that this set of exposures often leads to increased noise 
levels. So, as a standard set of exposure values, we used 
[0 EV, -1.5 EV, +1.5 EV]. This list of exposure values can 
be used in most cases, but for some specific purposes there 
are other parameters: 
 
In case of overexposed images, the best results are 
achieved with a set of 5 images with exposure values 
[0 EV, -1.5 EV, +1.5 EV, -2 EV, +2 EV].  
 
In case of underexposed images, the best results are 
obtained when using the set of exposure values [0 
EV, -1 EV, - 2.5 EV]. 
 
In case of X-rays of bones, good results are obtained 
with asymmetric values for the minimum and 
maximum exposure – for example [0 EV, -2 EV, +1 
EV]. This set increases details in lighter areas (like 
bone structures).  
 
In case of lung or soft tissues X-rays, good results 
are obtained with opposite asymmetric values for the 
minimum and maximum exposure – for example [0 
EV, -1 EV, +2 EV]. This set increases details in 
darker areas.  
 
In case of an image with a small dynamic range, a 
set of 5 images has to be used. This increases the 
details for all structures with different radiographic 
densities. 
Another major advantage of the proposed method is the 
ability to manage the transformation from a HDR-image to 
the final LDR-image. This allows an optimal image quality 
to be obtained without the occurrence of medical artefacts.  
The comparison of the results of the proposed method 
with other techniques showed that this method can help to 
obtain a major improvement in quality without the 
occurrence of medical artefacts. Especially important is the 
opportunity to use the same characteristics in all cases and 
always to get good quality – for example 5 images with 
exposure values [0 EV, -1.5 EV, +1.5 EV, -2 EV, +2 EV].  
A few examples of the method implementation and 
comparison with Laplacian pyramids filter and CLAHE are 
shown in Figure 6. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Image quality enhancement is very important because it 
increases readability and understandability of the analysed 
images, their details and structure. When the exploited for 
image generation model is known this increases possibilities 
to correct the image without generation of medical artefacts. 
The presented method for pseudo HRD enhancements of 
medical images enables increasing quality of understanding 
and information gathering.  
The next steps of this research are oriented to X-ray 
images of other body parts like bones, abdominal cavity, 
other soft tissues as well analyses of images from CT and 
other medical image sources. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is funded partially by the Bulgarian NSF under 
DO02/113 and DRNF02/3 projects.  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Arulmozhi, S.A. Perumal, K. Kannan, and S. Bharathi, 
“Contrast Improvement of Radiographic Images in Spatial 
Domain by Edge Preserving Filters,” IJCSNS International 
Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, Vol.10 
No.2, February 2010, pp. 233-240. 
[2] E. Reinhard, W. Heidrich, P. Debevec, and S. Pattanaik, High 
Dynamic Range Imaging: Acquisition, Display, and Image-
Based Lighting, 2nd Edition, Morgan Kaufmann, ISBN 978-
0123749147, 2010.  
[3] F. Banterle, A. Artusi, K. Debattista, and A. Chalmers, 
Advanced High Dynamic Range Imaging: Theory and 
Practice , A K Peters/CRC Press, ISBN 978-1568817194, 
2011  
[4] D. Nightingale, Practical HDR: A complete guide to creating 
High Dynamic Range images, 2nd edition, ISBN 978-
0240821221, 2011 
[5] R. Maini and  H. Aggarwal, A Comprehensive Review of 
Image  Enhancement Techniques, Journal of  Computing, 
Vol. 2, issue 3, March 2010, pp.8-13. 
[6] A. M. Trifas, Medical Image Enhancement, PhD Thesis, 
Louisiana State University and  Agricultural and Mechanical 
College, Dec. 2005. 
[7] Y. Abu Sadah, N. Al-Najdawi, and S. Tedmori, Exploiting 
Hybrid Methods for Enhancing Digital X-Ray Images, The 
International Arab Journal of Information Technology, Vol. 
10, No. 1, January 2013,28-32. 
[8] S.S. Bedi and R. Khandelwal, Various Image Enhancement 
Techniques - A Critical Review, International Journal of 
Advanced Research in Computer and Communication 
Engineering, Vol. 2, Issue 3, March 2013, pp.1605-1609.   
 
 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Comparison between our method, Laplacian pyramids and CLAHE: the proposed method improves contrast and details. 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Patient's rationale: Patient Knowledge retrieval from health forums 
 
S. Melzi, A. Abdaoui, J. Azé, S. Bringay, P. Poncelet 
LIRMM UM2 CNRS, UMR 5506  
161 rue Ada, 34095 Montpellier, France 
dermo_samo@hotmail.fr, abdaoui@lirmm.fr, 
Jerome.aze@lirmm.fr, bringay@lirmm.fr, 
pascal.poncelet@lirmm.fr 
F. Galtier 
CIC, CHU Saint Eloi, 80 avenue Augustin Fliche 34295 
Montpellier Cedex 5, France 
f-galtier@chu-montpellier.fr 
 
Abstract— Online health forums are areas of exchange where 
patients, on condition of anonymity, can speak freely on their 
personal experiences. These resources are a gold mine for 
health professionals—giving them access to patient to patient, 
patient to health professional and even health professional to 
health professional exchanges. In this study, we used text 
mining techniques to analyse health forums in order to extract 
emotions (e.g., joy, anger, surprise, etc.) expressed by patients. 
After a study of real messages, we demonstrate the difficulty of 
manual annotation due to the low level of agreement between 
humans. We propose a method to identify the polarity of a 
message and extract one or several emotions. This method was 
validated on a substantial real dataset. 
Keywords— Health forum analysis, emotion analysis 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Online health forums are areas of exchange where 
patients, on condition of anonymity, can speak freely about 
their personal experiences. Some examples are the very 
active forums, including healthforum.com[1], ehealthforum 
[2], 
which 
allow 
internet 
users 
(often 
non-health 
professionals) to exchange opinions on their health situation. 
Hancock [3] demonstrated that the ability to communicate 
anonymously via computers facilitates the expression of 
affective states such as emotions, opinions, doubts, risk fears, 
etc. These affective states are generally repressed in more 
traditional communication contexts, such as face to face 
interviews or when responding to surveys. These resources 
are a gold mine for health professionals—giving them access 
to patient to patient, patient to health professional and even 
health professional to health professional exchanges. For 
example, recently, the effects of new generation pills have 
been widely debated in French forums. This prompted some 
women to stop taking contraceptive pills, with a concomitant 
increase in abortions. Even if all patients do not use health 
forums, they represent a large and varied database of 
knowledge and patients’ perceptions on their illnesses and 
any healthcare they have received. In this highly subjective 
setting, the characterization and understanding of these 
perceptions is difficult but nevertheless particularly relevant 
for complementing and improving public health programs. 
As part of the French project called “Parlons de nous” 
(“Let’s talk about us”), we tried to combine different 
markers (emotions, risk fears, uncertainty, etc.) with respect 
to medical items (drugs, treatments, etc.) in order to identify 
common collocations (e.g., between mediator and fear). In 
this article, we focus on the identification of emotions as a 
specific sentiment analysis task. While many approaches 
have been proposed for the analysis of text polarity (positive 
and negative), few approaches focus on the analysis of 
feelings (joy, anger, sadness, etc.). From a corpus of 
messages collected on the English-language Spine Health 
website, we used the vocabulary of emotions of Mohammad 
and Turney [4] to automatically annotate messages. A part of 
the corpus was manually annotated by 60 annotators. Based 
on a study of the agreement between annotators, we were 
able to show that it was difficult, even for humans, to 
associate a particular emotion to a message. We decided to 
give two information items to health professionals: the 
polarity of the text (positive or negative) and associated 
emotions (e.g., joy). We looked for the best descriptors for 
these two items. Experiments on real datasets revealed the 
effectiveness of this approach and discussions with health 
professionals have shown the medical importance of 
identifying such information. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Section 
2, we identify the medical issues. In Section 3, we propose a 
first sentiment analysis categorization and recent methods. In 
Section 4, we describe the corpus used in our approach. The 
method we used is described in Section 5. In Section 6, we 
describe the main results. Finally, in Section 7, we conclude 
and give the main prospects. 
II. 
MOTIVATIONS 
As pointed out by Siegrist [5], one of the great challenges 
for health professionals is to capture patients’ satisfaction to 
answer the question "How can we improve our practice?". 
With this objective, Siegrist studied patients’ feedbacks after 
their stay in large American hospitals and turned them into 
raw data that could be tapped by the medical authorities for 
decision making. Using the forums as an object of study, we 
are getting closer to the patient private sphere. Indeed, 
patients express things in posts, they does not express in 
comments 
(even 
anonymous). 
However, 
precisely 
identifying the emotional state of patients through these 
messages is a difficult objective task and not always 
verifiable, as discussed by Quirk [6]. However, we could 
consider using these large amounts of emotionally-charged 
texts to construct indicators that are relevant for health 
professionals. An example of such an application is "We feel 
fine" [7]. This tool queries the web with the aim of assessing 
users’ moods. Every 10 minutes, the application considers 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

sentences with emotional words and performs statistical 
calculations based on the type of feelings, age, gender, etc. 
An example of application is dedicated to pharmaceutical 
companies. They monitor the social web in general to 
identify texts in which patients talk about their medications 
and measure the associated emotional states. This feedback 
can 
help 
them 
improve 
their 
products 
or 
their 
communication about these products. Another example 
concerns the physicians who want to know the patients fears 
about the prescribed treatments. This feedback can help them 
to improve their communications to patients. 
The (semi-)automatic analysis of forums is difficult from 
a technological standpoint. Most (semi)-automatic methods 
used in the health domain are applied to publications and 
hospital reports. Adapting these methods to messages from 
social media like forums is not simple at all. Such messages 
are written by patients in rather a loose style. They vary in 
size (between a hundred and a thousand characters). They 
contain 
non-standard 
grammatical 
structures, 
many 
misspellings, abbreviations, emotion-rich expressions as well 
as emotion-rich words (I love, I hate), unconventional lay-
out, e.g., repeated use of capital letters (TIRED), 
unconventional spelling (enoooooough), and punctuation 
repetition (!!!!!!!!), slang words that are (or not) specific to 
the forum or the topic (LOL vs. IVF) and emoticons (:-)). 
Message volumes are generally very high (in the French 
forum dedicated to breast cancer on the Doctissimo site, 
there are more than 3,300 threads, some of which contain 
more than 2,000 replies). Finally, the processing of health 
forum data based on semi-automatic information extraction 
methods is a significant technological challenge. 
III. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Sentiment analysis has been widely studied since the 
early 2000s. Many communities are interested in this area 
and their definitions and interpretations are highly varied 
(e.g., psychology, social sciences, computational linguistics, 
natural language processing, data mining, etc.). Sentiment 
analysis involves the extraction of emotional states expressed 
or implied in texts [8]. It includes the following tasks: 
1. Subjectivity analysis [9] focuses on the detection of 
feelings based on subjective expressions or words; 
2. Polarity analysis [10] focuses on the detection of 
positive and negative polarity of texts; 
3. Emotional analysis [11] focuses on the emotional 
category of texts (e.g., anger, disgust, fear, etc.) 
4. Intensity analysis [12] focuses on different levels of 
polarity or emotion intensity (e.g., very positive, very sad, 
etc.). These approaches offer a more precise granularity of 
expressed opinions and emotions. 
We focus on the third task. Like most semi-automatic 
methods in the literature, we use the typology of emotions 
defined by Ekman [13], which describes six emotions, but 
many other typologies also exist ([14]; [15]; [16]). 
The methods used to analyse feelings are numerous and 
generally specific to the text type, e.g., tweets [17], press 
titles [18], etc., and application areas, e.g., social media 
analysis 
[19], 
gender 
impact 
in 
negotiations 
[20], 
identification of suicidal emails [21]. 
For all studied sentiment analysis tasks (polarity and 
emotions), most previous studies focus either on the creation 
of resources to describe feelings or on the use of these 
resources to classify texts according to sentiments. In the 
first category, most methods associate texts with emotional 
word resources. Most of these resources have been compiled 
for English texts and polarity analysis, e.g., General Inquirer 
[22], Linguistic Inquiry and Word count [23], MicroWNOp 
[24], sentiwordnet [25]. More specific resources, such as the 
DAL dictionary [26], Wordnet affect [27] or the lexicon of 
Mohammad and Turney [4] were created for emotional 
words. There are also approaches for extending these 
vocabularies for specific application domains by building 
manual rules [28], or identifying co-occurring words with 
words already identified as denoting emotions through large 
corpora [29] or the web [30]. For classification, most 
approaches use machine learning techniques based on 
specific attributes, including emotion words ([31]; [18]) to 
build a statistical model from a corpus of texts and use it to 
detect feelings in other texts. 
While many of these methods are effective on large text 
corpora, they are limited in the case of short texts such as 
tweets or specific texts as in health forums. In our study, 
these limitations were mainly due to the subjectivity of the 
annotation task, as we describe in Section 4.2. 
IV. 
CORPUS 
A. Data collection and  annotation 
We built a corpus from 17,000 messages collected in the 
English-language Spine-health forum. We automatically 
annotated the corpus with the vocabulary of emotions of 
Mohammad and Turney [4]. This lexicon consists of more 
than 14,000 entries characterized by their polarity and 
associated with 8 emotions. In this work, we consider only 6 
emotions (Ekman, 1992): anger, disgust, fear, joy, sadness 
and surprise. 
Each word in the lexicon could be associated with several 
emotions (e.g., the word abandoned was associated with the 
emotions fear, anger and sadness). This automatic annotation 
enabled us to filter 22% of the messages (not containing 
emotion words). In order to focus only on emotions 
associated with medical items, we used MeSH to identify 
medical units in the text, which allowed us to filter messages 
without any medical references (6% of messages). In a 
message, many emotions were usually expressed because the 
messages were relatively long. We therefore chose to 
segment the messages in sentences. We finally kept 3,000 
sentences to constitute an Automatically Annotated Corpus 
(AAC) and labelled sentences with several emotions by the 
most frequent one (re-annotation step). 
A subset of this corpus (600 sentences) was manually 
annotated by 60 non-health professionals, i.e. basically 
Master’s students and computer science researchers from our 
lab. We called this the Manually Annotated Corpus (MAC). 
We thus set up a web-based platform. Unlike Strapparava 
and Mihalcea [18] who used an interface to annotate and 
capture many emotions through an emotion-intensity cursor, 
we decided to simplify the task and asked the annotators to 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

identify only the presence of emotions expressed in the texts. 
Each sentence was pre-labelled automatically via the 
lexicon, the corresponding emotion was shown by default 
but could be unchecked if the annotator believed that it was 
not expressed in the sentence. If the sentence did not express 
any emotion, all emotions were to be unchecked. Finally, if 
the annotator could not decide, "I do not know" was selected. 
Table 1 shows the distribution of sentences in both 
corpora according to six emotional categories. The AAC 
corpus was clearly unbalanced and both fear and sadness 
emotions were best represented. In the MAC corpus, 45% of 
the sentences were annotated as neutral (no emotion) and 9% 
were undecidable. We also noted after the re-annotation that 
the MAC corpus was better balanced than the AAC corpus. 
However, surprise was very poorly represented. 
TABLE I.  
PERCENTAGE OF SENTENCES IN BOTH AAC AND MAC 
CORPORA ACCORDING TO 8 CATEGORIES (J – JOY, SU - SURPRISE, F - FEAR, 
A - ANGER SA - SADNESS, D - DISGUST, N - NEUTRAL, DK - DO NOT 
KNOW) BEFORE AND AFTER RE-ANNOTATION. 
AAC 
J 
Su 
F 
A 
Sa 
D 
N 
DK 
Before 
22 
14 
39 
22 
39 
18 
/ 
/ 
After 
13 
4 
33 
9 
35 
6 
/ 
/ 
MAC 
J 
Su 
F 
A 
Sa 
D 
N 
DK 
Before 
10 
4 
17 
13 
19 
14 
45 
9 
After 
14 
6 
23 
14 
25 
18 
0 
0 
 
B. Between-annotator agreement 
We used the Kappa measure to assess the between-
annotator agreement. For this, 150 sentences from the MAC 
were annotated by two non-professional annotators. We got a 
Kappa of 0.26, which clearly shows that the agreement 
between annotators was very low. In addition, we measured 
the agreement between health professional annotators and 
non-professionals for the same 150 sentences and obtained a 
moderate agreement of 0.46. This preliminary experiment 
highlighted the difficulty of the manual annotation task. 
Moreover, the disagreement between annotators was mainly 
due to the variability between people and not their sensitivity 
to health (professional vs. non-professional). 
A first bias, already identified by [32], was in considering 
the perspective of the annotator/reader likely differed 
markedly from that of the author of the message. Indeed, 
health forum posts treat topics such as disease, treatment, etc. 
This information is negative by nature and most of the 
annotators, by empathy, associated an emotion such as 
sadness to factual information such as the description of a 
diagnosis. For example, the sentence "I am also HLA-B27 
negative, so was diagnosed with a spondyloarthropathy" was 
annotated as sad in our corpus, although it contained a 
factual diagnosis. A second bias concerned the fact that the 
corpus was in English, while the annotators were native 
French-speakers. Furthermore, by studying sentences with 
gaps in the annotations, we noticed that it was easier to 
identify the polarity than the emotion. It was also easier to 
predict positive emotions than negative emotions because 
negative emotions share very similar vocabulary. We also 
noted that surprise was the hardest emotion to identify, as 
also noted by Strapparava and Mihalcea [18] who argue that 
surprise is not often taken into account in studies of emotions 
as it is neutral in nature. For example, the sentence "I 
discovered its effect on me the hard way, hugging the toilet 
after a painful back procedure, ugh!" None of our annotators 
considered the emotion surprise, despite the presence of the 
word "discover".  
The quality of our annotated corpus was actually quite 
questionable. Indeed, the annotators were not sufficiently 
coached with specific instructions to avoid the biases 
mentioned above. Tests of internal consistency (inter-
individual reproducibility) would have to be done to assess if 
the annotators were consistent over time. Another possibility 
would be to get several annotators to annotate sentences and 
choose labels by majority vote. Finally, even with its 
drawbacks, this study gave a relatively clear picture of the 
difficulties involved in obtaining a qualitative corpus and the 
methodology to improve its quality. Based on these findings, 
we then decided to compare the results obtained with the 
AAC and MAC corpus, knowing that most of the methods of 
the state of the art only use AAC corpus. We evaluate 
different methods to characterize forum texts based on: 1) a 
two-category classification to identify the polarity of 
emotions; 2) a multi-category classification for six emotions: 
a sentence could only be associated with a single emotion 
class. Surprise was eliminated because of its neutrality. This 
typology is similar to that described by Roberts [17]; 3) a 
multi-label classification allowed us to associate a sentence 
to several emotion classes. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 
Our approach relies on a classification method based on 
attributes such as unigrams, bigrams and specific attributes, 
defined to capture traces of emotions in messages. It consists 
of two steps: 1) pre-processing of sentences from messages, 
and 2) classification of these sentences. Evaluation of the 
results depends on the classification performed. 
Pre-treatments: forum posts are specific in the sense 
that the words used are not necessarily found in conventional 
dictionaries 
(slang, 
special 
formatting, 
abbreviations, 
emoticons, etc.). It is therefore necessary to standardize them 
by generalizing their content. To do this, we applied the pre-
processing procedure outlined in Table 2 and corresponding 
to the chain set up by (Balahur, 2013) for tweets. 
TABLE II.  
APPLIED PRE-PROCESSING 
Pre-processing 
Example 
Resource 
Repeated punctuation 
!!!! 
/ 
Specific layout 
TIRED 
/ 
Emoticon 
:-) 
/ 
Slang 
2mr > Tomorrow 
Chatslang.com 
Emotional words 
Fear 
Mohammad’s lexicon [4] 
Classification: We used the following attributes in order 
to find the best emotion descriptors: 
– Attributes based on N-Grams (U, U+B): Unigrams, 
Unigrams and Bigrams; 
– Emotion words (EW): if a sentence contains two words 
corresponding to the emotion joy, it takes the value 2 for the 
corresponding attribute; 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

– Smileys (SMI): all emoticons (:-):-(...) were classified 
according to the six emotions. If a sentence contains a smiley 
related to joy, it takes the value 1 for the corresponding 
attribute; 
- Amplifiers (AM): These attributes correspond to 
punctuation (!,?...), repeated letters (looool) and capitalized 
words (HATE). If a sentence contains such elements, it takes 
the value 1 for the corresponding attribute; 
- The emotion context (CONT): we used two attributes 
that we call neighbour emotion and overall emotion. The 
first attribute is true if the sentence that precedes or follows 
the sentence expresses the same emotion and the overall 
feeling is the true value if there is another sentence in the 
message that expresses the same emotion. 
Like Bechet [33], we enriched the attributes with patterns 
obtained using a sequential pattern algorithm (PAT). For 
this, we used the MeSH medical thesaurus to identify 
medical words (labelled MW), the lexicon of emotion words 
(labelled EW) to identify traces of emotions and a 
lemmatizer for grammatical category words (labelled JJ, NN, 
VV, MD, etc.). Each sentence was then considered as a 
sequence of itemsets corresponding to a combination of 
these three labels. We then used the GSP algorithm [34] to 
obtain frequent patterns, i.e. frequent sequences. We used 
only those containing at least one label for a medical entity 
and another label for an emotion word. These patterns were 
then used as attributes. A sentence was labelled true for a 
pattern if its syntactic form fit the pattern. Figure 1 
summarizes the protocol for obtaining patterns. 
 
Initial sentence: 
Chronic pain may cause secondary depression 
 
Emotional and Medical word tagging: 
Chronic/MW 
pain/EW/MW 
may 
cause 
secondary 
depression/EW/MW 
 
Grammatical tagging: 
Chronic/MW/JJ 
pain/EW/MW/NN 
may/MD 
cause/VV 
secondary/JJ depression/EW/MW/NN 
 
Sequence: 
MW/JJ EW/MW/NN MD VV JJ EW/MW/NN 
Figure 1.   Sequence definition 
Evaluation: The quality of the two-class classification 
was evaluated using the standard precision measurements P 
(percentage of correct predictions), recall R (percentage of 
correct labels found by the system) and F-measure F 
(harmonic mean of precision and recall). For multi-class 
classification, we calculate both the average Fmi at a micro 
level (R and P were calculated by constructing the overall 
contingency table) and Fma at a macro level (R and P were 
calculated for each class and averaged). For multi-label 
classification, other metrics were needed. Indeed, if we took, 
for example, a sentence belonging to both classes sadness 
and anger, the system could predict: sadness and anger (the 
prediction was correct), sadness (the prediction was partially 
correct) and disgust (the prediction was wrong). So there 
were degrees of possible misclassification. Other measures 
[35] were then used such as the Hamming loss HL (accuracy 
for each class averaged per class), accuracy A (averaged for 
all examples) and macro F-measure Fma. 
VI. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
We used implementations of Weka for bi-class and 
multi-class 
classification 
and 
Meka 
for 
multi-label 
classification. We used the SMO implementation of the 
SVM classifier of Weka with default settings. We used the 
CC chain classification implemented in Meka for multi-label 
classification. We used two datasets: MAC and AAC 
corpora (considering that the majority emotion label set after 
automatic annotation was the class to predict). We carried 
out a cross-validation (10-fold) and used the attributes 
described in Section 5. Table 3 presents the AAC corpus 
results. We do not present the MAC corpus results which 
were similar that seems to suggest that even with the 
previsous limitations mentioned in Section IV.B, the MAC 
corpus has at least the same quality as the corpus used in the 
literature and obtained automatically from emotional word 
ressources. 
TABLE III.  
COMPARISON OF RESULTS OBTAINED ACCORDING TO A SET 
OF ATTRIBUTES USING THE AAC CORPUS 
 
Bi-class 
M-class 
M-labels 
Attributes 
R 
P 
F 
Fmi 
Fma 
HL 
A  
Fma 
U 
U+B 
U+B+EW 
U+B+EW+SM+AM 
U+B+EW+CONT 
U+B+EW+PAT 
62.7 
65.9 
66.3 
53.4 
53.6 
66.2 
57.8 
61.5 
64.1 
52.4 
45.5 
65.2 
60.1 
63.6 
65.1 
52.9 
49.2 
65.7 
24.4 
24.8 
27.3 
23.4 
25.2 
26.1 
23.2 
22.3 
25.1 
20.7 
22.5 
25.8 
0.24 
0.14 
0.12 
0.25 
0.22 
0.15 
51.5 
58.3 
61.4 
55.5 
55.4 
58.2 
58.2 
59.3 
61.8 
55.8 
57.6 
62.4 
 
The bi-class classification gave the best results, which 
seemed fairly consistent because the two classes were better 
represented. This task was also easier for human annotators. 
Multi-label classification gave better results than the multi-
class classification because one example could be associated 
with multiple classes. Moreover, we detected only little 
differences between the micro and macro F-measures for 
multi-class classifications, which suggests that all classes 
were hard to identify. These results should be compared with 
the inter-annotator agreement (see section 4.2). In both cases, 
the task was difficult, but the semi-automatic method seemed 
to detect patterns more systematically, except in specific 
cases such as irony. 
We could also conclude that the best descriptors were a 
combination of unigram and bigram with emotion words (U 
+ B + EW). Taking smileys and amplifiers into account did 
not improve the classification. Indeed, smileys were often 
used for irony, which was not captured by considering their 
presence in the sentence. For example, the sentence "I 
stopped working in 1/09 and kind a thought that at some 
point I would get better, in hindsight, also rather dumb:-) 
instead of picking up the pace of getting worse significantly" 
was automatically associated with the label joy because of 
the smiley:-),  even though it was used by the patient to 
indicate his bitterness. A simple improvement consists in 
changing the polarity of the smiley if in the near context 
there is a contradictory polarity. 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Similarly, the context was not an attractive attribute. 
Indeed, messages were often long (7 sentences on average in 
our corpus) and contained many feelings (more than 6 
emotions in 41% of the messages). Two consecutive 
sentences often contained different uncorrelated emotions. 
Finally, patterns were also ineffective because they were too 
general. They could easily be used to improve the accuracy if 
we define them by class of emotion. 
Note that when the classifiers were wrong, they often 
placed the sample in a "close" class, with the same polarity. 
These incorrect predictions were due to the fact that the 
classes shared many words (such as anger, disgust and 
sadness). Dictionaries and lemmatizers are used as resources, 
so the method could easily be applied for other languages 
using similar resources. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
Here we describe a method for analysing emotions in 
health forums. The main challenge was the acquisition of 
annotated data, and this step will be further improved. For 
the extraction of emotions, we compared different attributes 
for different classification tasks (two-class, multi-class and 
multilabel) and showed that the most effective were a 
combination of unigrams and bigrams and emotion words for 
classification bi-classes. However, suggesting a precise label, 
despite the precision obtained, could be relevant for the 
health care professionals involved in such studies. 
[36]Prospects associated with this work are numerous. 
From the emotion analysis standpoint, we will apply our 
method on larger datasets not specific to health, such as the 
SemEval challenge [37] and compare our method with other 
published methods such as SWAT [38], uPAR [31] and UA 
[30]. We will also take shifters into account. Indeed, Smith 
and Lee [36] showed that the polarity of a term is often 
modified by the context surrounding it, including markers of 
negation. In the sentence "This treatment does not make her 
happy", the negation changes the polarity of the sentence 
from positive to negative. In the case of emotions, it is harder 
to understand the impact of these shifters because there are 
close links between emotions, such as between the failure to 
be happy and to be sad. For this, more complex emotion 
models should be used, such as SentiSens [39] which takes 
the relationship between emotions into account (e.g., hate vs. 
love). In addition, we will build a lexicon of emotion words 
specific to our area, as proposed by Carrillo de Albornoz 
[39]. For this, several options are considered. Smith and Lee 
[36] used Wordnet [40] to associate new words with words 
already associated with an emotion based on the relationship 
"similar to" for adjectives and hyponymy for nouns and 
verbs. Inspired by the Turney and Littman approach [41], it 
is also possible to search for frequently co-occurring 
adjectives (or other grammatical forms) using the web or 
large corpora [30]. We will also validate the genericity of our 
approach on a French corpus. Indeed, our method relies 
solely on lexicons and a stemming tool. Finally, the 
attributes used in our study are focused on the expression of 
emotions through the lexicon and not through the syntax or 
through other discourse markers. An improvement would be 
to integrate these aspects, although complex rhetorical 
constructions are not frequent in the studied forums. 
We also identified issues related to the field of 
application. The spine-health forum is specialised in the 
topic of "pain" and discusses a pathology which is a disease 
of the elderly. The nature of the text message is closely 
related to these two factors (little smileys or slang, little 
expressions of joy, etc.). To explore other feelings, we need 
to diversify the themes of the studied forums. Once the 
emotions are identified, many applications can be envisaged. 
The discovery of novelties such as medical associations 
between medical entities and emotional markers can be used 
for informational searches by laboratories (e.g., what 
patients think of this medicine?), physicians (e.g., what 
patients think of this operation?), patients, etc. More 
generally, emotion searches could be used to model 
variations in emotions over time. For example, over time we 
frequently observed changes in the emotions of patients, e.g., 
"fear and surprise", "surprised and angry", etc. Furthermore, 
we could study the influence of the media on the patients’ 
emotion changes, e.g., the case of the third generation pill. 
Another 
application 
might 
be 
to 
identify 
patients 
communities based on the expressed emotions. For 
example, in the debate about the effects of new generation 
pills, it was noticed that many of the comments were related 
to religious beliefs. This information is essential for 
moderators. This applications list is not exhaustive. 
Identification of emotions is a step toward these 
applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is based on studies supported by the Maison 
des Sciences de l’Homme de Montpellier (MSH-M) within 
the framework of the French project Let’s talk about us 
(Parlons de nous) [42]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
“healthforum.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.healthforum.com/. [Accessed: 05-Jan-2014]. 
[2] 
“ehealthforum.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://ehealthforum.com/. [Accessed: 05-Jan-2014]. 
[3] 
 J. T. Hancock, C. Toma, and N. Ellison, “The truth 
about lying in online dating profiles,” in Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 2007, 
pp. 449–452. 
[4] 
 S. M. Mohammad and P. D. Turney, “Emotions Evoked 
by Common Words and Phrases : Using Mechanical Turk to 
Create an Emotion Lexicon,” in Workshop on Computational 
Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text, 
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2010, pp. 26–34. 
[5] 
 J. Siegrist, Emotions and Health in Occupational Life: 
New Scientific Findings and Policy Implications : Inauguration 
Speech Belle Van Zuylen Professorship. Universiteit Utrecht, 
1994. 
[6] 
 R. Quirk, A Comprehensive grammar of the english 
language. London [etc.]: Longman, 1985. 
[7] 
 S. D. Kamvar and J. Harris, “We feel fine and searching 
the emotional web,” in ACM International conference on Web 
search and data mining, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 117–126. 
[8] 
 B. Liu, Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining, vol. 5. 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2012. 
[9] 
 J. Wiebe, T. Wilson, and C. Cardie, “Annotating 
expressions of opinions and emotions in language,” Language 
Resources and Evaluation, vol. 39, no. issue 2–3, pp. 165–210, 
2005. 
[10] 
 E. Boiy, P. Hens, K. Deschacht, and M.-F. Moens, 
“Automatic sentiment analysis in on-line text,” in 11th 
International Conference on Electronic Publishing, Vienna, 
Austria, 2007, pp. 349–360. 
[11] 
 C. Lu, J. Hong, and S. Cruz-lara, “Emotion Detection in 
Textual Information by Semantic Role Labeling and Web Mining 
Techniques,” 
in 
Third 
Taiwanese-French 
Conference 
on 
Information Technology - TFIT 2006, Nancy, France, 2006. 
[12] 
 M. Mulder, A. Nijholt, M. D. Uyl, and P. Terpstra, “A 
lexical grammatical implementation of affect,” in 7th International 
Conference on Text, Speech & Dialogue, Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 
171–177. 
[13] 
 P. Ekman, “An argument for basic emotions,” Cognition 
and emotion, vol. 6, no. 3–4, pp. 169–200, 1992. 
[14] 
 R. Plutchik, “A general psychoevolutionary theory of 
emotion,” in Emotion: Theory, research, and experience: Vol. 1. 
Theories of emotion, R. Plutchik and H. Kellerman, Eds. New 
York: Academic press, 1980, pp. 3–33. 
[15] 
 L. Pearl and M. Steyvers, “Identifying emotions, 
intentions, and attitudes in text using a game with a purpose,” in 
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Analysis and 
Generation of Emotion in Text, USA, 2010, pp. 71–79. 
[16] 
 V. Francisco and P. Gervás, “Automated mark up of 
affective information in english texts,” in 9th international 
conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2006, pp. 375–382. 
[17] 
 K. Roberts, M. A. Roach, J. Johnson, J. Guthrie, and S. 
M. Harabagiu, “EmpaTweet: Annotating and Detecting Emotions 
on Twitter,” in Eight International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, Istanbul, Turkey, 23-25. 
[18] 
 C. Strapparava and R. Mihalcea, “Learning to identify 
emotions in text,” in Symposium on Applied Computing, New 
York, NY, USA, 2008, pp. 1556–1560. 
[19] 
 A. Balahur, “Sentiment Analysis in Social Media 
Texts,” in 4th Workshop on Computational Approaches to 
Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, Atlanta, 
Georgia, 2013, pp. 120–128. 
[20] 
 B. Boneva, R. Kraut, and D. Frohlich, “Using E-mail for 
Personal Relationships The Difference Gender Makes,” American 
Behavioral Scientist, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 530–549, Jan. 2001. 
[21] 
 J. P. Pestian, P. Matykiewicz, M. Linn-Gust, B. South, 
O. Uzuner, J. Wiebe, K. B. Cohen, J. Hurdle, C. Brew, and others, 
“Sentiment analysis of suicide notes: A shared task,” Biomedical 
Informatics Insights, vol. 5, no. Suppl. 1, p. 3, 2012. 
[22] 
 P. J. Stone, D. C. Dunphy, M. S. Smith, and D. M. 
Ogilvie, The General Inquirer: A Computer Approach to Content 
Analysis. MIT Press, 1966. 
[23] 
 Y. R. Tausczik and J. W. Pennebaker, “The 
Psychological Meaning of Words: LIWC and Computerized Text 
Analysis Methods,” Journal of Language and Social Psychology - 
J LANG SOC PSYCHOL, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 24–54, 2010. 
[24] 
 S. 
Cerini, 
V. 
Compagnoni, 
A. 
Demontis, 
M. 
Formentelli, and G. Gandini, “Language resources and linguistic 
theory: 
Typology, 
second 
language 
acquisition, 
English 
linguistics.,” A. Sansò, Ed. Milano, IT, 2007. 
[25] 
 S. 
Baccianella, 
A. 
Esuli, 
and 
F. 
Sebastiani, 
“SentiWordNet 3.0: An Enhanced Lexical Resource for Sentiment 
Analysis and Opinion Mining.,” in LREC, 2010, vol. 10, pp. 2200–
2204. 
[26] 
 C. Whissell, The dictionary of affect in language. 
Academic Press, 1989. 
[27] 
 C. Strapparava and A. Valitutti, “WordNet-Affect: an 
affective extension of WordNet,” in Proc. of 4th International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Lisbon, 2004, 
pp. 1083–1086. 
[28] 
 A. Neviarouskaya, H. Prendinger, and M. Ishizuka, 
“Affect analysis model: Novel rule-based approach to affect 
sensing from text,” Natural Language Engineering, vol. 17, no. 1, 
pp. 95–135, Jan. 2011. 
[29] 
 A. Harb, M. Plantié, G. Dray, M. Roche, F. Trousset, 
and P. Poncelet, “Web Opinion Mining : How to extract opinions 
from blogs ? Categories and Subject Descriptors,” in International 
conference on Soft Computing as Transdisciplinary Science and 
Technology, 2008. 
[30] 
 Z. Kozareva, B. Navarro, S. Vazquez, and A. Montoyo, 
“UA-ZBSA: a headline emotion classification through web 
information,” in 4th International Workshop on Semantic 
Evaluations, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2007, pp. 334–337. 
[31] 
 F. Chaumartin, “UPAR7 : A knowledge-based system 
for headline sentiment tagging,” in 4th International Workshop on 
Semantic Evaluations, Prague, Czech Republic, 2007, pp. 422–
425. 
[32] 
 M. Sokolova and V. Bobicev, “Sentiments and Opinions 
in Health-related Web messages,” in RANLP, 2011, pp. 132–139. 
[33] 
 N. Béchet, P. Cellier, T. Charnois, B. Crémilleux, and S. 
Quiniou, “SDMC : un outil en ligne d’extraction de motifs 
séquentiels pour la fouille de textes,” in Conférence Francophone 
sur l’Extraction et la Gestion des Connaissances, Toulouse, 
France, 2013. 
[34] 
 M. Zhang, B. Kao, C.-L. Yip, and D. Cheung, “A GSP-
based efficient algorithm for mining frequent sequences,” in Proc. 
of IC-AI, 2001, pp. 497–503. 
[35] 
 J. Read, B. Pfahringer, G. Holmes, and E. Frank, 
“Classifier Chains for Multi-label Classification,” in European 
Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in 
Databases: Part II, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 254–269. 
[36] 
 P. Smith and M. Lee, “A CCG-Based Approach to Fine-
Grained Sentiment Analysis in Microtext,” in AAAI Spring 
Symposium: Analyzing Microtext, 2013. 
[37] 
 C. Strapparava and R. Mihalcea, “SemEval-2007 Task 
14: Affective Text,” in Proceedings of the 4th International 
Workshop on Semantic Evaluations, USA, 2007, pp. 70–74. 
[38] 
 P. Katz, M. Singleton, and R. Wicentowski, “SWAT-
MP: the SemEval-2007 systems for task 5 and task 14,” in 4th 
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations, Stroudsburg, 
PA, USA, 2007, pp. 308–313. 
[39] 
 J. Carrillo de Albornoz, L. Plaza, and P. Gervás, 
“SentiSense: An easily scalable concept-based affective lexicon for 
sentiment analysis,” in 8th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, Istanbul, Turkey, 23-25. 
[40] 
 G. A. Miller, “WordNet: A Lexical Database for 
English,” Commun. ACM, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 39–41, Nov. 1995. 
[41] 
 P. D. Turney and M. L. Littman, “Measuring praise and 
criticism: Inference of semantic orientation from association,” 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), vol. 21, no. 4, 
pp. 315–346, 2003. 
[42] 
“Maison des Sciences de l’Homme de Montpellier. 
Parlons de nous,” 07-Jan-2013. Available: http://www.msh-
m.fr/programmes/programmes-2013/parlons-de-nous/ 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Context-Oriented Data Processing for Homecare Application  
 
 
Mirvat Makssoud 
Doctoral School of Sciences and Technology 
Lebanese University 
Tripoli, Lebanon 
abbaskarine@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—Due to growing numbers of elderly and increase in 
chronic diseases, many homecare systems have been proposed 
in order to improve the quality of care and social assistance 
services. These systems are based on using advanced 
technologies such as sensors in order to ensure a continual 
patient’s monitoring and support contextual information 
provided anywhere and at any time. Effectiveness and 
efficiency of homecare solution depends on the capability of 
processing the large amount of data acquired through sensors 
in a continual basis.  This paper addresses this issue and 
proposes an extensible approach aiming to process and filter 
data in real time in order to distinguish between normal and 
abnormal situations, detect alarm conditions and store only 
relevant information. To process data and take into account 
patient’s physiological and environmental changes, a sensors-
based context model and context-based rules are defined.  
Keywords—Context 
model; 
homecare 
system; 
rules 
management; sensors; data filtering; alarm situations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, face to growing numbers of elderly and 
increase in chronic diseases, many homecare applications 
have been proposed in order to improve the quality of care 
and social assistance services [1][2]. Financially, living in a 
smart home is preferable to living in a nursing home, which 
is quite expensive [3]. These applications integrate various 
advanced information and communication technologies such 
as sensors [4], wireless communication, ubiquitous 
computing [5], etc., which support ubiquitous information 
provided anywhere at home and at any time in order to 
ensure 
a 
continual 
patient’s 
monitoring. 
However, 
effectiveness and efficiency of long-term condition care 
depends on the capability of processing data gathered in 
continual basis and proposing adequate services to the 
patient.  
This situation confronts us with various challenges:     
(1) sensors generate a large amount of data in a continual 
basis, (2) data are not all necessary for use, (3) data should 
be analyzed immediately when received in order to detect 
alarm situations, (4) data should be filtered at home to 
eliminate irrelevant data before being transferred to health 
care professionals, and (5) sensors can change according to 
the development of the patient’s situation. 
In light of these challenges, we are proposing a home 
care solution capable of processing data locally at home. 
The motivation of this research is to design an approach 
aiming to filter data according the patient’s care needs. It 
provides an extensible prototype for monitoring and 
handling sensed data. This approach is based on using 
sensors in order to collect data on the patient’s everyday 
life. For this, managing the context in which the patient 
lives becomes a primordial requirement in order to support 
any changes in the patient’s status and environment. 
The prototype we develop will be implemented in a local 
application located in the patient’s home for two reasons. 
Firstly, data have to be filtering locally in order to send only 
useful information to health professionals. Secondly, critical 
situations should be taken into account immediately in the 
form of available services without waiting for the opinion of 
a health professional.  
This work is considered as a first phase of a complete 
project capable of processing data or external requests (for 
example, from professional health care) in order to propose 
and manage personalized services according to the patient’s 
needs and preferences. To release this goal, the prototype 
we develop should be generic and extensible in order to 
cover all patients’ needs and to adapt to any patients’ 
preferences.  
In this research, three processes are identified: alarm, 
storage and delete processes. Defined context-based rules 
are used for separating between normal and abnormal data 
and analyzing normal data in order to make decision to store 
useful information and reject useless data.    
We note that we are not concerned to collect data from 
sensors. We suppose that data are available to be processed 
in an exploitable format. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses 
related works. Section 3 presents the architecture of the 
system. Section 4 discusses about the modeling of context 
model based on using sensors. Section 5 presents the 
modeling of different rules useful for filtering data. Section 
6 explains the data acquisition process. Section 7 shows the 
different steps for data processing mechanism. We will end 
the paper with a conclusion and future works. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Nowadays, many researchers have been interested in 
elderly and dependent people needs, particularly in Europe 
[6], and proposed homecare systems such as Ambient-
assisted Living [7], Remote patient monitoring [8], location 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tracking, patient behavior modeling, etc. in order to 
recommend adequate solutions related to long-term 
monitoring of patient’s activity and homecare assistance [9].  
This convergence of homecare systems enables elderly 
and dependent people to stay at home and receive human 
care in a much quicker and easier manner [10][11]. These 
systems have mainly focused on the patient’s data 
acquisition through data monitoring devices such as sensors 
placed either directly on the patient’s body for collecting 
individual data (temperature, heart rate, oximetry, etc.) or at 
the patient’s environment for detecting distress situations 
(patient falling, fire, abnormal movement, etc.) [12]. Sensed 
data are then transferred to a central server via wireless 
communication technology to be analyzed by medical 
professionals in order to make decisions in consequence of 
them.    
In recent years, we have noticed that a homecare system 
providing a patient remote care is closely combined with the 
notion of context which is more commonly considered in 
context awareness systems [13][14]. A context is mainly 
defined as any information that can be used to characterize 
the situation of entity as the location, the time, the 
preferences, etc [15]. This concept has been mostly used in 
ubiquitous computing systems [16] and, more recently, in 
Ambient-Assisted Living (AAL) domain in order to locate 
users anywhere and propose services at anytime according 
to the user’s status and environmental conditions [17]. The 
contextual information acquisition and processing are 
among the main challenges identified in the AAL systems 
and performed by a central middleware [18]. Most of the 
context-based healthcare middleware centralize the data 
processing transferred from homes and focus on detecting 
critical situations. Moreover, most of researches in 
homecare domain are very specific to particular needs such 
as detecting alarm situations. However, to be more efficient 
and adaptive, it is more interesting to be able to cover all 
daily patients’ needs by abstracting from the different 
contextual situations in order to filter data, which specify 
the context and propose social assistance accordingly. In our 
opinion, the core of the application should be designed in a 
contextual independent way, i.e., by defining different 
contexts in which it will be used. In this paper, we are 
taking into account this challenge by proposing a data 
processing mechanism capable of filtering data in order to 
propose personalized and auto-trigged services in function 
of patients’ needs.    
III. 
ARCHITECTURE OF PROPOSED APPLICATION 
The main objective of this research is to design a data 
processing mechanism responsible for filtering contextual 
data acquired through sensors according to the patient’s care 
needs. The filtering process consists in analyzing sensed 
data in real time in order to distinguish between abnormal 
and normal situations and eliminate irrelevant information. 
Abnormal status concerns with critical conditions which 
need to be detected and handled immediately, whereas, 
normal status designates either the need to store data for a 
later use or simply to ignore them if no use. As a matter of 
fact, in normal situations, some gathered data are needed for 
specific tasks decided by health professionals (for example, 
writing a report once a day at 6 p.m on the patient’s state). 
Thus, the data processing mechanism refers to three 
steps: 1) alarm process for detecting critique situation, 2) 
storage process for testing if data need to be stored and 3) 
delete process for deleting useless data.  
Fig. 1 presents a functional description of the 
mechanism which consists of four modules: 1) acquisition 
of data, 2) data processing mechanism, 3) context-based 
rules, and 4) sensors-based context management. The first 
one describes how collected data are stored in an exploitable 
text format before being processed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Functional description of the application. 
The second one explains the different steps of 
performing the alarm, storage and delete processes in order 
to filter contextual data. The third module defines the 
context-based rules used in the data processing module in 
order to reason over the contextual information. The latest 
module creates a sensors-based context model served to 
represent a generic description of sensors and sensed 
contextual information. Each of these modules will be 
presented in detail in the next sections.  
IV. 
SENSORS-BASED CONTEXT MANAGEMENT 
In general, a home-based care system relies on using 
sensors located anywhere at home in order to provide 
information on patient’s daily-live conditions and the home 
environment. Thus, one of our key requirements is to 
manage sensors efficiency and easily by identifying their 
characteristics, their roles and their locations and by 
providing a description of contextual information collected 
from sensors. To do this, a generic, reusable and extensible 
sensors-based context model is proposed in order to 
facilitate adding new sensors, updating or deleting sensors at 
any time if needed.  
Sensors-based 
context 
management 
Context-based 
rules 
Model 
Rules 
Alarm process 
Storage 
process 
Delete process 
Data flow  
from 
sensors 
Acquisition 
of data 
XML 
file 
Sensors 
table 
Data processing 
mechanism 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Because the rules definition and the data acquisition 
modules use the high description of the sensors-based 
context model, it is important to be able to start with 
defining the sensors implemented at the patient’s home 
through the model.   
Fig. 2 represents an abstract description of sensors-based 
context model. A patient is characterized by a context which 
is identified by a set of sensors categories. Each category is 
composed of sensors or other categories. A sensor is 
described by a set of sensorInfo which describe the roles 
and the characteristics of the sensor. Each sensor is sensed 
by a set of composite context parameters represented by the 
entity complexContextP.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Abstract description of sensors-based context model 
These parameters give a high description of data 
extracted from a given sensor. A complexContextP entity is 
composed of contextParam entities which designate simple 
context parameters. The entity location represents where a 
sensor is located at patient’s home.  The entity priority 
represents the priority associated to a sensor. We identify 
three levels of priority: high (1), middle (2), low (3). 
Fig. 3 represents an example of concrete structure of 
sensors-based context model. This example identifies two 
categories of sensors: activity and environment sensors. 
Accelerometer 
and 
Temperature 
are 
two 
sensors. 
Accelerometer and temperature sensors are located at the 
bedroom. Info designates sensorInfo entity. Role is a 
simpleInfo entity which has a value ―detect walk‖. 
Accelerometer sensor is sensed by a contextParam ―action‖. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Concrete sensors-based context description 
V. 
DEFINITION OF CONTEXT-BASED RULES 
Once the sensors and their characteristics have been 
defined through the sensors-based context model, the rules 
useful for the data processing mechanism could be 
determined. These rules are applied on contextual data 
extracted from sensors what involves a relationship of 
dependence between sensors and rules (Fig. 4).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Abstract context-based rules model 
A rule is generally defined as a collection of one or 
several elementary conditions. Each condition depends on a 
sensor which means that one rule is associated to one or 
several sensors which regroup one or multiple elementary 
conditions (Figure 4). If a sensor is related to one condition, 
the latter is simply represented as a child node of sensor. 
Otherwise, conditions related to a sensor are interconnected 
by links named connectivity. We distinguish two forms of 
connectivity {AND, OR}. 
Fig. 5 illustrates an example of a rule with four 
conditions C1, C2, C3, C4 related to a given sensor, these 
conditions have to be connected with AND and/or OR. We 
suppose that C1, C2 and C3 are interconnected by AND and 
this collection is linked to C4 by OR.  
Therefore, we notice that these conditions are structured 
in three levels (Fig. 5). Level 1 is for OR, level 2 is for 
Patient1 
 
 
Context1 
 
 
 
 
Activity 
         
 
Environment 
 
 
 
Accelerometer 
     
               Temperature 
 
 
id    info       location   priority                    id        location    priority 
 
 
S3   role complexContextP bedroom  2   S1    complexContextP  1 
 
 
 Detect Walk   action  hour  date 
          temp      hour date 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

AND or/and elementary conditions and level 3 for 
representing elementary conditions.  
An elementary condition is composed of three parts: 
contextParam, 
predicate 
and 
value. 
contextParam 
designates an entity already defined in the sensors-based 
context model. As a rule is applied on data extracted from 
sensor, the use of the entity contextParam is highly 
justified. The predicate designates one of these possibilities 
{<, <=, >, >=, =, !=} . The value can be a number or a text. 
The manner of defining rules facilitates adding new 
rules for any process and updating existing rules. As the 
main objective of this application is to test if collected data 
from sensors is concerned with alarm, storage or delete 
cases, rules are then classified in two groups: alarm rules 
responsible for detecting alarm situations and storage rules 
which test if collected data must be stored for a later use. 
We will explain the use of these rules more in detail in 
the next section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  An example of a rule 
VI. 
ACQUISITION OF DATA 
The data acquisition introduces the way in which 
contextual data are represented to be exploitable by the data 
processing mechanism. In this research, we consider that 
contextual data are received by our application in a final 
format available to be analyzed. To deal with data, the data 
processing mechanism requires two basis: 
 
A table in which active sensors are declared 
 
XML files used to insert collected contextual data 
 
The table represents the identifications of sensors which 
are in action and send contextual data. This table is 
organized according to the sensors emission frequency. Two 
cases are possible: at a frequency f, we can have either one 
sensor which send data or several sensors which act 
together.  
Other more important factor which needs to be 
precessed is the priority between sensors. Indeed, each 
sensor has its own priority level already defined in the 
sensors-based context model by the priority entity. 
Therefore, sensors should be ordered and handled in order 
of priority. Once active sensors are specified in the table, 
our mechanism verifies their priority level and then 
classifies them in three levels: high, middle and low. Table1 
illustrates an example of the sensors representation. S1 and 
S2 are two sensors with high priority, S3 a sensor with 
middle priority, whereas S4 a sensor with low priority.  
TABLE I.  EXAMPLE OF SENSORS REPRESENTATION 
             Priority 
Frequency 
Low 
Middle 
High 
f1 
S4 
 
S1 ; S2 
f2 
 
S3 
S1 
f3 
S4 
 
S2 
 
The second facet of the data acquisition part consists in 
representing contextual data in XML files. This step is not 
discussed in this research. We work on the assumption that 
contextual data is organized in XML files and available to 
be handled in the data processing mechanism. The structure 
of a XML file is based on the sensors-based context model 
and more specifically by the entities: sensor, contextParam, 
complexContextP. Fig. 6 gives an example of a part of xml 
structure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Example of XML structure 
VII. 
DATA  PROCESSING MECHANISM 
The mechanism mainly consists in filtering data stored 
in XML files as described in the data acquisition section. 
Sensors which generate these data are specified in a sensors 
table. The filter process is based on using rules defined in 
the context-based rules module. We have two types of rules: 
alarm and storage rules. Each rule contains conditions 
<rule id=1> 
 
 <sensor id =3> 
 
       <OR> 
 
 
<condition id=’C4’> 
 
 
      <contextParam>param1</contextParam> 
 
 
      <predicate> = </predicate> 
 
 
      <value>45</value> 
 
 
</condition> 
 
           <AND> 
 
 
<condition id=’C1’> 
 
 
     <contextParam>param2</contextParam> 
 
 
     <predicate> = </predicate> 
 
 
     <value>45</value> 
 
              </condition> 
 
 
<condition id=’C2’> 
 
 
     <contextParam>param3</contextParam> 
 
 
     <predicate> = </predicate> 
 
 
     <value>29</value> 
 
 
 </condition> 
 
 
 <condition id=’C3’> 
 
 
     <contextParam>param1</contextParam> 
 
 
     <predicate> = </predicate> 
 
 
     <value>48</value> 
 
 
 </condition> 
 
           </AND> 
 
         </OR> 
 
    </sensor> 
    </rule> 
 
<sensors> 
< sensor id=’S3’> 
                 <complexContextP> 
                            <action>walking</action> 
  
<hour>8.30</hour> 
  
<date>25/12/2013</date> 
</complexContexP> 
</sensor> 
<sensor id=’S1’> 
      <complexContextP> 
<temp>37</temp> 
<hour>8.30</hour> 
<date>25/12/2013</date> 
    </complexContexP> 
</sensor> 
</sensors> 
 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

related to given sensors. Fig. 7 illustrates the different steps 
of the data processing mechanism. Firstly, we test if data are 
abnormal or normal. Then, we verify if data should be 
stored or deleted. 
The filter process is performed in various steps: 
1) For each row of the sensors table, we have to 
calculate all combinations between sensors. This 
calculation is made in function of the priority of 
sensors. We remind that we have three levels of 
priority: high, middle and low. We start with 
sensors which have high priority. We pass then to 
sensors with middle priority. Finally, we terminate 
with low priority sensors. We illustrate this 
calculation by an example. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7.  Data processing mechanism 
In row1, there are three sensors 
 
S1-S2 
with  
high priority 
 
S4 
 
with  
low priority 
- 
Firstly, we start by calculating combinations 
between high priority sensors S1 and S2 which has 
as result: S1, S2, S1-S2. 
- 
Secondly, as we do not have middle priority 
sensors, we pass to low priority sensors. We have 
one sensor S4. Then one combination is calculated 
= S4.  
- 
Finally, we calculate combinations between sensors 
S1, S2 and S4. We have as result: S1-S4, S2-S4, 
S1-S2-S4. 
The calculation of combinations has as result 
C = {S1, S2, S1-S2, S4, S1-S4, S2-S4, S1-S2-S4} 
2) Once combinations are found, the second step 
consists in looking for rules which correspond to 
sensors designated in each combination. As we 
have alarm and storage rules, we start by alarm 
rules because alarm process is more priority to take 
into account.  
For each combination c of C, we have two 
possibilities: 
 
Rules corresponding to sensors of c are 
not found => next combination 
 
Otherwise, conditions contained in each 
rule are extracted in order to form a XML 
query 
 
The formed query will be executed on the 
contextual data stored in the xml file. The 
execution of the query returns either 1 or 0. 
 
1 => data are abnormal 
 
0 => data are normal 
The first case triggers an alarm situation and data 
storage 
The second case triggers the storage process 
3) For normal data, we have to test if data need to be 
stored or deleted. Similar to alarm process, the 
same steps are applied on the combinations of C. 
We research if there are storage rules which 
correspond 
to 
sensors 
contained 
in 
each 
combination. If it is the case, a query is formed 
which will be executed on the xml file. We can 
have two responses: 
 
1 => data storage is needed 
 
0 => data can be deleted 
Once these different tasks are ended up, we can delete 
xml file which contains data under process and pass to next 
row of the sensor table.  
The next step in this research consists of triggering 
services in function of patient’s needs. In this paper, we do 
not develop this point, but we can give an idea on which our 
next research will include. In principle, each rule is 
associated to one or many services as described in Figure 8. 
Once a rule is found and its formed query returns 1 as a 
result, services related to this rule is triggered to execute 
tasks defined for selected services.  
 
Figure 8. Relationship between rule and service 
 
Thus, we have described the different steps needed to 
process and filter data generated through sensors and stored 
temporarily in xml files.    
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the paper, we have presented an approach capable to 
process and filter data acquired through sensors locally in 
order to classify them in three categories: alarm data to 
detect alarm situations, relevant data to be stored for a later 
use and irrelevant data to be eliminated. We remind that the 
Storage rules 
Collected data 
Test if alarm 
Abnormal data 
Alarm rules 
Normal data 
Test if data storage 
Data stored 
Data deleted 
YES 
NO 
YES 
NO 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

main objective of this application is not to trigger alarm 
situations, but only to indicate there are abnormal data 
which need to be taken into account immediately or normal 
data.  
This work is the first step in a project, which consists of 
assisting any patient at home whatever the situation, needs 
and preferences he has. To achieve this goal, a generic and 
personalized view is proposed in order to consider any new 
adding or change in the daily patient’s context.  For this, a 
sensors-based context model has been designed for 
characterizing sensors and contextual data. Context-based 
rules have been defined for reasoning over contextual data.  
This application has for advantage to eliminate irrelevant 
data at patient’s home and transfer only useful data. 
Extensibility and configurability of the context-oriented data 
processing mechanism behavior may be achieved by 
extending the context-based sensor model with new 
concepts or specializations of existing ones and by 
adding/modifying reasoning context-based rules. This 
application can be easily extended with using specified 
services in order to satisfy patient’s needs and provide 
personalized access to patient’s data. 
Presently, we are planning to implement the approach in 
java to evaluate and test the success of the prototype from a 
scenario. The second step is about using and managing 
services in order to improve alarm management and real-
time monitoring. We are also thinking about managing 
profiles needed for defining all patients’ characteristics such 
as pathologies, disabilities, preferences and personal data in 
order to propose to the patient personalized services. 
Finally, we will also consider actors involved in a different 
extent in the care of a patient such as patient’s relatives, 
doctors, nurses, the care center, etc. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Canale, ―The Bravehealth Software Architecture for the 
Monitoring of Patients Affected by CVD,‖ 5th eTELEMED, pp. 29-
34, 2013, Nice, France.  
[2] A. J. Bharucha, ―CareMedia: Automated Video and Sensor Analysis 
for Geriatric Care,‖ Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Association for Geriatric Psychiatry, 2006, Puerto Rico. 
[3] M. Chan, D. Esteve, C. Escriba, and E. Campo, ―A review of smart 
homes—Present state and future challenges,‖ Comput. Methods 
Programs Biomed. 91, 55–81, 2008. 
[4] A. Pietrabissa, C. Poli, D.G. Ferriero, and M. Grigioni, ―Optimal 
planning of sensor networks for assets tracking in hospital 
environments,‖ accepted for publication in Decision Support System 
(Elsevier), 2013.  
[5] J. Bravo, L. Fuentes, and D. Lopez-de-Ipina, ―Ubiquitous Computing 
and Ambient Intelligence,‖ Pers. Ubiquitous Comput, 5, 315-316, 
2011. 
[6] C. Willems, M. Spreeuwenberg, L. Heide, A. Glascock, D. Kutzik, 
and L. de Witre, ―Activity monitoring to support independent living 
in Dutch homecare support,‖ Everyday Technology for Independence 
and Care, G. Gelderblom, et al., Ed., Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2011, 
pp. 145-151.  
[7] W. Kurschl, S. Mitsch, and J. Schoenboeck, ―Modeling Situation-
Aware Ambient Assisted Living Systems for Eldercare,‖ In Proc. of 
the 6th Int. Conference on Information Technology : New 
Generations, 2009, Las Vegas, USA. 
[8] F. Paganelli, D. Giuli, ―An Ontology-based Context Model for Home 
Health Monitoring and Alerting in Chronic Patient Care Networks,‖ 
1st Int. Workshop on Smart Homes for Tele-Health, AINA 2007.  
[9] B.J.F. Van, B.P. Pawar, C.P. Dulawan, and H.J. Hermens, ―Mobile 
virtual communities for telemedicine: research challenges and 
opportunities,‖ International Journal of Computer Science and 
applications, Technomathematics Research Foundation, Vol. 6, no. 2, 
pp. 19 – 37, 2009. 
[10] D. Ding, ―Sensor technology for smart homes,‖ Maturitas, 69, 2011, 
131–136. 
[11] P. Paganelli, E. Spinicci, and D. Giuli, ―ERMHAN: a context-aware 
service platform to support continuous care networks for home-based 
assistance,‖ International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications, 
vol. 2008, iss. 5, Article no. 4. 
[12] S. Cheng, M. Azarian, and M. Pecht,  ―Sensor system for prognostics 
and health management,‖ Sensors , 10, 5774–5797, 2010. 
[13] N. Bricon-Souf, C.R. Newman, ―Context awareness in health care: A 
review,‖ Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 2–12. 2007.  
[14] J. Park, M. Moon, and S. Hwang, ―CASS: A Context-Aware 
Simulation System for Smart Home,‖ In Proc. of the 5th ACIS 
International Conference on Software Engineering Research, 
Management & Applications, Washington DC, USA, 2007. 
[15] A. Dey, K. Anind, ―Understanding and Using Context,‖ Personal 
Ubiquitous Computing 5 (1): 4–7, 2001. 
[16] T. Chaari, D. Ejigu, F. Laforest, and M. Scuturici, ―Modeling and 
Using Context in Adapting Applications to Pervasive Environments,‖ 
In the Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Pervasive 
Services (ICPS'06), Pages 111-120, Lyon, France, 2006.  
[17] N. Saranummi, ―IT applications for pervasive, personal, and 
personalized health,‖ IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 12, no. 
1, pp. 1–4, 2008.  
[18] C. Doukas, I. Maglogiannis, and G. Kormentzas, ―Advanced 
Telemedicine Services through Context-aware Medical Networks,‖ In 
Proceedings of the IEEE EMBS cosponsored International Special 
Topic Conference on Information Technology in Biomedicine (ITAB 
2006), Ioannina-Epirus, Greece, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

User-Centered and Persuasive Design of a Web-Based Registration and Monitoring 
System for Healthcare-Associated Infections in Nursing Homes 
Nienke de Jong1, Andrea Eikelenboom-Boskamp2,3, Andreas Voss2,3, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen1 
1Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
n.dejong@utwente.nl, j.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl 
 
2Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 
Canisius Wilhelmina Hospital 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands 
eikelenboomandrea@gmail.com, vossandreas@gmail.com  
 
3Medical Microbiology 
Radboud University Medical Centre 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands 
Abstract— Patient safety is increasingly threatened by 
healthcare-associated infections. To cope with this threat, 
insight into the occurrence of such infections is paramount. We 
used a holistic approach for the user-centered and persuasive 
development of a system for the registration of healthcare-
associated infections in nursing homes. To do so, we combined 
multiple methods (literature search, expert discussion, 
questionnaire, interviews and scenario-based user-tests), 
closely cooperating with end-users. This study shows why 
involving end-users in all stages of development is of 
paramount importance for the creation of successful eHealth 
technologies. 
Keywords-User-centered design; Persuasive design; Web-
based; eHealth technology 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Healthcare is increasingly confronted with threats caused 
by Healthcare-Associated Infections (HAIs)  [1]. To be able 
to adequately protect patients from this threat, one of the first 
steps is to gather knowledge on its occurrence [1]. For 
hospitals, already a vast amount of surveillance data is 
available [1-7]. For other healthcare institutions (such as 
nursing homes), prevalence studies have more recently 
begun to take place. The results of the first prevalence study 
of HAIs in Dutch nursing homes were published in 2011 [8].  
To enable prevalence research in nursing homes, data 
must be collected on all clients that are present in the nursing 
homes at one point in time. The success of such data 
collection is entirely dependent on the willingness and 
capability of the elderly care physicians to register their 
clients in a correct and timely manner. Preferably, the 
registered data should be collected in a standardized way to 
fit other (e.g., nation-wide) surveillance programs [1]. One 
way to achieve this is via the use of a standardized 
registration system, that allows users to collect, process, and 
analyze surveillance data.  
We developed a registration system to optimally support 
elderly care physicians in the correct and timely registration 
of their clients, taking into account the national prevalence 
studies [2] with which collected data should be compatible. 
We aimed to do so, by applying user-centered and persuasive 
design to the development process.  
The research question is: How can user-centered and 
persuasive design improve the registration of HAIs in 
nursing homes by elderly care physicians? Aim is to make 
the new registration system reliable, fitting within work 
processes, and faster, easier and clearer than the current 
registration method. 
First, the methods that are applied in this study are 
described: the analysis of the current situation via expert 
discussion (section II.A.); the analysis of the users’ needs 
via a questionnaire study (section II.B); and the analysis of 
the user-friendliness and persuasiveness via in-depth 
interviews and scenario-based tests with end-users (section 
II.C.). Then, the results of the different study methods are 
given: a description of the current situation (section III.A.); 
the users’ needs and values (section III.B.); the use of 
persuasive systems design in the prototype (section III.C.); 
and the user-friendliness of the prototype (section III.D.). 
Finally, the performed study is discussed (section IV) and 
conclusions are drawn (section V). 
II. 
METHODS 
The Center for eHealth Research and Disease 
Management (CeHRes) has developed a roadmap (see Fig. 
1) that is used as a framework for the holistic development 
of eHealth technologies [9]. It incorporates principles from 
business modelling, human-centred design and persuasive 
design 
within 
five 
development 
cycles 
[10, 
11].
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1.   CeHRes Roadmap [9]. 
 
A. Analysis of Current Situation via Expert Discussion 
This project started with a request from iPrevent [12] to 
aid in the development of a new ‘mobile’ registration 
system. iPrevent is a regional infection control network 
within which healthcare institutions, elderly care physicians, 
medical microbiologists and Infection Control Professionals 
(ICPs) work together to structurally offer high quality care 
in the field of infection prevention [12].  
To gain insight into what iPrevent specifically wants or 
needs from this project, and into the prerequisites for the 
registration system, an expert discussion was held, with two 
project leaders (one of whom is also the data analyst) and 
two behavioral researchers. The outcomes of the discussion 
were complemented with literature on the registered HAIs 
and national surveillance.  
B. Analysis of Users’ Needs via Questionnaire 
Based on the expert discussion a questionnaire was 
developed, to gain insight in what values end-users had 
(concerning a registration system) and whether the project 
aims match these values. 
A total of 24 physicians who worked at different nursing 
homes within the iPrevent network participated in the study. 
Their age ranged from 30 to 61 (mean age 47 years). Most 
participants were female (19 female vs. 5 male).  
Questionnaire results are analyzed to obtain descriptive 
statistics. Statistical analyses were deemed redundant, given 
the developmental purpose of the study. Answers that are 
given to open-ended questions, were summarized if they 
overlapped and then their frequencies were analyzed. 
C. Analysis of User-Friendliness and Persuasiveness via 
In-Depth Interviews and Scenario-Based Tests with End-
Users 
To validate the questionnaire data and to optimize the 
user-friendliness and persuasiveness of the prototype, 
scenario-based user-tests and in-depth interviews with end-
users are performed.  
Four female elderly care physicians who worked in 
different nursing homes within the iPrevent network 
participated. Their ages varied from 33 to 59 (mean age 45 
years). One of the nursing homes they worked at, already 
used Electronic Client Files, the others will start to do so in 
the near future.  
Based on the analysis of the context and of the users’ 
needs, and in close cooperation with an ICP, a prototype of 
the registration system was developed using Balsamiq 
software. The prototype incorporated elements of Persuasive 
Systems Design (PSD) [13]. Not all elements of PSD were 
deemed relevant for this system, but as much elements as 
possible have been applied.  
Two scenarios were developed for the user tests. They 
were developed by an ICP and made use of literature on the 
HAI definitions. The scenarios addressed critical issues for 
registration.  
The physician was instructed to talk out loud during the 
entire user-test, not only mentioning what she thought, but 
also what she saw or sought, did or wanted to do. 
The entire conversations (including both interview and 
user tests) took about 45-60 minutes each. Audio recordings 
of the conversations were transcribed verbatim and analyzed 
using a code book. Some examples of the codes are given in 
Table 1. All codes were combined and the frequencies with 
which they were mentioned were analyzed.  
TABLE 1. EXAMPLES OF CODES USED FOR ANALYSIS OF USER-TESTS 
Examples of codes used for data-analysis 
Category 
Code 
Description 
Contextual 
Inquiry 
C1 
Subject describes a problem that is 
experienced in the current work process 
Value 
Specification 
V1 
Subject thinks working with the new 
system might be faster 
Design 
D1 
Subject thinks the order of the items in 
the mock up is wrong 
Operationalization 
O1 
Subjects talks about a possible barrier 
for using the new system 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
RESULTS 
A. Current Situation 
iPrevent has over the last years worked together with the 
approximately 30 nursing homes within their network, to 
perform annual prevalence measurements for nursing home 
infections. This means that elderly care physicians are 
required to once a year register all relevant data about the 
residents that live in their nursing homes. Inherent to the 
fact that it is a prevalence measurement, all clients must be 
registered within a short timeframe around a reference date.  
The content of the registered data is largely determined 
by the definitions of HAIs. These definitions were 
developed by the regional network in cooperation with the 
national surveillance system (PREZIES) [14]. In the 
hospital setting, surveillance is performed by trained 
infection control nurses. The use of the definitions in the 
nursing home setting, where registration is performed by 
physicians with little or no experience with surveillance, 
registration is far more complicated. The currently used 
registration system translated definitions into questions, but 
did not offer the physicians any additional support. The 
prior 
registration 
system 
used 
a 
SurveyMonkey 
questionnaire for registration. The questionnaire consisted 
of a long list of complicated questions. Many of them are 
irrelevant for most residents. For example, if a client does 
not use an antibiotic, the question about what an antibiotic is 
used for, is rather redundant. Also, all questions are 
presented on a single page. Physicians thus have to scroll 
down seemingly endlessly, past irrelevant questions, while 
scanning to find questions that are relevant, all the way 
down to the bottom of the page, before they can start with 
the registration of the next resident.  
Furthermore, an increasing amount (>30) of nursing 
homes participate in the prevalence measurements that 
iPrevent performs. Thus, increasingly large datasets are 
collected. Data processing, data analysis and presentation of 
feedback of the results to the nursing homes are all 
performed by a single data-analyst. This will soon no longer 
be feasible. Project leaders (and the data-analyst) therefore 
would like the system to perform these tasks automatically.  
Finally, project leaders requested that the new system 
would be ‘mobile’ (to be used on a smartphone) to enable 
bedside registration of clients by elderly care physicians. 
B. Users’ Needs and Values 
The questionnaire resulted in insight in the context of the 
problem and in the users’ values. When asked what kind of 
device they would like to use for the registration, most 
subjects indicated they preferred a PC (50,0%) or laptop 
(20,8%). The other subjects preferred to use a smartphone 
(12,5%), tablet (8,3%), or paper (8,3%).   
Most important reasons for users to be willing to use the 
new registration system were: (1) if they can interrupt 
registration without losing data; (2) if the new system is 
more user friendly; (3) if it can be opened simultaneously 
with Electronic Client Files (‘Elektronisch Cliënten Dossier’ 
in Dutch); (4) if clear insight is given in the results; and (5) 
if registration can be performed faster.  
One of the prerequisites that were found during the 
expert discussion said that it would be desirable if 
registration could be performed at the residents’ bedside. 
This would enable the physicians to directly see how the 
resident is doing. However, the questionnaire showed that 
none of the physicians considered this to be desirable. Most 
of them (54,2%) did indicate that it would be of added value 
for them to be more flexible in the location in which they 
register their clients, but didn’t want to do so bedside. Also, 
41,7% said that it would not be of added value at all since 
they just liked to register their residents in their offices. One 
physician (4,2%) wanted to register her clients in the 
department’s office, with the client files at hand.  
Yet, the in-depth interviews gave even more insight into 
the situation. Physicians explained that their nursing homes 
were (going to be) using Electronic Client Files (ECF). This 
is software that contains highly personal and private 
information about the residents. Therefore, many safety 
measures have been taken to protect this information. 
Because of one of these safety measures it is impossible to 
simultaneously open the ECF and the World Wide Web. In 
practice, this meant that elderly care physicians had to open 
the ECF, and write down all the information about all of 
their clients that they needed to register in the prevalence 
measurements. Then they had to close the ECF and open the 
SurveyMonkey questionnaire and enter the information they 
had written down. Not to mention that if they had forgotten 
any information, the entire procedure had to be repeated. 
The subjects therefore did want registration to be possible 
on a mobile device, but for reasons that differed from what 
was expected, i.e.: so they could simultaneously open the 
ECF on their pc and the registration system on the other 
device.   
C. Use of Persuasive Systems Design in the Prototype 
1) Primary Task Support 
One of the main concerns with working with the prior 
registration 
system 
was 
that 
working 
with 
the 
SurveyMonkey questionnaire required the physician to read 
through many irrelevant questions for every client. One of 
the most important elements of PSD that were to be used in 
the new system was therefore tunneling [13]. The prototype 
system was designed to guide the user through the system, 
questions to be answered are dependent on the answers 
given to prior questions. Thus, the entire system is a big 
decision tree, to make sure every client is registered via the 
shortest (fastest) possible route. 
Another concern with the prior registration system was 
the complexity of the used questions (which were based on 
definitions of HAI). To reduce the complexity, and thus the 
risk of interpretation errors, reduction was used. The aim of 
reduction is to reduce complex behavior into simple tasks, 
to help users perform the target behavior [13]. This was 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

done by translating complex and long questions into a 
flowchart consisting of multiple questions. For example, the 
originally used question for Gastro-Enteritis, was rather 
lengthy and complicated (see Quote 1).  
 
 
Quote 1.   Question about Gastro-Enteritis in the prior registration system 
(Originally in Dutch) 
 
This question was translated into shorter and simpler 
questions divided into several screens. Some of these 
screens are shown in Fig. 2.  
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.   Part of the screens of the prototype used for Gastro-Enteritis; 
Example of Reduction: (1) Answer options: Yes / No; (2) Button to return 
to previous screen; (3) Help-button for additional information; (4) Button 
to continue to next screen. 
 
 As mentioned before, it was of great importance that 
registration would be faster and could be paused without 
losing data. To enable this, elements of tailoring are applied 
to the prototype, which allows the system to be tailored to 
(in this case) the usage context factors [13]. Every nursing 
home was given a unique log-in code and password. A 
physician had to log-in once, and was then able to continue 
registering their clients one after another. Moreover, when 
starting the system, physicians are given two options: to 
register a new client or to edit data of an existing client (see 
Fig. 3). For the latter, an overview was generated of all 
clients that had previously been registered by that specific 
nursing home. Clients of other nursing homes are not 
shown. 
 
             
 
Figure 3.  Example of a screen that leads to Tailored information 
 
2) Dialogue Support 
The prototype registration system requires physicians to 
indicate which pathogens caused an infection. However, 
during the user tests it became clear that within nursing 
homes, little funding is available to perform the laboratory 
tests to acquire this knowledge. Furthermore, if a laboratory 
test was performed at the moment of registration, its results 
were not always known yet. Therefore, in the final 
registration system, questions are added to ask whether a 
laboratory test was performed and whether its results were 
already known. If the latter question was answered with ‘no’ 
a pop-up screen appeared. This screen reminded [13] the 
physician that lab results should be added later. 
Also, suggestion [13] is added to the final registration 
system. One example of the application of suggestion was 
used since physicians have to register all antibiotics that are 
used by their clients. However, the variety of antibiotics that 
exist is enormous and their names are complex. Initially, the 
intention was to let physicians scroll through an alphabetical 
list of all antibiotics (see Fig. 4).  
 
          
 
Figure 4.   Example of the screen that subscribes the need for Suggestion 
 
However, this was still too time consuming. Therefore, in 
the final registration system, a search system in which the 
physician enters the first three letters of the antibiotic is 
added. The system then automatically generates only 
antibiotics that start with these letters. 
3) System Credibility Support 
Finally, in healthcare in general and for the registration of 
healthcare-associated 
infections 
in 
nursing 
homes 
specifically, it is of great importance that the system is 
credible according to its users. Therefore, a website  was 
created about the services provided by the registration 
system [15]. The Infection Manager website was developed 
Does the resident have Gastro-Enteritis? The diagnosis 
Gastro-Enteritis is given if one of the following symptoms 
occurs in the client:  
 Three times or more diarrhea (different from normal for this 
client, frequency is not applicable when using incontinence 
materials)  
 Diarrhea and two of the following symptoms: fever, 
vomiting, nausea, stomach ache, stomach cramps, blood or 
mucus in feces.  
 Vomiting three times within 24 hours, without any 
additional symptoms (if vomiting is not associated with 
medicine use)  
 Vomiting and two of the following symptoms: fever, nausea, 
stomach ache, stomach cramps, blood or mucus in feces.  
 
 
 
Does the client 
have diarrhea? 
If yes, more 
than three 
times a day? 
If no, does 
client vomit? 
3 
1 
2 
4 
1 
1 
Edit a client’s data; only 
clients of the own nursing 
home are shown 
Register a new client 
Too long list to scroll 
through, due to 
availability of many 
different antibiotics 
Which antibiotics does 
the client use? 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for the EurSafety Health-net project [16]. This is a large and 
successful European project involving many hospitals, 
microbiology laboratories and other healthcare institutions. 
The part of the website about the registration system 
consists of e.g. background information about the project 
and the parties that were involved in the development 
process. This was intended to give more clarity about the 
trustworthiness  and expertise of the project and its project 
members [13]. 
Finally, in the final registration system, it was decided to 
add the EurSafety logo, to give the system more surface 
credibility [13].  
D. Analysis of the User-Friendliness of the Prototype 
Based on the scenario-tests, many major and minor 
adjustments had to be made in the mock ups. These 
concerned the clarity of wording, sequence of questions, 
completeness, user-friendliness, design and location of the 
buttons. For example, initially, there were two screens in 
our prototype  for ‘Aids’, which asks whether the client uses 
any aids such as a catheter or tracheotomy; and 
‘Incontinence’, which asks whether the client is incontinent. 
During the user-tests, the subjects had several comments 
about these screens. First of all, whereas we interpreted the 
term ‘aid’ as being a catheter of some kind, the subjects 
indicated that the term ‘aid’ to them meant ‘walker’ (see 
Quote 2). So, they suggested using a different term.  
 
 
 
Furthermore, they found the screen about incontinence 
strange. In one of the scenarios, a client was described who 
had a catheter. The participants indicated that although 
incontinence is a possible reason for clients to get a catheter, 
they did not consider this client as being incontinent 
anymore (see Quote 3). They, therefore, said the option of 
having a catheter or stoma should be added to this screen. 
 
 
 
As a result, the two screens where replaced by a new 
screen. This screen asks whether a client is incontinent. 
However, an additional answer option has been added, to 
indicate that a client has a catheter or stoma.  
After the fourth user-test, no major issues where found 
anymore. Therefore, meetings with Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) developers were held to 
further discuss the requirements for the registration system 
and to finally develop it. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
This study was aimed at determining whether user-
centered and persuasive design could support a faster, 
easier, more fitting, more reliable and clearer registration of 
healthcare-associated infections by elderly care physicians. 
Regarding the design process, it can be said that the holistic 
approach using the CeHRes roadmap has provided the 
opportunity to not only develop an eHealth technology that 
fits the needs of its users and is successful in what it is 
intended to do, but to also make sure that it fits its context. 
The constant and structural cooperation with end-users 
during the development process, gave us the opportunity to 
make it an iterative process. This means that it was possible 
to evaluate the eHealth technology in every stage of its 
development, and to (at any time) adjust the direction that it 
was going in. This aids in the development of an eHealth 
technology that fits its users’ needs and context, and could 
potentially prevent high costs of re-design if major 
necessary adjustments are only found after final release of 
the technology. 
Certainly, we still want to evaluate the speed, user-
friendliness, fit with work processes, ease of use, clarity and 
persuasiveness of the final registration system. Thus, a 
summative evaluation is currently being planned. This 
evaluation will combine both qualitative and quantitative 
methods and will e.g. focus on user friendliness, speed of 
registration (both were found important by the end-users) 
and amount of errors that are made (important for the 
quality of the data). But for now, it can be said that the new 
system has already been used in two rounds of prevalence 
measurements, successfully registering over 3000 nursing 
home residents. It is web-based, and can therefore be used 
on any device capable of connecting to the world wide web. 
An example of a screen of the eventual registration system 
is given in Fig. 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of the look and feel of the eventual registration system 
(Originally in Dutch) 
(Quote 2 – Originally in Dutch) “Yes, we use the word ‘Aid’ 
for something completely different. We use this word for 
walkers. So I would try to come up with a different word 
here.”  
(Quote 3 – Originally in Dutch) “You see, this client is not 
incontinent, but has a urethra catheter… So this is strange. You 
should add catheter here I guess. Because with a catheter you 
are not really incontinent anymore.”   
 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Limitations 
A limitation of this study is that it suffered from very 
strict and ambitious deadlines. This limited us in the amount 
of effort that we could put into the implementation stage of 
the development. Although this is thought to be a very 
relevant stage according to the CeHRes Roadmap, in this 
project its influence might be limited. The elderly care 
physicians who are the end-users of the registration system 
in this study, are obligated to use it if their nursing home 
participates in the prevalence measurements. 
Another possible limitation might be that our study had a 
relatively low number of participants. However, aim of this 
study was solely the development of an eHealth technology, 
not to perform an evaluation of its effects. 
Also, this project concerned an already existing 
intervention. Question was, whether technology can aid in 
its optimization. The context was, however, explored: 
regulations and conditions for use of the technology and the 
fit with existing systems for processing the data have been 
studied in this project. 
Finally, the given setting for this project (nursing homes) 
presented us with its very own challenges. The opportunities 
for using technology were limited, because of the 
technological infrastructure of Dutch nursing homes 
(wherein often outdated PCs are used), and the degree to 
which people are used to working with technology (e.g. only 
47,1% of the physicians used a smartphone). However, this 
gave us an interesting opportunity to  put ourselves and the 
possibilities of the CeHRes Roadmap to the test, to see how 
it and how we would cope with such limitations. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This article goes beyond the mere development of eHealth 
technologies. It has subscribed our strong believe that 
involving end-users in all stages of development is of 
paramount importance for the creation of successful eHealth 
technologies, because (1) it gives insight in the needs and 
wishes of the end-users, that have to be met by the eHealth 
technology; (2) end-users are able to give feedback on both 
details (the location of a button) and on the bigger picture 
(the clinical practice that the technology has to be used in); 
(3) it allows for the development to be an iterative process, 
which may prevent costly redesign to be necessary; and (4) 
although they might have used their own words to express 
themselves, end-users appeared to have very clear ideas 
about the their needs regarding Persuasive Systems Design.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was funded by the Interreg IV “EurSafety 
Health-net” project. We also thank the elderly care 
physicians who participated in this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
ECDC, Point prevalence survey of healthcare-associated 
infections and antimicrobial use in European acute care 
hospitals., 2013, European Centers for Disease Prevention 
and Control: Stockholm. 
[2] 
PREZIES. Referentiecijfers maart 2007 t/m maart 2012: 
Prevalentieonderzoek. 2012  [cited 2013 9-3]; Available 
from: 
http://www.prezies.nl/zkh/prev/ref_cijfers/Referentiecijfers%
20Prevalentie%20tm%20maart%202012.pdf. 
[3] 
Mayon-White, R.T., Ducel, G., Kereselidze, T., and 
Tikomirov, E., An international survey of the prevalence of 
hospital-acquired infection. J Hosp Infect, 1988. 11 Suppl A: 
pp. 43-48. 
[4] 
Klevens, R.M., et al., Estimating health care-associated 
infections and deaths in US hospitals, 2002. Public health 
reports, 2007. 122(2): pp. 160. 
[5] 
Smyth, E.T.M., et al., Four Country Healthcare Associated 
Infection Prevalence Survey 2006: overview of the results. 
Journal of Hospital Infection, 2008. 69(3): pp. 230-248. 
[6] 
Gravel, D., et al., Point prevalence survey for healthcare-
associated infections within Canadian adult acute-care 
hospitals. Journal of Hospital Infection, 2007. 66(3): pp. 
243-248. 
[7] 
Lyytikäinen, O., Kanerva, M., Agthe, N., Möttönen, T., and 
Ruutu, P., Healthcare-associated infections in Finnish acute 
care hospitals: a national prevalence survey, 2005. Journal 
of Hospital Infection, 2008. 69(3): pp. 288-294. 
[8] 
Eikelenboom-Boskamp, A., et al., Three-year prevalence of 
healthcare-associated infections in Dutch nursing homes. 
BMC Proceedings, 2011. 5(Suppl 6): pp. 158. 
[9] 
Nijland, N., Grounding eHealth; Towards a holistic 
framework for sustainable eHealth technologies., in 
Psychology, Health & Technology, 2011, University of 
Twente: Enschede. 
[10] van Limburg, M., et al., Why business modeling is crucial in 
the development of eHealth technologies. Journal of medical 
Internet research, 2011. 13(4). 
[11] van Gemert-Pijnen, L., Karreman, J., Vonderhorst, S., 
Verhoeven, F., and Wentzel, J., Participatory Development 
via User-Involvement-A Case Study about the development of 
a 
Web-based 
Patient-communication 
system 
about 
Methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus 
aureus. 
electronic 
Journal of Health Informatics, 2011. 6(4):e28: pp: 1-15. 
[12] iPrevent. www.i-prevent.net.  [cited 2013 11-14]. 
[13] Oinas-Kukkonen, H. and M. Harjumaa, Persuasive Systems 
Design: Key Issues, Process Model, and System Features. 
Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 2009. 24(28). 
[14] iPrevent. Definities van verpleeghuisinfecties. 2013 09-2012 
[cited 
2013 
14-11]; 
Available 
from: 
www.infectionmanager.com/definities. 
[15] Infection Manager.  [cited 2013 11-14]; Available from: 
www.infectionmanager.com/prevalentie. 
[16] Wentzel, M.J., J. Karreman, and J.E.W.C.v. Gemert-Pijnen. 
Towards an internet-based infectious disease management 
platform to increase patient safety. in eTelemed. 2011. 
Gosier, Guadeloupe, France: IARIA. 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Fuzzified Clustering and Point Set Continuous Approximation in Prognosticating 
Gastric Cancer Surgery 
 
Elisabeth Rakus-Andersson, Hang Zettervall 
Department of Mathematics and Science 
Blekinge Institute of Technology 
37179 Karlskrona, Sweden 
Elisabeth.Andersson@bth.se, Hang.Zettervall@bth.se 
 
 
Abstract— We discuss two computational techniques in the 
current paper. In the first part, we aim at employing FCM 
(fuzzy c-means) clustering to compute membership degrees of 
two clusters providing decisions to perform surgery or not for 
a testing set of 25 gastric cancer patients. The second part 
handles mathematical modelling of a common function 
approximating the information obtained from the c-means 
procedure. After constructing the equation of the function, we 
can make the decision about the surgery in the form of the 
surgery degree for an arbitrary gastric cancer patient. A 
centre, dealing with mathematical techniques concerning 
surgery prognoses, can quickly decide about surgery for the 
patient who lives in a remote place. A transmission of 
information among the centre and some hospitals, interested 
in adopting the centre services, can facilitate surgery decision-
making. This trial can be treated as a contribution in the 
telemedicine domain. 
Keywords–c-means clustering; surgery degrees; clinical 
characteristic value; weights of importance; truncated π-
functions. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Multidisciplinary cancer conferences play a very 
important role in decision-making process in modern 
treatment of gastric cancer patients. The aim of the 
conference is to establish assessments and treatment 
decisions for particular patients. The most discussed method 
of gastric cancer treatment is the partial or the total resection 
of the stomach, which makes the surgery decision so 
important.  
To support the surgery decision-making, we develop 
different mathematical models, in which the entry data 
consist of the values of clinical markers, sampled during the 
examinations of the patients. 
We have been provided with the clinical data of 25 
gastric cancer patients, randomly selected and treated as a 
testing set. When designing the mathematical apparatus, we 
first intend to adapt the c-means method, separating patients 
in two sets named “degree of surgery” and “degree of no 
surgery”. A multidimensional data point-vector, consisted of 
values of the decisive biological markers, is assigned to each 
patient. The patient’s age, the crp-value (the C reactive 
proteins value) [1] and the body weight play a significant 
role in the surgery diagnosis. 
 
The differentiation of patients-vectors in two classes is 
well done by putting forward the fuzzified version of cluster 
analysis [2]. Among clustering approaches, the fuzzy c-
means clustering is regarded as the most efficient [2][3][4]. 
The earlier trials, involving fuzzy c-means clustering in 
surgery decision-making, were discussed by us in [5][6]. 
 
For each tested patient, the cluster matrix will deliver 
degrees of surgery and degrees of no surgery belonging to 
interval [0, 1]. 
 
After 
running 
the 
c-means 
algorithm, 
some 
characteristic values will be assigned to all patients tested. 
The characteristic values will combine measurements of 
biological markers with importance weights of these 
markers. Further, we will determine a set of points 
containing pairs (patient characteristics, degree of surgery). 
After inserting the points into the two-dimensional 
coordinate system, in accordance with ascending order of 
patient characteristic values, we will make a trial of 
approximating this set of points by the truncated version of 
the π-function [7][8]. The equation of the truncated π 
function makes possible to evaluate the surgery degree for 
an arbitrary patient. The approximation of the point set and 
prognoses, made for casual gastric cancer patients, 
constitute the paper’s second part, where our earlier and 
new theoretical contributions are sampled. 
 
We cannot compare our results with other mathematical 
trials testing the operation decisions, since we have not 
found any traces of such trials in literature. A confrontation 
of our results with the physicians’ decisions is the only way 
to validate a proposed mathematical system. 
 
Our further intention is to implement centralized 
computer programs. By spreading the effects of the program 
actions, we count on awaking some interest in other centres. 
These are expected to communicate with the main 
transmission station in order to obtain the support in surgery 
decision making. This trial of starting the communication by 
computers in the matter of surgery decision can be regarded 
as a contribution in the telemedicine domain. 
 
In Section II we list the steps of fuzzy c-means 
clustering. The technique of generating entries in the initial 
matrix is discussed in Section III. Section IV provides us 
with surgery prognoses made for 25 patients tested. 
Characteristic values of patients are introduced in Section V. 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The values will be later involved in the procedure of 
approximation of points (characteristics of patient, degree of 
surgery) by a continuous function in Section VI. We 
conclude in Section VII. 
II. 
FUZZY C-MEANS CLUSTERING ALGORITHM 
 
Let us recall the definition of a fuzzy set. The fuzzy set 
A is a collection ܣ ൌ ሼሺݔ,ݕ ൌߤ஺ሺݔሻሻሽ,ݔאܣ,ߤ஺ሺݔሻא
ሾ0,1ሿ. Each element x gets a membership degree ߤ஺ሺݔሻ, 
determined by the membership function ߤ஺. 
Suppose that ܺ ൌ ሼݔଵ, … ,ݔ௡ሽ is a finite data set. Each 
data point ݔ௞ ൌ ቀݔ௞భ, … ,ݔ௞೛ቁ , ݇ ൌ 1, … , ݊, is a pattern 
vector in R௣. Fuzzy c-means algorithm partitions X in a 
collection of ܵ௜ subsets, 2 ൑ ݅ ൑ ܿ, called fuzzy clusters. By 
running the algorithm repeatedly, a list of v௜ cluster centres 
and a partition matrix U are returned. 
The description of the c-means algorithm is performed 
in the following steps [2]: 
1) Select c=2, initialize m=3 and the termination 
tolerance ߳ ൌ 10ି଼. 
2) Set l = 0. 
3) Determine the initial values of degrees in partition 
matrix ܷ௟. 
4) Calculate cluster centres  v௜
௟, ݅ ൌ 1, … , ܿ, as 
 
v௜
௟ ൌ
∑
൬ቀఓ೔ೖ
೗ ቁ
೘
·௫ೖ൰
೙
ೖసభ
∑
൫ఓ೔ೖ
೗ ൯
೘
೙
ೖసభ
. 
(1) 
 
5) Calculate the updated partition matrix ܷ௟ାଵ by  
 
ߤ௜௞
௟ାଵ ൌ
ቆ
ଵ
ௗ൫௫ೖ,୴೔
೗൯
ቇ
భ ೘షభ
ൗ
∑
ቌ
ଵ
ௗቀ௫ೖ,୴ೕ
೗ቁ
ቍ
భ ೘షభ
ൗ
೎
ೕసభ
. 
(2) 
 
6) If ԡܷ௟ାଵ െ ܷ௟ԡ ൒ ߳, then set l = l + 1, and go to step 4. 
If ԡܷ௟ାଵ െ ܷ௟ԡ ൑ ߳, then stop the procedure. Matrix 
ܷ௟ାଵ is the optimal distribution of membership degrees 
of ݔ௞ in clusters ܵ௜. The symbol ԡ ԡ denotes a matrix 
norm. 
 
The steps of the c-means algorithm [2] contain 
expressions, which are explained in turn as: n is a number of 
data points, c is a number of clusters, the value of ߤௌ೔ሺݔ௞ሻ  
stands for the membership degree of ݔ௞ in cluster ܵ௜, 
݀ሺv௜,ݔ௞ሻ indicates the Euclidean distance between the 
cluster centre v௜ and ݔ௞, and constant ݉ ൐ 1 is a weighting 
exponent. 
The Euclidean distance is proved to guarantee a fast 
convergence of the algorithm to final results. We state m = 3 
as the curves, approximating clusters, are smoothest. 
 
The prior determination of the membership degrees in 
U0 plays a crucial role in the c-means algorithm, as their 
choice not only can affect the convergence speed, but also 
may have a direct impact on the results of the classification 
[2][9]. To avoid inaccuracy in final results, we will discuss 
our own technique of calculation of degrees in U0 to avoid 
guessing at their values intuitively. 
III. 
DEGREES IN THE INITIAL PARTITION MATRIX 
To make appropriate evaluations of the membership of 
ݔ௞ in ܵ௜, we adopt the s-class function [10]  
 
ݏሺݖ,ߙ,ߚ,ߛሻ ൌ
ە
ۖ
۔
ۖ
ۓ0
forݖ൑ߙ,
2 ቀ௭ିఈ
ఊିఈቁ
ଶ
forߙ൑ݖ൑ߚ,
1 െ 2 ቀ௭ିఊ
ఊିఈቁ
ଶ
forߚ൑ݖ൑ߛ,
1
forݖ൒ߛ.
 (3) 
 
in further calculations. 
Surgery prognoses usually can be expressed by “degree 
of surgery” contra “degree of no surgery”, when basing on 
the age, the crp-values and the weight. The linguistic 
degrees of surgery, like, e.g., “little” or “large”, can be 
proposed by a physician as terms of a list L. 
Generally, let us suppose that ܮ ൌ ሼܮଵ, … ,ܮఠሽ is a 
linguistic list consisting of ߱ words, where ߱ is an odd 
integer. Each word is associated with a fuzzy set, also 
named Ls, s = 1,...,߱. Furthermore, let E be the length of a 
common reference set R, containing all fuzzy sets Ls. Let 
ݖאܴ. For instance, R can be recognized as a density set 
between 0 and 100, in which densities about z = 20 belong 
to “little”. We divide the linguistic terms into three groups 
named: a left group, a middle group and a right group. 
The membership functions, assigned to the leftmost 
terms, are parametric functions, which are yielded by (4) as 
[11][12] 
 
ߤ௅೟ሺݖሻ ൌ
ە
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
۔
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۓ1 forݖ൑ ாሺఠିଵሻ
ଶሺఠାଵሻߜሺݐሻ,
1 െ 2 ቆ
௭ିಶሺഘషభሻ
మሺഘశభሻఋሺ௧ሻ
ಶሺഘషభሻ
ഘሺഘశభሻఋሺ௧ሻ ቇ
ଶ
 for ாሺఠିଵሻ
ଶሺఠାଵሻߜሺݐሻ ൑ݖ൑ ாሺఠିଵሻ
ଶఠߜሺݐሻ,
2 ቆ
௭ିಶሺഘషభሻሺഘశమሻ
మഘሺഘశభሻ
ఋሺ௧ሻ
ಶሺഘషభሻ
ഘሺഘశభሻఋሺ௧ሻ
ቇ
ଶ
for ாሺఠିଵሻ
ଶఠߜሺݐሻ ൑ݖ൑ ாሺఠିଵሻሺఠାଶሻ
ଶఠሺఠାଵሻߜሺݐሻ,
0 forݖ൒ ாሺఠିଵሻሺఠାଶሻ
ଶఠሺఠାଵሻߜሺݐሻ,
 
 
(4) 
 
 
where ߜሺݐሻ ൌ
ଶ௧
ఠିଵ ,ݐ ൌ 1, … ,
ఠିଵ
ଶ    is a parametric function, 
depending on left function number t.  
The membership function in the middle has the form of 
a bell. It is designed by (5) in the form of [11][12] 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
ߤ௅ഘశభ
మ
ሺݖሻ ൌ
ە
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
۔
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۓ0
forݖ൑ܧሺ߱െ2ሻ
2߱ ,
2 ቆ
ݖെܧሺ߱െ2ሻ
2߱
ܧ
߱
ቇ
2
forܧሺ߱െ2ሻ
2߱
൑ݖ൑ܧሺ߱െ1ሻ
2߱ ,
1 െ 2 ቆ
ݖെܧ
2
ܧ
߱
ቇ
2
forܧሺ߱െ1ሻ
2߱
൑ݖ൑ܧ
2,
1 െ 2 ൭
ݖെܧ
2
ܧ
߱
൱
2
forܧ
2൑ݖ൑ܧሺ߱൅1ሻ
2߱ ,
2 ൭
zെܧሺ߱൅2ሻ
2߱
ܧ
߱
൱
2
forܧሺ߱൅1ሻ
2߱
൑ݖ൑ܧሺ߱൅2ሻ
2߱ ,
0
forݖ൒ܧሺ߱൅2ሻ
2߱ .
 
(5) 
 
Finally, the membership functions on the right-hand 
side are expressed by (6) as 
 
ߤ௅ഘశయ
మ
శ೟షభሺݖሻ
ൌ
ە
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
۔
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۖ
ۓ0 for ݖ൑ܧ െ ாሺఠିଵሻሺఠାଶሻ
ଶఠሺఠାଵሻߝሺݐሻ,
2 ቌ
௭ିቆாିಶሺഘషభሻሺഘశమሻ
మഘሺഘశభሻ
ఌሺ௧ሻቇ
ಶሺഘషభሻ
ഘሺഘశభሻఌሺ௧ሻ
ቍ
ଶ
for ܧ െ ாሺఠିଵሻሺఠାଶሻ
ଶఠሺఠାଵሻߝሺݐሻ ൑ݖ൑ܧ െ ாሺఠିଵሻ
ଶఠߝሺݐሻ,
1 െ 2 ቌ
௭ିቆாିாሺఠିଵሻ
ଶሺఠାଵሻఌሺ௧ሻቇ
ாሺఠିଵሻ
ఠሺఠାଵሻఌሺ௧ሻ
ቍ
ଶ
for ܧ െ ாሺఠିଵሻ
ଶఠߝሺݐሻ ൑ݖ൑ܧ െ ாሺఠିଵሻ
ଶሺఠାଵሻߝሺݐሻ,
1 for ݖ൒ܧ െ ாሺఠିଵሻ
ଶሺఠାଵሻߝሺݐሻ.
 
(6) 
 
A new function ߝሺݐሻ ൌ 1 െ
ଶሺ௧ିଵሻ
ఠିଵ ,ݐ ൌ 1, … ,
ఠିଵ
ଶ  allows 
generating all rightmost functions one by one, when setting 
t-values in (6). 
IV. 
THE SURGERY DECISION FOR 25 PATIENTS 
 
To make a decision about surgery, concerning an 
individual patient in accordance with his/her biological 
markers’ values, we must involve the medical experience in 
the decisive process. In order to facilitate a conversation 
with a physician, we have prepared a list named “The 
primary medical linguistic judgment of surgery grade”= L = 
ሼܮଵ ൌ "none",  ܮଶ ൌ "little",  ܮଷ ൌ "medium",  ܮସ ൌ
"large",  ܮହ ൌ "total"ሽ. The evaluation of no surgery will be 
an inverted surgery term with respect to L. 
The excerpt of the data set, shown in TABLE I, consists 
of the patients’ clinical records and primary linguistic 
estimations of surgery grades. The judgments are made by 
the medical expert. The total medical report contains 25 
gastric cancer patients, randomly selected. 
 
TABLE I.  
THE DATA SET OF 25 GASTRIC CANCER PATIENTS 
Patient ࢞࢑ 
Attribute-vectors and surgery judgments 
Attribute-vectors  
(Age, weight, crp) 
Surgery 
ࢉ࢒࢛࢙࢚ࢋ࢘ ࡿ૚ 
No Surgery 
 ࢉ࢒࢛࢙࢚ࢋ࢘ࡿ૛
ݔଵ 
(71, 85, 1) 
Total 
None 
ݔଶ 
(81, 70, 9) 
Medium 
Medium 
ڮ ڮ ڮ ڮ 
ݔଶହ 
(54, 49, 36) 
None 
Total  
 
Each verbal expression, being the term of L, is 
associated with a fuzzy set. ܮଵ and ܮଶ represent two left 
fuzzy sets. ܮଷ is the fuzzy set in the middle, whereas ܮସ and 
ܮହ constitute two rightmost fuzzy sets. Unfortunately, these 
linguistic items do not provide us with any information 
about degrees, expected in matrix ܷ଴. To estimate degrees 
of surgery in cluster S1 and degrees of no surgery in cluster 
S2, we have initiated the following enumeration technique. 
By employing (4), (5) and (6) for E = 100 (a typical 
reference set in medical investigations of densities) and ߱ = 
5, we derive the membership functions of Ls, s = 1,…,5. 
Functions Ls are sketched in Figure 1.  
After setting ߙ ൌ 0,ߚ ൌ 50 and γ ൌ 100 in a new s-
function, impacted over set R, we determine 
 
ߤோሺݖሻ ൌݏሺݖ,0,50,100ሻ, 
(7) 
 
whose graph is added to Figure 1. 
 
 
L5 = total
L4 = large
L3 = midium
L2 = little
1 = none
L
( z 0, ,50,100 )
s
 
Figure 1. The collection of membership functions generated by (4), (5), (6) 
and (7) 
 
 
Figure 1 helps us to evaluate the degrees taking place in 
the first partition matrix ܷ଴. The second coordinates of the 
intersection points between ߤோሺݖሻ and ߤ௅ೞሺݖሻ, s = 1,…,5, 
will substitute the linguistic structures, filling L. Therefore, 
0.056 is assigned to “none”, 0.22 to “little”, 0.5 to 
“medium”, 0.78 to “large” and 0.944 to “total”. The list L 
can be extended by adding other verbal expressions to it. 
 
After the arrangements of numerical compensations of 
the terms from L, the words in TABLE I are replaced by 
values put in TABLE II. 
 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE II.  
DATA SET  WITH INITIAL DEGREES 
Patient ࢞࢑ 
Attribute-vectors and surgery degrees 
Attribute-vectors  
(Age, weight, crp) ࣆࡿ૚ሺ࢞࢑ሻ ࣆࡿ૛ሺ࢞࢑ሻ 
ݔଵ 
(71, 85, 1) 
0.944 
0.056 
ݔଶ 
(81, 70, 9) 
0.5 
0.5 
ڮ ڮ ڮ ڮ 
ݔଶହ 
(54, 49, 36) 
0.056 
0.944 
 
The entries of the initial partition matrix ܷଶൈଶହ
଴
 contain 
the values coming from the last two columns in TABLE II.  
If we go back to the c-means clustering algorithm and 
involve Matlab in calculations, then the cluster centres will 
become stable after 31 iterations. 
The last partition matrix has a pattern 
 
                                     ݔଵ     ڮ     ݔଶହ 
                          ܷଷଵ ൌ ܵଵ
ܵଶ ቂ0.79ڮ0.31
0.21…0.69ቃ
ଶ௫ଶହ
. 
 
The relations referring to magnitudes of the final degrees 
for 25 patients, classified for surgery in ܵଵ and for no 
surgery in ܵଶ, have confirmed the primary hypotheses. The 
final verdicts are softer, e.g., “total” is reduced to “large” for 
surgery prognosis, whereas “none” gets a status of “little” 
for no surgery.  
V. 
PATIENT CHARACTERISTIC VALUES 
 
We now generate a set of points (xk, ߤௌభሺݔ௞ሻሻ, ݇ ൌ
1, … , ݊. Let us note that the first coordinates xk do not 
belong to any real-valued xk-axis, since xk have not been 
characterized by any quantity. We thus want to assign a 
characteristic value to each patient xk [12] to be able to place 
xk’s characteristic values in an ascending order.  
 
The patients’ crp-values, the ages and the body weights 
play a significant role in the surgery diagnosis. Let us 
denote the space of the crp-values by CRP = [0, 85], the 
space of ages by A = [0, 100] and express the body weight 
space by BW = [40, 120].  
 
For xk, a characteristic value ݂௫ೖሺ ܿݎ݌௖ ܽ௖ ܾݓ௖ሻ ൌ
ݓ௖௥௣ܿݎ݌௖൅ݓ௔ܽ௖൅ݓ௕௪ܾݓ௖, ܽ௖∈ܣ, ܿݎ݌௖∈ܥܴܲ 
and 
ܾݓ௖∈ܤܹ, k = 1,...,n, [12]. The multipliers ݓ௖௥௣,  ݓ௔ and 
ݓ௕௪ are the importance weights, emphasizing the decisive 
power of each biological parameter for the surgery decision.  
 
To find values of importance weights ݓ௖௥௣,ݓ௔ and ݓ௕௪, 
we present our own procedure, sketched below.  
 
Generally, we compare p parameters to assign 
importance weights to them. A sequence p1>p2>...>pp will 
be thus arranged due to the expert’s opinion, provided that 
“>” is interpreted as “more important than”. We wish the 
sum of all weights wq, q = 1,...,p, to be 1 in accordance with 
 
݌ ·ݎ൅ ሺ݌ െ 1ሻ ·ݎ൅ڮ൅2·ݎ൅1·ݎ ൌ 1 
(8) 
 
where r is a quotient depending on p. Hence, ݓ௤ ൌ
ሺ݌ െݍ൅1ሻ ·ݎ, for q = 1,...,p. 
In the gastric cancer example, the physician determines 
the sequence crp>age>weight, which lets us evaluate 
ݓ௖௥௣ ൌ 0.498,  ݓ௔ ൌ 0.333 and ݓ௕௪ ൌ0.166. 
 
Example 1 
The eighty-one year old man xk, weighing 90 kg and 
revealing crp=16, is given by   ݂௫ೖሺܿݎ݌௖ ܽ௖  ܾݓ௖ሻ ൌ 49.88. 
VI. THE CURVE FITTING FOR  THE POINT SETS  
 
We wish to find a curve, which approximates the set of 
pairs (݂௫ೖሺܿݎ݌௖ ܽ௖  ܾݓ௖ሻ,ߤௌభ
௎యభሺݔ௞ሻሻ , symbolically denoted 
by ቀ݂௫ೖ,ߤሺݔ௞ሻቁ. In the set, the pairs are arranged in 
ascending order of characteristic values ݂௫ೖ. 
In accordance with [7][8] (our earlier procedures), we 
utilize the equation of the truncated ߨ function in the 
process of approximation of point sets, which build the 
pattern of a bell. The classical ߨ-function is limited by 
s(z,α1,β1,γ1=α2) in the left part and 1–s(z,α2=γ1,β2,γ2) in the 
right part, respectively [10]. Its truncated version has no 
intersection points with the z-axis. Without discussing the 
details, which are available in [7][8], we only mention that 
we need three characteristic points to start with the 
approximation. When remembering that ݂௫ೖ, ݇ ൌ 1, … , ݊, are 
ordered in the ascending sequence, we select: 
(f1=min௞ୀଵ,…,௡ሺ݂௫ೖሻ, μ1),  (f2, μ2ൌ max௞ୀଵ,…,௡ሺߤሺݔ௞ሻሻ) and 
(f3=max௞ୀଵ,…,௡ሺ݂௫ೖሻ, μ3). 
 
The coordinates of the points are included into four 
general equations of the truncated π: 
a) 
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
≤
≤
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
−
≤
≤
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
<
=
=
−
−
−
−
,
for
2
1
,
for
2
,
for
0
)
(
)
(
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
"
"
2
2
2
f
f
β
μ
β
f
f
μ
f
f
f
μ
f
π
k
k
x
k
k
x
k
k
k
x
α
f
f
f
x
α
f
α
f
x
x
surgery
x
slope
left
 
(9) 
for 
2 2
1
2 2
1
2
1
1
μ
μ
μ
μ
f
f
α
−
−
=
, 
2
1
μ < μ2
 and 
2
1
2f
α
β
= +
,  
b) 
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
≤
≤
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
−
<
=
=
−
−
,
for
2
1
 
,
for
0
)
(
)
(
2
1
2
2
1
"
"
2
2
f
f
f
μ
f
f
f
μ
f
π
k
k
x
k
k
k
x
α
f
f
f
x
x
surgery
x
slope
left
 
(10) 
 
where 
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
μ
μ
μ
f
f
f
α
⋅
−
−
−
=
 for 
2
1
μ ≥ μ2
. 
 
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

c) 
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
>
≤
≤
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
<
≤
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
−
=
=
−
−
−
−
,
for
0
,
for
2
,
for
2
1
)
(
)
(
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
"
"
2
2
2
f
f
f
f
β
μ
β
f
f
μ
f
μ
f
π
k
k
k
x
k
k
x
k
k
x
x
f
γ
γ
f
x
f
γ
f
f
x
surgery
x
slope
right
 
(11) 
 
for 
2
2
3
2
2
3
2
3
1
μ
μ
μ
μ
f
f
γ
⋅
⋅
−
−
=
, when 
2
3
μ < μ2
 and 
2
2
2
γ
f
β
+
=
 
 
and 
 
d) 
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
>
<
≤
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
−
=
=
−
−
,
for
0
,
for
2
1
)
(
)
(
3
3
2
2
2
"
"
2
2
f
f
f
f
f
μ
f
μ
f
π
k
k
k
x
k
k
x
x
f
γ
f
f
x
surgery
x
slope
right
 
(12) 
 
in which 
2 2
3
2
2
3
2
μ
μ
μ
f
f
f
γ
−
−
+
=
 for 
2
3
μ ≥ μ2
. 
 
Example 2 
The data of 25 patients xk, k = 1,...,25, are rearranged in 
ascending order due to  ݂௫ೖሺܿݎ݌௖ ܽ௖  ܾݓ௖ሻ ൌ 0.498ܿݎ݌௖൅
0.333ܽ௖൅0.166ܾݓ௖. For (݂௫ೖሺܿݎ݌௖ ܽ௖  ܾݓ௖ሻ,ߤௌభ
௎యభሺݔ௞ሻሻ, 
we select (f1, μ1) = (32.23, 0.682), (f2, μ2) = (36.428, 0.824) 
and (f3, μ3) = (112.60, 0.374). Figure 2 plots all points, 
assisting the patients’ clinical data and surgery degrees.  
 
 
Figure 2. The set of points (݂௫ೖሺܿݎ݌௖ ܽ௖  ܾݓ௖ሻ,ߤௌభ
௎యభሺݔ௞ሻሻ, ݇ ൌ 1, … ,25 
 
 
 
The left part of the truncated π, when ߤଵ ൐ ഋమ
మ  
(0.682>0.412), has the equation 
 
⎪⎩
⎪⎨
⎧
≤
≤
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
−
<
=
=
−
−
36.428,
for32.23
2
824 1
.0
32.23,
for
0
)
(
)
(
2
.428 22.127
36
.428
36
"
"
k
k
x
k
k
k
x
f
x
x
surgery
x
slope
left
f
f
f
μ
f
π
 
 
for restored 
22.127
.428
36
2 .0 824
.0 682
.0 824
36.428 32.23
=
−
=
⋅
−
−
α
, due to b). 
 
To derive the right part of π, we study c), as ߤଶ ൏ ഋయ
మ . 
Equation (11) provides us with the formula  
 
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎧
>
≤
≤
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
<
≤
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛
−
=
=
−
−
−
−
,6.
112
for
0
,6.
112
for109 ,164
.824 2
0
109 .164,
for 36.428
2
.824 1
0
)
(
)
(
2
36.428
9.
181
9.
181
2
36.428
9.
181
.428
36
"
"
"
"
k
k
k
x
k
k
x
k
k
x
x
f
x
f
x
surgery
x
slope
right
f
f
f
f
μ
f
μ
 
 
where γ = 181.9. 
 
The graph of both branches of 
)
"(
"
xk
surgery
f
μ
 is drawn 
in Figure 3. The function, created for degrees of no surgery, 
has a formula 
)
(
1
"
"
xk
surgery
f
− μ
. 
 
The formulas, expressed in Example 2, allow making 
surgery prognoses for an arbitrary patient, whose 
characteristic value lies in interval [32.23, 112.6]. If we face 
more extreme quantities, then we should construct another 
partition matrix, adapted to a new collection of clinical data.  
 
of " surgery "
function
"
"
none surgery
of
function
Figure 3. The membership functions of “surgery” and “none surgery”  
 
Example 3 
Evaluate a degree of surgery for the patient from Example 1. 
The patient characteristic value has equalled 49.88. Hence, 
ߤ"௦௨௥௚௘௥௬"ሺ49.88ሻ ൌ
(
) ⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎝
⎛ −
−
−
2
36.428
181 9.
2 49.88 36.428
.0 824 1
= 0.809. 
VI I.  
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
We have applied fuzzy 2-means clustering analysis to 
partition a patient data set, containing clinical records of 25 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

gastric cancer patients, in two fuzzy clusters. These reveal 
the numerical decision of states: “surgery” and “no 
surgery”.  
 
We notice that the patients’ original clinical marker 
values lead to higher membership degrees in the initial 
partition matrix, when comparing them to the lower values 
in the final matrix. This phenomenon can be explained by 
the fact that the decision for an individual patient has been 
made by the assistance of all data filling the data set. This 
means that the medical knowledge provided in the form of 
the collective information, reset numerically, could decide 
“softer” decisions. The obtained results converge to the 
surgery judgments made by physicians from Blekinge 
County Hospital, Karlskrona, Sweden.  
In the second part of the study, we have started with 
the constructions of characteristic values. The values are 
mixtures of clinical measurements and importance weights 
of markers examined. Then the points, characterized by 
coordinates equal to the patient characteristics and degrees 
of surgery, have been surrounded by the curve. The equation 
of this curve may be used to prognosticate a degree of 
surgery for any gastric cancer patient. The approximation by 
the truncated ߨ cumulates a little error for point shapes, 
similar to parts of a bell. The placement of minimal and 
maximal degrees in the graph of the curve, connected to 
“degree of surgery”, agrees with the medical knowledge on 
recommendations of surgery in the cases of gastric cancer 
patients. 
The idea of applying fuzzy set theory to the surgery 
decision is a pioneer in the field of medical applications of 
mathematics. Therefore, we cannot compare our effects to 
similar contributions, made in this domain. In spite of that, 
the physicians, cooperating with us, have confirmed the 
reliability of mathematical models.  
Apart from applications of ready-made algorithms, like 
the c-means method, we have introduced our own earlier 
and newer mathematical models to this medical example. 
The membership function families, exploiting to determine 
the initial membership degrees in the partition matrix, have 
been an efficient tool in the algorithm. The functions, 
furnished with parameters, allow constructing arbitrary 
linguistic lists containing many verbal judgments. The 
weights of importance have been computed by the action of 
a simple algorithm, specially constructed for this purpose. 
Lastly, the procedure of approximation of point sets, 
resembling the shape of a bell, remains our own substantial 
contribution. Without the equation of the approximating 
curve, we could not make any surgery prognoses for casual 
patients, who do not exist in the testing set of patients. 
Future challenges are also planned. We want to test 
larger samples of patients to open a database of truncated π 
equations, covering the most cases of patient clinical data. 
This may give us a chance to establish the information 
computer centre, making surgery prognoses. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. de Mello, L. Struthers, R. Turner, E. H. Cooper, and G. R. 
Giles, “Multivariate Analyses as Aids to Diagnosis and 
Assessment of Prognosis in Gastrointestinal Cancer,” Br. J. 
Cancer, vol. 48, pp. 341–348, 1983. 
[2] J. C. Bezdek, Pattern Recognition with Fuzzy Objective 
Function Algorithms, New York: Plenum Press, 1981. 
[3] R. Nock, and F. Nielsen, "On Weighting Clustering," IEEE 
Trans. on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 28 
Issue 8, pp. 1–13, 2006. 
[4] R. Duda, P. Hart, and D. Stork, Pattern Classification, 2nd ed., 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001.  
[5] H. Zettervall, E. Rakus-Andersson, and H. Forssell, “Applied 
Fuzzy c-means Clustering to Operation Evaluation for Gastric 
Cancer Patients,” Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Conference on Telemedicine and Social Medicine – 
eTELEMED 2013, Nice, France, IARIA, Feb., 2013, pp. 229–
233, ISSN: 2308-4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-252-3. 
[6] H. Zettervall, E. Rakus-Andersson, and H. Forssell, “Fuzzy c-
Means Cluster Analysis and Approximated Data Strings in 
Operation Prognosis for Gastric Cancer Patients,” in New 
Trends in Fuzzy Sets, Intuitionistic Fuzzy Sets, Generalized 
Nets and Related Topics, vol. II, Warsaw: IBS PAN - SRI 
PAS, pp. 181–200, 2013. 
[7] E. Rakus-Andersson, Fuzzy and Rough Techniques in 
Medical Diagnosis and Medication,  Berlin Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2007.  
[8] E. 
Rakus-Andersson, 
“Approximation 
and 
Rough 
Classification of Letter-like Polygon Shapes,” in Rough Sets 
and Intelligent Systems - Professor Zdzislaw Pawlak in 
Memoriam,  A. Skowron, and Z. Suraj, Eds., ISRL 43, Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 455–474, 2013. 
[9] J. Yang and Y. Ning, “Research on Initial Clustering Centers 
of Fuzzy c-means Algorithm and Its Application to Instrusion 
Detection,” Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Environmental 
Science 
and 
Information 
Application 
Technology 2009, Wuhan, China, IEEE, July, 2009, vol. 3, 
pp. 161–163, ISBN: 9781424444151.  
[10] H. J. Zimmermann, Fuzzy Set Theory and Its Applications, 
3rd ed., Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1996. 
[11] E. Rakus-Andersson, “The Mamdani Controller with Modeled 
Families of Constraints in Evaluation of Cancer Patient 
Survival Length,” in Emerging Paradigms in Machine 
Learning, vol 13, S. Ramanna, L. Jain, and R. Howlett, Eds., 
Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer, pp. 359–378, 2012. 
[12] E. Rakus-Andersson, “Selected Algorithms of Computational 
Intelligence in Surgery Decision making,” Open Access book 
Gastroenterology in SCITECH  
http://www.intechopen.com/articles/show/title/selected-
algorithms-of-computational-intelligence-in-cancer-surgery-
decision-making, [retrieved: January, 2014]. 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Reduced Elective Surgery Cancellations 
Through Patient Involvement In Pre-Operative Planning In Norway 
 
Conceição Granja 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
conceicao.granja@telemed.no 
Kari Dyb 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
kari.dyb@telemed.no 
Stein Roald Bolle 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
stein.roald.bolle@telemed.no 
 
Gunnar Hartvingsen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Tromsø 
Tromsø, Norway 
gunnar.hartvigsen@telemed.no
 
 
Abstract—Surgery cancellations are undesirable in hospital 
settings as they increase costs, reduce productivity and 
efficiency, increase waiting lists, and directly affect the patient. 
The elective surgery cancellations problem in a North 
Norwegian University Hospital is addressed. Based on 
observations and interviews, conducted at the hospital, lack of 
information during the pre-operative planning was identified as 
the main cause of elective surgery cancellations. The problems 
with the existing pre-operative process were identified and a 
new process is proposed. By studying the pre-operative planning 
at the hospital, we have determined that part of the information 
flow can be moved to the patient at home. From the work 
presented herein, we conclude that the assessment information 
required during the pre-operative planning can be compiled in 
a personal health assessment questionnaire, and requested from 
the patient, at an earlier stage. 
Keywords-elective 
surgery 
cancellations; 
pre-operative 
planning; communication; process optimization; Norway 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Surgical departments are simultaneously the major source 
of investment, and the greatest source of revenue for most 
hospitals [1, 2]. However, it is known that between 10 and 40 
% of elective surgeries are cancelled [1, 3-5]. In western 
countries, up to 20 % of elective surgeries are cancelled on the 
day of surgery [6-8]. Furthermore, it has been reported that 50 
% of these cancellations might be avoided [1, 9, 10]. 
Surgery cancellations are undesirable in hospital settings 
as they increase costs, reduce productivity and efficiency, 
increase waiting lists, and directly affect the patient [3, 8, 11]. 
Considerable resources are invested in maintaining operating 
theatres, and having surgeons and theatre staff available on an 
agreed schedule [1, 12]. In spite of this, the cancellation rate 
of elective surgeries is high, especially in the public sector [9, 
13]. Cancellations can significantly inconvenience patients 
and their families [14, 15]. It is also reported that patients may 
suffer psychological stress, and/or financial hardships [9]. 
Accordingly, cancellations are stressful and costly, with a high 
level of emotional involvement before surgery [1]. 
The causes for elective surgery cancellation are diverse 
and may be divided in two major categories: (a) hospital, and 
(b) patient related reasons, when considering who took the 
underlying decision to cancel. Hospital related reasons are the 
most frequent and encompass causes such as the 
unavailability of the surgical team [3, 7, 8], incomplete pre-
operative study/preparation [7, 16], lack of surgical/anesthetic 
readiness [7, 8], and lack of theatre time due to extended 
duration of scheduled surgeries [7]. On the other hand, patient 
related causes are mostly due to patient no-shows and refusal 
to undergo surgery [7, 8, 16]. It is argued that the majority of 
cancellations are due to information that existed prior to the 
day of surgery, but was not available when required [9, 13, 17-
20]. 
In line with what is reported in literature, our site of 
research, the University Hospital of North Norway (UNN), 
has identified inadequate planning due to lack of information 
as a main cause for cancellations (Figure 1). The hospital has 
reported that more than 50 % of all cancellations at UNN are 
related to inadequate pre-operative planning [17]. It is 
anticipated that the pre-operative planning process may be 
improved if adequate patient information is gathered at an 
earlier stage, before the patient is admitted at the hospital. 
In this paper, the elective surgery cancellation problem 
caused by inadequate pre-operative planning, in a University 
Hospital in Norway, is addressed. We started by mapping and 
evaluating the pre-operative process at UNN, and explored a 
system for gathering information from patients on his/her 
condition through a personal health assessment questionnaire. 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
Figure 1. Causes for day of surgery cancellations distribution at UNN from January to June 2011. 
This paper is divided in six sections. In the first section the 
problem object of the study is described and classified 
according to its causes. In the second section a brief review of 
the state of the art is presented. Data collection methodologies, 
with which the results were obtained, are presented and 
explained in the third section. The results are disclosed and 
interpreted in sections four and five. In the last section 
conclusions about the results are drawn, and some indicators 
of future work in the area foreseen. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Elective surgery cancellations, due to lacking information, 
at UNN are mainly related to inadequate pre-operative 
planning. In literature, pre-operative planning is reported to be 
approached in several different ways. A brief literature review 
on some of the approaches is presented below. 
A widely studied approach to the elective surgery 
cancellation problem is the establishment of pre-operative 
assessment clinics (POACs). The aim of a POAC is to prepare 
patients for the administration of anesthesia and for surgery. 
The implementation of POACs may take different 
configurations relating to the worker leading the appointment. 
Doctor-led POACs were implemented by [16, 21-23] in an 
attempt to solve elective surgery cancellations due to lacking 
information. In this settings, patients are referred to the POAC 
either from the ward or the outpatient clinic. It was concluded 
that the number of cancellations was reduced but considered 
not significant [16]. In nurse-led POACs [24-26] the role of 
the physicians is transferred to the nurse. Thus, in such 
environments, the pre-operative assessment is undertaken by 
nurses, 
with 
overall 
supervision 
of 
a 
consultant 
anesthesiologist. Nurse-led pre-operative assessment systems 
POACs do not address the hypothesis that the pre-operative 
assessment information may be collected from the patient at 
home. 
A different approach to improve pre-operative planning is 
to re-evaluate the role of health workers in the pre-operative 
process, and create tools that enable the transfer of 
responsibilities from physicians to nurses. It is advocated that 
the pre-operative assessment of elective surgical patients may 
be undertaken by trained nurses [18, 27, 28]. Following this 
hypothesis, nurse-led pre-operative assessment systems have 
been implemented [18, 27, 28], using protocols to guide 
nurses in the decision making process. Nurse-led pre-
operative systems do not address the hypothesis that the pre-
operative assessment information may be collected from the 
patient at home.  
Searches on the major academic literature databases (e.g. 
PubMed, Web of Science, Inspec, SCOPUS), on pre-operative 
planning that use communication with the patient at home, did 
not retrieve any relevant result. Following, an approach to the 
problem of elective surgery cancellations by contacting the 
patient at home is presented. 
Telephone calls are being studied as a solution to reduce 
elective surgery cancellations, due to patient no-shows, on the 
day-of-surgery 
[29, 
30]. 
Such 
studies 
propose 
a 
communication channel between the patient and the provider 
to enable the confirmation of the patient’s intention to attend 
surgery, or simply address patient questions and concerns. 
Information exchange between health personnel and patients, 
while the patients are still at home, may solve some of today’s 
challenges with late pre-surgical planning and, consequently, 
cancellations of surgical procedures. 
The aim of our research is to reduce the elective surgery 
cancellations at UNN, by studying pre-operative planning and 
determine if it may be moved from the hospital to the patient 
at home. We will explore if surgical patients and health 
personnel can collaborate in a team while the patient is still at 
home, and if this reduces elective surgery cancellations, by 
better preparing hospitals and patients for surgical procedures. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Frequency
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The management at UNN, our site of research, is 
determined to reduce the cancellation rate at the hospital. 
Resources have been allocated, and a Lean process for elective 
surgical patient pathways at the Operation and Intensive care 
clinic has been initiated at UNN. Lean projects are commonly 
used to transform healthcare organizations for improvements 
in patient care through the development of a quality driven 
culture [11]. At UNN, Lean is defined to concern the right 
things at the right place, time and amount, with a minimum of 
waste while, at the same time, being flexible and prepared for 
changes. The Lean process at UNN is organized as a project 
team, including a project manager, a Lean consultant, a Lean 
mentor, an economics and an IT-consultant. In addition, the 
Lean project has an executive board, a project group and a 
focus group. At the start of the Lean Project, the focus group, 
which is the actual working group, consisted of; one 
anesthetist nurse, one theatre nurse, two anesthesiologist, 
three surgeons, one member of the staff responsible for 
sterilization of surgical equipment, three staff members 
responsible for elective surgery planning and waiting lists in 
the surgery ward, one pediatric nurse, two ICT consultants 
(one responsible for the EHR), one employee representative, 
and one user (patient). 
Two researchers from our research team have followed the 
Lean process since the initial group meeting in April 2012. 
One has participated solely as a researcher, conducting 
observations during Lean meetings, while the other had an 
active role and contributed as an anesthesiologist in the Lean 
process. The researchers observed and participated in more 
than twenty meetings. In addition to following the Lean 
process, we have accomplish three weeks of fieldwork at the 
Operation and Intensive care clinic, conducting observations 
and 
unstructured 
interviews 
while 
following 
an 
anesthesiologist and an anesthetist nurse in their daily work. 
We have also conducted thirteen structured interviews with 
physicians, nurses and administrative personnel. 
Data collected through observations and interviews was 
analyzed together with observational data from the Lean 
project. Our analytical qualitative approach focuses on the 
interaction between technical and social factors that produces 
particular outcomes [31].The preliminary results are limited to 
the identification of the information needed for pre-operative 
assessment from the anesthetists and surgeons’ point of view. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The observations and interviews, described in section III, 
allowed the definition and mapping of the generic pre-
operative process model shown in Figure 2. A process model 
facilitates a systematic description of the events permitting the 
identification of decision activities, and the health worker 
responsible for each of them. In addition, it allows us to learn 
about the information flow, and to identify the underlying 
process issues that are causing the patient assessment 
information not to be available when required. At UNN, as 
seen in Figure 2, final pre-operative planning is often done 
after the patient has arrived for the scheduled surgery. Which 
means, the final pre-operative planning might me done the day 
before, or even on the day of surgery. During this final 
planning process, new information is gathered from patients 
which may lead to cancellations. 
Considering the data collected during the observations and 
interviews, and the analysis of the existing pre-operative 
process, all the decision activities were identified and 
characterized. Based on the information requirements on each 
of those activities, a new pre-operative process was proposed. 
In the new pre-operative process the assessment information 
is requested to the patient at an earlier stage and while the 
patient is still at home. The assessment information identified 
as required might be included in the personal health 
assessment questionnaire which some departments ask the 
patients to fill out and bring to the hospital when hospitalized 
for surgery. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper addresses the elective surgery cancellations 
problem at UNN, a North Norwegian University Hospital. 
Observations and interviews were conducted at UNN, and 
lack of information during the pre-operative planning was 
identified as the main cause of elective surgery cancellations. 
The problems with the existing pre-operative process were 
identified and a new process was proposed. In the new 
process, the assessment information is systematized in a 
personal health assessment questionnaire, and provided by the 
patient at an earlier stage, while the patient is still at home. 
The mapping of a generic pre-operative process model 
facilitated the identification of the decision activities, and the 
health worker responsible. The identification of activities, and 
their responsible health worker, allowed us to carry out semi-
structured interviews to determine the information required to 
complete the pre-operative assessment. Surgeons and 
anesthesiologists at UNN considered that the identified 
information may be provided by the patient. Some 
departments ask the patients to fill out a personal health 
assessment questionnaire and bring it to the hospital when 
hospitalized for surgery. The information classified as 
required might be included in this questionnaire. Such 
questionnaires can be sent to the patient through the postal 
system, and the patient can fill it out at home. 
In developed countries, like Norway, where the population 
is well prepared and able to use ICT (e-readiness), a new 
approach is possible [32] to promote patient-centered health 
care [33, 34]. Many patients [35], including elderly or less-
educated [36], are strongly motivated to use electronic 
services [37]. This has been implemented at the Mayo clinic 
(Rochester, MN, USA) for primary care, with a 40 % decrease 
of office visits [38]. Increased collaboration with patients, as 
active participants, through ICT solutions, are also defined as 
a priority area, as stated in the Norwegian Ministry of Health 
and Care Services’ Coordination Reform [39]. Currently, an 
extensive ICT investment is taking place in the northern health 
region of Norway, including at the UNN hospital, our site of 
research. Helse-Nord, the Northern Norway Regional Health 
Authority, is investing € 62.5 million in the FIKS (from the 
Norwegian Felles innføring kliniske systemer) project to 
develop the electronic health record for the future -– a 
fundamental tool for high-quality patient treatment [40]. The 
planning tool on the surgical module in the EHR system has 
been recognized as an unused resource by FIKS, Helse-Nord 
and the Lean Project [40]. The described health care trends in 
Norway open new possibilities to approach the elective 
surgery cancellation problem. 
 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Referral
Patient 
registration
Order entry
Start referral 
evaluation
Sufficient 
Information
Request information from 
referral institution or GP
Get information
Call the patient
Patient referred to 
Outpatient Clinic
No need for health care from 
specialist (Return to GP)
N
Letter to Patient 
and referral 
institution/GP
END
Inpatient Admission
Y
End referral 
evaluation
Letter to Patient and referral 
institution/GP acknowledging 
the referral was received 
Letter to Patient and 
referral institution/GP 
with time frame
Letter to Patient and 
referral institution/GP 
with time frame
Schedule patient to 
surgery (Day surgery)
Letter to Patient and 
referral institution/GP 
with time frame
Sufficient 
Information
N
Y
Appointment at 
Outpatient Clinic
Schedule patient to 
surgery (to himself)
Patient referred to 
appointment with 
another specialist
Internal Referral
No need for surgery
Letter to Patient 
and referral 
institution/GP
END
Schedule 
Follow-up
2nd Referral 
Evaluation
Letter to Patient 
and referral 
institution/GP
Letter to Patient and referral institution/
GP with appointment date/time and 
indication of additional examinations
Surgery planning meeting
Patient arrives at the 
hospital (if not Inpatient)
Procedures in surgical 
department
Surgical Assessment
Treatment
Medical Exam
Surgery 
Cancelled
Discharge
Information 
Required
Anesthesia 
Preparation
Surgery
Surgery form 
(operasjonmelding)
N
Y
OK for 
surgery
N
Y
Had Anesthesia 
Assessment
N
Y
Anesthesia 
Assessment
Admitted for 
Surgery
Admitted for 
Observation
Patient Observation & 
Further Investigation
Schedule for 
Surgery
Schedule 
Follow-up
Discharge
Secretary
Surgeon
Anesthesiologist
 
 
Figure 2. Scheme of the surgery process at UNN. Assessment activities after patient arrival (Box with green border), may contribute to late cancellations 
(box with red border) while there are many possibilities for hospital-patient interaction at earlier stages (Letters to patient and patient at the hospital). 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
By studying the pre-operative planning at UNN, we have 
determined that parts of the information flow can be moved to 
the patient at home. From the work presented herein, we 
conclude that the assessment information required during the 
pre-operative planning can be compiled in a personal health 
assessment questionnaire, and requested from the patient, at 
an earlier stage. 
The authors acknowledge that the paper-based pre-
operative planning process proposed is not in line with the best 
practices suggested in literature. When using the postal system 
the information flow between the patient and the hospital is 
time consuming, and it is not possible for the hospital to 
confirm the reception and submission of the personal health 
assessment questionnaire. At the same time, due to: (a) the 
patient prioritization rules in Norway [41], (b) waiting list, (c) 
and emergency surgeries, surgeries can be delayed and the 
patient might be requested to complete the personal health 
assessment questionnaire more than once. On the other hand, 
when asking the patient to answer a personal health 
assessment questionnaire from home, the patient might 
require support from health workers when interpreting the 
questions, and selecting the relevant information.  
The international healthcare trends on paperless and 
patient focused clinical processes, combined with the e-
readiness in Norwegian society, point to new possibilities on 
how to gather assessment information from the patient at 
home. To access this information, low-cost communication 
with patients and their families has been recommended [12]. 
Thereby improving pre-operative planning, and reducing the 
number of cancelations, due to lack of information. In order 
to enable the communication between the patient and the 
hospital, the interaction with patients should take place 
through a variety of synchronous and asynchronous secure 
communication channels, including phone, messaging 
systems, email, and web-pages. 
As patients use several types of communication devices, 
they should have the opportunity to be contacted on different 
platforms as well, such as smartphones, pads, and laptops. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the regional health 
authority Helse-Nord for funding the research project HST 
1119-13 and HST 1125-13. We would also like to thank the 
personnel at UNN and the Lean project, especially Tonje 
Drecker. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. N. Schofield, G. L. Rubin, M. Piza, Y. Y. Lai, D. 
Sindhusake, M. R. Fearnside, et al., "Cancellation of operations 
on the day of intended surgery at a major Australian referral 
hospital," Medical Journal of Australia, vol. 182, pp. 612-615, 
2005. 
[2] B. Denton, J. Viapiano, and A. Vogl, "Optimization of surgery 
sequencing and scheduling decisions under uncertainty," 
Health Care Manag Sci, vol. 10, pp. 13-24, 2007. 
[3] Audit Commission for Local Authorities the National Health 
Service in England Wales, "Operating Theatres: Review of 
National Findings," London, 2003. 
[4] M. J. Lacqua and J. T. Evans, "Canceled Elective Surgery: An 
Evaluation," American Surgeon, vol. 60, pp. 809-811, 1994. 
[5] B. Ivarsson, P. O. Kimblad, T. Sjoberg, and S. Larsson, 
"Patient reactions to cancelled or postponed heart operations," 
J Nurs Manag, vol. 10, pp. 75-81, 2002. 
[6] Aaserud M, Trommald M, and B. J., "Elektiv kirurgi - 
strykninger, skjerming og effektivitet," Tidsskr Nor Lægeforen 
vol. 21, pp. 2516-2519, 2001. 
[7] A. González-Arévalo, J. I. Gómez-Arnau, F. J. DelaCruz, J. M. 
Marzal, S. Ramírez, E. M. Corral, et al., "Causes for 
cancellation of elective surgical procedures in a Spanish 
general hospital," Anaesthesia, vol. 64, pp. 487-493, 2009. 
[8] S. Z. Yoon, S. I. Lees, H. W. Lee, H. J. Lim, S. M. Yoon, and 
S. H. Chang, The effect of increasing operating room capacity 
on 
day-of-surgery 
cancellation 
vol. 
37. 
Edgecliff, 
AUSTRALIE: Anaesthesia Society of Anaesthetists, 2009. 
[9] T. L. Trentman, J. T. Mueller, S. L. Fassett, C. L. Dormer, and 
K. P. Weinmeister, "Day of Surgery Cancellations in a Tertiary 
Care Hospital: A One Year Review," Journal of Anesthesia & 
Clinical Research, vol. 1, 2010. 
[10] P. Sanjay, A. Dodds, E. Miller, P. J. Arumugam, and A. 
Woodward, "Cancelled elective operations: an observational 
study from a district general hospital," J Health Organ Manag, 
vol. 21, pp. 54-8, 2007. 
[11] R. R. Cima, M. J. Brown, J. R. Hebl, R. Moore, J. C. Rogers, 
A. Kollengode, et al., "Use of Lean and Six Sigma 
Methodology to Improve Operating Room Efficiency in a 
High-Volume Tertiary-Care Academic Medical Center," 
Journal of the American College of Surgeons, vol. 213, pp. 83-
92, 2011. 
[12] V. Haana, K. Sethuraman, L. Stephens, H. Rosen, and J. G. 
Meara, "Case cancellations on the day of surgery: an 
investigation in an Australian paediatric hospital," ANZ 
Journal of Surgery, vol. 79, pp. 636-640, 2009. 
[13] M. B. Ferschl, A. Tung, B. Sweitzer, D. Huo, and D. B. Glick, 
"Preoperative clinic visits reduce operating room cancellations 
and delays," Anesthesiology, vol. 103, pp. 855-9, 2005. 
[14] M. G. Perroca, M. d. C. Jericó, and S. D. Facundin, "Surgery 
cancelling at a teaching hospital: implications for cost 
management," Revista latino-americana de enfermagem, vol. 
15, pp. 1018-1024, 2007. 
[15] A. R. Tait, T. Voepel-Lewis, H. M. Munro, H. B. Gutstein, and 
P. I. Reynolds, "Cancellation of pediatric outpatient surgery: 
economic and emotional implications for patients and their 
families," Journal of clinical anesthesia, vol. 9, pp. 213-219, 
1997. 
[16] M. Knox, E. Myers, I. Wilson, and M. Hurley, "The impact of 
pre-operative assessment clinics on elective surgical case 
cancellations," Surgeon-Journal of the Royal Colleges of 
Surgeons of Edinburgh and Ireland, vol. 7, pp. 76-78, 2009. 
[17] R. Busund, "Rapport fra prosjekt: Optimal ressursutnyttelse av 
opperasjonskapasiteten i UNN," Norway, 2008. 
[18] M. R. Rai and J. J. Pandit, "Day of surgery cancellations after 
nurse-led pre-assessment in an elective surgical centre: the first 
2 years," Anaesthesia, vol. 58, pp. 692-9, 2003. 
[19] A. R. Seim, T. Fagerhaug, S. M. Ryen, P. Curran, O. D. Sæther, 
H. O. Myhre, et al., "Causes of Cancellations on the Day of 
Surgery at Two Major University Hospitals," Surgical 
Innovation, vol. 16, pp. 173-180, 2009. 
[20] W. A. van Klei, C. L. Rutten, K. G. Moons, B. Lo, J. T. Knape, 
and D. E. Grobbee, "Limited effect of Health Council guideline 
on outpatient preoperative evaluation clinics in the 
Netherlands: an inventory," Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd, vol. 145, 
pp. 25-9, 2001. 
[21] M. A. Starsnic, D. M. Guarnieri, and M. C. Norris, "Efficacy 
and financial benefit of an anesthesiologist-directed university 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

preadmission 
evaluation 
center," 
Journal 
of 
clinical 
anesthesia, vol. 9, pp. 299-305, 1997. 
[22] M. Agah and B. Radpay, "Efficacy of Anesthesia Clinic on 
Preoperative Evaluation, Preparation and Related Costs," 
Tanaffos, vol. 3, pp. 63-8, 2004. 
[23] R. Odijk, "Process optimization of the preoperative anesthesia 
clinics at ZGT Almelo and Hengelo," 2012. 
[24] M. Reed, S. Wright, and F. Armitage, "Nurse-led general 
surgical pre-operative assessment clinic," Journal of the Royal 
College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, vol. 42, pp. 310-313, 1997. 
[25] B. J. Kirkwood, K. Pesudovs, P. Latimer, and D. J. Coster, 
"The efficacy of a nurse-led preoperative cataract assessment 
and postoperative care clinic," Medical journal of Australia, 
vol. 184, p. 278, 2006. 
[26] H. Walsgrove, "Piloting a nurse-led gynaecology preoperative-
assessment clinic," Nursing times, vol. 100, p. 38, 2004. 
[27] AmandaBeck, "Nurse-led pre-operative assessment for 
elective surgical patients," Nursing Standard, vol. 21, pp. 35-
38, 2007. 
[28] H. Kinley, C. Czoski-Murray, S. George, C. McCabe, J. 
Primrose, C. Reilly, et al., "Effectiveness of appropriately 
trained nurses in preoperative assessment: randomised 
controlled equivalence/non-inferiority trial," BMJ (Clinical 
research ed.), vol. 325, p. 1323, 2002. 
[29] M. A. G. de Avila and S. C. M. Bocchi, "Confirmação de 
presença de usuário à cirurgia eletiva por telefone como 
estratégia para reduzir absenteísmo," Rev Esc Enferm USP, vol. 
47, pp. 193-7, 2013. 
[30] K. Haufler and M. Harrington, "Using Nurse-to-Patient 
Telephone Calls to Reduce Day-of-Surgery Cancellations," 
AORN journal, vol. 94, pp. 19-26, 2011. 
[31] B. Latour, Science in action: How to follow scientists and 
engineers through society: Harvard university press, 1987. 
[32] H. K. Andreassen, M. M. Bujnowska-Fedak, C. E. Chronaki, 
R. C. Dumitru, I. Pudule, S. Santana, et al., "European citizens' 
use of E-health services: a study of seven countries," BMC 
Public Health, vol. 7, p. 53, 2007. 
[33] B. Kaplan and P. F. Brennan, "Consumer Informatics 
Supporting Patients as Co-Producers of Quality," Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 8, pp. 309-
316, 2001. 
[34] E. Randeree, "Personal Health Records: Patients in Control," 
in Health Information Systems: Concepts, Methodologies, 
Tools, and Applications, J. Rodrigues, Ed., ed: IGI Global, 
2010, pp. 2111-2124 pp. 
[35] L. Millsopp, S. Frackleton, D. Lowe, and S. N. Rogers, "A 
feasibility study of computer-assisted health-related quality of 
life data collection in patients with oral and oropharyngeal 
cancer," Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg, vol. 35, pp. 761-4, 2006. 
[36] P. E. Kummervold, D. Gammon, S. Bergvik, J. A. Johnsen, T. 
Hasvold, and J. H. Rosenvinge, "Social support in a wired 
world: use of online mental health forums in Norway," Nord J 
Psychiatry, vol. 56, pp. 59-65, 2002. 
[37] P. M. Webb, G. D. Zimet, J. D. Fortenberry, and M. J. Blythe, 
"Comparability of a computer-assisted versus written method 
for collecting health behavior information from adolescent 
patients," J Adolesc Health, vol. 24, pp. 383-8, 1999. 
[38] S. C. Adamson and J. W. Bachman, "Pilot study of providing 
online care in a primary care setting," Mayo Clin Proc, vol. 85, 
pp. 704-10, 2010. 
[39] Helse-og omsorgsdepartement, "Samhandlingsreformen," ed: 
Det Kongelige helse-og omsorgsdepartement, 2009. 
[40] Helse-Nord. (2012, 4 November 2013). Dette er de nye 
systemene. Available: http://www.helse-nord.no/helse-nord-
nytt/dette-er-de-nye-systemene-article90645-1526.html 
[41] Nasjonal Prioriteringsveiledere, Helsedirektoratet, 2009. 
Available: 
http://www.helsebiblioteket.no/retningslinjer/prioriteringsveil
edere 
 
 
 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Uptake and Impact of a Personal Health Record for Patients with Type 2 
Diabetes Mellitus in Primary Care 
A Research Protocol for a Backward and Forward Evaluation 
 
Floor Sieverink, Saskia M. Kelders, Louise M.A. Braakman-Jansen, Julia E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen 
Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
{f.sieverink, s.m.kelders, l.m.a.braakman-jansen, j.vangemert-pijnen}@utwente.nl
 
 
Abstract—A Personal Health Record (PHR) is a promising 
technology for improving the quality of chronic disease 
management. Despite the efforts that have been made in a 
research project to develop a PHR for patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus in primary care (e-Vita), differences have 
been reported between the number of registered users in the 
participating primary practices. To gain insight into the 
factors that influence the implementation of the PHR into daily 
health care processes and into the possibilities to improve the 
content, interviews have been conducted with participating 
primary practice nurses and other stakeholders in the research 
project. A first impression of the interviews indicated that in 
many cases, the low impact of the PHR is due to a lack of 
information about the purpose, content and use of the system. 
Keywords-component: personal health record; type 2 diabetes 
mellitus; implementation; interviews, contextual inquiry; value 
specification; summative evaluation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Personal Health Records 
The aging population and increased prevalence of chronic 
care requires an integral approach to disease management 
that is well coordinated and consistent with (inter)national 
care standards in order to support a shift from 
institutionalized care to home care [1-3]. Disease 
management may be viewed as a set of interrelated services 
that spans from prevention and self-management to 
intramural care for patients with chronic diseases [4-6]. 
Information- and communication technology (eHealth) will 
play an important role in disease management, e.g. in 
providing online support for self-management, in improving 
information exchange among professionals and with 
patients, as well as in monitoring the performance of the 
disease management program [7, 8]. 
The electronic personal health record (PHR) is a 
promising technology for improving the quality of chronic 
disease management [9, 10]. A PHR can be defined as “an 
electronic application through which individuals can access, 
manage, and share their health information and that of 
others for whom they are authorized, in a private, secure and 
confidential environment” [11], a definition that is adopted 
by many researchers over the years (e.g., [12-14]). 
However, PHRs are becoming more complex and 
potential functions of current PHRs may not only include 
sharing clinical and personal data (e.g. history, test results, 
treatment, appointments), but may also include self-
management support, patient-provider communication, 
information about the illness, peer support or monitoring 
health behavior data [13].  
Potential benefits of a PHR include empowering patients 
in managing their diseases and the reduction of geographical 
and communication barriers. This may, in turn, lead to a 
transition from episodic to continuous care, which has the 
potential to shorten the time to address disease-related 
complaints that may arise [12, 13].  
Despite these benefits, the use of such systems in diabetes 
care has only led to small improvements in diabetes quality 
measures that were of marginal clinical relevance [9], and 
up to now, evaluations have only provided little insight into 
why a particular outcome did occur [15, 16]. Consequently, 
the added value of the existing evidence is often limited for 
decision making in relation to the strategic direction of 
implementation efforts [17]. To gain insight into factors that 
contribute to a successful implementation of eHealth 
technologies in daily health care processes, it is necessary to 
look for methodological approaches that go beyond a before 
and after measurement of health outcomes. 
 
B. The CeHRes Roadmap 
The CeHRes Roadmap [18] is a framework that can be 
used to evaluate and improve existing eHealth technologies. 
The roadmap states that eHealth development is a 
participatory process and that development is intertwined 
with implementation into daily health care processes. Also, 
it requires continuous evaluation cycles. Through a 
contextual inquiry and a value specification, a support basis 
can be created for the development and implementation of 
the eHealth technology.  
 
C. e-Vita 
The PHR e-Vita is an initiative of the Dutch foundation 
Care Within Reach, a partnership between Philips and 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Achmea, a Dutch health insurance company. Currently, the 
main content of e-Vita consists of insight into personal 
health data (e.g., lab values, blood pressure), self-
monitoring health values (e.g., weight), education and a 
coach for reaching personal health-related goals. e-Vita is 
deployed in primary care in the Netherlands via a trial to 
study the effects of using a PHR in primary care for patients 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) (ClinicalTrials.gov 
number NCT01570140). 
Despite the efforts that have been made to develop a 
technology that has added value in the treatment of patients 
with T2DM in primary care, we signaled differences in the 
uptake and impact of e-Vita between the participating 
primary practices in the research project. To gain insight 
into the factors that influence the use of e-Vita in primary 
care, an evaluation via interviews has been conducted. 
These interviews serve as both a forward (contextual inquiry 
and value specification) and a backward evaluation to gain 
insight into the uptake and impact of e-Vita, as well as into 
the possibilities to improve the content of e-Vita according 
to health care providers. The outcome of the interviews will 
provide critical factors for the improvement of the content 
and the implementation process of e-Vita in primary care. 
The main research question is: 
 
What factors influence the uptake and impact of a PHR for 
patients with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) in primary health 
care, according to primary health care workers and other 
stakeholders? 
 
In the next paragraphs, we will describe the methods and the 
preliminary results of the interview study. In the discussion, 
we elaborate on future research. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Participants 
The interview study consists of two parts. In the first 
part, primary care nurses (PNs) of general practices in 
Drenthe, in the north of the Netherlands, were invited to 
participate in an interview. In the Netherlands, PNs are 
responsible for educating patients about their disease, 
guiding patients with the use of medication and lifestyle 
changes and performing health checks. In the e-Vita project, 
all selected PNs are responsible for explaining the purpose 
of e-Vita to the participants in the study and administering 
questionnaires regarding the effects of the PHR. No 
guidelines for intended use in daily care processes were 
defined.  
To reveal the differences between the implementation 
processes of practices with high and low numbers of 
participants, potential practices were selected for the 
interview study by the means of an inclusion percentage 
(high, middle, low). The inclusion percentage was  
calculated as follows:  
Inclusion percentage = 
(number of included patients for e-Vita in the study / total 
number of patients with T2DM in the practice)*100. 
 
The aim is to conduct five interviews in every group, 15 
interviews in total. When primary practices have indicated 
before that the inclusion of participants was postponed due 
to explainable circumstances (e.g. long-term diseases among 
the staff), practices were not contacted to participate in the 
interview study.  
In the second part of the study, five other stakeholders in 
the e-Vita diabetes project (e.g. project leaders) will be 
invited to answer questions about their view on the topics as 
revealed in the first part of this study and the choices that 
have been made regarding these topics during the project. 
 
B. Design and Procedure 
First, 
semi-structured 
in-depth 
interviews 
were 
conducted among PNs that already take part in the e-Vita 
project. During the interviews, questions were asked 
regarding the purposes, reasons and incentives to use and 
implement a PHR in their primary practice, the use and the 
users of the PHR so far, the bottlenecks and barriers that are 
encountered or expected, the results so far and the way that 
a PHR will change the primary health care for patients with 
T2DM and their caregivers in the future. All PNs received a 
gift voucher of 50 euros for participating. 
Based on the identified themes, a second interview 
scheme will be prepared for other stakeholders in the e-Vita 
project (e.g., project leaders). These interviews will be used 
to test the topics as discussed during the interviews among 
the PNs. These questions are asked via e-mail and validated 
by telephone. Ethical approval for this study was obtained 
by the ethics committee of the University of Twente.  
 
C. Analyses 
All interviews (among PNs as well as the other 
stakeholders) will be transcribed and themes and categories 
will subsequently be coded via open coding, axial coding 
and selective coding [19]. In this way, recurring themes and 
items of interest regarding the implementation and use of 
eHealth technologies in primary health care practice can be 
identified.  
 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
A first impression of the eleven interviews among PNs so 
far indicated that, despite respondents’ enthusiasm, the PHR 
has a rather low reach.  In many cases, this is due to a lack 
of information about the purpose, content and use of the 
PHR. The participating PNs were mostly trained to 
administer the questionnaires in the research project and 
little attention has been gone to the content of e-Vita and the 
integration of the PHR in daily health care routines. Also, 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

PNs reported that they find it difficult to promote a platform 
they hardly know.   
Second, little thought has gone towards the integration of 
PHRs with other health care systems and the integration of 
the PHRs with national guidelines for the treatment of 
chronic diseases in primary care.   
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In the current research project, we signaled differences 
between the inclusion percentages of the participating 
primary care practices. The goal of this study is therefore to 
identify the factors that influence the uptake and impact of a 
PHR for patients with T2DM in primary health care. 
Because the PNs are responsible for promoting the PHR e-
Vita among their patients, we  identified the bottlenecks for 
the implementation of a PHR in primary care from the view 
of PNs.  
We believe that the development of eHealth technologies 
is an ongoing process that requires continuous evaluations. 
We therefore conducted both a forward and a backward 
evaluation in order to not only gain insight into the factors 
that influence the uptake and impact of a PHR, but also to 
identify possibilities for improving the content of the PHR 
in the future.  
To understand the choices that have been made regarding 
the process of development and implementation of the PHR 
so far, recurring themes in the interviews with PNs will be 
tested among the other stakeholders in the e-Vita project. To 
gain insight into the developmental course of the e-Vita, this 
evaluation cycle is planned to be repeated in the next two 
years.  
Because 
we 
feel 
that 
the 
development 
and 
implementation of eHealth technologies is a matter of co-
creation, we plan to involve both health care providers and 
patients as potential end-users. Therefore, we will also plan 
interviews with patients to gain insight into the factors that 
influence the use of the platform.  
At this moment (November 2013), the interviews among 
the PNs, eleven in total, are conducted. The results of the 
first part of the study are expected in January 2014. The 
results of the second part of the study are expected in March 
2014.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J.E. Shaw, R.A. Sicree, and P.Z. Zimmet, “Global estimates 
of the prevalence of diabetes for 2010 and 2030,” Diabetes 
Research and Clinical Practice, vol. 87(1), 2010, pp. 4-14, 
doi:10.1016/j.diabres.2009.10.007. 
[2] D.C. Klonoff, “Using telemedicine to improve outcomes in 
diabetes—an emerging technology,” Journal of Diabetes 
Science and Technology, vol. 3(4), 2009, pp. 624. 
[3] R. Bellazzi, “Telemedicine and diabetes management: current 
challenges and future research directions,” Journal of 
Diabetes Science and Technology, vol. 2(1), pp. 98. 
[4] T. Bodenheimer, K. Lorig, H. Holman and K. Grumbach, 
“Patient self-management of chronic disease in primary care,” 
JAMA, 
vol. 
288(19), 
2002, 
pp. 
2469-2475, 
doi:10.1001/jama.288.19.2469. 
[5] S.L. Norris et al., “Recommendations for healthcare system 
and self-management education interventions to reduce 
morbidity and mortality from diabetes,” American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, vol. 22(4 SUPPL.1), 2002, pp. 10-14, 
doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(02)00422-1. 
[6] E.H. Wagner et al., “Quality improvement in chronic illness 
care: a collaborative approach,” The Joint Commission 
journal on quality improvement, vol. 27(2), 2001, pp. 63-80. 
[7] F. Verhoeven, K. Tanja-Dijkstra, N. Nijland, G. Eysenbach 
and L. van Gemert-Pijnen, “Asynchronous and synchronous 
teleconsultation for diabetes care: a systematic literature 
review,” Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, vol. 
4(3), 2010, pp. 666-684. 
[8] H.I. Goldberg, J.D. Ralston, I.B. Hirsch, J.I. Hoath and K.I. 
Ahmed, “Using an Internet comanagement module to improve 
the quality of chronic disease care,” Joint Commission 
Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, vol. 29(9), 2003, pp. 
443-451. 
[9] M. Tenforde, A. Nowacki, A. Jain and J. Hickner, “The 
Association Between Personal Health Record Use and 
Diabetes Quality Measures,” Journal of General Internal 
Medicine, 
vol. 
27(4), 
2012, 
pp. 
420-424, 
doi: 
10.1007/s11606-011-1889-0. 
[10] C.Y. Osborn, L.S. Mayberry, S.A. Mulvaney, and R. Hess, 
“Patient web portals to improve diabetes outcomes: A 
systematic review”, Current Diabetes Reports, vol. 10(6), 
2010, pp. 422-435, doi:10.1007/s11892-010-0151-1. 
[11] Connecting for health, “The Personal Health Working Group 
final report”, July 1, 2003. 
[12] P.C. Tang, J.S. Ash, D.W. Bates, J.M. Overhage, and D.Z. 
Sands, “Personal Health Records: Definitions, Benefits, and 
Strategies for Overcoming Barriers to Adoption,” Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 13(2), 
2006. pp. 121-126, doi:10.1197/jamia.M2025. 
[13] C. Pagliari, D. Detmer, and P. Singleton, “Potential of 
electronic personal health records,” BMJ, vol. 335(7615), 
2007, pp. 330-333, doi:10.1136/bmj.39279.482963.AD. 
[14] M. Tenforde, A. Jain, and J. Hickner, “The value of personal 
health records for chronic disease management: what do we 
know?,” Family Medicine-Kansas City, vol. 43(5), 2011, pp. 
351. 
[15] A.D. Black, et al., “The Impact of eHealth on the Quality and 
Safety of Health Care: A Systematic Overview,” PLoS Med, 
vol. 
8(1), 
2011, 
 
pp. 
e1000387, 
doi:10.137/journal.pmed.1000387. 
[16] B. Kaplan, “Evaluating informatics applications—some 
alternative approaches: theory, social interactionism, and call 
for methodological pluralism,” International Journal of 
Medical 
Informatics, 
vol. 
64(1), 
2001, 
pp. 
39-56, 
doi:10.1016/S1386-5056(01)00184-8.. 
[17] S. Clamp, and J. Keen, “Electronic health records: Is the 
evidence base any use?,” Informatics for Health and Social 
Care, 
vol. 
32(1), 
2007, 
pp. 
5-10, 
doi:10.1080/14639230601097903. 
[18] J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, et al., “A holistic framework to 
improve the uptake and impact of eHealth technologies,” 
Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 13(4), 2011, doi: 
10.2196/jmir.1672 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[19] J. Corbin, and A. Strauss, Basics of qualitative research: 
Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc., 2008. 
 
 
  
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Antibiotic Information App for Nurses 
Development and Preliminary Effects 
Jobke Wentzel, Julia E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen 
Dept. of Psychology, Health and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands 
m.j.wentzel@utwente.nl 
 
 
Abstract—Antibiotic stewardship programs aim to optimize 
antibiotic use in order to control antibiotic resistance. Nurses 
need easily accessible information on antibiotics to perform 
antimicrobial-related tasks optimally. A task supporting 
antibiotic information application was developed to support 
nurses. With log file analysis, scenario-based tests and 
information behavior questionnaires we evaluated the app. 
The results show steady, continuing use. Instruction pages are 
most popular, and first responses to the application are 
positive regarding look and feel and accessibility of 
information.  
Keywords-eHealth; antibiotic stewardship; nurse; task-
support 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mis- or over-use of antibiotics contributes to the problem 
of antibiotic resistance. Due to their resistance to antibiotics, 
infections caused by resistant pathogens are difficult to treat. 
To stop resistance forming and preserve their effectiveness, 
prudent use of antibiotics is needed [1]. Antibiotic 
Stewardship Programs (ASPs) aim to optimize antibiotic use 
in clinical settings. Formulary restrictions, antibiotic cycling, 
multidisciplinary bed-side consultation and improved 
diagnostics are some strategies that are used. Infectious 
disease specialists, clinical microbiologists, pharmacists and 
physicians work together in ASP to improve antibiotic use. 
Optimal antibiotic therapy relies on timely adjustment of 
therapy, based on lab results (diagnostics) as well as careful 
monitoring of patient progress and vital signs. Correct 
execution of antibiotic therapy (including preparation and 
administration of the medications) as prescribed by the 
physician stands at the base of successful ASPs. In addition 
to expert input in ASPs, nurses contribute a great deal. 
Nurses spend much time caring for and observing patients, 
they are the eyes and ears of the physician and notice 
changes in patient status that call for antibiotic therapy 
adjustment. 
In earlier research, we already identified nurses as an 
important stakeholder for ASPs [2], even though scientific 
literature on ASPs focuses mainly on physicians and clinical 
experts [3]. As earlier research indicated that nurses have 
high information needs regarding the antibiotic care process, 
we aimed to optimally support nurses in their antibiotic-
related tasks. We applied human centered design to develop 
an information application, that takes into account user needs 
and provides bed-side task support. 
Information and communication technology holds the 
promise of facilitating information transfer and offering 
support in a variety of health care settings [4, 5]. 
Applications aimed to support health care workers (HCWs) 
are abundant, both in mobile applications (for smartphone or 
tablet) or websites and web apps [6]. However, sometimes 
apps and websites that are supposed to facilitate and support 
HCW‟s jobs are perceived as distracting, user-unfriendly and 
ill-fitted to work practice, thereby possibly compromising 
patient safety [7-9]. In some cases, taking a more user- or 
practice- based focus throughout the design phases may help 
to overcome these difficulties [8, 10]. Also, incorporating 
persuasive system design into technology may help to 
improve uptake and effectiveness. In this model, the targeted 
behavior is reinforced, shaped or changed by the technology, 
thereby „persuading‟ its users [11]. Designing technology in 
such way that it is unobtrusive, useful and easy to use helps 
to blend the technology seamless into users‟ work (or life) 
and quickly reach their goals [11]. With regard to nurse 
support 
in 
antimicrobial 
stewardship, 
no 
dedicated 
applications were identified in literature, as nurses are often 
overlooked as stakeholder in ASPs. Nurse tasks in ASPs are 
demanding and ask for good information integration and 
decision making: nurses gather information from different 
information systems, integrate it, and decide whether further 
action is required. We suspect that especially task support 
and system credibility strategies from the Persuasive 
Systems Design model are influential; formative evaluations 
revealed a lack of task support and easy accessible 
information, which is a barrier for nurse empowerment in 
ASP [2]. Based on this understanding of the work context, 
we developed an application. 
In this paper, we describe preliminary summative 
evaluation results of an antibiotic information app for nurses, 
by focusing on actual use and effects of use on antibiotic 
stewardship-related tasks. The following research questions 
guided this research:  
1. How is the application being used? 
2. Does the application support nurses in their 
antibiotic-related tasks? 
3. Is app-use more efficient than standard information 
sources ? 
4. How do nurses experience the use of the app? 
II. 
THE ANTIBIOTIC INFORMATION APP 
Based 
on 
formative 
evaluations, 
the 
antibiotic 
information app was developed [12]. In focus groups, 
interviews, scenario tests and usability tests nurses in our 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

pilot research expressed a need for an easily accessible, 
centralized information application, where they could find all 
information on the use of antibiotics they need during their 
work. This included instructions on preparation and 
administration, as well as background information and 
information that is needed on specific occasions only (e.g., 
when side effects occur). First, a prototype was created in 
WordPress [13], with some alterations to fit our specific 
content management demands. Based on its evaluations a 
final release was launched. The application is web-based, 
and can be run from the hospital‟s own server. However, for 
the pilot the system was made available via the internet, and 
was taken up in the nurses‟ personal hospital start page so 
that it could be accessed easily. Besides PC, the application 
is optimized for mobile (tablet, smartphone) use. For the 
app‟s content, the information sources that were already used 
by the nurses served as input. These sources were „chopped 
up‟, selecting only the content that is necessary for nurses to 
execute their tasks (the original sources often contain much 
information aimed at physicians or medical expert, irrelevant 
and confusing to nurses). The different types of content are 
ordered according to the mental models of the nurses as they 
resulted from the card-sort study. Information is grouped by 
the following categories: information needed to perform the 
primary tasks, important information and warnings, general 
or background information, extra checks and safety 
information, and information for specialists and medical 
background (see Figure 1). A demo version (in Dutch) of the 
app can be accessed via [14]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshot of antibiotic overview page. A: task instructions, B:important information and 
warnings, C: general or background information, D: Safety checks and quality control, E: 
information for specialists and medical background, F: search field for antibiotic or select from list, 
G: search all pages (per antibiotic). 
By providing easily accessible information, nurses may 
be better equipped to perform antibiotic related tasks, and are 
able to recognize and address instances of suboptimal 
antibiotic use. This supports improved knowledge and 
recognition of instances to optimize antimicrobial use and 
nurse empowerment to discuss patient therapy and alert 
physicians in case of suboptimal antibiotic use. Figure 2 
shows an instruction page of the application, where nurses 
can read how to administer a certain antibiotic, including 
what to pay extra attention to. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of antibiotic overview page. A:back-button B: print and email buttons, C: 
search field, D: breadcrumb trail, E: instruction block on administration, F: source of the information 
with link, G: information on last update of the information block  
III. 
METHODS 
A. Participants 
Two lung wards of a local 1000-bed teaching hospital 
participated in this research. The wards have total of  57 
beds. During the pilot phase, 62 nurses (45 FTE) worked at 
the two wards. A number of them were informed about the 
app and the importance of antimicrobial stewardship in 
presentations, all received an email with instructions and 
instructional fact-sheets on antimicrobial stewardship and 
the app were distributed repeatedly throughout the wards. 
B. Information behaviour questionnaire 
We created a questionnaire to measure satisfaction and 
usability of information sources. In addition, items to 
measure to what extent nurses feel secure and confident to 
report and discuss suboptimal antibiotic use were added to 
the questionnaire. The questionnaire consists of existing 
scales that we adapted to better fit our research questions: 
To measure to what extent nurses feel supported by the 
information supply and its usability we adapted parts of 
Persuasive Systems Design (PSD) questionnaire (task 
support, persuasiveness, unobtrusiveness) [15, 16], and the 
 
 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Website Evaluation Questionnaire (WEQ): relevance, user 
friendliness, hyperlinks, speed [17]. To measure to what 
extent nurses feel confident to discuss antibiotic therapy 
suggestions with physicians we used parts of The 
Organization and Management of Intensive Care Units,  by 
Shortell and Rousseau (openness, accuracy, understanding) 
[18], and the Safety Attitudes Questionnaire (teamwork 
climate) [19]. Lastly, four ASP-specific items and seven 
items to measure demographics and internet experience [20] 
were added. Questionnaire items that were originally in 
English were translated into Dutch and back-translated into 
English to check for translation errors. The questionnaire 
was sent by email, and in case of non-response, up to two 
reminders were sent. 
C. Scenario-based user tests 
Ten scenarios were created together with a pharmacist 
and clinical microbiologist. The scenarios present situations 
that can arise during the nurse‟s work, eliciting some 
information 
need 
regarding 
the 
(correct) 
use 
of 
antimicrobials. The most critical moments in antimicrobial 
use, where mistakes are most likely and better information 
could have prevented them, were translated into cases. The 
cases addressed e.g. interaction of multiple types of 
medication, administering two or more medications at the 
same time, (sub) optimal dose due to abnormal weight, etc. 
Sixteen nurses participated in the baseline measurement 
tests, forty nurses will participate in the post-measurements 
(consisting of two conditions). The participants vary in age, 
work experience and gender. 
During baseline measurement all nurses had no 
experience with the antibiotic information app and had to 
resolve the scenarios relying on their usual information 
sources. During post measurement (in progress), all nurses 
will have had >6 months of experience using the app 
(having had >6 months access to it). One group will be 
randomized into the condition that they have to resolve the 
scenarios without the antibiotic information application 
(thus again using their usual information sources), the other 
group is allowed to use the application. All participants are 
presented with a scenario, and asked to give a solution (what 
would you do/needs to be done). They are asked to perform 
their information-search activities while talking out loud; 
e.g., look it up in a computer, ask a colleague, call the 
pharmacist, etc. This activity is recorded on audiotape as 
well as video. 
The audio and video files are analyzed to determine a) 
whether the scenario was resolved correctly b) what 
information source(s) was used c) whether any problems 
arose during the search; and d) how much time was needed 
to resolve the scenario. 
D. Log-file analysis 
The application was introduced at the two pilot wards 
where users could access the application directly on a pc 
without login. Mobile use was possible only via login. 
Throughout the pilot we monitored the use of the app to 
ensure whether it fulfills information needs, at what moment 
these needs arise most, and what type of content is viewed. 
The use of the application is being logged using Google 
Analytics, as well as a Wordpress (the app‟s software) plug-
in [13]. Log information of interest includes visits per day, 
time of day with most visits, most frequently viewed content 
and visit duration.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
In this paper, we present preliminary results because post 
measurements and analysis are ongoing. The available 
results include log file results and baseline measurements. 
A. Information behaviour questionnaire 
The baseline questionnaire was completed by 27 nurses 
(24 women, 3 men) out of 64 nurses that were invited to 
participate (42%). Their mean age was 36 years old (sd 
10.4), and on average they had 8.1 (sd 6.1) years of 
experience working on their ward, and 12.3 (sd 9.8) years of 
experience working as a nurse. Their internet experience, as 
measured by the amount of hours they use the internet per 
day (work and private use) is 2.7 (sd 2.7) hours. 
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONNAIRE OUTCOMES 
Information behavior 
questionnaire 
Subdomain or scale 
(number of items) 
Mean 
score 
Experience, 
satisfaction 
and 
usability of information 
Task support  (2) 
3.0 
Reliability (1) 
2.8 
Persuasiveness (3) 
2.9 
Unobtrusiveness (4) 
1.9 
Relevance (3) 
2.7 
User friendliness (3) 
2.0 
Speed (2) 
1.5 
Hyperlinks (2) 
2.4 
Nurse-physician communication 
Openness (4) 
2.7 
Accuracy (5) 
2.4 
Understanding (8) 
2.2 
Safety culture 
Teamwork (14) 
2.8 
Stewardship Climate 
ASP-questions (4) 
2.3 
a. Mean scores are presented per scale. All individual items were scored on a 5-point Likert scale, 
with scores ranging from 0 (totally disagree), 1 (disagree), 2 (don‟t agree, don‟t disagree), 3 (agree),  
to 4 (totally agree)  
With the questionnaire, we measured the following 
subdomains: Task support: 2 items, Reliability: 1 item, 
Persuasiveness: 
3 
items, 
Unobtrusiveness: 
4 
items, 
Relevance: 3 items, User friendliness: 3 items, Speed: 2 
items, Hyperlinks: 2 items, Openness: 4 items, Accuracy: 5 
items, Understanding: 8 items, Teamwork: 14 items, ASP: 4 
items. Table 1 shows the accumulated, averaged scores of 
all participants on the scale. Negative items were conversed. 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Higher numbers means a more positive score on that domain 
(e.g., better communication, more persuasiveness of 
available information sources, etc.). Table 1 shows that 
although nurses experience the information they use to be 
supportive of their task, score of 3.0 (on a 0-4 scale), it is 
not easy or user friendly to find information, given the low 
scores on unobtrusiveness (1.9), speed (1.5) and user 
friendliness (2.0). Further, moderately lower scores are 
found 
on accuracy (2.4), understanding (2.2) and 
stewardship (2.3).  
 
B. Scenario tests 
The reported results are preliminary (see Future Work for 
planned analyses) 
Sixteen nurses were presented with three scenario‟s 
each. Nurses needed different amounts of time to resolve the 
scenario‟s, ranging from instantly resolving it (ready 
knowledge), to up to 8 minutes needed to find the 
information. To complete the scenario‟s, nurses used the 
following strategies: read drug instruction leaflet, search 
pharmacy 
information 
website, 
search 
on 
national 
pharmacologic information site, search protocol database, 
search in (outdated) print instruction manual, call physician, 
call pharmacist, ask a colleague, search in Google, and in 
some cases, the nurse had sufficient (ready) knowledge to 
solve the scenario. 
Among the experienced problems when resolving the 
scenarios are: difficulty to decide on the correct source to 
search in, difficulty to access a source (including technical 
problems/long page loading time/login problems), difficulty 
to localize and comprehend the precise information needed 
(re-reading large amounts of text), and more in general, time 
needed to find the information. 
C. Log file analysis 
Intended use is somewhat difficult to establish. First of 
all, nurses indicated during development phases that they 
especially look for instructions when dealing with antibiotics 
that are unfamiliar to them and this does not happen 
frequently (otherwise, they would quickly become familiar 
with the antibiotic and the related information). Further, 
information is needed when a patient reacts to the medication 
in an unexpected way (side effect or allergy). Lastly, 
inexperienced nurses may need to look up information more 
often than experienced nurses. Thus, information need 
instances do not arise regularly and are difficult to predict, 
but when they arise finding correct information fast is 
important. The application was launched at the end of March 
2013, and has been used four times per day on average since. 
The bounce percentage is 8% (users leaving directly after 
entering). The log files show a steady use of the application 
(see Figure 3). Pages that are viewed most, aside from the 
welcome page and antibiotic overview pages (see an 
example page in Figure 1), include instructions on 
preparation and instructions on administration. Information 
on 
the 
antibiotics 
Amoxicillin-Clavulanic 
acid 
and 
Ceftazidim was viewed most often. The first is used 
frequently, but the second is used much less on these wards. 
The users prefer to search for an antibiotic by typing it in the 
search field; 74% vs. 26% out of 3,060 search instances. 
 
 
Figure 3. Daily app visits throughout the pilot period.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Effects on work process 
During development, nurses already proclaimed that 
having all their information centralized to one location is 
helpful. However, with the explosion of available medical 
apps, information systems and other information sources, 
providing more information is not always better [21]. This is 
supported by the baseline questionnaire that measured 
several aspects of information seeking behavior and 
appraisal. It shows that although nurses show they have good 
information, it is not user friendly and costs time to find. The 
scenario-based tests show similar results; nurses loose time 
locating the desired information. So, information quality is 
not a problem, finding the right information quickly is. This 
problem might be overcome with the app, as we hypothesize, 
because it tailors information and provides chunks that match 
the information need.  
Centralized, tailored information possibly helps to 
empower nurses in order to function optimally in antibiotic 
stewardship. Tailored information is one of the areas where 
the questionnaire and scenario tests results show room for 
improvement, as well as stewardship culture. For nurses to 
be able and feel confident to detect and discuss sub-optimal 
antibiotic use, they need to be able to rely on quickly 
available information. However, organization safety culture 
and nurse physician interaction play a big role and need to be 
addressed as well. Possibly, standardized communication 
aided with alerts and checklists of when to alarm or discuss 
with a physician can be useful [22]. 
B. App use 
The log file analysis shows that the app does support 
nurses during their work: use remains steady over time, and 
the bounce percentage is low. As original sources of 
information are still available to the nurses, the data show 
that at least some nurses prefer to use the app instead of 
conventional materials, as they keep accessing the app, 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

months after its release. Relatively little introductory 
activities were undertaken; some nurses attended an 
instructional meeting and fact sheets on antibiotic 
stewardship and the app were distributed. The minimal 
introduction may have sufficed because the intended users 
initially proclaimed they liked the concept and look and feel 
of the app, which has possibly led to increased willingness to 
start to use the app, and spread the word. It makes a strong 
case for human centered design, as involvement in the 
development process generates user commitment. It might be 
more difficult to reach this type of involvement on a large 
scale however.  
As the most popular pages of the app are instructions on 
preparation and administration of antimicrobials, task 
support can be better. Of course, these pages are expected to 
be visited most frequently, because preparation and 
administration of antimicrobials are tasks that occur most 
often, whereas side effects or unexpected progress or 
deterioration in patient status occurs much less frequent. 
However, the app should provide support in these not-so-
frequent occasions so in the app‟s evaluation, attention will 
be paid to precisely what content of the app is most useful to 
the nurses, and why other content is used less often. 
C. Considerations for implementation 
Nurses 
spend 
much 
time 
and 
effort 
gathering 
information, so surely an application that centralizes 
information has much to offer. However, this implies that 
somehow the information from different sources needs to be 
centralized and the ability to do so automatically depends 
heavily on the information sources that underlie the app. In 
our case, „filling‟ the app and managing its content was done 
manually because automatizing this process would be too 
complex and costly in this pilot phase. Individual hospitals 
and sometimes even individual wards use different 
information systems, so a one fits all solution may be 
difficult to achieve. For long term implementation and 
sustainment this is an issue that must be resolved, for 
example by assigning quality staff or specialized nurses to 
maintain information up to date. 
With regard to implementation throughout the hospital, 
nurses outside our pilot ward found the app on the intranet of 
the hospital and wanted to use it. In this sense, the app 
implemented itself just by being available. In addition, 
physicians who the app was demonstrated to were interested 
in a physician-aimed version. To some extent, the positive 
reactions to the app can be explained by the fact that often 
medical information applications are developed and 
managed by experts. They offer an expert-based view and 
scope of information. We tailored the various expert-based 
sources to fit clinical practice, something that is not done 
often because it costs time, effort, and multidisciplinary 
cooperation and understanding. Human centered design can 
help to meet end-user needs [23]. However, when these 
needs require highly tailored information via applications 
with dynamic content that need of frequent quality checks 
and updates, this poses some challenges. Design teams 
should then find a balance between available resources to 
manage the information, and generalizability and up-scaling 
possibilities. 
D. Limitations 
The outcomes of this research must be interpreted with 
care because of several possible limitations. First of all, the 
application was developed and tested with the help of nurses 
of two wards in one hospital. Generalizing the results greatly 
depends on the specific information sources in place and the 
app‟s effectiveness may differ in other settings. This is to 
some extent a consequence of the design approach of 
zooming in in local needs and local contexts. Agile methods 
can be used for re-design in other wards or institutes. In this 
case, identification of local information sources and 
integrating them in the app are among such up-scaling 
activities.  
Further, the questionnaire baseline measurements suffer 
from a substantial non-response (58%). Even though for 
survey research this might not be high, given the relatively 
small sample (64 nurses participated in the pilot) the results 
must be interpreted cautiously. However, with the scenario-
based tests we were able to reproduce some of the 
questionnaire results regarding nurse experience of finding 
and using information; the scenario tests show, as well as the 
questionnaires that this is time-consuming and user-
unfriendly. 
Another point of caution lies in the operationalization of 
antibiotic stewardship work processes. To detect the effects 
of the app on work processes regarding antibiotic 
stewardship is difficult, especially in a short period. As 
nurses are not the actual prescribers, the effect of more 
knowledge and empowerment can only indirectly influence 
actual use. With the questionnaire we are able to detect some 
antimicrobial stewardship-related behaviors; e.g., whether 
nurses give physicians suggestions regarding antibiotic 
treatment, or alert physicians when treatment seems to be 
sub-optimal. Besides, we plan to study hospital statistics on 
antimicrobial use and length of stay to get an indication of 
possible effects on actual antibiotic use. Antibiotic therapy 
appropriateness and optimization (adjusting therapy timely 
based on patient progress) is determined on a per-patient 
basis [24], as it depends on every patient‟s unique status (in 
other words, what „optimal‟ is, depends on patient-specific 
characteristics). Therefore, the effects of the app on 
antibiotic stewardship would be incomplete when looking at 
overall antibiotic use alone. So, depending on post-
measurement results and the up scaling of the app, per-
patient analysis will be done as well. 
E. Future Work 
In-depth analysis of the scenario-test recordings and 
transcripts will enable statistical comparisons between the 
three scenario research conditions: information search 
without app, before implementation; information search with 
app, after implementation; and information search without 
app, after implementation. The conditions will be compared 
on the following variables: time needed for search, number 
of encountered problems during search, number of times a 
scenarios was resolved correctly. Furthermore, scenario 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

results regarding encountered problems as vocalized by the 
participants will be analyzed and grouped. As mentioned 
before, on a patient basis, changes in quality of care will 
also be studied using time series analysis on variables such 
as length of stay, antibiotic use, and mortality. 
The application will be introduced on different wards 
and in other hospitals as well, following short re-design or 
adaptation of the app and its content to fit local work 
methods. This broad implementation will be accompanied 
by evaluations on use and user satisfaction.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was funded by the Interreg IV “EurSafety 
Health-net” project. We thank the various participants in the 
pilot for their cooperation in this research: the nurses, chest 
physicians of the A4/C4 department, and hospital 
pharmacists of the Medisch Spectrum Twente hospital in 
Enschede, The Netherlands. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. MacDougall, and R. Polk, Antimicrobial stewardship 
programs in health care systems. Clinical microbiology 
reviews, 2005. 18(4): p. 638. 
[2] J. Wentzel, M. van Limburg, J. Karreman, R. Hendrix and L. 
van Gemert-Pijnen. Co-creation with stakeholders: a Web 2.0 
Antibiotic Stewardship Program. Proc. Etelemed 2012. 
[3] M. van Limburg, R. Köck, J. Karreman, B. Sinha, N. de Jong, 
J. Wentzel, et al., Towards an implementation strategy for 
antibiotic/antimicrobial stewardship: a systematic review. 
Under review. 
[4] M. Prgomet, A. Georgiou and J. I. Westbrook, The impact of 
mobile handheld technology on hospital physicians' work 
practices and patient care: a systematic review. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, 2009. 16(6): pp. 
792-801. 
[5] C. A. Caligtan, D. L. Carroll, A. C. Hurley, R. Gersh-
Zaremski and P. C. Dykes, Bedside information technology to 
support patient-centered care. International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, 2012. 81(7): pp. 442-451. 
[6] S. H. Koch, C. Weir, M. Haar, N. Staggers, J. Agutter, M. 
Görges, et al., Intensive care unit nurses' information needs 
and recommendations for integrated displays to improve 
nurses' situation awareness. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, 2012. 19(4): pp. 583-590. 
[7] A. Holzinger, M. Baernthaler, W. Pammer, H. Katz, V. 
Bjelic-Radisic and M. Ziefle, Investigating paper vs. screen in 
real-life 
hospital 
workflows: 
Performance 
contradicts 
perceived superiority of paper in the user experience. 
International Journal of Human Computer Studies, 2011. 
69(9): pp. 563-570. 
[8] B. Middleton, M. Bloomrosen, M.A. Dente, B. Hashmat, R. 
Koppel, J.M. Overhage, et al., Enhancing patient safety and 
quality of care by improving the usability of electronic health 
record systems: Recommendations from AMIA. Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, 2013. 20(E1): 
pp. e2-e8. 
[9] R. J. Katz-Sidlow, A. Ludwig, S. Miller and R. Sidlow, 
Smartphone 
use 
during 
inpatient 
attending 
rounds: 
Prevalence, patterns and potential for distraction. Journal of 
Hospital Medicine, 2012. 7(8): pp. 595-599. 
[10] J. E. W. C.van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, 
H. C. Ossebaard, S. M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, et al., A 
holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of 
eHealth technologies. Journal of medical Internet research, 
2011. 13(4). 
[11] H. Oinas-Kukkonen, and M. Harjumaa, Persuasive systems 
design: Key issues, process model, and system features. 
Communications of the association for Information Systems, 
2009. 24(1): pp. 485-500. 
[12] J. Wentzel, L. Van Velsen, M. Van Limburg, N. De Jong, J. 
Karreman, M. G. R. Hendrix, et al., Participatory eHealth 
Development to support Nurses in antimicrobial Stewardship. 
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, in review. 
[13] Wordpress, accessed on 31-01-2014 via: http://wordpress.org 
[14] Demo Information Application for nurses. Accessed on 31-
01-2014 via http://abnurseapp.infectionmanager.com 
[15] F. Drozd, T. Lehto and H. Oinas-Kukkonen, Exploring 
Perceived Persuasiveness of a Behavior Change Support 
System: A Structural Model, in Persuasive Technology. 
Design for Health and Safety, M. Bang and E. Ragnemalm, 
Editors. 2012, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 157-168. 
[16] T. Lehto, H. Oinas-Kukkonen and F. Drozd. Factors affecting 
perceived persuasiveness of a behavior change support 
system. 2012. 
[17] S. Elling, L. Lentz and M. De Jong, Website evaluation 
questionnaire: Development of a research-based tool for 
evaluating informational websites. 2007. pp. 293-304. 
[18] S. M. Shortell, D. M. Rousseau, R. R. Gillies, K. J. Devers 
and T. L. Simons, Organizational assessment in intensive care 
units (ICUs): construct development, reliability, and validity 
of the ICU nurse-physician questionnaire. Medical Care, 
1991. 29(8): pp. 709-726. 
[19] J. B. Sexton, R. L. Helmreich, T. B. Neilands, K. Rowan, K. 
Vella, J. Boyden, et al., The Safety Attitudes Questionnaire: 
psychometric properties, benchmarking data, and emerging 
research. BMC health services research, 2006. 6(1): p. 44. 
[20] S. M. Kelders, E. T. Bohlmeijer and J. E. W. C. Van Gemert-
Pijnen, Participants, usage, and use patterns of a web-based 
intervention for the prevention of depression within a 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of medical Internet 
research, 2013. 15(8). 
[21] L. van Velsen, D. J. Beaujean and J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen, 
Why mobile health app overload drives us crazy, and how to 
restore the sanity. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision 
Making, 2013. 13(1). 
[22] M. Leonard, S. Graham and D. Bonacum, The human factor: 
The 
critical 
importance 
of 
effective 
teamwork 
and 
communication in providing safe care. Quality and Safety in 
Health Care, 2004. 13(SUPPL. 1): pp. i85-i90. 
[23] S. Kujala, User involvement: A review of the benefits and 
challenges. Behaviour and Information Technology, 2003. 
22(1): pp. 1-16. 
[24] R. C. Owens Jr., and P. G. Ambrose, Antimicrobial 
stewardship 
and 
the 
role 
of 
pharmacokinetics–
pharmacodynamics in the modern antibiotic era. Diagnostic 
Microbiology 
and 
Infectious 
Disease, 
2007. 
57(3, 
Supplement): 
pp.S77-S83.
 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Interruption Management for Hospital Communications Systems  
A user requirements study 
 
Bernd Talsmaa, Terje Solvolla,b, Gunnar Hartvigsenb 
aNorwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine, 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
bDepartment of Computer Science, 
University of Tromsø 
Tromsø, Norway 
b.g.talsma@gmail.com, terje.solvoll@telemed.no, gunnar.hartvigsen@uit.no 
 
Abstract—Working in a hospital environment requires highly 
mobile personnel. To facilitate the increasing need for 
exchange of patient data between healthcare professionals, 
mobile 
communication 
devices 
are 
used. 
Mobile 
communication devices also increase the occurrence of 
inappropriate interruptions during clinical task performance. 
These interruptions have been related to decreased quality of 
clinical care. User requirements were elicited using a scenario-
based approach. The results present insights into user 
requirements for an interruption management system for 
hospitals. Hospital workflow protocols were identified as a 
major source of interruptions. Suggestions by participants for 
managing these interruptions related to improving workflow 
using IT instead of merely preventing interruptions. We have 
shown that even though the hospital is an exceptionally 
demanding 
environment, 
the 
user 
requirements 
for 
interruption management concur with earlier findings in the 
broader fields of context aware interruption management and 
computer supported cooperative work. 
Keywords-Hospital communications systems; interruption 
management; workflow support; user requirements 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Medical personnel’s working environment requires them 
to frequently move around during their work and at the same 
time be able to communicate with colleagues when needed 
[1–3]. Mobile communications devices, which are used to 
make this possible, have introduced a new problem; 
increased interruptions during their work related tasks. Such 
interruptions increase the likelihood of several negative 
consequences [4–8].  
This situation calls for help to balance between increased 
availability and increased interruptions. This has been 
discussed by Solvoll and Scholl [9], who analysed the need 
and user preference for a better communication system. The 
CallMeSmart project at the Norwegian Centre for Integrated 
Care and Telemedicine, University Hospital of North 
Norway, has presented one approach to solve this problem. 
In CallMeSmart decision making is supported by a rule-
based system. The rules and resulting actions must reflect the 
wishes of the medical personnel [10].  
The purpose of this study is to formally verify and 
possibly identify additional requirements for a system aiming 
to achieve our overall goal – to find a way to balance 
between 
the 
increased 
availability 
and 
increased 
interruptions. 
In this paper a user-oriented approach is used to verify 
and expand identified user requirements for an interruption 
management system for mobile communications in hospitals. 
The paper presents the results from interviews and 
discussions with doctors and nurses concerning interrupts in 
their daily work situation. This study was previously 
presented as a poster [11].  
II. 
MATERIALS & METHODS 
A. Eliciting User Requirements 
Several different techniques can be used to elicit the 
requirements of a system from the stakeholders. In the early 
stages of a project, techniques such as interviews (Fig. 1) and 
user observation can be used to clarify the problem. When 
some 
knowledge about 
the 
stakeholders 
and their 
requirements 
has 
been 
acquired, 
workshops 
and 
brainstorming can be used to define requirements for the 
system. Carroll [12] argues for the use of scenarios in the 
design of human-computer interaction (HCI). Lu and Bao 
[13] propose that context aware service design should be 
scenario driven process. Benyon and Macaulay [14] lay 
down a framework for their use in human-computer 
interaction. 
The user-system interaction scenarios can be written 
based on the previous steps. Creating the scenarios according 
to a specified framework, as described by Benyon and 
Macaulay [14], helps to shape it into a multidisciplinary 
design tool. This is useful since the next step is to formalize 
the interactions in use cases. A prototype can be used to play 
out the elicited concrete scenarios and if necessary to refine 
the service.  
The framework laid down by Benyon and Macaulay [14] 
consist of two main approaches to uncover the design 
dimensions and their aspects. First the user-centred 
perspective is characterized by Person, Activity, Context, 
and Technology (PACT). After the PACT aspects have been 
uncovered, 
the 
designer-centred 
aspects, 
Function, 
Interactions, Content, and Structure (FICS) can be discussed. 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Introduction 
Background figures, information, and study aim.  
Introducing the interview structure. 
 
Checking user story 
Are there any critical situations missing? 
Do you think the situations are realistic? 
 
Interruption management 
Introducing the CallMeSmart prototype: 
- Its context aware features 
-The envisioned interruption management techniques 
 
Discussion 
Discussing the conceptual scenario and PACT aspects.  
-Do you think the concept is useful? 
 
(P) Who do you think will benefit from this system and who 
will use it? 
(A) How and with what purpose would you or others use 
the system? 
(C) When and where? 
(T) What kind of devices would benefit? 
 
What will adoption success depend on? 
Figure 1: The interview protocol based on the PACT framework. 
Hevner et al. [15] describe a framework for information 
systems research. This framework divides business needs in 
three categories, People, Organizations, and Technology. 
The PACT framework seems to mirror these elements. 
Continuing the framework laid out by Benyon and Macaulay 
[14] also complies with the guidelines on research conduct, 
as stated by Hevner et al. [15]. 
Sutcliffe [16] has also described the use of scenarios 
throughout the design process. In the first phases of system 
design he describes his scenarios as ‘visioning scenarios’, 
‘scenarios of use’, and ‘context and use scenarios’. These 
three types of scenarios again mirror Benyon and 
Macaulay’s [14] framework for scenarios throughout the 
design process. 
Go and Carroll [17] describe the use of scenarios in HCI 
and requirements engineering. Their article also describes the 
shift of scenario usage from a single user with a single 
device to computer supported cooperative work. In a project 
these different levels of scenarios can also be used, as 
Benyon and Macaulay [14] also argues for a broad use of 
different types of scenarios throughout the de-sign process. 
Two projects in context-aware systems by Bardram [18]. 
and Favela et al. [19], similar to CallMeSmart, have also 
applied scenario design in some form. 
Bardram [18] wrote about scenario-based design in 
computer supported cooperative work. He agrees with 
Benyon and Macaulay [14] on the dynamic nature of 
scenarios throughout the process. This work describes 
various types of records, oriented towards different aspects. 
The ‘organizational’ and ‘personal’ oriented records 
resemble the PACT aspects. The ‘object’ oriented record on 
the other hand, resembles the FICS aspects. 
Favela et al. [19] have used a less formalized scenario 
structure to illustrate typical environment in which their 
solution has to function and how it does so.  
Scenario design and the framework for the actual 
scenario will be performed according to the framework 
presented by Benyon and Macaulay [14]. This approach 
includes the PACT and FICS aspects. The Structure aspect 
of FICS is however replaced with a Service aspect as 
presented in other studies [20,21]. 
Scenarios in HCI design have been used for different and 
sometimes contrasting goals. Sometimes scenarios are meant 
to leave room for discussion and interpretation, while on the 
other hand, scenarios and their adaptations are used to deal 
with any present ambiguities [14]. 
In this research the conceptual scenario is supposed to 
leave room for discussion. The scenario describes a 
generalized day of a physician, performing several 
recognizable 
tasks, 
such 
as 
handover 
meetings, 
consultations, surgery, and patient rounds. In this conceptual 
scenario, the CallMeSmart system is used for managing 
mobile communications. The scenario was presented and 
discussed together with a parallel user story, mirroring the 
same tasks, but without the interruption management system. 
The complete scenario document is not included here due to 
space limitations.  
Concrete scenarios should eventually deal with any 
remaining ambiguities, so the system requirements can be 
clearly defined. After the developers have been involved in 
formulating the concrete scenarios, the results should be 
evaluated by potential users before proceeding to the next 
step. The resulting requirements can then be used to guide 
software engineers who have not been part of the process so 
far and have less knowledge about the subject. In this way, a 
formal user oriented approach is applied, similar to the 
development of the first prototype described by Botsis et al. 
[22]. 
B. Data Analysis 
The scenario discussions were recorded and transcribed. 
The participants’ expectations of, and opinions on, 
interruption management systems were compared to the 
literature based on the PACT framework, on which the 
scenarios are based. The focus was on the similarities 
between the interview results and various parameters and 
abstractions that are used in context-aware and interruption 
management literature [23-27]. 
 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 2: CallMeSmart prototype network structure 
 
C. The CallMeSmart Prototype 
A working prototype of the CallMeSmart system has 
been developed. The network on which the CallMeSmart 
prototype operates is shown in Figure 2. Interruption 
management can be provided for both android-based 
smartphones and tablets, as well as for Ascom DECT-
phones. The interruption management service itself runs on a 
server, which also serves as a private branch exchange 
(PBX). A PBX facilitates in-house phone communications 
for organizations and businesses, including hospitals. 
A context aware application handles data and sends 
relevant information to a call handling script to provide the 
correct services at the right moment. For more information 
on the softphone and android mobile devices, see Solvoll et 
al. [10]. There are several theoretical frameworks in which 
CallMeSmart can be placed. Here we will introduce three of 
them. 
De Guzman’s classifications of ‘receiver oriented’, 
‘negotiated’, or ‘caller oriented’, as presented by De Guzman 
et al. [23], fit the CallMeSmart system clearly in the ‘caller 
oriented’ category. Of these three categories, ‘caller 
oriented’ is the only one that doesn’t require any attention 
from the user. In the hospital environment, reducing 
interruptions would only be achieved by such a ‘caller 
oriented’ system. 
The CallMeSmart system implements ‘burden-shifting’, 
‘time-shifting’, and ‘activity-based sharing’ as used by 
Lindqvist and Hong [24]. The burden is shifted, because the 
first step, if a user is busy, is to notify the caller of the user’s 
inferred situation. The options presented to the caller, the 
interrupter, allow for ‘time-shifting’. The ‘time-shifting’ can 
be achieved by suggesting using other, conventional, 
technologies, such as messaging or voicemail. 
The design dimension axes of availability sharing, as 
defined by Hincapie-Ramos et al. [25], can be used to 
classify CallMeSmart. The system abstracts the sensor data 
to a ‘discrete’ ‘availability’ mode. ‘Implicit interaction’ is 
used to present the data whenever necessary. The 
presentation of availability data is ‘asymmetric’, since you 
do not need to share your status to be able to identify the 
status of the person you're trying to call. When two persons 
are in each other’s contact list, their status sharing could be 
called ‘symmetric’. Connected to the ‘symmetry’ dimension 
is the ‘traceability’. Here Hincapie-Ramos et al. [25] defined 
parameters, which do not describe the possibilities for the 
dimensions they identify as accurately as the parameters in 
other dimensions. The system can be either ‘blind’ or 
‘traceable’, according to the framework. This represents the 
systems options to let users know not only how and when 
others see them, but also who these others are. In this aspect, 
CallMeSmart is however two thirds blind. The status callers 
get to see is the same as the status shown on the user’s 
phone. Information on who has viewed a user’s status and 
when they have done this, is however not being registered. 
CallMeSmart’s obtrusiveness along the axes is ‘selectively 
focal’. On the ‘temporal gradient’ it focuses on users’ 
‘current availability’. With the identified design dimensions, 
CallMeSmart adheres quite close to the optimal dimensions 
identified by the authors. The main difference is the 
‘blindness’ in the information ‘asymmetry’. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The results presented here are representative quotes from 
interviews and discussions, which led to interesting new 
insights. This section is organized following the PACT 
framework. 
Quotes of the three doctors are identified by Dr. A, B, 
and C. The nurses’ quotes are identified with nurse A, nurse 
B, and nurse C. 
Discussing the aspects of the PACT framework led to 
some interesting insights into the wishes of the intended 
target environment and users. While discussing aspects of 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the framework, some obtained results were more relevant to 
other aspects and are presented there. 
A. Persons 
As nurse A stated:  
“The doctors are definitely the ones who are the most 
disturbed.”  
Dr. A stated however, that he expected:  
“The most advantage is for the caller.” 
Dr. B made an interesting remark about the sources of 
interruptions.  
“We have incoming calls all the time, from GPs [general 
practitioners], wanting to ask questions.” 
Previously Dr. A had already mentioned a possible 
solution for this, now verified, problem:  
“He[a general practitioner] should have an option, if it’s 
urgent he gets through, if not he can wait. It could be very 
useful for the GP. Including GP’s directly, system can help 
more than switchboard currently does.” 
Dr. C generalized this even further saying that: 
“So many interruptions are from outside the hospital. 
Personal, from family, or even media trying to call. There 
should be a barrier to calls from the outside [of the 
hospital].” 
B. Activities 
The CallMeSmart prototype has the option to hang up 
after hearing the callee is busy, without this information 
being shared with the callee. In a reaction to this feature, Dr. 
A stated the following: 
“I would strongly suggest making it an option to be able to 
see everyone who has tried to reach you, even if they decided 
not to leave a message. I guess some people would like to 
know that.”  
Nurse A suggested that the possibility for everybody to 
send text messages will lead to more asynchronous 
communication. 
“[about messages]It’s the same as when we started to use e-
mail [on desktop computers]. You don’t need to synchronize 
communication.”  
Dr. C made the same point and voiced the need for a way 
to handle any backlogs that might occur. 
“They will need to prioritize this backlog of communication 
requests. Maybe color-coded. They should be able to give 
these prioritizations themselves.” 
Which was directly in line with Dr.A’s request for: 
“Some asynchronous feature to allow me to start working, 
which should also show priorities to the pending messages 
and call back requests.” 
To which nurse C added an interesting idea, which 
however wasn’t mentioned by anyone else. The idea is that 
users should be notified when calls initially directed at the 
user are successfully handled by a colleague.  
“An overview of all calls and messages that don’t need 
further follow-up would be useful.”  
Two typical answers when talking about the activities 
aspect came from Dr. B and nurse A respectively: 
“If you had a function that could let you say “I’m busy” or 
“ask me via sms” that would be nice. A function where you 
set up the busy button as similar to the silent mode, or as a 
response to a call is feasible to think about.”  
“Standard messages are a good thing. If I can’t reach 
someone who will be available in a minute I won’t have to 
use my time to find someone else to answer my question.(...) 
Maybe an option to let the callee know when someone is 
trying to call and let the caller know when he will be 
available, though this is an interruption.” 
An interesting remark from nurse B reflected a topic that 
came up several times with several participants: 
“If you know where a person is, you know he’s busy and 
why and thus call a different person.” 
C. Context 
Two quotes from Dr. A and B respectively, made it clear 
that they do not want to be disturbed in the operating room 
(OR). 
“The operation setting is the most important one. That’s a 
situation where people really don’t want to be disturbed.” 
“They’re always busy in two places, the trauma room and 
the OR. If you’re there, you’re busy, that’s the name of the 
game.” 
Dr. B also stated that the contexts, from which many 
interruptions originate, are standard situations, dictated by 
protocols, for example: 
“Most nurses are experienced, but need to have the doctors’ 
permission. […] It’s like, can I take aspirin or paracetamol 
for pain, of course, but they have to ask for permission. It’s 
the doctor who’s responsible for the patient. That’s a very 
typical situation. It would be nice to have a way to arrange 
that”. 
D. Technology 
To be able to integrate any solution in the hospital 
environment, Dr. A advised the following: 
“I would be careful to exclude options, someone might 
prefer the pagers.” 
Dr. C clearly stated an issue that came up more often. 
“It would be nice if you could use the system on a device 
like an iPad and have information, like the EPJ, integrated.”  
E. System Adoption 
A subject that came up with all the participants was 
clearly stated by nurse A: 
“It is more the culture to want the answer now. You need to 
teach the people that they don’t need the answer right now.”  
Dr. C formulated an issue that was mentioned by all 
doctors participating in this research: 
“If the doctors can’t trust the system to be consequent and 
reliable, they will go back to their old system.” 
A concerned voiced by several participants was 
explained by Dr. C in the following way:  
“Doctors will be the main users of the system. They might 
however try to use the system to put up a cocoon around 
themselves, using it as a barrier and not as a tool. Some 
doctors currently switch of their phones, or never turn them 
on. They might use the system in a similar way, always 
keeping their phone on busy.” 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Widya et al. [20] pose that scenarios should be very 
domain specific for participants to recognize the situations. 
In the CallMeSmart project, more general scenarios have 
been used. This was intentionally done for several reasons. 
The first of which is that the CallMeSmart system is meant 
for many different sub-domains inside the hospital. It also 
enabled discussions of the scenarios with healthcare staff 
from the various disciplines, which were available for this 
research. Even though it was not very domain specific, 
several interviewees spontaneously noted that they could 
relate to it.  
There was, however, one physician who felt unable to 
participate in this research. This was because the physician 
did not recognize personal work situations in the scenario. 
When the system is being customized for a hospital and 
its departments, very domain specific, detailed, accurate 
scenarios can be used. The local policies, user habits, and 
preferences can then be taken into account. The current 
scenarios are also quite fragmented. This fragmentation is 
the result of the systems' wide range of functions and options 
for the varying situations. Since many functions are 
replacing functionalities of current communication systems, 
they could be given less attention in future user requirement 
research. 
Only a limited number of medical staff participated in 
this study. They were from widely varying backgrounds, 
which had several consequences. The results represent 
requirements of a wide variety of hospital workers, i.e., 
nurses, an anaesthesiologist, a surgeon, and a department 
head. The participants did not, however, discuss the results 
with their colleagues. It could be that the current results 
include personal opinions or suffer from oversight. 
A. Persons 
One might expect doctors, as senior responsible staff, to 
gain the most benefit from interruption management. During 
interviews however, both doctors and nurses brought up the 
benefits they expected the interrupters would gain. 
Interruptions are generated by a need for information to 
accomplish a task. Proper interruption management would 
have to deal with these information requests, thus facilitating 
the work of the interrupters. 
It was interesting to note that medical personnel seemed 
very annoyed by calls from outside the hospital. It could 
mean that either the volume of interruptions is indeed high, 
or that these interruptions more often occur at inappropriate 
moments, due to even less knowledge about the availability 
of the callee for the callers. Either way, this source of 
interruptions should be considered in designing an 
interruption management system. 
B. Activities 
One of the doctors made an interesting remark on the 
symmetry of information sharing. When the CallMeSmart 
system intervenes, a caller can infer information about the 
person in question, thus enabling the need for traceability 
measures, as discussed by Hincapié-Ramos et al. [25].  
The expected increase of asynchronous communication 
has been shown to increase efficiency in hospital work [7]. 
Managing these communications could further increase the 
efficiency. 
It is interesting to note that users came up with ideas for 
handling interruptions in ‘receiver oriented’, ‘negotiated’, 
and ‘caller oriented’ approaches, as described by De Guzman 
et al. [23]. They also expressed a strong preference for 
interruption management not only ‘during switch phase’, but 
also ‘after switch’, as described by McFarlane and Latorella 
[26]. The notion to classify communications by priority will 
probably suffer from the same mismatches in perceived 
urgency between users as described by Wu et al. [7]. 
‘Awareness’ or ‘presence’ cues were suggested as a way 
to reduce interruptions. These cues can be visualized by 
icons and represent contextual information, such as location. 
The CallMeSmart project does not have this feature, as it 
requires extra time investment from the users, every time 
they want to make a call. This was assumed to be 
unfavorable for efficient system adoption and the good 
results achieved by Oulasvirta and Petit [27] were not 
expected to be reproducible in a hospital environment. 
C. Context 
All 
participants 
emphasized 
the 
significance 
of 
interruptions on the OR. They emphasized that the first 
problem that should be solved are interruptions on the OR 
and ER. Even if a system would only solve interruptions on 
these locations they would like to try it. 
D. Technology 
Including options to integrate the different devices could 
lead to higher adoption rates, because it doesn’t require users 
to switch to a new device. It would however also give users 
the option to handle a larger variety of interruptions via 
mobile communication devices. The use of tablet devices to 
handle interruptions could lead to more mobile workflow 
support of users, while their information requests to each 
other can be managed by CallMeSmart. 
E. System Adoption 
Three main issues for adoption were identified. Firstly, 
hospital personnel will have to get used to asynchronous 
communication. Secondly, the system should be reliable, 
consistent, and transparent for users to understand its 
functionality. Thirdly, users will have to be loyal to the 
system, using it in the way it is intended. Trying to use the 
system as an extra barrier all the time will not lead to 
successful implementation. 
F. Insights gained 
The potential users suggested new ways of managing 
interruptions, but also suggested integration of the 
communication system with other hospital IT systems.  
Though the interviews yielded a lot of ideas on 
interruption management, many of the mentioned causes for 
interruptions originated from workflow protocols. The 
participants would often offer solutions which would change 
the workflow. This is interesting because of the comments 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

on system adoption, where participants stated it should not 
require change to the current processes.  
Although the study included only a limited number of 
participants and the results might therefore not be 
generalizable, it is suggestive that their opinions do highly 
correlate to the literature of the wider field of context-aware 
interruption management. 
The study aims of Bardram and Favela, to support 
computer workflow instead of managing interruptions 
directly, is interesting [18,19]. According to our findings, 
supporting workflow could further reduce the need for 
interruptions. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The requirements, elicited using scenarios, match with 
the broader literature of interruption management and 
previously identified requirements. Wishes of medical 
personnel adhere to previous literature in the broader fields 
of context awareness and interruption management. 
Computer supported cooperative work is closely related to 
interruption management due to its potential to reduce the 
need for interruptions.  
The CallMeSmart system has been further developed 
according to the feedback from the users and is now ready to 
be tested in clinical settings. This pilot will start during 
January 2014, and CallMeSmart will first be installed and 
tested at the Oncology department at University Hospital of 
North Norway. The results from this pilot will be published 
during and after the pilot, late 2014 and 2015.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work was supported by Norwegian Research 
Council Grant No. 174934. We would like to thank the 
doctors, nurses, and developers who participated in the 
process. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Coiera E. Communication systems in healthcare. The Clinical 
Biochemist. Reviews / Australian Association of Clinical 
Biochemists 2006;27, pp. 89–98. 
[2] Scholl J, Hasvold P, Henriksen E, Ellingsen G. Managing 
Communication Availability and Interruptions : A Study of 
Mobile Communication in an Oncology Department. 5th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Pervasive 
Computing, 
PERVASIVE, 2007, pp. 234–50. 
[3] Bardram J, Doryab A. Activity analysis: applying activity 
theory to analyze complex work in hospitals. CSCW  ’11 
Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work, pp. 455–64. 
[4] Coiera E, Tombs V. Communication behaviours in a hospital 
setting: an observational study. BMJ 1998;316:673–6. 
[5] Grundgeiger T, Sanderson P. Interruptions in healthcare: 
theoretical 
views. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Medical 
Informatics 2009;78, pp: 293–307. 
[6] Westbrook JI, Coiera E, Dunsmuir WTM, Brown BM, Kelk 
N, Paoloni R, Tran C. The impact of interruptions on clinical 
task completion. Quality & Safety in Health Care 2010;19, 
pp: 284–9. 
[7] Wu R, Rossos P, Quan S, Reeves S, Lo V, Wong B, Cheung 
M, Morra D. An evaluation of the use of smartphones to 
communicate between clinicians: a mixed-methods study. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research 2011;13:e59. 
[8] Coiera E. The science of interruption. BMJ Quality & Safety 
2012;21, pp. 357–60. 
[9] Solvoll T, Scholl J. Strategies to reduce interruptions from 
mobile communication systems in surgical wards. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare 2008;14, pp. 389–92 
[10] Solvoll T, Gironi L, Hartvigsen. CallMeSmart: A VoIP 
Softphone on Android based mobile devices using SIP. 
eTELEMED2013, pp. 198-203 
[11] Bernd G. Talsma, Terje Solvoll, Gunnar Hartvigsen: User 
Requirements for Interruption Management in Mobile 
Communications in Hospitals. MedInfo 2013: p. 1095 
[12] Carroll JM. Five reasons for scenario-based design. 
Interacting with Computers 2000;13, pp. 43–60. 
[13] Lu T, Bao J. A Systematic Approach to Context Aware 
Service Design. Journal of Computers 2012;7, pp. 207–17. 
[14] Benyon D, Macaulay C. Scenarios and the HCI-SE design 
problem. Interacting with Computers 2002;14, pp. 397–405. 
[15] Hevner A, March S, Park J, Ram S. Design science in 
information systems research. MIS Quarterly 2004;28, pp. 
75–105. 
[16] Sutcliffe A. Scenario-based requirements engineering. Journal 
of Lightwave Technology, IEEE Comput. Soc; 2003, pp. 
320–9. 
[17] Go K, Carroll JM. The blind men and the elephant. 
Interactions 2004;11, pp. 44–53. 
[18] Bardram J. Scenario-based design of cooperative systems. 
Group Decision and Negotiation 2000;9, pp. 237–50. 
[19] Favela J, Tentori M, Castro L a., Gonzalez VM, Moran EB, 
Martínez-García AI. Activity Recognition for Context-aware 
Hospital Applications: Issues and Opportunities for the 
Deployment of Pervasive Networks. Mobile Networks and 
Applications 2007;12, pp. 155–71 
[20] Widya I, Bults R, Wijk R De. Requirements for a nutrition 
education demonstrator. Requirements Engineering, 2011, pp. 
48–53. 
[21] Van ’t Klooster J-W, Van Beijnum B-J, Eliens A, Hermens H. 
Interactive scenario visualization for user-based service 
development. 2012 International Conference on Collaboration 
Technologies and Systems (CTS), IEEE; 2012, pp. 498–503. 
[22] Botsis T, Solvoll T, Scholl J, Hasvold, P, Hartvigsen, G. 
Context-aware systems for mobile communication in 
healthcare: a user oriented approach. AIC’07, Athens: 2007, 
pp. 69–74. 
[23] De Guzman ES, Sharmin M, Bailey BP. Should I call now? 
understanding what context is considered when deciding 
whether to initiate remote communication via mobile devices. 
Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2007 on - GI  ’07, New 
York, New York, USA: ACM Press; 2007, p. 143. 
[24] Lindqvist J, Hong J. Undistracted driving. Proceedings of the 
12th Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and 
Applications - HotMobile  ’11, New York, New York, USA: 
ACM Press; 2011, pp. 70–5. 
[25] Hincapié-Ramos JD, Voida S, Mark G. A design space 
analysis of availability-sharing systems. Proceedings of the 
24th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and 
technology - UIST  ’11, New York, USA: ACM Press; 2011, 
p. 85. 
[26] McFarlane D, Latorella K. The Scope and Importance of 
Human Interruption in Human-Computer Interaction Design. 
Human-Computer Interaction 2002;17:1–61. 
[27] Oulasvirta A, Petit R. Interpreting and acting on mobile 
awareness cues. Human–Computer Interaction 2007;22, pp: 
97–135. 
 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Nursing Professionals’ Roles in Terms of Communication with Patients Using 
Electronic Devices 
 
Marita Koivunen 
Satakunta Hospital District/University of Turku, 
Department of Nursing Science 
Pori, Finland 
e-mail: mhkoivu@utu.fi 
 
Anne Niemi 
Eura Healthcare Center 
Eura, Finland 
e-mail: anne.niemi@eura.fi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maija Hupli 
University of Turku, Department of Nursing Science 
Turku, Finland 
email: maija.hupli@utu.fi 
 
 
Abstract: The purpose of this study is to gain understanding of 
nursing professionals’ expectations of their roles in terms of 
communication with patients using electronic devices. A 
quantitative design was used in the study. The target group of 
the study comprised the nursing professionals who worked in 
outpatient clinics, appointments, or reception services within 
either special or primary health care in one hospital district in 
Finland. The data was collected by an electronic questionnaire 
developed for the study and was analyzed by descriptive 
statistical methods. The nursing professionals were asked to 
choose the two most important roles that they thought 
described their own role in terms of communication with 
patients using electronic devices. The alternatives given were:  
learner, advisor, collaborator, teacher and limit setter. The 
descriptions of the roles were developed in the researcher's 
(MK) earlier study. Most often the professionals chose the role 
of collaborator where they communicate with patients by 
electronic devices. The role of collaborator was chosen 102 
times. The second most common choice was advisor, which was 
chosen 64 times, while the least popular choice was the role of 
limit setter. Patient-centered care and shared decision-making 
require that professionals collaborate actively with patients. 
The findings show that the members of nursing staff estimate 
their role to be that of collaborator and so they want to be 
partners in cooperation with patients. We can assume that 
nursing professionals are ready to utilize electronic devices in 
communication in concert with patients. 
 
Keywords-electronic communication; information technology;  
role relationship 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Nursing 
professionals 
have 
a 
critical 
role 
in 
communication with patients in health care. They can 
provide individuals with timely, effective and appropriate 
services and assist in safeguarding patients’ rights at 
treatment facilities [1, 2].  Nurses establish a caring 
relationship where both parties work together helping 
patients to cope with their health problems [3].  
Traditionally, nurses have been seen as servants who 
follow the physician’s instructions and ensure that patients 
receive high-quality care [4]. In addition, nurses’ role has 
been that of patient advocate, promoting health by giving 
information and educating patients. A key role is to support 
the patient as an independent survivor [5].  
While nursing staff was earlier seen as information 
providers, the trend in communication and patient education 
in the 2000s has shifted towards collaboration between 
patients and professionals [6, 7]. Nurses often have the role 
of coordinator in patient care.  They are responsible for  
discussing patients’ status with the patients themselves but 
also with family members and other health care 
professionals [8]. Thus, nurses need a wide range of 
communication skills and have a variety of communication 
situation related roles.  
Reciprocity and simultaneousness are central aspects in 
communication [3]. It attempts to build a confidential and 
equal partnership between professionals and patients 
through communication [9].  
Using the Internet for seeking health information and 
electronic devices for communication has become a popular 
choice in healthcare [10]. Today, the Internet is an easily 
available tool [11] and citizens are able to be in contact with 
healthcare staff via remote connections [12]. Patients are 
interested in using electronic applications for appointments 
[13], for looking at their own patient records [14] and for 
satisfying their health information needs [15]. The use of 
different reminder messages that are transmitted via mobile 
phone is also becoming more popular [13].  
The use of modern technology, such as mobile phones 
and email, can enhance communication between patients 
and health care professionals.  It is possible that the use of 
information 
technology 
makes 
nurses’ 
work 
more 
independent. For this reason, nurses’ awareness of their 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

roles and skills in electronic communication will be critical 
for efficient service delivery [16].   
According to earlier studies, the use of information 
technology applications for communication requires new 
skills, roles and attitudes on the part of staff in health 
services [17]. It is clear that face-to-face communication is 
different from virtual communication [18]. It can be 
expected that cooperation with patients becomes more 
significant than before when electronic applications are used 
because the professional must be able to clarify the patient’s 
situation and needs, sometimes without eye contact [19]. It 
is not possible for the professional to perceive and interpret 
the patient’s physical reactions, expressions and gestures 
which might provide valuable additional information about 
the patient’s situation and health status [20]. However, it is 
possible 
to 
use 
videophones 
and 
other 
computer 
applications that relay images. When using these tools 
communication becomes nearly the same as face to face 
[21].  
Information technology is widely used in Finnish health 
care organizations. Electronic patient records are in 
comprehensive usage both in specialized health care and 
primary care. Its distribution covers 100% of these health 
care providers [22]. However, electronic communication is 
not as common between patients and health care 
professionals.  
In this study, communication means patient-professional 
interaction which takes place with the aid of electronic 
devices. The key is to examine nursing professionals’ roles 
in this communication from professionals’ point of view. 
Electronic devices refer to the devices which belong to the 
field of information and communication technology: 
computers, mobile phones, videophones and various 
applications (e-mail, text messages transmitted with a 
mobile phone and Internet software, electronic forms, 
Internet 
applications), 
which 
make 
electronic 
communication possible between nursing professionals and 
patients.  
When the use of electronic communication becomes 
more common in nurses’ work, it is important to examine 
how nurses experience their own roles as service providers 
by these applications. New working methods may change 
the work of nursing staff  in such a way that the changes 
must be taken into account in the training or during the job 
orientation period. 
The purpose of this study is to gain understanding of 
nursing professionals’ expectations of their roles in terms of 
communication with patients using electronic devices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The research questions were: 
1) How do the nursing professionals experience their 
own role in electronic communication with the 
patients? 
2) Do the professionals’ experiences of their own role 
in electronic communication differ in special health 
care and primary health care? 
3) Do the experiences of different occupational 
groups regarding their own role in electronic 
communication differ from each other? 
The study is part of a wider project whose objective is to 
clarify nursing professionals’ experiences of the use of 
electronic communication in Finnish public health services.   
 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
A. Design and data collection 
 
A quantitative design was used in this part of the 
project. The target group of the study (N = 567) comprised 
the nursing professionals who worked in outpatient clinics, 
appointments, or reception services within either special or 
primary health care in one hospital district on the west coast 
of Finland.  
The data was collected in spring 2012 using a 
structured questionnaire developed for the study. The survey 
was carried out in electronic form using the Webropol® 
service. The participants got the link to their personal e-mail 
and were able to answer the questions using the link. In one 
organization, the staff did not have e-mail addresses and the 
questionnaire was delivered to them as a paper version. 
The survey instrument was organized into four blocks 
of questions: a) background characteristics, b) electronic 
communication with patients, c) electronic communication 
with 
colleagues, 
d) 
nurses’ 
roles 
in 
electronic 
communication. This paper concentrates on block d; the 
findings of the other blocks will be reported elsewhere.  
In block d, the participants were asked to choose the 
two most important roles that they thought described their 
own role in terms of communication with patients using 
electronic devices. The given alternatives were:  learner, 
advisor, collaborator, teacher and limit setter. The 
descriptions of the roles were developed in the researcher’s 
(MK) earlier study which was carried out in psychiatric 
nursing (see Table 1). The study aimed to identify nurses’ 
roles in systematic patient education sessions where also 
computer-based education was used [23]. In the present 
study, the target group received a short description of the 
roles in the questionnaire.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE 1. DESCRIPTIONS OF THE ROLES 
 
Role 
Description of the role 
 Limit setter 
 
You feel it is your task to set limits e.g. to the 
information that is given to the client utilizing 
electronic devices. 
 Teacher 
 
You feel above all that you provide information for 
the client by making use of electronic devices. 
 Collaborator 
 
You feel you work in cooperation with the client in 
utilizing electronic devices. 
 Advisor 
 
You feel you are a guide who utilizes electronic 
devices as you give information to the client. 
 Learner 
 
You feel you learn new things about the use of 
technology, the relationship between client and 
nurse, the client’s health problem and treatment etc. 
 
B. Ethical considerations 
 
The data collection was authorized by the nursing or 
medical directors of the study organizations. The basic 
principles of research ethics, such as confidentiality and 
good study practices, were followed throughout the study 
[24]. The target group was informed of the purpose of the 
study and the participation of the nurses was voluntary.  
 
C. Data analysis 
 
The statistical software package SPSS for Windows 
version 20 was used to analyze the data.  Descriptive 
statistics were computed for background information on 
organization 
and 
occupational 
groups. 
Nursing 
professionals’ 
choices 
of 
their 
roles 
in 
electronic 
communication were looked at from the software using 
frequencies. Because of small sample size in some job areas 
(charge nurses, practical nurses, physiotherapists and 
occupational therapists), the groups had to be pooled for 
statistical analyses. Chi-squared tests were used to 
determine the differences in background factors between the 
professionals’ role choices. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
 
Out of 567 eligible participants in the sampling frame, 123 
answered the questionnaire (total response rate 22%). 23% 
of the participants worked in specialized health care and 
77% in primary care. There were 34% nurses among the 
respondents, 46% were community nurses, 7% charge 
nurses, 7% practical nurses and others, and 5% were 
physiotherapists and occupational therapists. 
The participants chose the role of collaborator 102 times 
when they estimated their own role in communication with 
patients by electronic devices. The second most common 
choice was advisor’s role, which was chosen 64 times. The 
most infrequently chosen role was that of limit setter, which 
was chosen eight times. (Figure 1) 
 
 
 
Figure 1 – Nursing professionals’ roles in terms of 
communication with patients using electronic devices (F = the 
count of the choices) 
 
There were no statistically significant differences in 
professionals’ experiences of their own roles in electronic 
communication with patients between staff working in 
special health care and primary health care. (Table 2) 
Similarly, there were no differences between occupational 
groups. (Table 3) 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
 
Our study showed that the use of electronic devices in 
communication between nursing professionals and patients 
might not change staff roles in practice compared with face-
to-face communication. This was supported by the study 
findings showing that nurses were seen as collaborators with 
patients when they used various information sources for 
giving information to patients [6, 24]. It is clear that the use 
of electronic devices does not remove the role of advocate 
for patients from nursing professionals. Compared to 
traditional practice, possible remote services require 
different sensitivity on the part of nurses to identify patients’ 
situation and needs.  
It is traditionally thought that nursing practice requires 
close face-to-face interaction. It can therefore be natural for 
nursing professionals to tend to collaborate actively with 
patients 
instead 
of 
using 
electronic 
devices 
for 
communication. On the other hand, it can be supposed that 
nurses choose more often the role of teacher because patient 
education has a significant role in client-nurse interaction 
and it often involves actual teaching.  
However, it is clear that professionals should be ready to 
tailor their roles according to the patient’s situation. In the 
present study, some of the participants were community 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

nurses who worked in school health care. Their patients are 
young children, so it can sometimes be important that the 
professional takes the role of limit setter. A competent and 
expert health care professional can operate flexibly. She or 
he can recognize different situations and patients’ needs 
when electronic devices are used in communication.  
There were no differences in nursing professionals’ 
experiences of their own roles in electronic communication 
with patients between staff working in special health care 
and primary health care as distinct occupational groups. It is 
probable that nursing professionals’ work does not differ 
very much in outpatient clinics between special and primary 
health care organizations. Communication with patients is a 
significant part of nursing professionals’ work and they use 
varying roles in practice regardless of the structure of the 
organization. Perhaps the most crucial factor that may affect 
the choice of the role of nursing professionals is the 
patient’s situation.  
The study had some weaknesses. First, nursing 
personnel’s participation in the survey was not very active, 
which may limit the generalizability of the findings. The 
study was performed in one hospital district area in Finland. 
It was known that the use of electronic devices for 
communication was not very common in this area. For this 
reason, is possible that nursing staff members were not 
interested in responding to the questionnaire. It may be that 
some of the nurses did not have much experience of 
electronic communication, which is why they found it 
difficult to look at their own role in it. 
Second, the descriptions of the roles were developed in a 
systematic patient education project in the area of mental 
health nursing. Now they were tested for the first time in 
other nursing areas.  However, we have no reason to believe 
that these limitations appreciably biased the findings. The 
results are suggestive and describe the situation among the 
target group. 
Our results show that nursing professionals have 
competence to use electronic systems in various ways for 
communication with patients. Therefore, there are no 
explicit barriers to the implementation of new applications 
for daily care. It is not self-evident that new applications 
will bring immediate economic benefits and working time 
savings, but there is some evidence that they increase access 
to health care services, thus helping patients [25]. For this 
reason, is important to ensure nurses’ role and competence 
in electronic communication.  
 
V. 
 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
According to the study, nursing professionals assume 
different roles in communication with patients using 
electronic devices. Most often nursing staff members think 
of themselves as collaborators. The findings show that 
professionals estimate their role to be collaborators, and we 
can thus suppose that they want to be partners in 
cooperation with patients. Patient-centered care and shared 
decision-making requires that professionals collaborate 
actively with their patients.  
It 
seems 
that 
the 
introduction 
of 
electronic 
communication devices in health care does not cause a 
problem from the point of view of professionals’ working 
methods. The results can be used in nursing education and 
orientation to ensure nursing professionals’ abilities to 
communicate with patients using electronic devices.  
In future, it is important to investigate electronic 
communication from the patients’ perspective. It is 
necessary to find out patients’ expectations for nurses when 
services are transferred to electronic format.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The study was partly funded by Satakunta Hospital 
District (EVO 81051) and the Finnish Cultural Foundation, 
Satakunta Regional fund.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Robinson, “Care coordination: a priority for health reform”,  
Policy Polit Nurs Pract, vol. 11, Nov. 2010, pp. 1266-1274. 
[2] K. Vondrak, “Healthcare reform, health IT, and EHRs: The 
nurse executive’s role”, Nurs Manage, vol. 43, Dec. 2012, pp. 
46-51. 
[3] M. Shattell, “Nurse-patient interaction: a review of the 
literature“, J Clin Nurs, vol. 13, Sep. 2004, pp. 714-722. 
[4] S. Strech and D Wyatt. „Partnering to lead change: Nurses‘ 
role in the redesign of health care“, AORN Journal, vol. 98, 
Sep. 2013, pp. 260-266. 
[5] D. Whitehead, “Health promotion in nursing: a Derridean 
discourse analysis“, Health Promot Int, vol. 26, pp. 117-127. 
[6] R. Bellamy, “An introduction to patient education: theory and 
practice“, Med Teach, vol. 26, Jun. 2004, pp. 359-365. 
[7] G-M. Breen, T. Wan, N. Zhang, S. Marathe, B. Seblega, and S. 
Paek, “Improving doctor-patient communication: Examining 
innovative modalities vis-á-vis effective petient-centric care 
management technology“, J Med Syst, vol. 33, Apr. 2009, pp. 
155-162. 
[8] P. Dykes, M. Cashen, M. Foster, J. Gallagher, M. Kennedy, R. 
MacCallum, J. Murphy, R. Schleyer, and S. Whetstone, 
”Surveying acute care providers in the U.S. to explore the 
impact of HIT on the role of nurses and interdisciplinary 
communication in acute care settings”, J Healthc Inf Manag, 
vol. 20, Spring 2006, pp. 36-44. 
[9] S. Tveiten, and E. Severison, “Communication – a core 
concept in client supervision by public health nurses“, J Nurs 
Manag, vol. 14, Apr. 2006, pp. 235-243. 
[10] E. Iveroth, P. Fryk, and B. Rapp, ”Information technology 
strategy and alignment issues in health care organizations”, 
Health Care Manage Rev, vol. 38, Jul-Sep. 2013, pp. 188-200. 
[11] Official Statistics of Finland (OSF). Use of information and 
communications 
technology 
by 
individuals. 
ISSN=2323-2854. 
Helsinki: 
Statistics 
Finland 
2012.  
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Available: 
http://www.tilastokeskus.fi/til/sutivi/sutivi_2012-
11-07_uut_001_en.html. Access 12. January 2014 
[12] V. Wade, J. Karnon, A. Elshaug, and J. Hiller, “A systematic 
review of economics analyses of telehealth services using real 
time video communication”, BMC Health Serv Res, vol. 10, 
Aug. 2010, doi:10.1186/1472-6963-10-233 
[13] J. Car, I. Gurol-Urganci, T. de Jongh, V. Vodopivec-Jamsec, 
and R. Atun, “Mobile phone messaging reminders for 
attendance at healthcare appoinments“, Review. Cochrane 
Database 
Syst 
Rev. 
2012 
Jul 
11;7:CD007458. 
doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD007458.pub2. 
[14] R. Vuokko, J. Suhonen, and J. Porrasmaa, “Functional 
description of patient information release from a hospital 
district patient register and from the KanTa national health 
care archive: Informing a patient, patient’s release consent and 
release refusal”, National Institute for Health and Welfare 
(THL). Report 63/2012. Helsinki, Finland. 
[15] H. Bastian, ”Health literacy and patient information: 
developing the methodology for a national evidence based 
health website”, Patient Educ Couns, vol. 73, Dec. 2008,  pp. 
551-556. 
[16] H. Blake, “Mobile technology: streamlining practice and 
improving care”, Br J Community Nurs, vol. 18, Sep 2013, pp. 
430-432. 
[17] A. 
Barton, 
“Health 
information 
technology 
safety. 
Implications for the clinical nurse specialists“, Clin Nurse 
Spec, vol. 26, Jul-Aug. 2012, pp. 198-199. 
[18] A. Adams, R. Adams, R. Thorogood, and C. Buckingham, 
”Barriers to the use of e-health technology in nurse practioner-
patient consultations”,  Inform Prim Care, vol. 15, Jun. 2007, 
pp. 103-109. 
[19] H. Atherton, J. Car, and B. Meyer, “Email for clinical 
communication between patients/caregivers and healthcare 
professionals“, 
Cochrane 
Database 
Syst 
Rev. 
2012, 
Nov14;11:CD007978.doi:10.1002/14651858.CD007978.pub2 
[20] J. Silverman, and P. Kinnersley, ”Doctors'non-verbal 
behaviour in consultations: look at the patient before you look 
at the computer”, Br J Gen Pract, vol. 60, Feb. 2010, pp. 76-78. 
[21] J. Winters, and J. Winters, “Videoconferencing and telehealth 
technologies can provide a reliable approach to remote 
assessment and teaching without compromising quality“, J 
Cardiovasc Nurs, vol. 22, Jan-Feb. 2007, pp. 51-57. 
[22] I. Winblad, J. Reponen, and P. Hämäläinen, ”Use of 
Information and Communication Technology in Finnish 
Health Care in 2011. Status and Future Directions”, National 
Institute for Health and Welfare (THL). Report 3/2012, 178 
pages. 
Helsinki, 
Finland 
2012. 
Available: 
http://www.thl.fi/thl-client/pdfs/825d0af8-f97c-4192-bf5b-
ba5e1bf773aa. Access 12. January 2014 
[23] M. Koivunen, J. Huhtasalo, P. Makkonen, M. Välimäki, and 
H. Hätönen, “Nurses’ roles in systematic patient education 
sessions in psychiatric nursing”, J Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs, 
vol. 19, Aug. 2012, pp. 546-554. 
[24] ETENE, The National Advisory Board on Social Welfare and 
Health Care Ethics, “Ethical evaluation of the research in 
Finland”, 
2006, 
Available: 
http://www.etene.fi/c/document_library/get_file?folderId=171
45&name=DLFE-529.pdf Access 12. January 2014 
[25] E. Iveroth, P. Fryk, and B. Rapp. “Information technology 
strategy and alingment issues in health care organizations”, 
Healht Care Manage Rew, vol. 38, Jul-Seb 2013, pp. 188-200. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 2. NURSING PROFESSIONALS’ ROLES IN TERMS OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION IN SPECIAL HEALTH CARE AND 
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
 
Organization 
  
Collaborator 
Advisor 
Learner 
Teacher 
Something else 
Limit setter 
  
n 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
Special health care 
28 
86 
14 
64 
36 
25 
75 
11 
89 
7 
93 
0 
100 
Primary health care 
94 
83 
17 
49 
51 
34 
66 
19 
81 
6 
94 
7 
93 
Chi2 (df) p 
  
0.118 (1) 0.734 
2.038 (1) 0.156 
0.811 (1) 0.372 
1.077 (1) 0.303 
0.020 (1) 0.888 
2.212 (1) 0.139 
 
 
TABLE 3. OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS AND THEIR ROLES IN TERMS OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION 
 
Position 
  
Collaborator 
Advisor 
Learner 
Teacher 
Something else 
Limit setter 
  
n 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
yes % 
no % 
Nurse 
41 
83 
17 
46 
54 
32 
68 
17 
83 
10 
90 
5 
95 
Community nurse 
56 
84 
16 
57 
43 
34 
66 
14 
86 
2 
98 
9 
91 
Other 
24 
79 
21 
50 
50 
6 
18 
25 
75 
17 
83 
4 
96 
Chi2 (df) p 
  
0.269 (2) 0.754 
1.158 (2) 0.643 
0.624 (2) 0.654 
1.348 (2) 0.519 
5.888 (2) 0.546 
0.919 (2) 0.950 
 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Intravenous Drip Infusion Monitoring System  
with Body Area Communication Tag 
 
Yoshitoshi Murata, Kazuhiro Yoshida 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp, kyoshida@ipu-office.iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Intravenous drip infusion is a common method of 
administering medication. However, it is difficult for a nurse to 
continuously monitor the administration since it can take more 
than one hour. It is difficult to instantly detect problems such 
as removal of a drip infusion administration set by a patient or 
an empty bag. We propose an intravenous drip infusion 
monitoring system equipped with body area communication 
tags that can instantly detect such incidents. 
Keywords- 
intravenous 
drip 
infusion; 
body 
area 
communication tag; medication; medical administration 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Intravenous 
drip 
infusion 
is 
widely 
used 
for 
administering medication in hospitals. However, it is 
difficult to continuously monitor administration, since it can 
take more than one hour. Therefore, it is difficult to instantly 
detect incidents. The following incidents should be 
monitored. 
- Infusion rate: Changing of infusion rate causes 
insufficient therapy or serious problems. 
- Empty medication bag: Empty medication bag 
sometimes results in a blocked cannula by blood and 
has to be exchanged with a new one. 
- Remaining quantity of medication fluid in the bag: It is 
possible to estimate changing of infusion rate and 
empty medication from the remaining quantity of 
medication fluid. 
- Getting the drip administration set off the body: Getting 
the drip administration set off results in insufficient 
therapy. In case of administering toxic medication such 
as anticancer drugs, a skin with which toxic medication 
oozing through a cannula is stained sometimes becomes 
necrotic.  
 
Several types of intravenous drip infusion monitoring 
equipment have been developed. Optical devices, such as Ir-
da, are widely used to measure the drip rate [1][2][3][4][5]. 
Ogawa et al. developed a system for measuring the drip rate 
using electrodes instead of optical devices [6]. However, the 
drip rate is not steady, and the size of the drip is not the same 
[7]. Generally, lower the drip rate, smaller the drip size. For 
steady and accurate infusion, it is necessary to equip an 
ordinary administration set with some form of servo-control 
mechanism. Barros and dos Santos proposed not only 
monitoring the drip rate but also controlling it to maintain 
steady and accurate infusion [1]. However, since their system 
estimates the infusion rate from the drip rate and does not 
take into account the change in drip size, it is difficult to 
accurately estimate the infusion rate. On the other hand, 
Wang and Chen estimated the infusion rate instead of the 
drip rate using an ultrasonic transducer [8]. Cataldo et al. 
proposed a measuring scheme to estimate the remaining 
quantity of fluid in a bag. They used the microwave time-
domain reﬂectometry (TDR) to estimate this [9][10]. Their 
system can measure the infusion rate from the remaining 
quantity, not the drip rate. Huang and Lin proposed a 
warning system using Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID) to detect an empty bag [11]. 
Current systems and tools cannot detect getting the drip 
administration set off the body. Some cognitively impaired 
patients 
consciously 
remove 
their 
drip 
infusion 
administration sets by themselves. Hence, a monitoring 
system that can detect such behavior is needed. We propose 
an intravenous drip infusion monitoring system that can 
detect both an empty bag and removal of a drip infusion 
administration set. We previously presented the results of a 
feasibility study of our proposed system [12]. We use body 
area communication tags called the Touch tag to estimate 
both actions. The Touch tag is developed and supplied by 
Adsol Nissin Corp. [13]. 
After related work is discussed in Section II, we describe 
the basic principle and structure of our proposed system in 
Section III. The basic characteristics of the proposed system 
are presented in Section IV. The experimental parameters of 
the system and evaluations we conducted are described in 
Section V. The key points are summarized and future work is 
mentioned in Sections VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we introduce schemes for detecting the 
remaining fluid in a bag and body area communication tags, 
which are related to our system. 
A. Schemes for detecting remaining fluid in intravenous 
bag 
Cataldo et al. used microwave TDR for a two-strip 
adhesive probe attached to a bag to estimate the remaining 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

quantity of fluid in the bag, as shown in Fig. 1 [9][10]. The 
TRD value varies corresponding to the remaining quantity 
of fluid. The measuring accuracy may be acceptable. 
However, since it requires a TRD measuring instrument, 
such as a network analyzer, and to measure TRD value vs. 
remaining quantity of fluid for kinds of bag or medication. 
Huang and Lin used RFID to detect an empty bag [11]. 
A RFID tag is attached to the bottom of an intravenous bag. 
They argued that a tag reader could read a RFID from a few 
meters during fluid level was under a RFID tag, as shown in 
Fig. 2. However, they did not provide practical experimental 
data on if a tag reader could read RFID. 
 
Figure 1. Scheme for measuring remaining liquid quantity using TDR 
 
 
Figure 2. Scheme for detecting an empty bag using RFID 
B. Body area communication tag 
There are two types of body area communication 
systems [14]. One involves the human body as a data-bus 
between devices attached to the body. The other involves a 
radio system used as a communication system between 
devices attached to the body. The first type was invented by 
T. G. Zimmerman in 1996 [15]. His body area 
communication system used the variable of the electric field 
on the body of which the frequency range was from 0.1 to 1 
MHz. He built a prototype operating at 330 kHz. However, 
since he chose a frequency range from 0.1 to 1.0 MHz to 
suppress electric-field emissions, probably it was difficult to 
achieve stable communication because of the significant 
ambient noise. Ambient noise usually presents itself at 
frequencies below 1 MHz. When the transmission signal is 
strong enough to maintain stable communication, there is no 
difference between his system and existing near-field 
communication systems such as WiFi and Bluetooth. 
Ultimately, Zimmerman stopped developing this technology 
and chose the second scheme. 
Panasonic Electric Works Co. Ltd. developed a touch 
communication system using the variable of the electric 
current in a body instead of the electric field to avoid the 
ambient noise in 2004 [16]. 
Yuichi Kado evolved Zimmerman’s body area 
communication system [17]. He selected the frequency band 
from 5 to 10 MHz to avoid the ambient noise and developed 
a modulation scheme to efficiently modulate the electric 
field near the body and receiver circuits which reduce 
ambient noise such as electrical hum.  
Our partner, Ad-Sol Nissin Corp., introduced a semi-
active scheme to improve the battery life cycle of tags used 
in evolved electric field schemes [13]. It is possible to use a 
tag for a few years without having to replace the battery. We 
chose Ad-Sol Nissin’s Touch tag to develop a medication 
error protection system [18], since it is possible to 
communicate over clothes or shoes and the life cycle of the 
tag is long. The Touch tag was used for verifying the 
relationship among an intravenous bag, patient, and nurse. 
We noticed that the received signal level when the Touch 
tag was touched directly was different from the level when 
the tag was touched through an intravenous bag. 
III. 
BASIC PRINCIPLE AND SYSTEM STRUCTURE 
A. Basic principle 
Our system uses Touch tag features to detect an empty 
intravenous bag and a removal of a drip infusion 
administration set. The Touch tag reader sends a calling 
signal over the electric field for the Touch tag to send a reply 
message. The tag that received the calling signal sends a 
reply message including its ID over the electric field. 
Therefore, the tag reader can read the ID in a tag a few 
centimeters away from it without requiring any media. In 
addition, when there are ionized media, such as isotonic 
sodium chloride solution, in a tube between a reader and tag, 
the distance from where the reader can read the tag becomes 
longer. When a person touches the tube between a reader and 
tag, the communication length becomes very short. The 
reason is that the electric field generates between a tag and 
the ground via a person in addition to a section between a 
reader and tag, and the strength of the electric field between 
a reader and tag weakens.  
It is possible to detect an empty bag by changing from 
able to read a tag to unable to read a tag derived from fluid in 
a tube being empty.  
The removal of a drip infusion administration set is 
detected by changing from unable to read a tag to able to 
read a tag, because of the patient removing the tube and the 
tag together with the cannula. The tube was attached to an 
arm or other body parts of a patient before removing. It is 
difficult to detect if a patient removed only the cannula. 
However, we believe that a cognitively impaired patient may 
remove the tube and tag together with the cannula. 
B. System structure 
The structure of our proposed system is shown in Fig. 3. 
A tag reader is attached to a tube beneath a chamber, Tag1 is 
attached to the tube at longer than the longest position that a 
reader can read a tag’s ID when there is no fluid in the tube 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(L1), and Tag2 is attached to the tube between the shortest 
position that a reader cannot read a tag’s ID when a person 
touches it (L2) and the longest position that a reader can read 
a tag’s ID when there is fluid in the tube (L3). L1, L2 and L3 
are lengths from a reader. An arm is attached to the tube at a 
position near Tag2. Not reading Tag1 means the amount of 
fluid in the tube is nothing; and reading Tag1 and Tag2 
simultaneously means the tube was removed from an arm. 
When a PC detects no amount of fluid in a bag or a tube has 
been removed, it sends an alert to the nurses’ station. Only 
Tag1 is needed for detecting only an empty bag. On the other 
hand, only Tag2 is needed for detecting a removal of a drip 
infusion administration set. 
One of the advantages of the proposed system is that 
installation is very easy. Attaching an electric-probe or an 
RFID on a bag is not necessary. Installation only involves 
fastening an electrode of a reader and one or two tags to a 
tube. For this research, the electrode of a reader was fastened 
using magic tape and a tag was fastened using a rubber band, 
as shown in Fig. 4. Fastening becomes easier to change them 
to clipping type. 
 
 
Figure 3. System structure 
IV. 
BASIC CHARACTERISTICS 
A.  Humidity 
Since the touch tag is an electric-field-type tag, we 
assumed L1, L2 and L3 would be affected by humidity. We 
measured the relationship between L1, L2, L3 and humidity 
for two tags on three different days, as shown in Fig. 4. This 
photo shows when measuring L2. We used a bag filled with 
an isotonic sodium chloride solution. 
An electrode of the reader was attached to a tube beneath 
a chamber with magic tape. A tube was attached to a 
patient’s arm between an electrode and  a tag with gummed 
tape, and Touch tags were attached to the same tube with a 
rubber band to easily change their positions. Since a reader 
can surely read a tag at less than or equal to L1 or L3, the 
measured data were of the longest length on which a reader 
can read a tag continuously 10 times. The other hand, since a 
reader surely cannot read a tag at longer than or equal to L2, 
the measured data were of the shortest length on which a 
reader cannot read a tag continuously 10 times. 
The measurement data of L1, L2, and L3 are shown in 
Figs. 5, 6 and 7, respectively. We could not find any effects 
of humidity on the readability of touch tags. The reader 
could not read a tag 18 cm away, when there was not fluid in 
a tube, as shown in Fig. 5. Therefore, Tag1 must be attached 
to a tube more than 18 cm from the reader-electrode. The 
reader could not read a tag’s ID more 60 cm away, when 
someone touched the tube, as shown in Fig. 6, but it could 
read the tag within 84 cm, when there was fluid in a tube, as 
shown in Fig. 7. From these experimental data, Tag2 must be 
attached to a tube between 60 and 84 cm from the reader-
electrode. 
 
Figure 4. Photograph of measuring L2 
 
Figure 5. Measurement results of L1 
 
Figure 6. Measurement results of L2 
 
Figure 7. Measurement results of L3 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Angle between reader-electrode and tag 
The electrode of a touch tag reader and a touch tag is 
designed to generate an electric field on the surface of the 
body. Therefore, they have directional characteristics. We 
measured the received signal strength for a tag of which the 
direction increased 15 degrees from 0 to 315 degrees. The 
measurement conditions were as follows; 
- 
There was fluid in the tube, or it was empty. 
- 
Distances between the reader and a tag were 5 and 
10 cm. 
We used an intravenous bag filled with an isotonic sodium 
chloride solution. 
The data were averaged over ten received signals. The 
measurement data are shown in Fig. 8. When there was fluid 
in the tube, the directional pattern was omni-directional. On 
the other hand, when there was not fluid in the tube, the 
received signal strength was stronger in the same or opposite 
direction between the reader-electrode and tag. 
For detecting the 
removal of 
a drip infusion 
administration set, since there was fluid in a tube, a nurse did 
not have to focus on the attaching angle of Tag2. On the 
other hand, L1 has to be considered. However, when we 
measured L1 (Fig. 5), the angle between the reader-electrode 
and tag varied every time. We believe the measurement data 
include this variation. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Directional characteristics of angle between reader-electrode and 
tag 
 
C. Touching tube between reader-electrode and tag 
An electric-field-type body area communication tag and 
reader-electrode generate an electric field between them and 
the earth via the human body when a person touches a tube 
between a reader-electrode and a tag, as shown in Fig. 9. 
Therefore, the received signal strength from a tag to the 
reader weaken when the person touches the tube. We 
measured how much the received signal strength was 
affected when someone touched the tube between the reader-
electrode and tag, as shown in Fig. 9. The length between the 
reader-electrode and tag was 40 cm. There was fluid in the 
tube, which was attached to an arm with gummed tape. We 
used an intravenous bag filled with an isotonic sodium 
chloride solution. The measurement data are shown in Fig. 
10. The received signal strengths for Tag1 and Tag2 were 
roughly the same and always steady when a tube was 
removed from an arm. On the other hand, the received 
signals for Tag1 and Tag2 varied by about 5 dB, when a 
participant touched the tube. There was not big difference 
between values for each tag. There was a 15 – 20 dB 
difference between when a participant touched the tube and 
did not. Since the signal strength at 25 cm for both tags was 
weak and varied like a sine-wave, we estimated there was a 
standing wave on the tube. However, we miss-estimated 
since the frequency of the touch tag was 3.2 MHz . 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Image of electric-field between reader electrode, tag and earth via 
human 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Effect of participant touching tube between reader and tag 
 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D. Simultaneously reading two tags 
The Touch tag uses the semi-active method. The tag 
responds to a compellation of a reader to suppress electricity 
consumption of the battery in a tag. Therefore, the reader 
sometimes fails to read when two tags send a response at the 
same time. We measured the characteristics for reading two 
tags simultaneously. Tag2 was attached to a tube 80 cm from 
the reader and Lr at which Tag1 was attached changed from 
20 to 70 cm, as shown in Fig. 11. We used an intravenous 
bag filled with an isotonic sodium chloride solution. The 
number of continuous miss-readings for each tag is shown in 
Fig. 12. In this figure, Lr is 20, 50 and 70 cm. The number of 
tag readings was 237 at 20 cm, 171 at 50 cm, and 253 at 70 
cm. The values in Fig. 12 were corrected to normalize 100 
readings.  
A reader could read Tag1 every time from Lr=20 to 40 cm. 
Since there is not a big difference between Lr=20 and 40 cm, 
the figure at 40 cm is not presented. The reason the reader 
could perfectly read Tag1 must be due to the fact that the 
signal strength from Tag1 is much stronger than that from 
Tag2. Hence, when Lr was 70 cm, the number of continuous 
miss-readings for Tag1 was the same as that for Tag2. We 
believe the number of continuous miss-readings for Tag1 and 
Tag2 being completely the same must be a coincidence. 
When a reader does not read Tag1, the tube must be empty, 
or the reader or tag is broken. The proposed system can 
instantly detect when a tube is empty. 
No more than nine miss-readings occurred at every Lr. 
when the drip infusion administration set was removed, our 
system must detect it within at least of ten trying to read a 
tag after removing occurence. It is possible to detect such 
actions within 10 sec., when the reading period is 1 sec.  
 
 
 
Figure.11 Positions at Tag 1 and Tag 2 for measuring characteristics for 
reading two tags simultaneousl 
 
 
(a) Distance from reader Lr=20 cm 
 
(b) Distance from reader Lr=50 cm 
 
(c) Distance from reader Lr=70 cm 
Figure 12. Miss-readings for two tags simultaneously 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
From the results discussed in Section IV-A, we attached 
Tag1 20 cm from the reader and Tag2 70 cm from the reader, 
as shown in Fig. 3. The proposed system could detect an 
empty intravenous bag and a removal of a drip infusion 
administration set. We used an intravenous bag filled with 
an isotonic sodium chloride solution. The evaluations 
conditions were as follows. 
- When bag was empty: was continuously unable to read 
Tag1 10 times. We decided this condition to get 
certainty. 
- Removal of the drip infusion administration set: 
instantly could read Tag2. The reason we used this 
condition was that the reader may read Tag2 ten times 
to detect if an administration set was removed, 
derived from the results in Fig.12 (a). This means the 
detection speed was very slow.  
In our prototype system, an alert message for each 
incident was presented on a PC display. We determined if 
the bag was empty by pulling a tube off the bag instead of 
running fluid out of the bag. The reasons were that we did 
not have enough bags filled with the isotonic sodium 
chloride solution and it took too much time to measure. We 
did not connect a cannula to the tube. As a matter of course, 
we did not insert a cannula into a participant’s arm. There 
were seven participants.  
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

We measured five times whether the proposed system 
could detect an empty bag and removal of a drip 
administration set or not for each participant. The proposed 
system could perfectly detect both types of incidents.  
From the results in Fig. 12 (a), not being able to read 10 
times is too severe for detecting if a bag is empty. In fact, 
the system presented an alert message for an empty bag 
being just after pulling the tube off the bag during the 
experiments. This judgment condition will have to be 
changed in a commercial system. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We developed an intravenous drip infusion monitoring 
system using the Touch tags, a type of body area 
communication tag. This system can detect an empty 
infusion bag and removal of a drip infusion administration 
set by a patient. Unfortunately, this system cannot detect 
whether a cannula got off from the blood vessel or not, if the 
cannula is on or under the skin, because of the tube attached 
to the skin which prevents a reader to read the Tag2 keeping 
on the skin. 
One of the advantages of the proposed system is that 
installation is very easy. Installation only involves fastening 
an electrode of a reader and one or two tags to a tube. There 
also is no need to change an existing a drip infusion 
administration set. This system is applicable not only for 
standard gravity infusion administration sets but also a 
pump infusion administration sets. 
We have already demonstrated this system at an 
exhibition for medical and welfare appliances and no miss-
readings occurred. Since there is currently no monitoring 
system that can detect if a patient has removed his or her 
drip infusion administration set from his or her arm, our 
system was highly rated by participants such as nurses, 
doctors and medical equipment providers.  
We could not evaluate the proposed system in a real-
world situation for this research. Before evaluating the 
proposed system in such a situation, such as a hospital, we 
would like to change the design of the touch tag and 
electrode of the touch tag reader so that it can be easily 
attached to a tube, and transfer the decision function to a tag 
reader from a PC. We also plan to evaluate it in a real-world 
situation such as in a hospital. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Barros, and M. V. D. dos Santos, “A Safe, Accurate 
Intravenous Infusion Control System,” IEEE Micro, Vol. 18, 
No. 5, Sep./Oct. 1998, pp. 12–21. 
[2] M. Oden, Y. Miraval, M. Epstein, and R. Richard-Kortum, 
“Engaging 
Undergraduates 
to 
Solve 
Global 
Health 
Challenges: A New Approach Based on Bioengineering 
Design,” Annals of Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 38, No. 9, 
September 2010, pp. 3031–3041. 
[3] V. V. Kamble, P. C. Pandey, C. P. Gadgil, and D. S. 
Choudhary, “Monitoring of Intravenous Drip Rate,” Proc. of 
ICBME, December 2001, pp. 21-24. 
[4] Xinling, “Design of Medical Infusion Monitor and Protection 
System On Wireless Communication Technolgy,” IEEE, in 
Proc. Second International Symposium on Intelligent 
Information Technology Application, December 2008. 
[5] Y. S. Yang, H.C. Kim, “Development Of A Miniaturized IV 
Drip Rate Using Optical Sensors And Fuzzy Rule Based 
Detection 
Algorithm,” 
IEEE, 
in 
Proc. 
20th 
Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society, Vol.20, No.4, 1998. 
[6] H. Ogawa, H. Maki, S. Tsukamoto, Y. Yonezawa, H. Amano, 
and W. M. Caldwell, “A new drip infusion solution 
monitoring system with a free-flow detection function,” in 
Proc. 32nd Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE EMBS, Aug./Sep. 2010, pp. 
1214–1217. 
[7] F. C. Flack, and T. D. Whyte, “Behaviour of Standard 
Gravity-fed Administration Sets Used for Intravenous 
Infusion,” British Medical Journal, 17, Aug. 1974. 
[8] M.Wang, and J. Chen, “A high-precision gravity intravenous 
infusion rate meter using CMUT arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Int. 
Ultrason. Symposium, March 2009, pp. 1355–1358. 
[9] A. Cataldo, G. Cannazza, N. Giaquinto, A. Trotta, and G. 
Andria, “Development of a Remote System for Real-Time 
Control of Intravenous Drip Infusion,” IEEE, in Proc. 
Medical Measurements and Applications (MeMeA), May 
2011. 
[10] A. Cataldo, G. Cannazza, N. Giaquinto, A. Trotta and G. 
Andria, “Microwave TDR for Real-Time Control of 
Intravenous 
Drip 
Infusions,” 
IEEE, 
Transaction 
on 
Instrumentation and Measurement, Vol. 61, No.7, July 2012. 
[11] Chi-Fang Huang, and Jen-Hung Lin, “A Warning System 
Based on the RFID Technology for Running-Out of Injection 
Fluid,” IEEE, 33rd Annual International Conference of the 
IEEE EMBS, Aug./Sep. 2011. 
[12] S ． Takii ， Y． Murata， N． Sato ， and T． Takayama, 
“Proposal of Intravenous Drip Infusion Monitoring System 
with Body Area Communication Tags,” IPSJ, Proceedings of 
the 75th National Convention of IPSJ, March, 2013, 4ZG-7. 
(in Japanese) 
[13] Touch Tag, http://www.adniss.jp/en/archives/59, January, 
2014. 
[14] Intrabody communication, Nikkei Electronics, June, 30th, 
2008. (in Japanese) 
[15] T. G. Zimmerman, “Personal Area Networks: Near-field 
intrabody communication,” IBM Systems Journal, Vol.35, 
Nos. 3&4, 1996, pp.609-617. 
[16] Remarkable 
ubiquitous 
technologies: 
Body 
Area 
Communication 
(in 
Japanese), 
http://itpro.nikkeibp.co.jp/prembk/NBY/techsquare/20050304
/157032/, January, 2014. 
[17] Yuichi Kado, and Mitsuru Shinagawa, “RedTacton Near-body 
Electric-field 
Communications 
Technology 
and 
Its 
Applications,” NTT Technical Review, Vol. 8 No. 3 March 
2010. 
[18] Yoshitoshi Murata, Nobuyoshi Sato, Tsuyoshi Takayama, and 
Shuji Ikuta, “Medication Error Protection System with A 
Body Area Communication Tag”, ITU-T, Kaleidoscope 2013, 
April 2013, p.8. 
 
 
 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Are Mobile Devices Ready for Telementoring? A Protocol Design for Randomized 
Controlled Trials 
Andrius Budrionis, Gunnar Hartvigsen, Johan Gustav Bellika 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of Northern Norway 
Tromsø, Norway  
Email: {Andrius.Budrionis; Gunnar.Hartvigsen; Johan.Gustav.Bellika} @telemed.no 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a study addressing the usability 
issues of relatively small touchscreen devices used as endpoints 
for telementoring. The trial is motivated by the need for 
systematic knowledge and user experiences on the use of 
mobile devices for remote supervision of surgeons. Having a 
stationary computer equipped with relatively large screen and 
using mouse as an input device in mind, we challenge mobile 
touchscreen gadgets in order to find out if the same (or 
sufficient) 
qualities 
of 
mentoring 
from 
the 
mentor’s 
perspective are maintained. The presented study protocol 
exploits 
crossover 
randomized 
controlled 
trail 
design 
addressing the usability of mobile touchscreen devices for 
controlling a moving scene (video) and freehand sketching.  
Keywords-telementoring; 
mobile 
devices; 
usability; 
telestration; platform; RCT. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Supervision of medical personnel over distance in order 
to improve patient outcome has been discussed from 1960s 
[1]. Technologies changed while the years passed by finally 
bringing the computational power, required for establishing 
telementoring session, to the devices surrounding us every 
day. One could call it the time when the dreams come true - 
the high availability of medical experts without any 
dedicated hardware became feasible. The employment of 
the ubiquitous technology to serve as a mediator between 
two remote parties pushed the domain to a new dimension.  
However, is there any proof that the new dimension ensures 
the same qualities of mentoring? Literature search identifies 
no interest in investigating the aspects of technology shift in 
clinical settings. It supports the claim that mobile 
touchscreen devices were considered and accepted as 
inevitable technological progress. But, is it the way to go? 
There are no doubts that mobile gadgets used in random 
settings are more likely to fail than stationaries, located in 
surgeon’s office. Varying network coverage, battery 
constrains, interruptions by surrounding people and many 
other reasons create a fertile environment for unforeseen 
adverse events. However, not enough credit for the 
mentioned facts was given in publications so far.  
Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic 
Surgeons 
(SAGES) 
defines 
telementoring 
(or 
teleproctoring) as “a real-time and live interactive 
monitoring (evaluation) of technique(s) or procedure(s) of 
an applicant seeking privileges, or a surgeon seeking to 
certify or document his competence in a specific technique 
or procedure(s)” [2]. It is a process consisting of two 
interacting parties – a surgeon (mentee), performing an 
operation in the operating room and seeking for an advice 
from the domain expert (mentor) who is not available on 
site. The paper focuses on the infrastructure to facilitate the 
interaction between mentor and mentee.  
The recent shift from stationary platforms to mobile 
touchscreen devices has not left telementoring systems 
behind. While bringing new features and possibilities, it 
brought new challenges as well. This paper summarizes the 
protocol for a Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) aiming 
to compare different devices and find out whether they can 
be used as mentoring endpoints on mentor side. In the scope 
of the paper, platform refers to different hardware employed 
in a study, not looking into the differences of software 
platforms.  
A telementoring system, developed in Norwegian Centre 
for Integrated Care and Telemedicine (NST) and deployed 
at University Hospital of North Norway (UNN), is used in 
the experiment. Telestration (drawing of freehand sketches 
over live video) is used in a combination with Video 
Conferencing (VC) system [3]. Notwithstanding the 
advantages of live video annotating in actual telementoring 
session, using the feature in the experiment allows us to 
compare mouse and touchscreen inputs for mentoring, 
extending the comparison of the platforms [4]. 
The paper is structured as follows: after a brief 
background on telementoring, the gap in research regarding 
the usability of touchscreen devices for telementoring is 
stated. Method section covers the study design and scenario, 
followed by the expected results. The paper is concluded by 
discussing the advantages of selecting the crossover study 
design and admitting potential biases and weaknesses. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Search for research comparing different input devices 
reported a low interest in the analyzed topic. Baldus and 
Patterson summarized the reported attempts to measure the 
differences in performing pointing and dragging actions in 
still scenes and office environment. Moreover, a comparison 
of mouse, touchscreen and touchpad was presented while 
controlling a still scene in a moving environment (vehicle) 
[5]. A gap in research dealing with usability of different 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

inputs while controlling a moving scene (video) and 
freehand hand sketching was identified.  
III. 
METHOD 
To produce sound proof on the analyzed topic, a RCT 
was constructed, employing the crossover study design 
(Figure 1). Instead of employing the common approach for 
the RCT (one type of intervention per arm), we let the 
participants experience all 3 devices in a randomized order. 
The absence of dependency on the interventions (devices) 
allows minimizing the number of participants as well as 
enables the reflection of preferences on the platforms [6]. 
Due to the high (and increasing) number of mentoring 
devices, generalization initiative was imposed. The pool of 
endpoints was divided into three groups based on the screen 
size, forming the arms of the study:   
1. Screen size >13” laptop/desktop computer located in the 
office of the surgeon, representing stationary platforms. 
Mouse is used for annotating;  
2. Touchscreen size 9”-10” Tablet computer, representing 
middle-sized mobile devices;  
3. Touchscreen size <=5” Smartphone, representing small-
sized mobile devices.  
Even though the technologies allow using a wide 
selection of devices on each arm (which would be a typical 
scenario in a real case), the choice was limited in order to 
produce consistent and comparable results independent on 
different hardware on the same arm of RCT. The following 
devices were selected to represent the platforms: 
1. Stationary device – Lenovo X220, I7, Windows 7 
equipped with external monitor; 
2. Tablet – Asus MeMO Pad, Full HD, Android 4.2; 
3. Smartphone – Samsung Galaxy S4, Android 4.3. 
Public wireless network infrastructure at the hospital is 
used for the experiment. All devices run the latest version of 
Google Chrome web browser as client software to run the 
telementoring service. 
Surgeons at UNN are recruited to participate in the 
study. As the study employes an imitation of a mentoring 
session, the inclusion criteria for the participants are not 
emphasized. The properties of mentoring, observed on the 
mentee side are not taken into consideration in this study. 
Every participant is asked to perform the same 
mentoring task on all three platforms in a randomized order. 
After each device, they fill in the questionaire, reflecting 
their experiences on the mentoring endpoint. Minimum 
washout period between testing different device is set to 3 
days. Results are accumulated on a server side database for 
further analysis.  
In the scope of this particular study, we collect the 
following data: 
1. Mentor response time - duration between the initiation 
of mentoring session and mentor being present online 
(Figure 2); 
2. Mentor’s interaction with the device – coordinates of 
annotations, use of pause, resume and zoom functions 
are logged; 
3. Final outcome of mentoring – video and overlaid 
annotations are recorded; 
4. User experiences on every device are recorded by filling 
in an online questionnaire after each round.  
The task for this particular experiment was defined as an 
imitated surgical mentoring session. The following scenario 
is being pursued: participants of the experiment are given 
the devices they will use for mentoring during a regular 
work day at the hospital. At random order and time, they are 
notified (by email and text messaging) to connect to the 
C 
B 
A 
C 
C 
A 
B 
Tablet (9”-10” 
touchscreen) 
 
Stationary 
device (>13” 
screen, mouse) 
Smartphone 
(<=5” 
touchscreen) 
  Mentors 
Randomize 
Stationary 
device (>13” 
screen, mouse) 
Tablet (9”-10” 
touchscreen) 
Smartphone 
(<=5” 
touchscreen) 
Smartphone 
(<=5” 
touchscreen) 
Tablet (9”-10” 
touchscreen) 
Stationary 
device (>13” 
screen, mouse) 
B 
A 
Figure 2. Mentor response time 
Figure 1. Schematic Trial Design 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

mentoring service and perform the task. After the mentor is 
connected, a short video, recorded during laparoscopic 
procedure, is broadcasted to the device. Participants are 
asked to identify and mark certain locations in the video 
(Figure 3).  
 
Figure 3. Telementoring task 
A schematic view of the trial is depicted in Figure 4. 
Mentor side of the link facilitates all the functionality 
required to complete the mentoring task, while mentee part 
acts as an infrastructure for capturing the progress of the 
mentor for further analysis.  
 
Figure 4. Mentor-Mentee interaction 
IV. 
EXPECTED RESULTS 
The paper presents a protocol for the oncoming study 
focusing on the usability of newly introduced devices. It is 
addressing the topic, which until now was considered to be 
natural due to the technological progress. While the move 
from stationary to mobile platforms is natural in many 
settings, medical domain deserves a more detailed outlook. 
The critical scenarios in the domain require in depth 
research before adopting the new devices.  
The study, firstly, looks into the response time of the 
surgeon on call. It is defined as duration between mentee 
initiates request for supervision and mentor is connected to 
the system and is ready to assist (Figure 2). Due to the use 
of ubiquitous technologies, it should considerably decline, 
shortening the duration of the procedure (no need to get to 
predefined 
mentoring 
“station”, 
mentor’s 
office 
to 
supervise).  
Secondly, we aim at studying whether the representation 
of surgical videos on small screens ensures the same (or 
sufficient) perception of the progress transmitted from the 
operating room. The complexity of projecting and 
perceiving a high resolution video on a small screen are 
obvious, however, having the technical advances of screen 
technology and the experience of surgical personnel in 
mind, the applicability of different sized endpoints for 
mentoring needs to be tested and evaluated.  
Finally, we look at the way the user interacts with the 
device. In our case, it is either using mouse input or 
touchscreen in order to produce freehand annotations over 
live video stream. The study questions if different inputs can 
generate the same or comparable result, when it comes to 
accuracy. Is touchpad as good (or good enough) compared 
to mouse? 
It is difficult to answer the postulated questions based on 
quantitative measurements. Differences of the devices 
(screen size, input using touchscreen of mouse) may have 
influence on mentoring process. However, we aim at 
answering whether the sufficient quality of mentoring is 
maintained while roaming among the platforms. Moreover, 
the trade between increasing availability of the domain 
experts due to the use of mobile ubiquitous devices and 
higher quality and accuracy, possibly ensured by stationary 
platforms, is also worth mentioning. No studies report what 
qualities of the mentoring process are considered sufficient. 
The results of the study contribute to defining the minimal 
set of requirements for surgical telementoring systems [7].  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper presented a method to evaluate the use of 
mobile devices in health care settings with respect to the 
established technology (stationary platform – control arm in 
RCT design). It built the fundamentals for further 
investigations following the presented template. Imitated 
surgical telementoring session was selected for the case 
study. The identified gap of knowledge in literature 
regarding the use of different input devices in clinical 
settings encourages making the study protocol more generic 
for applying it in a wide range of settings. Generalization 
and reuse of the presented approach is straightforward. The 
main challenge is classification of high number of 
technological instances to representative clusters.  
The 
selected 
crossover 
study 
design 
gives 
a 
comprehensive comparison of the different platforms. The 
main advantage of taking this approach is the fact that study 
could be performed including relatively low number of 
participants. As the order of using different devices is 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

randomized, every mentor gets a chance to try every device. 
Eventually, the comparison of results can be performed at 
the level of individual (using results from testing stationary 
device as control), minimizing the bias caused by previous 
personal experience with the technologies or specific 
technical skills. It supplements the generalized comparison 
of the results among the different RCT arms [6].  
The weak point of the study, possibly having some 
implications on final results, is the memory effect of the 
participants. They are asked to perform the same task three 
times, which will stimulate learning and may introduce bias. 
To minimize it, the order of the devices is randomized for 
every participant. In addition, washout periods after each 
step of the trial are imposed.   
We also admit that the results of the study may be case 
and mentor experience dependent, especially when it comes 
to perceiving important internal body structures, represented 
on a small screen. However, this study emphasizes the use 
of the different devices and experiences of the users rather 
than mentoring process itself or how it is perceived on the 
mentee side. Therefore, the mentoring task performed on 
each device is kept simple to minimize the advantage of 
more experienced mentors. By including the mentors based 
on their experience it could improve the outcome; however, 
an objective measure of surgical skills is complicated due to 
the number of approaches [8]. In addition, differentiation 
based on experience would complicate the inclusion criteria 
for the participants, increasing the numbers of the surgeons 
to be recruited, as well as producing partitioned results.  
Future work, first of all, concerns the analysis of the 
results from the current study. A series of trials, following 
the same study design, are planned in order to test and 
compare the properties of different platforms and video 
processing techniques used for remote mentoring. The 
results will form solid fundamentals for the development of 
telementoring systems.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was funded by a Helse Nord grant (ID 
5614/HST1025-11) to the Norwegian Centre of Integrated 
Care and Telemedicine (NST), University Hospital of North 
Norway (UNN). The study would not have been possible 
without the support of the Mobile Medical Mentor (M3) 
project team at NST and collaborators at UNN.  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. M. Augestad and R. O. Lindsetmo, “Overcoming 
Distance: Video-Conferencing as a Clinical and Educational 
Tool Among Surgeons,” World J. Surg., vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 
1356–1365, Apr. 2009. 
[2] Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic 
Surgeons, 
“Guidelines 
for 
the 
Surgical 
Practice 
of 
Telemedicine,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.sages.org/publications/guidelines/guidelines-for-
the-surgical-practice-of-telemedicine/ 2014.01.15. 
[3] A. Budrionis, K. M. Augestad, and J. G. Bellika, 
“Telestration in Mobile Telementoring,” in eTelemed 2013, 
The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine, 2013, pp. 307–309. 
[4] A. Budrionis, K. M. Augestad, H. R. Patel, and J. G. Bellika, 
“An Evaluation Framework for Defining the Contributions of 
Telestration in Surgical Telementoring,” Interact. J. Med. 
Res., vol. 2, no. 2, p. e14, Jul. 2013. 
[5] T. Baldus and P. Patterson, “Usability of pointing devices for 
office applications in a moving off-road environment,” Appl. 
Ergon., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 671–677, Nov. 2008. 
[6] B. Jones, Design and analysis of cross-over trials, 2nd ed. 
Boca Raton, Fla: Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2003. 
[7] A. Budrionis, K. Augestad, H. Patel, and J. Bellika, “Towards 
Requirements for Telementoring Software,” Scand. Conf. 
Health Inform. 2012, 2012. 
[8] I. Ghaderi, F. Manji, Y. S. Park, D. Juul, M. Ott, I. Harris, 
and T. M. Farrell, “Technical Skills Assessment Toolbox: A 
Review Using the Unitary Framework of Validity,” Ann. 
Surg., Jan. 2014. 
 
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Can Assessment of Health on an ICT-platform Improve Optimal Functionality
and Lead to Participatory Care Among Older Adults?
Samal Algilani1, Ann Langius-Eklöf2, Annica Kihlgren1 Karin Blomberg1
1School of Health and Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden
2Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
(samal.algilani@oru.se) (ann.langius-eklof@ki.se) (annica.kihlgren@oru.se) (karin.blomberg@oru.se)
Abstract-The number of people reaching old age is increasing
rapidly, challenging the society and healthcare to promote
healthy and meaningful aging. There is, and has been for a
few years, a big interest in collecting patient reported
outcomes (PROs)
as a base
for clinical
management.
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and
assistive technology in elderly care increase and may
facilitate the care of older adults as they are moved from
nursing homes to private homes. An ICT-platform for
reporting health issues with immediate access to self-care
advice
and
direct
communication
with
healthcare
professionals has been developed. The overall aim of this
project is to evaluate the effects of the interactive ICT-
platform regarding optimal functionality and participatory
care. The project will be conducted in three phases:
development of the ICT-platform, feasibility evaluation and
evaluation of effects. The platform is unique by integrating
interactive components for direct clinical management and
needs to be thoroughly evaluated before implementation in
daily practice. It is hypothesized that, by using an interactive
ICT-platform,
it
will
promote
participatory
care
and
enhance the communication between older adults and their
professional carers. The platform will be further developed,
as well as tested in a full-scale study.
Keywords-information
and
communication
technology;
older adults; patient-reported outcomes measure.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the Western world, the number of people reaching
older age is increasing quite rapidly. Better living
conditions such as improvements in nutrition, health and
healthcare give a higher life expectancy and can be an
explanation for the increase [1, 2]. The aging and elderly
populations
are
placing
demands
on
society,
and
especially
on
healthcare,
to
promote
healthy
and
meaningful
aging,
according
to
the
World
Health
Organization’s (WHO) concept of “active ageing” [3].
This project will establish a new and modern technique
where older adults can accurately report factors that
influence
their
health
and
daily
life,
as
well
as
systematically
and
rapidly
communicate
these
to
healthcare professionals caring for them. The older adults
will
also
have
access
to
instant
self-care
advice
appropriate to the level of factors they report. This will
enable problems to be identified earlier and necessary
interventions to be initiated more promptly and enhance
the communication between older adults and healthcare
professionals,
an
approach
to
healthcare
that
is
encouraged and needed today. We also intend to develop
our theoretical model, The Participatory Care Model,
which will support the implementation of a personalized
interactive monitoring system for the older adults. The
model focuses on allowing patients to take a participatory
role in their own health and health care in an interaction
with the healthcare providers i.e. being a member of the
team.
II.
BACKGROUND
A.
Patient-reported outcomes measure
A
Patient
Reported
Outcome
Measure
(PROM)
includes all the aspects of a patient’s health status,
including disease symptoms, functioning and Health-
Related Quality of Life (HRQoL), so that they are able to
directly
communicate
these
aspects
to
healthcare
professionals without interpreting the patient’s response
by a caregiver or anyone else [4]. There is, and has been
for a few years, a big interest in collecting PROM as a
base for clinical management. Different ways have been
used, for a long time pen and paper, but recently
applications,
such
as
touch
screens
and
web-based
systems, have been tested to collect PROMs [5]. Several
studies in this area have shown that the use of PROM in
clinical settings can simplify the detection of problems,
facilitate communication between patients and clinicians,
promote shared decision making and enhance patient
satisfaction [6, 7].
B.
Information and communication technology
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
friendly utilities and assistive technology in elderly care
tend to increase since the care of older adults is not
performed in nursing homes but in private homes instead
[8]. The WHO defines E-health as “the transfer of health
resources and health care by electronic means” [9] which
makes the concept closely connected to activities on the
Internet.
A
complement
to
E-health
is
assistive
technology, which is defined by the WHO as a concept for
any device or system that enables an individual to carry
out an activity that otherwise would be very difficult or
impossible to carry out [10]. ICT can help older adults to
stay independent and healthy [11]. Overall, ICT combined
with a strong governance structure and a fair performance
management may result in integrated healthcare [12] and
promotion
of
self-management
[13].
Using
ICT
to
enhance the care of and for older adults has several
advantages such as providing information on how to
manage occurring health issues [14]. The use of ICT has
been shown to improve Quality of Life and feelings of
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

being safe among older adults suffering from Alzheimer’s
Disease [15].
We did a scoping review to explore the concept
optimal functionality in old age (people over 65 years of
age in developed countries) and to integrate it with
PROM. A total of 25 scientific articles were analysed.
Three major themes were identified in the concept of
optimal functionality in old age: self-related factors, body-
related factors and external factors [16].
As far as we know, no studies regarding older adults
using interactive ICT to promote optimal functionality
have been made, thus showing that a knowledge gap can
be seen in this area. The overall aim of this study is to
evaluate the effects of an ICT- platform integrated with
PROM to assess its effects on older adults’ optimal
functionality and participatory care.
The specific research questions are:
-
How will the mobile phone system enable older
adults
to
enhance
engagement
in
self-care
activity in order to improve health and optimal
functionality?
-
How feasible, user-friendly, and accepted is the
ICT-platform from the elderly and health care
professional´s perspective?
-
How does the use of an interactive ICT-platform
contribute to participatory care?
III.
METHOD
The project will be conducted in three phases. Phase 1
includes development of the ICT-platform; Phase 2
evaluates the feasibility and acceptability of the ICT-
platform; and Phase 3 concerns evaluation of effects.
A.
Phase 1 The development of the ICT-platform
In a literature review and interviews with older adults
and nurses involved in homecare, determination of the
content of the questions in the application was explored
(Fig 1).
1) Review of the literature, interviews with experts,
older adults (n=12, >65 years of age) and healthcare
professionals (n=8) were conducted to identify indicators
that promote and/or counteract a good daily life and
health. Fifteen areas were identified: fever, dizziness,
difficulties eating, diarrhea, constipation, pain, fatigue,
difficulties
sleeping,
worry,
depression
(sadness,
dysphoria), difficulties performing daily activities indoors,
difficulties performing activities outdoors, difficulties
performing activities with others, experience of being
safe, and experience of having a meaningful daily life of
which 15 questions were created.
The structure of questions included in the application
is
based
on
standardized
symptom
and
QoL
questionnaires [17, 18] that is, the questions ask for
occurrence, frequency, and distress level. For example
“Do you experience constipation?” If the answer is yes,
the older adult is asked how often it occurs, rated by
frequency: never, sometimes, rather often, or very often.
Furthermore, the older adult is asked how distressing the
symptom is: not at all, a little, rather, or very much. The
older adults will report at least three days during a week.
A reminder message is sent if report has not been
submitted.
Besides
the
questions,
the
application
contained evidence-based self-care advice related to the
older adults´ concerns. Additionally, the application
contains links to suggested relevant websites for more
reading. The application also included a history graph in
which the older adults could see how they reported their
health status over a period of time (Fig. 1). A risk
assessment model based on occurrence and frequency of
the reported data was integrated into the application.
Depending on the severity of the reported data, the nurse
in charge could receive two sets of alarms to their work
mobile phone (text messages), red and yellow alarms. Red
was the more acute one meaning that the nurse would
contact the older adult within a few hours; the yellow
alarm meant that the nurse would contact the older adult
the next day at the latest. This initiates an interaction
whereby a nurse contacts the older adults for discuss their
concerns.
With the help of a Swedish health management
company
(Health
Navigator),
the
contents
were
implemented in a smart tablet as an application. The
nurses in charge could also log into a web-interface and
view the reports of the older adults on their computers
(Fig. 2).
Figure 1. Outline over the platform development.
Review of the literature
(based on 25 articles)
Interviews
5 experts: a geriatrician, a
manager responsible for
geriatric issues at The National
Board of Health and Welfare, a
professor in health care
science, 12 older adults,
8 health care professionals
Areas of interest
Validation
All areas of interest
were brought back to
the research group and
an external expert in
geriatric for validation
Self-care advices
History graphs
ICT-platform
Self-reports
Alarm
Web-interface for
nurses
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Illustration of the application chain.
B.
Phase 2 The evaluation of the feasibility and
acceptability of the ICT-platform
1) Eight older adults, ranging between the ages of 67
to 90 years of age, were included in the study. Inclusion
criterions for participating in the study were being over 65
years of age, having a healthcare contact, being able to
speak Swedish and also being able to read and write in
Swedish. The older adults should be cognitively intact
and/or not have an altered mental status. All the study
participants were given a tablet (Nexus Google). The
older adults tested the tablet with the ICT-application for a
period of four weeks. Three nurses working with the older
adults agreed to participate in the study. They were
informed about the study, how the interactive system
worked and how they would proceed when logging into
the web-interface as well as view how the older adults
have reported. The nurses were also informed on how
they would handle the alarms coming into their work
mobile phones.
2) Both older adults and nurses were asked to
participate in individual interviews after the four weeks
had
passed.
The
older
adults
were
interviewed
individually and asked about the usability of the tablet and
the application and the relevance of the questions in the
health measure. The nurses were also interviewed about
the relevance of the questions and about their experience
of monitoring reports from the older adults and using the
web-interface. Overall, the older adults found using the
tablet and application as quite favourable. The application
was perceived as user friendly, educational and fun to use.
The questions were seen as relevant and clear but also as
having a more broad perspective. The nurses in the study
experienced the system as valuable and as something that
could make the care with the older adults more accessible.
One
nurse
expressed
that
this
was
a
way
of
communicating with the older adults directly without any
intermediaries.
C.
Phase 3 The evaluation of effects
Next phase of this project will focus on testing the
ICT-platform in a larger group of older adults (n=50) for a
period of six months. There will also be a control group
not using the ICT-platform to evaluate and determine its
effects. Main outcomes are areas related to optimal
functionality (for examples well-being, mental health, gut
health, nutritional status, health literacy, coping ability,
self-care and risk for falling). Interviews with the older
adults and the health care professionals will also be
conducted focusing on participatory care.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The first phases of this study show that the interactive
developed ICT-platform was feasible from both the older
adults and their nurses’ perspective. These studies will
deepen our understanding of how older adults perceive
participatory care, i.e., being a member of a team, when it
came to the older adults’ own healthcare plans, using
PROM. Conclusively, the concept of optimal functionality
can in the future enhance participatory care in the sense
that the older adults know and are aware of their
preferences. Possible effects will be measured in a larger
sample of older adults and will enable us to improve and
develop
the
ICT-platform,
as
well
as
develop
opportunities
to
increase
older
adults´
optimal
functionality.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank all the participants in the pilot
study and the nurses in the municipality who assisted us
with support. We would also like to thank Health
Navigator for the collaboration and technical support in
this project.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Kinsella and H. Wan, "An Ageing World: 2008,"
2008, [cited November 11, 2013],
Available from:
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/wpp20
08/wpp2008_highlights.pdf.
[2]
United Nations, "World Population Prospects The
2008 Revision," 2008, [cited November 11, 2013],
Available
from:
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/wpp20
08/wpp2008_highlights.pdf.
[3]
World Health Organization, "Active Ageing A Policy
Framework,"
2002,
[cited
November
11,
2013],
Available
from:
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2002/WHO_NMH_NPH_
02.8.pdf.
[4]
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services FDA
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services FDA
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research and U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services FDA
Center
for
Devices
and
Radiological
Health,
“Guidance
for
industry:
patient-reported
outcome
measures: use in medical product development to
support labeling claims: draft guidance,” Health Qual
Life
Outcomes,
vol.
4,
Oct.
2006,
pp.
79,
´doi´:10.1186/1477-7525-4-79.
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[5]
M. Rose and A. Bezjak, “Logistics of collecting
patient-reported outcomes (PROs) in clinical practice:
an overview and practical examples,” Quality of Life
Research,
vol.
18,
Feb.
2009,
pp.
125-136,
´doi´:10.1007/s11136-008-9436-0.
[6]
C. F. Snyder and N. K. Aaronson, “Use of patient-
reported outcomes in clinical practice,” Lancet, vol.
374, Aug 1. 2009, pp. 369-370, ´doi´:10.1016/s0140-
6736(09)61400-8.
[7]
J. M. Valderas, A. Kotzeva, M. Espallargues, G.
Guyatt, C. E. Ferrans, M. Y. Halyard, et al., “The
impact of measuring patient-reported outcomes in
clinical practice: a systematic review of the literature,”
Quality of Life Research, vol. 17, Mar. 2008, pp. 179-
193, ´doi´:10.1007/s11136-007-9295-0.
[8]
C. Harrefors, K. Axelsson and S. Savenstedt, “Using
assistive technology services at differing levels of
care: healthy older couples' perceptions,” Journal of
Advanced Nursing, vol. 66, Jul. 2010, pp. 1523-1532,
´doi´:10.1111/j.1365-2648.2010.05335.x.
[9]
World
Health
Organization,
"E-Health,"
[cited
November
19,
2013],
Available
from:
http://www.who.int/trade/glossary/story021/en/.
[10]
World health Organization, "A glossary of terms for
community healh care and services for older persons,"
2004, [cited November 11, 2013],
Available from:
http://www.who.int/kobe_centre/ageing/ahp_vol5_glo
ssary.pdf.
[11]
European
Commission,
"Living
Healthy,
Ageing
Well," 2013, [cited November 12, 2013],
Available
from: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/node/1103.
[12]
E. Suter, N. D. Oelke, C. E. Adair, C. Waddell, G. D.
Armitage
and
L.
A.
Huebner,
"Health
systems
integration – definitions, processes & impact: a
research synthesis," Ottawa, Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR), 2007, [cited January 20,
2014],
Available
from:
http://www.calgaryhealthregion.ca/hswru/documents/r
eports/HEALTH
SYSTEMS
INTEGRATION_2007.pdf.
[13]
S. McLean, D. Protti and A. Sheikh, “Telehealthcare
for long term conditions,” BMJ, vol. 342, 2011, pp.
d120, ´doi´:10.1136/bmj.d120.
[14]
M. A. Winker, A. Flanagin, B. Chi-Lum, J. White, K.
Andrews, R. L. Kennett, et al., “Guidelines for
medical and health information sites on the internet:
principles
governing
AMA
web
sites.
American
Medical Association,” JAMA, vol. 283, Mar 22-29.
2000, pp. 1600-1606,
[15]
A. Pilotto, G. D'Onofrio, E. Benelli, A. Zanesco, A.
Cabello, M. C. Margeli, et al., “Information and
communication technology systems to improve quality
of life and safety of Alzheimer's disease patients: a
multicenter
international
survey,”
Journal
of
Alzheimer's Disease, vol. 23, 2011, pp. 131-141,
´doi´:10.3233/jad-2010-101164.
[16]
S. Algilani, L. Östlund-Lagerström, A. Kihlgren, K.
Blomberg, R. J. Brummer and I. Schoultz, “Exploring
the concept of optimal functionality in old age,”
Journal of Multidisciplinary Healthcare, vol. 7, 2014,
pp.69-79,
´doi´:http://dx.doi.org/10.2147/JMDH.S55178.
[17]
M. Browall, E. Kenne Sarenmalm, S. Nasic, Y.
Wengström and F. Gaston-Johansson, “Validity and
reliability of the Swedish version of the Memorial
Symptom Assessment Scale (MSAS): an instrument
for
the
evaluation
of
symptom
prevalence,
characteristics, and distress,” Journal of Pain and
Symptom Management, vol. 46, 2013, pp. 131-141,
´doi´:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2012.07.023.
[18]
R. K. Portenoy, H. T. Thaler, A. B. Kornblith, J. M.
Lepore, H. Friedlander-Klar, E. Kiyasu, et al., “The
Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale: an instrument
for
the
evaluation
of
symptom
prevalence,
characteristics and distress,” European Journal of
Cancer, vol. 30A, 1994, pp. 1326-1336,
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Lifestyle Log Based Blood Glucose Level Prediction for Outpatient Care 
Istvan SZABO1, Peter GYUK2, Istvan VASSANYI3 
Medical Informatics R&D Center  
University of Pannonia 
Veszprém, Hungary 
e-mail: 1sz.pisti1@gmail.com, 2gyukpeti@gmail.com, 3vassanyi@almos.vein.hu 
 
Abstract—Treatment of diabetes mellitus is a crucial problem 
in modern health care. Surveys show that the currently used 
methods to estimate the required amount of insulin are quite 
inefficient in practice as they are based on experience and 
conjecture. This paper offers a new method to predict the 
glucose level of people with diabetes. The proposed approach 
combines two efficient models found in literature. The mixture 
of the methods tracks the blood sugar level considering 
nutrition, applied insulin and initial glucose level. According to 
our tests, the model gives satisfactory results with real patients 
both in inpatient and outpatient care.  
Keywords—Glucose-level tracking; eHealth; Glucose-Insulin 
system; Glucose absorption; Diabetes mellitus 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disease that affects the 
whole society. It is a typical disease of the modern culture 
caused by obesity, the lack of physical activity and the 
changing of culinary culture. At the moment, this problem 
hits 3% of the population [1], but this number is increasing. 
The current predictions report that the number of people with 
diabetes can reach 5% within 2 decades [1]. This underlines 
the importance of diabetic lifestyle support. 
The official classification separates diabetes mellitus into 
different types, according to clinical age [2]: 
 
Type 1 diabetes results from the lack of insulin 
production. The failure of insulin output is caused by 
an autoimmune destruction of beta-cells in the 
pancreas, which usually leads to absolute insulin 
deficiency. Patients diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes 
have to follow a strict diet and apply subcutaneous 
insulin by injection or insulin pump. 
 
Type 2 is the major form of diabetes as it accounts 
for 90% to 95% of all diagnosed patients (in the 
USA [3]). It is an insulin resistant stage caused by 
failure in insulin secretion. The treatment of these 
patients varies from lifestyle changing through diet 
and oral medications to subcutaneous insulin 
necessity. 
 
The third category contains special types, including 
gestational diabetes and other types caused by 
medications, infections, or other illnesses. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: 
Section II presents some related works and summarizes the 
prospects of this field. Section III contains the description of 
the proposed glucose level prediction system. Section IV 
includes the result of several tests with the model. Section V 
contains the discussion of the results. Finally, Section VI 
concludes the paper and outlines future work. 
II. 
MOTIVATIONS AND LITERATURE OVERVIEW 
The basic motivation of our efforts is to provide diabetics 
with a tool that they can use in everyday life to predict their 
blood glucose level. We focus on outpatients treated with 
insulin injection no matter having type 1, type 2 or other 
types of diabetes. These patients inject themselves with 
insulin considering meal, physical activity, sports and also 
the weather change. The main index to verify the patients' 
state is HbA1c (Glycated hemoglobin). According to the 
recent surveys, these values are far from ideal in the case of 
several patients [4]. The gap does not seem big, but it can 
lead to serious complications; moreover a big variation of 
glucose levels endangers the life of a person with diabetes.  
The whole metabolism can be divided into two parts, as 
Figure 1 shows. The first one is glucose absorption from 
meals and the second one is the glucose controlling system 
including insulin evolution.  
From the aspect of glucose uptake, the absorption from 
intestine is the main factor, but the stomach has a significant 
role in the procedure as well. In connection with glucose 
control, there are many factors to take into account such as 
glucose uptake, inner insulin production, insulin input, etc. 
These factors are discussed later in this paper.  
 
 
Figure 1.  The process of metabolism 
 
 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I.  
THE PARAMETERS OF THE MODEL OF GLUCOSE 
ABSORPTION 
 
TABLE II.  
THE PARAMETERS OF THE GLUCOSE CONTROL MODEL 
 
Our model uses a combination of two existing models for 
nutriment absorption and glucose control. 
There are methods for measuring glucose absorption [5] 
from meals such as the Diabetes Advisory System - DIAS 
[6]. Lots of models build upon this system though its base is 
only a simple one-compartment model.  In order to create a 
more precise algorithm, other methods use glycemic indices 
(GI) [7] allowing mixed meals input such as the two-
compartment model from Arleth et al. [8]. These methods 
provide a simulation closer to reality. 
Beside glucose absorption, the evolution of insulin is the 
other main factor in tracking glycemia. There are even more 
methods in this field [9] starting with the so called minimal 
model which is still used in practice since it is a relatively 
simple method based on ordinary differential equations [10]. 
Several methods are the approximations of this model, e.g., 
[11]. The minimal model has low number of parameters, 
hence a limited predictive power. This problem is solved in 
more sophisticated methods, using differential equations. 
These approaches might use integro-differential equations 
[12], partial differential equations [13] or delay differential 
equations [14]. Such solutions as the latter support 
Glucose control model 
Variables 
𝐺(𝑡) 
Plasma glycemia. [mM = mmol/l] 
𝐼(𝑡) 
Insulinemia. [pM = pmol/l] 
𝑆1(𝑡) 
The 
insulin 
mass 
in 
the 
accessible 
 
subcutaneous depot. [pmol/𝑘𝑔𝐵𝑊] 
𝑆2(𝑡) 
The insulin mass in the non-accessible 
 
subcutaneous depot. [pmol/𝑘𝑔𝐵𝑊] 
𝑓(𝐺) 
Pancreas Insulin Delivery Rate. 
Parameters 
𝐾𝑥𝑔𝑖  
Rate of glucose uptake by insulin-dependent 
 
tissues per pM. [1/(min ∗ pM)] 
𝑇𝑔𝑕 
Net balance between hepatic glucose output 
and insulin-independent zero-order glucose 
uptake (by brain). [mmol/(min ∗ 𝑘𝑔𝐵𝑊)] 
𝑉𝐺 
Distribution volume for glucose. [L/𝑘𝑔𝐵𝑊] 
𝐾𝑥𝑖 
Apparent first-order disappearance rate for 
insulin. [1/min] 
𝑇𝑖𝐺𝑚𝑎𝑥  
The maximal rate of second-phase insulin 
 
release. [pmol/(min ∗ 𝑘𝑔𝐵𝑊)] 
𝑉𝑖 
Distribution volume for insulin. [L/𝑘𝑔𝐵𝑊] 
𝜏𝑔 
The delay with which the pancreas varies 
 
secondary insulin release in response to 
 
varying plasma glucose concentrations. [min] 
𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 ,𝐼 
Time-to-maximum insulin absorption. [min] 
𝑢(𝑡) 
Subcutaneous insulin delivery rate. [pM/min] 
𝑘𝑔𝐵𝑊 
The weight of the patient. [kg] 
𝐺∗ 
The glycemia at which the insulin release is 
half of its maximal rate. [mM] 
𝛾 
The progressivity with which the pancreas 
reacts to circulating glucose concentrations. 
 
 
 
 
Model of glucose absorption 
Prefixes 
∆ 
The actual time interval (∆𝑡 = 𝑡𝑖+1 − 𝑡𝑖). 
𝑚 
The component is added by meal. 
𝑠 
The component is in the stomach. 
𝑒 
The component is ejected from the 
 
stomach into the intestine. 
𝑖 
The component is in the intestine. 
𝑓 
The component leaves the intestine as 
 
faeces. 
𝑎 
The component is absorbed through the 
 
intestinal wall. 
Variables 
𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡(𝑡𝑖) 
The amount of proteins at time step 𝑡𝑖. 
𝐿𝑖𝑝(𝑡𝑖) 
The amount of lipids at time step 𝑡𝑖. 
𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟(𝑡𝑖) 
The amount of fibres at time step 𝑡𝑖. 
𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐(𝑡𝑖) The amount of monosaccharides at time 
 
step 𝑡𝑖. 
𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼(𝑡𝑖) 
The amount of starch with the given GI 
 
at time step 𝑡𝑖. 
𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑠(𝑡𝑖) 
The amount of nutriment at time step 𝑡𝑖. 
𝑊𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟(𝑡𝑖) 
The amount of water at time step 𝑡𝑖. 
𝐺𝐸𝑅 
Gastric emptying rate. [kJ/min] 
𝑠𝑉𝑜𝑙 
Stomach volume. [ml] 
𝜏𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑙  
 Average time before the food obtains 
contact with the intestinal wall. [min] 
𝜏𝐺𝐼 
The time of the starch breakdown 
process with glycemic index GI. [min] 
Parameters 
𝐵𝑀 
The body mass in kg. 
𝐺𝐼 
The glycemic index of the food. 
Constants 
𝐶𝐻𝑂𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙 
Bioavailability. The optimized value is 
0.76. 
𝑠𝑉𝑜𝑙0 
Exponential 
constant 
for 
stomach 
emptying. The value is 225 ml. 
𝑆𝐸𝑅 
 The 
specific 
emptying 
rate. 
The 
optimized value is 0.161. 
𝐼𝐴𝑅 
Maximal intestinal absorption rate, the 
 
estimated value is 2.0 g/min. 
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑗  The energy density is 17kJ/g for 
 proteins, starch and monosaccharide, 
0kJ/g for fibres and 39 kJ/g for lipids. 
𝜏𝑓𝑖𝑏𝑟  
Exponential time constant for excretion 
 
set to 180 min. 
𝜏𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑙 0 
Set to 1000 min. 
𝜏100  
Time constant for starch breakdown with 
 
GI 100. The optimized value is 28.0 min. 
𝛼 
Parameter relating 𝜏𝐺𝐼  to the glycemic 
 
index. The optimized value is 0.0125. 
 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

subcutaneous insulin depot, create better representation of 
the Insulin Delivery Rate (IDR), etc. 
 
Figure 2.  The process of absorption from mixed meals 
III. 
THE PROPOSED METHOD 
As mentioned before, our method combines two existing, 
state-of-the-art models to simulate plasma glycemia by 
influences of meals and insulin uptake. We chose these 
models because they have a realistic, comprehensive set of 
parameters capable of simulating a real-life outpatient as 
well. 
A. Glucose Absorption From Meals 
A two-compartment method [8, 15] is used to model the 
effect of nutrition on blood glucose level. The model 
proposed by Arleth T. et al. divides the digestion into two 
segments, as seen in Figure 2. The food first arrives to the 
stomach compartment followed by emptying into the small 
intestine and later into the large intestine. The absorption of 
the monosaccharide happens in the intestinal part; the 
remaining mass is ejected as faeces. 
Simpler methods, like DIAS, operate with carbohydrate 
as input and take some components (e.g., lipids, proteins, 
starch) out of consideration. In contrast, our model takes 
protein, lipid, monosaccharide, fibre and starch as input, each 
one having its own effect during the absorption. In addition, 
the method can deal with mixed meals by using GI. 
Moreover, digestion overlap is handled properly as well. 
The whole process is based on mass balance equations 
[15]. The equations for the stomach compartment are as 
follows: 
𝑠𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡 𝑡𝑖+1 = 𝑠𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡 𝑡𝑖 + ∆𝑚𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡 𝑡𝑖 − ∆𝑒𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡 𝑡𝑖  
(1) 
𝑠𝐿𝑖𝑝 𝑡𝑖+1 = 𝑠𝐿𝑖𝑝 𝑡𝑖 + ∆𝑚𝐿𝑖𝑝 𝑡𝑖 − ∆𝑒𝐿𝑖𝑝 𝑡𝑖  
(2) 
𝑠𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖+1 = 𝑠𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖 + ∆𝑚𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖 − ∆𝑒𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖  
(3) 
𝑠𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖+1 = 𝑠𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 + ∆𝑚𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 
∗ 𝐶𝐻𝑂𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙 − ∆𝑒𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 
+  ∆𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 
𝐺𝐼
 
(4) 
𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖+1 = 𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 + ∆𝑚𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 
∗ 𝐶𝐻𝑂𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙 − ∆𝑒𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 
− ∆𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖  
(5) 
The rate of ejection from stomach to intestine is 
measured by the gastric emptying rate (GER) [15]:  
𝐺𝐸𝑅 = 𝑆𝐸𝑅 ∗ 𝐵𝑀 ∗  
𝐵𝑀
70  
0,425
∗ (1 − 𝑒𝑠𝑉𝑜𝑙 /𝑠𝑉𝑜𝑙0)   
(6) 
𝑠𝑉𝑜𝑙 =  𝑠𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡 + 𝑠𝐿𝑖𝑝 + 𝑠𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 +  𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼
𝐺𝐼
 ∗ 3
+ 𝑠𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 ∗ 18 
(7) 
The ejection from stomach to intestine is calculated 
considering the energy of the food components (𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑗 ) 
using GER. The following equations [15] determine the 
actual ejections for each state variable (𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑖): 
∆𝑒𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑖 = ∆𝑡 ∗ 𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑖 ∗
𝐺𝐸𝑅
𝑠𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦    
(8) 
𝑠𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦 =  𝑠𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑗
𝑗
 
(9) 
𝑠𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝑗 = 𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑉𝑎𝑟𝑗 ∗ 𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑗  
(10) 
The next compartment is the intestine, where proteins 
and lipids do not play a role anymore. The absorption of 
monosaccharides (15) happens here. 
𝑖𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖+1 = 𝑖𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖 + ∆𝑒𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖 − ∆𝑓𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖  
(11) 
∆𝑓𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑖𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 𝑡𝑖 ∗ (1 − 𝑒−∆𝑡/𝜏𝑓𝑖𝑏𝑟 ) 
(12) 
𝑖𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖+1 = 𝑖𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 + ∆𝑒𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 
− ∆𝑎𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 
+  ∆𝑖𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 
𝐺𝐼
 
(13) 
𝑖𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖+1 = 𝑖𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 + ∆𝑒𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 
− ∆𝑖𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖  
(14) 
∆𝑎𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 = min  𝑖𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 
∗  1 − 𝑒
− ∆𝑡
𝜏𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑙  ,  𝐼𝐴𝑅 ∗ ∆𝑡   
(15) 
𝜏𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑙 = 𝜏𝑤𝑎𝑙𝑙 0 ∗ 𝑖𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟/𝑖𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑠 
(16) 
𝑖𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑠 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑖𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 +  ∆𝑖𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 
𝐺𝐼
+ 𝑖𝑊𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑡𝑖 + 𝑖𝐹𝑖𝑏𝑟 
(17) 
𝑖𝑊𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑖𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜𝑠𝑎𝑐 𝑡𝑖 ∗ 37 
(18) 
 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The following equations [15] calculate the breakdown of 
starch into monosaccharides: 
∆𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑠𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 ∗ (1 − 𝑒−∆𝑡/𝜏𝐺𝐼 ) 
(19) 
∆𝑖𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑖𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑕𝐺𝐼 𝑡𝑖 ∗ (1 − 𝑒−∆𝑡/𝜏𝐺𝐼 ) 
(20) 
𝜏𝐺𝐼 = 𝜏100 1 + 𝛼 ∗ (100 − 𝐺𝐼)  
(21) 
The definition of the parameters is given in Table I. For 
further details of the model see [15]. 
B. Glucose Control System 
A sophisticated glucose control system model was 
chosen using Delay Differential Equations (DDE), proposed 
by P. Palumbo et al. [14, 16]. This model has several 
parameters to support both type 1 and type 2 diabetics (see 
Table II). It is also possible to use insulin pump or 
subcutaneous insulin injections as input. The method uses 
two subcutaneous depots (accessible and not-accessible) to 
simulate subcutaneous insulin absorption. The main 
equations [16] are: 
𝑑𝐺
𝑑𝑡 = −𝐾𝑥𝑔𝑖 𝐺 𝑡 𝐼 𝑡 + 𝑇𝐺𝐻
𝑉𝐺
 
(22) 
𝑑𝐼
𝑑𝑡 = −𝐾𝑥𝑖𝐼 𝑡 + 𝑇𝑖𝐺𝑚𝑎𝑥
𝑉𝐼
𝑓 𝐺 𝑡 − 𝜏𝐺  +
1
𝑉𝐼𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 ,𝐼
𝑆2(𝑡) (23) 
𝑑𝑆2
𝑑𝑡 =
1
𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 ,𝐼
𝑆1(𝑡) −
1
𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 ,𝐼
𝑆2(𝑡) 
(24) 
𝑑𝑆𝐼
𝑑𝑡 = −
1
𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 ,𝐼
𝑆1(𝑡) − 𝑢(𝑡) 
(25) 
The Insulin Delivery Rate (IDR) is modeled by the 
nonlinear 𝑓(𝐺) function [16]: 
𝑓(𝐺) = −
 𝐺
𝐺∗ 
𝛾
1 +  𝐺
𝐺∗ 
𝛾 
(26) 
IV. 
RESULTS 
We implemented the combined model in a prototype and 
checked the correctness of our implementation by comparing 
its results to those published for a virtual patient in the 
original paper [16]. The parameters of the model were taken 
from the literature [17], from an intravenous glucose 
tolerance test experiment on an obese patient, slightly 
changed to simulate Type 2 diabetes mellitus (see Table III).  
The results showed good correlation to those published. 
In the next step, we validated this model on outpatient 
data. Two persons with diabetes mellitus were examined. 
The first test involved a woman with Type 2 diabetes, while 
the second patient was a Type 1 diabetic man (see Table IV). 
Both patients are treated with subcutaneous insulin injection.  
TABLE III.  
THE PRAMETERS OF THE VIRTUAL PATIENT WITH TYPE 2 
DIABETES MELLITUS 
Parameter 
Value 
𝐾𝑥𝑔𝑖  
 
3.11*10-5 
𝑇𝑔𝑕 
0.003 
𝑉𝐺 
0.187 
𝐾𝑥𝑖 
1.211*10-2 
𝑉𝑖 
0.25 
𝑇𝑖𝐺𝑚𝑎𝑥  
0.236 
𝜏𝑔 
24 
𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 ,𝐼 
55 
𝐺∗ 
9 
𝛾 
3.205 
TABLE IV.  
THE PARAMETERS OF THE OUTPATIENTS WITH 
SUBCUTANEOUS INSULIN TREATMENT 
Patient A with Type 2 diabetes 
mellitus 
Patient B with Type 1 diabetes 
mellitus 
Birth date 
1952 
Birth date 
1993 
Gender 
female 
Gender 
male 
Height 
156 cm 
Height 
196 cm 
Weight 
78 kg 
Weight 
83 kg 
Applied insulin 
Lispro 
Applied insulin 
Glulisine 
Peak 
60 
Peak 
55 
Quantity/Unit 
6000 pmol 
Quantity/Unit 
6000 pmol 
The tests on both persons were executed with the same 
parameters as seen in Table III except 𝑇𝑖𝐺𝑚𝑎𝑥 , which is set to 
0.1. The patients used similar types of insulin with the same 
quantity per unit indicator. On the whole, a reliable 
comparison can be made between the outcomes. 
The first diabetic patient, outpatient A, was treated as 
inpatient to adjust her inordinate glycemia. Medication, 
glucose readings and meals were logged during 6 days 
including 15 meals and 45 glucose level measurements by 
ordinary blood sugar meter. The available meal log may 
contain inaccurate values if the patient consumed other meals 
except those offered as the controlled menu. 
In the case of outpatient B, a controlled experiment was 
conducted during 3 days with 13 meals. The blood sugar 
level was monitored by a Medtronic Guardian Real-Time 
Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM) System, measuring 
the actual value every 5 minutes. The food portions were 
measured properly with scale and the time of meal and 
insulin input was logged correctly with minimum possibility 
of false values, using an android-based nutrition logger 
application [18]. 
Two different kinds of tests were made with each patient. 
The first simulation used meal wise records, i.e. the meals 
were treated as separate tests. Each test was run with zero 
startup blood insulin level and no running glucose 
absorption. The second test used a whole day’s data with 
zero startup blood insulin level in the morning. During this 
test, the absorption of the insulin and the glucose from food 
could be in progress at the next meal as well.  
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 3.  The fifth day of the meal wise test of patient A (solid line – model estimations, dashed line – measured values)
 
Figure 4.  The first eight hours of the whole third day of patient B (solid line – model estimations, dashed line – measured values) 
The results (see Table V and Table VI) prove that the 
whole day test gives better tracking as it takes more factors 
into account. The model copes with insulin absorption and 
digestion overlap which means around 5% improvement 
regarding the rate of deflection. The average deflection 
decreased with 0.45 mmol/l. 
Comparing the two patients (see Figure 3 and Figure 4), 
there is more than 1 mmol/l decrease in average deflection if 
the experiment is properly logged. There is also more than 
10% increase in the significant fields of rate of deflection 
(<3mmol/l). 
TABLE V.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE TWO TESTS WITH PATIENT A 
Patient A – 15 meals 
Meal wise 
Whole day 
Average deflection  
4,0 mmol/l 
3,55 mmol/l 
Rate of 
deflection 
< 3 mmol/l 
50 % 
57 % 
< 5 mmol/l 
68 % 
79 % 
< 8 mmol/l 
93 % 
93 % 
TABLE VI.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE TWO TESTS WITH PATIENT B 
Patient B – 13 meals 
Meal wise 
Whole day 
Average deflection  
2,99 mmol/l 
2,35 mmol/l 
Rate of 
deflection 
< 3 mmol/l 
65 % 
69 % 
< 5 mmol/l 
76 % 
81 % 
< 8 mmol/l 
94 % 
100 % 
V. 
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 
The large differences between the prediction and the 
measured values that we experienced for patient A were 
most probably due to the poor quality of the dietary log. 
Also, it is harder to assess the performance of the model 
using only point-wise measurement data. For patient B, the 
error was fairly low (below 4 mmol/l) in the first hours (Fig. 
4) and since we can re-start the model after the meals, the 
error calculated for the whole day in Table VI is over-
pessimistic. However, the 4 mmol/l error is still fairly large, 
so relying solely on the model we could not exclude 
emergency situations (i.e. hypoglycemia) in a real life 
application. For better results, more efficient parameter 
training is needed. 
The meal wise test with patient A also shows (see Figure 
3) that using an ordinary blood sugar meter can lead to 
considerable errors in blood sugar level estimation. The 
patient measured a high value at 120 minutes, but the model 
shows even higher values between the two real-life 
measurements (0 min and 120 min). In this situation the gap 
is small, but there could be bigger differences as well. The 
frequent presence of these situations can lead to higher 
HbA1c values. 
Long-term model based predictions are in general less 
unreliable as the deviations accumulate. However, the 
proposed approach gives satisfactory results for short time 
prediction, which is the main demand to estimate the 
required amount of insulin in outpatient care. 
0
5
10
15
20
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
mmol/l
min
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
280
320
360
400
440
480
mmol/l
min
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper presented a combined model for the short time 
prediction of the blood glucose level, based on the dietary 
log of type I and type II diabetic patients. The results are 
satisfactory even without any model training. 
Further research is needed for 
 
training the model to support personal variations in 
model parameters 
 
extending the model to use also other physiological 
data available like physical activity and stress. 
Our aim is to decrease the average error under 1 mmol/l, 
which is a sufficient margin of error considering that the 
currently used real measurements have similar margin of 
error. The model is currently being further evaluated in a 
clinical study involving 20 rehabilitation patients, as an add-
on module to the Lavinia lifestyle mirror [18]. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The work presented was supported by the European 
Union and co-funded by the European Social Fund, project 
title: “Telemedicine-focused research activities in the field of 
Mathematics, Informatics and Medical Sciences”, project 
number: TÁMOP-4.2.2.A-11/1/KONV-2012-0073. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Wild, G. Roglic, A. Green, R. Sicree, and H. King, "Global 
prevalence of diabetes: estimates for the year 2000 and 
projections for 2030," Diabetes Care 27, May. 2004, pp. 
1047-1053. 
[2] American 
Diabetes 
Association, 
"Diagnosis 
and 
Classification of Diabetes Mellitus," Diabetes Care 27.90001, 
2004, pp. 5S-10. 
[3] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, "National 
diabetes fact sheet: national estimates and general information 
on diabetes and prediabetes in the United States," Atlanta, 
GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2011. 
[4] J. Nicholas, J. Charlton, A. Dregan, and M.C. Gulliford, 
"Recent HbA1c Values and Mortality Risk in Type 2 
Diabetes,"  Population-Based Case-Control Study. PLoS ONE 
8(7), 2013, pp. e68008, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068008. 
[5] A. Makroglou, J. Li, and Y. Kuang, "Mathematical models 
and software tools for the glucose-insulin regulatory system 
and diabetes: an overview," Appl. Numer. Math. 56, 3-4, Mar. 
2006, pp. 559-573.  
[6] S. Andreassen, O.K. Hejlesen, R. Hovorka, and D.A. Cavan, 
"The diabetes advisory system – an IT approach to the 
management of insulin dependent diabetes," (Eds.) Medical 
Informatics Europe '96, IOS Press, Netherlands, 1996, pp. 
1079-1083.  
[7] D.J.A. Jenkins, et al., "Glycemic index of foods: a 
physiological basis fo carbohydrates exchange," American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, March. 1981, pp. 362-366. 
[8] T. Arleth, S. Andreassen, M. Orsini-Federiri, A. Timi, and M. 
Massi-Benedetti, "A model of glucose absorption from mixed 
meals," 4th IFAC Modelling and control in biomedical 
systems, 2000, pp. 307-312. 
[9] P. Palumbo, S. Ditlevsen, A. Bertuzzi, and A. De Gaetano, 
"Mathematical modeling of the glucose-insulin system: a 
review," Mathematical Biosciences, 244(2), Aug. 2013, pp. 
69-81. 
[10] R.N. Bergman, Y.Z. Ider, C.R. Bowden, and C. Cobelli, 
"Quantitative estimation of insulin sensitivity," American 
Journal of Physiology, 236(6), 1979, pp. E667–E677. 
[11] R. Hovorka, et al., "Nonlinear model predictive control of 
glucose concentration in subjects with type I diabetes," 
Physiological Measurement, 25(4), Aug. 2004, pp. 905-920. 
[12] A. De Gaetano and O. Arino, "Mathematical modelling of the 
intravenous glucose tolerance test," Journal of Mathematical 
Biology, 40(2), Feb. 2000, pp. 136–168. 
[13] P. Wach, Z. Trajanoski, P. Kotanko, and F. Skrabal, 
"Numerical approximation of mathematical model for 
absorption of subcutaneously injected insulin," Medical & 
Biological Engineering & Computing, 33(1), Jan. 1995, pp. 
18–23. 
[14] P. Palumbo, P. Pepe, S. Panunzi, and A. De Gaetano, (2011). 
"Glucose control by subcutaneous insulin administration: a 
DDE modelling approach," in Proc. 18th IFAC World 
Congress, Milan, Italy, 2011, pp.1471-1476. 
[15] T. Arleth, S. Andreassen, M. Orsini-Federici, A. Timi, and M. 
Massi-Benedetti, "Optimisation of a model of glucose 
absorption from mixed meals," 2005, pp. 1-28. 
[16] P. Palumbo, P. Pepe, S. Panunzi, and A. De Gaetano, 
"Observer-based glucose control via subcutaneous insulin 
administration," 8th IFAC Symposium on Biological and 
Medical Systems, 8, 2012, pp. 107-112. 
[17] S. Panunzi, A. De Gaetano, and G. Mingrone, "Advantages of 
the single delay model for the assessment of insulin 
sensitivity from the intravenous glucose tolerance test," 
Theoretical biology & medical modelling, 7, Mar. 2010, pp. 
1-20. 
[18] B. Pintér, I. Vassányi, B. Gaál, and G. Kozmann, 
"MenuGene: A Comprehensive Expert System for Dietary 
and Lifestyle Counseling and Tracking," In Proc. 8th 
International Conference on Information Technology and 
Computer Science, May. 2012, Athens, Greece, pp. 257-26. 
 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Let us Get Real! An Integrated Approach for Virtual Coaching and Real-time Activity
Monitoring in Lifestyle Change Support Systems
Olga Kulyk∗, Rieks op den Akker†, Randy Klaassen†, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen∗
∗Center for eHealth Research and Disease Management, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
†Human Media Interaction, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
{o.a.kulyk, h.j.a.opdenakker, r.klaassen, l.vangemert-pijnen}@utwente.nl
Abstract—There is a fast growing number of eHealth systems
aiming at supporting a healthy lifestyle. Tailored lifestyle coaching
services offer individual users access to web portals where they
can communicate about a growing number of ingredients of
everyday life concern: physical activity, nutrition, medication,
mood, sleep. Mobile technology in combination with body worn
sensors support user’s awareness of their physical condition
and lifestyle. Despite the large number of available lifestyle
interventions and pilot trials, only very few are successfully
transferred into the real health care practice. This paper presents
new insights and recommendations for the design of lifestyle
support systems with personalized virtual coaching based on
two user studies. The ﬁrst study focuses on the mobile physical
activity coaching for diabetes patients and ofﬁce workers. The
second study summarizes the persuasive factors on attitudes of
high-risk adolescents towards a virtual coach in mobile eHealth
applications and social media. We present a new approach that
integrates an animated digital coach in an activity monitoring
lifestyle change support system.
Keywords-Mobile Activity Monitoring, Personalized eHealth;
Persuasive
Feedback,
Usability;
Virtual
Coaching;
Behavior
Change; Lifestyle Interventions
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recent massive media attention to the obesity epidemic
worldwide and growing number of patients with chronic
diseases raises the demand for encouraging physical activity
and raising health awareness [1]. Next to classical web-based
interventions, eHealth behavior change support systems for
healthy lifestyle promotion aim to motivate patients to healthy
behavior change [2] [3] [4]. Some systems become proactive
and provide real time information and feedback to their users
based on data gathered through various sensors and personal
devices [5] [6].
Despite the large number of existing lifestyle interventions
and pilot trials, only very few are successfully transferred into
the real healthcare practice [7] [8]. Users often have problems
to navigate through the system, they get lost or they do not
ﬁnd the information they are looking for [9]. Low usability
and lack of transparency on the reliabilty and trustworthiness
of the information are just a few examples of the major barriers
for successful implementation [4] [7] [8]. There is also a lack
of standardization for interoperability between various parts of
the systems and a lack of connection between the feedback,
the actual usage patterns and the task a user is involved in [10].
These problems are often caused by a design that does not meet
the actual needs of the target users while using the system and
a lack of connection with ofﬂine, daily, activities. A holistic
design approach for eHealth intervention development which
we use in our research has proven to contribute in overcoming
these barriers [8].
This paper presents new insights and recommendations for
the design of lifestyle support systems with personalized vir-
tual coaching based on two user studies. The studies represent
different perspectives on eHealth systems. The ﬁrst study has
a Human Computer Interaction (HCI) perspective and focuses
on the use of a virtual animated character in a multi-device
mobile physical activity coaching system for diabetes patients
and ofﬁce workers. It was performed at the Human Media
Interaction group of the Computer Science Department at
the University of Twente. It was carried out in the context
of the EU funded Artemis project Smarcos, led by Nokia,
VTT and Philips. The overall theme of this ICT project is
the inter-usability of multi-device multi-sensor systems. The
second study summarizes the persuasive factors and attitudes
of high-risk adolescents towards virtual coach in mobile health
applications and social media. This study was performed at
the Center for eHealth Research and Disease Management,
Psychology Health and Technology group of the Behavioral
Sciences Department at the same university.
In the next section, we ﬁrst highlight ﬁndings from related
work on physical activity monitoring, virtual coaching and
mobile eHealth applications for lifestyle support. After that,
we present a new approach for a multi-device coaching system
based on the outcomes of two user studies on virtual coaching
for lifestyle support. The ﬁrst study describes results of the user
evaluation of the mobile physical activity coaching system for
ofﬁce workers and diabetes patients. The second study focuses
on persuasive factors and attitudes of high-risk adolescents
towards virtual coaching, social media and mobile apps for
sexual health promotion. Summarizing the main outcomes,
we then present recommendations for the design of lifestyle
support systems with personalized virtual coaching. Finally,
we present the main conclusions and discuss future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
There have been various attempts in categorizing eHealth
technology [5] [8] [11] [12] [13]. In this paper, we focus
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

on monitoring physical activity and health related parameters
(blood pressure, weight) in lifestyle interventions for preven-
tive professional care support. A categorization is based on the
type of platform that the eHealth technology is realized on:
stand alone devices; integrated web-based interventions and
personal mobile devices; or a combination of various devices
to monitor online and ofﬂine activities of a target user. We
will highlight the multi-device approach which falls into the
category.
A. Physical Activity Monitoring and Coaching
Wearable health technology, such as activity sensors, is
often used as a surveillance tool to objectively assess physical
activity patterns [6] [14] [15]. They provide an inexpensive,
accurate, and reliable objective measure of physical activity
by counting the number of steps taken per day, enabling the
accumulative measurement of occupational, leisure time, and
household activity, along with activity required for everyday
transportation. In addition to their use as a measurement tool,
activity sensors are also a popular motivational tool. The
ability of an individual to receive immediate feedback on
their accumulated step count is an important feature of the
motivational aspect of the applications using activity sensors
data [15]. A comparative study suggests that the greatest
increase in step counts occurs when participants are requested
to wear an unsealed sensor and record their step counts real
time.
Engaging patients requires user friendly interfaces and user
friendly interaction with the systems. Patients often have to
cope with various physiological measurements instruments (ei-
ther active or passive): blood pressure, blood sugar and weight.
Willingness to measure these parameters strongly depends on
the complexity of the user interface of the measuring device
or sensor, as well as the data transfer process [16].
Based on an extensive literature study, H. op den Akker
et al. [17] identiﬁed six key areas for research to improve
digital coaching for physical activity by tailoring to the in-
dividual user. Two of them are of interest here: advanced
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and pervasive coaching.
To increase perceived intelligence of a coaching system, a
virtual coach offers an interesting opportunity as an interface
metaphor. Bickmore et al. [2] studied the effects of inter-
ventions for multiple health behaviors using conversational
agents as a coaching system. This study showed that virtual
conversational agent as a coach can have a positive effect on
perceived relationship of a patient with an eHealth system.
Computer tailoring and personalized eHealth offer great
potential for motivating people by providing personal infor-
mation and feedback [18]. Characteristics of an intervention,
such as enabling personal goal setting and providing tailored
feedback are thought to be among the important factors related
to of use of and exposure to lifestyle support systems. Next
to tailoring, personal feedback needs to be dynamic to provide
new information and real time feedback on the daily activities.
The user study of Consolvo et al. [14] reports that negative
feedback or paternalism has a negative impact on the users.
B. Mobile eHealth and Coaching
Mobile devices providing personalized feedback to inﬂu-
ence physical activity behavior are gaining more and more
popularity [19]. There are few examples of mobile health
applications (apps) speciﬁc for behavior change and physical
activity support [5] [19] [20]. Despite a huge range of health-
related apps on the market, there is little in depth research on
user experiences and views on a wide range of features that
apps can provide.
Fanning et al. [19] present extensive review on efﬁcacy of
mobile devices in the physical activity and recommendations
for implementation. This study concludes that mobile technol-
ogy applied in behavior change interventions is an effective
tool for increasing physical activity.
User studies in mobile health research are rarely performed
with young adults, though adolescents are forerunners of
mobile technology. Dennison et al. [20] present the ﬁndings
of a focus group study with students on the use of mobile
apps to support a healthy lifestyle, the attitude of adolescents
on the usefulness of various features of such apps. The results
suggest that the most important factors inﬂuencing the use and
uptake of mobile apps are accuracy, legitimacy, security, effort
required, and immediate effects on mood. Another features
that young adults valued were ability to record and track own
behavior and goals, as well as the ability to receive advice
and real time information. Interesting ﬁnding from this study
is that context-sensing capabilities of mobile apps and social
media features were perceived as unnecessary.
Consolvo et al. [14] reports a long-term user evaluation
with the UbiFit system which aims at raising individual
awareness on physical activity level. The results show that
glanceable representations of information on personal, mobile
displays can stimulate the person to do more exercises. These
ﬁndings are consistent with another study [21].
C. Serious Gaming for Lifestyle Support
New forms of entertainment media such as serious gaming
are used for promoting healthy lifestyle [22]. Serious gaming
and interactive gaming elements embedded in eHealth technol-
ogy offer great potential in innovative opportunities for engag-
ing adolescents and other patients in interventions promoting
healthy nutrition habits and physical activity changes that can
contribute to obesity prevention and healthier lifestyle [22].
III.
USER EVALUATIONS OF A MOBILE ANIMATED
ACTIVITY COACHING SYSTEM
As humans interact with many different devices during the
day, cross media systems offer the opportunity for the activity
coach to travel with the user across those devices. Depending
on the needs and context of the user, coaching can thus be
provided on the most suitable device (e.g., smartphone, PC,
smart television) [23].
A. Digitial Coaching Architectures
A multi-device digital coaching can have a more central-
ized or a more decentralized architecture. The main difference
is in the measure of autonomy of the mobile coaching appli-
cation. The Continuous Care & Coaching Platform (C3PO),
developed at Roessingh Research and Development (RRD)
in the Netherlands, enables continuous remote monitoring of
elderly patients and patients with chronic disorders [24]. In
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the C3PO platform, there is only one device with which the
patients users interact, the smartphone. The care givers can
view patient data that is uploaded to a server. An activity
monitoring and feedback system was designed to guide pa-
tients in reaching a healthy daily activity pattern. Objective
daily activity is assessed using an inertial sensor node that
captures and communicates wireless. The sensor can store
large amount of data and send the data over Bluetooth to a
PDA (an Android based HTC Desire) where further processing
and communication to the patient is handled. The users receive
feedback on their smartphone at scheduled times or if their
activity level calls for this. In this decentralized architecture
the coaching rules reside on the client-side mobile. In contrast
to this, in the centralized architecture of the Smarcos platform
the coaching rules reside on the server (see Figure 1 for an
overview). Based on server side stored sensor data or on ﬁxed
times, the server sends a message to the client, who can receive
the message on the device of his own choice. To upload activity
data the user has to connect his sensor to the internet.
In the Smarcos system, feedback is a reminder to connect
the activity monitor to upload data, a motivating message when
activity is less than the target or an overview of daily, weekly
and monthly scores. A drawback of the Smarcos system
compared to the RRD system is that feedback is not real-time.
The RRD system allows immediate feedback based on recent
data collected from the sensor. A call for urgent medication
intake (e.g., in a diabetes I medication coach) requires real-
time feedback. In the Smarcos system, scores are presented
as percentages of a user set target score and in terms of kCal.
The user can get these activity overviews on his mobile device
app, as well as via a web portal.
B. User Evaluations: Animated Virtual Coach
User evaluations were performed throughout the devel-
opment of the Smarcos coaching system [23] for physical
activity support and diabetes II patients. We performed short
user evaluation with diabetes patients and ofﬁce workers. We
focused on the graphical user interface, on the interaction
and on personal feedback in particular. We looked at timing,
content, modality and presentation format. We are particularly
interested in the application of animated virtual humans and
multi-modal natural dialog as a means for interaction between
the user and the digital coach. At the Human Media Inter-
action group we developed mobile technology for responsive
animated Embodied Conversational Agents (ECAs) [26] for
the presentation of feedback on a mobile app. The system can
produce ECA behaviors (eye blink, eye gaze, head movements,
lip sync with natural speech and facial expressions) speciﬁed in
the Behavior Markup Language (BML) [27]. In the centralized
Smarcos system the server sends a feedback message to a
client containing a BML speciﬁcation. The BML contains the
text to be pronounced by the ECA as well as the non-verbal
embodiments.
The mobile animated virtual coach was used in several
short user experiments with the Smarcos architecture, as well
as with the decentralized coaching platform developed at
Roessing Research and Development [23].
In a ‘long-term’ user evaluation with the Smarcos system
ofﬁce workers (forty-one completed the evaluation, aged 21-
57 years) were randomly assigned to one of three groups: one
group (N=19) received feedback as text (TXT), a second group
(N=15) received feedback by an animated agent (ECA). A third
control group (N=9) did not receive feedback message on the
smart phone. They could only get feedback via the web portal.
Overview of activity is shown graphically in both conditions.
Interviews and questionnaires were used at the start, halfway
and at the end of the six week period. After a calibration week
to measure their regular daily activity level users could set
their target activity level themselves. This level is presented as
a reference for the actual daily activity.
Results of a six weeks user evaluation with the physical
activity coaching system show that Physical Activity Level
(PAL) values do not differ between the ECA and TXT con-
dition. Thus feedback by means of an ECA has no added
value over feedback by means of a text message if we
look at the target objective. The control group that did not
receive feedback and no reminders to upload their sensor data
performed worse compared to both ECA and TXT group.
In particular, in the control group the mean of the PAL
values dropped from week 4 onwards. We used a Mann-
Whitney U test to compare the results between the different
groups. At the end of week 6 the PAL level of the ECA
group wa signiﬁcantly less than the mean for the TXT group
((Mdn = 1, 61), U = 36, 00, p = 0, 014, r = −0, 460). The
number of uploads of PAL data in the control group was
signiﬁcantly less than in the TXT group during all six weeks
((Mdn = 3, 00), U = 51, 00, p = 0, 045, r = 0, 378).
Interviews and questionnaires reveal that on smartphones
users prefer glanceable presentation of feedback messages.
Reading the short text message is faster than listening to
the spoken message. Smart phones are for quick access and
glanceable presentation of feedback ﬁts the message and the
use context. In line with the conclusions of Lisetti et al. [28],
we believe that the opportunities offered by the technology
of animated conversational characters are exploited fully in
multi-modal spoken personalised emphatic dialogs with the
user. The user evaluations reported by Lisetti et al. had a
similar objective as ours but the research methods differ in
a number of ways. The most important is that Lisetti uses
a lab test; therefore, we had a real-life evaluation. A second
important difference is that our ECA platform is based on the
BML framework and runs on mobile platforms. This offers
new opportunities for coaching systems in clinical applications.
A cross media or multi-device coaching system can support
the execution of an intervention program in which a team of
human and virtual coaches work towards a negotiated goal, or
to sustain a certain lifestyle. Such a blended format combining
virtual coaching with real-world coaching is a novelty in HCI
design.
IV.
USER EVALUATIONS: PERSUASIVE DESIGN FACTORS
FOR EHEALTH AND SOCIAL MEDIA APPS
Sexual health is a speciﬁc sensitive subject in many cultures
and there is little research on the effects of prevention-focused
interventions in this domain. The exploratory user study aimed
at identifying the design features interventions have to possess
to facilitate qualitatively well-designed and tailored eHealth
interventions in the future and to evaluate currently available
ones. We investigated which design factors are important using
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1: Overview of the multi-sensor multi-device digital coaching system developed in the Smarcos project [25].
focus group discussions with high-risk adolescents. The user
study focused on social media, serious games, mobile appli-
cations and the use of personal virtual coaching for lifestyle
support. Primary research question was which persuasive de-
sign factors inﬂuence the use and adoption of various eHealth
interventions in public sexual health services.
In total, 37 young adults with low socio-economical and
various ethnical backgrounds (51, 4% male and 48,6% female;
age 12 - 24 years, M=17,4 SD=3,1) participated in four focus
group discussions. Participants are considered as having ethnic
origin in case if at least one parent comes from abroad.
Participants explored and gave feedback on a number of
existing and new social media applications and modern media
applications in a focus group setting. All sessions were audio
recorded with participants permission.
Participants were also asked to express their opinion about
the three new concepts for new media applications integrated
in modern social media, namely, (i) a serious game embedded
in the existing social network, e.g., Facebook, (ii) a mobile
application functionality embedded in Facebook, and (iii) a
personal virtual coach embedded in either a social network,
a website or a mobile application. Each concept represented
certain persuasive factors which were discussed using clear
visual examples without naming the exact factor.
In the last part, adolescents shared their own ideas and
tips about promoting public sexual health services and healthy
lifestyle via eHealth applications and social media. The script,
the power point slides and the duration of various parts of
the focus group session were ﬁrst tested during a pilot session
and adjusted based on the outcome. An assistant took notes
and answered questions about the group assignments.
During the data analysis, audio ﬁles were fully transcribed,
analyzed, coded and categorized. The social support elements
have been coded according to the Persuasive System Design
model [29]. An analysis of the inﬂuence of persuasive fac-
tors on the response of adolescents towards various types of
presented media was done.
A. Result of the Focus Group Study
The results of the focus group study showed that adoles-
cents have positive attitude towards the use of a personal virtual
coach for health promotion, as long as they perceive there
is a real human behind the virtual character. Several impor-
tant design factors were identiﬁed during the data analysis.
Anonymity was found as the most important factor, which
has important implications for the use of social networks for
sexual well-being enhancement. Social media networks lack
privacy and therefore eHealth applications, for example on
Facebook, are not a recommended media for enhancing sexual
well-being of high-risk adolescents. Instead, social networks
can be used to increase the familiarity of the target group with
the existing interventions. The next factor, level of interactivity
was identiﬁed as indispensable. Serious games and mobile
applications are expected to have a high level of interactivity
to better engage users and thus increase uptake of lifestyle
interventions. The type of platform the eHealth technology
is realized on was another essential factor. Personal mobile
devices, and smart phones in particular, were most preferred
due the high level of privacy and familiar user experience. In
addition to the factors mentioned above, the reliability of the
information source was clearly an important issue across all
media types. Participants stated the importance of the clear
visibility of the information source, as well as the logo or the
name of the health organization behind the intervention. An-
other factor, namely, support for visual aids, was also identiﬁed
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

across all types of applications. Speciﬁc to adolescents with
low soci-economical background, lifestyle interventions have
to be more visually aided. The language use in the content has
to be simple, low threshold and preferably in several languages
to reach various ethnic groups. Applying these factors in the
design of eHealth technologies should increase their uptake
and usefulness for enhancing sexual well-being of high-risk
adolescents and contribute to healthier lifestyle.
V.
LESSONS LEARNED: PERSONAL COACHING AND
LIFESTYLE SUPPORT
What have we learned from studies about the effects of a
virtual coach in lifestyle coaching systems? In general, user
studies showed positive attitude towards the use of a virtual
coach for lifestyle change support. Users prefer to be in control
of how, when and on what device they want to receive personal
feedback from a virtual coach. In addition, we learned that
users want to monitor their history and progress: what they
have done and what they should do next. They expect a
connection between the goal-setting features for behavioral
change and the personal coach to support them.
Motivation is an important factor when it comes to the
willingness to use a particular lifestyle coaching system. It
makes a difference if an eHealth intervention is supported by
a real human healthcare professional. Effective coaching and
tailored feedback in terms of its timing, content and interaction
design are crucial elements in affecting behavioral change. The
next generation of the lifestyle coaching systems will be able to
predict the optimal timing for providing feedback by analyzing
previously given feedback messages. A personal target has to
be challenging and reachable, step by step, within a set period
of time.
Next lesson is the need to provide personalized (tailored)
feedback: show progress towards target, adjust target, motivate,
suggest actions, provide real time information. Facilitating
navigation through information that user needs is also found
important, for example by offering a user to search information
by alternative interaction modalities such as speech input.
However, the coach should not talk to the user when the
head phone is unplugged. Therefore, a context-sensitive smart
sensors technology is needed to enable this feature.
Online coaching also needs to be better integrated with
ofﬂine feedback to stimulate the participation and commitment
of the user to a lifestyle intervention [30]. Combining real-
time usage behavior data with personalized virtual coaching
and timely persuasive feedback can contribute to higher en-
gagement and better uptake of lifestyle change support system
by patients as well as healthcare professionals.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Applying user-centered design techniques can signiﬁcantly
improve the appeal of the user interface and thus the en-
gagement with personal lifestyle coaching system [31]. Next
to the ease-of-use, visual appeal and clear presentation, the
user experience has to be enjoyable and rewarding. Active
engagement of the user in interaction with lifestyle intervention
is crucial to ensure prolonged use of an intervention.
There is a need for guidelines and standardization for
eHealth technology in general [10], as well as for the lifestyle
interventions, in particular. In addition, the multi-device ar-
chitecture is necessary to enable easy exchange of monitoring
data between web-based and private mobile parts of lifestyle
support systems. This paper makes two contributions: (1) new
insights into the existing lifestyle interventions with virtual
coaching, their limitations and recommendations for improve-
ments (lack of unanimity in interface and interaction, etc.)
and (2) integrated approach, by considering a multi-device
eHealth system with motivational design features (such as
timely feedback) which increases the involvement of patients
as well as healthcare professionals.
To conclude, lifestyle behavior support systems need to be
be evaluated throughout all stages of the eHealth technology
development cycle. Furthermore, it is also essential to evaluate
the effects of eHealth interventions that have already been
disseminated, using multidisciplinary approach and by inde-
pendent evaluators.
A. Future Challenges in Evaluating eHealth Systems
One of the main future challenges in eHealth technology
[10] is developing a mixed methods approach and standards
for evaluating the effects of eHealth from a user perspective
[5] [8]. Validated instruments for user evaluations are needed
to measure the effects of personalized eHealth interventions,
such as changes in lifestyle or other behavior change [32]. The
ﬁeld of eHealth technology and telemedicine can beneﬁt from
adopting design and evaluation methods from the ﬁeld of HCI.
HCI evaluation methods are well suited for the short-term user
evaluation to measure the effects of intervention before the
long-term implementation. Naturally, HCI evaluation methods
need to be adjusted to the speciﬁc goal of the eHealth tech-
nology and multi-device lifestyle support systems in particular
[31]. In return, HCI ﬁeld can beneﬁt from the active logging
methods and eHealth techniques for analyzing usage behavior
patterns for better tailoring of personalized feedback [9] [10]
[33].
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all participants of the focus groups and other
user studies, Municipal Health Services and social workers.
Special thanks are due to Irina Lehmann and Cristel Boom
for assistance in recruitment and data analysis. Part of the
work presented is funded by the EU, within the framework
of the ARTEMIS JU SP8 SMARCOS project 100249. Focus
group study is a part of Sense eHealth project funded by the
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport (VWS) and is carried
out in collaboration with the Dutch National Institute for Public
Health and Environment (RIVM).
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Yekeh and J. Kay, “Hypothesis evaluation based on ubicomp sens-
ing: Moving from researchers to users,” in Persuasive’13, ser. CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, S. Berkovsky and J. Freyne, Eds., vol. 973,
2013.
[2]
T. W. Bickmore, D. Schulman, and C. Sidner, “Automated interventions
for multiple health behaviors using conversational agents,” Patient
education and counseling, vol. 92(2), August 2013, pp. 142–148.
[3]
T. W. Bickmore, L. Caruso, and K. Clough-Gorr, “Acceptance and
usability of a relational agent interface by urban older adults,” in
ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’05).
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 1212–1215.
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[4]
H. op den Akker, M. Tabak, M. Marin-Perianu, R. Huis in ’t
Veld, D. V. M. Jones, D. Hofs, T. M. T¨onis, B. W. van Schooten,
P. M. M. Vollenbroek-Hutten, and P. H. J. Hermens, “Development
and evaluation of a sensor-based system for remote monitoring and
treatment of chronic diseases - the continuous care & coaching
platform,” in 6th International Symposium on eHealth Services and
Technologies, EHST 2012.
Portugal: SciTePress - Science and
Technology Publications, July 2012, pp. 19–27. [Online]. Available:
http://doc.utwente.nl/83432/ [retrieved: Jan 29, 2014]
[5]
L. Van Velsen, N. Nijhof, and O. Kulyk, “Health 2.0 emerging tech-
nologies,” in Improving eHealth, J. van Gemert-Pijnen, O. Petersen, and
H. Ossebaard, Eds.
Boom Publishers, den Haag, The Netherlands,
2013, pp. 111–126.
[6]
S. Ananthanarayan and K. Siek, “Persuasive wearable technology
design for health and wellness,” in 6th International Conference on Per-
vasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth’12),
2012, pp. 236–240.
[7]
N. Nijland, “Grounding ehealth: towards a holistic framework for
sustainable ehealth technologies,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands, January 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://doc.utwente.nl/75576/ [retrieved: Jan 29, 2014]
[8]
E. J. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, C. H.
Ossebaard, M. S. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, and R. E. Seydel, “A holistic
framework to improve the uptake and impact of ehealth technologies,”
J Med Internet Res, vol. 13, no. 4, Dec 2011, p. e111. [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22155738 [retrieved:
Jan 29, 2014]
[9]
M. S. Kelders, E. J. Van Gemert-Pijnen, A. Werkman, N. Nijland,
and R. E. Seydel, “Effectiveness of a web-based intervention aimed at
healthy dietary and physical activity behavior: A randomized controlled
trial about users and usage,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 13, no. 2, Apr
2011, p. e32.
[10]
K. D. Ahern, M. J. Kreslake, and M. J. Phalen, “What is ehealth (6):
Perspectives on the evolution of ehealth research,” J Med Internet Res,
vol. 8, no. 1, Mar 2006, p. e4.
[11]
S. Pingree, R. Hawkins, T. Baker, L. duBenske, L. Roberts, and
D. Gustafson, “The value of theory for enhancing and understanding
e-health interventions,” American journal of preventive medicine, vol.
38(1), 2010, pp. 103–109.
[12]
H. Oh, C. Rizo, M. Enkin, and A. Jadad, “What is ehealth (3): A
systematic review of published deﬁnitions,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 7,
no. 1, Feb 2005, p. e1.
[13]
A. Black, J. Car, C. Pagliari, C. Anandan, and K. e. a. Cress-
well, “The impact of ehealth on the quality and safety of health
care: A systematic overview,” PLoS Med, vol. 8(1), 2011, e1000387.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000387 [retrieved: Jan 29, 2014].
[14]
S. Consolvo, P. Klasnja, D. W. McDonald, D. Avrahami, J. Froehlich,
L. LeGrand, R. Libby, K. Mosher, and J. A. Landay, “Flowers or a
robot army?: Encouraging awareness & activity with personal, mobile
displays,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing, ser. UbiComp ’08.
New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2008, pp. 54–63.
[15]
S. A. Clemes and R. A. Parker, “Increasing our understanding of
reactivity to pedometers in adults,” Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise, 2009.
[16]
M. Kasza, V. Szucs, A. Vegh, and T. Torok, “Passive vs. active
measurement: The role of smart sensors,” in The Fifth International
Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and
Technologies, 2011.
[17]
H. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, R. op den Akker, V. Jones, and
H. Hermens, “Opportunities for smart amp; tailored activity coaching,”
in Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS), 2013 IEEE 26th Inter-
national Symposium on, 2013, pp. 546–547.
[18]
W. Brouwer, A. Oenema, R. Crutzen, J. de Nooijer, N. de Vries, and
J. Brug, “An exploration of factors related to dissemination of and
exposure to internet-delivered behavior change interventions aimed at
adults: A delphi study approach,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 10(2):e10,
2008.
[19]
J. Fanning, P. S. Mullen, and E. McAuley, “Increasing physical activity
with mobile devices: A meta-analysis,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 14 (6),
Nov 2012, p. e161.
[20]
L. Dennison, L. Morrison, G. Conway, and L. Yardley, “Opportunities
and challenges for smartphone applications in supporting health behav-
ior change: Qualitative study,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 15, no. 4, Apr
2013, p. e86.
[21]
S. Bosch, M. Marin-Perianu, R. Marin-Perianu, P. Havinga, and H. Her-
mens, “Keep on moving! activity monitoring and stimulation using
wireless sensor networks,” in Smart Sensing and Context, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, P. Barnaghi, K. Moessner, M. Presser, and
S. Meissner, Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2009, vol. 5741, pp.
11–23.
[22]
T. Baranowski and L. Frankel, “Let’s get technical! gaming and tech-
nology for weight control and health promotion in children,” Childhood
Obesity, vol. 8(1), 2012, pp. 34–37.
[23]
R. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, T. Lavrysen, G. Geleijnse, A. van
Halteren,
H.
Schwietert,
and
M.
van
der
Hout,
“A
personal
context-aware multi-device coaching service that supports a healthy
lifestyle,” in Proceedings of the 25th BCS Conference on Human-
Computer
Interaction,
ser.
BCS-HCI
’11.
Swinton,
UK,
UK:
British Computer Society, 2011, pp. 443–448. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2305316.2305397 [retrieved: Jan 29,
2014]
[24]
H. op den Akker, M. Tabak, M. Marin-Perianu, M. H. A. Huis in ’t Veld,
V. M. Jones, D. H. W. Hofs, T. M. T¨onis, B. W. van Schooten, M. M. R.
Vollenbroek-Hutten, and H. J. Hermens, “Development and evaluation
of a sensor-based system for remote monitoring and treatment of chronic
diseases - the continuous care & coaching platform,” in Proceedings of
the 6th International Symposium on eHealth Services and Technologies,
EHST 2012, Geneva, Switzerland.
Portugal: SciTePress - Science and
Technology Publications, July 2012, pp. 19–27.
[25]
R. Klaassen, R. op den Akker, and H. op den Akker, “Feedback
presentation for mobile personalised digital physical activity coaching
platforms,” in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments, ser. PETRA
’13.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 64:1–64:8. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2504335.2504404 [retrieved: Jan
29, 2014]
[26]
R. Klaassen, J. Hendrix, D. Reidsma, R. op den Akker, B. Dijk, and
H. op den Akker, “Elckerlyc goes mobile-enabling natural interaction
in mobile user interfaces,” International journal on advances in telecom-
munications, vol. 6 (1-2), 2013, pp. 45–56.
[27]
H. Vilhjalmsson, N. Cantelmo, J. Cassell, N. E. Chafai, M. Kipp,
S. Kopp, M. Mancini, S. Marsella, A. N. Marshall, C. Pelachaud,
Z. Ruttkay, K. R. Thorisson, H. van Welbergen, and R. J. van der Werf,
“The behavior markup language: Recent developments and challenges,”
in Intelligent Virtual Agents, ser. LNCS, C. Pelachaud, J.-C. Martin,
E. Andre, G. Collet, K. Karpouzis, and D. Pele, Eds., vol. 4722. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 99–111.
[28]
C. Lisetti, R. Amini, U. Yasavur, and N. Rishe, “I can help you change!
an empathic virtual agent delivers behavior change health interventions,”
ACM Trans. Manage. Inf. Syst., vol. 4, no. 4, Dec. 2013, pp. 19:1–
19:28.
[29]
H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive systems design: Key
issues, process model, and system features,” Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, vol. 24(28), 2009.
[30]
J. Freyne, I. Saunders, E. Brindal, S. Berkovsky, and G. S. 0003,
“Factors associated with persistent participation in an online diet
intervention.” in Extended Abstracts of the ACM Annual Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2012, J. A. Konstan, E. H.
Chi, and K. H¨o¨ok, Eds.
ACM, 2012, pp. 2375–2380.
[31]
J. Scholtz and S. Consolvo, “Toward a framework for evaluating
ubiquitous computing applications,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 3,
2004, pp. 82–88.
[32]
P. Klasnja, S. Consolvo, and W. Pratt, “How to evaluate technologies for
health behavior change in hci research,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 3063–3072.
[33]
A. Barak, L. Hen, M. Boniel-Nissim, and N. Shapira, “A comprehen-
sive review and a meta-analysis of the effectiveness of internet-based
psychotherapeutic interventions,” Journal of Technology in Human
Services, vol. 26(2-4), 2008, pp. 109–160.
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Critical Success Factors for Inter-Organizational Process Collaboration in 
eHealth 
 
Niels F. Garmann-Johnsen 
Institute of Information Systems 
University of Agder, Norway 
e-mail: niels.f.garmann-johnsen@uia.no 
Tom Roar Eikebrokk 
Institute of Information Systems 
University of Agder, Norway 
e-mail: tom.eikebrokk@uia.no 
 
 
Abstract – In most Western countries, there is substantial 
growth in inter-organizational cooperation in design and 
delivery of health services based on Internet technology. 
However, there is a gap in the literature describing these 
efforts, and future research as well as practice can 
benefit from more elaborate theoretical models to 
understand this phenomenon. In order to close this gap, 
this study reviews the literature on Business Process 
Management in an inter-organizational context with a 
special focus on factors that can explain the success of 
process development in inter-organizational contexts. 
The review identifies several critical success factors that 
may be important as a starting point for future research 
in eHealth. 
 
Keywords – Inter-Organizational Collaboration. Business 
Process Management. eHealth. Information Systems 
Research. eHealth Literature Review. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Integrated processes using eHealth technology in inter-
organizational collaborations are needed to accommodate 
future increasing demands and provide better utilization of 
scarce specialized-care resources and preventive medicine 
and care. Such collaboration is not without challenges.  
For example, in Norway a new legislation has been 
passed to ensure close collaboration between hospitals and 
municipalities, with a strong incentive for more inter-
municipal and public-private collaboration (the Norwegian 
Collaboration reform ‘Samhandlingsreformen’, passed as 
law no. 30, June 24, 2011).  
Such calls for action often entail a need for process 
collaboration and integration at an inter-organizational level. 
What factors determine success or failure of such 
collaborations? 
The purpose of this paper is to study whether literature on 
Collaborative Business Process Management (CBPM) in an 
inter-organizational context may inform researchers and 
practitioners on existing gaps in our knowledge of the 
sociotechnical 
factors 
critically 
impacting 
inter-
organizational CBPM success, with consequences for 
eHealth process integration. 
We looked at Business Process Management (BPM) as a 
management strategy [11], supported by more or less 
integrated tools, ranging from Business Process Modelling 
Notation as an illustration of ‘AS-IS’ and ‘TO-BE’ 
scenarios, to BPM systems with full workflow integration 
using service-oriented architecture. BPM has evolved as a 
synthesis of business process reengineering involving an all-
or-nothing redesign of business processes, and total quality 
management 
[13] 
with 
emphasis 
on 
continuous 
improvement, customer orientation, employee involvement, 
and other benefits [7, 17]. The BPM subfield of CBPM is 
defined here as coordinated initiatives that involve actors 
from inside or outside of an organization, as opposed to 
non-collaborative BPM, where individuals conduct non-
coordinated efforts to alter business processes [14].  
Despite growing interest in the subject, there is a gap in 
the literature as to the importance of context for successful 
CBPM (Niehaves et al. 2012; ref. Appendix; J15), including 
inter-organizational contexts where BPM is coordinated 
between two or more corporations as separate legal entities. 
EHealth can be defined as the application of the Internet and 
other related technologies to improve the access, efficiency, 
effectiveness, and quality of clinical and business processes 
utilized by healthcare organizations, practitioners, patients, 
and consumers [9]. This definition is not exhaustive, as 
eHealth also entails IT-supported measures to promote good 
health in the general population. 
Understanding and succeeding with CBPM in inter-
organizational contexts, such as the health sector, represents 
an increasing relational challenge for many organizations 
and is thus particularly difficult [15]. Issues may arise due to 
politics [6], culture [19], or factors related to ‘people’ [8] 
and the ‘soft side’ of organizations [12], which are even 
more elusive or blurry concepts in an inter-organizational 
context.  
The paper is organized as follows: In the next section, we 
describe the methods chosen for the literature review in 
addressing our research questions. Then, we present the 
results for each research question before we end with a 
discussion and conclusion regarding the status of the 
research on CBPM and implications for further research in 
eHealth. 
II. 
METHOD 
First, we looked for existing literature reviews on BPM 
research; specifically, we looked for overviews of critical 
success factors for CBPM. We found literature reviews 
summing up intra-organizational factors, collaboration 
using external consulting resources, culture factors, and 
general feasibility studies. We did not find any literature 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

reviews summing up inter-organizational CBPM critical 
success factors. We addressed this gap by performing our 
own review of the information system (IS) literature.  
This research addressed the following questions:  
RQ1: Is successful inter-organizational CBPM perceived 
differently in eHealth than in current research? Here we 
want to know how current research has assessed success in 
terms of the value that is generated from CBPM.  
RQ2: Is the success rate of inter-organizational CBPM 
reported differently in eHealth than in current research? 
RQ3: Are the factors that influence successful inter-
organizational CBPM in general also identified in the 
eHealth context?  
    We adopted the guidelines of a systematic literature 
review suggested by Webster and Watson [20], von Brocke 
et al. [18], and Okoli and Schabram [16]. In screening and 
collecting data from the articles, we adopted the guidelines 
suggested by Kitchenham et al. [10]. 
   The process of identifying the literature was organized in 
three steps. The first step involved ten database searches in 
several databases (Scopus, IEEE, Emerald, ISI Web of 
knowledge, 
and 
others) 
using 
the 
search 
words 
‘collaborative business process management’, ‘BPM’, and 
‘inter-organizational’. We used different truncations of these 
terms and in different combinations: for example, ‘business 
process’, ‘management’, ‘collabo*’ OR ‘coop*’, or ‘inter 
org’. We also did special searches on IS sources with a 
special focus on BPM, including journals like Business 
Process 
Management 
Journal 
and 
Journal of Enterprise Information Management. We also 
did a special search for ‘BPM’ in the proceedings of the 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS).  
   We only included articles in English and that were 
published after 2004. Our last search was performed on 30 
June 2013. This step returned 5.361 titles. However, a 
screening of the found articles showed that the majority of 
the articles were irrelevant to our research questions. We 
excluded articles that did not describe inter-organizational 
process collaboration or success perspectives or factors, e.g., 
articles focusing solely on technical feasibility. This 
screening of articles thus resulted in 47 relevant articles. 
This led to the third and final step in our search process. We 
combined forward and backward searches for articles either 
cited by or citing the previously identified articles, as 
recommended by Webster and Watson [20]. In this last step, 
we also included articles from before 2005. This step led us 
to three additional articles, for a total of 50 (see Appendix). 
Eleven of these 50 articles reported studies from an eHealth 
context (Appendix; J1, J3, J5, J7, J11, J12, J15, J28, C8, C9, 
and C16). 
   Our search criteria may have omitted articles that focused 
on inter-organizational CBPM but used other terms. In 
screening the articles, we may also have omitted articles that 
should have been included.  
III. 
RESULTS 
   In this section, we present the findings from our review of 
the literature according to the three research questions 
outlined above.  
A. How is success assessed in CBPM research? 
   CBPM is often believed to add substantial value to 
organizations [15]. Still, the concept of value or successful 
CBPM is multi-faceted and often implicit in most studies. 
As a result, we wanted to identify the perspectives used to 
describe CBPM success in the identified literature. Table 1 
shows that CBPM success involves many dimensions, from 
efficiency of project teams and processes, to effectiveness in 
goal achievement and quality of work practices involving 
production of design, products, and services. Success is also 
understood in some articles as the satisfaction of 
stakeholders involved in the collaborative processes. For 
example, in a healthcare context, doctors, patients, and their 
relatives are examples of important stakeholders in 
interpreting success.  
 
TABLE 1.   PERSPECTIVES ON SUCCESS MEASURES  
(with no. of reports) 
Perspectives on success 
eHealth 
other 
Efficiency 
 
 
Team performance (knowledge and 
information sharing, service quality) 
1 
4 
Process performance (time, costs, product 
and process quality) 
4 
7 
Value creation 
1 
	  
Satisfaction 
 
 
Stakeholder satisfaction (process owner, 
client, relatives) 
1 
2 
Job effectiveness 
 
1 
Information system quality 
 
2 
Interoperability, information handoff 
quality 
3 
 
Achieving legitimacy through 
standardization 
 
1 
Effectiveness 
 
 
Goal achievement 
1 
1 
Improved work practices 
 
1 
Improved user interface 
 
1 
Quality of design and service 
1 
6 
IT innovation 
	  
1 
Competitiveness 
 
 
Market share, profitability, growth, return 
on investment 
 
3 
Innovativeness 
1 
1 
Cost leadership 
	  
1 
Other perspectives 
 
 
Active user participation 
 
1 
Multi-party coordination, relationship 
management capability 
1 
2 
Customer responsiveness 
	  
1 
Products and services innovation 
(Complementarity, lock-in) 
	  
4 
(Organizational) political benefits 
	  
1 
Perspectives used in eHealth-focused articles  
are marked with italics. 
 
   The perspectives seem to differ with the sector studied. 
Eleven articles studied or included healthcare. There seems 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to be a gap in the inter-organizational CBPM eHealth 
literature concerning the use of important performance 
indicators of satisfaction (job effectiveness, information 
system 
quality, 
achieving 
legitimacy 
through 
standardization), effectiveness (improved work practices, 
improved user interface, IT innovation), competitiveness 
(market share, profitability, growth, return on investment, 
cost leadership), active user participation, customer 
responsiveness, 
products 
and 
services 
innovation 
(complementarity, lock-in), and (organizational) political 
benefits.  
B. Success rates in the eHealth studies compared to other 
contexts 
   Our review shows that the literature reports a lower rate of 
success for inter-organizational CBPM in eHealth than in 
other sectors. Of the 11 articles on eHealth contexts, three 
articles (27%) described successes, while three articles 
(27%) described full or partial failures. In five of the 11 
eHealth articles (45%) this classification was not applicable.  
   Three articles combine eHealth and other contexts. A total 
of 42 articles reported on other contexts. Of these, 18 
articles (43%) described successful outcomes. Eleven 
articles (26%) described full or partial failures, and in 13 
articles (31%) this classification was not applicable. 
   From the studies, we cannot conclude whether eHealth has 
a lower success rate in inter-organizational CBPM projects, 
or that this level of success is not reported. This may be an 
indication of gaps in our knowledge on inter-organizational 
CBPM in eHealth. 
C. What critical success factors are identified in inter-
organizational CBPM research? 
   We define critical success factors in the context of CBPM 
(following Butler and Fitzgerald [3] and Eid et al. [4]) as the 
areas or functions where things must go right to ensure 
successful performance of the Collaborative Business 
Process Management efforts. These areas or functions 
represent barriers or drivers that need managerial attention 
to ensure that CBPM achieves the projected benefits. In 49 
of the 50 articles we identified critical success factors 
(CSFs), or what could be inferred as CSFs from the 
narratives, related to CBPM cases or other studies. We 
organized the list of identified CSFs by the level of analysis 
of the studies and by the phase of development they reflect 
in the collaborative BPM projects. The level of analysis 
ranges from the inter-organizational or network level to the 
intra-organizational level. Three phases in the life-cycle of 
CBPM can be identified, following the same pattern as in 
the work of Blut et al. [2]: phase one, initiation and 
development; phase two, implementation and early 
maturation; and phase three, late maturation and renewal or 
termination. One final group includes studies of critical 
success factors that did not fit into this framework of phases.  
 
 
 
 
TABLE 2. OVERVIEW OF CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS 
(with no. of reports) 
Critical success factors (#) 
eHealth 
Other 
Inter-organizational level 
 
 
1. Management 
1 
4 
2. Maturity 
1 
7 
3. Partner knowledge 
0 
3 
4. Scalability 
0 
2 
5. Simplicity 
0 
4 
6. Governance, inter-org.  
1 
1 
Intra-organizational level 
 
 
7. Benefits 
0 
8 
8. Co-opetition 
1 
4 
9. Democratization 
2 
1 
10. Diffusion of innovation 
0 
4 
11. Experiences 
0 
2 
12. Finance 
1 
2 
13. Governance, org.  
1 
3 
14. Information sharing 
2 
4 
15. Involvement 
2 
3 
16. IS tool quality 
1 
5 
17. Resources 
1 
5 
18. Support 
1 
3 
19. Transparency 
1 
5 
20. Accessibility (users) 
1 
0 
21. Coherency  
0 
1 
22. Consistency  
0 
1 
23. Continuity  
0 
2 
24. Contract clarity  
0 
2 
25. Culture 
0 
1 
26. Decision promptness 
1 
3 
27. Equality  
1 
1 
28. Legitimacy  
1 
2 
29. Organizational size  
1 
0 
30. Relationship portfolio  
0 
1 
31. Relationship quality  
0 
2 
32. Responsibility  
0 
1 
33. Adaptive standards 
1 
0 
34. Stepwise implementation 
1 
0 
35. Strategy and vision 
0 
2 
36. Terminology  
1 
0 
Critical success factors used in eHealth-focused articles  
are marked with italics. 
 
   The CSFs found are synthesized into concepts following 
Webster and Watson’s recommendation [20], and numbered 
for later reference. We identified 36 different concepts 
reflecting critical success factors for CBPM. These factors 
can describe different activities depending on the phases of 
the collaboration life cycle they represent.  
   Looking at an inter-organizational unit of analysis, 
successful management style (CSF #1) changes from highly 
adaptive in early phases (J17, J21) to less adaptive and more 
determined closer to implementation (J21), with the 
exception of one study (C8), which also includes adaptive 
management style in a later phase. Process maturity (#2) is 
important throughout the first phases, but emphasis changes 
over the phases from collaboration maturity to technological 
maturity, including the capability to use CBPM tools. 
Partner knowledge (#3) is important for the outcome on a 
business network level. New joint processes, IT solutions, 
and inter-organizational standards must be scalable (#4) and 
simple (#5). 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

   One study (J27) stresses the importance of governance and 
measurement systems for the collaborative network (#6). 
Another study claims that it is important that the owners of 
the e-business ‘hubs’ do not profit at the participants’ 
expense (finance sector; J11).  
   On the individual participating organization level, benefit 
management (#7) seems important. Participants must have a 
clear idea of what benefits to expect, how to realize them, 
and how to measure them. Co-opetition in terms of 
simultaneous cooperation and competition (#8) must be 
managed throughout the collaboration lifecycle, or benefits 
may be lost. 
   Democratization of decision-making and the development 
of a common vision (#9) are important in the earliest phases 
of collaboration. Diffusion of collaboration (#10) offers 
participating organizations additional market and innovation 
channels, and helps to overcome resource scarcity.  
   Joint community learning is also identified as a positive 
side effect of this diffusion. Some studies (C5, C17) found 
that prior experience with collaboration and experience with 
performance during the implementation phase (#11) 
explained success on an organizational level.  
   Cost reduction (finance; #12) is important. In the 
implementation phase the financial status of partners may 
also explain success or failure (J15). Good governance of 
projects, contracts, and IT are identified as a CSF (#13). 
One paper (J4) argues for a service broker function for 
better governance (in the context of implementing cloud 
computing services; J4). Information and knowledge sharing 
across functions (#14) are dominant factors, especially in 
the early phases of collaboration (J27, J28, C12, C20). One 
study from the health-care sector explores the importance of 
information handoff processes for patient safety. User 
involvement (#15) is a dominant factor in both the 
development (J17, J28, C3) and implementation phases (J3, 
J24). Resources (competence, capacity, capabilities; #16) 
are needed for change management, and training employees 
in new practices. Support (#18) must be provided for the 
innovation and collaboration processes. Many studies 
emphasize the need for transparency (#19) in process design 
and technological solutions. 
   User accessibility plays a great role in e-government 
solutions (#20). The need for coherent public policies is also 
apparent in e-government standards development (C4; #21). 
Within supply chains it is suggested that collaborative 
solutions (using the Internet) should have a consistent 
strategy and focus on value creation, not just cost reduction 
(J6; #22). Other special critical success factors found in 
some studies are continuity (in use of collaborative tools; # 
23), contract clarity (#24), and management of cultural 
differences (#25). Decision promptness is identified by 
some studies (J17, J27, J28, C17; #26), but seems to 
contradict other studies (e.g. J21) that emphasize adaptive 
management and democratization. Equality of participants is 
found to be a factor in some business networks (J11, J27; 
#27). Legitimacy of the change process in the eyes of the 
organization’s constituents is found to be of importance, 
especially in public administration (J12, C15, C17; #28). 
Organizational size is also identified as a success factor in 
public sector CBPM projects (J15; #29), with smaller 
organizations more eager to collaborate with others. 
Concentrating the portfolio of partner relationships is 
identified as a success factor in some chemical and 
mechanical industries (J18; #30). Organizational size and 
portfolio concentration may arguably be related to the 
resource concept (#17) as a success factor. Relationship 
quality (#31) involves external partners in business process 
outsourcing (J8) and process collaborations in industries 
(J18). Responsibility (commitment to change process 
objectives; #32) is identified as a success factor by a panel 
of BPM experts (J24). Standardization can in some 
instances be a barrier for performance. Transparency (#19) 
is important, but premature standardization that conflicts 
with actual workflows has in one case proven to be 
detrimental to collaborative performance in healthcare (J7), 
so an adaptive standardization process is a success factor 
(#33). A stepwise implementation of new processes can be 
one way to avoid issues (J1; #35). Developing a common 
terminology stimulates CBPM in processes characterized by 
high quality and intensity, such as in healthcare (J5; #36). 
   We found some CSFs that seem to be of potential 
significance in eHealth: 
 
Decision promptness (#26): Prompt actions when issues 
were raised in an implementation project, taking feedback 
seriously, and solving issues before further rollout of new 
solutions were significant factors in a physician order entry 
system and in patient health record systems (J28). 
 
Equality of participants (#27): 
Power 
balances 
in 
partnerships are necessary to attract participants, as reported 
by case studies in the Global Healthcare Exchange (GHX) 
(J11). 
 
Legitimacy (#28): Legitimacy of initiatives (in the eyes of 
stakeholders) is necessary for successful e-government 
initiatives and in the adoption of Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) and information infrastructure for 
governmental services (C15, C17), and is a prerequisite for 
implementing welfare technologies for assisted living at 
home for elderly and chronically ill patients [42; p. 90]. 
 
Organizational size (#29): Smaller organizations, such as 
smaller municipalities, may have restricted opportunities for 
sourcing new services internally and are more dependent on 
external sourcing and collaboration (J15). In Norway, as in 
other countries with a geographically scattered population, 
ideal municipality size is debated. The assumption is that 
bigger municipalities may provide better services, but 
smaller organizational size can make collaboration less 
complex and easier to manage and may be a positive driving 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

force for CBPM. This might result in a higher success rate 
of CBPM in small municipalities. 
 
Flexible/mature 
standards 
(#33) 
and 
a 
stepwise 
implementation (#34): Kauffman and Tsai (J7) cite a case 
study 
in 
Norwegian 
hospitals 
where 
a 
premature 
standardization project (electronic patient record) had 
negative effects on organizational performance and care 
practices. The proposed new standards did not fit the 
information system environment and did not capture the 
needs of the work processes, resulting in more fragmented 
patient records. Albani and Dietz (J1), using examples from 
healthcare, argue for a stepwise implementation, where 
experiences are gradually taken into consideration when 
going from local to global coordination. They call this the 
‘choreography of business processes’. 
   On the other hand, many inter-organizational non-eHealth 
CBPM critical success factors are missing in the eHealth 
context (Table 2; CSF# 3-5, 7, 10-11, 21-25, 30-32, and 35). 
We cannot conclude whether awareness of some factors is 
irrelevant to eHealth or simply not reported. This gap 
indicates that further research is needed. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
   In general, studies from the public sector are more often 
concerned with satisfaction of involved stakeholders and 
quality of services and less concerned with efficiency and 
competitiveness. As McNulty (J12) reports, an emerging 
process perspective on eHealth, with its emphasis on value 
creation, 
will 
challenge 
deeply 
rooted 
functional 
perspectives that emphasize control. 
   Most 
studies 
have 
adopted 
a 
perspective 
where 
collaboration in the inter-organizational context of BPM is 
seen as largely free from competition and conflict. Five 
notable exceptions study competition as a barrier to 
collaboration (J2, J9, J12, C2, C17). Organizations also 
compete in the public sector; for example, municipalities 
and institutions compete for positions, location of shared 
functions, and funding resources. Competition as a barrier 
may extend from an individual level to become an inter-
organizational challenge. These barriers can become a major 
problem for society. 
   In the cases described, some critical success factors seem 
to be particularly context-dependent (CSF # 6, and 20-36 in 
table 
2). 
Further 
studies 
should 
investigate 
their 
generalizability. More research is needed to understand 
critical success factors across different sectors and phases of 
collaboration, and to create a more holistic understanding of 
inter-organizational CBPM.  
   As we have shown, there are gaps and inconsistencies in 
success factors within eHealth. For example, intra-
organizational governance is also important in the eHealth 
sector, but there is limited information on what performance 
measures or perspectives of success such governance 
initiatives should focus on. This corresponds also with some 
of the lacking critical success factors, for instance the 
benefits concepts and relates to the success rate of eHealth 
research in general. These gaps suggest a need further 
research. We believe that researchers of CBPM in eHealth 
can benefit from critical success factors identified in other 
contexts and can use them as a basis for conceptualization 
and empirical testing in an eHealth context.  
   The eHealth sector in particular poses special challenges 
for both decision-makers and lawmakers. A coherent 
roadmap for successful implementation of complex eHealth 
inter-organizational CBPM initiatives will require attention 
to multiple factors; thus far, we only have scattered case 
studies on which to build our understanding of these factors. 
   Our review identified a wide variety of theoretical 
approaches used to date. A unified theoretical framework 
could stimulate further development in the field. An 
interesting starting point for this integration could be studies 
of value creation in e-business models (Amit and Zott [1]) 
that are inter-organizational and process-focused [5], 
covering many challenges similar to those in inter-
organizational CBPM. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
   There 
are 
gaps 
in 
our 
understanding 
of 
inter-
organizational process collaboration in eHealth. Many 
critical success factors and perspectives reported in other 
contexts are missing in the eHealth context but could prove 
important in the field of eHealth. The reported success rate 
of CBPM in an eHealth context seems to be lower than in 
other contexts, but the sample size of eHealth-related studies 
is too small to allow for any decisive conclusions. Some 
critical success factors must be given special consideration 
in an eHealth context. Are we missing pieces of the puzzle 
for successful inter-organizational CBPM implementation in 
eHealth? 
   Further research is needed on the content, relevance, and 
impact 
of 
sociotechnical 
factors 
like 
co-opetition 
management (ref. Appendix; J2, J9, and J12), as the 
successful balance between simultaneous cooperation, or 
collaboration, to achieve coherent patient treatment, and 
competition for positions, resources, and funding. Further 
research is also needed on the relative weight of the 
different factors over different phases of collaboration.  
   This research will inform further eHealth research and 
successful eHealth initiative implementation, and will be of 
use to lawmakers and regulators. 
 
VI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Amit and C. Zott: ‘Value creation in eBusiness’. Strategic 
management journal 2001, 22(6-7): pp. 493-520.  
[2] 
M. Blut, C. Backhaus, T. Heussler, D. M. Woisetschläger, H. 
Evanschitzky and D. Ahlert: (2011), ‘What to expect after the 
honeymoon: Testing a lifecycle theory of franchise relationships’. 
Journal of Retailing 2011, 87(3): pp. 306-319.  
[3] 
T. Butler and B. Fitzgerald: ‘Unpacking the systems development 
process: an empirical application of the CSF concept in a research 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

context’. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 1999, 8(4): 
pp. 351-371.  
[4] 
R. Eid, M. Trueman and A. M. Ahmed: ‘A cross-industry review of 
B2B critical success factors’. Internet Research 2002, 12(2): pp. 110-
123.  
[5] 
T. R. Eikebrokk and D. H. Olsen: ‘An empirical investigation of 
competency factors affecting e-business success in European SMEs’. 
Information & Management 2007, 44(4): pp. 364-383. 
[6] 
V. Grover, S. R. Jeong, W. J. Kettinger, and J. T. C. Teng: ‘The 
implementation of business process reengineering’. Journal of 
Management Information Systems 1995: pp. 109-144.  
[7] 
M. Hammer: ‘Reengineering Work: Don’t Automate, Obliterate’. 
Harvard Business Review 1990, 68(4): 104-112. 
[8] 
M. Hammer and J. Champy: ‘Reengineering the corporation: a 
manifesto for business evolution’. Nicholas Brealey, London; 1993.  
[9] 
HIMSS 
EHealth 
SIG 
White 
Paper 
[http://www.himss.org/content/files/ehealth_whitepaper.pdf] 
(Retrieved Oct 2012) 
[10] B. Kitchenham, O. Pearl Brereton, D. Budgen, M. Turner, J. Bailey, 
and S. Linkman: ‘Systematic literature reviews in software 
engineering—a systematic literature review’. Information and 
software technology 2009, 51(1): pp. 7-15.  
[11] R. Lee and B. Dale: ‘Business process management: A review and 
evaluation’. Business Process Management Journal 1998, 4(3): pp. 
214-225. 
[12] O. Marjanovic: ‘Supporting the ‘soft’ side of business process 
reengineering’. Business Process Management Journal 2000, 6(1): pp. 
43-55.  
[13] B. Niehaves, R. Plattfaut and J. Becker: ‘Does Your Business Process 
Management (Still) Fit the Market?’ A Dynamic Capability 
Perspective on BPM Strategy Development. In Proceedings of the 
16th Americas Conference on Information Systems. AMCIS 2010. 
Lima, Peru. Paper 292. 
[14] B. Niehaves and R. Plattfaut: ‘Collaborative business process 
management: Status quo and quo vadis’. Business Process 
Management Journal 2011, 17(3): pp. 384-402.  
[15] B. Niehaves and J. Henser: ‘Business Process Management beyond 
Boundaries? A Multiple Case Study Exploration of Obstacles to 
Collaborative BPM’. In 2011 proceedings of the 44th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS): IEEE 2011; 
pp. 1-13- 
[16] C. Okoli and K. Schabram: ‘A guide to conducting a systematic 
literature review of information systems research’. 2010. 
[17] T. C. Powell: ‘Total quality management as competitive advantage: A 
review and empirical study’. Strategic Management Journal 1995, 
16(1): pp. 15-37. 
[18] J. vom Brocke, A. Simons, B. Niehaves, K. Riemer, R. Plattfaut, and 
A. Cleven: ‘Reconstructing the giant: on the importance of rigour in 
documenting the literature search process’. In 2009 proceedings of 
the 17th European Conference on Information Systems, Verona, Italy: 
2009 pp. 2206-2217- 
[19] J. vom Brocke and T. Sinnl: ‘Culture in business process 
management: A literature review’. Business Process Management 
Journal 2011, 17(2), pp. 357-378.  
[20] J. Webster and T. R. Watson: ‘Analysing the past to prepare for the 
future: Writing a literature review’. MIS quarterly 2002, 26(2).  
VII. APPENDIX 
1) Journal articles reviewed 
ID 
Reference 
J1 
Albani, A. and Dietz, J. L. (2009), ‘Current trends in modeling inter-
organizational cooperation’, Journal of Enterprise Information 
Management, 22(3), pp. 275-297. 
J2 
Baruch, Y. and Lin, C. P. (2012), ‘All for one, one for all: 
coopetition 
and 
virtual 
team 
performance’, 
Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 79(6), pp. 1155-1168. 
J3 
Bochicchio, M., Bruno, A. and Longo, A. (2011), ‘Supporting 
Continuous Improvement in Care Management with BPM’, 
Software Engineering, 1(2), pp. 32-38. 
J4 
Demirkan, H. and Goul, M. (2013), ‘Taking value-networks to the 
cloud services: security services, semantics and service level 
agreements’, Information Systems and e-Business Management, 
11(1), pp. 51-91. 
J5 
Gogan, J. L., Baxter, R., Boss, S. R. and Chircu, A. (2013), ‘Handoff 
Processes, Information Quality and Patient Safety: A Trans-
Disciplinary Literature Review’, Business Process Management 
Journal, 19(1), pp. 70-94. 
J6 
Jonsson, S. and Gunnarsson, C. (2005), ‘Internet technology to 
achieve supply chain performance’, Business Process Management 
Journal, 11(4), pp. 403-417. 
J7 
Kauffman, R. J. and Tsai, J. Y. (2010), ‘With or without you: The 
countervailing forces and effects of process standardization’, 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 9(4), pp. 305-322. 
J8 
Lacity, M. C., Solomon, S., Yan, A. and Willcocks, L. P. (2011), 
‘Business process outsourcing studies: a critical review and research 
directions’, Journal of information technology, 26(4), pp. 221-258. 
J9 
Lin, C. P., Wang, Y. J., Tsai, Y. H. and Hsu, Y. F. (2010), 
‘Perceived job effectiveness in coopetition: a survey of virtual teams 
within business organizations’, Computers in Human Behaviour, 
26(6), pp. 1598-1606. 
J10 
Magdaleno, A.M., Cappelli, C., Baiao, F.A., Santoro, F.M. and 
Araujo, R. (2008), ‘Towards collaboration maturity in business 
processes: an exploratory study in oil production processes’, 
Information Systems Management, 25(4), pp. 302-318 
J11 
Markus, M. L. and Bui, Q. N. (2012), ‘Going concerns: the 
governance of inter-organizational coordination hubs’, Journal of 
Management Information Systems, 28(4), pp. 163-198. 
J12 
McNulty, T. (2003), ‘Redesigning public services: challenges of 
practice for policy’, British Journal of Management, 14(s1), pp. 
S31-S45. 
J13 
Münstermann, B., Eckhardt, A. and Weitzel, T. (2010), ‘The 
performance impact of business process standardization: An 
empirical evaluation of the recruitment process’, Business Process 
Management Journal, 16(1), pp. 29-56. 
J14 
Niehaves, B. and Plattfaut, R. (2011), ‘Collaborative business 
process management: status quo and quo vadis’, Business Process 
Management Journal, 17(3), pp. 384-402. 
J15 
Niehaves, B., Plattfaut, R. and Becker, J. (2012), ‘Business process 
governance: a comparative study of Germany and Japan’, Business 
Process Management Journal, 18(2), pp. 347-371. 
J16 
Pramatari, K., Evgeniou, T. T. and Doukidis, G. (2008), 
‘Implementation of collaborative e-supply-chain initiatives: an 
initial challenging and final success case from grocery retailing’, 
Journal of Information Technology, 24(3), pp. 269-281. 
J17 
Puschmann, T. and Alt, R. (2005), ‘Developing an integration 
architecture for process portals’, European Journal of Information 
Systems, 14(2), pp. 121-134. 
J18 
Rai, A. and Tang, X. (2010), ‘Leveraging IT capabilities and 
competitive 
process 
capabilities 
for 
the 
management 
of 
interorganizational relationship portfolios’, Information Systems 
Research, 21(3), pp. 516-542. 
J19 
Rajaguru, R. and Matanda, M. J. (2009), ‘Influence of inter-
organisational integration on business performance: the mediating 
role of organisational-level supply chain functions’, Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, 22(4), pp. 456-467. 
J20 
Reijers, H. A. (2006), ‘Implementing BPM systems: the role of 
process orientation’, Business Process Management Journal, 12(4), 
pp. 389-409. 
J21 
Ritala, P., Hurmelinna-Laukkanen, P. and Nätti, S. (2012), 
‘Coordination in innovation-generating business networks–the case 
of Finnish Mobile TV development’, Journal of Business & 
Industrial Marketing, 27(4), pp. 324-334. 
J22 
Rohloff, M. (2011), ‘Advances in business process management 
implementation based on a maturity assessment and best practice 
exchange’, Information Systems and E-Business Management, 9(3), 
pp. 383-403. 
J23 
Schäfermeyer, D. K. M., Rosenkranz, C. and Holten, R. (2012), 
‘The Impact of Business Process Complexity on Business Process 
Standardization’, Business & Information Systems Engineering, 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

4(5), pp. 261-270. 
J24 
Schmiedel, T., vom Brocke, J. and Recker, J. (2013), ‘Which 
cultural values matter to business process management? Results 
from a global Delphi study’, Business Process Management Journal, 
19(2), pp. 5-5. 
J25 
Sila, I. (2010), ‘Do organisational and environmental factors 
moderate the effects of Internet-based interorganisational systems on 
firm performance?’, European Journal of Information Systems, 
19(5), pp. 581-600. 
J26 
Silva, A. R. and Rosemann, M. (2012), ‘Processpedia: an ecological 
environment for BPM stakeholders’ collaboration’, Business 
Process Management Journal, 18(1), pp. 20-42. 
J27 
Simatupang, T. M. and Sridharan, R. (2008), ‘Design for supply 
chain collaboration’, Business Process Management Journal, 14(3), 
pp. 401-418. 
J28 
Tarafdar, M. and Gordon, S. R. (2007), ‘Understanding the influence 
of information systems competencies on process innovation: A 
resource-based view’, The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 
16(4), pp. 353-392. 
J29 
Venkatesh, V. and Bala, H. (2012), ‘Adoption and impacts of inter-
organizational business process standards: Role of partnering 
synergy’, Information Systems Research, 23(4), pp. 1131-1157. 
J30 
vom Brocke, J. and Sinnl, T. (2011), ‘Culture in business process 
management: a literature review’, Business Process Management 
Journal, 17(2), 357-378. 
 
B. Conference articles reviewed 
ID 
Reference 
C1 
Becker, J., Heddier, M. and Knackstedt, R. (2012, January), 
‘Towards Business Process Modeling in Business Contracting: 
Analyzing Collaboration Contracts as a Field of Application for 
Process Models’, In 2012 proceedings of the 45th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Science (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 
4376-4385. 
C2 
Eikebrokk, T. R. and Olsen, D. H. (2005, January), ‘Co-opetition 
and e-business success in SMEs: an empirical investigation of 
European SMEs’, In 2005 proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 
162a-162a. 
C3 
Eikebrokk, T. R., Iden, J., Olsen, D. H. and Opdahl, A. L. (2010, 
January), ‘Determinants to the use of business process modeling’, 
In 2010 proceedings of the 43rd Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 1-10. 
C4 
Flak, L. S. and Nordheim, S. (2006, January), ‘Stakeholders, 
contradictions and salience: An empirical study of a Norwegian 
G2G effort’, In 2006 proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, Vol. 
4, pp. 75a-75a. 
C5 
Frick, N., Hemmerich, K. M. and Schubert, P. (2012, January), 
‘Benefits Identification in Inter-Organizational Information System 
Implementation Projects: A Multi-Case Study Approach’, In 2012 
proceedings of the 45th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 4662-4671. 
C6 
Hrastinski, S., Kviselius, N. Z., Ozan, H. and Edenius, M. (2010, 
January), ‘A review of technologies for open innovation: 
Characteristics and future trends’, In 2010 proceedings of the 43rd 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS), IEEE, pp. 1-10. 
C7 
Ickler, H. and Baumoel, U. (2010, January), ‘Swarm-based 
coordination of business networks: An approach for collaborative 
value creation of innovative goods and services’, In 2010 
proceedings of the 43rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 1-9. 
C8 
Janssen, M. and Kuk, G. (2006, January), ‘A complex adaptive 
system perspective of enterprise architecture in electronic 
government’, In 2006 Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE Vol. 
4, pp. 71b-71b. 
C9 
Klein, S. and Schellhammer, S. (2011, January), ‘Developing IOIS 
as Collective Action: A Cross-Country Comparison in the Health 
Care Sector’, In 2011 proceedings of the 44th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 1-
10. 
C10 
Koivuniemi, J. and Edelmann, J. (2007, January), ‘Networked 
innovation management: A framework and case application’, In 
2007 proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 229b-229b. 
C11 
Kwak, D. H. and Ramamurthy, K. (2011, January), ‘IOS Resources, 
Electronic Cooperation and Performance: A Conceptual Model’, In 
2011 proceedings of the 44th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 1-10. 
C12 
Lin, Y. T. and Hsu, C. (2011, January), ‘Unfolding the Organizing 
Vision for Straight-Through-Processing in Taiwan Financial 
Industry’, In 2011 proceedings of the 44th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, (pp. 
1-10). 
C13 
Madlberger, M. and Roztocki, N. (2010, January), ‘Digital Cross-
Organizational Collaboration: A Metatriangulation Review’, In 
2010 proceedings of the 43rd Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 1-10. 
C14 
Magdaleno, A.M., de Araujo, R.M. and Borges, M.R.S. (2007), 
‘Designing collaborative processes’, in proceedings of the 8th 
Workshop on Business Process Modeling, Development, and 
Support (BPMDS’07), Nordheim, Norway. 
C15 
Magnusson, J. and Nilsson, A. (2006, January), ‘Infusing an 
Architectural Framework with Neo-institutional Theory: Reports 
from recent change management initiatives within the Swedish 
Public Administration’, In 2006 proceedings of the 39th Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 
IEEE, Vol. 4, pp. 67b-67b. 
C16 
Niehaves, B. (2011, January), ‘Democratizing Process Innovation: 
A Comparative Study of Public Sector Business Process 
Management Networks’, In 2011 proceedings of the 44th Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 
IEEE, pp. 1-9. 
C17 
Niehaves, B. and Henser, J. (2011, January), ‘Business Process 
Management beyond Boundaries? A Multiple Case Study 
Exploration of Obstacles to Collaborative BPM’, In 2011 
proceedings of the 44th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 1-13. 
C18 
Thimm, H. and Rasmussen, K. B. (2010, January), ‘A Decision and 
Transparency Support Service for Moderation Management of 
Virtual 
Enterprises 
in 
Collaborative 
Networks’, 
In 2010 
proceedings of the 43rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 1-10. 
C19 
Tung, W. F. and Yuan, S. T. (2007, January), ‘iDesign: an 
intelligent design framework for service innovation’, In 2007 
proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 64-64. 
C20 
Turoff, M. (2012, January), ‘Organizational Factors Inhibiting the 
Design of Effective Emergency Management Information Systems 
(EMIS)’, In 2012 proceedings of the 45th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Science (HICSS), IEEE, pp. 
402-411. 
 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Does Telecare have an Economic Effect when Used by Patients with Chronic 
Diseases in the Long Run? 
Based on Nine-Year Data from Nishi-Aizu Town, Fukushima Prefecture, Japan 
 
Masatsugu Tsuji 
Graduate School of Applied Informatics 
University of Hyogo 
Kobe, Japan 
tsuji@ai.u-hyogo.ac.jp 
Yuji Akematsu 
Graduate School of Economics 
Osaka University 
Toyonaka, Japan 
y_akematsu@yahoo.co.jp 
 
 
Abstract— This study aims to demonstrate that telecare (e-
Health) is one essential measure for coping with increases in 
medical expenditure related to chronic diseases such as heart 
failure, high blood pressure, diabetics, and stroke. To do so, the 
long-term effects of telecare use by residents of Nishi-aizu Town, 
Fukushima Prefecture, Japan, between 2002 and 2010 is 
examined by comparing medical expenditure and days of 
treatment between telecare users (treatment group) and non-
users (control group) based on receipt data obtained from the 
National Health Insurance. Our previous studies used receipt 
data obtained for the years 2002 to 2006. This study expands the 
period of analysis for four more years with respect to 
respondents who were included in previous analyses. 90 users 
and 118 non-users were included in both analyses. Using rigorous 
statistical methods, including system Generalized Method of 
Moments (GMM), which deals with the endogeneity problem, 
this paper demonstrates that telecare users require fewer days of 
treatment and smaller medical expenditures than non-users with 
respect to chronic diseases, even in the long run. To date, there 
have been no studies examining the long-term economic effects of 
telemedicine use, and thus the current study presents a new facet 
of research in this field. In particular, the economic foundation 
for the sustainability of the telecare (e-Health) project will be 
supported by this study. 
Keywords- telecare; medical expenditure; days of treatment; 
System GMM; chronic diseases. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Increasing medical costs and shortages of medical doctors 
in rural areas are issues that urgently need to be addressed in 
healthcare around the world. Medical expenditure in Japan has 
been steadily increasing, and in FY2012 amounted to JPY35.1 
trillion (US$4,387 billion) with more than half (51.7%) of that 
being spent on the care of patients over the age of 65. In 2012, 
24.2% of the Japanese population was over the age of 65, and 
this is expected to increase in the near future. Furthermore, the 
number of outpatient days in Japan is the largest among the 
OECD member countries at 13.4 days per person per year, 
compared with 4.0 (US), 5.9 (UK), 7.8 (Germany), and 6.9 
(France) days per person per year (OECD Health Data). It is 
imperative to reduce the number of treatment days as well as 
overall medical expenditure in Japan. To cope with the serious 
healthcare situation in Japan, local governments have begun to 
implement telecare, or e-Health, which allows the local 
government to remotely monitor the health of elderly residents 
at home by transmitting health-related data, such as blood 
pressure, blood oxygen level, and ECG, to medical institutions 
via telecommunications networks. Telecare is thus expected to 
improve users’ health, as our previous studies[1][2][3][4] 
demonstrated. 
The present study selected Nishi-aizu Town as the project 
site. This town, located in Fukushima Prefecture, Japan, has 
nearly 20 years experience with telecare. The objective of the 
paper is to demonstrate that telecare use reduces not only 
medical expenditures but also days of treatment of patients 
with chronic diseases such as stroke, hypertension, heart failure, 
and diabetes, even over the long-term period of nine years. In 
addition, a rigorous statistical method, system Generalized 
Method of Moments (GMM), is used to statistically assess the 
causal relationship through which telecare use actually reduces 
medical expenditure and days of treatment. This relationship is 
not “seemingly correlated”[3][5][6]. In order to carry this out, 
field research was conducted in March 2012 to obtain two 
basic data for the statistical analysis; receipt data for 272 
telecare users (treatment group) and 247 non-users (control 
group) for the period 2007 to 2010, and their responses to a 
questionnaire. This data included individuals who were 
included in our previous studies in the period 2002 to 2006, 
and thus data for 90 telecare users and 118 non-users for the 
whole period 2002 to 2010 were used in this study. 
Another objective of this paper is to focus on medical 
expenditure and days of treatment of patients with particular 
chronic diseases such as stroke, hypertension, heart failure, 
and diabetes, since the increase in the number of chronic 
diseases is one of the major reasons for medical expenditure 
rises worldwide. Although the previous paper[7] compared 
these two outcomes for general users and nonusers for five-
and nine-year data, this paper examines whether the same 
results hold particularly for patients with chronic diseases. The 
rationale for this research question is that the increase in 
medical expenditures is a common global issue and it is 
generally understood that the increase in chronic diseases is 
the major cause. Moreover, it is well known that chronic 
diseases can be prevented by lifestyle changes, for example. In 
this context, this study can provide one solution to these issues.   
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Another objective of this study is to compare the results 
from the same telecare project in Nishi-aizu obtained by our 
previous studies[1][2][3][4]. These studies cover the data for   
199 telecare users (treatment) and 209 non-users (control) in 
the period 2002-2006. The results of this five-year period are 
summarized as follows: (i) telecare users had lower medical 
expenditures for chronic diseases than non-users; (ii) the 
longer the subjects used telecare, the lower the medical 
expenditures  became; (iii) the longer the subjects used 
telecare, the larger the elasticity of the reduction of medical 
expenditures became; that is, the more years users utilized 
telecare, the greater the decrease in medical became for each 
additional year of use compared with those whose years of use 
were fewer; and (iv) the effect of the reduction of medical 
expenditures due to telecare is higher, especially for telecare 
users with chronic diseases.  
The same hypotheses are applicable to treatment days. This 
paper thus compares the results for the five-year and nine-year 
research. This paper consists of the following sections. Section 
II describes the usage of the telecare system in Nishi-aizu, 
Section III outlines the materials and methods of the paper, 
Section IV indicates the results of the estimations, and in 
Section V we state our conclusions. 
II. 
TELECARE USAGE IN NISHI-AIZU 
Here we describe the background and history of the 
telecare system in Nishi-aizu. 
A. Healthcare in Nishi-aizu 
Nishi-aizu is located in the northwest corner of Fukushima 
Prefecture, Japan, and is an important point of transit to and 
from Niigata Prefecture and the nearby major city of Aizu-
wakamatsu. The town is surrounded by mountains, which 
cover 86% of the prefecture, and the town center is located in a 
geographical basin. There are approximately 10,000 residents 
in 3,000 households, and in 2001, 35.9% of the population was 
over the age of 65. The town’s main industry is agriculture, and 
rice is the main product. The climate is characterized by very 
high temperatures in summer and very low temperatures with 
heavy snow in winter. The severe winter conditions deprive the 
elderly residents of opportunities for sufficient physical 
exercise. Furthermore, due to a traditional diet of salty and 
protein-poor foods, the town’s death rate was 1.7 times higher 
than the national average between 1983 and 1987, with 
relatively high rates of stomach cancer. The number of 
bedridden elderly people suffering from osteoporosis or 
arthritis is also higher than the national average[8]. 
B. Introduction of the telecare system in Nishi-aizu 
The town introduced telecare in 1994 to reduce the 
incidence of chronic diseases such as cerebral infarction and 
stroke. Three hundred peripheral devices, called “Urara,” 
manufactured by Nasa Corporation, were provided to residents 
with chronic diseases. The Urara device is connected to a host 
computer via a public switched telephone network. Health-
related data such as the user’s blood pressure, pulse rate, ECG, 
blood oxygen level, weight, and body temperature are 
transmitted to a server operated by the town. In 1996 and 1997, 
an additional 50 terminals were purchased with subsidies from 
the Japanese Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. In 
2002/2003, an additional 187 terminals were purchased with 
the town budget. The town thus currently owns 587 terminals. 
These terminals use the CATV network for transmitting data. 
All the costs of operating the system are paid for by the local 
government. The Urara devices are distributed to the following 
three groups of patients: (i) elderly residents with diseases, (ii) 
elderly residents who have been referred by a doctor, (iii) other 
residents who are living alone or referred by a doctor[9]. 
C. Operation of the telecare system in Nishi-aizu 
The Nishi-aizu Department of Health and Welfare oversees 
the administration of the telecare system. Six public health 
nurses check the health data transmitted by the Urara devices 
and use that data as part of their consultations with users. If 
these nurses observe unusual data, they ask a medical doctor 
from one of the clinics to visit the user in question. The health 
data for each user are summarized in a monthly report, which 
is then sent to the physician in charge. After the physician and 
a public health nurse add their comments, the report is sent to 
the user. When the user visits a doctor, they are asked to bring 
the report with them (see [9] for more details). 
The telecare system is operated as part of the town’s 
“Project for Promoting Total Care,” and the underlying 
principle is close collaboration between the health, medical, 
and welfare activities in the town. Regional Care Meetings are 
an important example of this collaboration. More than 20 
people attend each meeting, which consists of doctors, nurses, 
public health nurses, town office staff, care-takers of the 
elderly, and lifestyle advisers. At these meetings, medical care 
for individual telecare users, such as necessary medical 
examinations, specific health advice, and general healthcare 
issues, are discussed in detail, the telecare health data playing a 
central role. To improve the residents’ motivation for using the 
telecare system, the town office organizes telecare users’ 
meetings five times a year. At the meetings, users can 
exchange their experiences and views of using the system. In 
fact, our in-depth interviews conducted with public nurses 
working in Nishi-aizu revealed that the number of patients with 
chronic diseases visiting doctors decreased with increasing 
telecare use.  
The introduction of the telecare system should not be 
considered the sole factor promoting better regional healthcare; 
rather, it should be seen as the framework that assists all the 
departments and personnel involved to deliver more effective 
health care. 
III.     MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Here we outline the materials and methods used in this 
paper. 
A.  Sample selection 
Here two kinds of data for analysis, namely receipt data and 
responses of questionnaire are explained. In our previous study, 
the receipt data for 199 users and 209 non-users collected 
between 2002 and 2006 was obtained from the National Health 
Insurance. The receipts for each month are kept at the Nishi-
aizu town office, and include a range of information. In the 
current study, the following data were used: (i) name of patient, 
(ii) birth date, (iii) regular outpatient treatment or hospitalized 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

patient treatment, (iv) name(s) of major disease(s), (v) date of 
initial treatment, (vi) number of days of treatment was needed, 
and (vii) the medical treatment “points” (one point is 
equivalent to JPY10).  
Next the receipt data for the years 2007 to 2010 was 
collected. To ensure that the patients included in the previous 
studies were also included in the current study, we first 
checked whether they responded to the questionnaire survey 
(whether the person had deceased or not, etc.); about half of the 
subjects failed to respond, which resulted in a lack of samples. 
We therefore selected 565 new subjects from among the 
telecare users. The questionnaire used in this study was the 
same as that used in our previous studies. The questionnaire 
asks for information on characteristics such as sex, age, and the 
individuals’ use of the telecare system, which is data not 
included in the receipt data. Non-users were selected by 
stratified sampling from the list of subscribers to the National 
Health Insurance, which amounted to 1035 non-users. The 
respondents are summarized in Table I, which shows that 272 
users and 247 non-users were selected as valid respondents for 
this study; 91 users and 118 non-users were included in both 
the previous study and the current study. We then collected the 
data mentioned above (regarding the construction of data, see 
[9] in more detail.). 
TABLE I.  
RESPONDENTS TO MAIL QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
 
No. of residents sent 
questionnaire 
No. of valid 
respondents 
(No. of valid 
respondents between 
2002 and 2009) 
2007 
Survey 
Users 
412 
199 
Non-users 
450 
209 
Total 
862 
408 
2012 
Survey 
Users 
565 
272 (91) 
Non-users 
1035 
247 (118) 
Total 
1600 
519 (209) 
 
B.  Summary of mail survey 
The percentages of users and non-users by gender is shown 
in Table II. The percentage of males (57.1%) is higher than 
that of females (42.9%). 
TABLE II.  
GENDER 
 
Users (%) 
Non-users (%) 
Total (%) 
Male 
52 (57.1) 
72 (61) 
124 (59.3) 
Female 
39 (42.9) 
46 (39) 
85 (40.7) 
Total 
91 
118 
209 
 
Table III shows average ages of samples and since the same 
persons are compared average age of 2012 sample is five years 
older than that of 2007. 
TABLE III.  
AVERAGE AGE OF RESPONDENTS 
 
N 
Average age 
(2007) 
Average age 
(2012) 
Users 
91 
70.67  
75.67 
Non-users 
118 
70.76  
75.76 
 
The telecare system in Nishi-aizu was implemented to help 
in the management of chronic diseases such as heart disease, 
hypertension, diabetes, and stroke. Table IV shows the number 
of patients with these four diseases that were treated within the 
study period. Hypertension was the most common of these four 
diseases, followed by heart disease. 
Table V summarizes the number of years of individual 
telecare use. Users that had used the telecare system for more 
than 10 years accounted for 25.6% of the total number of users, 
which is the largest percentage, and this makes examination of 
the long-term effect of the system possible. The number of 
respondents who replied that they did not use the telecare 
system accounted for 30% of the respondents, which is larger 
than expected. It is possible that they responded that they did 
not use the system since they became too old, even though they 
had a telecare device in their homes. 
TABLE IV.  
SELECTED DISEASES TREATED BETWEEN 2002 AND 2010 
 
Users (%) 
Non-users (%) 
Total (%) 
 
2002– 
2006 
2007– 
2010 
2002– 
2006 
2007– 
2010 
2002– 
2006 
2007– 
2010 
Heart disease 
19 
19 
15 
15 
34 
34 
(0.21) 
(0.21) 
(0.13) 
(0.13) 
(0.16) 
(0.16) 
Hypertension 
49 
51 
40 
57 
89 
108 
(0.54) 
(0.56) 
(0.34) 
(0.48) 
(0.43) 
(0.52) 
Diabetes 
8 
11 
9 
14 
17 
25 
(0.09) 
(0.12) 
(0.08) 
(0.12) 
(0.08) 
(0.12) 
Stroke 
5 
8 
7 
9 
12 
17 
(0.06) 
(0.09) 
(0.06) 
(0.08) 
(0.06) 
(0.08) 
TABLE V.       YEARS USING TELECARE 
 
2007 (%) 
2012 (%) 
Less than 1 year 
2 (2.2) 
0 (0) 
1–3 years 
15 (16.5) 
8 (8.8) 
3–5 years 
19 (20.9) 
8 (8.8) 
5–7 years 
21 (23.1) 
11 (12.1) 
7–10 years 
16 (17.6) 
13 (14.3) 
>10 years 
18 (19.8) 
23 (25.3) 
Do not use 
2 (2.2) 
27 (29.7) 
Not answered 
0 (0) 
1 (1.1) 
Total 
91 
TABLE VI.         FREQUENCY OF USE 
 
2007 (%) 
2012 (%) 
Almost every day 
41 (45.1) 
27 (29.7) 
3–4 times a week 
22 (24.2) 
15 (16.5) 
1–2 times a week 
10 (11) 
7 (7.7) 
1–2 times a month 
11 (12.1) 
7 (7.7) 
Rarely use 
6 (6.6) 
24 (26.4) 
Not answered 
1 (1.1) 
11 (12.1) 
Total 
91 
 
Table VI summarizes frequency of telecare use. More than 
half of the respondents reported that they used the telecare 
system at least once a week to communicate with a nurse or to 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

alert medical staff of distress or discomfort. This high 
frequency of use is possibly due to the town office’s efforts in 
holding public meetings to educate users in the use of the 
system, as already mentioned. One fourth of respondents 
answered that they rarely use the telecare system, which 
corresponds with the number of users who answered that they 
do not use the system (Table V). 
D. Method of estimation 
The outcome variables of days of treatment and medical 
expenditure are not stable over the study period, and it is 
difficult to assess whether there are any differences between 
users and non-users over the study period. Rigorous statistical 
analyses are therefore necessary. We thus employed a 
regression analysis to assess whether telecare use reduces days 
of treatment and/or medical expenditure. Studies in this field 
face a number of important methodological issues. First, there 
is the problem of endogenous explanatory variables. One 
method of solving this is by using system GMM, which allows 
treatment of not only endogenous explanatory variables but 
also of the dynamic relationships among the variables that arise 
due to the chronic time-lagged effect of chronic diseases on 
patients. Moreover, system GMM is able to deal with the 
reverse correlation between outpatient medical expenditure and 
telecare use. In this context, we attempted to demonstrate 
causality between telecare use and decreased medical 
expenditures, or, in other words, to show that the relationship is 
not seemingly correlated. A number of previous studies have 
successfully attempted to handle endogeneity problems in 
telemedicine and telecare evaluation[3][5][6]. 
IV.    RESULTS 
Here we set out the results of our estimations. 
A.  Model for estimation 
In the estimation, the dependent variables were (1) days of 
treatment of outpatients, all diseases, (2) medical expenditure 
for outpatients, all diseases, (3) days of treatment of outpatients, 
chronic diseases, and (4) medical expenditure for outpatients, 
chronic diseases. The explanatory variables were telecare use 
(if users, 1; otherwise, 0), age, income, and the presence of any 
of the four main chronic diseases such as heart disease, 
hypertension, diabetes, and stroke (if treated, 1; otherwise, 0). 
In addition, other factors were added as instrumental variables, 
such as dummy variables for sex or year dummies. System 
GMM estimators developed by Arellano–Bond, Arellano–
Bover, and Blundell–Bond are general estimators for coping 
with data that have “small T, large N” panels. System GMM 
can be used in models in which the independent variables are 
not strictly exogenous, namely, those correlated with past and 
possibly current realizations of the error. System GMM can 
also be used to treat data with heteroskedasticity. The 
Arellano–Bond test for AR (2) (second stage autocorrelation), 
the test of weak instruments, and the Hansen test for over-
identifying restrictions were used. 
B.  Estimation results, all diseases 
Tables VII and VIII show the results of the estimation 
using system GMM. The coefficient of telecare use is 
negatively significant for days of treatment (p<0.10) and 
medical expenditure (p<0.05). These findings imply that 
telecare contributed to reductions in days of treatment and 
medical expenditure. However, the Arellano–Bond test for AR 
(2) for the model of medical expenditures (see Table VIII) 
showed that there was autocorrelation under the 1% 
significance level. This means that serial correlation of the 
error terms cannot be denied, and accordingly, the estimates 
still have small biases. The test of weak instruments showed 
that instruments and endogenous variables used are correlated 
significantly, which indicates exemption from a problem of 
weak instruments. Furthermore, the Hansen test for over-
identifying restrictions showed that the instrumental variables 
were properly chosen. This means that the model specification 
was adequate and that the parameters were significant and 
robust. In addition, age is positively significant for both days of 
treatment and medical expenditure (p< 0.01), which is natural 
considering that days of treatment and medical expenditure 
increase with age. Finally, the coefficients of three chronic 
diseases (heart disease, hypertension, and diabetes) are 
positively significant for both days of treatment and medical 
expenditure. According to the estimations, telecare use reduces 
days of treatment for all diseases by 7.9 days per user per year, 
and medical expenditures for all diseases by approximately 
JPY 106,904 per user per year. However, the latter may contain 
biases due to serial correlation, and therefore the result may not 
be reliable. 
TABLE VII.  RESULT OF SYSTEM GMM (1): DAYS OF TREATMENT 
(OUTPATIENTS, ALL DISEASES) 
 
Coefficient 
SD 
t value 
p value 
 
Telecare use 
−7.889  
4.081  
−1.93  
0.053  * 
Age 
0.125  
0.022  
5.66  
0.000  *** 
Income 
−0.003  
0.007  
−0.43  
0.664   
Heart disease 
16.031  
8.880  
1.81  
0.071  * 
Hypertension 
15.688  
1.962  
8.00  
0.000  *** 
Diabetes 
11.809  
5.199  
2.27  
0.023  ** 
Stroke 
−3.657  
8.395  
−0.44  
0.663   
Number of observations 
1820 
 
Arellano–Bond test for AR (2) (p value) 
0.109 
 
Test of weak instruments (p value) 
< 0.01 
 
Hansen test for over-identifying restrictions (p value) 
0.144 
 
Note: ***, **, and * indicate levels of significance of 1%, 5%, 
and 10%, respectively. 
C.  Estimation results, chronic diseases 
The same models were applied for patients with chronic 
diseases. The other variables were the same as in the previous 
estimations. Tables IX and X summarize the results of these 
estimations. Both the Arellano–Bond test for autocorrelations, 
the test of weak instruments, and the Hansen test for over-
identifying restrictions were satisfied, since they were not 
significant (p =0.692). Thus, the instrumental variables were 
selected appropriately. The coefficients for telecare use were 
negatively significant for both days of treatment (p<0.05) and 
medical expenditure (p<0.05). Age was again positively 
significant for both outcomes (p<0.01). In contrast to the 
previous estimation, only hypertension was positively 
significant for days of treatment (p<0.01) and medical 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

expenditure (p<0.01). This means that hypertension is a major 
contributing factor to days of treatment and medical 
expenditures. The coefficients indicate that telecare use reduces 
days of treatment for chronic diseases by 4.2 days per user per 
year, and medical expenditure for chronic diseases by JPY 
64,944 per user per year. 
TABLE VIII. RESULT OF SYSTEM GMM (2): MEDICAL EXPENDITURE 
(OUTPATIENTS, ALL DISEASES) 
 
Coefficient 
SD 
t value 
p value 
 
Telecare use 
−10690.36  
5232.40  
−2.04  
0.041  ** 
Age 
134.54  
30.15  
4.46  
0.000  *** 
Income 
−5.82  
7.61  
−0.76  
0.444   
Heart disease 
31937.81  
10053.93  
3.18  
0.001  *** 
Hypertension 
17968.45  
2278.68  
7.89  
0.000  *** 
Diabetes 
13425.88  
6351.97  
2.11  
0.035  ** 
Stroke 
−20272.70  
13779.70  
−1.47  
0.141   
Number of observations 
1820 
 
Arellano–Bond test for AR (2) (p value) 
0.005 
 
Test of weak instruments (p value) 
< 0.010 
 
Hansen test for over-identifying restrictions (p value) 
0.563 
 
Note: ***, **, and * indicate levels of significance of 1%, 5%, 
and 10%, respectively. 
 
TABLE IX.     RESULT OF SYSTEM GMM (3): DAYS OF TREATMENT 
(OUTPATIENTS, CHRONIC DISEASES) 
 
Coefficient 
SD 
t value 
p value 
 
Telecare use 
−4.223  
1.957  
−2.16  
0.031  
** 
Age 
0.053  
0.012  
4.50  
0.000  
*** 
Income 
0.002  
0.004  
0.47  
0.637  
 
Heart disease 
1.761  
3.873  
0.45  
0.649  
 
Hypertension 
9.061  
1.111  
8.16  
0.000  
*** 
Diabetes 
3.370  
2.471  
1.36  
0.173  
 
Stroke 
−3.856  
4.621  
−0.83  
0.404  
 
Number of observations 
1820 
 
Arellano–Bond test for AR (2) (p value) 
0.415 
 
Test of weak instruments (p value) 
< 0.01 
 
Hansen test for over-identifying restrictions (p value) 
0.231 
 
Note: ***, **, and * indicate levels of significance of 1%, 5%, 
and 10%, respectively. 
TABLE X.   RESULT OF SYSTEM GMM (4): MEDICAL EXPENDITURE 
(OUTPATIENTS, CHRONIC DISEASES) 
 
Coefficient 
SD 
t value 
p value 
 
Telecare use 
−6494.41  
3215.58  
−2.02  
0.043  
** 
Age 
70.83  
19.37  
3.66  
0.000  
*** 
Income 
−3.11  
8.25  
−0.38  
0.707  
 
Heart disease 
6885.39  
4903.83  
1.40  
0.160  
 
Hypertension 
9714.75  
1466.91  
6.62  
0.000  
*** 
Diabetes 
5606.42  
4452.80  
1.26  
0.208  
 
Stroke 
−6857.28  
6447.90  
−1.06  
0.288  
 
Number of observations 
1820 
 
Arellano–Bond test for AR (2) (p value) 
0.165 
 
Test of weak instruments (p value) 
< 0.01 
 
Hansen test for over-identifying restrictions (p value) 
0.692 
 
Note: ***, **, and * indicate levels of significance of 1%, 5%, 
and 10%, respectively. 
 
D.  Comparison with the results of five year data  
Table XI summarizes the results from our previous study of 
the five-year period between 2002 and 2006[1][2][3]. The 
results obtained in the current study are larger than those 
reported previously, which means that telecare use produces 
both long-term and short-term effects. Therefore, the longer 
patients use telecare, the larger the reductions in days of 
treatment and medical expenditure. 
The analysis of the nine-year period only demonstrated the 
result (i); telecare users had a lower medical expenditure on 
chronic diseases than non-users. Regarding the result (ii); the 
longer the subjects use telecare, the lower medical 
expenditures become, [10] demonstrated this result by using 
the difference-in-difference propensity score matching (DID-
PSM) method, which enables examination of the time trend 
effect. In particular, for patients with chronic diseases, 
medical expenditures over 10 years are reduced by 
JPY21,194.6 (US$235,5) (p<0.05), and treatment days by 1.73 
days (p<0.05) per year per user. These are smaller than the 
results obtained in this paper. Other results obtained in the 
five-year data are unable to show reductions mainly due to the 
small number of subjects in the 2012 research. In addition, 
further rigorous statistical inference is required.  
TABLE XI.   PREVIOUS RESULTS FROM FIVE-YEAR DATA 
 
OLS1 
System GMM2 
PSM3 
Medical  
expenditure 
JPY 15,302  
(US$ 191.28) 
- 
JPY 25,538–39,936  
(US$ 319.23–499.20) 
Days of 
treatment 
1.6 days 
2.0 days 
2.6–4.0 days 
Note: 1Akematsu and Tsuji (2009), 2Minetaki, Akematsu, and 
Tsuji (2011), 3Akematsu and Tsuji (2012). 
 
V.       CONCLUSTIONS 
This study aims ato providinge one clue tofor solveing athe 
global issue of the increase in patients with chronic diseases 
and suggests itthat the solution is telecare. The economic effect 
of telecare obtained here is not limited to an example in Japan 
alone. The research of the effect of telemedicine in other 
countries with macro data, representative macro approaches 
include those of [11] and [12], which used national cross-
sectional data or panel data from OECD countries, 
respectively. Representative micro approaches include the 
following four papers. Evaluating 19 cases in Australia, [13] 
found that the cost-effectiveness of both telehealth and 
telemedicine improved considerably when they were part of 
an integrated use of telecommunications and information 
technology; [14] showed that advancements in e-Health 
transformed health care delivery and achieved such positive 
results as improving clinical decision making, increasing 
efficiency, and strengthening communication between 
physicians and patients; [15] found that an interactive 
telephonic support system which included coaching, 
education, and reinforcement modules reduced total costs 
for hospitalizations and emergency room visits by $5,271 
per user per year; and [16] reported an average visit cost of 
$48.27 for a face-to-face home visit versus $22.10 for a 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

virtual visit. Moreover, [17] conducted a systematic search 
of the literature and concluded that information technologies 
were effective in improving the quality and efficiency of 
care.     
Regarding the studies that used micro data, there are similar 
projects with telecare in other countries. Scientific results have 
been obtained and it is possible to compare our results with 
those of other projects. Results obtained in other countries 
consist of the Kent Development Pilot in the UK and the VHA 
CCHT project in the US. The former studied the effect of 
telehealth on the number of inpatient days, general 
practitioners (GP), acute care, and others by experimental 
observation with statistical analysis[18]. This study compared 
outcomes at baseline and after six months with a focus on 
patients with COPD, heart disease, and diabetes. The authors 
concluded that telecare use resulted in a decrease in the number 
of home visits and GP surgery per participant, Accident and 
Emergency (A&E) visits of 0.5days, and inpatient treatment 
days of 1.5days. The results of the VHA CCHT project in the 
US are similar to those of the Kent study, that is, the number of 
inpatient treatment days was reduced by 25%, and the number 
of hospital admissions by 19%[19]. Thus the results of 
international projects were estimated mainly in terms of 
inpatient treatment days, not expenditures, and for all diseases, 
not only chronic diseases. This paper aimed to obtain results 
which are directly comparable with other studies. According to 
our results, the Nishi-aizu project shows a larger reduction in 
inpatient treatment days than the Kent project (3.3 vs. 1.5 days). 
On the other hand, the reduction of bed days is calculated as 
approximately 16.12% in this paper, which is smaller than that 
of the VHA project (25%). 
The results obtained in this study show the importance of 
telemedicine. Japanese local governments implementing this 
system currently do not charge users for the service. The 
system is funded from tax money raised from local residents. 
For the initial investment for the in-home devices, servers, and 
network, local governments receive subsidies from the central 
government. The Nishi-aizu local government received funds 
from three different ministries. However, due to the current 
adverse economic situation in Japan, local governments can no 
longer rely on such subsidies, implying that the sustainability 
of telecare or e-Health is an issue that urgently needs to be 
addressed[8]. From a financial point of view, a new framework 
is required. Reimbursement through the medical insurance 
system, for example, is one possibility for increasing the use of 
telecare systems. Here, we provide an important basis for 
evidence-based public health policies.  
It should be noted for further research that chronic 
conditions tend not to occur singly, and many patients have 
more than one at the same time. For example, patients with 
high blood pressure or diabetes are also likely to suffer from 
heart disease. This multiplicity of conditions hampers analysis. 
This paper examines single chronic diseases, and does not 
include multiplicity. In addition, neither does this study analyze 
how telecare improves these outcomes. In the telecare system 
introduced in Section II, telecare users become more concerned 
about their health condition when reviewing the data returned 
to them by the town health office, and make personal efforts to 
improve their health indicators. This assists in the prevention of 
chronic diseases. Although these psychological effects cannot 
be denied, more studies are required on the medical 
mechanisms by which telecare imparts positive impacts on 
health. These are remaining issues for future study.   
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Akematsu and M. Tsuji, “An empirical analysis of the reduction in 
medical expenditures by e-health users,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 15, 
pp. 109-111, April 2009. 
[2] Y. Akematsu and M. Tsuji, “Measuring the effect of telecare on medical 
expenditures without bias using the Propensity Score Matching Method,” 
Telemed. J. E Health, vol. 18, pp. 743-747, December 2012. 
[3] K. Minetaki, Y. Akematsu, and M. Tsuji, “Effect of e-health on medical 
expenditures of lifestyle-related diseases by using system GMM,” 
Telemed. J. E Health, October 2011. 
[4] Y. Akematsu and M. Tsuji, “An empirical approach to estimating the 
effect of e-health on medical expenditure,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 16, 
pp. 169-171, April 2010. 
[5] F. Wang “The role of cost in telemedicine valuation,” Telemed. J. E 
Health, vol. 15, pp. 949-955,  November 2009. 
[6] Y. Akematsu and M. Tsuji, “Relation between telecare implementation 
and number of treatment days in a Japanese town,” J. Telemed. Telecare, 
vol. 12, pp. 36-39, January 2013. 
[7] Y. Akematsu, S. Nitta, K. Morita, and M. Tsuji, “Empirical analysis of 
the long-term effects of telecare use in Nishi-aizu Town, Fukushima 
Prefecture, Japan,” Technology and HealthCare, vol. 21, pp. 173-82, 
March 2013. 
[8] Zaikai 21, “Challenge to 100 Years Old of Nishi-aizu Town, Fukusima 
Prefecture: Building a Town of Total Welfare (in Japanese),” Zaikai 21, 
Tokyo, 2003.  
[9] M. Tsuji, Y. Akematsu, and F. Taoka, “Empirical analysis of roles and 
issues of Japanese Health systems: Case of Nishi-aizu Town, Fukushima 
Prefecture,” J E Health Technol. Appl. vol. 6, July 2008. 
[10] Y. Akematsu and M. Tsuji, “The Long-term Effect of Telecare on 
Medical Expenditures and Days Spent for Treatment: Difference-in-
Difference 
Propensity 
Score 
Matching 
(DID-PSM) 
Analysis” 
Proceeding of iHEA2013, USB, Sidny, Aistraial, July 2013.   
[11] A. A. Okunade and C. Suraratdecha, “Health care expenditure inertia in 
the OECD countries: A heterogeneous analysis,” Health Care 
Management Science, vol. 3 pp. 31-42, 2000. 
[12] I. Mosca, “Decentralization as a determinant of health care expenditure: 
empirical analysis for OEDC countries,” Applied Economics Letters, 
vol 14, pp. 511-5,  2007. 
[13] J. Mitchell, “Increasing the cost-effectiveness of telemedicine by 
embracing e-Health,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, Vol 6. pp. 
16-9,  2000. 
[14] J. B. 
Marion 
and 
L. 
Jennifer, 
“E-health: 
transforming the 
physician/patient relationship,” International Journal of Medical 
Informatics Vol. 61, pp. 1-10, 2001. 
[15] J. Vaccaro, J. Cherry, and A. Harper, “Utilization Reduction, Cost 
Savings, and Return on Investment for the PacifiCare Chronic Heart 
Failure Program, Taking Charge of Your Heart Health,” Disease 
Management, Vol. 4, pp. 131-42,  2001. 
[16] S. M. Finkelstein, S.M. Speedie, and S. Potthoff, “Home Telehealth 
Improves Clinical Outcomes at Lower Cost for Home Healthcare,” 
Telemedicine and e-Health, Vol. 12, pp. 128-36, 2006.  
[17] C. Basit, J. Wang, and S. Wu, “Systematic Review: Impact of Health 
Information Technology on Quality, Efficiency, and Costs of Medical 
Care,” Annals of Internal Medicine, Vol. 144, pp. 742-52, 2006. 
[18] Coulton, S. and K. Coulton, Promoting and Sustaining Independence in 
a Community Setting: A Study into the Management of People with 
Long Term Conditions, Kent County Council, 2010 
[19] A. Darkins, et al. “Care coordination/home telehealth: The systematic 
implementation of health informatics, home telehealth, and disease 
management to support the care of veteran patients with chronic 
conditions,” Telemedicine and e-Health, Vol. 14, pp. 1118-1126, 2008.  
 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Using Models and Simulation for Predicting Efficiency as a Measure of Success of 
Different Telemedicine Deployments  
 
Cristina Adriana Alexandru 
School of Informatics 
University of Edinburgh 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
C.A.Alexandru@sms.ed.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—The planning and development of large-scale 
telemedicine system implementations throughout Europe 
motivates the need for cost effective ways to predict the level of 
their success in each new context. The efficiency of the system 
and that of the work process involving it influence the success 
of any telemedicine implementation, determining whether the 
existing healthcare staff will be able to manage their workload 
in their available time. This paper demonstrates by means of 
examples how we could use observations from repeated 
simulations of a nurse working with a telemedicine system in 
different contexts, which may differ in several ways, to predict 
the efficiency of the work process. The examples presented in 
the paper are based on previous experience with the use of 
telemedicine systems in Lothian, Scotland. 
Keywords-telemedicine; telemonitoring; efficiency; scaling 
up;  cognitive modelling; simulation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Despite its potential advantages for patients suffering 
from long-term conditions, healthcare systems and the 
economy ([1]), the benefits of telemedicine in terms of 
patient care and costs have not been convincingly proven 
yet. Although many studies conclude that telemedicine is 
beneficial (e.g. [2, 3]), their evidence is often hard to 
generalise, as it is the result of small scale trials lead by 
enthusiasts [4, 5], and does not meet high evaluation 
standards [6, 7]. 
Several European countries are currently planning and 
developing large-scale telemedicine pilots, which will help 
assess whether telemedicine would work at scale. Two 
important examples are:  
 The Renewing Health European project ([8]), which 
involves nine European regions in the provision of 
telemedicine services for large segments of the population 
suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), diabetes and cardiovascular disease; 
 The ITTS (Implementing Transnational Telemedicine 
Solutions [9]) project partly funded by the EU Northern 
Periphery Programme, which involves partners from six 
Northern European countries and aims to facilitate 
transnational 
knowledge 
exchange 
for 
implementing 
telemedicine solutions at scale.  
The UK is also planning a large-scale deployment of 
systems such as these through the Delivering Assisted 
Living Lifestyles at Scale (DALLAS [10]) programme. The 
Scottish government placed such nationwide deployment at 
the centre of Scotland's eHealth strategy [11].  
Given the high level of risk associated with such 
projects, it becomes desirable to find cost-effective means to 
predict the success of telemedicine systems in different 
deployments, as this could influence the decision of 
investing into each deployment and help save resources. In a 
context characterised, on one hand, by a predicted shortage 
of human resources in healthcare and, on the other, by an 
increase in their workload due to an increase in the number 
of patients suffering from long term conditions ([1, 12]), the 
efficiency of a telemedicine system and that of the work 
process in which it is used are important factors for its 
success. We define efficiency here as how likely a 
healthcare professional is to care for her patients in her 
available time by using a work process involving the 
telemedicine system.   
We have previously described a methodology and 
associated modelling approach which can be used for 
predicting the usability of telemedicine systems in different 
deployments [13]. We will only briefly summarize them in 
this paper, focusing only on the efficiency component of 
usability. Elsewhere, we have shown by means of examples 
how our approach would work for predicting the efficiency 
of the system when deployed in contexts differing in 
workload, user and system characteristics [14]. The 
differences we observed were only in terms of minutes, as 
actions on the system in question would take little time and 
rarely escalate to dramatic changes in the user’s total time 
available. The very time intensive user work, which 
importantly influences the handling of her workload, lies 
outside of the system, within the work process. To cater for 
this conclusion, in this paper we exemplify how our 
approach can be used for predicting the efficiency of the 
work process involving the telemedicine system. While it 
may be hard for the naked eye to foresee how the user’s 
time would vary in contexts which differ in several 
characteristics of her workload which may influence each 
other, we show how our approach can help in this respect to 
provide a clear indication of the time that the user would 
need within each context for managing her work safely. The 
examples contain invented facts and numbers, derived from 
previous experience with telemedicine systems in Lothian, 
Scotland ([15]). We also describe the study we commenced 
for validating our approach. 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
THE PROPOSED METHODOLOGY AND MODELLING 
APPROACH 
Our methodology is a guide for reusing models, which 
are found to reliably determine the efficiency of a work 
process involving a telemedicine system into a reference 
deployment site, for predicting the efficiency of the same 
work process if the system is deployed into a potential site, 
using only information about the characteristics of the 
potential site. Its main advantage is that it reduces the need 
for evaluating the system and work process into each new 
context, thus saving resources. It also helps analyse whether 
the work process would be manageable in potential contexts 
and explore what-if scenarios involving changes to the 
workload, user, process or system characteristics if not. A 
step-by-step description of the methodology is provided in 
Fig 1.  
Although our methodology can be used with any type of 
modelling approach, depending on the level of perceived 
risk of the problem at hand, we have chosen to represent a 
work process by means of a user and system model which 
are run in parallel. The user model is a cognitive model 
inspired by the Icarus cognitive architecture ([16, 17, 18, 19, 
20]), which receives as inputs a description of a user’s 
profile in terms of goals, knowledge, skills as related to her 
work, and the time the user spends for performing actions 
on or outside of the system. We have chosen cognitive 
modelling due to the cognitive nature of nurses’ medical 
work ([21], [22]). The system model is a basic labelled 
transition system, which receives as inputs what the system 
presents to the user or stores internally at one time, how this 
changes as an effect to user actions on it, and the time it 
takes to make such changes (waiting time). The ‘run of the 
model’ means the parallel run of the user and system model, 
simulating a user using the system and doing any actions 
external to it. It takes as inputs a new workload and other 
characteristics of the work environment, which can be either 
constants (the same on every simulation run e.g. the number 
of patients to be monitored) or numbers drawn from 
probability distributions (e.g. for the values of readings). A 
high enough number of runs helps to obtain the expected 
distribution of the time spent by the user in achieving her 
goals (doing her work) in one deployment site. By changing 
the characteristics of the workload and/or the inputs to the 
models (e.g. to reflect changes in user skills, way of doing 
things or system design) we can model potential 
deployments, which can differ in several ways, sometimes 
interacting with each other, to the reference one. By running 
another high enough number of runs, we can obtain 
predictions of the efficiency of each potential context, 
unobvious to the naked eye, and useful for the analysis of 
whether work would be manageable there, as we will 
exemplify below. 
III. 
EXAMPLES 
Let us consider the case of a hypertension monitoring 
work process performed by nurses with the help of an online 
telemonitoring system, in which the nurses follow the steps 
from below (derived from previous experience [15]): 
 
Figure 1.  The methodology. 
From the table of patients from the system’s homepage, 
the nurse selects one who is flagged up (as having the last 
systolic-diastolic pairs as exacerbations) by choosing an 
appropriate action from a pop-up box, which takes her to 
the patient’s details page. Here, she can see the patient’s 
demographics, contact details, and last two days of systolic-
diastolic pairs of readings. If the readings are concerning, 
the nurse clicks on a button to go into the patient’s extended 
(seven day) details. Next, she needs to go into the electronic 
health record, on a separate system, to check the patient’s 
medical history. If the patient’s condition seems to be 
worsening, the nurse may decide to call her to check on her 
state, gain any additional information and give her advice. 
For doing this, she needs to go back to the patient’s details 
page and retrieve her phone number. Following this call, if 
the nurse concludes that the patient needs an appointment 
with her GP (General Practitioner), she will retrieve the 
GP’s phone number from the same page and call the GP, 
also passing on the medical information gained. Even if the 
patient did not require a call or an appointment, the nurse 
will next enter her conclusion as a note in a form provided 
on the patient’s details page. Following this step or if the 
patient’s condition noticed from the extended details page 
and history was not worsening, the nurse returns to the 
homepage. As there are no options in the system to 
acknowledge who has been checked, she writes the patient’s 
name down before selecting the next flagged up patient in 
the list, scrolling down to retrieve her first if necessary. The 
nurse finishes her work when all of the flagged up patients 
have been checked. 
Let us consider for a first scenario a medical practice 
which has recruited 20 patients for being monitored by 
using the telemonitoring system, and where a nurse’s time 
allocated for the monitoring work is 2 hours (many practices 
in the UK allocate a fixed amount of time from a nurse’s 
shift for telemonitoring work). Let us suppose that, 
according to our analysis of the context, we found that the 
patients’ reading criticality is characterized by a mean of 
30% and standard deviation of 10%. While for keystroke-
level actions we use the time from the Keystroke-Level 
Model (KLM [23, 24]), we define the following times for 
actions performed outside of the system: 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 Calling up patients: the nurse will dial the number in a 
time characterized by a mean of 8 seconds and standard 
deviation of 1 second. She will hold on the phone for 10 
seconds. Patients pick up the phone in a time characterized 
by a mean of 7 seconds and standard deviation of 1 second, 
so the nurse will not miss any patients in this context. 
 Speaking with the patients will take the nurse a time 
characterized by a mean of 8 minutes and standard deviation 
of 2 minutes. 
 Calling up and speaking with the GP will take the nurse 
a time characterized by a mean of 3 minutes and standard 
deviation of 30 seconds. Please note that here we have not 
broken down the steps of performing the call as for patient 
calls from above, as we consider that the GPs will always 
pick up and that there is efficient communication set up 
between the nurse and the GP. 
 Writing down names takes the nurse a time defined by a 
mean of 5 seconds and standard deviation of half a second. 
 Checking the electronic health record (which is a 
separate system, and so we are not considering it within the 
system model) takes a time defined by a mean of 3 minutes 
and standard deviation of 20 seconds.  
Also, let us consider that an analysis of the practice’s 
statistical data on who has been called and how often, we 
found that out of the patients whose medical history the 
nurse checks, those who need a call are characterized by a 
mean of 50% and standard deviation of 10%. Also, out of 
the patients whom the nurse has called, we find that those 
who need an appointment with their GP are characterized by 
a mean of 30% and standard deviation of 10%. This data is 
used to simulate a nurse’s decision of when to call the 
patient and GP. 
We implemented the above scenario by using our 
modelling approach, and performed 200 runs to obtain a 
prediction of the distribution of the time it takes for the 
nurse to monitor all of the patients who are flagged up. A 
representation of the results is provided in Fig. 2. 
The figure predicts that the nurse will always manage 
her work within the 2 hours (7200 seconds) allocated for it- 
in ideal conditions, where there are no interruptions, the 
latest time she will always finish is 7000 seconds- 3 minutes 
earlier than the deadline. Moreover, she would very rarely 
need the time between the last 20 and the last 3 minutes 
(only once in 100 work sessions would she need more than 
6000 seconds- 1h 40min) and she would rarely need the 
time between the last 37 and the last 20 minutes (only 2.5 
times in 100 work sessions would she need between 5000 
seconds- 1h 23min, and 6000 seconds- 1h 40min). This  
analysis, together with an analysis of cost and of the nurses’ 
workload for other duties, could aid in the reconsideration 
of the time allocated to them for the monitoring work. The 
two hour time allocation already offered to them is predicted 
to be the safest option, as the nurse would always manage  
all of the patients in this time. Nevertheless, if cost is more 
of a concern and/or the nurse’s time is critically needed for 
other duties, offering each nurse 1h 45min, or even 1h 
30min would be better options, and still safe enough, as in 
very rare cases would the nurse have to exceed them. 
Figure 2.  First scenario. 
We suppose that the efficiency results in the first 
scenario correspond with experience there. Let us next 
consider that there are plans to deploy the system into two 
potential sites, in both of which a nurse will deal with 
double the number of patients than in our reference site (40), 
and which, it turns out, differ in various other ways. We 
would be interested to estimate how much time nurses 
should have allocated for the monitoring work in each of the 
sites. 
The first potential deployment site (second scenario) 
has decided to recruit double the number of patients than the 
reference site, but these patients are less sick- the criticality 
of their readings has a mean of 20% and standard deviation 
of 5%, and the nurses are more likely to refer called up 
patients to their GPs- out of the patients who have been 
called up, those who are to be set up an appointment are 
characterised by a mean of 50% and standard deviation of 
10%.  
Although one would normally expect that double the 
patients would mean double the time spent monitoring 
them, our variations on the reading criticality and 
percentage of patients to require an appointment with the 
GP make our conclusion less clear. It is in such cases that 
our modelling approach can be of help. By reinstantiating 
our models with the new inputs and running another 200 
simulation runs, we obtain the graph presented in Fig. 3. 
Figure 3.  Second scenario. 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The graph predicts that the decrease in the criticality of 
the patients’ readings has mostly compensated the doubling 
of the number of patients and the increase in the percentage 
of called patients who need a referral, as the maximum time 
that the nurse would spend in this scenario is 9000 seconds 
(2.5 hours), only half an hour more than in the first scenario. 
Moreover, the nurse would need the last 17 minutes of this 
time extremely rarely (1.5 cases in every 100 work 
sessions), and the last 33 minutes very rarely (in 2 every 100 
work sessions). This predicts that the safest time the nurse 
should have allocated is 2 and a half hours, but that 2h 
15min and 2 hours would be more economical, and still safe 
enough, options. Our approach thus helps explore how the 
different inputs to the models interact to influence the total 
time. 
The second potential site (third scenario) has also 
decided to recruit double the number of patients than the 
reference site, and these patients are sicker- the criticality of 
their readings has a mean of 40% and standard deviation of 
10%. For fear that they would not be able to manage their 
work, the nurses here have decided on some simple 
questions to always ask patients whenever they call them, 
which would lead to less time spent during phone 
conversations with them- the new time is characterised by a 
mean of 6 minutes and standard deviation of 1 minute and 
20 seconds.  
Although double the patients and sicker patients would 
intuitively lead to more than double the time spent 
monitoring them as compared to the reference site, the fact 
that nurses speak less time on the phone with patients, 
where phone conversations are the most time consuming 
external action, will compensate some of the time, but it is 
difficult for the naked eye to decide how much. By 
reinstantiating our models and running another 200 
simulation runs for this new scenario, we obtain the graph 
from Fig. 4. 
 The graph predicts that the introduction of the nurses’ 
call protocol does not compensate greatly the time 
influenced by the more numerous and sicker patients, as 
nurses would still maximally spend more than double the 
time of the reference deployment site monitoring all of their 
patients. Nevertheless, the graph predicts that nurses would 
very rarely (in 3 every 100 work sessions) need more than 
3h 3min (11000 sec) to handle all of the patients. Therefore, 
although an ideal, safest time to offer them would be 4h 
(over 14000 sec), 3h 30, 3h 15min and 3 hours would be 
more economical, and still safe enough, options. 
IV. 
START ON VALIDATION 
To validate our work, we will use our methodology and 
modelling approach to help predict the efficiency of a 
monitoring work process for a new telemonitoring system 
introduced in Lothian, Scotland. We are currently working 
on iteratively improving our modelling approach until it can  
be used to reliably predict the efficiency of the work process 
for deployment sites where the system is already being used. 
To do this, we are conducting observations of users 
monitoring patients using the system, and using data from 
system logs, other system documentation and the practices’  
Figure 4.  Third scenario. 
statistical data, which helps us both obtain inputs for our 
model, and gain an understanding of the true efficiency of 
the work process to test the results of running our model 
against. Once our modelling approach is found to be reliable 
enough, we will gather data about potential deployment 
contexts and use our approach to predict efficiency there. A 
new evaluation of the efficiency of the work process in 
these contexts, once the system has been deployed and users 
have gained some experience with it, will reveal whether 
our approach is successful. The system is being used for 
monitoring two long-term conditions, by users with 
different roles and experience (non-clinical call centre staff 
vs. clinical users- nurses, physiotherapists, GPs, more or 
less computer literate or used with the system), which will 
help us also explore how efficiency is influenced by such 
aspects.  
V. 
RELATED WORK 
From a methodological standpoint, although we have not 
found any literature describing a methodology similar to 
ours, the areas of performance modelling and business 
process change management are the closest. In the area of 
performance modelling, the most relevant work is that by 
Bailey and Snavely ([25]), as it proposes using models for 
the ‘what-if’ exploration of how, in this case, the 
performance of large-scale scientific programs, is affected 
by systems of different sizes and different jobs. Like us, 
they stress that such an approach helps reduce the need for 
more costly evaluation, and inform the choice of a system. 
The authors of SAP (Systems, Applications and Products in 
Data Processing [26, 27]) combine the two areas to propose 
an approach allowing the exploration of ‘what-if’ scenarios 
for business process models. The purpose of these papers is 
to explore changes to one deployment site, while that of our 
work is to compare sites differing in several aspects which 
may influence each other. 
From a work process standpoint, time and motion is 
considered the most reliable method for analysing the 
impact that the introduction of health information systems in 
hospitals would have on the workflow of health 
professionals [28]. Recent years have seen a surge in the use 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

of time and motion studies in health informatics, due to 
some pioneering papers ([29], [30]), the development of a 
data acquisition tool ([31], [32], [33]) and steps towards 
methodological standardisation [28]. Through continuous 
observation of clinician work, time and motion can help 
deduce important aspects of the efficiency of work 
processes involving a health information system: the time it 
takes to perform each type of task, where inefficiencies may 
lie, the effect of interruptions, collaboration with colleagues 
and multitasking.  
There is of course a lot of literature on using models for 
predicting the efficiency of a system or process in terms of 
execution time, most notable being the work on the GOMS 
(Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules) family of 
models [34]).  
Our work is not intended to compete with model-based 
evaluation approaches, and it is not currently evaluating the 
efficiency of a single work process in the same depth as the 
time and motion method. Its strength does not lie in the 
prediction of efficiency within a single context, but in being 
used for analysing efficiency in contexts which may differ 
in several ways, including scale, without the need for costly 
evaluation with users, and in the area of telemedicine where 
there is a strong motivation for such an approach. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have briefly described a methodology which can be 
used for predicting the efficiency of a work process 
involving a telemedicine system in different deployment 
sites, and proposed a modelling approach to be used with it. 
We have exemplified them in action for providing an 
indication of the distribution of the time needed by a nurse 
performing monitoring work using a telemonitoring system, 
and showed how these results can be used for deciding what 
would be a good time limit to give to nurses such that their 
work is safe enough. Given considerations of cost and 
resources, its findings can lead to a decision of whether the 
work in the potential site is manageable, before any 
resources are wasted in deploying the system in that site. 
Should the work be found unmanageable, we could use it to 
answer ‘what-if’ questions about the effects of potential 
solutions: changing the characteristics of the workload, user, 
process or system. 
Although for contexts which differ slightly our approach 
might not be necessary, as the practicality of deploying the 
system there would be clear, there are many contexts where 
differences are complex and interact with each other where 
our approach could be useful. These contexts could be real 
ones where the system is planned to be deployed, or 
hypothetical ones- e.g. would monitoring work still be 
manageable if the system is to be used during an epidemic, 
with more and sicker patients? 
We have also described the validation work that we have 
started for our approach. The result of the current phase will 
be an improved modelling approach, including changes both 
to its logic and the specification of the models, and a good 
understanding of its pros and cons. The next step is to check 
whether our approach will provide good efficiency 
predictions in potential deployment sites.   
REFERENCES 
[1] “Telemedicine for the benefit of patients, healthcare systems 
and society”, European Commission Staff Working Paper 
[Internet] SEC (2009) 943 final, June 2009, Available from: 
 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/cf/docume
nt.cfm?action=display&doc_id=622 
[2] P. Trief, J.A. Teresi, J.P. Eimicke, S. Shea, and R.S. 
Weinstock, “Improvement in diabetes self-efficacy and 
glycaemic control using telemedicine in a sample of older 
ethnically diverse individuals who have diabetes”, the 
IDEATel project, Age Ageing, 2009,  pp. 219-25. 
[3] M. Clarke, A. Shah, and U. Sharma, “Systematic review of 
studies on telemonitoring of patients with congestive heart 
failure: a meta-analysis”, J Telemed Telecare, 2011, pp. 7-14. 
[4] B. McKinstry, H. Pinnock, and A. Sheikh, “Telemedicine for 
management of patients with COPD”, Lancet 2009, 
374(9691), pp. 672-673. 
[5] S.I. 
Chaudhry, 
J.A. 
Mattera, 
and 
H.M. 
Krumholz, 
“Telemonitoring in patients with heart failure. Authors’ 
response to letters”. N Engl J Med, 2011, pp. 78-80. 
[6] J. Barlow, D. Singh, S. Bayer, and R. Curry, “A systematic 
review of the benefits of home telecare for frail elderly people 
and those with long-term conditions”, J Telemed Telecare, 
2007, pp.172-179. 
[7] T.S. Bergmo, “Can economic evaluation in telemedicine be 
trusted? A systematic review of the literature”. Cost Eff 
Resour Alloc, 2009, pp 7-18. 
[8] “REgioNs of Europe WorkINg together for HEALTH”, 
Renewing 
Health 
[Internet], 
2013, 
Available 
from: 
http://www.renewinghealth.eu/en/ 
[9] “Implementing 
Transnational 
Telemedicine 
Solutions”, 
University of Aberdeen Centre for Rural Health [Internet], 
available from: http://www.transnational-telemedicine.eu/. 
[10] “DALLAS - delivering assisted living lifestyles at scale”. 
Technical report, Technology Strategy Board, June 2012, 
Available 
from 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130221185318/
www.innovateuk.org/_assets/0511/sbri_comp_dallas.pdf. 
[11] “The Scottish Government. ehealth strategy 2011-2017”, 
 
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2011/09/09103110/9
, September 2011. ISBN 978 1 78045 376 7. 
[12] Good health adds life to years - global brief for world health 
day 2012, Technical report, World Health Organization, 2012, 
Available from: 
 
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2012/WHO_DCO_WHD_2012.2
_eng.pdf. 
[13] C.A. Alexandru and P. Stevens, “Models to extend the scope 
of usability testing for telemedicine systems”. In Digital 
Futures 2012: The Third Annual Digital Economy All Hands 
Conference, Aberdeen, October 2012, Available from: 
http://www.dotrural.ac.uk/digitalfutures2012/sites/default/file
s/digitalfutures2012papers/Papers/Session4CUsability/Alexan
dru&Stevens_TelemedicineSystems.pdf 
[14] C.A. Alexandru and P. Stevens, “Predicting the Usability of 
Telemedicine Systems in Different Deployments through 
Modelling and Simulation”, Proceedings of the European 
Workshop on Practical Aspects of Health Informatics (PAHI 
2013), Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, March 2013, pp. 58-66. 
[15] C.A. Alexandru, “Usability testing and improvement of 
telemedicine websites”, Master's thesis, University of 
Edinburgh, School of Informatics, 2010.  
[16] P Langley, K. Cummings, and D. Shapiro, “Hierarchical skills 
and cognitive architectures”, in Proceedings of the Twenty-
Sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 
2004, pp. 779-784. 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[17] D. Choi, M. Kaufman, P. Langley, N. Nejati, and D. Shapiro, 
“An 
architecture 
for 
persistent 
reactive 
behavior”; 
International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and 
Multiagent Systems, 2004, pp. 988-995. 
[18] P. Langley and D. Choi, “A unified cognitive architecture for 
physical agents”, in Proceedings of the 21st national 
conference on Artificial intelligence, Volume 2, AAAI'06, 
AAI Press, 2006, pp. 1469-1474. 
[19] P. Langley, D. Choi, and S. Rogers, “Acquisition of 
hierarchical reactive skills in a unified cognitive architecture”, 
Cognitive Systems Research, 10(4), 2009, pp. 316-332. 
[20] P. Langley, D. Choi, and N. Trivedi, “Icarus user's manual, 
July 2011”, Available from: http://www.dongkyu.com/icarus-
tutorial/ICARUS_manual_3.pdf 
[21] P. Potter, L. Wolf, S. Boxerman, D. Grayson, J.  Sledge, C. 
Dunagan, and B. Evanoff, “An Analysis of Nurses' Cognitive 
Work: A New Perspective for Understanding Medical 
Errors”, on: Advances in Patient Safety: From Research to 
Implementation (Volume 1: Research Findings), 2005. 
[22]  C.A. Tanner, “Thinking Like a Nurse: A Research-Based 
Model of Clinical Judgment in Nursing”, 2006, Available 
from 
http://jxzy.smu.edu.cn/jkpg/UploadFiles/file/TF_0692810354
_thinking%20like%20a%20nurse.pdf  
[23] S.K Card, T.P. Thomas, and A. Newall, “The Psychology of 
Human-Computer Interaction”, London: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, ISBN 0-89859-243-7, 1983. 
[24] D. Kieras, "Using the Keystroke-Level Model to Estimate 
ExecutionTimes", http://courses.wccnet.edu/~jwithrow/docs/k
lm.pdf  (On-line handout), 1993, 2001. 
[25] D. H. Bailey and A. Snavely, “Performance modeling: 
Understanding the past and predicting the future”, in Euro-Par 
2005 Parallel Processing Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
volume 3468, 2005, pp. 185-195. 
[26] M. Fritzsche, M. Picht, W. Gilani, I. Spence, J. Brown, and P. 
Kilpatrick, “Extending bpm environments of your choice with 
performance related decision support”, in Proceedings of the 
7th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Business 
Process 
Management, BPM '09, Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 
2009, pp. 97-112. 
[27] M. Fritzsche and W. Gilani, “Model transformation chains 
and model management for end-to-end performance decision 
support”, in Proceedings of the 3rd international summer 
school conference on Generative and transformational 
techniques in software engineering III, GTTSE’09, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 345–363. 
[28] K. Zheng, M. H. Guo, D. A. Hanauer, “Using the time and 
motion method to study clinical work processes and 
workflow: methodological inconsistencies and a call for 
standardized research”. J Am Med Inform Assoc, volume 18, 
2011, pp. 704–710. 
[29] J. M. Overhage, S. Perkins, W. M. Tierney, et al., “Controlled 
trial of direct physician order entry: effects on physicians’ 
time utilization in ambulatory primary care internal medicine 
practices” J Am Med Inform Assoc, volume 8, 2001, pp. 361-
371. 
[30] L. Pizziferri, A. F. Kittler, L. A. Volk, et al., “Primary care 
physician time utilization before and after implementation of 
an electronic health record: a time-motion study”, J Biomed 
Inform, vol. 38, 2005, pp. 176-188. 
[31] J. Westbrook, A. Ampt. “Design, application and testing of 
the 
Work 
Observation Method by 
Activity 
Timing 
(WOMBAT) to measure clinicians’ patterns of work and 
communication”, Int J Med Inform. vol. 78, 2009, pp. 25–33. 
[32] M. Ballerman, N. Shaw, D. Mayes, et al., “Validation of the 
Work 
Observational 
Method 
By 
Activity 
Timing 
(WOMBAT) method of conducting time-motion observations 
in critical care settings: an observational study”. BMC 
Medical 
Informatics 
and 
Decision 
Making, 
2011,  
doi:10.1186/1472-6947-11-32. 
[33] J. Westbrook, N. Creswick, C. Duffield, et al., “Changes in 
nurses’ work associated with computerised information 
systems: opportunities for international comparative studies 
using the revised Work Observation Method By Activity 
Timing (WOMBAT)”. Proceedings of 11th International 
Congress on Nursing Informatics. AMIA 2012, pp. 448–452. 
[34] B. E. John and D. E. Kieras, “The GOMS family of user 
interface analysis techniques: Comparison and contrast”, ACM 
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 3, 1996, pp. 
320-351. 
 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Security Challenges and Solutions for Telemedicine over EPON 
Ying Yan and Lars Dittmann 
Department of Photonics Engineering, Technical University of Denmark 
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
{yiya, ladit}@fotonik.dtu.dk 
 
 
Abstract— Keeping data integrity and privacy is a major de-
sign concern for telemedicine applications, where sensitive and 
personal information are collected and disseminated over tele-
communication system. For this reason, this study discusses 
the network characteristics and security issues in the Ethernet 
Passive Optical Network (EPON), which is responsible for 
conveying traffic between the hospital or healthcare centers 
and patients. Subsequently, different types of security chal-
lenges are classified and a survey of solutions is presented. The 
purpose of this research is to highlight the security issues in 
EPON system as a transmission method of telemedicine ser-
vices and any person will be aware of the potential attacks 
during data transmission.  
Keywords-security challenges; EPON; telemedicine. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Security issue is a primary concern for the telemedicine 
application, where confidential data are exchanged between 
healthcare providers and patients. A telemedicine communi-
cation system consists of three principal divisions: a hospital 
service/data center, a transmission and distribution system, 
and patient home environment. The hospital service/data 
center provides medical instructions and assignments to in-
dividual patient, meanwhile it stores patient personal infor-
mation and medical records/documents in the data center. 
The transmission and distribution system connects the hospi-
tal and the patient at home and exchanges data (such as mes-
sages, files, videos, and so on). Telemedicine applications 
and devices are used by patients at their homes, so that they 
can remotely communicate with doctors and get correct and 
necessary medical advices. This work studies the usage of 
optical access network for the telemedicine communication 
system for data transmitting and distributing.   
Delivering data over optical fiber links becomes the most 
prominent way in the access networks. Presently, the Fiber to 
the Home (FTTH) are being deployed to the subscriber by a 
strong worldwide push: in United States, the annual growth 
rate was 112% during September 2006 to September 2007 
and in Denmark, the FTTH subscribers increased 90% in 
year 2008 [1] [2]. The cost effective Ethernet Passive Optical 
Networks (EPON) with point-to-multipoint architecture is 
the prevalent solution to FTTH. The typical EPON system is 
a tree structure consisting of an Optical Line Terminal (OLT) 
located at a central office, a 1:N splitter, and multiple Optical 
Network Units (ONUs) at the end users’ premises.  
The telemedicine communication system relies primarily 
on health information security and confidentiality. Many 
countries have legislations with appropriate confidentiality 
policies, individual identification procedures and practices, 
so that information access is strictly limited to authorized 
person with the consent of the patient [3]. In order to design 
a completely secure telemedicine system, security must be 
integrated into every node and each element is responsible 
for ensuring information security. This dictates that data se-
curity is related to the entire communication system.  
Currently, various research projects begin to investigate 
the potential security risks on different aspects in the tele-
medicine system in order to minimize the consequential im-
pacts on the privacy of the whole system and patient personal 
information. The telemedicine communication system con-
tains different kinds of hardware equipments, software appli-
cations and transmission mediums. Therefore, the security 
and privacy issues are identified and discussed from different 
aspects. At the software level, Baker and Wallace [4] explore 
the risks of hacking in software and computer systems and 
tempering user database, where data can be stolen or altered. 
At the network level, two network technologies, Ethernet 
and mobile network, have been studied and discussed regard-
ing to the security aspect, respectively Kiravuo et al. in [5] 
and Boukerche and Ren [6]. In [7], besides the manmade 
events, Carvalho and De Souza worked on network resili-
ence and path protection in order to reduce the risks caused 
by natural effects or earthquake.  
This paper focuses on the security issues in the stage of 
data transmission and distribution. On the basis of EPON, it 
is vitally important to ensure that any data transmitted over 
optical channel, for example, medical history of a patient, 
cannot be leaked out and used to identify a person.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 
II, we first describe the basic architecture and operation pro-
cesses of EPON. We present the security challenges in 
EPON and give a survey on proposed solutions in section III 
and section IV, respectively.   
II. 
EPON SYSTEM  
In an EPON system, one OLT is functionalized as an 
administrator connecting multiple ONUs in the subscribers’ 
locations. IEEE 802.3ah Task Force [8] specifies the physi-
cal layer and MAC layer characteristics of EPON.  
As shown in Figure 1, we consider an EPON system con-
sisting of K ONUs that connect to a central control station, 
OLT, via the optical link. In the downstream direction from 
the OLT to the associated ONUs, data are broadcasted to 
each ONU in a point-to-multipoint architecture. On the other 
hand, it is a multipoint-to-point architecture in the upstream 
direction from the ONUs to the OLT. 
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1:N 
splitter
OLT
ss1
1
2
k
1
1
1
2
k
1 k
1
2 1 2
k
uplink
downlink
1
1
1
2
2
k
k
ONU 1
ONU 2
ONU k
ss2
ssk
 
Figure 1. EPON system: upstream (multi-point to point) and downstream 
(point to multi-point) transmission. 
 
Multiple ONUs share the optical bandwidth with Time 
Division Multiplexing (TDM) technique [1]. The OLT allo-
cates upstream bandwidth among the ONUs and each ONU 
transmits packets in dedicated time slots in order to avoid 
collision. Two processes are performed: the auto-discovery 
process and the normal process.  
 
During the discovery process, the OLT searches for 
ONUs, authenticates and registers attached ONUs, and 
calculates the Round Trip Time (RTT). After discover-
ing and registering the connected ONUs, the OLT sets 
up an entry table, which contains the ONU Logic Link 
Identification (LLID) and RTT values.  
 
A key perspective of the normal process is the ability to 
assign bandwidth and schedule transmission for all reg-
istered ONUs in a manner of fairness and without con-
flict. The OLT polls registered ONUs and assigns time 
slots either statically or dynamically based on the re-
source requirement negotiation. 
III. 
SECURITY CHALLENGE IN EPON 
In a communication system for telemedicine applications, 
security management is applied for keeping the data integrity 
without being tampered, patient privacy and confidentiality 
without being released or retrieved, and access control with-
out being unauthorized accessed. In this paper, EPON is used 
for data transmission for telemedicine service and we study 
communications security challenges in EPON. EPON have 
security threats and vulnerabilities that are experienced in the 
general network. Meanwhile, there are special attacks due to 
transmission characteristics in EPON, for example, network 
topology, control protocol, communication equipments as 
well as network access ports [9][10].  
A. Potential Security Risk with EPON Topology 
Security depends highly on the configuration of network 
architecture. Unlike a peer-to-peer network, where a trust 
between a server and a user is normally existed, EPON sys-
tem with a point-to-multipoint structure is vulnerable to in-
truders. In EPON, downstream traffic is broadcasted and 
upstream bandwidth resources are shared by multiple users. 
Besides, we cannot assume a fixed topology, because the 
registration of ONUs is dynamic and an ONU may leave or 
join the network at any time. The potential threats, eaves-
dropping and Denial of Service (DoS), are possible occurred 
due to the point-to-multipoint topology.  
 
 
Eavesdropping: ONUs can receive all downstream traffic 
by simply disabling the address/ID filter and freely re-
ceiving data destined to other ONUs. Since it is difficult 
to detect such an attack at OLT, a malicious ONU can 
eavesdrop traffic without being noticed and interrupted 
for 24 hours per day.  
 
Denial of Service (DoS): the upstream bandwidth is dis-
tributed among several users. Each ONU needs to trans-
mit in upstream direction by complying with the assigned 
timeslots. If a misbehaved ONU on purpose transmits 
outside the schedule, it can consequently cause collision 
with the ongoing transmission from a legitimate ONU, 
and even worse, it can block the channel with large 
amounts of traffic.   
 
Theft of Service (ToS): ToS is threat that is common to all 
networks. One malicious subscriber attempts to imper-
sonate another legitimate ONU, by forging all useful 
ONU information including LLID, MAC address, and so 
on. Since the LLID is the identity assigned during the 
registration process and used as a digital signature during 
the normal process, the malicious subscriber obtains 
bandwidth without any access cost by a forged LLID.   
B. Potential Security Risk with Control Protocol 
The Multi-Point Control Protocol (MPCP) as the control 
and signaling protocol is defined in EPON standard. After 
the registration process, the OLT communicates and sched-
ules transmission timeslots to ONUs based on their assigned 
identifications, LLIDs. During the registration process, a 
potential threat is called impersonation.  
The malicious user has opportunity to collect information 
about the target ONU such as its LLID and MAC address 
and masquerade as a legitimate ONU to use network re-
sources with free charge. Even worse, the attacker can seri-
ously invade other’s privacy by forging wrong information 
and transmitting on behalf of another ONU.  
IV. 
SURVEY OF SOLUTIONS FOR EPON SECURITY 
EPON system has unsurpassed advantages in comparison 
to the data transmission over copper wires or air interfaces. 
However, protecting the patient’s privacy and secure the 
transmission system becomes an important concern due to its 
topology. With properly designed security management can 
reduce the risk of security attacks even though they may not 
be eliminated. Based on the potential threats and security 
challenges in EPON, various solutions are proposed to an-
swer specific security requirements.   
A. Data Cryptography 
Cryptography is the process of hiding the original data in 
a serial of meaningless scrambled code during transmission. 
At the receiver node, data is deciphered and converted back 
into the original information. Due to the point-to-multipoint 
network topology, eavesdropping is possible in the down-
stream direction by simply changing a registered ONU con-
figuration into the promiscuous mode. Thus, the downstream 
data need to be encrypted to safeguard the information.  
 
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The data encryption for 1G-EPON is undefined in origi-
nal 802.3ah-2004 standard [8]. Later in 2008, the YD/T 
1771-2008 Technical Requirements for Access Networks - 
Interoperability of EPON Systems uses the triple churning 
algorithm [11]. When evolving into 10G-EPON, an ad-
vanced encryption method, Galois Counter Mode (GCM) is 
adopted as described in the IEEE MAC security (MACsec) 
standard, 802.1AE [12]. GCM provides high security by 
using 128 bits Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) in 
counter mode and supports high speed data transmission due 
to the pipeline architecture of AES [13]. An alternative solu-
tion is the multi-byte churning encryption algorithm, which 
increases the key length in order to improve the security lev-
el and can be implemented at fast transmission speed [14].   
In order to analyze the alternative encryption algorithms 
proposed for EPON system, we compare the single / triple 
churning algorithm and the AES algorithm in terms of speed, 
complexity and security strength (shown in Table 1). The 
churning algorithm is used to protect data confidentiality by 
scrambling function. The single churning algorithm uses a 
24-bit key code. The implementation is simple and high 
speed. Triple churning algorithm is expanded on the basis of 
single churning algorithm in order to increase the security 
level. The key length is increased to 48 bits. AES is a sym-
metric-key encryption algorithm, where the same key is used 
for both encryption at the transmitter and decryption at the 
receiver. In EPON standard, GCM uses the AES with a key 
length of 128 bits. Designed as a pipelined architecture, AES 
is suitable for high-speed hardware implementation and 
meets the operation requirement in the10G EPON systems.  
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF ENCRYPTION ALGORITHMS IN EPON  
 
Single 
Churning 
Triple Churning 
GCM with AES 
Speed 
Fast 
Fast 
Fast 
Security level 
Low 
(14 
bits key) 
Low (48 bits 
key) 
High (128 bits 
key) 
Implementa-
tion  
Complexity 
Low 
Low 
high 
 
B. Authentication Protocols 
An authentication protocol is used to verify an identifica-
tion of a node as a valid member in the network. Same as 
date encryption, node authentication is also a main defense 
again attack. EPON topology is open and dynamic. In the 
upstream direction, an authorization and authentication 
mechanism is required to ensure the communication reliabil-
ity and to avoid the impersonation from illegal masquerading 
users. A new ONU must be mutually authenticated during 
the auto-discovery process.  
Given various authentication protocols have been pro-
posed [10], ONU authentication and secure provisioning are 
presented in the latest IEEE 1904.1-2013 standard for Ser-
vice Interoperability in EPON (SIEPON) [15] [16]. To deal 
with both legacy 1G-EPON and the next generation 10G-
EPON, IEEE 802.1X-2004 and IEEE 802.1X-2010 are de-
fined as ONU authentication mechanisms, respectively. Both 
two generations are based on Extensible Authentication Pro-
tocol (EAP) methods:  
 
 
IEEE 802.1X-2004 and EAP-MD5: The EAP-MD5, 
defined in RFC 2284, is known as simple with very light 
and fast processing. The principle is in a challenge-
response principle. The OLT as an authenticator sends 
an EAP request. The ONU as a supplicant replies with 
its identification in a response message, which is relayed 
to an authentication server. The OLT then sends an EAP 
challenge packet of type MD5 challenge to the ONU. 
After calculating a MD5 hash based on the challenge, 
the ONU returns a response containing the hash value. 
On the server side, the same hash computation is per-
formed and two values are compared. The authentication 
is success if two hash values are identical, otherwise, the 
authentication fails.  
 
IEEE 802.1X-2010 and EAP-GPSK: the authentication 
scheme, EAP Generalized Pre-Shared Key (EAP-
GPSK), is an advanced technique to obtain mutual au-
thentication and key agreement between the authentica-
tor and supplicant [17]. For the authentication in the 
10G-EPON, an OLT starts with an EAP request mes-
sage containing its identification ID_olt. The applicant 
ONU responses with its own identification, ID_onu. The 
OLT sends ID_olt, a random number RAND_server, 
and a list of supported ciphersuites, CSuite_List. The 
ONU then requests with ID_onu, a random number,    
RAND_onu, a repeat of received parameters of the 
OLT, the selected ciphersuite and a Message Authenti-
cation Code (MAC_onu) that is computed based on all 
the transmitted parameters. The OLT verifies the re-
ceived MAC_onu code and the consistency of parame-
ters. In case of successful verification, the EAP server 
computes a MAC_olt over the session parameter and re-
turns it to the peer. The peer verifies the received 
MAC_olt code, and consistency of parameters.  If the 
verification is successful, ONU replies with a message 
that can optionally contain the peer's protected data pa-
rameters. Then, the OLT sends an EAP Success mes-
sage to indicate the successful outcome of the authenti-
cation. The keys used to compute MAC at the OLT and 
ONU are both derived from a Key Derivation Function 
(KDF), which based on a long-term pre-shared key. 
Both the server OLT and the peer ONU are authenticat-
ed by using the MAC key code.   
 
During the authentication process, three types of ONU 
identification are used: MAC address based, logical ID based 
and hybrid authentication. The first method uses information 
provided by ONU during the auto-discovery process. The 
second method requires a provider defined logical ID, which 
is manufactured into an ONU device. In the hybrid mode, if 
the MAC address based authentication fails, the OLT then 
initiates to the logical ID based authentication [16].  
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Security Enhanced Communication Technologies 
PON technology is developed with the aims of increased 
data rate, increased range, reduced cost and reduced energy 
consumption. The following technologies improve network 
performances and profits. Meanwhile they affect the security 
properties of EPON system in term of involving multiple 
wavelengths, operating at fast speed, and deploying a differ-
ent multiplexing method.  
 
 
Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) technology: 
The straight way to improve network security is to setup 
a point-to-point communication between the server and 
the client. By assigning traffic on links with different 
wavelengths, the WDM-PON allows the OLT exchange 
data with each ONU at a unique wavelength.   
 
High speed 10G-EPON: The churning encryption 
scheme has drawbacks such as short key length and low 
operation speed. With the upgrading to 10G EPON, 
GCM is deployed to ensure data security as well as to 
guarantee the information reliability. By combining 
Galois field message authentication code (GMAC), the 
method realizes authentication process and can be used 
as an incremental MAC [13]. 
 
Optical Code Division Multiple Access (OCDMA) tech-
nology: While being successfully developed in wireless 
communication, the OCDMA introduces this concept in-
to fiber optic communication systems, where encoding 
and decoding operations are performed in optical do-
main. Advantages of using OCDMA include realizing 
higher spectral efficiency, providing higher system ca-
pacity and enhancing security. In OCDMA-PONs, dif-
ferent users are assigned orthogonal codes, with which 
each user’s data are encoded/decoded with an optical 
pulse sequence. Thus, this technique provides asynchro-
nous communications and security against unauthorized 
users [18] [19]. 
D. Security Enhanced Communication Devices 
Using a conventional TDM PON, security enhancement 
can be introduced to the physical devices, OLT and ONU. In 
[20], authors demonstrate the physical security enhancement 
from using a pair of matched tunable lasers in OLT. A 
unique point-to-point link is created between the OLT and 
the destination ONU since the tunable laser transmits each 
frame with a unique identifying code and each ONU is also 
assigned with a unique wavelength.  
E. Security Mechanism in Hybrid Network Topology 
A telemedicine communication system is composed of 
different communication technologies instead of a solo 
transmission links. EPON is responsible for delivering traffic 
to the users’ premises. The last-mile can be accomplished by 
using Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) or Wireless Local Area 
Network (WLAN) technologies. Research about a unified 
security framework for integrated technologies is ongoing. In 
[21] [22], authors discuss about the integrated authentication 
process and data encryption scheme in the combined EPON 
and wireless networks. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The major strengths of EPON are its high data rate and 
low cost. They are also the causes of its prevalence in the 
access network. Nowadays, security issues for EPON system 
become a serious concern, particular for transmitting patient 
medical histories and hospital health records. Concerns are 
raised about patient privacy and data security due to the 
broadcast characteristics in EPON. This paper discusses sev-
eral research efforts, which have been trying to address the 
security issues in EPON. The challenges are addressed in 
order to point out the secure weakness caused by EPON 
structure, protocol and devices. Hence, this work shows that 
as the transmission channel is vulnerable, potential attacks 
can be possible to harm the entire telemedicine system. This 
paper further presents a survey of existing solutions to deal 
with data confidentiality, authentication, access control and 
integration with other network technologies. Through our 
study, we showed different aspects and concerns for a securi-
ty framework for the telemedicine system over EPON. Fu-
ture work will consider simulation and result analysis for the 
discussed solutions.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support by 
the Patient @ Home project - Danish welfare technological 
research and innovation initiative project [23].  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Maier, “Optical Access-Metro Networks”, in “Broadband 
Access Networks”, Springer US, pp. 237-259, 2009. 
Doi:10.1007/978-0-387-92131-0_11 
[2] “Denmark Sees the Light: 90% Increase in the Fibre‐to‐the
‐Home Subscribers in the Past Year”, Press release, 2009. 
[3] B. Fong, A.C. M. Fong, and C.K. Li, “Telemedicine 
Technologies: Information Technologies in Medicine and 
telemedicine”, Wiley, United Kingdom, pp.137-170, 2011.  
[4] W. H. Baker and L. Wallace, “Is Information Security Under 
Control?: Investigating Quality in Information Security 
Management”,  IEEE Security & Privacy, vol 5, iss. 1, pp. 36 
– 44, Feb 2007.  
[5] T. Kiravuo, M. Sarela, and J. Manner, “A Survey of Ethernet 
LAN Security”,  IEEE communications surveys & tutorials, 
vol. 15, no.34, pp. 1477 – 1491, 2013. 
[6] A. Boukerche and Y. Ren, “A Secure Mobile Healthcare 
System using Trust-Based Multicast Scheme”,  IEEE Journal 
on selected areas in communications, vol 27, no. 4, pp. 387 – 
399, May 2009.  
[7] M. M. Carvalho and E. A. De Souza, “A Novel Protection 
Mechanism in TDM-PON”, 11th International Conference on 
Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON), pp. 1-4, July 2013. 
[8] IEEE 802.3ah Ethernet in the First Mile Task Force. 
[9] S. Roh and S. Kim, “Security model and authentication 
protocol in EPON-based optical access network”, 5th 
International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks 
(ICTON), pp. 99-102, July 2003. 
[10] M. Hajduczenia, P. Inacio, H. Silva, M. Freire, and P. 
Monteiro, 
“On 
EPON 
Security 
Issues”, 
IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, pp. 68-83, May 2007. 
[11] YD/T 1771-2008, “Technical Requirements for Access 
Networks – Interoperability of EPON Systems”, Mar 2008.  
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[12]  “IEEE 802.1AE – Media Access control (MAC) Security”, 
2006.  
[13] X. Chen, G. Shou, Z. Guo and Y. Hu, “Encryption and 
Authentication Mechanism of 10G EPON systems Based on 
GCM”, 2nd International Conference on e-Business and 
Information System Security (EBISS), pp. 1-4, May 2010. 
[14] X. Xu, G. Shou, Z. Guo and Y. Hu, “Encryption Method of 
Next Generation PON systems”, 3rd International Conference 
on Broadband Network and Multimedia Technology (IC-
BNMT), pp. 384-387, Oct 2010. 
[15] G. Kramer, L. Khermosh, F. Daido, A. Brown, H. Yoon, K. 
Suzuki, and W. Bo, “The IEEE 1904.1 Standard: SIEPON 
Architecture and Model”, IEEE Communications Magazin, 
pp. 98-108, September 2012.  
[16]  “1904.1-2013 - IEEE Standard for Service Interoperability in 
Ethernet Passive Optical Networks (SIEPON)”, September 
2013. 
[17] T. Clancy, and H. Tschofenig, "Extensible Authentication 
Protocol - Generalized Pre-Shared Key (EAP-GPSK) 
Method", RFC 5433, IETF Request for Comments, February 
2009  
[18] A. Stok and E. H. Sargent, “The Role of Optical CDMA in 
Access Networks”, IEEE Communication Magazine, vol. 40, 
iss. 9, pp. 83 – 87, 2002 
[19] H. A. Bakarman, T. Eltaif, P. S. Menon, M. Muqaibel, and S. 
Shaari, “Optical Access Network based on OCDMA Systems: 
Transmission and 
Security Performance”, Journal 
of 
Communications , vol. 7, pp. 35-41, 2013.  
[20] A. Harris, A. Sierra, S. Kartalopoulos, and J. Sluss, “Security 
Enhancements in Novel Passive Optical Networks”, IEEE 
International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 
1399-1403, 2007.  
[21] S. Chowdhury and M. Maier, “Security Issues in Integrated 
EPON and Next Generation WLAN Networks”, IEEE 
Consumer Communications and Networking Conference 
(CCNC), pp. 1-2, Jan 2010 
[22] W. Gu, P. K. Verma and S. V. Kartalopoulos, “A Unified 
Security Framework for WiMAX over EPON access 
Networks” Security and Communication Networks, vol 4, iss. 
6, pages 685–696, June 2011.  
[23] Patient 
at 
Home 
project. 
Website: 
http://www.patientathome.dk/ 
 
 
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Expectations of Middle-aged and Elderly Persons towards using Telecare 
Technologies and eHealth Applications in Primary Care 
Martine W. J. Huygens1,2, Joan Vermeulen1,2, Luc P. de Witte1,2,3 
1CAPHRI, Maastricht University, Universiteitssingel 40, 6229 ER, Maastricht, The Netherlands 
2Centre for Care Technology Research, Duboisdomein 30, 6229 GT, Maastricht, The Netherlands 
3Reserach Center for Technology in Care, Zuyd University of Applied Sciences, Henri Dunantstraat 2, 6419 PB, Heerlen, 
The Netherlands 
m.huygens@maastrichtuniversity.nl, j.vermeulen@maastrichtuniversity.nl, luc.dewitte@zuyd.nl
 
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this study was to investigate general 
expectations of middle-aged and elderly persons towards using 
care technologies and eHealth applications in primary care. 
Participants were recruited at an event about health and 
exercise for elderly people. Persons aged fifty years or older 
and who were able to provide informed consent were eligible 
for inclusion. A cross-sectional mixed method approach was 
used; participants could choose whether they wanted to 
participate in this study by filling out a questionnaire or by 
participating in a short structured interview. Fifty-seven 
participants rated 22 items of a questionnaire on a five-point 
Likert scale. The questionnaire consisted of seven subscales: 
experiences with general technology, experiences with care 
technology, perceived barriers, perceived benefits, external 
cues to take action, attitude towards using and intention to use 
technologies in primary care. Furthermore, six interviews were 
conducted. The questionnaire revealed that participants had a 
positive attitude towards using technology in primary care and 
that their behavioral intention to use technology in primary 
care was high. In addition, the mean score of perceived benefits 
was higher than the mean score of perceived barriers. Time-
saving, comfort and a higher degree of expected safety were 
the most frequently mentioned advantages in the structured 
interviews. The lack of personal contact and usability 
difficulties were the most frequently reported disadvantages of 
care technology. Based on the results it can be concluded that 
middle-aged and elderly persons have a positive view towards 
primary care technologies. However, the mentioned barriers 
should be taken into account during the implementation and 
development of technologies in primary care.   
Keywords-eHealth; telecare, expectations, intention to use, 
primary care, middle-aged adults, elderly persons 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The number of elderly persons is increasing. The number 
of persons aged sixty years or older tripled between 1950 and 
2000, and is expected to increase threefold again by 2050, up 
to nearly two billion [1]. Mainly as a result of this, the 
number of chronically ill patients is increasing. Parallel to 
these increasing numbers, there is a relative decrease in the 
number of staff working in the healthcare sector. Due to 
these reasons, a fundamental change is necessary in the 
healthcare process [2]. Telecare technologies and eHealth 
applications could facilitate a shift from intra-institutional 
care to more home-based care. It is expected that these 
technologies, which support self-care and self-management, 
can reduce healthcare costs and can improve health 
outcomes among chronically ill patients [3, 4]. 
Despite these positive expectations, a recently published 
review by Peeters et al. [5] showed that most studies which 
explored the effects of technology in home-based care were 
pilot-studies with small samples e.g., [6-8]. In addition, the 
majority of these studies had short durations with only one 
follow-up assessment and no control group. Although 
positive effects of technology in primary care are expected, 
up until now there is not enough convincing evidence for 
these effects. Furthermore, many studies explored the effects 
of care technologies in controlled conditions. Due to this, it 
is difficult to guarantee that these technologies will also 
work in real life environments, when embedded in daily care 
procedures. Large-scale studies in care practices are needed 
to investigate the effects and consequences of using 
technology in primary care on a general level.  
Before large-scale studies in care practices can be set-up, 
it is important to investigate users’ needs and expectations 
regarding the use of telecare products and services, since 
taking these into account during the development and 
implementation process will increase the level of user 
satisfaction and user acceptance [9-12]. However, studies 
exploring patients’ needs and expectations towards large-
scale use of telecare technologies and eHealth applications in 
the Dutch primary care setting are scarce.  
Middle-aged and elderly persons are a major group of 
primary care users. Therefore, the aim of this study was to 
investigate general expectations of persons aged fifty years 
or older towards using telecare technologies and eHealth 
applications in primary care. This provides important input 
for the implementation of care technologies in primary care. 
Since the data collection is still ongoing, this paper will 
discuss the preliminary results of this study. 
The paper describes the methodology (Section II) and 
presents the preliminary results of this study (Section III). In 
Section IV the results are discussed and the conclusion and 
future work are presented in Section V.  
II. 
METHODS 
 This methods section describes the recruitment of the 
participants, setting, study procedure, measurements and 
analyses which were utilized for this study. 
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Design, setting, and participants 
The study has a cross-sectional, mixed methods design. 
Questionnaires and structured interviews were used for data 
collection. 
Participants were recruited at an event regarding health 
and exercise for elderly persons that took place at a large 
sports hall in Nederweert (the Netherlands). Inclusion criteria 
were: fifty years or older and Dutch-speaking, since the 
information letter and questionnaire were in Dutch. 
Exclusion criteria were: serious visual impairments for the 
study with questionnaires, and serious hearing impairments 
for the interviews. 
At the stand at the event the researchers showed movies 
and presentations about examples of telecare technologies 
and eHealth applications. In addition, the stand was 
decorated with posters which presented several examples of 
primary care technologies. Furthermore, two Ipads with a 
medication management app, a physical activity monitoring 
and feedback system for chronically ill patients [13, 14], a 
physical functioning monitoring and feedback system for 
elderly persons [15] and an online platform for care and 
wellbeing for elderly persons (including functions regarding 
social contacts, comfort, and health and safety) were 
demonstrated. The study was carried out in the first week of 
October 2013. 
B. Study procedure 
Visitors of the event were asked by the researchers 
whether they wanted to participate in this study by filling 
out a questionnaire or by participating in an interview. If 
people were willing to participate, they signed an informed 
consent form after reading the information letter. In both the 
questionnaires and the interviews everyday language was 
used. 
On the first page of the questionnaire several examples 
of telecare technologies and eHealth applications in primary 
care were described. This was done to ensure that 
participants were aware of the following possibilities that 
such technologies provide: planning an online appointment 
with a general practitioner, online video consult with a 
general practitioner, online coaching program to quit 
smoking, online revalidation program, physical activity 
monitoring and feedback system, medication management 
program, and Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) motion 
tracking systems. Next, participants filled out their 
demographical data. Then, they filled out questions 
regarding their expectations of technologies in primary care. 
Filling out the entire questionnaire took approximately 
fifteen minutes.  
People who preferred to participate in an interview sat 
down with the researcher at a separate/quiet corner of the 
stand. The interviews took approximately fifteen minutes 
and were recorded with a voice recorder. 
C. Measurements 
Information regarding demographical data (gender, age, 
highest level of education, marital status and living 
situation) and health status (general health status, physical 
fitness, (chronic) diseases, and illness in last three months) 
were collected using the first part of the questionnaire.  
The second part of the questionnaire was largely based 
on previous research regarding the possibility of using 
concepts of the Health Belief Model to predict the intention 
of the general population and chronically ill patients to use 
telecare products and services [16, 17]. The items were 
translated into Dutch and adapted to the topic of this study. 
In addition, several items about technology usage were 
added. The adapted questionnaire consisted 22 items 
divided over seven subscales: general technology usage (3 
items), experience with technology in healthcare (1 item), 
perceived benefits (4 items), perceived barriers (3 items), 
external cues to take action (4 items), attitude towards using 
(3 items) and behavioral intention (4 items) to use telecare 
technologies and eHealth applications in primary care. An 
overview of the items is provided in Table I. Participants 
rated each item on a five-point Likert scale, ranging from 1 
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). In addition, the 
following open-ended question was added: “What kind of 
technologies in primary care would you like to use at home, 
and why?”. Participants could write down additional 
comments at the end of the questionnaire.  
     To gather more in-depth information about expectations 
of technology in primary care, interviews were conducted. 
The structured interview consisted of the following 
questions: “Do you use a lot of technology in daily life?”, 
“When I speak of technologies in primary care, what kind of 
technologies do you think of?”, “What are the advantages 
and disadvantages of technology in primary care?” and 
“What kind of technologies in primary care would you like 
to use?”.  
D. Analyses 
The scores of the questionnaire were quantitatively 
analyzed. First, mean scores and standard deviations of the 
seven different subscales were calculated for the whole 
study sample. Furthermore, the spread of participants on the 
different subscales was explored using boxplots. Moreover, 
differences between men and women, participants aged 
below 65 years and aged 65 years or older, and participants 
with or without chronic diseases were investigated for each 
subscale independently. In addition, differences between 
participants with high general technology experiences 
(mean scores of 3.5 or higher on that subscale) and low 
general technology experiences (mean scores below 3.5 on 
that subscale) were explored on experiences with 
technology in healthcare, perceived benefits, perceived 
barriers, external cues to take action, attitude towards using 
and intention to use. These differences were investigated 
using independent sample t-tests. The statistical analyses 
were performed using the Statistical Package for Social 
Sciences (SPSS) 21.0 for Windows [18]. 
 
 
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

General technology experience 
1. I use many technological devices in daily life (think about 
computers, mobile phones, tablet etc.). 
2. I like to discover new technologies. 
3. I have mainly positive experiences with technological devices. 
Experiences of technology in health care 
4. I have experience with technology in health care. 
Perceived benefits 
5. I think that using technologies in primary care are helpful in 
monitoring my health. 
6. I think that using technologies in primary care increases my safety 
in daily life. 
7. I think that technologies in primary care can enhance my level of 
convenience in accessing medical care services. 
8.  I think that technologies in primary care can enhance the quality of 
my life.  
Perceived barriers of taking action 
9. I am concerned that technologies in primary care are not adequately 
secure and that it might lead to the leak or abuse of my personal 
information. 
10. I am concerned that technologies in primary care would violate 
my privacy. 
11. I am concerned that the accuracy and reliability of technologies in 
primary care are not high enough.  
External cues to action 
12. I think that relatives will encourage and support me to use 
technologies in primary care. 
13. I think that friends will encourage and support me to use 
technologies in primary care. 
14. I think that medical care personnel will encourage and support me 
to use technologies in primary care. 
15. Media endorses the use of technologies in primary care. 
Attitude towards using 
16. I think I will like using technologies in primary care.  
17. Overall, I consider technologies in primary care to be just right. 
18. In my old age, using technologies in primary care would be ideal.  
Behavioral intention to use 
19. Overall, I am highly willing to use technologies in primary care. 
20. If necessary, I would use technologies in primary care often. 
21. In my old age, I am willing to use technologies in primary care. 
22. In my old age, I would use technologies in primary care often.  
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
ITEMS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
The interviews were transcribed verbatim. Afterwards, 
the researcher (MH) checked the transcripts against the 
audio recordings. Field notes from the interviews were also 
included in the analyses if they were available. The 
researcher (MH) independently coded the transcripts of the 
interviews using open coding. The following codes 
regarding technologies in primary care were used: first 
opinions, advantages, disadvantages and preferences.  
III. 
RESULTS 
This section provides the preliminary results of this 
study. First, an overview of the characteristics of the 
participants is given, followed by the mean scores of the 
subscales of the questionnaire, the spread of participants on 
the different subscales, the differences between groups, and 
participants’ preferences for using specific primary care 
technologies. Furthermore, the main results of the structured 
interviews are described.  
A. Characteristics of study participants 
In 
total, 
sixty-three 
participants 
filled 
out 
the 
questionnaire. Six participants were excluded from the 
analyses because their age was below 50 years. The mean 
age of the remaining fifty-seven participants was 67 (SD: 
9.26, range: 51-85). Twenty-one of them (37.5%) were male 
and twenty-eight (49.1%) had one or more chronic diseases 
(including diabetes type I and II, cardiovascular diseases, 
diseases of the joints, cancer, diseases of the nervous 
system, respiratory diseases, depression and/or anxiety 
disorders). 
     Six participants agreed to participate in an interview, of 
which 4 (66%) were male. The mean age of the interviewed 
participants was 64.4 (SD: 10.16, range: 52-76).  
B. Scores subscales questionnaire 
Figure 1 shows the mean scores of subscales of the 
questionnaire. The mean score of general technology 
experience was 3.42 (SD: .95), the mean score of experience 
with technology in healthcare was 2.22 (SD: 1.17). The 
mean score of perceived benefits was 3.88 (SD: .77), the 
mean score for perceived barriers of taking action 2.85 (SD: 
.93). External cues to action scored 3.56 (SD: .86). The 
mean scores of attitude towards using and the behavioral 
intention to use were respectively 3.83 (SD: .82) and 3.79 
(SD: 1.00).  
Figure 2 shows the spread of participants on the different 
subscales. It can be seen that 50% of the participants had a 
mean score between 3.5 and 4.25 on perceived benefits. The 
mean scores were lower for perceived barriers: 50% of the 
sample had mean scores between 2.0 and 3.67. Furthermore, 
50% of the participants scored between 3.0 and 4.13 on 
external cues to action. In addition, half of the participants 
had mean scores between 3.33 and 4.67 on attitude towards 
using and scores between 3.0 and 4.63 on intention to use. 
      
 
 
Figure 1. Mean scores of the different subscales of the questionnaire. 
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Looking at the differences between groups there was a 
significant difference (p: .050) between age groups on 
general technology experience, with a mean score of 3.66 
(SD: .90) for participants with an age below 65, compared 
with a mean score of 3.15 (SD: .95) for participants aged 65 
years or older. In addition, there were significant differences 
between 
participants 
with 
low 
general 
technology 
experience and high general technology experience on 
perceived benefits (p: .013), attitude towards using (p: .001) 
and intention to use technology in primary care (p: .001), 
with higher mean scores for participants with high general 
technology experiences (respectively 4.14, SD: .54; 4.19, 
SD: .70 and 4.25, SD: .67) compared with participants with 
low general technology experiences (respectively 3.63, SD: 
.86; 3.48, SD: .80 and 3.38, SD: 1.10). Furthermore, no 
significant differences were found between the other 
subgroups.  
C. Preferences for specific care technologies  
At the end of the questionnaire the open question “What 
kind of technologies would you like to use at home? And 
why?” was asked. The most frequently mentioned 
technology was an AAL motion tracking system (n: 11), 
followed by self-monitoring systems to monitor blood 
pressure, heartbeat or glucose level (n: 5), online 
appointments (n: 5) and online video consults (n: 5). In 
addition, six participants responded that they did not want to 
use care technologies in care at that moment, five 
participants mentioned that they had no idea, and twenty-
three participants did not answer the question. 
D.   Structured interviews 
In general, at the start of the interview participants had 
some ideas about what kinds of technologies could be used 
in primary care. Most participants linked these technologies 
with using a computer.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Spread of participants on the different subscales. The boxplots are 
demonstrating extremes, interquartile range (25%-50% light grey; 50%-
75% dark grey) and median.  
 
“Today, when my blood pressure needs to be measured, I 
first have to make an appointment with the general 
practitioner, and I have to take some time off. That’s a 
hassle…” (Female, 54 years) 
“If you don’t feel quite well at night, and you call the 
doctor, it would be good if they could give you advice on the 
basis of self-measured data. Then, you feel more 
reassured…” (Male, 52 years) 
“Nowadays, if there is something wrong I have to call my 
neighbors. If I can contact caregivers with just one push on 
a button I don’t have to call them.  That’s a big advantage, 
and I can receive help quicker. (Male, 75) 
“Many elderly persons have difficulties with walking. It is a 
great advantage if you only have to push a button to directly 
contact a care institution. Just with a simple connection…” 
(Male, 52 years) 
 
     Besides these positive responses, many participants 
doubted if care technologies were not too difficult in use.  
 
“But that is just too difficult for us. It’s the age, we did not 
grow up with technology… Reading an email is already too 
difficult for us…” (Male, 75) 
 
     The participants with an age over seventy linked 
technology immediately to difficult to use computers and 
mobile phones. When we showed them an Ipad, they were 
surprised about the small size and the user-friendly design.  
 
“I really don’t want to have a computer, I just don’t want 
to.” After showing her the Ipad:”Is this the entire device? Is 
everything included? Internet as well? So this doesn’t have 
to be connected to a wire?.... If I push on this button I can 
send a message? This is not difficult, for this I don’t have to 
follow a computer course. I was thinking about a big 
screen…” (Female, 76) 
 
     In addition, participants doubted if personal contact will 
not disappear when using primary care technologies.  
 
“I think using technologies in primary care is positive, 
however, if you need care, you need human contact. Not 
only devices, it should be a combination between technology 
and personal attention…” (Female, 54) 
“I hope that technology can accompany care, but that 
contact will always exist. That is really important…” (Male, 
52) 
 
     Furthermore, some participants mentioned that getting 
feedback from the care giver is important.  
 
“If I take the effort to measure my blood pressure and send 
the data to my general practitioner, I would like to get a 
message like: you’re blood pressure is okay, in three months 
you get a new message…” (Female, 54) 
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

“At this moment I write my blood pressure results on a 
note…. However, if I take the results with me to the general 
practitioners or specialist, they do nothing with these data. 
With these new technologies, you sent a lot of data to the 
general practitioner, however, they should do something 
with it…” (Male, 65) 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Overall, participants had a positive attitude towards using 
technologies in primary care and their behavioral intention 
to use technology in primary care was high. These results 
are in line with studies investigating attitude and intentions 
regarding telecare and eHealth [19, 20]. In addition, scores 
of perceived benefits were higher than scores of perceived 
barriers. Participants with a high degree of general 
technology experiences had significantly higher scores on 
perceived benefits, attitude towards using and intention to 
use technology in primary care, than participants who had 
less experience with general technology use. Similar results 
were found in a study by Wilson et al. [21] that showed that 
participants who already relied on the internet in daily life, 
were more likely to accept eHealth.  
Structured interviews revealed that time-saving, comfort 
and a higher degree of safety were the most expected 
advantages of using technologies in primary care. On the 
other hand, the possible lack or decrease of personal contact 
and usability difficulties were the most frequently expected 
disadvantage of using primary care technologies. Time-
saving as advantage and less face-to-face contact as 
disadvantage were also found in previous research [22] 
investigating patients’ expectations and experiences towards 
an online appointment booking system. In a study 
investigating the risks and benefits of home telecare [20], 
trust of the equipment was found to be a concern among 
patients. This was not found in the present study.  
In a recently published eHealth monitor in which the 
development and progress of eHealth in the Netherlands 
was described [23], it was indicated that the Dutch 
population is still relatively unfamiliar with eHealth and the 
use of eHealth applications. eHealth applications that can 
monitor health data are not commonly used. This is in line 
with the low scores we found on experiences with 
technology in primary care. 
A. Strengths and limitations  
A strength of this study is that it aimed to investigate the 
expectations towards using care technology on a larger scale 
in primary care in an important ‘potential user group’ of this 
technology. By not focusing on the expectations regarding 
one specific technological innovation but on the broad use 
of telecare technologies and eHealth applications, this study 
provided insights that could be taken into account when 
implementing such technologies in primary care.  
In this study a cross-sectional mixed method approach 
was used, combining quantitative and qualitative data.  
Besides questionnaires, interviews were conducted to gather 
more in-depth information about expectations of care 
technologies in primary care. These interviews were 
conducted with different participants than the people who 
filled out a questionnaire. Therefore, a cross validation of 
the data could not be made.  
Another possible limitation of this study is that the 
number of currently included participants is small and 
therefore no generalizations can be made based on the 
preliminary results reported in this paper. In addition, in 
studies by Huang et al. [16, 17] in which the Health Belief 
Model was used to predict the intention to use telecare, a 
distinction was made between chronically ill patients [16] 
and general public [17]. The factors which had an influence 
on intention to use telecare differed between the two 
samples according to Huang et al. [16, 17]. In the current 
study no differences were found between patients with a 
chronic disease and patients without a chronic disease. This 
could also be caused by the small sample size of the present 
study. In addition, more than half of the participants did not 
respond to the question which technologies they would like 
to use at home or answered that they do not need it at this 
moment. This might be the result of the fact that these 
people currently do not have any complaints for which these 
technologies could be used.  
Furthermore, the study took place in a sports hall during 
an event about health exercises for elderly people. Because 
of this event, the noise level was quite high which could 
have influenced the data collection process to some extent. 
However, the noise level did not seem to disturb the study 
and it created an informal atmosphere. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper discusses the preliminary results of this 
study. In the upcoming months, the data collection will be 
continued. Based on the preliminary results it can be 
concluded that middle-aged and elderly persons have a 
positive view towards primary care technologies.  
Recently the project eLabEL [24] has started within the 
Centre for Care Technology Research [25]. In this three-
year program ‘living labs’ within primary care centers will 
be established in which new care technologies can be 
implemented and evaluated in ‘real life’ environments on a 
substantial scale. Ten large primary care centers in the 
Netherlands will be equipped to adopt existing state of the 
art technologies as part of their standard care routines.  
Before eHealth applications and telecare technologies can 
be implemented, several other factors should be further 
investigated. For example, privacy and security are 
important issues while sharing personal health related 
information [26]. In addition, connecting and integrating 
different technologies to one database will be a challenge 
[27]. These factors will be further explored in the eLabEL 
project during the next two years.  
The present study provides insights in the views of 
Dutch middle-aged and elderly persons towards using 
telecare technologies and eHealth applications in primary 
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

care, which should be taken into account during the 
implementation of primary care technologies.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
eLabEL is a project of the Center for Care Technology 
Research [25]. This work is partly funded by a grant from the 
Netherlands 
Foundation 
for 
Health 
Research 
and 
Development (ZonMw); grant number: 10-10400-98-009.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
Population Division, “World population ageing: 1950–2050,” 
2002, 
retrieved 
from 
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/worldageing19
502050/ assessed on October 31, 2013  
[2] G. Paré, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte, “Systematic review of 
home telemonitoring for chronic diseases: The evidence 
base,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 14, 2007, pp. 269-
277, doi: 10.1197/jamia.M2270 
[3] K. H. Bowles, and A. C. Baugh, “Applying Research 
Evidence to Optimize Telehomecare,” J. Cardiovasc. Nurs., 
vol. 22, 2007, pp. 5-15 
[4] T. Botsis, and G. Hartigsen, “Current status and future 
perspectives in telecare for elderly people suffering from 
chronic diseases,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 14, 2008, pp. 
195-203, doi: 10.1258/jtt.2008.070905 
[5] J. M. Peeters, T. A. Wiegers, and R. D. Friele, “How 
technology in care at home affects patient self-care and self-
management: a scoping review,” Int. J. Environ. Res. Public 
Health, 
vol. 
10, 
2013, 
pp. 
5541-5564, 
doi: 
10.3390/ijerph10115541 
[6] J. Frühauf, G. Schwantzer, M. Ambros-Rudolph, W. Weger, 
V. Ahlgrimm-Siess, W. Salmhofer, and R. Hofmann-
Wellenhof, “Pilot study on the acceptance of mobile 
teledermatology for the home monitoring of high-need 
patients with psoriasis,” Australas. J. Dermatol, vol. 53, 2012, 
pp. 41–46, doi: 10.1111/j.1440-0960.2011.00852.x 
[7] E. J. Gómez, M. E. Hernando, A. Garcia, F. del Pozo, J. 
Cermeño, R. Corvoy, E. Brugués and A. de Leiva, 
“Telemedicine  as  a  tool  for  intensive  management  of  
diabetes:  The  DIABTel experience,” Comput. Methods 
Programs. Biomed., vol. 69, 2001, pp. 163-177, doi: 
10.1016/S0169-2607(02)00039-1 
[8] J. Finkelstein, O. Lapshin, H. Castro, E. Cha, and P. G. 
Provance, “Home-based  physical telerehabilitation in patients 
with multiple sclerosis: A pilot study,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., 
vol. 
45, 
2008, 
pp. 
1361–1374, 
doi: 
10.1682/JRRD.2008.01.0001 
[9] S. de Rouck, A. Jacobs, and M. Leys, “A methodology for 
shifting the focus of e-health support design onto user needs: 
A case in the homecare ﬁeld,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 77, 
2008, pp. 589-601, doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2007.11.004 
[10] C. Pagliari, “Design and evaluation in eHealth: challenges and 
implications for an interdisciplinary ﬁeld,” J. Med. Internet 
Res., vol. 9, 2007, pp. doi: 10.2196/jmir.9.2.e15 
[11] M. I. Hwang, R. G. Thorn, “The effect of user engagement on 
system success: A meta-analytical integration of research 
ﬁndings,” Inform. Manage., vol. 35, 1999, pp. 229-236, doi. 
10.1016/S0378-7206(98)00092-5 
[12] L. Damoran, “User involvement in the systems design process 
- a practical guide for users,” Behav. Inforfm. Technol., vol. 
15,1996, pp. 363-377, doi: 10.1080/014492996120049 
[13] S. van der Weegen, R. Verwey, M. Spreeuwenberg, H. Tange, 
T. vander Weijden, L. de Witte, “The development of a 
mobile monitoring and feedback tool to stimulate physical 
activity of people with a chronic disease in primary care: a 
user-centered design,” JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 1, 2013, 
doi 10.2196/mhealth.2526 
[14] R. Verwey, S. van der Weegen, H. Tange, M. Spreeuwenberg, 
T. van der Weijden, L. de Witte, “Get moving: the practice 
nurse is watching you! A case study of the user-centred 
design process and testing of a web-based coaching system to 
stimulate the physical activity of chronically ill patients in 
primary care,” Inform. Prim. Care., vol. 20, 2012, pp. 289-298 
[15] J. Vermeulen, J. C. Neyens, M. D. Spreeuwenberg, E. van 
Rossum, W. Sipers, H. Habets, D. J. Hewson, and L. P. de 
Witte, "User-centered development and testing of a 
monitoring system that provides feedback regarding physical 
functioning to elderly people,” Patient Prefer. Adherence, vol. 
7, 2013, pp. 843-854, doi: 10.2147/PPA.S45897 
[16] J. C. Huang, and Y. C. Lee, “Model construction for the 
intention to use telecare in patients with chronic diseases,” 
Int. J. Telemed Appl., vol. 2013, pp. 1-6 2013, doi: 
10.1155/2013/650238 
[17] J. C. Huang, S. P. Lin, “Exploring the Key Factors in the 
Choice of Home Telehealth by Using the Health Belief 
Model,” Telemedice and e-Health, vol. 15, 2009, pp. 87-92, 
doi: 10.1089/tmj.2008.0069 
[18] IBM Corp, IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 21.0, 
Released 2012, Armonk, NY: IBM Corp 
[19] M. L. Jung, and K. Loria, “Acceptance of Swedish e-health 
services,” J. Multidiscip. Healthc., vol. 3, 2010, pp. 55-63, 
doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S9159 
[20] G. Demiris, S. Speedie, and S. Finkelstein, “A questionnaire 
for the assessment of patients' impressions of the risks and 
benefits of home telecare,” Health Care Sciences & Services, 
vol. 6, 2000, pp. 278-284, doi: 10.1258/1357633001935914 
[21] E. V. Wilson, and N. K. Langton, “Modeling Patients’ 
Acceptance of Provider-delivered E-health,” J. Am. Med. 
Inform. 
Assoc., 
vol. 
11, 
2004, 
pp. 
241-248, 
doi: 
10.1197/jamia.M1475 
[22] D. Flynn, P. Gregory, H. Makki, and M. Gabbay, 
“Expectations and experiences of eHealth in primary care: A 
qualitative practice-based investigation,” Int. J. Med. Inform., 
vol. 
78, 
2009, 
pp. 
588–604, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2009.03.008 
[23] J. Krijgsman, J. de Bie, A. Burghouts, J. de Jong, G. J. Cath, 
L. Gennip, and R. Friele, “eHealth, verder dan je denkt: 
eHealth-monitor 2013,” Den Haag, 2013 
[24] http://www.caretechnologyresearch.nl/elabel 
assessed 
on 
January 21, 2014 
[25] http://www.caretechnologyresearch.nl assessed on January 
21, 2014 
[26] T. M. Burkow, and P. A. Bakkevoll, “The Grid as an Enabler 
for Home Based Healthcare Services” in Proceedings of MIE 
2005 Connecting Medical Informatics and Bio-Informatics, R. 
Engelbrecht et al. (Eds.). ENMI, 2005, pp. 1305–1310 
[27] D. D. Vergados, “Service personalization for assistive living 
in a mobile ambient healthcare-networked environment” Pers. 
Ubiquit. Comput., vol 14, 2010, pp. 575-590  
 
 
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Real-world Gyroscope-based Gait Event Detection and Gait Feature Extraction
Paolo Fraccaro
Centre for Health Informatics
City University London, UK.
Paolo.Fraccaro.1@city.ac.uk
Lorcan Walsh
CASALA
Dundalk Institute of
Technology, Ireland.
Lorcan.Walsh@CASALA.ie
Julie Doyle
CASALA
Dundalk Institute of
Technology, Ireland.
Julie.Doyle@CASALA.ie
Dympna O’Sullivan
Centre for Health Informatics
City University London, UK.
Dympna.O’Sullivan.1@city.ac.uk
Abstract—Falls in older adults are a major clinical problem
often resulting in serious injury. The costly nature of clinic-based
testing for the propensity of falling and a move towards home-
based care and monitoring of older adults has led to research
in wearable sensing technologies for identifying fall-related pa-
rameters from activities of daily living. This paper discusses the
development of two algorithms for identifying periods of walking
(gait events) and extracting characteristic patterns for each gait
event (gait features) with a view to identifying the propensity
to fall in older adults. In this paper, we present an evaluation
of the algorithms involving a small real-world dataset collected
from healthy adults in an uncontrolled environment. 92.5% of
gait events were extracted from lower leg gyroscope data from
5 healthy adults (total duration of 33 hours) and over 95% of
the gait characteristic points were identiﬁed in this data. A user
interface to aid clinicians review gait features from walking events
captured over multiple days is also proposed. The work presents
initial steps in the development of a platform for monitoring
patients within their daily routine in uncontrolled environments
to inform clinical decision-making related to falls.
Keywords-eHealth; Falls; Gait; Wearable Sensors.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The global population is ageing - the proportion of the
population over 60 years of age has risen from 8% in 1950
to 11% in 2009, and is expected to dramatically increase to
22% in 2050 [1]. This trend will place an enormous burden
on healthcare systems and the instantiation of a proactive,
preventative approach to delivering healthcare is gaining recog-
nition. Falls are a major problem amongst the older adult
population and can lead to injury, hospitalization, restricted
mobility, and institutionalization [2]. Falls in older adults have
been estimated to cost in the region of U.S. $20 billion per
year [3]. The instrumentation of standard clinical tests has
been shown to discriminate between fallers and non-fallers
[4], [5]. However, as clinic-based testing is costly and often
performed infrequently, research is beginning to focus on home
and community-based technologies. Such technologies would
provide insight into the variability in daily activities over
extended periods. This paper focuses on the development of
technology which translates the assessment of gait from a
clinical to a home/community based setting.
Technologies for home-based gait monitoring can be di-
vided into two categories: non-contact technologies and wear-
able sensors. Non-contact technologies range from image-
based techniques (e.g. the Microsoft Kinect platform [6]) to
sensorised ﬂoors (such as the GaitRite [7] walkway or The
ELSI Underﬂoor Sensing Laminate by Marimils Oy [8]).
Image-based systems have the limitation of not catering well
with the changing orientation and/or position of the person
or the inability to capture gait data for the entire day as
the person moves between different locations. Additionally
image-based systems have privacy concerns. While sensorised
ﬂoor systems may provide a high level of detail, often these
systems are expensive to deploy and require specialist expertise
to install. Motion sensor based platforms, such as Passive
Infra-Red (PIR) sensors, can capture variations in transition
times between locations in an unobtrusive fashion, however
the gait metrics derived for such systems are generally limited
to gait speed measurements and their diurnal variations [9].
Wearable technologies are generally composed of inertial
sensors (including accelerometers and/or gyroscopes) applied
to various locations on the body (such as the waist or on
the lower shanks). Wearable sensors have been shown to
derive multiple gait parameters (such as stride length) from
walking events (known as gait events) through identifying the
repeating gait characteristic points of the gait cycle (such as
initial contact point). In many cases wearable sensors have
extracted the gait characteristic points using angular velocity
(captured via a gyroscope) and/or linear acceleration data, from
inertial sensors (often placed on the legs) [10], [11]. To date,
a number of gait feature extraction algorithms have focused
upon gyroscope data which quantiﬁes rotation in multiple axes,
and is therefore less dependent on the exact positioning of
the sensor [12]. Wearable inertial technologies may provide a
high utility (in terms of the number of gait features they can
report), however they also require the conscious participation
of the user (for example in applying the sensors daily). As
such the successful instantiation of wearable sensors over
extended term deployments may prove challenging. In contrast,
wearable inertial sensors continuously extracting gait features
can monitor and quantify longitudinal variability in gait, and
this may provide a greater clinical insight into why falls occur
than a single clinic-based falls assessment.
Inertial sensor technologies have recently been investigated
for their suitability for extended deployments in home and
community settings [13]. While clinic-based data collection
and analysis platforms are becoming more stable, signiﬁcant
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

challenges exist when moving towards the real-world [14].
For example, data collection in uncontrolled environments
requires stable and extensively tested platforms requiring
minimal user interaction, with the added complexity of data
being transferred seamlessly to central servers. Analysis will
likely be subsequently performed on the collected data with
results made available for later examination by users, carers
and/or clinicians. In the context of gait data, this challenge
is made more difﬁcult through the highly variable nature of
real-world gait data; users may only walk for limited periods
of time, those walking events may be short in duration, the
environment may affect the nature of the gait cycle, and
the persons own gait cycle may change throughout the day
(perhaps across different environment, through tiredness, from
diurnal variations and/or the effect of medications taken at
different times throughout the day). Potential clinical beneﬁts
lie in bringing gait information together with contextual details,
as demonstrated through associating images with gait data
[13]. Furthermore, making this gait information accessible to
clinicians through an interactive interface is crucial to the
success of the system. This interactive tool must be easy to use,
present meaningful data in a format that is easily interpretable
and support the clinician in querying the data so as to inform
an appropriate intervention.
This paper discusses the development of a platform which
identiﬁes gait events in continuous inertial data from wearable
sensors, extracts gait features for each of these events, and
presents this information to a clinician through a simple
interface. A signiﬁcant contribution of this work is that it
pertains to the application of gait feature extraction on real-
world data, and uses adaptive algorithms designed to allow for
intra- and inter-individual variations. This system is evaluated
using data collected from a healthy adult cohort. Future work
will evaluate this system with an older adult cohort. This study
design has been chosen in order to minimise any technical or
user acceptance issues before involving a sensitive older adult
cohort. The ﬁrst algorithm analyses long duration (typically
over 6 hours) gyroscope signals across 5 healthy adults,
recorded in an uncontrolled environment during a routine day,
to detect possible gait events. The second algorithm augments
an adaptive gait feature extraction approach [11] to work on
gait cycle signal shape, identiﬁes the gait characteristic points
and subsequently calculates commonly reported gait parame-
ters. Results from an evaluation of the algorithms using data
from healthy adults is presented along with a proposed user
interface to feed back gait parameters for walking segments
performed throughout the day to a falls specialist.
II.
BACKGROUND
In a recent review, Taraldsen et al. [15] surveyed a number
of papers examining physical activity in older adults, all
using accelerometers, over durations longer than 24 hours.
Studies were broadly divided into two areas: Activity Counts
(reporting energy expenditure and/or intensity of activity) and
Activity Recognition (reporting stepping or walking events,
posture, and/or transitions). It was noted that in order to
compare across studies there is a need for a consensus in
both activity monitoring protocols and also the variables (in
this case, gait features) reported. As described brieﬂy in
Section I, both the technologies and methods by which gait
features are derived varies widely. The diversity in gait feature
extraction algorithms is evidenced in a systematic review using
inertial sensors by Yang et al. [16]. Signiﬁcant effort has been
undertaken to validate these gait features using clinical gold
standards. However, as gait monitoring moves from a stand-
alone clinical snapshot (taken no more than once per year)
to multi-day home-based gait monitoring, signiﬁcant technical
and person-centered challenges exist including the processing
of continuous gait data, feeding back the gait information to
clinicians and users, and the acceptability of the gait data
collection system.
In terms of moving towards data collection in uncontrolled
environments using inertial sensors, gyroscope-based features
of gait cycles have been identiﬁed from walking data by
comparing successive steps and extracting speciﬁc gait char-
acteristic points [11], [17], [18]. Four of these characteristic
points [19] (as illustrated in Figure 1) are relatively easy to
identify:
1)
Mid-Swing (MS) point: highest position of the leg
during the gait cycle;
2)
Initial-Contact (IC) point: initial contact of the foot
with the ﬂoor;
3)
Full-Contact (FC) point: full contact of all the surface
of the foot and the ﬂoor;
4)
Terminal-Contact (TC) point: terminal contact of the
foot with the ﬂoor before the next step.
Figure 1: Example of gait gyroscope signal from the left shank
over 7 gait cycles with annotated points 1) MS point; 2) IC
point; 3) FC point; 4) TC point.
Over recent years, several algorithms have been described
for the identiﬁcation of these characteristic points [11], [20],
[21]. In particular Sabatini et al [20] adopted an approach
using empirically-deﬁned signal values during experiments.
However, it was found that this was too dependent on speciﬁc
measurements, and not always feasible in everyday-life context
across varying environments and people. Subsequently, Lee
et al [21] adopted an approach focussing on ﬁnding patterns
within the gait signal and demonstrated this using a quasi real-
time analysis system. The system produced a high accuracy
and a small delay in detection of gait events. Greene et al [11]
used an adaptive approach to initially identify the MS points
and to subsequently identify the remaining gait characteristic
points (IC, FC, and TC). This approach allowed for varying
heights in the MS point which occur both between successive
gait cycles and also across different individuals. Subsequently
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

local minima and maxima were determined through ﬁrstly
ensuring they were of a certain range and subsequently ﬁnding
the peak and trough points.
After the characteristic gait points are found, a number
of gait features can then be derived. While the number of
gait parameters that may be extracted from the gait cycle is
large (for example, 130 variables were identiﬁed from falls risk
assessments using inertial sensors [22]), often only a subset of
these are commonly reported in the literature. These include:
•
Cadence: number of steps per minute.
•
Stride time: the time from IC of one foot to IC of the
next foot.
•
Coefﬁcient of Variation (CV) of stride time: ratio of
stride time standard deviation and stride time mean.
•
Stride length: distance covered between the TC and
IC points of the same foot.
•
CV stride length: ratio of stride length standard devi-
ation and stride length mean.
•
Stride velocity: stride length divided by stride time.
•
CV stride velocity: ratio of stride velocity standard
deviation over stride velocity mean.
As outlined above, signiﬁcant work has been undertaken in
the extraction of gait features from inertial data from wearable
sensors in clinic-based environments. However, limited re-
search has taken place in catering for the additional challenges
in moving towards gait assessment from uncontrolled real-
world environments (such as the home and community).
III.
METHODS
The gait of 5 healthy participants (3M, 2F, mean age: 30
years old) has been measured using the SHIMMER wireless
sensor platform [23] placed on participants lower shanks using
an elasticated bandage. All participants worked in a research
environment mainly performing desk-based research and were
asked to continue performing their normal daily activities. The
participants were instructed to wear the sensors for as long
as was comfortable. The sensors were removed at the end
of the working day corresponding to a mean duration of 6.6
hours of data. Shimmer data were synchronized manually after
data collection. Accelerometer and gyroscope signals were
recorded at a sampling rate of 51.2 Hz and stored locally on
an SD card. The gyroscope data was low-pass ﬁltered with
a cut-off frequency at 20Hz using a 5th order Butterworth
ﬁlter. Gyroscope signals were post-processed off-line using the
MATLAB R⃝platform [24].
IV.
REAL-WORLD GAIT FEATURE EXTRACTION
Two novel algorithms are presented in this section. The ﬁrst
algorithm identiﬁes periods (or frames) of inertial sensor data
where a gait event has likely occurred. Subsequently, for each
frame of data, a second algorithm is applied which extracts
multiple gait features.
A. Identiﬁcation of Gait Events
Each frame of gait data is found by identifying a recurrent
signal peak corresponding to the MS point occurring over mul-
tiple gait cycles. Below, the steps of the algorithm are described
in detail. Figure 2 shows multiple gait events identiﬁed from
continuous gyroscope data.
Step I - LP Filter: The signals are low pass ﬁltered
with a zero-phase 5th order Butterworth ﬁlter with a 3Hz cut
off frequency.
Step II - Calculate the adaptive threshold: An adaptive
threshold is used to identify the MS point candidates in the left
and right gyroscope signals. Firstly peaks are found using the
derivative of the signal. The adaptive threshold is deﬁned as
an average of heights, in degrees/sec, of the top ten peaks and
scaled by 0.2. A minimum value of 40 degrees/sec is taken.
Step III - Group MS peaks to identify gait event: All
peaks above the adaptive threshold are found. Gait events are
grouped together as one event as long as two MS peak points
are not more than 4 seconds apart. Additionally, each gait event
must last a minimum of 15 seconds. This duration has been
chosen to ensure that only events where steady state walking
occurs are examined.
Step IV - Ensure left and right occurrence of gait
events: Identiﬁed gait events are compared between both
signals and MS peaks must occur consecutively.
B. Extraction of Gait Features from Gait Events: Framing
algorithm
The extraction of gait characteristic points from the gy-
roscope data was performed using a modiﬁed version of the
approach used by Greene et al [11], as per Figure 3. Initially,
an adaptive threshold, proposed by Greene et al. [11] over
the entire gait event is found (step II) and used to identify
MS points (step III). Subsequently, a novel technique taking
advantage of the shape of the gait cycle signal, has been
adopted to identify the other gait characteristic points as shown
in Figure 4 (A). In order to ﬁnd the IC, FC and TC points,
the signal is windowed between consecutive MS points (step
III). The ﬁrst local minimum is deﬁned as the IC point,
subsequently a local maximum is deﬁned as the FC point, and
lastly another local minimum is deﬁned as the TC point (step
IV). Figure 4 shows an example of the gyroscope signal and
characteristic points during the ﬁnal phases of the algorithm.
Step I - LP Filter: A 5th order Butterworth low-pass
ﬁlter with cut-off frequency 5Hz is applied to the gyroscope
data to remove noise components.
Step II - Calculating the adaptive threshold:
The
adaptive threshold is deﬁned as per Greene et al [11] and is
calculated as:
th = 0.8 1
N
N
X
i=1
(ωMLi > ωML)
(1)
Where ωML is the mean of the medio-lateral (ML) angular
velocity signal and N is the number of samples occurring
above the mean.
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2: Example of right gyroscope signal processing
through the described algorithm where the Roman Numberals
in the circles refer to the steps of the algorithm. Part (a) is
the gyroscope signal ﬁltered at 3Hz. Each identiﬁed gait event
is outlined by dotted rectangles. Part (b) shows the gyroscope
signal for the gait event occurring between 10060 and 10210
seconds. The black dotted rectangle delineates the entire gait
event identiﬁed. The shaded rectangle (slightly larger than the
black dotted rectangle) shows the edges of the gait event as
identiﬁed by the gait feature extraction algorithm.
Step III - Identifying the MS points: MS points are
deﬁned to occur above the threshold and the peak of the signal
above the threshold are identiﬁed as candidate MS points.
Candidate points occurring after 0.5 seconds are excluded.
Step IV - Frame the signal between consecutive MS
points: The 5Hz ﬁltered signal is framed between 2 MS
candidates and the highest peak in the frame is selected as
FC candidate.
Step V - Identify IC and TC points: The minima
occurring between the ﬁrst MS point and the FC point is
identiﬁed as the IC point and the minima occurring between
the FC point and the second MS point is identiﬁed as the TC
point. This process is repeated for each frame. For each point,
a window of data occurring on the 20Hz signal 0.1 seconds
either side of the point is extracted and each point is updated
to occur at the local minimum within this window.
Step VI - Artefact rejection: If any artefacts, identiﬁed
using the following list, were found, that data was removed
from the calculation of gait cycle parameters.
•
If the difference between IC and TC points is greater
than 2 seconds.
•
If the TC point is before the IC point.
•
If the TC point is before the FC point.
•
If the difference between two MS points is greater than
1.75 times the mean difference within that frame.
Step VII - Calculate gait parameters: A number of
gait parameters have been derived from the gait characteristic
points [11], [25] including walking time, number of steps,
cadence, stride time, CV stride time, stride length, CV stride
length, stride velocity, and CV stride velocity.
V.
RESULTS
Tables 1 and 2 report results from the analysis of the daily
monitoring of the 5 healthy participants involved in the study.
Data was recorded for between 5.5 to 7.9 hours long (Table
1). In particular, participants 1 and 3 (with a length record
of 5.6 and 6.5 hours respectively) had the highest number of
gait events (27 and 25) and walking times (1413.8 seconds
and 1214.29 seconds). Participants 2 and 5 (length record
respectively 7.9 and 7.4 hours) had the lowest number of gait
events (15 and 7) and walking times (650.89 seconds and
566.78 seconds).
To evaluate the accuracy of the algorithm for gait event
identiﬁcation, a manual analysis of signals was performed,
thus providing a gold standard for evaluation. The algorithm
correctly identiﬁed 92.5% of all gait events. Such a high
accuracy is due of the adopted adaptive techniques that allow
the algorithm to correctly analyse signals in different gait
situations (e.g. different speed or walking time). Table 1 shows
also that globally the minimum walking time was about 20
seconds (when walking periods less than 15 seconds were
excluded) for all participants (except for participant 5 with
26.58 seconds), while the maximum registered walking time
was longer, for example participants 5 (197.10 seconds), 1
(178.50 seconds) and 3 (154.90 seconds) and shorter for
participants 2 and 4 (81.31 seconds and 90.88 seconds).
All gait derived parameters in Table 2 have been calculated
taking advantage of the identiﬁed characteristic points through
the Framing algorithm. The mean cadence was between 99.62
and 110.85 steps/min for participants 1,2,3 and 4. Participant
5 had the highest cadence with a value of 129.07 steps/min.
Concerning the mean stride time, participant 3 had the highest
average value (1.18 seconds) while the other participants
were all around 1.10 seconds. The mean stride length was
higher for participants 1 and 3 (1.20 and 1.21 metres), while
participants 2 and 4 had the lowest values (1.01 and 1.02
metres). Finally, the mean stride velocity was around 1.10 m/s
for all participants except participant 4 who had a value of
0.97 m/s. Concerning the coefﬁcient of variations, the values
were around 0.10% for the mean CV stride time and 0.5 for
mean CV stride length and velocity.
Gait information produced by these algorithms can be
overwhelming and difﬁcult for clinicians to interpret due to the
number of metrics reported, and their decontextualised nature.
A prototype user interface is proposed in Figure 5 to allow
clinicians user friendly access to information concerning daily
gait patterns. Such an interface allows the clinician to inter-
rogate gait data as required. General information concerning
the selected day (walking time per day and total activity per
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 3: Framing algorithm.
Figure 4: Example gyroscope signal for one gait event (A) and a number of consecutive gait events (B). In (A), a single gait
event, between MS points, is shown along with IC, FC and TC points. In (B), the gait event under analysis (highlighted with a
transparent blue shading) is shown along with an artefact (identiﬁed as no future IC, FC or TC points are found). The numbers
in circles refer to steps in the Framing algorithm from Figure 3.
TABLE I: Results from the gait experiments.
Subject
ID
Total
record
time [hours]
# of iden-
tiﬁed gait
events
correctly identiﬁed
events (number of
missed)
Total
walking
time [s]
Min
walking
time [s]
Max
walking
time [s]
Min # of
steps
Max # of
steps
1
5.6
27
90 % (3)
1413.8
19.38
178.5
31
352
2
7.9
15
88.2% (2)
650.89
19.75
81.31
29
161
3
6.5
25
89.2% (3)
1214.29
19.67
154.9
33
253
4
5.8
19
95%(1)
679.06
18.55
90.88
25
171
5
7.4
7
100%
566.78
26.58
197.1
54
425
hour) or the previous week (activity over previous week) is
presented on the upper panel. The middle panel provides the
ability to select gait events which occurred throughout the
day in order to provide gait information for that event. The
calculated features for the selected gait event (as shown on the
bottom right) and the corresponding gyroscope signal (bottom
left) is also presented.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a platform that extracts gait infor-
mation from gyroscope sensors placed on the lower shanks.
The system automatically identiﬁes gait events, extracts gait
characteristic points for each event, and subsequently derives
gait features. The identiﬁcation algorithm accurately detected
92.5% of gait events from a day of gait data from 5 healthy
adults (total duration of 33 hours). Upon a visual examination,
the Framing algorithm successfully identiﬁed over 95% of
the gait characteristic points using gyroscope data from the
successive gait cycles within the gait events. A validation study
using a larger and more varied cohort is required to evaluate
the accuracy of the Framing algorithm. Further experiments
with older people (mean age >60 yrs) will be beneﬁcial
for the project as studies reveal that one in three adults
aged 65 and older fall each year. However this validation
will be difﬁcult as traditional approaches have been clinic-
based, and this may not translate well for uncontrolled home
and community environments. For example, the context of
where the person is walking may be very important (e.g. is
the surface uneven?) or other factors which may affect the
biomechanics of walking (e.g. what type of shoes are being
worn?). Additionally, longitudinal changes in gait may be
more important, and as such technologies which provide a
broad insight may be clinically useful (e.g. how has gait speed
changed over the past year?).
251
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE II: Derived parameters from the analysis.
Sub
ID
Cadence (num steps
per min)
Mean stride time [s]
Mean
CV
stride
time [%]
Mean stride length
[m]
Mean
CV
stride
length [%]
Mean stride veloc-
ity [m per s]
Mean CV stride ve-
locity [%]
1
104.43 ±12.43
1.14 ± 0.12
0.12 ± 0.06
1.20 ± 0.09
0.48 ± 0.07
1.09 ± 0.11
0.52 ± 0.12
2
104.92± 15.27
1.08 ± 0.14
0.11 ± 0.05
1.01 ± 0.07
0.49 ± 0.05
0.97 ± 0.13
0.51 ± 0.06
3
99.62 ± 7.06
1.18 ± 0.06
0.10 ± 0.04
1.21 ± 0.08
0.48 ± 0.05
1.04 ± 0.09
0.49 ± 0.05
4
110.85 ± 13.67
1.04 ± 0.19
0.12 ± 0.08
1.12 ± 0.09
0.48 ± 0.08
1.12 ± 0.15
0.50 ± 0.08
5
129.07 ± 13.22
1.10 ± 0.04
0.11 ± 0.03
1.02 ± 0.05
0.51 ± 0.04
1.12 ± 0.04
0.52 ± 0.04
Figure 5: Clinician user interface for gait data
While the platform presented in this paper is applied to data
from healthy adults, on-going work is investigating applying
the methods to data collected in an older adult population
where it can be reviewed (post data collection) by a clinical
falls specialist. This system aims to present more contextu-
alized gait information, collected in home and community
settings, to support clinical decision making and inform falls
interventions, as necessary. Signiﬁcant challenges exist in the
further development of this system including extracting gait
features from individuals with an impaired gait.
We further plan to implement the proposed user interface in
a web-based system (accessible via secure connection through
laptop, tablet or smartphone) which could be accessed by both
physicians and patients with the aim of leading to better self-
management of the older population.
REFERENCES
[1]
Affairs/Population U.N. E.&S., Division. World Population Prospects,
2009.
[2]
M.E. Tinetti, ”Preventing Falls in Elderly Persons,” N. Engl. J. Med. vol.
348(1), pp. 4249, 2003.
[3]
J.A. Stevens, P.S. Corso, E.A. Finkelstein, and T.R. Miller, ”The costs
of fatal and non-fatal falls among older adults,” Inj. Prev., vol. 12(5), pp.
290295, 2006.
[4]
E.P. Doheny, et al., ”Falls classiﬁcation using tri-axial accelerometers
during the ﬁve-times-sit-to-stand test,” Gait Posture, vol. 38(4), pp. 1021-
1025, 2013 .
[5]
B.R. Greene, et al., ”Quantitative falls risk assessment using the timed
up and go test,” IEEE Trans. BioMed. Eng., vol. 57(12), pp. 29182926,
2010.
[6]
E. Stone and M. Skubic, ”Unobtrusive, Continuous, In-Home Gait
Measurement Using the Microsoft Kinect,” IEEE Trans. BioMed. Eng.,
vol. 60(10), pp. 2925-2932, 2013.
[7]
GAITRite Systems, http://www.gaitrite.com/, [retrieved: January, 2014].
[8]
MariMils, http://www.marimils.com/, [retrieved: January, 2014].
[9]
L. Walsh, B.R. Greene, A. Burns, and C. Ni Scanaill, ”Ambient assess-
ment of daily activity and gait velocity,” Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Perv. Comp.
Tech. for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth 2011), pp. 418-425, 2011.
[10]
I. Tien, S.D. Glaser, R. Bajcsy, D.S. Goodin and M.J. Aminoff, ”Results
of using a wireless inertial measuring system to quantify gait motions in
control subjects,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Tech. Biomed., vol. 14(4), pp. 904915,
2010.
[11]
B.R. Greene, et al., ”Adaptive estimation of temporal gait parameters
using body-worn gyroscopes,” Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Bio. Soc. (EMBC
2011), pp. 1296-1299, 2010.
[12]
K. Tong K and M.H. Granat, ”A practical gait analysis system using
gyroscopes,” Med. Educ. Phys., vol. 21(2), pp. 8794, 1999.
[13]
A.F. Smeaton, J. Lanagan and B. Caulﬁeld, ”Combining wearable
sensors for location-free monitoring of gait in older people,” J. Ambient
Intell. Smart Environ., vol. 4(4), pp. 335346, 2012.
[14]
J. Doyle, C. Bailey, C. Ni Scanaill and F. van den Berg, ”Lessons
learned in deploying independent living technologies to older adults
homes,” Univ. Access Inf. Soc., 2013.
[15]
K. Taraldsen, S.F.M. Chastin, I.I. Riphagen, B. Vereijken and J.L.
Helbostad, ”Physical activity monitoring by use of accelerometer-based
body-worn sensors in older adults: A systematic literature review of
current knowledge and applications,” Maturitas, vol.71, pp. 13-19, 2012.
[16]
S. Yang and Q. Li, ”Inertial Sensor-based Methods in Walking Speed
Estimation: A Systematic Review,” Sensors, vol. 12, pp. 6102-6116,
2012.
[17]
K. Aminian, B. Najaﬁ, C. Bla, P.F. Leyvraz and P. Robert, ”Spatio-
temporal parameters of gait measured by an ambulatory system using
miniature gyroscopes,” Int. J. Biomech., vol. 35(5), pp. 689699, 2002.
[18]
K. Aminian, et al., ”Evaluation of an ambulatory system for gait analysis
in hip osteoarthritis and after total hip replacement,” Gait Posture, vol.
20(1), pp. 102107, 2004.
[19]
J. Perry, Gait Analysis: Normal and Pathological Function: Slack, 1992.
[20]
A. Sabatini, C. Martelloni, S. Scapellato and F. Cavallo, ”Assessment of
walking features from foot inertial sensing,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 52(3), pp. 486494, 2005.
[21]
J. Lee and E. Park, ”Quasi real-time gait event detection using shank-
attached gyroscopes,” Med. Bio. Eng. Comp., vol. 49(6), pp. 707712,
2011.
[22]
J. Howcroft, J. Kofman and E.D. Lemaire, ”Review of fall risk assess-
ment in geriatric populations using inertial sensors,” J. Neuro. Rehab.,
vol. 10:91, 2013.
[23]
A. Burns, et al., ”SHIMMER A Wireless Sensor Platform for Noninva-
sive Biomedical Research,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 10(9), pp. 1527-1534,
2010.
[24]
MATLAB, http://www.mathworks.co.uk/, [retrieved: January, 2014].
[25]
E.P. Doheny, T.G. Foran and B.R. Greene, ”A single gyroscope method
for spatial gait analysis,” Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Bio. Soc (EMBC 2010),
pp. 1300-1303, 2010.
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Developing a Supportive Tool to Facilitate Shared Decision Making in Dementia  
Involvement of end users in the design phase 
 
Marijke Span, Marike Hettinga, Carolien Smits, Leontine 
Groen-van de Ven, Jan Jukema 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
m.span@windesheim.nl, m.hettinga@windesheim.nl, 
chm.smits@windesheim.nl, lm.groen-
vande.ven@windesheim.nl, js.jukema@windesheim.nl 
 
 
 
Myrra Vernooij-Dassen  
Radboud University Nijmegen, IQHealth Care and 
Department of Primary Care, Kalorama Foundation, 
Radboud Alzheimer Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands  
myrra.vernooij-dassen@radboudumc.nl 
Jan Eefsting 
EMGO+ Free University Medical Centre of Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands 
j.eefsting@zgijv.nl 
 
Abstract— Developing an IT application facilitating Shared 
Decision Making (SDM) in dementia is complex. This is caused 
by the increasing cognitive decline associated with dementia 
and the number of involved people (people with dementia, 
informal caregivers and case managers). The aim of this study 
is to identify design issues in developing a user-friendly IT 
application facilitating Shared decision-making in dementia. 
Data collection in this study with an iterative participatory 
design based on the CeHRes roadmap included: focus group 
interviews with people with dementia, informal caregivers and 
case managers; a cognitive walkthrough with researchers; and 
a first usability test with case managers. This resulted in a list 
of issues addressing the quality of the system, content and 
service and a revision of the tool before informal caregivers 
and people with dementia will be invited to participate in 
usability tests.  
 
Keywords-shared decision-making, dementia, supportive 
device, design, co-creation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Dementia is a degenerative disease that increasingly 
affects people worldwide; from 66 million in 2030 to 115 
million in 2050 [1, 2]. Decreasing abilities address memory 
loss, oute planning, behavioral change and orientation 
problems among other things. People with dementia and 
their informal caregivers are faced with many problems and 
decisions addressing both care and well-being [3, 4]. 
Unfortunately, participation of people with dementia in 
decision-making processes is not self-evident [5]. 
Shared Decision Making (SDM) is an approach that 
involves 
patients 
in 
making 
medical 
decisions 
in 
collaboration with professionals. [6, 7]. SDM increases 
patient autonomy and empowers the patient [5]. Several 
decision aids (digital or paper based) have been developed 
to facilitate SDM in medical decisions in the clinical setting. 
Our research program aims to develop an IT application to 
facilitate case managers in supporting SDM in care 
networks of people with dementia in a community setting.  
 
This IT application distinguishes itself from existing IT 
applications in aiming to do justice to all involved parties, 
both in decision-making and in its design and development. 
With regard to SDM, the new IT application differs from 
existing decision aids. First, people with dementia and their 
caregivers have to make many decisions over time versus 
single –issue decisions. Second, the new IT application has 
to take into account the (decreasing) cognitive capacities of 
people with dementia versus decision aids that focus on 
cognitive able people. Third, SDM in dementia is 
characterized by a variety of involved persons, a network, 
versus regular decision aids focusing on patient-clinician 
relation. Fourth, decisions people with dementia and their 
informal caregivers have to make concern mainly care and 
well-being aspects, versus medical decisions in traditional 
decision aids.  
The new IT application aims to increase the influence of 
people with dementia in decision-making by giving them a 
voice in the decision-making process of care and well-being 
related issues.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II elaborates 
on the complexity of designing an IT application in 
dementia networks. Section III describes the design and  
methods used. Section IV presents the main results: design 
issues. Finally, Section V provides a conclusion and future 
work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Developing an IT application facilitating SDM in 
dementia is complex because it involves a variety of people 
(people with dementia, informal caregivers and case 
managers) with different capacities and different interests 
and the cognitive decline inherent to dementia. Computer 
interfaces do not fit all persons. Older persons and disabled 
persons, e.g., persons with dementia are not average web 
users. They have problems using a ‘one size fits all’ 
computer interface [8]. Zaphiris et al. [9] distinguished 
guidelines when designing computer interfaces for older 
people in their review (e.g., information should be 
concentrated mainly in the center; clear navigation should 
253
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

be provided; screen layout should be simple, clear and 
consistent; colored text on colored background should be 
avoided). Savitch and Zaphiris [10] noticed that the 
terminology and phrases used when designing for people 
with dementia are extremely important – possibly more so 
than for the average web user. Several researchers give 
dementia related interface recommendations to designers: 
facilitating an easy orientation [11, 12]; using cues that are 
familiar; legible and distinctive  [13]; using touch screens, 
large format screen and large font sizes, minimal use of text; 
use of a hypermedia structure with limited options for 
selection, and an attractive design [14]; using tablets [15]. 
Less information is available addressing design of 
interactive IT applications for users with different 
capacities. Nevertheless, involvement of end users is 
mentioned as an important feature [16]. Moreover, 
involvement of people with dementia leads to better attuned 
IT applications [17].  
The present study, developing an IT application 
facilitating SDM in dementia, is part of a major research 
program on SDM in care networks of people with dementia 
aiming to improve professional care. Besides, developing 
theory building and competencies for case managers, 
developing a supportive IT application to facilitate SDM in 
dementia care networks aiming to contribute to dementia 
care practice. In a prior study we identified user 
requirements to determine the content of such an IT 
application [18]. This paper focuses on designing the 
computer interface that has to take these user requirements 
into account. The aim of this study is to identify design 
issues. The research question read: which design issues can 
be identified in developing an IT application facilitating 
SDM in dementia.  
III. 
APPROACH 
In this study with an iterative participatory design we 
consider involvement of end users, particularly people with 
dementia [17], as one of the key factors for developing a 
user-friendly and usable IT application.  
We used the CeHRes  (Center for eHealth Research and 
Disease Management) roadmap for the development of the 
IT application, because this approach connects a Human 
Centered Design with eHealth Business Modeling and 
emphasizes the importance of involving all stakeholders to 
develop sustainable innovations [19]. The CeHRes roadmap 
offers a holistic framework consisting of five phases:  
contextual inquiry phase; value specification phase; design 
phase; operationalization; and summative evaluation. This 
paper describes the third phase, the design of the IT 
application facilitating SDM in dementia.  
 
A. Focusgroup interviews 
First, eight focus group interviews were organized with 
end users including people with dementia, informal 
caregivers and case managers. The goal of these focus group 
interviews was to receive feedback on the first mock-ups of 
the IT application, the DEcideguide (Figure 1). The mock-
up, including 11 slides, was presented in the focus groups 
[19]. End users were asked to comment on the different 
slides in common, textual, in content, on user -friendliness 
and on the (attractiveness of) design. 
Twenty-seven end users participated in the six focus 
group interviews. The two focus group interviews with 
people with dementia and informal caregivers consisted 
both of six and four participants respectively. The focus 
group interviews with case managers consisted both times 
of the same seven participants. Participants of the second 
focus groups commented both on the mock-up and the 
feedback of the first focus group. The principal researcher, 
assisted by another researcher or designer, moderated the 
focus groups.  
People with mild to moderate dementia were recruited 
from two day-care centers. Informal caregivers were 
recruited from residential homes and the Dutch Alzheimer 
Association. Case managers were recruited from regional 
case managers’ networks. All participants gave their written 
informed consent. The focus group interviews that lasted 1-
2 hours were audio taped and transcribed verbatim.  
Framework analysis was used to analyze the focus group 
interview transcriptions [20]. The three levels of assessing 
design quality of the CeHRes was used as framework to 
identify design issues: system quality (technology that is 
user-friendly and safe), content quality (content that is 
understandable and meaningful) and service quality (service 
that is timely and persuasive) [21].  
 
 
Figure 1. Concept SDM application. Perspective of people with 
dementia used in focus groups 
 
B. Cognitive walkthrough 
Second, 
a 
cognitive 
walkthrough 
session 
with 
researchers was organized to test the first interactive 
prototype of the DEcideguide (Figure 2). During a two 
hours session three researchers tested the DEcideguide using 
a case with the perspectives of a person with dementia, an 
informal caregiver and a case manager to identify bugs, 
possible user problems and testing the user friendliness. The 
session was audio and video taped. The analysis of the 
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

transcripts focused on identifying (additional) design issues 
to the focus group interviews related to system, content and 
service quality.  
 
 
Figure 2. Chat in  the DEcideguide used in cognitive walkthrough and 
usability test 
 
C. Usability tests  
Third, usability tests were performed with the adapted 
interactive prototype of the DEcideguide (Figure 2). The 
goal of these usability tests is to further refine the 
DEcideguide into a prototype that is robust enough to be 
used in a pilot study [22].  Case managers tested the 
working prototype in a two hour Think aloud session [20]. 
The session was audio and video taped and transcribed 
verbatim. The analysis of the transcript focused on 
identifying additional design issues. After adjusting the 
DEcideguide, usability tests will be conducted with elderly, 
informal caregivers and people with dementia in succession. 
We chose for this iteration in participants to iron out major 
bugs in an early stage in order to enable end users to focus 
on the refinement of the DEcideguide.   
 
IV. 
RESULTS  
A. Focus group interviews 
All respondents participated because they experience 
decision-making in dementia as an important and difficult 
area. They expect a supportive tool to be very useful and 
helpful. The design issues that arose from feedback of 
respondents could be assigned to the three levels of design 
quality: system; content and service quality.  Design issues 
addressed mainly the system quality and the content quality. 
Case managers were the only respondents who commented 
directly on the service quality. They considered the tool as 
very nice and useful for their practice. All respondents 
commented on the content quality and agreed about the 
difficulty of the content: too much and too difficult. 
Moreover, case managers’ comments on the content of the 
tool focused on extra options they would like: e.g., skype, 
agenda, domotics, and separate communication with family 
members. Informal caregivers commented in particular on 
terminology. Similar questions were removed and synonym, 
more familiar, words given (e.g., ‘social contacts’ changed 
into ‘family and friends’).  People with dementia advised 
simplifying the tool in words and size. Most feedback 
addressed the system quality. Main comment of all 
participants focused on the ‘ease of use’ that was failing 
(Table 1). 
 
TABLE 1 DESIGN ISSUES IN DEVELOPING THE DECIDEGUIDE 
Design quality 
Identified design issues  
System quality 
User-
friendliness 
‘Nice to haves’ 
-Adding things like an agenda; personalized part in tool for case 
managers; linking with domotics; skype function 
-Alerts for daily activities (taking medication; eating etc)   
 
Navigation structure/ease of use 
-Too much screens for people with dementia (cm/ pwd)a 
-Simplifying the screens for people with dementia (pwd) 
-Too many examples with too many colors with too small letters (not all 
pwd agreed) 
-messy screens with too much information (ic) 
-Messages in timeline with chat become a big mess (cm) 
Presentation of content 
-use of smileys is clear but not really nice  (pwd)  
-use of colors red, orange and green is nice. Use of smileys is a bit 
childlike (if) 
-frequency of monitor question differs per network. Monitoring well-
being is important (ic).  
-Attention for use of red color in tool. Red smiley is similar to feeling not 
well. Using also red color for a (neutral) theme suggests ‘danger’ (ic)  
- use of colors in messages is not clear/distinguishing enough (cm+ic) 
Design 
persuasiveness 
Lens for design 
All network members view all messages because the starting point of the 
tool is transparency and open communication.  This is not always 
advisable for person with dementia.  (cm) 
Content quality 
Comprehen-
sibility 
Comprehensibility/Terminology=semantic shortcomings 
-Use of some terms is not clear enough and tool difficult; e.g., options and 
pros and cons of options (pwd)  
-Use of terms is not specific enough; e.g., ‘How are you right now?’ 
instead of  ‘How are you today?’ (pwd) 
 
Accuracy 
- Date and year are incorrect (pwd+ic)  
 
Relevance 
- Open questions are less attractive than question that also offer examples.  
- tool is too directive (pwd) 
- tool is directive: easy to use because you don’t have to invent answers 
by yourself  (ic)  
-adding a wish button… (ic)  
Service quality 
Perceived 
usefulness 
- the tool is very useful  in facilitating SDM in dementia  but how useful 
will it be for people with dementia? (cm) 
aPwd=person with dementia; ic=informal caregiver; cm= case manager 
 
B. Cognitive walkthrough 
The cognitive walkthrough with the research team 
resulted in a fundamental discussion that addressed the 
complexity of the context of decision-making in dementia. 
Researchers commented mainly on the complexity of the 
DEcideguide in particularly for people with dementia. 
Researchers argued that the desirable starting point of the 
DEcideguide, transparency between all network members, 
easily conflicted with the well-being of people with 
dementia. Researchers advised to simplify the DEcideguide 
for those end users. 
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Usability tests 
The feedback of case managers addressed mainly the 
system quality. A variety of bugs was detected together with 
lack of user-friendliness and presence of too many technical 
errors. Case managers commented also on service quality. 
They experienced the tool as very useful and helpful to their 
daily practice but in the mean time they doubted whether the 
tool would be useful for the current group of people with 
dementia because of the lack of computer experience of that 
group. In their opinion the transparency in the DEcideguide 
can be confronting and therefore conflicting with the well-
being of people with dementia. Many people with dementia 
are suspicious. On the one hand, transparency helps to 
decrease suspicion. On the other hand, transparency can 
give an overload of information that people with dementia 
cannot cope with and could result in restlessness. The 
comments of the case managers resulted in a revision of the 
DEcideguide. After this revision is finished other end users 
will test the DEcideguide (Table 1). 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND  FURTHER WORK 
The design phase of the DEcideguide resulted in a list of 
design issues addressing mainly user friendliness and 
comprehensibility. Both researchers and case managers 
considered that the starting points of the DEcideguide, 
transparency and open communication, probably conflict 
with the overall well-being of people with dementia because 
it provides too much information. The usability tests with 
informal caregivers and people with dementia will show 
whether this dilemma will be confirmed or not. Developing 
an IT application for various end users with different 
capacities and interests requires involvement of all end users 
in the design phase of the development trajectory. 
The next step, after finishing the usability tests, is 
conducting a pre-pilot with the refined tool with a dementia 
network consisting of a person with dementia, informal 
caregivers and a case manager acting in daily life. Then, a 
five-month pilot study will be conducted and evaluated.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The Dutch Foundation Innovation Alliance (SIA RAAK 
[Regional Attention and Knowledge Circulation] PRO), 
Zorgpalet Hoogeveen (Residential care organization for 
older adults) and Windesheim University of Applied 
Sciences funded this study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Prince, R. Bryce, and C. Ferri, “World Alzheimer Report 2011,” 
2011. 
[2] 
C. Ferri, et al., “Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi consensus 
study,” Lancet, 2005. 366: pp. 2112-2117. 
[3] 
G. Livingston et al., “Making decisions for people with dementia who 
lack capacity: qualitative study of family carers in UK,” BMJ, 2010, 
341((aug 18 1) c4184). 
[4] 
H.G. van der Roest et al., “What do community-dwelling people with 
dementia need? A survey of those who are known to care and welfare 
services,” International Psychogeriatrics, 2009, 21(05), pp. 949-965. 
[5] 
M. 
von 
Kutzleben, 
W.Schmid, 
M. 
Halek 
B.Holle, 
S. 
Bartholomeyczik, “Community-dwelling persons with dementia: 
What do they need? What do they demand? What do they do? A 
systematic review on the subjective experiences of persons with 
dementia,” Aging & Mental Health, 2012, 16(3), pp. 378-390. 
[6] 
G. Elwyn, A. Edwards, and P. Kinnersley, “Shared decision-making 
in primary care: the neglected second half of the consultation,” 
British Journal of General Practice, 1999, 49, pp. 477-482. 
[7] 
G. Elwyn et al., “Developing a quality criteria framework for patient 
decision aids: online international Delphi consensus process,” BMJ, 
2006. 
[8] 
P. Zaphiris, M. Ghiawadwala, and S. Mughal. “Age-centered 
Research-Based Web Design Guidelines,” in Proceedings of CHI 
2005 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2005, 
Portland, USA. 
[9] 
P. Zaphiris, S. Kurniawan, and M. Ghiawadwala, “A Systematic 
Approach to the Development of Research-Based Web Design 
Guidelines for Older People,” Universal Access in the Information 
Society Journal, 2007, 6(1), pp. 59-76. 
[10] N. Savitch.and P. Zaphiris. “Accessible websites for People with 
Dementia: a Preliminary Investigation into Information Architecture,” 
in ICCHP, 2006. 
[11] K. Day, D. Carreon, and C. Stump, “The therapeutic design of 
environments for people with dementia: a review of the empirical 
research,” The Gerontologist, 2000, 40(4), pp. 397-416. 
[12] L. Mitchell et al.,  “Making the outside world dementia friendly: 
design issues and considerations,” Environment and Planning B: 
Planning and Design, 2003, 30, pp. 605-632. 
[13] E. Burton and L. Mitchell, “Urban design for longevity,” Urban 
Design Quarterly, 2003, 87, pp. 32-35 
[14] N. Alm et al., “Making software accessible for users with dementia,” 
In J. U. Lazar (Ed.), Niversal usability: Designing computer 
interfaces for diverse users 2007, Wiley: New York. pp. 299-316. 
[15] F.S. Lim et al., “Usability of tablet computers by people wih early-
stage dementia,” Gerontology, 2013, 59, pp. 174-182. 
[16] H. Beyer. and K. Holzblatt, Contextual Design. Defining Customer-
Centered Systems, 2010, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
[17] M. Span et al., “Involving People with Dementia in the Development 
of Supportive IT Applications: a Systematic Review,” Ageing 
Research Reviews  2013, 12, pp. 535-551. 
[18] M. Span et al., “Towards an Information Technology Application that 
Supports Shared Decision Making in Dementia: Identifying User 
Requirements,” Unpublished. 
[19] J.E.W.C. Van Gemert-Pijnen et al., “Introducing a holistic framework 
for eHealth technologies,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, 
2011, 13 (4):e111. 
[20] N. Nijland, “Grounding eHealth: towards a holistic framework for 
sustainable eHealth technologies,”, University of Twente, Enschede,  
2011. ISBN: 9789036531337  
[21] J. Brender, Handbook of Evaluation Methods for Health Informatics. 
2006: Elsevier Academic press, USA. ISBN-13: 978-0-12-370464-1 
[22] J. Ritchie and L. Spencer, eds. “Qualitative data analysis for applied 
policy research,” in Bryman and Burgess, eds., Analysing Qualitative 
Data. 
1994: 
London: 
Routledge 
pp.173-194.
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Preliminary Cost-Benefit Analysis of a Real-Time Telemedicine System 
 
Francesca Frexia, Riccardo Triunfo, Francesco Cabras, 
Cecila Mascia, Gianluigi Zanetti 
Healthcare Flows Group 
CRS4 - Center for Advanced Studies, Research and 
Development in Sardinia 
Pula, Italy 
e-mail: name.surname@crs4.it 
Sabrina Montis, Roberto Tumbarello 
Pediatric Cardiology Structure 
Azienda Ospedaliera “G.Brotzu” 
Cagliari, Italy 
e-mail: namesurname@aob.it
 
 
Abstract—Information and communication technology 
in the medical field has witnessed great advances at 
research level but it is still largely unapplied in routine 
clinical practice.  Technology-driven solutions, proved 
experimentally effective, are not always efficient in the 
complex health world.  Each form of innovation needs  
to be sustainable, from an economic and organizational 
points of view, if it is to progress from the prototype 
phase to become a practical element of the healthcare 
system.  A cost-benefit analysis can help establish if this 
is the case.  Here, we apply a preliminary cost-benefit 
analysis to the real-time telemedicine platform we 
developed.  It has proven successful from a diagnostic 
point of view, but how does it perform from an economic 
perspective?  Our analysis compares the overall cost of 
the platform to the economic savings made from its 
operational use - where unnecessary patients’ transfers 
are avoided. We estimate potential savings of about 66% 
of current costs.   
 
Keywords-real-time telemedicine; pediatric cardiology; cost-
benefit analysis 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Tele-health, when supported by solid economic and 
organizational design, can promote new care models (like 
hub-and-spoke distribution or home monitoring), fostering a 
rational and effective use of investments [1] [2] [3] [4]. 
Standard telemedicine technology proves its validity in 
several contexts, but is generally unsuitable to situations 
involving operator-dependent diagnostic techniques – it is 
not sufficient simply to store and send images, it also needs 
the timely application of specific expertise in order to 
complete the examination.  Only by providing real-time 
collaboration do the standard telemedicine technologies 
produce value. Pediatric Cardiology is one of those clinical 
discipline [5] requiring a specialized operator to obtain a 
reliable result: echocardiography is the focus of a congenital 
heart disease (CHD) evaluation, and it is only accurate when 
performed by an expert. In general, specialists in this fields 
are rare and their lack is particularly critical in some regions 
with high incidence of this kind of disease, like Sardinia - 
one of Italy’s major islands (Fig. 1): in Sardinia CHD has a 
mean incidence of 20.25%, more than twice the typical 
incidence [6] and there is a unique specialized center 
(Pediatric Cardiology Structure in Azienda Ospedaliera “G. 
Brotzu”, Cagliari [7]). As can be seen in TABLE I, the 
distances between the center and the eight main health 
districts (ASL-Azienda Sanitaria Locale), corresponding to 
the main cities (Sassari, Nuoro, Oristano, Lanusei, 
Carbonia, Olbia, Sanluri, Cagliari), are not extreme but the 
logistic infrastructure can cause critical travel time for 
patients’ life. To mitigate the high risks deriving from this 
situation, CRS4 [8] and Brotzu hospital carried out a 
research project resulting in a real-time low cost 
telemedicine platform, able to support clinicians with the 
tele-presence 
of 
a 
specialist 
in 
real-time 
during 
echocardiographic evaluations [9]. The platform developed 
allows echocardiographic exams to be performed remotely, 
without physical interaction between the patient and the 
specialist. The ultrasound analysis is operated by a third 
doctor who physically visits the patient, while the specialist 
guides the operator directly, viewing the echographic output 
and the examination scene at the same time. The system has 
proven its diagnostic value [10] and the analysis presented 
below is a preliminary evaluation of its economic 
advantages, in anticipation of a regional scale trial. 
Here, we test the hypothesis that the use of our real-time 
telemedicine platform is economically beneficial for both 
the Sardinian health service and patients by comparing the 
system’s cost to that of savings to be made in patient 
transport - a very specific but substantial aspect.  At this 
preliminary stage, we do not attempt an assessment in terms 
of quality of care – the necessary data are not yet available.  
Similarly, at this stage, a cost-utility or cost-effectiveness 
analysis, as recommended by literature [11][12][13], is not 
attempted.  Nevertheless, this preliminary cost-benefit study 
gives some indicators for the future implementation of the 
system in real clinical life. The Material and Methods 
section describes the system workflow and the approach for 
cost evaluation analysis, which lead to the estimate 
summarized in the Results section and discussed in the 
Discussion and Conclusions. 
 
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure  1 – Sardinian Health District locations. 
 
TABLE I.  
DISTANCES 
 
 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
To evaluate the cost-benefit of our telemedicine system, 
we consider the route from the unique centre of 
specialization in Cagliari to nine secondary hospitals - one 
per Sardinian health district (ASL), plus another hospital in 
Cagliari (AO).  Below we outline the method of evaluation. 
 
A. Cost-benefit analysis: approach  
 
We take a societal perspective, highlighting cost and 
benefits deriving from the use of the system both for health 
system and for patients – but only in terms of travel savings, 
since our system is not currently operational so we are yet to 
measure benefits in terms of effectiveness. The analysis is 
based on a cost comparison during the year 2012 considered 
with and without the system. 
Currently, patients suspected of CHD are sent to Cagliari 
(Brotzu Hospital), by their General Practitioner (GP) or, in 
emergencies, sent directly by other hospitals, often by 
ambulance. A specialized visit then occurs to confirm CHD, 
or not.  Visits that do not confirm CHD are indicated as 
unnecessary below.  TABLE II details the consultations 
claimed by health structures or by GP (for outpatients).  We 
enumerate the former category into both necessary and 
unnecessary visits – but lack the data to do the same for 
outpatients consultations. 
With the presence of the telemedicine system, the main 
costs are those related exclusively to the system set-up and 
maintenance, while the main economic benefits consist in the 
savings due to avoiding patient transfers to Cagliari: the 
patients could be first visited in their health district and then 
only urgent cases sent to the main center. Therefore, the 
economic benefits are: 
 
for the patient, in saving the cost of all transfers 
required for outpatient consultations; 
 
for the health structures, in saving the cost of 
transfers at first considered to be urgent but 
revealed as unnecessary.   
 
These costs may be evaluated by this equation: 

 















n
Mn
T
D
Cu
Mf
Cf
Ct
Cv
C
*
*
   (1) 
 
where: 
Cv = vehicle cost (ambulance, or standard car) 
Ct = team cost (only in case of ambulance) 
Cf = fuel cost 
Mf = medium fuel usage 
Cu = fixed cost of usage 
D = distance 
T = time 
Mn= nth member of ambulance team 
 
When transfer is by ambulance, both the terms Cv 
and Ct are present, since both vehicle and the team have 
associated costs - which vary according to the specific 
conditions. 
D and T are the values of distance and time, respectively, 
taken from TABLE I. 
The term Cf is calculated as the average fuel 
(diesel and gasoline) costs in Italy in 2012, published by 
Italian Economic Development Ministry [15][16]. 
Distance of each Health Districts from the main hospital 
Health District 
(ASL) 
Distance (km) 
Time (hours) 
ASL 1 - Sassari  
216 
02:19 
ASL 2 - Olbia  
276 
02:57 
ASL 3 – Nuoro 
207 
02:18 
ASL 4 – Lanusei 
125 
01:52 
ASL 5 - Oristano 
96.9 
01:08 
ASL 6 – Sanluri 
47.9 
00:39 
ASL 7 – Carbonia 
71 
00:56 
ASL 8 – Cagliari 
4.8 
00:11 
AO      – Cagliari 
4.8 
00:11 
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
TABLE II.  
2012 CONSULTATIONS  
Face-to-face Consultations Performed in 2012 
Health District 
(ASL) 
Consultations by 
Health Structures 
Required 
(Necessary) 
Outpatient 
Consultations 
ASL 1 - Sassari  
1 (1) 
82 
ASL 2 - Olbia  
0 (0) 
71 
ASL 3 – Nuoro 
4 (2) 
164 
ASL 4 – Lanusei 
0 (0) 
41 
ASL 5 - Oristano 
1 (1) 
210 
ASL 6 – Sanluri 
2 (0) 
378 
ASL 7 – Carbonia 
23 (5) 
348 
ASL 8 - Cagliari 
57 (4) 
1839 
AO - Cagliari 
18 (5) 
- 
 
 
B. The Platform: Description and cost evaluation 
A suspected CHD case may be detected either by a GP 
or a health structure: with our telemedicine system in use, 
the patient is to be sent to the closest secondary center with 
a teleconsultation station. The workflow has three main 
parts, depicted in Fig. 2: 
1. scheduling: the secondary center, according to the 
tertiary/specialist 
center 
availability, 
requires 
the 
teleconsultation (step 1 and 2 in Fig.2); 
2. teleconsultation: the specialist accepts the request and 
starts the remote visit, interacting in real-time with the 
operator at the secondary center (step 3 and 4 in Fig.2); 
3. reporting: the specialist saves the digital diagnosis in a 
structured report which becomes immediately available 
to the doctor who performed the test and to the patient 
(step 5 in Fig.2). 
 
From the software point of view, the system is open-
source and composed of a portable application for the 
sonographer, a desktop application for the specialist and a 
web application for managing scheduling and patient 
information (clinical data and reports). As for hardware, the 
platform requires a central server, a laptop for the specialist 
and, for each center requiring teleconsultation, a network 
camera (to record the examination scene), an encoder 
(directly connected to the echograph) and a mobile device 
like an Apple iPod touch (to enable the communication 
between the clinicians through a VOIP audio chat). So, from 
the hardware point of view, the system costs are the sum of 
these items. 
 
 
Figure  2 – System basic workflow. 
 
The costs are based on market prices: the estimate for 
the server is based on the idea of using a clustered virtual 
machine [14]. There are no additional costs for the network 
infrastructure: the system is designed to take advantage of 
preexisting networks and it doesn’t need dedicated 
connections, requiring only 2.5MBps bandwidth. Each 
center has its own existing general purpose communication 
infrastructure so no additional costs are incurred during the 
development of the telemedicine intervention system due to 
such communication. 
Moreover, each center has an IT department and the 
maintenance of the system can be easily incorporated in the 
routine maintenance of the other systems already running in 
each center. The platform does not require specific 
knowledge to be used by the clinicians once they have had a 
few hours training experience. TABLE III summarizes the 
costs for the telemedicine system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE III.  
PLATFORM COSTS 
Platform costs 
Type of unit 
Component 
Price (€) 
Center Requiring 
Consultation 
Encoder video  
Axis Q7401 
400 
 
Apple iPod touch  
250 
 
Network Camera 
 Axis PTZ 214  
1300 
TOTAL FOR THE UNIT 
1950 
Center 
Offering 
Consultation 
McBookAir  
 
1000 
 
Central server 
2000 
TOTAL FOR THE UNIT 
3000 
 
C. Transfer costs analysis: healthcare system perspective 
Adopting our telemedicine system ought to enable the 
specialist in Cagliari to see the patient nearer the onset of 
suspected CHD, allowing the patient to be transferred for 
therapy at an earlier stage.  
It is hard to quantify a priori the advantage of such 
prompt intervention, but we can evaluate the savings in 
transfer cost.  We have no hard data whether transport cost 
are incurred by health service (ambulance transfer) or by 
patient (own car) so we consider the costs in each case, 
supposing either transfer via ambulance or via a “standard” 
car. As the costs for medical and private vehicle transfer are 
not directly available, we estimate them using equation (1), 
taking into account both the cost of the vehicle and the cost 
of the team. 
For the evaluation of the medical vehicle costs we 
consider a series of 10 vehicles on the market [18], 
obtaining for each of them an estimate of our term Cu [17] 
and  term Mf. 
For the evaluation of the team costs, we consider five kinds 
of team, composed by: 
 
A1 – driver and nurse on duty; 
 
A2 - driver and nurse on call; 
 
B1 – driver, nurse and doctor on duty; 
 
B2 - driver, nurse on call and doctor on duty; 
 
B2 - driver, nurse on duty and doctor on call; 
 
B3 - driver, nurse on call and doctor on call. 
The hourly costs for the personnel are in TABLE IV. 
 
TABLE IV.  
AMBULANCE TEAM COSTS 
Ambulance team costs (€/hour) 
Team Member 
Cost 
Driver  
14.80 
Nurse (on duty)  
16.38 
Nurse (on call) 
27.00 
Doctor (on duty) 
36.34 
Doctor (on call) 
60.00 
 
 
 
Combining all these factors with data  from 2012 about 
transfers from health structures (TABLE II), it is possible to 
evaluate the total costs for (necessary/unnecessary) transfer 
by ambulance. The methodology used to evaluate term Cv 
in case of private cars is described in the next section. 
 
D. Transfer costs analysis: patient perspective 
In case of non-urgent suspected CHD, patient families use 
their own car for all outpatient consultations. To evaluate 
these costs, we considered only the term Cv in (1), 
calculating it for a “standard” car,  i.e. the best-selling car in 
Italy in 2012 [19], FIAT Panda “1.3 MJT 16V 95 CV”. Term 
Mf was obtained from the manufacturer website, term Cu 
from ACI databases [17] and term D from TABLE I. After 
estimating the cost for car, we multiplied it by the number of 
transfers in TABLE II. We did not include transfers from 
within the Cagliari District since patients would already be in 
the hospital of destination (Brotzu Hospital) so there was no 
need to move. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Transfer costs analysis results: healthcare system 
perspective 
The estimate of the transfer costs to Brotzu Hospital for 
the consultations required by other structures are presented 
in TABLE V, for both vehicle-types: ambulance and private 
car. Since for consultations by health structures we have the 
data for whether a request was necessary or not we also list 
the unnecessary costs in the table. 
 
B. Transfer costs analysis results: patient perspective 
The costs for patient transfers to Cagliari center related 
to outpatient consultations are depicted in TABLE VI. 
 
C. Transfer costs analysis results: societal perspective 
Considering all the results for the transfer costs analysis 
from health system and patients perspective, we obtained 
the overall cost-benefit results of  TABLE VII.  
In the table, the column “expenditure nature” clarifies if, 
for society, the amount must be considered a cost or a 
benefit. The costs for transfers from other structures by 
ambulance are marked with (A), while the costs by private 
cars are marked with (C). 
 
 
 
 
 
260
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
TABLE V.  
2012 TRANSFER COSTS RELATED TO CONSULTATIONS 
REQUIRED BY HEALTH STRUCTURES (AMBULANCE AND PRIVATE CAR) 
Costs for Consultations Required By Health Structures (Ambulance) 
Health District 
(ASL) 
Consultations 
Required (of which 
Necessary) 
Ambulance 
Costs Due to 
Unnecessary 
Consultations 
Costs € 
Private Car 
Costs Due to 
Unnecessary 
Consultations 
Costs € 
ASL 1 - Sassari  
1 (1) 
0 
0 
ASL 2 - Olbia  
0 
0 
0 
ASL 3 – Nuoro 
4 (2) 
572 
190 
ASL 4 – Lanusei 
0 
0 
0 
ASL 5 - Oristano 
1 (1) 
0 
0 
ASL 6 – Sanluri 
2 (0) 
149 
86 
ASL 7 – Carbonia 
23 (5) 
2481 
602 
ASL 8 - Cagliari 
57 (4) 
824 
876 
AO - Cagliari 
18 (5) 
202 
319 
TOTAL 
106 (18) 
4228 
208 
 
 
 
TABLE VI.  
2012 TRANSFER COSTS RELATED TO OUTPATIENT 
CONSULTATIONS 
Consultations required by GPs 
Health District 
(ASL) 
Consultations 
Required 
Consultations Costs  
€ 
ASL 1 - Sassari  
82 
6113 
ASL 2 - Olbia  
71 
6763 
ASL 3 – Nuoro 
164 
11717 
ASL 4 – Lanusei 
41 
1769 
ASL 5 - Oristano 
210 
7023 
ASL 6 – Sanluri 
378 
6249 
ASL 7 – Carbonia 
348 
8527 
ASL 8 - Cagliari 
1839 
NOT CONSIDERED 
TOTAL 
1294 
48163 
 
 
The cost-benefit analyses are summarized in TABLE 
VIII, which shows that our telemedicine platform could help 
save between 33586 € and 35740 € within one year, 
reducing the costs of the system to 66% of the total 
expenditure. Moreover, in the future hardware costs should 
decrease, while the same is not expected for transport costs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VII.  
COMPARISON OF 2012 COSTS WITH AND WITHOUT THE 
TELEMEDICINE SYSTEM 
Comparison Of Costs With And Without The Telemedicine System 
Expenditure Cause 
Expenditure 
Type 
Costs With 
Telemedicine 
€ 
Costs Without 
Telemedicine 
€ 
Regional 
Telemedicine 
System 
Cost 
16650 
0 
Necessary 
Transport From 
Health Structures 
Present in all 
cases 
1832 (A) 
692 (C) 
1832 (A) 
692  (C) 
Unnecessary 
Transport From 
Health Structures 
Benefit 
0 
4228 (A) 
2074 (C) 
Transport For 
Consultation 
Required By GPs 
Benefit 
0 
48163 
TOTAL 
18482 (A) 
17342 (C) 
54223 (A) 
50929 (C) 
 
TABLE VIII.  COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS RESULTS 
Expenditure Cause 
Min 
€ 
Max 
€ 
Costs 
16650 
16650 
Benefits 
50263 
52391 
TOTAL 
SAVINGS
33586 
35740 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Although the result of our analysis appear good we 
should emphasize some limitations of this study: 
 the precise number of consultation requiring 
ambulance transfer are unavailable for some 
health structures; 
 the ambulance costs are an estimate since the 
precise cost are unavailable;  
 for outpatient consultation we used average 
estimates of distance rather than precise 
mileages; 
 for the patient perspective costs, we excluded data 
from the Cagliari district. 
 
These limitations probably do not undermine the value 
of our preliminary analysis, but they do suggest themes for 
future studies: cost-effectiveness analysis and sensitivity 
analysis should be designed to enhance the quality of the 
system evaluation. 
Another question left open is that of the relative 
performance of telemedicine systems: our solution is open 
and low cost, but about commercial systems? We have yet 
to compile a similar table of costs for existing commercial 
telemedicine applications (their prices are not publicly 
available).  Instead, we tabulate some teleconference 
261
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

systems (not necessarily dedicated to CHD), that might be 
used in similar way. TABLE IX summarizes the systems we 
studied. 
   
TABLE IX.  
SIMILAR TELEMEDICINE SOLUTIONS 
System 
Price 
VSEE 
[20] 
$299/kit/month 
$49/user/month 
Lifesize Communications 
conference streaming system 
[21][22] 
$2000 to $15000 hw 
$49/month sw 
Cisco TelePresence 
[23][24] 
$ 9900 hw 
Tanderberg video communication 
(Cisco company) 
[25][26][27] 
~$10000 to $30000 for 
clinical presence system 
VIDYO 
[28][29] 
starting at $17000 
 
None of the solutions we list here appear to guarantee 
the performance offered by our platform, in terms of 
teleconsultation 
support 
and 
setup/maintenance 
cost 
savings. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The preliminary cost-benefit analysis presented in this 
paper shows that the adoption of the real-time telemedicine 
solution we developed is potentially useful from a societal 
perspective. This analysis is local and is focused on a 
specific situation, but the design principles that guided its 
development enable it to be applied in other clinical 
contexts 
that 
require 
operator-dependent 
diagnostic 
techniques. At the moment, the telemedicine system is 
under trial in emergency structures for the FAST (Focused 
Assessment with Sonography for Trauma) examination. 
Another added value of the system derives from its 
adaptability to support learning sessions. In conclusion, the 
benefits of our telemedicine system confirm the original 
hypothesis from which we started and encourage us to trial 
the system on a regional scale, once the an organizational 
model has been completely defined. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Gavin Brelstaff, Emiliano 
Deplano, Emanuela Falqui and Luisa Coraddu for all the 
support, during the system development and during the 
analysis presented in this paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Whitten, B. Holtz, L. Nguyen, “Keys to a successful and 
sustainable telemedicine program”, International Journal of 
Technology 
Assessment 
in 
Health 
Care, 
Cambridge 
University Press, Vol. 26, Issue 02, pp. 211-216, April 2010 
[2] A. G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, S. Flottorp, “Effectiveness of 
telemedicine: a systematic review of reviews”, Int. Journal 
Medical Informatics, 79: pp. 736-771, 2010 
[3] “The telemedicine challenge in Europe”, The European Files, 
2010 
[4] I. Iakovidis, “Towards Digital Agenda Targets: Patients’ 
Access to their Health Data ”, World of Health IT, 2011 
[5] A. Taddei, “How we set up telemedicine for diagnosis and 
care of heart defects in the foetus and newborn ”, E-Journal of 
Cardiology Practice, Vol 9, N.33, June 2011 
[6] P. Bassareo, A. Antonelli, P. Neroni, M. Urru, M. Pisano, S. 
Montis, G. Mercuro, R. Tumbarello, “Incidenza delle 
cardiopatie congenite in Sardegna.”, Giornale Italiano di 
Cardiologia, vol. 6 (Suppl. 2), pp. 24–25, 2009 
[7] http://www.aobrotzu.it/dipartimenti/patologiacardio.html  
[8] http://www.crs4.it/healthcare-flows 
[9] www.telecap.it 
[10] R.Triunfo, F.Frexia, F.Cabras, C. Buttu, V. Lecca, S.Gessa, S. 
Montis, P. Neroni, R.Tumbarello, “Real-time telemedicine in 
pediatric cardiology”, IARIA 2013, pp. 320-326, 2013 
[11] P.S.Whitten, F.S. Mair, A Haycox, C.R. May, T.L. Williams, 
S. Hellmich, “Systematic review of cost effectiveness studies 
of telemedicine intervention”, BMJ 2002; pp. 324:1434 , BMJ 
2002 
[12] J.D. Whited, “Economic analysis of telemedicine and the 
teledermatology paradigm”, Telemedicine journal and e-
health, 16(2), pp. 223-228, March 2010 
[13] A. Martinez, V. Villarroel, J. Puig-Junoy, J. Seoane, F. del 
Pozo, “An economic analysis of the EHAS telemedicine 
system in Alto Amazonas”, Journal of Telemedicine and 
Telecare, 13(1), pp. 7-14, 2007 
[14] http://www.vmware.com/advantages/total-cost/virtual-
machine-density.html 
[15] http://dgerm.sviluppoeconomico.gov.it/dgerm/prezzimedi.asp
?anno=2012 
[16] http://dgerm.sviluppoeconomico.gov.it/dgerm/prezzimedi.asp
?prodcod=2&anno=tutti 
[17] http://www.aci.it/i-servizi/servizi-online/costi-
chilometrici.html?no_cache=1 
[18] http://www.bollanti.it/ 
[19] http://www.motori24.ilsole24ore.com/MediaCenter/Gallery/
Mercato/2013/top-ten-immatricolazioni-italia/top-ten-
immatricolazioni-italia_fotogallery.php 
[20] http://vsee.com 
[21] http://www.tribecaexpress.com/products/by-
manufacturers/lifesize-pricelist.htm?p=1 
[22] http://www.lifesize.com/en/solutions/industry/healthcare 
[23] http://www.cisco.com/en/US/prod/collateral/ps7060/ps11304/
ps11313/ps11424/ps12153/data_sheet_c78-688342.htm 
[24] http://www.cisco.com/en/US/prod/collateral/ps7060/ps11304/
ps11313/ps11424/ps12153/data_sheet_c78-688342.htm 
[25] http://www.tkoworks.com/video-
conferencing/equipment/tandberg/880/bundles.html 
[26] http://www.ivci.com/videoconferencing-tandberg-clinical-
presence-system.html 
[27] http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2691934/pdf/
268_2009_Article_36.pdf 
[28] http://www.vidyo.com/solutions/healthcare/ 
[29] http://www.vidyo.com/2010/05/vidyo-unveils-
groundbreaking-videoconferencing-telemedicine-solution-
connects-multiple-practitioners-and-patients-via-the-internet/ 
 
 
[ALL ONLINE REFERENCES RETRIEVED: JANUARY 
2014]
 
262
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Assessment of Differences in Acceptance of e-Health Applications Between 
Physicians and Patients with Chronic Diseases 
 
Mariusz Duplaga 
Department of Health Promotion, Institute of Public Health, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Jagiellonian University Medical College 
Kraków, Poland  
e-mail: mmduplag@cyfronet.pl 
 
 
Abstract—The implementation of e-health solutions targeting 
patients and citizens as users is an important aspect of national 
policies 
of 
development 
of 
information 
technology 
infrastructure in health care in Poland. The success of these 
plans is related not only to political decisions but also to the 
response of potential users. The main objective of the study 
was the comparison of the level of acceptance of the use of 
e-health solutions for accomplishment of specific activities 
demonstrated by physicians and patients with chronic diseases. 
The analysis presented in the paper was based on the results of 
two surveys dedicated to the assessment of the views of medical 
personnel and patients on the importance of e-health in Polish 
health care system. The survey for physicians was performed 
among participants of speciality trainings in the period from 
November 2011 to December 2012 in Krakow, Poland. The 
survey for patients was carried out among the patients 
diagnosed with chronic disease who were hospitalized or 
attended ambulatory visit at three health care centers in 
Krakow, Poland in the period from mid-December 2011 to 
mid-February 2012. From 200 questionnaires distributed to 
physicians, 
186 
were 
returned 
by 
respondents. 
The 
questionnaires for patients were filled by 207 respondents from 
230 who were approached. The level of acceptance for specific 
e-health applications was higher among physicians. The 
differences were statistically significant in case of all but one 
application. Interestingly, the applications with highest 
acceptance in both groups of respondents included online 
appointment with physician, access to the results of laboratory 
tests and access to educational resources. In conclusion, it 
should be stated that physicians reveal significantly higher 
acceptance of e-health use, but the perception of priorities 
among specific e-health applications is convergent between 
physicians and patients.  
Keywords-e-health 
acceptance; 
Internet; 
information 
and 
telecommunication technologies; physicians; patients. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Chronic care remains one of the greatest challenges for 
modern health care systems. Patients suffering from chronic 
disorders require support on long-term basis. There are 
estimations which indicate that even 40% of citizens living 
in modern societies are afflicted with chronic medical 
conditions [1]. Furthermore, the budgets used for support of 
chronic patients reveal growing trends [2]. 
As close cooperation and communication between 
patients and physicians are prerequisites of efficient care, 
both groups of users should be ready to use proposed 
e-health solutions. The use of such solutions may enhance 
repetitive interactions between patients and providers. 
Nowadays, it is also obvious that patients should be involved 
in activities related to controlling and treating of disease 
[3,4]. All these circumstances result in search for more 
efficient models of care which could be offered to patients 
with chronic disorders [5-8].  
The main objective of the study was the comparison of 
the level of acceptance of the use of e-health solutions for 
accomplishment of specific activities demonstrated by 
physicians and patients with chronic diseases. 
The paper consists of five sections. The Introduction 
section indicates rationale and objective for the study. In the 
Methods section the methodology of the surveys carried out 
among patients and physicians is described. The Results 
section brings the characteristics of both respondents’ groups 
as well as results of comparison of acceptance of specific 
e-health applications between them. In the Discussion 
section, short discussion about significance of results is 
provided. In the final section, the conclusion summarizing 
obtained results is given. Furthermore, the plans for future 
research are revealed. 
II. 
METHODS  
The comparison of the acceptance of specific e-health 
applications among patients and physicians was carried out 
on data obtained from surveys targeting both groups.  
The survey designed for physicians was focused on the 
general use of computers and Internet, the perception of 
importance and circumstances of e-health in modern health 
care, and finally, the acceptance for performance of specific 
health care services in e-health environment. In total, 30 
items were included in the questionnaire. The methodology 
of the survey performed among physicians was described in 
detail elsewhere [9]. 
The survey realized among patients covered the issues 
related to coping with chronic condition, general issues of 
computer and Internet literacy, the use of information 
technology (IT) for health-related activities, the perception of 
e-health feasibility for support of health care and finally, the 
acceptance of specific functionalities delivered with e-health 
applications. Further details on the patients survey may be 
263
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

found in an earlier published paper [10], focusing 
exclusively on patients with chronic respiratory diseases.  
The items targeting the assessment of the acceptance of 
concrete e-health applications were compatible both in term 
of the set of enlisted applications and response scale. Both 
questionnaires included predominantly closed questions. The 
responses to the items focused on the opinions of the 
respondents were based on 5-point Likert scale with neutral 
option in the middle (from ‘decidedly yes’ to ‘decidedly 
no’).   
The survey for physicians was performed among 
participants of the courses on public health obligatory to 
participants of all specialities training and organized by 
Medical Centre of Postgraduate Education, Jagiellonian 
University, in Krakow, from November 2011 to December 
2012. The survey for patients was carried out among the 
patients diagnosed with chronic disease who were 
hospitalized or attended ambulatory visit at three health care 
centers in Krakow, Poland in the period from mid-December 
2011 to mid-February 2012. Only patients with established 
diagnosis of chronic disease were recruited to the survey. 
Patients, who were hospitalized or admitted to polyclinics for 
diagnosis of new symptoms, were not included in the study, 
unless they had previously been diagnosed with a chronic 
disease. 
Both surveys were assessed by Bioethical Committee at 
Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Poland (decision No 
KBET/226/B/2011 dated October, 27, 2011 for physicians’ 
survey and decision No KBET/107/B/2011 dated June 30, 
2011 for patients’ survey). The questionnaires were filled by 
physicians anonymously. The patients were asked to fill 
informed consent form. The respondents were informed 
before the survey that they can withdraw from the study in 
any moment.  
Statistical analysis was carried out with Statistica v.10 Pl 
(StatSoft Inc, Tulsa, OK, USA) [11]. The descriptive 
analysis was performed for the variables included in this 
paper. If not stated otherwise, the frequency of a given 
response to a specific item was given as a percentage of all 
valid responses excluding missing responses. The level of 
acceptance was assessed with 5-point Likert scale. Definite 
negative option of response was assigned with value of 1, 
and the most positive opinion with value of 5. The 
differences in the acceptance level for specific e-health 
applications were assessed with non-parametric test for 
independent samples (Mann-Whitney U test).  
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Physicians 
Characteristics of respondents   
Questionnaires were distributed to 200 respondents; 
filled ones were returned by 186 of them. Five questionnaires 
were excluded from further analysis due to considerable 
deficiencies of responses. Women made 65.7% (n=119) of 
the group of respondents. The mean age of physician who 
filled the questionnaires was 34.9 (SD=6.4) years, 
34.7(SD=6.7) among women and 35.5 (SD=5.9) among 
men. 
There were 29.8% (n=54) of respondents with speciality 
certificate in internal medicine, 5.5% (n=10) in surgery, 
3.9% (n=7) in anesthesiology, 10.5% (n=19) in pediatrics, 
2.2% (n=4) in gynecology, and 3.9% (n=7) in family 
medicine. Other specialities were declared by 27.1% (n=49), 
and none by 20.4% (n=37) of them. As many as 75.7% 
(n=137) of respondents were employed in hospitals with at 
least 200 beds, 6.1% (n=11) in hospitals with 100-200 beds, 
and 7.2% (n=13) in hospitals <100 beds. Furthermore, 33.1% 
(n=60) of them worked in polyclinics, and 15.5% (n=28) in 
private practices. 
The use of Internet was confirmed by all participants of 
the survey (n=181). Among respondents, 2.2% (n=4) used 
Internet not longer than for 2 years, 7.8% (n=14) for above 2 
to 5 years, 30.2% (n=54) for above 5 to 10 years, and 59.8% 
(n=107) for more than 10 years. Every day use of Internet 
was declared by 82.3% (n=148) respondents; several times a 
week but not every day by 16.2% (n=29), and only once a 
week by 1.1% (n=2). The use of Internet at home was 
indicated by 96.1% (n=174) of physicians and at work site 
by 88.4% (n=160). Wireless access to Internet was utilized 
by 27.1% (n=49) respondents. Detailed characteristics of the 
physicians who participated in the survey was covered 
elsewhere [9]. 
TABLE I.  
ACCEPTANCE OF SPECIFIC E-HEALTH APPLICATIONS 
AMONG PHYSICIANS (%, n) 
E-health 
applications  
decidedly 
no 
rather 
no 
I’m not 
sure 
rather 
yes 
decidedly 
yes 
Teleconsultation with 
physician 
7.7 
(14) 
24.3 
(44) 
18.8 
(34) 
30.9 
(56) 
18.2 
(33) 
Contact with health 
care providers in case 
of doubts 
5.0 
(9) 
6.1 
(11) 
15.0 
(27) 
46.7 
(84) 
27.2 
(49) 
Telemonitoring of 
physiological 
parameters   
6.8 
(12) 
10.2 
(18) 
15.3 
(27) 
32.2 
(57) 
35.6 
(63) 
Making appointment 
with physician   
0.6 
(1) 
1.1 
(2) 
0.6 
(1) 
16.2 
(29) 
81.6 
(146) 
E-diary for chronic 
patients  
1.1 
(2) 
2.9 
(5) 
2.9 
(5) 
34.9 
(61 
58.3 
(102) 
Personal Internet  
health account  
0.6 
(1) 
2.8 
(5) 
6.6 
(12) 
23.8 
(43) 
66.3 
(120) 
Access to profiled 
educational resources   
0.6 
(1) 
1.1 
(2) 
3.3 
(6) 
27.1 
(49) 
68.0 
(123) 
Reporting health 
status to physician  
5.0 
(9) 
16.7 
(30) 
16.1 
(29) 
36.1 
(65) 
26.1 
(47) 
Contact with health 
professional during 
exacerbations  
3.6 
(6) 
12.3 
(22) 
10.1 
(18) 
42.5 
(76) 
31.8 
(57) 
Access to laboratory 
test results  
0.6 
(1) 
1.7 
(3) 
2.2 
(4) 
23.5 
(42) 
72.1 
(129) 
Renewal of 
prescriptions  
1.7 
(3) 
7.2 
(13) 
12.2 
(22) 
25.0 
(45) 
53.9 
(97) 
The acceptance of specific e-health applications 
potentially feasible for patients with chronic diseases  
The results of the survey related to the acceptance of 
specific e-health solutions feasible for care of patients were 
included in the Table I. The physicians showed the highest 
264
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

acceptance for the use of Internet for making appointments 
for visit in physician’s office or polyclinics by patients (4.76, 
SD=0.58), for access to the results of laboratory tests (4.64, 
SD=0.68), for access to educational resources (4.62, 
SD=0.67), and for the use of personal health account (with 
repository of medical documentation) (4.56, SD=0.76). 
B. Patients 
Sociodemographic characteristics of respondents   
The survey was carried out in the group of 207 patients 
receiving care in health care institutions located in Krakow, 
Poland. There were 65.4% (n=134) women in this groups. 
Mean age of respondents (n=197) was 49.6 (SD=17.6) years, 
48.2 (SD=17.2) among women and 52.4 (SD=17.2) among 
men. Further sociodemographic data were included in the 
Table II.  
Among patients participating in the survey, 55.1% 
(n=114) suffered from one chronic disease, others were 
afflicted with more chronic conditions. The most frequent 
chronic diseases occurring in respondents were related to 
cardiovascular system (49.8%, n=103). Other frequent 
disorders included diabetes (38.2%, n=79), bronchial asthma 
(18.4%, n=38), diseases of musculoskeletal system (21.3%, 
n=44), diseases of nervous system (11.1%, n=23), and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (10.6%, n=22). 
TABLE II.  
SOCIODEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS OF PATIENTS 
RECRUITED TO THE SURVEY 
Sociodemographic 
variables  
Category 
N 
% 
Sex 
women 
men 
134 
71 
65.4 
34.6 
Place of residence 
rural 
urban <100 000 
urban >100 000 
68 
45 
89 
33.7 
22.3 
44.1 
Education* 
category A 
category B 
category C 
68 
65 
74 
32.9 
31.4 
35.7 
Family status 
maried 
unmarried 
widow/widower 
partnership 
130 
43 
22 
8 
64.0 
21.2 
10.8 
3.9  
The number of persons 
in the household 
1 
2 
3 
>3 
22 
75 
40 
69 
10.7 
36.4 
19.4 
23.6 
*Categories established on the basis of Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(2011) Revision of the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED): 
category A – education lower than ‘upper secondary’, category B – from ‘upper 
secondary’ to ‘post-secondary non-tertiary’, category C – higher than ‘post-secondary 
non-tertiary’[12]   
Computer and Internet use 
The use of computer was declared by 65.7% (n=136) of 
respondents. The duration of computer use above 10 years 
was indicated by 41.2% (n=56), above 5 to 10 years by 
24.3%, and not longer than 5 years by 34.6% of them. 
Internet browser, e-mail software and text processor were 
types of applications used most frequently by computer users 
(87.5%, n=119; 72.1%, n=98; 52.9%, n=72, respectively). 
More rarely the respondents indicated spreadsheet programs 
30.1%, n=41), data bases (30.9%, n=42) and software 
supporting company activities (23.5%, n=32).  
The use of Internet on their own was declared by 57.5% 
(n=119) patients, and with help of other person by 11.1% 
(n=23). No use of Internet was indicated by 31.4% (n=65) of 
them.  
TABLE III.  
ACCEPTANCE OF SPECIFIC E-HEALTH APPLICATIONS 
AMONG PATIENTS (%, n) 
E-health 
applications  
decidedly 
no 
rather 
no 
I’m not 
sure 
rather 
yes 
decidedly 
yes 
Teleconsultation with 
physician 
13.1 
(22) 
15.5 
(26) 
21.4 
(36) 
33.9 
(57) 
16.1 
(27) 
Contact with health 
care providers in case 
of doubts 
10.4 
(17) 
12.8 
(21) 
18.9 
(31) 
39.0 
(64) 
18.9 
(31) 
Telemonitoring of 
physiological 
parameters   
18.8 
(30) 
17.1 
(29) 
27.8 
(46) 
23.8 
(38) 
10.6 
(17) 
Making appointment 
with physician   
7.2 
(12) 
9.6 
(16) 
10.2 
(17) 
25.3 (42) 
47.6 
(79) 
E-diary for chronic 
paitents  
8.8 
(14) 
11.9 
(19) 
25.2 
(40) 
26.4 
(42) 
27.7 
(44) 
Personal internet  
health account  
9.8 
(16) 
8.6 
(14) 
23.3 
(38) 
27.0 
(44) 
31.3 
(51) 
Access to profiled 
educational resources   
7.5 
(12) 
9.3 
(15) 
19.9 
(32) 
29.8 
(48) 
33.5 
(54) 
Reporting health 
status to physician  
12.5 
(20) 
18.1 
(29) 
23.8 
(38) 
22.5 
(36) 
23.1 
(37) 
Contact with health 
professional during 
exacerbations  
10.3 
(17) 
15.8 
(26) 
23.6 
(39) 
29.1 
(48) 
21.2 
(35) 
Access to laboratory 
test results  
8.6 
(14) 
9.9 
(16) 
21.0 
(34) 
22.2 
(36) 
38.3 
(62) 
Renewal of 
prescriptions  
11.2 
(18) 
12.4 
(20) 
19.3 
(31) 
20.5 
(33) 
36.6 
(59) 
Among Internet users, there were 25.0% (n=29) of 
respondents who used it above 10 years, 37.1% (n=43) above 
5 to 10 years, and 37.9% (n=44) not longer than 5 years. 
Daily use of Internet was confirmed by 67.0% (n=79) of 
patients using Internet without help of other person, several 
times a week but not every day by 22.0% (n=26), once a 
week by 8.5% (n=10) and more rarely by 2.5% (n=3) of 
them. In the group of independent Internet users, access to 
Internet at home was indicated by 98.3% (n=117) of 
respondents, in the work place or at school by 49.6% (n=59), 
in friends by 6.7% (n=8) and in Internet café by 1.7% (n=2).  
The acceptance of specific e-health applications 
potentially feasible for patients with chronic diseases  
The structure of responses on acceptability of specific 
e-health applications among patients participating in the 
survey were shown in the Table III. Patients revealed the 
highest acceptance (mean, SD) for e-health applications 
enabling appointments to physician’s office (3.77, SD=0.57), 
access to educational resources (3.57, 0.66), access to the 
results of laboratory tests (3.56, SD=0.67) and renewal of 
prescriptions (3.49, SD=1.03). The acceptance for the 
teleconsultation with physician was the lowest from all 
potential solutions (3.20, SD=1.23). 
265
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. The comparision of the acceptance of e-health 
applications between physicians and patients  
The comparison of the acceptance of specific e-health 
applications feasible for patients with chronic diseases 
between physician and patients revealed uniformly higher 
level of acceptance among physicians. The differences in the 
level of acceptance were significantly higher for all but one 
application (teleconsultation with physician). The details of 
the analysis were shown in Table IV.  
TABLE IV.  
THE COMPARISION OF THE ACCEPTANCE OF E-HEALTH 
APPLICATIONS BETWEEN PHYSICIANS AND PATIENTS 
E-health 
applications  
Physicians 
[mean (SD)] 
Patients 
[mean (SD)] 
corr. Z 
p value 
Teleconsultation 
with physician 
3.28 
(1.15) 
3.20 
(1.23) 
0.688 
0.49 
Contact with health 
care providers in 
case of doubts 
3.85 
(1.11) 
3.34 
(1.05) 
4.999 
<0.001 
Telemonitoring of 
physiological 
parameters   
3.80 
(1.11) 
2.92 
(1.22) 
7.376 
<0.001 
Making 
appointment with 
physician   
4.77 
(1.20) 
3.77 
(0.57) 
9.389 
<0.001 
E-diary for chronic 
patients  
4.46 
(1.12) 
3.40 
(0.79) 
9.687 
<0.001 
Personal internet  
health account  
4.52 
(1.16) 
3.48 
(0.79) 
9.416 
<0.001 
Access to profiled 
educational 
resources   
4.61 
(1.13) 
3.57 
(0.66) 
9.840 
<0.001 
Reporting health 
statuts to physician  
3.62 
(1.18) 
3.20 
(1.18) 
3.648 
<0.001 
Contact with health 
professional during 
exacerbations  
3.87 
(1.14) 
3.28 
(1.10) 
5.429 
<0.001 
Access to 
laboratory test 
results  
4.65 
(1.19) 
3.56 
(0.67) 
9.726 
<0.001 
Renewal of 
prescriptions  
4.22 
(1.24) 
3.49 
(1.03) 
6.287 
<0.001 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The surveys performed in the group of physicians 
participating in the speciality courses and in the group of 
patients with chronic conditions revealed significant 
differences in the level of acceptance between these two 
groups. Physicians demonstrated higher acceptance for 
specific application than patients and most differences were 
statistically significant.  
It should be noted that the differences could be attributed 
not only to perception of e-health feasibility among both 
groups of respondents but also to the fact that the mean age 
of physicians was lower than of patients.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Despite significant differences in the acceptance levels 
for specific applications between physicians and patients, the 
e-health applications which were top-ranked by both groups 
included making appointments with physician, access to the 
results of laboratory tests and access to educational resources 
profiled for patients. The author plans to proceed with 
assessment of the acceptance of e-health solutions by other 
patients and health professionals groups as well as 
identification of barriers for e-health growth in Poland. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author acknowledges the help of Elzbieta Brzezicka, 
M.Sc. and Michal Witkowski, M.Sc. in the survey data entry. 
The author thanks to Katarzyna Kruczak, MD. PhD., 
Miroslawa Dzikowska, M.Nurs., Anna Andrychiewicz, 
M.Nurs., Monika Rucka, M.Nurs., and Bartlomiej Matejko 
for help in distributing the questionnaire to potential 
respondents.  
This research was supported by the resources of the 
project No. K/ZDS/003685 at the Jagiellonian University 
Medical College, and of the project No. 13-0093-10 funded 
by the National Centre of Research and Development in 
Poland. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Anderson G. Horvath J: The Growing Burden of Chronic Disease in 
America. Public Health Rep, vol.119, pp.263-270, 2004. 
[2] DeVol R. Bedroussian A: An Unhealthy America: The Economic 
Burden of Chronic Disease. Milken Institute. October 2007. [Online] 
Available from http://www.njhcqi.org/documents/an-unhealthy-nj-7-
29-08.pdf [Retrieved on January 23, 2014]. 
[3] Kennedy A. Rogers A., and Bower P: Support for self-care for 
patients with chronic disease. BMJ, vol.335, 2007, pp.968-970, doi:  
10.1136/bmj.39372.540903.94. 
[4] Greenhalgh T: Chronic illness: beyond the expert patient. BMJ 
vol.338, b49, 2009, doi: 10.1136/bmj.b49. 
[5] Forkner-Dunn J: Internet-based Patient Self-care: The Next 
Generation of Health Care Delivery. J Med Internet Res, vol.5(2), e8, 
2003, doi: 10.2196/jmir.5.2.e8. 
[6] Oh H. Rizo C. Enkin M., and Jadad A: What is eHealth (3): A 
Systematic Review of Published Definitions. J Med Internet Res, 
vol.7(1), e1, 2005, doi: 10.2196/jmir.7.1.e1. 
[7] Harrison JP. Lee A: The Role of E-Health in the Changing Health 
Care Environment. Nurs Econ, vol.24(6), 2006, pp.283-288. 
[8] Coye MJ. Haselkorn A., and DeMello S: Remote Patient 
Management: 
Technology-Enabled 
Innovation 
And 
Evolving 
Business Models for Chronic Disease Care. Health Aff, vol.28(1), 
2009, pp.126-135, doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.28.1.126. 
[9] Duplaga M. Grysztar M. Poglądy lekarzy na temat przydatności 
systemów e-zdrowia. (The views of physicians about usefulness of 
e-health systems) Hygeia Public Health, vol.48(4), 2013, pp.553-559. 
[Online]. Available from http://www.h-ph.pl/pdf/hyg-2013/hyg-2013-
4-553.pdf [Retreved on January 23, 2014]. 
[10] Duplaga M. The Acceptance of e-Health Solutions Among Patients 
with Chronic Respiratory Conditions. Telemedicine e-Health 
vol.19(9), 2013, pp.863-691, doi: 10.1089/tmj.2012.0306. 
[11] STATSOFT. Statistica v.10 Pl Statsoft Inc., Tulsa, Oklahoma.  
[12] Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization (2011) Revision of 
the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED). 
[Online]. Available from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/ 
002116/211619e.pdf [Retrieved on January 23, 2014]. 
 
 
266
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Open Source Home Care Technology 
Technical design and development, user research, cost-benefit analysis, and business modeling 
 
Marike Hettinga, Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis, Ander de 
Keijzer, Jan M. Nauta 
Research group IT Innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{m.hettinga, ege.lohuis, a.de.keijzer, jm.nauta} 
@windesheim.nl 
 
 
Rens Balkenende, Niels Donninger 
VAC Thuistechnologie 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{r.balkenende, n.donninger}@vacbv.nl 
Guido van Alphen 
Stichting TriVici 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
g.alphen@trivici.nl 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the work in progress for the 
Hightech@home project. The aim of this project is to develop 
technology and knowledge concerning open source home care 
technology, utilizing open standards. Currently, there is 
limited availability of high tech sensor and communication 
technology while costs are high. By producing open source 
technology we aim at providing a starting point towards 
interoperability. Hence, increasing availability and lowering 
costs by avoiding vendor lock-ins. The Hightech@home project 
consists of five tracks. The first track, the technical design and 
development, focuses on a portal being generically available 
through any web browser. The portal will facilitate video 
contact and transmit and receive data from sensors located in 
the house, or on the body of the user. Technical design and 
development is iteratively informed by the user research in the 
second track. The iterative cycles start with small scale 
experiments with mock-ups leading to a field study when 
robust prototypes are available. During this field study, data 
will also be retrieved to perform a cost-benefit analysis, the 
third track of the project. To ensure the structural embedding, 
viable business models are developed in a fourth track. Finally, 
a fifth track focuses on the facilitation of bachelor students in 
the Hightech@home project in particular and in eHealth 
research in general. 
Keywords-home care technology; open source; WebRTC; 
sensortechnology; user research. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The aim of the Hightech@home project is to develop 
technology and knowledge concerning open source home 
care technology, utilizing open standards. The choice for 
open source is based on the current lack of low-cost, high 
quality, high tech, plug and play home care technology. The 
choice for open protocols enables interoperability: which 
most literally unlocks the consumer technology we already 
have in our homes and which we already carry around. 
As far as high tech sensor and communication 
technology is available for home care, the costs are high. 
Potential users with the greatest need for this type of 
technology, e.g. elderly, chronically ill, often lack the 
required financial means. Vendor lock-in (mostly through 
the use of closed protocols) is one of the reasons for the high 
pricing. Customers are dependent on one vendor after an 
initial choice for home care technology. When there is, for 
instance, a wish for extending the current technology with 
additional sensors customers appear to be dependent on the 
original vendor. Hence, low-cost alternatives are not an 
option. Although completing a single project will not break 
through an established vendor lock-in, we aim at producing 
open source technology and knowledge, thus providing a 
starting point towards interoperability.  
Existing home care technology often requires a 
technician to install. This not only results in extra costs, but 
also raises the threshold for people to start using it. Our aim 
is to design and develop plug and play technology by means 
of a co-creation process with potential end-users. This co-
creation process ensures that customers (clients or patients), 
informal carers, and carers are able to install the equipment. 
Furthermore, having interoperability at the centre of 
development, allows for (re-)use of already existing 
technology and therefore enable specific use cases which are 
otherwise not possible or viable. 
Designing and developing open standards and open 
source technology in a co-creation process with potential 
end-users will not be the only focus of the Hightech@home 
project. A main research theme of the research group IT 
(Information Technology) Innovations in Health Care at 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, is the structural 
embedding of innovations in routine care. The end of an 
innovative project should not imply the end of the 
innovation. Too often this is still the case [1]. Initiating the 
development of a viable business model in an early stage of 
the project enhances the chance on structural embedding the 
innovation. The Hightech@home project aims to include this 
business modelling, also adding a cost-benefit analysis. 
In this paper we describe the approach of the five tracks 
of the Hightech@home project, followed by the preliminary 
results in the next section. We complete the paper with a 
conclusion and a description of future work. 
 
267
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
APPROACH 
The project is structured around four research topics and 
a fifth goal concerning the structural embedding of eHealth 
research in the education of our students. The approach of all 
five tracks is briefly outlined in this section. 
A. Technical Design and Development 
We envision a portal, to be used at home bringing 
communication 
capabilities 
centred 
around 
health-
communication. The portal is a framework which can be 
used to offer different, in general communication, 
capabilities to the user. The portal should be available 
through any generic web browser and should be capable of 
transmitting and receiving video, audio and data streams. 
The video and audio data streams allow the users to make 
video calls to other users, whereas the data stream can be 
used to communicate data from sensors in the house, or on 
the body. The information gathered from sensors, possibly 
coupled with the audio and video information can be used by 
healthcare professionals to remotely assist the user. To 
realise the above, the design and development consists of 
fourth tracks. 
In the first track we aim to embed open standards based 
and license free video communications in an open source 
portal already being developed and partially made available 
by TriVici Foundation for the community (see [2] – in 
Dutch). The video communication added to this portal is 
based on WebRTC (Web Real-Time Communications) [3] 
and WebSockets for signalling.  
Secondly, we will develop and implement secure transfer 
of sensor signalling and data over WebRTC, with the goal to 
enable easy and reliable connections using open standards / 
protocols based sensor technology that is currently available 
in the (consumer – prosumer) marketplace. This will give 
meaning to the overall goal of interoperability. 
The third track is to interface with the currently under 
development Smart Optical Sensor and to implement 
WebRTC and VP8/VP9 to its capabilities. For more 
information, please see [4]. 
The fourth track is utilizing newly developed single chip 
radar technology as a sensory device. This technology is still 
in its early development phases, and we have yet to 
determine the goals of this part of the project. 
B. User Research 
User research is iteratively integrated in the design and 
development process, leading to a co-creation process. User 
research starts with the inventory of user requirements and 
contextual conditions. During early stages of design we use 
mock-ups in interviews and focus groups. When first 
prototypes are available potential users will experiment with 
them in our Telecare Skillslab.  
During these interviews and experiments the focus is not 
only on the technology, but additionally also on important 
issues such as privacy, legislation, and embedding the 
technology in daily routines. 
When a robust prototype is available, a field study will be 
carried out. Such a study is the final test for functionality, 
reliability and usability. Furthermore, during the field study 
it is explored whether end-users intend to keep using the 
technology and to what price. A final aim of the field study 
is to investigate whether the use of the technology leads to 
the intended effects: more indepency in living at home 
leading to the same or higher quality of care against lower 
costs. 
The facilities to perform relevant user research have 
recently been extended. The research group IT Innovations 
in Health Care established the Telecare Skillslab, not only to 
contribute to education in eHealth, but also to facilitate 
telecare research. The Skillslab actually consists of two 
locations both situated at the campus of Windesheim, 
separated about 200 m. One of the locations has been 
furnished as a living accommodation which makes it 
possible to experiment with domestic applications of sensors 
in a realistic manner. The other location typically aims at 
facilitating formal or informal carers, providing care at a 
distance. Camera’s installed in the ceiling provide the 
researchers with possibilities for non-obtrusive observation. 
In addition to this interviews and focus groups can be hosted 
in an informal setting in the living room part of the Skillslab. 
C. Cost-benefit Analysis 
To ensure the structural embedding of the developed 
technology in routine care, costs and benefits need to be 
balanced. Not only should overall costs be evened out with 
overall benefits, but balance between costs and benefits of 
single stakeholders within the care chain should also be 
pursued. 
The 
goal 
of 
the 
cost-benefit 
analysis 
in 
the 
Hightech@home project is to provide insight in the costs and 
benefits on the level of single stakeholders within the 
involved care chain. Relevant data will be collected during 
the field study. 
D. Business Modeling 
IT-related business model innovations have become key 
factors in achieving structural innovation in healthcare [5]. 
Hence, in former projects [6] we developed a business model 
approach to be used as an instrument to bridge the gap of 
innovative eHealth ideas to successful IT-based care 
services. A main component of this approach is the online 
webtool, the eHealth innovation Matrix ([7] – in Dutch). 
When using open source technology, new business 
models need to be developed. Therefore we will use this 
eHix-approach during the Hightech@home project. This 
implies the application of relevant instruments and 
knowledge as included in all five distinguished phases of the 
eHix. See Figure 1 for the five phases and examples of 
knowledge and instruments per phase. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. eHix: innovation phases and examples 
  
  
Design & 
Development 
Experimental  
Pilot 
-Usability 
-Start design  
  business model 
-Invest in  
  resources 
-Reliable  
  technology 
-Training facilities 
-User support 
-Evidence based  
  medicine 
-Business model 
Inventory 
Implementation 
-Openness 
-Technology and 
  market scan 
-Needs research 
268
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

E. eHealth research in education 
Being a University of Applied Sciences, it is important to 
include students in our research. In this project bachelor 
Information Technology students are involved both in 
technical design and development as in the above mentioned 
research. User research is also performed by Bachelor Health 
and Welfare students. 
To facilitate future involvement of students in our 
eHealth-projects, an additional aim of the Hightech@home 
project is the design and development of a digital learning 
environment. This environment will facilitate students with 
easy access to all relevant knowledge to provide them with a 
head start. 
 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
The project Hightech@home started in June 2013 and 
will conclude at the end of 2014. Hence, at the time of 
writing the first four months of the project can be considered. 
This section highlights some preliminary results and lessons 
learnt from these four months. 
 
A. Technical Design and Development 
The portal contains video and audio capabilities to 
communicate with care professionals and friends. Since the 
portal itself is made available through the web browser, the 
video and audio capabilities should also be available there. 
The benefit of this set-up is that no additional software is 
required. We use WebRTC [8] to facilitate video and audio 
in the browser. At this moment WebRTC is available in at 
least Google Chrome, but implementations in other browsers 
are likely to be completed in the future. WebRTC makes it 
possible to communicate peer-to-peer , without the need for a 
central server. Currently, in our set-up we assume both 
clients to use the same codec, which makes a translation of 
the data stream unnecessary. The result is a fully peer-to-peer 
audio and video connection between two clients. 
Setting up this connection between peers, however, 
requires some administration. We used the Session Initiation 
Protocol (SIP), with a central Asterisk server for this 
purpose. After initiation, the connection is completely peer-
to-peer and the central server is no longer needed. 
B. User Research 
Top priority of the involved user researchers, is the 
selection and inclusion of a specific end-user target group. 
So far we were not successful in obtaining full commitment 
of a care organisation, despite principles concerning the 
involvement of end-users. This puts pressure on the intended 
co-creation process. Due to political developments in The 
Netherlands, care organisations need their full attention, 
available time and staff to focus on their primary processes. 
Innovation activities are cut back. Hence, involvement in a 
project like Hightech@home becomes less likely. At the 
moment of writing we are still aiming at the commitment of 
a care organisation. Furthermore we are considering 
alternative options concerning informal carers. 
C. Cost-benefit Analysis 
To provide insight in the costs and benefits on the level 
of single stakeholders within the involved care chain, a cost-
benefit analysis will be drafted in the Hightech@home 
project. The relevant data for this analysis will be collected 
during the field study where the prototype will be tested for 
functionality, reliability and usability. It is only after 
exploration whether end-users intend to keep using the 
technology and to what price and whether the use of the 
technology leads to the intended effects that this cost-benefit 
analysis can be drawn up. 
D. Business Modeling 
Menko et al. described the eHealth innovation Matrix and 
illustrated the application of its business model framework 
with an example of an eHealth innovation, namely the 
DiMove service [6]. In the Hightech@home project the eHix 
will be applied as well. Both the eHix Scan and the Library 
will be utilized. The Scan consists of a questionnaire which 
allows users to determine the status of their project. The 
Library contains, among other things, templates and 
checklists to facilitate the innovation process. 
Not only will the eHix be applied in the Hightech@home 
project, but the use of the eHix will also be studied in order 
to discover opportunities for further improvement and 
enhancement of the approach. Technical action research 
(TAR) [9, 10] has been selected to study the use of the eHix 
in practice. In this approach, the researcher plays three 
logically separate roles: the developer and the investigator of 
(in this case) the eHix approach together with a role in which 
the client is supported in using the eHix to improve the 
client’s eHealth innovation process. In these three roles the 
eHix will be applied, studied in practice, and possibly 
improved. 
 
E. eHealth research in education 
The project activities of the project Hightech@home are 
carried out by researchers, lecturers and students from both 
the programs Bachelor of IT and Bachelor of Health Care. 
This creates integration of education and research and a 
multidisciplinary approach. The activities in the various 
Hightech@home projects should provide a structural 
assurance in the educational curriculum of IT training. 
Therefore, after careful consideration of the various forms of 
imbedding the Hightech@home project activities in the 
educational curriculum at the start of the project, one of the 
deliverables of this project is a sustainable learning 
environment for IT students in the field of e-health and home 
care technology. Compatible with the current trend in 
education, this deliverable will take form in a digital learning 
environment (DLE) created by and for Bachelor of IT 
students.  
The DLE consists of three levels - macro, meso and 
micro level. The macro level gives the context of e-health 
and the documentation contains general introductions to e-
health in the IT domain. The micro level consists of 
information on home care technology in the Netherlands. At 
269
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the 
micro 
level 
all 
documents 
regarding 
the 
Hightech@home project are presented. 
The DLE has many benefits. It ensures that students of 
Information Technology (IT) have access to a high quality 
of information related to e-health and open high-tech home 
technology in a quick and in a pleasant way. Using open 
technology of d-wiki, the DLE is easy to access and has as 
low cost start up and maintenance [11]. Through 
independent study of this learning environment the IT 
student can quickly prepare and act in any e-health project 
and an open home care technology project almost 
independently, with less preparation time and little 
guidance.  
After in-depth interviews with various groups of IT 
students, consultation with researchers and lecturers and 
after thorough desk research on digital learning, two IT 
students have drafted the requirements analysis and set up 
the technical structure of the DLE. The next two months 
these students will sample the content and present the 
documentation on the DLE in the appropriate way. In 
January 2014 the first version of the DLE will be released 
after formal approval by the project group. Ready for use 
this DLE will be evaluated and updated methodologically 
by the next group of IT students working on the 
Hightech@home project. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we described the Hightech@home project’s 
ambition to develop technology and knowledge concerning 
open source home care technology utilizing open standards, 
to perform user research with prototypes, to draft a cost-
benefit analysis, and to develop a viable business model. We 
also presented the first months of progress of the 
Hightech@home project. 
The main conclusion to be drawn from the current 
progress is that WebRTC seems both very promising to 
realise our ambitions and feasible to work with. With 
guidance from our researchers, the students were able to 
realise a fully peer-to-peer audio and video connection 
between two clients. 
A second conclusion concerns the high ambitions of the 
project. For a project lasting only 18 months with limited 
resources we are quite demanding with our goals set on five 
different topics: Technical Design and Development, User 
Research, Cost-benefit Analysis, Business Modelling, and 
eHealth research in education. Nonetheless we think we can 
realise our ambitions and hence make a difference in home 
care by providing low cost plug and play home care 
technology. 
Future work on the project concerns the plans on all five 
tracks as described, with a high priority focus on including a 
care organisation in the project team. Beyond the described 
plans, future work concerns scaling up the project. Several 
eHealth companies have already shown interest in joining 
the team if a follow-up project will be funded and started. 
We conclude from this interest, that open source home care 
technology is a wanted technology to further develop and 
investigate. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank TechForFuture, Centre of 
Expertise HTSM (http://www.techforfuture.nl) for its 
financial support. The centre is an initiative of Saxion and 
Windesheim, universities of applied sciences and was 
established with the support of the Province of Overijssel.  
We thank IT students Infrastructure Design and Security 
for their work on the homecare portal: Ashley Fennema, 
Patrick van der Graaf, Jeroen van der Linde, Robbert 
Mulder, Andries Roodbergen, Martijn Rotman. And we 
thank the IT students Business IT and Management for their 
work on the Digital Learning Environment: Emiel Hofstede 
and Jesse Lantinga.  
We also thank OpenXs and Castbasics for their 
cooperation in the Hightech@home project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Broens, T.H.F., et al., Determinants of successful telemedicine 
implementations: a literature study. Journal of Telemedicine 
and Telecare, 2007(13): p. 303-309. 
[2] 
OpenPortaal. 
 
[27-01-2014]; 
Available 
from: 
www.openportaal.nl. 
[3] 
WebRTC. 
 
[27-1-2014]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.webrtc.org/. 
[4] 
OpenXS.  [27-1-2014]; Available from: www.openxs.eu. 
[5] 
Haaker, 
T., 
Business 
modellen 
voor 
ICT-intensieve 
zorginnovatie., 2010, Nictiz Kennisartikel 10025. 
[6] 
Menko, R., et al., Applying the Stof Business Model Framework 
in eHealth Innovations, in eTELEMED 2013: The Fifth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine2013: Nice, France. 
[7] 
eHix.  [27-1-2014]; Available from: www.eHix.nl  
[8] 
Johnston, A.B. and D.C. Burnett, WebRTC – APIs and 
RTCWEB Protocols of the HTML5 Real-Time Web2012: Digital 
Codex LLC. 
[9] 
Wieringa, R.J. and A. Morali, Technical Action Research as a 
Validation Method in Information Systems Design Science., in 
Seventh International Conference on Design Science Research 
in Information Systems and Technology (DESRIST). LNCS 
7286., K. Peffers, M. Rothenberger, and B. Kuechler, Editors. 
2012, Springer. p. 220-238. 
[10] 
Wieringa, R.J., Designing technical action research and 
generalizing from real-world cases., in 24th International 
Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering, 
CAiSE2012: Gdansk, Poland. 
[11] 
DokuWiki. 
 
[27-1-2014]; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.dokuwiki.org/dokuwiki. 
 
 
270
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
Approaching 2014: Is Telemedicine Assessed from The Social Perspective?  
A Brief 2013 Systematic Review
Francesco Fusco, Leopoldo Trieste, Giuseppe Turchetti. 
Institute of Management-Management and Innovation (MAIN) 
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna 
Pisa, Italy 
e-mail: f.fusco@sssup.it, l.trieste@sssup.it, g.turchetti@sssup.it  
 
Abstract—Recent reviews in Telemedicine (TM) detected 
methodological flaws in economic assessment. Our brief review 
addresses the perspective adoption problem, investigating to 
what extent adopting a broader point of view could have an 
impact on TM economic studies and consequential diffusion. 
Out of 486 articles found, 15 studies were selected for full-text 
assessment. Most of them showed an improvement in 
methodology if compared with the past TM economic 
evaluations. However, only 4 papers reported data from the 
social perspective and among them 3 presented productivity 
loss. Although some positive results in economic evaluation 
were observed, to date it is not clear to what extent TM is paid 
for by third parties or has to be paid by the patients. 
Keywords-economic evaluation perspective; cost-effectiveness; 
cost-utility; review;  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Telemedicine (TM) is a relative recently established 
field, nonetheless it is dominating the debate in the scientific 
community. Information and Communication Technologies 
(ICT) constant improvement resulted in various benefits for 
the users. In fact it should be considered the revolution in 
users’ life when the ICT reached a wide diffusion. In less 
than 30 years, the average consumer passed from barely 
communicating with Total Access Communication System 
(TACS), to gathering lap-top duties in smart-phones. This 
overturn in everyday lifestyle, completely changed habits 
and therefore the time spent in different daily life tasks. 
While mobile communications and Internet diffusion have 
already shown to have a positive effect on GDP and 
productivity growth, [1,2] the same could not be stated for 
telemedicine. In the global financial crisis setting, resources 
allocated to the healthcare sector were significantly 
diminished; this scenario asks for cost-saving initiatives, but 
also for innovative and effective strategies able to make the 
healthcare system financially sustainable. Within this 
framework, Medicare and Medicaid provided reimbursement 
for many telemedicine programs for preserving high quality 
healthcare and pursuing a cost-saving strategy in those areas 
where specialized employees are not available (e.g., rural 
districts) [3]. The forecasted market value for telecare was 
predicted to double from $9.8 billion (2010) to $27.3 billion 
(2016); 18.6% being the compound annual growth rate, 
having not substantial hinders on its growth [4]. 
Nevertheless, 
effectiveness 
and 
cost-effectiveness 
of 
telemedicine and its related fields are not clear yet. Both 
early and the most recent literature reviews [5-10] report 
contradictory results on the actual impact of telemedicine in 
terms of costs and effectiveness. However, most of the 
reviewers observed a high prevalence of poor designed and 
developed studies, probably responsible for reluctance in 
adopting telemedicine. In addition, it is not clear to what 
extent telemedicine should be considered an only third-party 
payer's matter or not. There is a common agreement about 
cost-utility analysis to be performed adopting National 
Health Service (NHS) perspective. Nonetheless, estimating 
only third-party payer's costs could be responsible for partial 
cost assessment, and consequential partial benefit estimation. 
NHS perspective disregards all patients’ related cost, 
excluding indirect and out-of-pocket costs. Productivity loss 
is a very controversial point in economic evaluation in 
healthcare. In health economics it was extensively discussed 
whether indirect costs (productivity loss) should be included 
in Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (CEA), without reaching a 
final and wide consensus [11,12]. The explanation for that 
could be found in the necessity for the NHS to optimize 
resource consumption as it is driven by spending cap issues. 
However, patients (and potential informal caregivers) 
perspective could consequentially report extra information 
able to influence society itself. Other issues frequently 
disregarded in economic evaluation are direct non-medical 
costs (i.e., travelling and accommodation expenditures), 
which account for a considerable amount of resources 
consumed if considering high prevalence diseases. The 
societal perspective is able to embrace all these costs, 
merging NHS costs (medical and not medical direct cost) to 
patient ones (out-of-pocket medical and non-medical direct 
cost; indirect and intangible costs). The object of our brief 
review is to investigate to what extent economic evaluations 
in telemedicine published up to 2013 were able to capture 
potential benefits considering the social perspective issue.  
The article is composed by five sections. Introduction 
addresses state of art and the systematic review aim. 
Methods section describes the procedures used to select 
the included articles. Results section explores and 
highlights the main findings. Discussion reports issues 
and possible solution to assess properly telemedicine. 
Finally, conclusion accounts for authors considerations. 
271
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
II. 
 METHODS 
In order to identify all published studies inherent to 
economic evaluation in telemedicine, a systematic review 
was conducted throughout the following databases: EBSCO 
host (Medline; Cinahl; EconLit; PsycInfo); Database of 
Abstracts of Reviews of Effectiveness (DARE); ISI 
Databases (Science Citation Index; Social Science Citation 
Index; Arts and Humanities Citation Index); Embase; NHS 
Economic 
Evaluation 
Database; 
Health 
Technology 
Assessment Database and the Cochrane Databases. The 
studies included in the review are full economic evaluations 
according to Drummond [11]; therefore, the following terms 
were included in the search strategy: Cost-Minimization 
Analysis (CMA), Cost-Consequences Analysis (CCA), Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis (CEA), Cost-Utility Analysis (CUA), 
Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) of telemedicine and its 
explosion in mesh tree. Studies reporting only costs or only 
effectiveness were excluded. Other exclusion criteria were: 
email-only or telephone-only based studies and different 
languages than English. Results were limited to the period 
January 1st, 2013 to November, 2013, as previous reviews 
extensively reported and discussed data and methodological 
issues [8,10]. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Once identifying the article titles, duplicates were deleted 
using MS excel 2013 (Microsoft Corporation). 486 articles 
were obtained from search strategy terms research. After 
titles revision 451 articles were excluded because they were 
not economic evaluation. Abstracts revision has led to 
exclude 20 articles: 6 considered only cost, 4 were reviews, 3 
considered only effectiveness, 2 were study protocols and 5 
were excluded for other reasons (telephone based, different 
language than English, patients preference, validation study). 
After the abstract assessment, 15 articles were included for 
full-text evaluation (Figure 1). NHS and Social perspective 
were the most adopted respectively 10 and 4 studies. 
A. NHS perspective 
Among the included trials (Table I), the majority adopted 
the NHS perspective. The whole set of studies was assessing 
performance of telemonitoring devices in chronic diseases 
(Heart failure, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 
Diabetes, Hypertension), reporting in most of the cases 
utility outcomes (e.g., Quality Adjusted Life Years - 
QALYs). Time horizon ranged from 6 months to 16 months. 
Out of 6 decision models (Table II), 4 of them were Markov         
model-based economic evaluation and 2 decision tree ones. 
Although most of them adopted a third-party payer point of 
view, QALY was chosen as effective outcome in 5 studies. 
The time horizon covered period ranging from 3 years up to 
lifetime. Beyond clinical trials and decision models, 2 out of 
5 studies with various designs (Table III) assessed TM from 
the NHS perspective. The interventions were compared with 
results belonging to the same patients, but observed before 
telemedicine procedure started. No Health Related Quality of 
Life (HRQOL) outcomes were considered; authors chose 
monetary benefits or clinical outcomes. 
B. Social perspective 
Most of the studies assessing costs alongside clinical 
trials adopted NHS perspective. Nevertheless, Zanaboni et al. 
[13] showed costs experienced by patients for travelling and 
private visits in both study arms; however, patients’ costs 
were excluded in CUA. No significant difference in cost for 
NHS was observed, on the other hand patients in TM arm 
experienced a lower expense of 100€ per patient/year 
(p<0.05). This difference was detectable in all the patients' 
related costs (Protocol-defined visits and Emergency 
Department visits) with exception of “Non-urgent in-office 
visits”, where usual care was less expensive (p>0.05). The 
authors concluded that remote monitoring led to cost saving 
for patients of about 24% of their cost per year. However, 
limiting analysis to patients for whom QALY was available, 
it was considered only NHS costs and was observed a cost 
reduction of €888.10 per patient over 16 months. Only one 
Markov model assessed CEA from both the NHS and social 
perspective [14]. Once household costs were considered, the 
TM intervention cost increased. However, Rachapelle et al. 
[14] stated that most of TM costs are related to additional 
hospital fees rather than to travelling costs or productivity 
loss. Among studies adopting different design than clinical 
trials or decision models, 2 of them developed the study from 
the society point of view. No HRQOL outcomes were used 
in these studies. Levin et al. [15] performed an uncontrolled 
retrospective study, assessing cost reduction adopting 
telemedicine in diabetes teleconsulting in Denmark. In this 
case, results compared haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels in 
diabetic patients using TM to Dansk Voksen diabetes 
database (DVDD) patients’ levels [15]. Isetta et al. [16] 
results compared telemonitoring for low risk newborns with 
usual care in terms of Emergency Department (ED) accesses. 
Indirect costs concerning one of the newborn’s parents were 
 
Figure 1. Study selection flow chart. 
272
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
assumed to be €15 for missed hour of work, while €30 for 
travelling expenses to reach the hospital. Sensitivity analyses 
varied the following costs by ±75%: Emergency Department 
visit, hospital visit, nurses’ salary per hour, travelling to 
hospital and parents’ productivity loss. Even in these cases, 
the ICER was in favour of telemonitoring.  
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
 In the last years, many authors questioned the 
methodological approach to capture costs and effectiveness 
of telemedicine [5-10]. The most important problems 
identified were: study design, small samples, limited time 
horizon, heterogeneous cost-related variables and proxies for 
effectiveness, control group absence and cost analysis 
perspective. In the papers published in 2013, we registered a 
somewhat improvement with regards to most of these 
elements. In particular, most of the studies retrieved have a 
sufficiently broad sample and used well-defined cost items 
and outcomes variables. However, the perspective of 
analysis remains an unsolved issue. In Italy, it is not clear if 
telemedicine should be reimbursed or not [13].  
In this setting, a narrow perspective is not suitable to 
properly answer to this question. The societal point of view 
is by definition the broadest one, embracing NHS, patients 
and caregivers perspective. From the patients and the 
caregivers point of view, direct (medical and non-medical), 
indirect, and intangible costs (HRQOL) should be assessed 
[11]. In effect, telemedicine, theoretically, could sharply 
decrease all of these cost items. One of the focal points of 
telemedicine 
adoption 
is 
abridging 
distances 
and 
consequentially to reduce productivity loss, and delivering 
high quality healthcare outside the healthcare centre. This 
has of course an influence in patient’s expenditure in terms 
of travelling and/or accommodation. Zanaboni et al. reported 
reduction in out-of-pocket costs for in-office and clinic 
visits. Even if the authors did not report non-medical direct 
and indirect costs, it is consequential that a reduction in the 
number of visits was reflected in a reduction in travelling 
costs and productivity loss for the telemonitoring arm. 
Likewise, Isetta et al. [16] reported positive results in their 
cost-effectiveness study including non-medical direct and 
indirect costs (estimated by assumption). On the other hand, 
Rachapelle et al. assessed TM intervention adopting the NHS 
and societal perspective. From the latter point of view, the 
intervention was no more cost effective in the same 
timeframe where it was for NHS. In all the cases the 
introduction or exclusion of productivity loss and 
travelling/accommodation costs was able to influence the 
study results. 
 The other 10 studies reported only the third-party payer's 
perspective. However, in comparison to the previous 
reviews, 2013 brought an improvement in terms of 
methodological reliability in telemedicine studies. Although 
the number of well-designed studies has somewhat 
increased, further methodological reliable studies have to be 
developed 
in 
order 
to 
confirm 
telemedicine 
cost-
effectiveness. In addition, the adopted perspective and 
indirect cost assessment still represent a pivotal unsolved 
point. Introduction of indirect cost in CEA and CUA was 
extensively discussed; the main issues raised in the literature 
were equity, measurement, double counting in HRQOL 
benefits and opportunity cost [17]. Of course, to convert 
productivity loss in monetary terms, therefore, limiting it to 
employed patients, could influence the equity purpose in 
healthcare, giving priority to employed patients [18]. 
However, unpaid job could be involved in the analysis 
attempting to overcome this problem (e.g., considering the 
avert cost for the closest paid job) [17].  
Another important issue to be considered is the 
measurement of indirect costs, as there is little agreement 
about what methods among human capital or friction 
approach is the best in capturing indirect cost. The first one 
estimating the productivity gain as an averted earning, while 
the latter depend on the productivity reduction of each 
patient during the condition and the amount of time (friction 
period) required to completely restore patient’s productivity. 
Double counting point concerns about whether the observed 
monetarized outcome (productivity loss) has been fully 
incorporated in the non-monetarized effectiveness unit. 
Therefore, double counting could be avoidable considering 
clinical outcomes instead of HRQOL ones, as in this case 
outcomes would not express patient’s preferences. However, 
it would lead to lose all the comparability and generalization 
advantages in using HRQOL outcomes like QALYs. 
Regarding to this topic Olsen et al. [19] stated that whether 
the preference based outcome did not report dimension 
clearly describing income changes related to health gain, it is 
not possible to know if the patient provided or not these data 
in his/her utility. In our review the productivity loss was 
included in 3 studies [14-16], two of them assess indirect 
cost by assumption, while Rachapelle and colleagues 
reported productivity loss only for those who had a paid job. 
On the other hand, Isetta et al. [16] included an estimation of 
indirect cost for only one of the newborn parents.  
A constrained number of studies adopted a broad 
perspective, and even a smaller number introduced 
productivity loss. In a public healthcare setting, opportunity 
costs should be carefully assessed. Although NHS 
expenditure reduction is straightforward to assess, assessing 
productivity gain is more complex. Let us consider a 
hypothetic innovative procedure to be no more expensive 
than usual care from the NHS perspective, but less expensive 
from the societal one, the additional resources obtained could 
be invested directly or indirectly in healthcare again. This 
would be reflected in extended budget for every single 
activity able to influence QALYs in favour to the least 
expensive procedure from social perspective [17]. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Although the controversial issue about including indirect 
costs in CUA, societal perspective should be adopted 
considering non-medical direct costs, while productivity loss 
could be assessed in terms of usual activities loss, but not 
included in CUA. This would report all the most remarkable 
273
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
items of cost and highlight indirect gains (included in 
QALY, but perhaps hidden in it), resulting in the best 
informing data for policymakers. 
Further methodologically robust studies should be 
designed and conducted in order to drive both the adopters 
and the policy makers to more informed and reliable 
investment decisions.     
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank: Ms Carla Papa and Ms Maria Teresa 
Nevigato for the help in retrieving all the articles. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Gruber and P. Koutroumpis, “Mobile telecommunications 
and the impact on economic development,” Panel draft for 
52nd Economic Policy Panel Oct. 2010. 
[2] Internet Advertising Board, “Assessing the consumer benefits 
of online advertising”, Jul. 2010. 
[3] S.E. Palsbo, “Medicaid Payment for Telerehabilitation,’ Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil, Jul. 2004, vol. 85, pp. 1188-1191.  
[4] “Research, Telemedicine opportunities for medical and 
electronic providers,” Wellesley BBC Research US 2011. 
[5] R. Roine, A. Ohinmaa, D. Hailey, “Assessing telemedicine: a 
systematic review of the literature,” CMAJ, Sept. 2001; vol. 
165; pp. 765-771. 
[6] R. Wootton, “Twenty years of telemedicine in chronic disease 
management an evidence synthesis,” Journal of Telemedicine 
and Telecare, Jun. 2012, vol. 18, pp. 211-220. 
[7] N. Van den Berg, M. Schumann, K. Kraft, W. Hoffmann, 
“Telemedicine and telecare for older patients A systematic 
review,” Maturitas, Oct. 2012, vol. 73, pp. 94-114. 
[8] A.G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, and S. Flottorp, “Methodologies for 
assessing telemedicine: A systematic review of reviews,” Int. 
J. of Medical Informatics, Jan. 2012, vol. 81, pp. 1-11. 
[9] A.G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, S. Flottorp, “Effectiveness of 
telemedicine: A systematic review of reviews,” Int. J. of Med. 
Informatics, Nov. 2010, vol. 79, pp. 736-771. 
[10] H. Mistry, “Systematic review of studies of the cost-
effectiveness of telemedicine and telecare. Changes in the 
economic evidence over twenty years,” J Telemed Telecare, 
Jan. 2012, vol. 1, pp. 1-6. 
[11] M.F. Drummond, M. J. Schulper, G. W. Torrance, B. J. 
O’Brien, and G. L. Stoddart, Methods for the economic 
evaluation of health care programmes, Third edition. (Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2005). pp. 22-43, 
pp. 96-110.  
[12] A.M. Gray, P.M. Clarke, J. Wolstenholme, and S. 
Wordsworth, Applied Methods of Cost-effectiveness Analysis 
in Healthcare, (Oxford University Press, Oxford, United 
Kingdom,2010), pp. 124-125. 
[13] P. Zanaboni, M. Landolina,M. Marzegalli, M. Lunati, G.B. 
Perego, and G. Guenzati. “Cost-Utility Analysis of the 
EVOLVO Study on Remote Monitoring for Heart Failure 
Patients 
With 
Implantable 
Defibrillators: 
Randomized 
Controlled Trial,” J Med Internet Res, May 2013,vol. 5, pp. 
106, doi:10.2196/jmir.2587 
[14] S. Rachapelle, R. Legood, Y. Alavi, R. Lindfield, T. Sharma, 
and H. Kuper, ”The Cost–Utility of Telemedicine to Screen 
for Diabetic Retinopathy in India,” Ophthalmology, Mar. 
2013, vol. 120, pp. 566-73. 
[15] K. Levin, J.R. Madsen, I. Petersen, C.E. Wanscher, and J. 
Hangaard. “Telemedicine Diabetes Consultations Are Cost-
Effective, and Effects on Essential Diabetes Treatment 
Parameters Are Similar to Conventional Treatment: 7-Year 
Results from the Svendborg Telemedicine Diabetes Project,” 
Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, May 2013, vol. 
7, pp. 587-595. 
[16] V. Isetta, C. Lopez-Agustina, E. Lopez-Bernal, M. Amat, and 
M. Vila, “Cost-Effectiveness of a New Internet-Based 
Monitoring Tool for Neonatal Post-Discharge Home Care,” J 
Med Internet Res, Feb. 2013, vol. 2, pp. e38. 
[17] M.A. Koopmanschap and F H. Frans, “Indirect Costs: The 
Consequence of Production Loss or Increased Costs of 
Production,” Medical Care, Dec. 1996, vol. 34, pp. DS59-
DS68. 
[18] J.A. Olsen, “Production gains: should they count in health 
care evaluations?,” Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 
Feb. 1994, vol. 41, pp. 69-84. 
[19] J. A. Olsen and J. Richardson, “Production Gains from Health 
Care: What Should be Included in Cost-effectiveness 
Analyses?,” Social Science & Medicine, Jul. 1999, vol. 49, 
pp. 1-12. 
[20] C. Henderson, M. Knapp, J. Fernández, J. Beecham, S.P. 
Hirani, and M. Cartwright. Cost effectiveness of telehealth for 
patients with long term conditions (Whole Systems 
Demonstrator 
telehealth 
questionnaire 
study): 
nested 
economic evaluation in a pragmatic, cluster randomised 
controlled trial. BMJ. Mar. 2013, vol. 346, pp. 1-19 doi: 
10.1136/bmj.f1035. 
[21] J.J.J. Boyne, A. DI Van Asselt, A.P.M. Gorgels, L. M.G. 
Steuten, and G. De Weerd, J. Kragten, “Cost-effectiveness 
analysis of telemonitoring versus usual care in patients with 
heart failure: the TEHAF-study,” J Telemed Telecare, Jul. 
2013, vol. 19, pp. 242-248, doi: 10.1177/1357633X13495478 
. 
[22] A. Stoddart, J. Hanley, and S. Wild, “Telemonitoring-based 
service redesign for the management of uncontrolled 
hypertension (HITS): cost and cost-effectiveness analysis of a 
randomised controlled trial,” BMJ Open, Oct. 2013, vol. 3, 
pp. 1-12, doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002681. 
[23] P. Thokala, H. Baalbaki, A. Brennan, A. Pandor, J.W. 
Stevens, and T. Gomersall “Telemonitoring after discharge 
from hospital with heart failure: cost-effectiveness modelling 
of alternative service designs,” BMJ Open, May 2013, vol. 3, 
pp. 1-9, doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003250. 
[24] S.D. Solomon, J. Dobson, S. Pocock, S. Hicham, J.J.V. 
McMurray, and C. B.Granger, “Influence of nonfatal 
hospitalization for heart failure on subsequent mortality in 
patients with chronic heart failure,” Circulation, Aug. 2007, 
vol. 116, pp. 1482-1487. 
[25] E. Kirkizlar, N. Serban, J. A. Sisson, J. L. Swann, C. S. 
Barnes, and M. D. Williams, “Evaluation of Telemedicine for 
Screening of Diabetic Retinopathy in the Veterans Health 
Administration,” Ophthalmology, Sep. 2013, vol. 120, pp. 1-
7, doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2013.06.029. 
[26] P.R. Conlin, B.M. Fisch, J.C. Orcutt, B.J. Hetrick, and A.W. 
Darkins, “Framework for a national teleretinal imaging 
program to screen for diabetic retinopathy in Veterans Health 
Administration patients,” J Rehabil Res Dev, Dec. 2006, vol. 
43, pp. 741-748. 
[27] J. Orcutt, A. Avakian, T.D. Koepsell, and C. Maynard, “Eye 
disease in veterans with diabetes,” Diabetes Care, May 2004, 
vol. 27, pp. B50-B53. 
[28] H. Mistry and H. M. Gardiner, “The cost-effectiveness of 
prenatal detection for congenital heart disease using 
telemedicine screening,” Telemed Telecare, May 2013, Vol. 
19, pp. 190-196, doi: 10.1258/jtt.2012.120418. 
[29] R. Dowie, H. Mistry, T.A. Young, R.C. Franklin, and H.M. 
Gardiner, “Cost implications of introducing a telecardiology 
274
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
service to support fetal ultrasound screening,” J Telemed 
Telecare, Dec. 2008, vol. 14, pp. 421-426. 
[30] B. Kaambwa, S. Bryan, S. Jowett, J. Mant, E. P. Bray, and 
F.D. R. Hobbs, “Telemonitoring and self-management in the 
control of hypertension (TASMINH2): a cost-effectiveness 
analysis,” European Journal of Preventive Cardiology, Aug. 
2013, vol. 20, pp. 1-14, doi: 10.1177/2047487313501886. 
[31] R.J. Mc Manus, J. Mant, E.P. Bray, R. Holder, M.I. Jones, 
and S. Greenfield, “Telemonitoring and self-management in 
the control of hypertension (TASMINH2): A randomised 
controlled trial,” Lancet, Jul. 2010, vol. 376, pp. 163-172. 
[32] J.A. Switzer, B.M. Demaerschalk, J. Xie, L. Fan, K.F. Villa 
and E.Q. Wu, “Cost-Effectiveness of Hub-and-Spoke 
Telestroke Networks for the Management of Acute Ischemic 
Stroke From the Hospitals' Perspectives,” Circ Cardiovasc 
Qual Outcomes Oct. 2013, vol. 6, pp. 18-26. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.112.967125 
[33] Y. Chen, Y. Lin, C. Hung, C. Huang, D. Yeih, and P. Chuang, 
“Clinical Outcome and Cost-Effectiveness of a Synchronous 
Telehealth Service for Seniors and Nonseniors with 
Cardiovascular Diseases: Quasi-Experimental Study,” J Med 
Internet 
Res, 
Apr. 
2013, 
vol. 
15, 
pp. 
e87, 
doi:10.2196/jmir.2091. 
[34] Dansk Voksen Diabetes Database (DVDD). National 
årsrapport 2011. Version 1.4.                                
https://www.sundhed.dk/content/cms/88/4688_dvdd_kommen
teret_ aarsrapport.pdf. (visited on: 3rd of October,2013) 
[35] G. Parè and P. Poba-Nzaou, ”Home Telemonitoring for 
Chronic Disease Management: An Economic Assessment,” 
International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health 
Care, 
Apr. 
2013, 
vol. 
2, 
pp. 
155-161, 
doi:10.1017/S0266462313000111. 
[36] Y. Akematsu, S. Nitta, K. Morita, and M. Tsuji, ”Empirical 
analysis of the long-term effects of telecare use in Nishi-aizu 
Town, Fukushima Prefecture, Japan,” Technol Health Care, 
Mar. 2013, vol. 2, pp. 173-182. doi: 10.3233/THC-130728
275
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
CLINICAL TRIAL BASED ECONOMIC ANALYSES.  
Clinical-trial  
Features 
Population 
Study design 
Intervention 
description 
Data provided 
Results 
Henderson et 
al. 2013[20] 
1’573 patients with 
chronic diseases: 
Heart failure, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary 
disease or diabetes. 
Mean age: 71 years. 
 
Economic evaluation 
based on a pragmatic, 
cluster randomized 
controlled trial. 
Perspective: NHS.  
Time horizon:  
1 year. 
 
Intervention:  
Telemonitoring in 
addition to the usual 
care. 
Control:  
Usual care (UC). 
Costs: 
Telehealth cost,  
self-reported service use data. 
Effectiveness outcomes: 
QALY. 
ICER:  
£92’000/QALY (£79’000/QALY project mana
From no capability to full capability: £98’000 (
with WTP: £30000).  
Sensitivity analyses:  
a) 80%, TM cost reduction: £539 (34%probabi
b) TM Cost reduction (80%) combined with hi
£12’000/QALY. (61% cost-effective probabilit
Boyne et al. 
2013[21] 
382 patients with 
congestive heart 
failure  
Mean age: 71 years. 
Multicentre 
randomized controlled 
trial.  
Perspective: NHS. 
Time horizon: 1 year. 
Intervention: 
Telemonitoring device 
connected to 
telephone line. 
Control:  
Usual Care. 
Costs:  
direct medical costs, 
telephone consultation, 
telemonitoring, ambulance, 
caregiver-patient phone 
contact (paid by NHS).  
Effectiveness outcomes: 
QALY. 
Costs: 
Total costs: €16’687 (TM) vs €16’561 (UC) (n
Physiotherapy costs TM costs €46 more than U
ICER (TM vs UC) €40’321/QALY (48% cost
€50’000). 
Subgroup analysis: 
HF duration ≤18 months probability TM to co
HF duration ≥18 months probability TM to co
Stoddart et al. 
2013[22] 
401 patients with 
uncontrolled 
hypertension  
Mean age: 60.6 years. 
Pragmatic randomized 
controlled trial.  
Perspective: NHS. 
Time horizon:  
6 months. 
  
Intervention: 
Telemonitoring based 
service for the 
management of 
uncontrolled 
hypertension. 
Control:  
Usual care. 
Direct Costs:  
Outpatients, nurse 
consultations emergency 
telephone, ER visits; drugs. 
Effectiveness Outcomes:  
Mean daytime systolic 
ambulatory blood pressure 
(SABP). 
Cost: 
Mean difference (TM vs UC) cost-patient per 6
Effectiveness Outcome:  
SABP difference (6 months): -6,05 mm Hg (TM
Mean difference between TM-UC (6 months):-
Zanaboni et al. 
2013 [13] 
200 patients heart 
failure patients 
implanted. 
Mean age:  
not stated,  
TM median age: 66 
years. 
UC median age: 69 
years. 
Prospective, 
randomized, open, 
multicentre clinical 
trial. 
Perspective: 
NHS/patient. 
Time horizon:  
16 months. 
Intervention:  
Wireless implantable 
defibrillator. 
Control:  
Usual care. 
NHS costs:  
Direct medical costs, 
TM follow-up. 
Patient cost:  
Outpatient private visits; ED 
visits, out-of-pocket 
expenses.  
Effectiveness outcomes:  
QALY. 
NHS cost: Mean cost per patient (1 year): €1’9
€2’130.01(UC);(p=0.80). 
Patient cost: Mean cost per patient (1 year): €3
(UC);(p=0.01). 
Cost-utility analysis: Mean cost per patient (16
€2’962.80 (UC);(p=0.33). 
QALYs gained (16 months):1.03 (TM) vs 0.97
Even if a €900 fee would be applied to TM, the
be negative. 
(i.e., TM is cost-effective and dominant solutio
 
 
 
 
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
DECISION MODEL BASED ECONOMIC ANALYSES (PART I)  
Decision 
model  
Features 
Population 
Study design 
Intervention 
description 
Data provided 
Results 
Thokala et al. 
2013 
[23] 
7’572 patients [24]: 
Discharged from 
Heart Failure related 
hospitalization at most 
28 days.  
Mean age: 65.5 years. 
Cost-effectiveness  
Markov model. 
Perspective: NHS. 
Time horizon:  
38 months. 
 
Intervention: 
Home TM. 
Control: Structured 
telephone support 
(human based); 
Structured telephone 
Support 
(Human-machine 
interface).  
Costs:  
Telemonitoring costs (after 
initial discharge only) direct 
costs, repeat hospitalization 
cost.  
Effectiveness Outcomes:  
QALY, Death probability. 
Base case analysis (House HF study included):
ICER: £11’873  
(40%cost-effective TM probability with WTP:
House HF study excluded: 
ICER:£ 6’942  
(73% cost-effective TM probability with WTP
Kirkizlar et al. 
2013 
[25] 
900 diabetic patients  
(type 1 and type 2 ) 
belonging to those 
enrolled in the 
medical centre before 
or after the teleretinal 
screening (2005) 
[26,27]. 
Mean age: not clearly 
stated. 
Retrospective cohort 
study plus Markov 
model for  
cost-effectiveness 
analysis. 
Perspective: NHS. 
Time horizon: 
patient's death or at 99 
years. 
Intervention: 
Telemedicine 
screening program 
aimed to detect 
diabetic retinopathy. 
Control:  
No control group. 
Costs: 
TM costs, UC costs 
(ophthalmologist visit, scatter 
photocoagulation and focal 
photocoagulation), 
Annual care for a blind 
person.  
Effectiveness outcomes: 
Macular edema, diabetic 
retinopathy, blindness and 
QALY. 
Teleretinal screening showed to be cost-effecti
3’000patients. (WTP: $50’000). 
Rachapelle et 
al. 2013[14] 
Hypothetical cohort of 
1’000 rural 
unscreened diabetic 
patients. 
Mean Age: 40.0 years. 
Markov model to 
perform a cost–utility 
analysis. 
Perspective: Society. 
Time horizon:  
25 years. 
 
Intervention: 
Telemedicine 
screening program 
aimed to detect 
diabetic retinopathy. 
Control:  
No screening 
program. 
NHS Costs:  
Telemedicine screening 
retinal examinations, laser 
photocoagulation. 
Patients perspective cost: 
Travel, food, 
accommodation, hospital 
fees, drugs and productivity 
loss.  
Effectiveness outcome: 
QALY. 
ICERs : 
NHS perspective: 
Once in lifetime screening: $1’320/QALY. 
(Inside cost-effective range: $1’061 to $3’183/
Annual screening: $4’029/QALY (outside cost
ICER for twice in lifetime, 1 every 5, 3 or 2 ye
effective range. 
Social perspective: 
ICERs for once or twice in a lifetime and every
(ICER range$1’061–3’183/QALY ) ICER ever
longer cost-effective in this setting. 
Mistry et al. 
2013 
[28] 
4’786 Standard risk 
women to deliver 
babies with congenital 
heart disease(CHD) 
 [29]. 
Mean age: not clearly 
stated. 
Decision tree model 
based  
cost-effectiveness 
analysis. 
Perspective: NHS. 
Time horizon:  
15 months. 
 
Intervention: 
Store-and-forward 
telemedicine first 
consultation for 
families with 
traditional CHD risk. 
Control:  
No telemedicine 
screening. 
Cost: 
Telemedicine system costs, 
lifetime costs for children 
with and without CHD. 
Effectiveness outcomes: 
Lifetime outcomes for 
children with and without 
CHD, QALY. 
ICERs: Base-case deterministic analysis:  
No woman receives TM: £12’906; QALY: 23
All women receive TM (50% replacement for 
£12’876; QALY: 23.28 (Dominant). 
Base-case probabilistic analysis:  
No woman receives TM: £12’880; QALY 23.
All women receive TM (50% replacement for 
£12’850; QALY: 23.28 (Dominant). 
Almost 100%. cost-effective probability with 
£20’000/QALY. 
                                                                                                                                     
 
 
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
DECISION MODEL BASED ECONOMIC ANALYSES (PART II) 
Decision 
model  
Features 
Population 
Study design 
Intervention 
description 
Data provided 
Results 
Kaambwa et 
al. 2013[30] 
Patients with 
hypertension 
belonging to 
TASMINH2 trial.[31] 
Mean age: 66.0 years. 
Markov model-based 
probabilistic  
cost-effectiveness 
analysis. 
Perspective: NHS. 
Time horizon:  
35 years. 
 
Intervention: 
Hypertension TM 
device. 
Control:  
Usual care. 
Costs: 
Hospitalization, outpatient 
visits, primary care 
consultations, drugs, 
equipment, training and 
equipment replacement (five 
yearly). 
Effectiveness outcome:  
QALY. 
ICERs:  
Self-management vs UC: €1’891/QALY(males
€5’733/QALY (females) 99% cost-effective pr
with a WTP: €23’000/QALY. 
Sensitivity analysis: All ICERs remained below
decreased of 20% or 36% (intervention applied
intervention beginning, for male and female).T
maintained all ICERs below 23’000€, after 5 y
5, 6 and 15 years after the intervention start for
Switzer et al. 
2013 [32] 
1’112 acute ischemic 
stroke (AIS) patients 
from Georgia Health 
Sciences University 
and the Mayo Clinic 
telestroke networks 
(unpublished data) 
Mean age: not stated. 
Cost-effectiveness  
decision tree 
Perspective: NHS. 
Time horizon:  
5 year. 
 
Intervention: 
Hub and spoke 
telestroke network. 
Control:  
No network. 
Costs:  
Telestroke costs, treatment 
costs for AIS and 
reimbursements.  
Effectiveness outcomes:  
Discharge (defined by 
treatment with intravenous 
thrombolysis), endovascular 
stroke therapy, and on set to 
treatment time. 
Base case analysis:  
-$358’435 per year TM network vs without (fir
Effectiveness outcomes:  
114 fewer AIS hub-hospital admission per year
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III.  
OTHER STUDY DESIGN ECONOMIC ANALYSES 
Other study 
design 
Features 
Population 
Study design 
Interventions 
description 
Data provided 
Results 
Chen et al. 
2013[33] 
141 cardiovascular 
disease patients. 
Mean age: 68.5 years. 
Non concurrent 
prospective study  
Perspective: NHS. 
Time horizon:  
1 year. 
 
Intervention: TM and  
Cardiologist 
consultation (24 
hours). 
Control: TM patients 
observed for 6 
months before TM 
start (usual care). 
Direct costs:  
outpatient visits, 
hospitalization, total cost  
(all causes) 
Effectiveness outcomes: 
Admission rates, length of 
hospital stay. 
Cost pre-post TM: 
Inpatient care: - US $511.52 patient/month. 
Emergency room (ER): +US $9.05 per patient/m
Outpatients: +US $56.76 per patient/month. 
Total cost (all-causes):-US $445.75 per patient/
Levin et al. 
2013 
[15] 
78 patients: 
23 type 1 diabetes 
mellitus (T1DM) 
55 type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM). 
Mean age: 66.4 years. 
Uncontrolled 
retrospective study  
Perspective: Society. 
Time horizon:  
≥6 months of 
Telemedicine. 
Intervention: 
Telemedicine 
consultations to 
diabetes parameters. 
Control: intervention 
group compared to 
Danish database [34]. 
Direct non-medical cost: 
Travelling expenses 
Indirect cost: 
Productivity loss 
(assumption) 
Effectiveness Outcomes  
HbA1c level. 
Cost reduction range: 
$9’430-$11’170 (TM vs UC). 
Effectiveness Outcomes:  
HbA1c level reduction: T2DM 7.4% (TM) vs 7
T1DM 8.0 % (TM) vs 7.9% (p>0.05). 
Paré et al. 
2013 
[35] 
95 patients with heart 
failure or 
hypertension or 
diabetes, or COPD 
patients.  
Mean age: 70.0 years. 
Ambispective cohort  
cost minimization 
study 
Perspective: NHS. 
Time horizon: 
21 months  
(12 months before, 
4 months home care; 
4 months after TM). 
Personalized TM to 
check various health 
parameters. 
Control:  
TM patients data 
before enrolment 
(usual care). 
Direct Costs: 
ER Visits, Hospitalizations, 
Length of Stay, Nurse Home 
Visits, Home telemonitoring.  
Effectiveness Outcomes: 
Assumption of non-
inferiority for TM respect to 
UC. 
Total costs:  
Pre TM: $3’840 . 
During and after TM: $2’283.  
Effectiveness Outcomes:  
Assumed to be equal to UC. 
Isetta et al. 
2013[16] 
230 low risk 
newborns discharged  
Mean age: N/A      
(newborns). 
Retrospective cohort 
study.  
Perspective: Society. 
Time horizon: at most 
2 months (the baby 
had to reach an 
appropriate weight 
condition). 
Intervention:  
Web telemonitoring. 
Control:  
Usual care. 
Direct costs:  
ED visits, hospital visits, and 
web monitoring nursing, 
travelling(assumption)  
Indirect costs: 
Productivity loss 
(assumption) 
Effectiveness Outcomes: 
ED accesses number.  
Cost:  
Web TM follow-up cost: €86.1 per patient durin
Hospital-based follow-up cost: €182.1 per patie
Effectiveness Outcomes: 
ED return rate: UC follow-up: 15.8%; TM: 5.6%
ICER: -941.2€. 
Sensitive analysis: One-way:  
Varying ±75% the cost, Internet-based follow-u
TM. 
Akematsu et 
al. 2013[36] 
208 patients with 
various diseases 
(Chronic and not 
chronic conditions). 
Mean age: 75.7 years. 
Regression model to 
assess cost reduction 
adopting telecare. 
Perspective: not stated 
Time horizon:  
7 years. 
Intervention: 
Telemonitoring  
Control: 
Usual care. 
Costs:  
Medical expenditures 
Effectiveness outcomes:  
Days of treatment. 
All diseases: 
Telecare had a negative coefficient for number 
medical expenditure (p<0.05). Author stated an
because autocorrelation under the 1% of signific
Chronic condition: 
Coefficient for telecare use: medical expenditur
of treatment (-4.2) (p<0.05). Only hypertension
coefficient for medical expenditure(+6885.39) a
(+9.06)(p<0.01).The author concluded observin
for treatment days (4.2 days) and medical expen
 
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Future of e-Health  
  Isabel Pirillo1  Giovanna Ricci 2  Francesco Amenta1 
 
 
1School of Pharmacy, University of Camerino, Italy 
2 School of Law, University of Camerino, Italy 
 
e-mail: {isabel.pirillo, giovanna.ricci, francesco.amenta}@ unicam.it  
 
 
Abstract- The European Union has promoted several 
actions on health. The document accompanying the "e-
Health"Action Plan 2012-2020, Communication from 
the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions – “e-Health Action 
Plan 2012-2020” - An innovative approach to healthcare 
for the 21st century.COM (2012) 736,  describes the 
vision of e-Health in Europe in line with the objectives of 
the Europe 2020 Strategy and the Digital Agenda for 
Europe. The Action Plan presents and consolidates 
actions to exploit the potential of e-Health, describes the 
role of the European Union and calls on member states 
and stakeholders to collaborate with each other. In this 
paper, the difficulties that affect the spread of e-Health 
and 
some 
ethical 
aspects 
of 
the 
doctor-patient 
relationship and the protection of health data are 
considered.  It is clear that the adoption and diffusion  of 
e-Health across borders is a priority for the European 
Union.  
Keywords-cross-border healthcare, ethical and legal 
problems 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
   E-Health, in which healthcare and resources are 
transferred by electronic means, is a relatively recent term 
for the practice of healthcare supported by electronic 
processes. It is thought that  in time with the spread of new 
technologies such as the Internet, this practice will become 
more efficient. Therefore, the healthcare sector has 
considerable potential for growth yet faces numerous 
challenges in terms of efficiency, as well as financial and 
social sustainability.  
   To meet these challenges, several actions on health have 
been promoted by the European Union. Figure 1 
summarizes the main initiatives at European and Italian 
level in the field of e-Health from 2008 to 2013 [1].  
   Decision no. 1786/2002/EC of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 23 September 2002 introduced a 
program of Community action in the field of public health 
[2] and was the first integrated Community programme in 
this field.  
  The 
Digital 
Agenda 
proposed 
by 
the 
European 
Commission is an important part of the Europe 2020 
Strategy as it aims to better exploit the potential of 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) to 
foster innovation, economic growth and progress in the 
European Union. 
   For the first time, Directive 2011/24/EU on the application 
of patients' rights in cross-border healthcare established the 
rights of patients in Europe who wish to  seek healthcare in 
another member state and be reimbursed for it [3]. The right 
to healthcare in other member states existed prior to 
adoption of this Directive; various European Union 
regulations apply to unexpected medical treatment that 
might be necessary during a temporary stay abroad 
(Regulation No. 883/2004 on the coordination of social 
security systems, and the European Health Insurance Card) 
[4]. 
    In May 2011, a task force of leading personalities in the 
field of politics, health and Information and Communication 
Technologies was established to analyze the role played by 
technology in addressing the major challenges to the 
healthcare industry. 
   The European guidelines for Patient Summaries (2013), 
provided for by Directive 2011/24, define the data content 
of the patient summary: a collection of information 
photographing the clinical condition and health of every 
citizen [3]. 
   This information can be electronically exchanged between 
member states to support healthcare for european citizens in 
any country of the European Union. Each state shall 
establish a system of storing sensitive information that is in 
line with the standards of data protection. 
   Among the Italian initiatives in the field of eHealth is the 
implementation of Electronic Health Records that contain 
all the clinical information of the patient and collect digital 
documents relating to health and social health related 
280
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

clinical events. This information will allow decisions of a 
medical nature to be made much faster, which is especially 
important in emergency situations. 
The 
ePrescription 
service 
allows 
the 
electronic 
prescription of medicine by a legally authorised physician.  
The prescription is created using specific software and 
electronically transmitted to the pharmacist. Information 
relating to drugs dispensed by the pharmacist is then 
transmitted to the system that manages the electronic patient 
record in their country of origin. 
The process of dematerialization of health records will 
benefit the organization and management. 
The service of electronic transmission of medical 
certificates allows you to fully automate and digitize the 
entire process that originates with the production of medical 
certificates and certificates of illness by the doctor and ends 
with the transmission, by the worker, certificates to 
employers. 
These initiatives demonstrate how e-Health is an 
important element of the " e Europe " strategy . 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Initiatives at European and Italian level in e-Health from    
2008 to 2013; Board of Health, Italy [1]. 
 
 
 
II.    STATE OF THE ART 
   In recent years, the development of wireless and mobile 
networks has encouraged the application of mobile 
healthcare systems. An important issue is security, as many 
patients have privacy concerns when it comes to sharing 
personal information on open channels. These issues must 
be dealt with and mobile systems might be improved [5]. 
One challenge is the time that it takes to obtain treatment. 
This has been addressed by a study which analyses the 
benefits of telematic services and the use of mobile and 
wireless devices to develop models that aid the transfer of 
healthcare. Telematic system requirements which can 
improve time to treatment for emergency services [6].   
   The application of healthcare information systems has 
been shown to assist elderly residents of nursing homes. The 
use of a web application to collect patient data, creating a 
personalised electronic file for the residents, has helped 
physicians to manage the nursing home and the condition of 
their patients [7]. 
     In the development of e-Health, it is important that 
attention is focused on the interests of the patient. 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
Among the various initiatives taken by the European 
Union in the field of eHealth, the following have been 
analysed: eHealth Action Plan 2012-2020, Directive 
2011/24/EU [3]  and Law August 6, 2013, n. 96 [8], with 
which Italy launched the final phase of the formal 
transposition of Directive 2011/24/EU [3] . The Action Plan 
aims to guide healthcare workers and patients in times of 
austerity, investing in research to create personalised 
medicine and cost efficient, high quality care for all.  
 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The European Union is interested in strengthening and 
promoting the efforts of member states in the field of e-
Health because this practice can bring several benefits to 
citizens and health professionals: offering user-friendly, 
secure systems that allow patients to take greater control 
over the management of their healthcare [9]. E-Health 
includes the practice of telemedicine, 
which uses 
information technologies and telecommunication to provide 
healthcare at a distance; finally, as e-Health is the third 
largest industry in the health sector, it is also an important 
part of economic growth. As its adoption increases, it will 
also be possible to reduce spending on healthcare. Finally, it 
must be considered that in terms of economic advantages, 
telemedicine can greatly reduce time spent off work and 
minimize waiting times for physicians and patients alike.  
The European Union‟s population is also rapidly aging: 
the percentage of the elderly (65 +) and very elderly (80 + ) 
281
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

will increase from 17.4 % in 2010 to 30.0% in 2060 and 
from 4.7 % in 2010 to 12.1% in 2060; this will also require 
a better quality of services and healthcare [10]. 
However, there are still obstacles to the full deployment 
of eHealth. 
First, we should consider legal barriers: 
1) Privacy 
Medical privacy, or the practice of keeping information 
about a patient strictly confidential, has to be ensured. This 
involves conversational discretion on the part of healthcare 
providers, and the security of medical records [11]. Privacy 
can be considered a barrier to e-Health. In e-Health, there is 
an electronic transfer of patient medical data and medical 
records to the physician. Healthcare providers must comply 
with data protection, and in doing so must take significant 
action to comply with legal restrictions [12]. Telemedicine  
is challenged by unclear legal regulation for some practices.   
2) Security 
Data protection in e-Health is very important. There are 
security issues in the storage of medical data so that it can 
be accessed by doctors and patients over the web. The 
confidentiality of medical information is valued very highly 
by consumers, but there is a real risk that sensitive 
information might be compromised through electronic 
storage and transmission [12]. 
Medical professionals and telemedicine users must 
always be aware of one of the most important principles of 
medical practice, that is to say the respect of privacy.  In 
particular, in e-Health we talk about „sensitive personal 
data‟ ( relating to “physical or mental health or condition”). 
  Then, there is the question of the type of information 
that is handled: should there be full data disclosure or just 
the minimum data needed  to form a diagnosis? The patient 
must be informed about this and must consent to any 
procedures. 
Another topic is access to this data. Information must be 
collected and recorded in such a way that no outside person 
can see, copy or download it and clearance should be 
reserved for the parties concerned (patient, attending 
physician, or telemedicine specialist). This is one of the 
occasions in which the Information and Communications 
Technology specialist must support the medical team. For 
example, electronic patient files should be accessed only by 
the treating physician and medical assistants according to 
necessity, including the possibility of emergency access. 
Any access beyond that should require a special consent of 
the patient.  
Some questions remain open but one thing is for sure: 
doctors should respect and maintain confidentiality; if not 
for legal, at least for ethical reasons. 
 3 ) Licensure 
The license for a physician is essential to ensure safety. 
The licensure of physicians is a regulatory function that is 
performed by the individual state. When physicians practice 
e-Health across state borders by treating a patient in a 
different state; there is often no way of knowing if they have 
licensure,  are under suspension, or have lost their license. 
4) Other barriers 
Due to the exclusive nature of the Information and 
Communication 
Technologies 
equipment 
used 
in 
telemedicine services, it is very expensive to buy and install 
the equipment necessary for practicing telemedicine. 
   Another limitation may be the lack of general guidelines 
for the practice of international telemedicine or rules that 
can standardize the use of telemedicine across member 
states. 
Guidelines 
should 
be 
seen 
as 
a 
set 
of 
recommendations that aim to facilitate the exchange of data 
across borders, understand what data is to be included in 
datasets and meet organizational and technical requirements.  
 
Therefore, a study of existing legal barriers between 
member states is important for the diffusion of e-Health in 
Europe, and to this end the European Commision has 
created a legal framework for e-Health. The Directive on the 
application of patients' rights in cross-border healthcare will 
contribute to achieving this objective, as it defines what 
rights relating to such assistance remain with the patient 
across borders.  
The document of the Commission services on the 
applicability of the current legal framework to telemedicine 
services (Commission Staff Working Paper on the 
applicability of existing European Union legal framework to 
telemedicine services) clarifies that European Union 
legislation is applicable to issues related to reimbursement, 
responsibilities, and authorizations of healthcare data 
protection in relation to the provision of telemedicine 
services across borders.  
Since 2013, the Commission has initiated a dialogue on 
the legal aspects related to e-Health. It should be 
remembered that rules which serve to safeguard and protect 
people can not be totally eliminated, but it is possible to 
standardize rules among the states.  
There are also some technical problems relating to the 
adoption of e-Health, such as: 
1) Unavailability of cell phone network coverage or a   
network with weak reception, especially in remote areas or 
in the desert. 
2)  Unavailability of Internet or slow connection. 
3) Unavailability or improper equipment used in e-
Healthcare such as computers, printers, scanners, a good 
quality camera, as well as specific telemedicine devices. 
282
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

4) Absence of effective information technology systems 
and supporting infrastructure, which represents a major 
barrier to initiate a telemedicine program. For example, the 
method of data transmission must have adequate bandwidth 
to transmit large amounts of data quickly, accurately, and 
safely.  
Organizational problems: 
A standard verification process for telemedicine 
providers is lacking.  
Financial issues are delaying a more rapid uptake of 
telemedicine.  
There is a lack of coordination between clinicians and 
technology developers. 
Standards and guidelines for best practices in 
telemedicine should be better defined and made more 
consistent. 
To overcome some of these obstacles to the Action Plan 
of the European Union, a greater interoperability of e-Health 
services is recommended. This aspect of interoperability 
concerns the way in which organizations, such as public 
administrations in different member states, shall cooperate 
to achieve common goals. 
To create confidence in e-Health it is necessary to ensure 
an efficient protection of health data. 
In January 2012, the Commission adopted a proposal for 
a Regulation establishing a comprehensive framework for 
European Union data protection aimed at updating the 
current rules and greater harmonization [13]. 
Cultural Barriers 
Another important limit to e-Health are cultural barriers. 
These might be due to lack of available information about 
the practice of e-health, or the unwillingness of some 
physicians to adapt clinical paradigms for telemedicine 
applications. Understandably, there is a general lack of 
confidence in the adoption of e-health, due to the fact that 
the physician need not be present to offer health solutions. 
Often, physicians are not even aware of the existence of 
telemedicine services and, in fact, can often only approach 
e-Health through postgraduate training, Master‟s Degrees or 
university courses. If the possibilities of telemedicine are 
unknown, neither doctors nor patients will be interested in 
taking advantage of the multiple opportunities it offers.  
In the changing cultural conditions in which it is 
practiced today, the relationship between doctor and patient 
is mediated by an instrument of a legal nature which is 
known as "informed consent."  
In principle, informed consent is not reducible to a 
simple information sheet; it must be signed by the patient 
(or someone for him): it is the reference point of the doctor-
patient relationship, since it contains what is to be done in 
the present moment from the clinical point of view, on 
which interpersonal respect, concern for others, the 
recognition of professionalism and attention to dialogue 
should be exercised [13].  
Therefore, one of the problems in the use of 
telemedicine is the selection and adoption of an informed 
consent form suitable for use in e-Health. 
Medicine which works on human subjects is also 
inextricably linked to values such as friendship and justice, 
and the sick person is not a mere object of the physician‟s 
art but is always subject to a therapeutic relationship.  
In Italy, Law August 6, 2013, n . 96 Delegation to the 
Government for the transposition of European directives and 
the implementation of other acts of the European Union - 
Delegation of European Law, 2013, with which the final 
phase of the formal transposition of Directive 2011/24/EU 
commenced, entered into force on 4 December, 2013 [8].  
Until 4 December 2013, people were subject to the 
rights provided for in the regulations that already governed 
the assistance of the citizen, in a country other than their 
own, but this Directive can now be applied. The Directive 
ensures that citizens have the right to freely choose the place 
where to seek treatment within the EU. 
Important 
aspects 
are: 
prior 
authorization, 
reimbursement and border agreements. Each state should 
now have a system of prior authorization and  may also 
provide a list of health benefits for which permission will 
not be required. 
Reimbursement: a member state will determine at local, 
regional and national level, the healthcare for which an 
insured person is entitled to reimbursement, as well as their 
level of coverage. 
In addition to authorizations and reimbursements, 
agreements between the States which should cooperate to 
facilitate the implementation of the Directive will be 
required. 
V.  CONCLUSION 
 
   E-Health is not just "selling" a service or a product; it is a 
relationship that, while never replacing the human 
relationship between physician and patient, may still be 
useful in the treatment of certain diseases. It could also help 
patients to emerge from the isolation an illness can bring. 
 
The patient must always be protected when accessing 
online services, for it is necessary to know which sites are 
safe. On this topic, states must intervene. In addition to the 
initiatives of the European Union and co-operation between 
individual states, it is important to promote initiatives aimed 
at a greater knowledge of telemedicine. It is important to 
increase confidence among patients but also among 
283
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

healthcare workers. 
 
   The transmission of knowledge through education 
(including through training courses, University courses and 
Master‟s degrees) can break down barriers more than the 
implementation of a document, although this is also 
important and fundamental. 
 
By using cross-border e-Health it will be possible to 
ensure continuity of care and assistance for citizens. If the 
system is well built, it can ensure quality healthcare and the 
adoption of state of the art techniques, in particular 
concerning the diagnosis and treatment of rare diseases, will 
ensure the system is more effective and might also reduce 
healthcare costs in the long run. 
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1]  http://www.salute.gov.it [retrieved: January, 2014] 
 
          [2] Decision No 1786/2002/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 23 September 2002 adopting a programme of 
Community action in the field of public health (2003-2008) - 
Commission Statements, Official Journal L 271 , 09/10/2002 
P. 0001 – 0012 
 
         [3] Directive 2011/24/EU on the application of patients‟ rights in 
cross-border healthcare was adopted on 19 January 2011 and 
published in the EU‟s Official Journal on 9 March 2011.  
 
          [4]  Regulation No. 883/2004 on the coordination of social security 
systems, and the European Health Insurance Card  http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:200
4R0883:20130108:EN:HTML [retrieved: February, 2014]. 
 
          [5] A. Boukerche and R. Yonglin, “A Secure Mobile Healthcare 
System using Trust-Based Multicast Scheme”,  IEEE Journal 
on Selected Areas in Communication vol. 27,  Issue: 4 , May 
2009, pp. 387-399.  
 
          [6]  I. Widya, A. Van Halteren, V. Jones, R. Bults, D. Konstantas, 
P. Vierhout and J. Peuscher, "Telematic Requirements for a 
Mobile and Wireless Healthcare System Derived from 
Enterprise Models", In the Proceedings of 7th International 
Conference on Telecommunications 2003, Croatia 2003, pp. 
527-534 . 
 
          [7] S. Nikolidakis, D.D. Vergados, I. Anagnostopoulos, 
“Healthcare Information Systems for Assisting Living of 
Elderly People at Nursing Home”, 3rd International Workshop 
on 
Semantic 
Media 
Adaptation 
and 
Personalization 
(SMAP‟08), December 15-16, 2008, Prague, Czech Republic, 
pp. 122-127, doi=10.1109/SMAP.2008.36. 
 
          [8]  Law 6 August 2013, n. 96 , Delegation to the Government for 
the 
transposition 
of 
European 
directives 
and 
the 
implementation of other acts of the European Union - 
Delegation of European Law, 2013 (13G00137); Gazzetta 
Ufficiale, 
Serie 
generale, 
n. 
194 
of 
20.8.2013 
http://www.gazzettaufficiale.it/eli/id/2013/08/20/13G00137/sg 
[retrieved: January, 2014] 
  . 
       [9] Communication from the Commission to the European 
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social 
Committee commit and the Committee of the Regions on 
Telemedicine for the benefit of patients, healthcare systems 
and society; Commission of the European Communities 
Brussels, 
http://eurlex.europa.eu/lexuriserv/lexuriserv.do?uri=celex:52
008dc0689:en:not [retrieved: February, 2014]  
 
       [10]   http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal  
                [retrieved: February, 2014]  
 
[11]   Medical privacy  
         http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medical_privacy 
         [retrieved: January, 2014] 
 
[12]  Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to 
the processing of personal data and on the free movement of 
such data (General Data Protection Regulation), Brussels, 
25.1.2012 COM (2012) 11 final 2012/0011 (COD) http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2012:00
11:  FIN: EN: PDF[retrieved: February, 2014] 
 
[13] E.H. Kluge, “Ethical and legal challenges for health telematics 
in a global world: telehealth and the technological 
imperative”, International Journal of Medical Informatics 
vol. 80, Issue 2, February 2011, pp. e1–e5 Special Issue: 
Security 
in 
Health 
Information 
Systems, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2010.10.002.  
 
284
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Economic impact of remote specialist consultations using videoconferencing: an 
economic model based on data from randomised controlled trials  
Trine S Bergmo 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine, University Hospital of North Norway  
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: trine.bergmo@telemed.no     
 
 
 
Abstract – The University Hospital of North Norway plans to 
replace some of the outpatient consultations with real-time 
telemedicine. It has been estimated that 7000 consultations 
annually can be handled remotely by videoconferencing. As 
part of this initiative, a project assessing the economic 
impact of using videoconferencing at scale has been initiated. 
Cost-effectiveness will be assessed using models based on 
data from existing randomised controlled trials. A literature 
search in relevant databases has been conducted to collect 
data on patient flow and clinical effectiveness (QALYs). 
Data on the cost parameters will be collected locally. The 
data on costs and effectiveness parameters will then be 
synthesised to estimate average group values. Probabilistic 
methods will be used for estimation of expected outcomes 
and for sensitivity analysis. This paper describes the planned 
modelling evaluation, reports the results from the literature 
review and outlines potential model structures.  
Keywords – cost-effectiveness analysis, decision analytical 
modelling, telemedicine, videoconferencing, randomised trials, 
literature review, and economic model.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
    Telemedicine has been around for almost two decades, 
but is still viewed as outside the mainstream of most 
health care services (except possibly for radiology) [1]. 
Implementing telemedicine technologies as part of routine 
health care delivery requires evidence of the following: its 
technical feasibility; its practicality in a clinical setting; 
and finally its being worthwhile, that is, that the 
additional costs are met with savings or improvements in 
health outcomes [2, 3]. Main arguments for introducing 
telemedicine services has been to decrease costs, improve 
efficiency and increase access in health care delivery. 
These cost savings and efficiency potentials make 
economic 
evaluation 
of 
central 
importance 
to 
telemedicine evaluations. To be able to make well-
informed resource decisions, information on costs and 
consequences associated with these decisions must be 
available. Information on costs and consequences can 
broadly be collected in two ways: alongside trials and 
observational studies (primary data); and, from the 
existing literature (secondary data) [4, 5].          
A.     Economic data 
   New primary economic data can be collected alongside 
randomised clinical trials, non-randomised interventions 
and observational studies (general issues in economic 
evaluations are common to all these) [5]. 
    Randomised trials are designed to investigate the 
relative effectiveness of different medical interventions 
[6]. The most important advantage of randomisation is 
that it minimises allocation bias and balances other factors 
that might affect the result, both known and unknown. 
Strictly controlled trials are not very common in 
telemedicine research for practical reasons, nor are they 
well suited for economic evaluations. The more controlled 
a trial is the less can be concluded about how much the 
intervention costs and how well it works for normal 
caseloads in everyday practice. The trial context is often 
very different from real-world decisions and conditions 
that will improve internal validity in randomised 
controlled trials will undermine the economic evaluation 
[7]. Real-setting clinical trials are in many telemedicine 
situations both time consuming, difficult to conduct (too 
few participants) and expensive to run. This often leaves 
decision-makers without information about clinical and 
economic 
consequences 
of 
different 
telemedicine 
interventions.  
     Another way to inform decision-makers is to use the 
best available evidence from existing sources and 
decision models. Secondary data can come from clinical 
trials, observational studies meta-analysis and case reports 
found in the literature. Data can also be found in 
databases and administrative records. Decision models 
provide a means to bringing this evidence together in a 
systematic way. 
B. When to Model 
    A well-designed model is essentially a tool that can 
simulate or mimic a clinical trial [8]. Models can simulate 
different scenarios by making explicit assumptions about 
the incidence, prognosis, duration, benefits, health-related 
quality of life and costs. It allows one to investigate how 
cost and benefits might change if the values of key 
parameters in the model change. The purpose of 
modelling is not to make unconditional claims about the 
285
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

consequences of an intervention, but rather to reveal the 
relation between assumptions and outcomes [9]. 
    Whether to use new trial-based data or existing data 
and decision models in economic evaluation of 
telemedicine should be seen in relation to the objective 
and role of the study and the viewpoint of those who are 
expected to use the results [7]. A randomised trial focuses 
on particular measurements for specific patients in one 
specific setting. These are essential in establishing safety 
and clinical effectiveness as a first stage in developing 
telemedicine applications. The evidence base for 
decision-making should be based on the best available 
measurements on clinical and economic outcomes and 
these come from trials. Decision models are useful in 
situations where more evidence is required than can be 
obtained in one single trial. Furthermore, in a situation 
where a decision has to be made in the absence of 
evidence from trials, modelling can help structure the 
problem, assess potential pathways and identify the level 
of uncertainty.  
    In this paper, we describe an economic evaluation 
based on existing data and modelling techniques. The 
paper is structured as follows: Section II provides the 
background and includes an overview of the local context, 
the use of clinical videoconferencing, and the rationale and 
aim of this project. Section III outlines the research 
approach and provides an overview of the modelling study 
and the data collection. Section IV reports the results of 
the literature search and propose two preliminary model 
structures. 
Section 
V 
discusses 
implications 
and 
limitations. Finally, conclusions and future work are 
discussed in Section VI.   
II. 
BACKGROUND   
    The University Hospital of North Norway (UNN) plans 
to replace some of the outpatient consultations with real-
time telemedicine consultations. In May 2011, the 
management at UNN made a decision to invest in 
videoconferencing equipment 
at scale to provide 
specialist services to patients at local health centres and 
GP-clinics in the region. A committee report from 2011 
estimated that 7000 patient consultations annually could 
be handled by video-consultations saving both hospital 
visits and travel costs (unpublished but available from the 
author on request). The implementation has been 
postponed awaiting further investigation into conditions 
for and potential consequences of a large scale 
videoconferencing network.  
    The reason for the videoconferencing initiative seems 
to be twofold: First, it has been recognised that high 
quality services for patients cannot be provided by one 
health care discipline alone or by one single sector. The 
new health care reform; the Coordination Reform is one 
initiative to ensure high quality services across sectors 
and 
between 
health 
care 
levels 
[10]. 
Using 
videoconferencing can contribute to more personalised 
and integrated care pathways: it will give the patients the 
opportunity to get treatment locally; they might avoid 
burdensome travels; and this might improve the quality of 
care through a better coordinated health service delivery. 
Second, the management at UNN wants to reduce the 
costs by reducing hospitalisation and outpatient visits and 
save travel costs (the health authorities cover travel costs 
in Norway).  
A. Clinical videoconferencing 
    The use of videoconferencing to examine and treat 
patients over a distance can be used in most medical 
specialities and settings [2, 11]. In a remote specialist 
consultation, the patient, usually accompanied by a health 
care worker, meets the specialist in real time via 
videoconferencing. These latter types of telemedicine 
consultations have for example been used in psychiatry 
[12-14], dermatology [15, 16], oncology [17], to support 
renal dialysis [18], cardiology [19], in diabetes, asthma, 
epilepsy [20, 21] and lifestyle group counselling [22]. 
There now exists a range of evidence supporting that 
videoconferencing for a variety of conditions produce 
similar health outcomes to treatment delivered in-person 
[11, 23, 24]. However, there exists no robust evidence 
that remote video consultations is cost-effective compared 
to conventional health care delivery. Wade (2010) 
reviewed the literature of real-time video-communication 
and found it to be cost-effective for home care and access 
to on-call hospital specialists, it showed mixed results for 
rural service delivery, and it was not cost-effective for 
local delivery of services between hospitals and primary 
care [25]. It is, however, not realistic to make one general 
recommendation for cost-effectiveness across services 
and settings. The local context will decide important cost 
parameters, such as travel costs, the need for investment 
in infrastructure and technologies, and the opportunity 
costs of health professionals making it difficult to 
compare results across evaluations. Most reviewers, 
however, report that the evidence of cost effectiveness is 
scarce and more research on resource allocation and costs 
is still needed [26, 27].  
B. Aim 
    In this project, we will use a combination of existing 
evidence found in the peer-reviewed literature and local 
data to build a decision model to analyse the economic 
impact of remote specialist consultations. The model will 
be used to structure and simulate patient pathways with, 
and without videoconferencing; to identify expected 
outcomes of different strategies; and, to explore the costs 
and benefits of different scenarios under different 
assumptions. The main aim is to assess the cost-
effectiveness of remote specialist consultations using 
videoconferencing compared with usual care. This work 
is conducted in three related phases: 
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1. Develop the structure of the cost-effectiveness 
model and identify key parameters relevant to 
the decision problem;  
2. Identify local setting parameters such as medical 
field, investment and technical support costs, 
personnel- and travel costs.   
3. Populate the cost-effectiveness model and 
analyse the economic impact of remote specialist 
consultations 
using 
videoconferencing 
in 
Northern Norway.  
 
    This paper describes the economic modelling study and 
reports on its first phase.  
III. 
METHODS  
    Decision models provides a framework to draw costs 
and benefit data from a range of different sources together 
in a systematic way [5].  
A. The Modelling Study  
    In this project, a decision model will be constructed to 
assess the 
cost-effectiveness 
of 
remote specialist 
consultations compared to usual care. In the model remote 
specialist consultation refers to situations in which the 
patients, usually accompanied by a health care worker at 
one location, consults with the specialist at the hospital 
using videoconferencing. Usual care refers to situations in 
which the patients see the specialist in a face-to-face 
consultation at the hospital. The model is populated with 
parameters collected from the peer-reviewed literature 
and with general cost parameters collected locally.  
    The primary outcome in the economic model is costs 
and quality adjusted life years (QALYs) in a cost per 
QALY ratio. If QALYs are not found in the literature, 
other effectiveness measures will be considered. If no 
effectiveness measure is found, episode of care (number 
of patients managed) will be used as an effectiveness 
measure and a net cost (or net benefit) per episode of care 
will be used as pathway outcome. Data on costs and 
effectiveness parameters are synthesised in a cost per unit 
of effect or a net costs to estimate average group values 
(cohort 
models). 
The 
model 
assesses 
short-term 
alternative branches or events defined as consultations. 
Another key model parameter of interest is the proportion 
of patients within each strategy or pathway. Probabilistic 
methods will be used both for estimation of expected 
outcomes and for sensitivity analysis. The evaluation will 
have a health provider perspective, that is, only include 
costs falling on the health care budget.   
    The data are collected in two steps. The first step is to 
conduct a systematic literature search to identify existing 
studies analysing effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of 
videoconferencing alongside randomised trials. The 
literature 
can 
provide 
information 
on 
structural 
assumption, parameter inputs, and areas of uncertainty. 
The second step is to collect local cost parameters. These 
include equipment costs, technical support costs, 
personnel costs, travel costs, and other health care costs 
from the health clinics involved. These will be collected 
from hospital departments, local health centres already 
using videoconferencing and regional health authorities.   
    This paper reports results from the first step: the 
literature search and structural model assumptions. 
B. The systematic review 
    The systematic literature search has two main 
objectives; to collect information on a) previous cost-
effectiveness analyses and decision modelling studies in 
real-time telemedicine studies; and, b) to collect data on 
structural 
assumptions, 
probabilities 
and 
clinical 
effectiveness in randomised controlled trials of using 
videoconferencing.   
    The search strategy included two main search terms:  
1. Real-time telemedicine OR videoconferencing 
OR video-link OR video-communication OR 
videophones OR video-consultation OR hub and 
spoke OR remote teleconsultation OR real-time 
consultation AND 
2. a) Economic modelling OR economic model OR 
decision model OR decision analytic model OR 
decision modelling OR cost-effectiveness OR 
cost-utility OR 
b) Randomised OR randomized  
     
   The following databases have been searched: PubMed, 
PsycINFO and ISI Web of Knowledge, CINAHL, Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis Registry and the NHS Economic 
Evaluation Database (NHS-EED). Furthermore, reference 
lists in the retrieved articles and existing reviews have 
also been screened.  Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Registry 
and the NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHS-EED) 
were 
searched 
using 
videoconferencing, 
video-
consultation or video-link as search words. 
     Only articles published in peer-reviewed journals were 
included. The search was limited to English language text 
and publication date from 1990 to 2013. 
    The articles relevant for this study cover remote 
specialist consultations using real-time audio and visual 
telemedicine technologies (videoconferencing) and only 
include aspects in which the patient is directly involved 
and present at the or GP office, local health centre or rural 
hospitals. Studies analysing video contact from home, 
store-and-forward 
transmissions 
of 
data, 
e-mail 
consultations or structured telephone support were 
excluded. We only included randomised trials to collect 
data on clinical process or patient flow through the health 
system, 
and 
clinical 
effectiveness 
of 
using 
videoconferencing. 
    Selection of relevant publications was based on 
information found in the abstracts. Full-text articles were 
retrieved when the abstract indicated a cost-effectiveness 
analysis and an assessment of effectiveness and patient 
flow through the health system. Full-text was also 
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

retrieved for closer inspection if the abstract did not 
provide clear indication of the content. Figure 1 shows a 
flow diagram mapping the number of studies identified, 
the number of studies included and excluded, and reasons 
for exclusions.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
    The literature search identified 1265 records. These 
were found searching PubMed (n = 618), ISI Web of 
Knowledge (n = 532), CHINAL (n = 81) PsycINFO (n = 
21) and NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHS-EED) 
(n = 13). No articles were found searching the Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis Registry. From these records, 46 
full text articles were retrieved for further inspection. Two 
more articles were identified screening reference lists. 
Sixteen articles were selected for inclusion (see Figure 1).  
    The 
full 
text 
articles 
assessed 
were 
reviews, 
methodology papers, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness 
studies alongside randomised trials, case control studies 
and decision models. The decision modelling studies were 
analysing the use of videoconferencing in pulmonary care, 
stoke treatment and home visits for tuberculosis treatment 
[28-31].  
A. Inluded studies 
    Sixteen articles were included in this review. Ten of 
these met all the inclusion criteria, that is, they reported 
results from randomised trails and included information on 
clinical 
process 
and 
patient 
flow 
of 
using 
videoconferencing in remote specialist consultations [32-
41]. These articles form the basis for the model estimation 
in this study. Six other studies were also included. These 
were effectiveness or cost-effectiveness studies containing 
information on clinical process and effectiveness. These 
studies used case-crossover design [42-44], retrospective 
pre-post design [45] and two were models based on data 
from the literature [28, 46]. Reliable parameter data from 
these studies will also be used where parameter values are 
still lacking.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Flow diagram. 
  
 
    The included studies found data on the following 
parameters:  
 
The 
proportion 
of 
patients 
in 
which 
videoconferencing is a suitable and reliable 
option compared to face-to-face consultations. 
 
The proportion of patients in need of  second 
consultation  
 
Outcome or clinical effectiveness  
 
Time use  
B. Model structure 
    Data on patient management and patient flow found in 
the literature suggest that videoconferencing is acceptable 
for approximately 70 % of the patients [41, 42, 44]. This is 
supported by a review where it was reported that 70 % of 
the patients avoided travels [46].    
    Furthermore, the studies included reported an increased 
follow-up rate for patients seen by telemedicine [32, 34, 
35]. For example one large scale telemedicine trial found 
that the follow-up visits for video consultations compared 
to usual care in general practice had an odds ratio of 1.52, 
95% CI 1.27 to 1.82. [32]. 
    The data suggest two possible models that describe the 
structural process of using video-consultations. The first 
model assumes a broad approach and includes all patients 
in the videoconferencing arm without any pre-selection. 
Figure 2, show this model populated with follow-up data 
from a large scale telemedicine trial by Wallace et al 
(2002) [32] as an example. Usual care refers to outpatient 
consultations. The second potential model assumes a 
screening process selecting the patients most suited for 
remote consultations beforehand. This might reduce the 
relative increase in follow-up visits for the remote arm. 
Figure 3 shows the model with pre-selection of patients.   
    Other parameters found in the included papers were:  
 
Effectiveness as number of patients managed 
times utility (preferences for videoconferencing 
compared to outpatient consultations). Utility was 
estimated by expert opinion (10 physicians) [28]  
 
Time use for the different alternatives [33] 
 
 
 
Figure 2. A decision model without pre-selection of patients populated 
with follow-up data from a large scale telemedicine trial as by Wallace et 
al (2002) [32] as an example. 
 
Reference lists (n=2) 
Records identified through 
database searching (n =1265) 
 
 
 
 
Full-text articles 
assessed (n = 46)  
 
Records excluded by 
title and abstract 
(n = 1219) 
 
Full-text articles excluded  
No videoconferencing (n = 2)  
No process or outcome 
measures (n =28) 
Methodology/teaching (n = 2)  
Studies included 
RCT (n = 10) 
Other studies (n = 6) 
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

   
Figure 3. A model where the patients suited for videoconferencing has 
been pre-selected 
 
None of the studies measured the clinical effectiveness of 
videoconferencing in QALYs.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
    The literature on telemedicine is extensive. A search in 
PubMed in November 2013 found over 16 000 papers on 
the topic. There is, however, a relatively small number of 
randomised trials in telemedicine research and even fewer 
analysing the effect of using videoconferencing in 
providing remote specialist consultations. A review from 
2012 identified 141 randomised controlled trials in 
telemedicine [47]. These studies analysed interventions in 
chronic disease management and the majority analysed 
home monitoring and telephone support. Few studies 
looked into the use of videoconferencing. Recent 
telemedicine research seems to focus more on home based 
services using monitoring and telephone contact with less 
focus 
on 
remote 
specialist 
consultations 
using 
videoconferencing. 
    Only ten randomised trials met all the inclusion criteria 
and analysed the effect of remote specialist consultations.    
The clinical disciplines in the included articles were 
mental health, dermatology, orthopaedics, neurology and 
single studies with a mix of medical and surgical 
specialities. The studies varied in terms of sample size, 
outcome measures and contexts. All these studies 
included some evidence on patient management and the 
clinical process of using videoconferencing to examine 
and treat patients over a distance. Furthermore, we found 
that the increased offer of follow-up differed between 
specialities. It was highest in surgical specialities and 
neurology and lowest in mental health [32, 35, 38, 40]. 
This implies that the base model will have to include a 
specific patient group within one clinical discipline and 
not a general patient population.     
    We were not able to find any studies measuring clinical 
effectiveness in QALYs. One reason for this may be that 
using videoconferencing as a substitute for a face-to-face 
consultation have little or no effect on patient’s health. 
The benefits for the patients are most likely the avoidance 
of burdensome travels. Since no QALYs were found, we 
will consider other preference measures identified from 
literature search. If the effectiveness measures is of low 
quality and cannot be used, a net cost per episode of care 
will represent the pathway outcome (assuming similar 
health outcomes).    
    The main purpose of this literature search was to 
identify randomised trials analysing the effect of remote 
specialist consultations. Consequently, the scope is 
therefore quite narrow. Furthermore, the fact that only 
articles written in English and published in peer-reviewed 
journals (to provide some basic quality control) were 
included is recognised as a limitation. The search strategy 
used might also have missed some evaluations. Remote 
specialist consultation is not easily defined. Some analysts 
might have used other terms and definitions to describe the 
provision of specialist treatment over a distance than the 
search terms used in this review. 
    The proposed model structures can be seen as 
hypothetical trial with two arms. In some context, the 
model might include a third arm in which the specialist 
travels to the remote health centres or clinics. None of the 
reviewed studies included this option. It will, however, be 
considered if a third arm is relevant in the areas selected 
for this study.  
     There is a number of valid concerns about using models 
to assess the economic consequences of an intervention 
[48]. The most important is the quality of the data used. 
The quality and validity of the results from modelling 
studies are not any better than the data used in the models. 
Telemedicine research has in general been criticised for 
being full of demonstration projects, anecdotal evidence 
and poor study design [49]. One way to ensure high 
quality data has been to limit the included studies to 
randomised trials. This strategy, however, produced few 
articles. To supplement the data six other studies were 
included.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
    This paper has presented an economic modelling study, 
reported results from its first phase of collecting existing 
data from the literature and outlined potential model 
structures.  
    The next step is to develop the model, that is, to decide 
clinical field and primary care catchment area, to decide 
the final model structure and to organise and systematise 
the data on key input parameters and probabilities. 
Furthermore, we have to decide pathway outcome (cost 
per unit of effect or net costs). The model structure will 
also be adapted to local practices. Then local cost will be 
collect. The final step is to populate the model and 
analyse the cost-effectiveness of using videoconferencing 
for remote specialist consultations.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the regional health authorities Helse Nord 
for funding this project.  
 
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

REFERENCES 
[1] 
N. A. Brown, "Information on telemedicine," J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 117-26, 2005. 
[2] 
P. Taylor, "Evaluating telemedicine systems and 
services," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 167-77, 
2005. 
[3] 
S. Ruckdaschel, M. Reiher, R. Rohrbacher, and E. 
Nagel, "The Role of Health Economics in 
Telemedicine," Disease Mgt Health Outcomes, vol. 
14, pp. 3-7, 2006. 
[4] 
J. A. Fox-Rushby and J. Cairns, Eds., Economic 
evaluation. Maidenhead, UK: Open Univiversity 
Press, 2005, p.^pp. Pages. 
[5] 
M. F. Drummond, M. J. Sculpher, G. W. Torrance, B. 
J. O'Brien, and G. L. Stoddart, Methods for the 
Economic Evaluation of Health Care Programmes, 3rd 
ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
[6] 
P. Laake, H. B. Benestad, and B. R. Olsen, Research 
methodology in the medical and biological sciences: 
Academic Press, 2007. 
[7] 
T. S. Bergmo, "Approaches to economic evaluation in 
telemedicine," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 18, pp. 181-4, 
Jun 2012. 
[8] 
K. Kuntz and M. Weinstein, "Modelling in economic 
evaluation," in Economic evaluation in health care: 
merging theory with practice, M. Drummond and A. 
McGuire, Eds., ed Oxford Oxford University Press, 
2001, pp. 141–171. 
[9] 
M. C. Weinstein, B. O'Brien, J. Hornberger, J. 
Jackson, M. Johannesson, C. McCabe, et al., 
"Principles of Good Practice for Decision Analytic 
Modeling in Health Care Evaluation: Report of the 
ISPOR Task Force on Good Research Practices—
Modeling Studies," Value in Health, vol. 6, pp. 9-17, 
2003. 
[10] 
"Ministery of Health and Care Services. Report no. 47 
to the Storting. The Coordination Reform, Proper 
treatment - at the right place at the right time," 
Ministery of Health and Care Services, Oslo, 2009. 
[11] 
T. Reardon, "Research findings and strategies for 
assessing telemedicine costs," Telemed J E Health, 
vol. 11, pp. 348-69, Jun 2005. 
[12] 
D. Hailey, R. Roine, and A. Ohinmaa, "The 
effectiveness of telemental health applications: a 
review," Can J Psychiatry, vol. 53, pp. 769-78, Nov 
2008. 
[13] 
D. Savin, D. A. Glueck, J. Chardavoyne, J. Yager, and 
D. K. Novins, "Bridging cultures: child psychiatry via 
videoconferencing," Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N 
Am, vol. 20, pp. 125-34, Jan 2011. 
[14] 
I. R. Sharp, K. A. Kobak, and D. A. Osman, "The use 
of videoconferencing with patients with psychosis: a 
review of the literature," Ann Gen Psychiatry, vol. 10, 
p. 14, 2011. 
[15] 
G. R. Kanthraj, "Classification and design of 
teledermatology practice: what dermatoses? Which 
technology to apply?," J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol, 
vol. 23, pp. 865-75, Aug 2009. 
[16] 
M. N. Johnson and A. W. Armstrong, "Technologies 
in dermatology: teledermatology review," G Ital 
Dermatol Venereol, vol. 146, pp. 143-53, Apr 2011. 
[17] 
S. Sabesan, K. Simcox, and I. Marr, "Medical 
oncology clinics via videoconferencing: An acceptable 
tele health model for rural patients and health 
workers," Intern Med J, Jun 1 2011. 
[18] 
M. Rumpsfeld, E. Arild, J. Norum, and E. Breivik, 
"Telemedicine in haemodialysis: a university 
department and two remote satellites linked together 
as one common workplace," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 
11, pp. 251-5, 2005. 
[19] 
G. J. Morgan, B. Craig, B. Grant, A. Sands, N. 
Doherty, and F. Casey, "Home videoconferencing for 
patients with severe congential heart disease following 
discharge," Congenit Heart Dis, vol. 3, pp. 317-24, 
Sep-Oct 2008. 
[20] 
S. N. Ahmed, S. Wiebe, C. Mann, and A. Ohinmaa, 
"Telemedicine and epilepsy care - a Canada wide 
survey," Can J Neurol Sci, vol. 37, pp. 814-8, Nov 
2010. 
[21] 
S. McLean, D. Protti, and A. Sheikh, "Telehealthcare 
for long term conditions," BMJ, vol. 342, p. d120, 
2011. 
[22] 
J. Laitinen, E. Korkiakangas, M. Alahuhta, S. 
Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi, U. Rajala, O. Timonen, et 
al., "Feasibility of videoconferencing in lifestyle 
group counselling," Int J Circumpolar Health, vol. 69, 
pp. 500-11, Dec 2010. 
[23] 
K. Steel, D. Cox, and H. Garry, "Therapeutic 
videoconferencing interventions for the treatment of 
long-term conditions," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 17, 
pp. 109-17, 2011. 
[24] 
G. Pare, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte, "Systematic review 
of home telemonitoring for chronic diseases: the 
evidence base," J Am Med Inform Assoc, vol. 14, pp. 
269-77, May-Jun 2007. 
[25] 
V. A. Wade, J. Karnon, A. G. Elshaug, and J. E. 
Hiller, "A systematic review of economic analyses of 
telehealth services using real time video 
communication," BMC Health Serv Res, vol. 10, p. 
233, 2010. 
[26] 
D. Kairy, P. Lehoux, C. Vincent, and M. Visintin, "A 
systematic review of clinical outcomes, clinical 
process, healthcare utilization and costs associated 
with telerehabilitation," Disabil Rehabil, vol. 31, pp. 
427-47, 2009. 
[27] 
D. Hailey, "The need for cost-effectiveness studies in 
telemedicine," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 379-
83, 2005. 
[28] 
Z. Agha, R. M. Schapira, and A. H. Maker, "Cost 
effectiveness of telemedicine for the delivery of 
outpatient pulmonary care to a rural population," 
Telemed J E Health, vol. 8, pp. 281-91, Fall 2002. 
[29] 
J. A. Switzer, B. M. Demaerschalk, J. Xie, L. Fan, K. 
F. Villa, and E. Q. Wu, "Cost-effectiveness of hub-
and-spoke telestroke networks for the management of 
acute ischemic stroke from the hospitals' 
perspectives," Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes, vol. 
6, pp. 18-26, Jan 1 2013. 
[30] 
R. E. Nelson, G. M. Saltzman, E. J. Skalabrin, B. M. 
Demaerschalk, and J. J. Majersik, "The cost-
effectiveness of telestroke in the treatment of acute 
ischemic stroke," Neurology, vol. 77, pp. 1590-8, Oct 
25 2011. 
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[31] 
V. A. Wade, J. Karnon, J. A. Eliott, and J. E. Hiller, 
"Home videophones improve direct observation in 
tuberculosis treatment: a mixed methods evaluation," 
PLoS One, vol. 7, p. e50155, 2012. 
[32] 
P. Wallace, A. Haines, R. Harrison, J. Barber, S. 
Thompson, P. Jacklin, et al., "Joint teleconsultations 
(virtual outreach) versus standard outpatient 
appointments for patients referred by their general 
practitioner for a specialist opinion: a randomised 
trial," Lancet, vol. 359, pp. 1961-8, Jun 8 2002. 
[33] 
P. Jacklin, J. Roberts, P. Wallace, A. Haines, R. 
Harrison, J. Barber, et al., "Virtual outreach: economic 
evaluation of joint teleconsultations for patients 
referred by their general practitioner for a specialist 
opinion," BMJ, vol. 327, p. 84, 2003. 
[34] 
J. R. Benger, S. M. Noble, J. Coast, and J. M. Kendall, 
"The safety and effectiveness of minor injuries 
telemedicine," Emerg Med J, vol. 21, pp. 438-45, Jul 
2004. 
[35] 
R. Chua, J. Craig, R. Wootton, and V. Patterson, 
"Randomised controlled trial of telemedicine for new 
neurological outpatient referrals," J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry, vol. 71, pp. 63-6, Jul 2001. 
[36] 
R. Wootton, S. E. Bloomer, R. Corbett, D. J. Eedy, N. 
Hicks, H. E. Lotery, et al., "Multicentre randomised 
control trial comparing real time teledermatology with 
conventional outpatient dermatological care: societal 
cost-benefit analysis," Bmj, vol. 320, pp. 1252-6, May 
6 2000. 
[37] 
J. C. Fortney, J. M. Pyne, S. B. Mouden, D. Mittal, T. 
J. Hudson, G. W. Schroeder, et al., "Practice-based 
versus telemedicine-based collaborative care for 
depression in rural federally qualified health centers: a 
pragmatic randomized comparative effectiveness 
trial," American Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 170, pp. 
414-425, 2013. 
[38] 
P. E. Ruskin, M. Silver-Aylaian, M. A. Kling, S. A. 
Reed, D. D. Bradham, J. R. Hebel, et al., "Treatment 
outcomes in depression: comparison of remote 
treatment through telepsychiatry to in-person 
treatment," Am J Psychiatry, vol. 161, pp. 1471-6, 
Aug 2004. 
[39] 
A. M. Oakley, P. Kerr, M. Duffill, M. Rademaker, P. 
Fleischl, N. Bradford, et al., "Patient cost-benefits of 
realtime teledermatology--a comparison of data from 
Northern Ireland and New Zealand," J Telemed 
Telecare, vol. 6, pp. 97-101, 2000. 
[40] 
R. O'Reilly, J. Bishop, K. Maddox, L. Hutchinson, M. 
Fisman, and J. Takhar, "Is telepsychiatry equivalent to 
face-to-face psychiatry? Results from a randomized 
controlled equivalence trial," Psychiatric Services, 
vol. 58, pp. 836-843, 2007. 
[41] 
O. Timonen, "The teleconsultation in general practice. 
A randomized, controlled study of a remote 
consultation experiment using a videoconferencing 
system," International journal of circumpolar health, 
vol. 63, 2004. 
[42] 
E. Gilmour, S. M. Campbell, M. A. Loane, A. Esmail, 
C. E. Griffiths, M. O. Roland, et al., "Comparison of 
teleconsultations and face-to-face consultations: 
preliminary results of a United Kingdom multicentre 
teledermatology study," Br J Dermatol, vol. 139, pp. 
81-7, Jul 1998. 
[43] 
K. Harno, E. Arajarvi, T. Paavola, C. Carlson, and P. 
Viikinkoski, "Clinical effectiveness and cost analysis 
of patient referral by videoconferencing in 
orthopaedics," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 7, pp. 219-25, 
2001. 
[44] 
M. A. Loane, R. Corbett, S. E. Bloomer, D. J. Eedy, 
H. E. Gore, C. Mathews, et al., "Diagnostic accuracy 
and clinical management by realtime teledermatology. 
Results from the Northern Ireland arms of the UK 
Multicentre Teledermatology Trial," J Telemed 
Telecare, vol. 4, pp. 95-100, 1998. 
[45] 
D. Buckley and S. Weisser, "Videoconferencing could 
reduce the number of mental health patients 
transferred from outlying facilities to a regional 
mental health unit," Aust N Z J Public Health, vol. 36, 
pp. 478-82, Oct 2012. 
[46] 
R. Wootton, K. Bahaadinbeigy, and D. Hailey, 
"Estimating travel reduction associated with the use of 
telemedicine by patients and healthcare professionals: 
proposal for quantitative synthesis in a systematic 
review," BMC Health Serv Res, vol. 11, p. 185, Aug 8 
2011. 
[47] 
R. Wootton, "Twenty years of telemedicine in chronic 
disease management--an evidence synthesis," J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 18, pp. 211-20, Jun 2012. 
[48] 
M. J. Buxton, M. F. Drummond, B. A. Van Hout, R. 
L. Prince, T. A. Sheldon, T. Szucs, et al., "Modelling 
in economic evaluation: an unavoidable fact of life," 
Health Econ, vol. 6, pp. 217-27, May-Jun 1997. 
[49] 
J. D. Whited, "The quality of telemedicine research," J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 12, pp. 271-3, 2006. 
 
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

An eHealth Innovation Map for 
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises 
Towards Feasible, yet Convincing, Evidence 
Ruud Janssen, Marike Hettinga, Sikke Visser, Robbert Menko,  
Hilco Prins, Irene Krediet, Timber Haaker, and Lianne Bodenstaff 
Research group ICT Innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{TJWM.Janssen, M.Hettinga, S.Visser, RA.Menko, H.Prins, I.Krediet}@windesheim.nl 
Timber.Haaker@novay.nl, L.Bodenstaff@bizzdesign.nl 
 
 
Abstract - eHealth applications hold many promises, for 
instance to improve the quality of health care, to increase its 
accessibility, or to reduce its cost. Yet, many eHealth 
innovations never reach the stage where they get embedded 
into routine health care. This is due in part to a lack of 
evidence that these innovations indeed deliver what they 
promise. For small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in 
particular, 
collecting 
convincing 
evidence 
for 
eHealth 
innovations proves to be a challenge as the available time, 
resources and expertise to do so are often limited. In response 
to this challenge, the research group ICT Innovations in Health 
Care at the Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
initiated a joint research project, Successful Entrepreneurship 
in eHealth, with 28 eHealth SMEs, care providers, and other 
stakeholders in the Dutch health care system. The project’s 
main result is an eHealth innovation map. This map consists of 
a diagram showing eHealth SMEs which parties in the Dutch 
health care system to involve, their roles and their mutual 
relations, their interests in eHealth innovation, and the kinds of 
evidence that may convince them of the added value of an 
eHealth innovation. A set of corresponding fact sheets was 
developed to provide eHealth SMEs with concise yet easily 
accessible 
information 
for 
choosing 
an 
appropriate 
“innovation route” and for determining what evidence to 
collect for relevant stakeholders. Preliminary findings show 
that the innovation map is indeed a useful instrument, and that 
the corresponding fact sheets manage to capture all the 
essential information needed to guide an eHealth SME along a 
chosen innovation route. 
Keywords - eHealth; innovation map; innovation route; 
evidence guidelines; health care system; stakeholder 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Getting an eHealth innovation embedded into routine 
health care often turns out to be a challenge, in particular for 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Several causes 
can be identified, for instance a lack of a good underlying 
business model [1]. The research group ICT Innovations in 
Health Care at the Windesheim University of Applied 
Sciences (Zwolle, The Netherlands) has dedicated itself to 
study these issues and to support eHealth SMEs in 
overcoming them. Note that eHealth SMEs are defined here 
as small and medium sized enterprises offering eHealth 
products and services to patients, health care providers, and 
the general public. All SMEs participating in the project had 
less than 10 employees. 
During a series of workshops organized by the research 
group, an inventory was made of the problems encountered 
when SMEs are trying to get eHealth innovations embedded 
into routine health care. Collecting evidence for an 
innovation came out first: to get their innovation accepted by 
patients and care providers, reimbursed by health insurance 
companies, endorsed by patient organizations, or approved 
by national health care authorities, innovators often need to 
show evidence for the innovation’s effectiveness, for 
instance to improve treatment quality or reduce the cost of 
delivering health care. 
For a typical eHealth SME it is often unclear what kind 
of evidence is expected and by whom, and according to 
which standards this evidence should be collected. In other 
cases, the standard may be clear (e.g., a randomized 
controlled trial) yet practically unfeasible for an SME due to 
a lack of available time, (financial) resources, or expertise. 
Other researchers have also identified this barrier to 
eHealth implementation, although not specifically for SMEs. 
For instance, Mair et al. [2, 3] conclude in a meta-review of 
eHealth implementation studies that lack of validation and 
evaluation is frequently presented as a barrier to eHealth 
implementation: “Without strong data demonstrating that a 
system works, improves standards of care, can be used 
efficiently and easily, and is cost-effective to implement, it is 
unlikely to win the confidence of policy makers and users.” 
[2, p. 23]. 
The project Successful Entrepreneurship in eHealth was 
initiated by the research group to address these challenges. 
The project constitutes a cooperation between 28 eHealth 
SMEs, health care providers, patient organizations, health 
insurance companies, and national health care authorities in 
The Netherlands. The project’s aim is to establish guidelines 
for collecting evidence in such a way that (i) it is practically 
feasible for eHealth SMEs to do so and (ii) the resulting 
evidence is acceptable and potentially convincing for care 
providers, health insurers, or care authorities. 
The project’s main aim is to offer guidance to eHealth 
SMEs: which parties will need to be convinced of the 
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

effectiveness of an innovation, what evidence will be 
required, and how to collect this evidence in a feasible yet 
acceptable way. 
The structure of the remainder of this paper is as follows. 
In Section II the approach followed will be introduced, 
including the four phases in which the project was structured. 
Next, Section III will discuss the main findings and lessons 
learned. Section IV describes the eHealth innovation map 
and the accompanying sets of fact sheets. Finally, Section V 
summarizes the main conclusions. 
II. 
APPROACH 
The project Successful Entrepreneurship in eHealth 
started at the beginning of 2012 and will conclude at the end 
of 2013. At the outset the project was structured into four 
phases; these phases are briefly outlined in this section. More 
details about the approach followed are given in [4] and [5]. 
A. Phase 1: Inventory 
During this phase an inventory was made of generally 
recognized types of evidence. This was done by means of a 
literature review and a workshop with representatives of 
Dutch health care providers, insurers, patient organizations, 
and national health care authorities. Questions to be 
answered included: Which parties are involved when getting 
an eHealth innovation embedded in routine health care? 
What kind of evidence is generally needed, and how should 
it be collected? How do parties value various kinds of 
evidence? And what criteria are typically used? 
B. Phase 2: Case studies 
Whereas the analysis during the inventory phase was top-
down, the analysis during the case studies was deliberately 
bottom-up – to involve the SMEs and to enrich the analysis 
with examples of concrete situations, dilemmas and 
obstacles encountered. Cases from the participating eHealth 
SMEs were subjected to a detailed study by means of in-
depth, semi-structured interviews and an analysis of 
available documentation. Questions included: How are 
SMEs trying to get their innovations embedded into routine 
care? Which stakeholders do they identify and involve? 
What kinds of evidence do these stakeholders require? What 
evidence did the SMEs collect so far, and in what ways? 
How did stakeholders evaluate the evidence, against what 
criteria? 
C. Phase 3: Guidelines and best practices 
In this phase, the insights gained from the inventory and 
the case studies were combined. Best practices for 
embedding eHealth innovations in routine health care were 
identified, and guidelines for collecting required evidence 
were developed. Best practices and guidelines were then 
combined into a systematic approach for collecting evidence 
for eHealth innovations. To validate the newly developed 
approach it was applied and evaluated in a second series of 
case studies. 
D. Phase 4: Consolidation and tool development 
In this final project phase, the systematic approach 
described above was consolidated into an “eHealth  
innovation map”. The map consists of a diagram showing 
eHealth SMEs which parties in the Dutch health care system 
to involve, their roles and their mutual relations, their 
interests in eHealth innovation, and the kinds of evidence 
that may convince them of the added value of an eHealth 
innovation. As part of the map, a set of corresponding fact 
sheets was developed to provide eHealth SMEs with concise 
yet easily accessible information for choosing one of four 
possible “innovation routes”, and for determining what 
evidence to collect for relevant stakeholders encountered 
along each route. The map and fact sheets have been made 
available to a wide audience in The Netherlands, by means 
of a convenient booklet and a corresponding interactive web-
based tool. 
E. Ongoing dialogue 
Next to the activities in the above four phases, regular 
project meetings were organized to stimulate an ongoing 
dialogue between the participating organizations. During 
these meetings, SMEs introduced their cases, representatives 
of health care organizations discussed procedures or criteria 
used to evaluate eHealth innovations, and the research team 
presented the project’s latest results. To collect feedback 
from the project’s participants, mini-workshops were 
organized to evaluate the usefulness and correctness of the 
developed tools, typically by applying them to cases at hand. 
III. 
OVERVIEW OF FINDINGS 
This section briefly highlights the main findings and 
lessons learned. A complete overview, including a detailed 
discussion of the case study results, is provided in [5]. 
A. Existing frameworks offer little guidance for SMEs 
During the literature study more than a few reports and 
scientific papers offering proposals for eHealth evaluation 
frameworks were found, most of them containing guidelines 
for setting up a proper evaluation study, lists of outcome 
indicators and measures for various aspects of eHealth’s 
impact, and descriptions of methods and instruments to 
collect data. Examples are the National Telehealth Outcome 
Indicators Project [6], Model for the Assessment of 
Telemedicine Applications [7], and Guidelines for the 
Economic Evaluation of Health Technologies [8]. However, 
these frameworks seem to be directed mostly at academic 
experts. The Health Information Technology Evaluation 
Toolkit [9] is one of the very few examples primarily aimed 
at the non-expert. It provides step-by-step guidance for 
project teams who are developing evaluation plans for health 
IT projects. 
Although these frameworks indeed offer guidance with 
regard to setting up a proper study, none of the frameworks 
found provide the same kind of guidance with regard to 
identifying the various stakeholders involved in embedding 
an eHealth innovation into routine care, including their 
possible interests in the innovation, and subsequently the aim 
of an evaluation and the kinds of evidence that may be 
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

required. This is especially striking since researchers have 
argued for a contextualized approach in which all relevant 
stakeholders are actively involved in the definition of the 
outcome indicators that will be used [10, 11]. 
B. Stakeholders’ views on evidence 
During an expert session with representatives from health 
care providers, insurers, patient organizations, and national 
health care authorities, three dominant themes were 
recognized by the participants within the larger concept of 
evidence: effectiveness (“did health care get any better?”), 
cost efficiency (“did it get any cheaper?”) and labor savings 
(“did it get any less labor intensive?”), including respective 
outcome indicators and methods. During the session it 
became clear that strong forms of evidence (obtained using, 
for instance, randomized controlled trials) are certainly not 
always necessary to facilitate the uptake of eHealth 
applications. The participants agreed that randomized 
controlled trials are not always useful, necessary, or 
practically feasible. Furthermore, care providers and health 
care insurers indicated that they will still rely on their own 
patient data to support any decisions they make about 
embedding eHealth applications. 
National care authorities, on the other hand, held the 
view that eHealth applications typically only change the way 
in which health care is being delivered. As long as there are 
no indications that safety or clinical effectiveness are at 
stake, and within the limits defined by regulations governing 
the provision of health care, care providers and health care 
insurers are free to negotiate and decide about the use (and 
reimbursement) of eHealth applications. 
C. Four “innovation routes” for eHealth innovations 
One topic which arose very prominently during the same 
expert session, is that it is not straightforward which path an 
SME should follow within the Dutch care system to get an 
eHealth innovation embedded into routine care. In part this is 
due to the wide variety of applications that fall under the 
common denominator of eHealth, but it is also due to the 
complexity of the Dutch care system, which is highly 
regulated and in which various authorities and other parties 
each play a distinct role. An SME should consider very 
carefully which “innovation route” to follow, as the chosen 
route will determine which stakeholders to address and 
involve. 
Stakeholders 
will 
have 
their 
own 
roles, 
responsibilities and interests, and hence will need their own 
arguments to get convinced of an eHealth application’s 
added value. It is, therefore, the chosen innovation route that 
determines the context in which evidence will be collected, 
the purpose for which it is collected, and the requirements 
that it should satisfy. 
Based on the above findings, a review of online 
documentation pertaining to innovation in the Dutch health 
care system took place (e.g., [12-16]), and follow-up 
interviews with representatives of the participating health 
care organizations were organized. These efforts resulted in a 
comprehensive description of the Dutch health care system, 
including the roles of the parties involved, their interests in 
eHealth innovation, and criteria they use to evaluate eHealth 
innovations. Four main innovation routes were identified and 
described, including the specifics of each route and criteria 
for when to choose which route: 
 
The consumer route where an eHealth application is 
offered to and paid by patients/consumers. For 
example, a medical translation app that can be used 
when visiting a doctor abroad. 
 
The provider route where an application is offered to 
and paid by health care providers. For instance, an 
online treatment plan which allows clients to consult 
their plan and report about their progress. 
 
The insurer route where an application becomes part 
of an existing treatment that is offered by a care 
provider and reimbursed by a health insurance 
company. For example, a real-time medication 
monitoring service to improve the medication 
adherence of a diabetes patient. (In this case, the 
medication is the existing treatment and real-time 
monitoring becomes part of it.) 
 
The government route where an application leads to 
a new treatment not yet offered by care providers or 
reimbursed by health insurance companies, and 
where health care authorities need to decide whether 
it should be admitted to publicly insured care. Here, 
an 
example 
might 
be 
the 
introduction 
of 
telemonitoring of epilepsy patients in the home 
environment, to respond quickly in the event of a 
major seizure. 
D. The paths followed by eHealth SMEs 
During the case studies phase, eight cases submitted by 
seven SMEs were selected for in-depth, semi-structured 
interviews. During each interview, the path followed by the 
SME to get its eHealth innovation embedded into routine 
care was reconstructed. Particular attention was paid to the 
stakeholders that had been identified and involved, and (if 
applicable) the evidence that had been collected. Where 
available, underlying documentation was used to analyze the 
collected evidence, in particular the outcome indicators and 
methodology used, the conclusions drawn, and, if applicable, 
how these conclusions were translated into a business case 
for stakeholders. 
A detailed discussion of the case study results is outside 
the scope of this paper. We briefly summarize a few 
highlights here, more details are reported in [5]. 
 
Entrepreneurs with little or no experience in the 
health care sector often had difficulties in identifying 
a successful innovation route. The paths they 
followed were frequently based on trial and error, 
during which they steadily built up a better 
understanding of how the health care system works. 
 
The role of health insurance companies in the health 
care 
system, 
their 
interests 
in 
health 
care 
innovations, and the criteria by which they evaluate 
eHealth innovations were often unclear to SMEs. 
 
SMEs tended to involve health insurance companies 
too early, when strong support among care 
providers, endorsements from patient organizations, 
294
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

or approvals from professional associations were still 
lacking. Insurance companies, on the other hand, 
used these as principal criteria for the selection of 
promising innovations. 
 
Health 
care 
providers 
and 
health 
insurance 
companies often had partly conflicting interests, 
making it difficult to come up with a business case 
which was compelling to both parties at the same 
time. 
 
Within the “insurer route”, clinical trials were often 
essential to build up evidence for an innovation’s 
effectiveness. SMEs lacked the expertise and 
financial resources to carry out a proper trial, forcing 
them to involve experts and to find sponsoring. 
Furthermore, it was not always clear exactly what 
evidence was required. 
 
In cases where evidence had been collected in trials, 
this had been done using randomized controlled 
trials – the “golden standard” [17]. These trials were 
designed and performed by academic experts. These 
experts assumed responsibility for deciding which 
evidence was to be collected and how this should be 
done. However, it remained unclear to which extent 
external stakeholders had been consulted before 
these choices were made. 
 
The results from a trial had sometimes been 
developed into a business case for stakeholders. One 
case was especially illustrative: the effect that was 
found on an intermediary outcome measure used in 
the trial was first translated into an effect on a 
relevant end measure (a reduction in health related 
costs) using the results of a systematic review found 
in the scientific literature. This was then translated 
into a reduction in insurance claims for a health 
insurance company, based on the results of an 
internal study performed by the insurer. In this way, 
the clinical trial could focus on an intermediary 
outcome measure where effects could be measured 
on a much shorter time scale.  
 
Judging from the cases under study, it was clear that 
decision makers (for instance in health insurance companies, 
but also in other stakeholders) should be more closely 
involved when an evaluation is being planned. In this way, 
the criteria that play a role in the decision process can be 
clarified early on, when they can still be taken into account 
in the development of evaluation plans or business cases, or 
in the design of clinical trials. 
E. The criteria used by the insurance company 
In the Dutch health care system, the insurance company 
often plays a crucial role in the reimbursement of eHealth 
based care. Based on three cases that were monitored closely 
during the project, it became clear that three criteria are 
essential for the insurer: (i) is there sufficient support for the 
innovation among care providers (for instance, does it 
address any evident needs or demands), (ii) does the 
innovation fit into existing health care processes, and (iii) 
will it be able to substitute for existing forms of care. Other 
important criteria were: (iv) is the innovation fully 
developed, (v) is it fully interoperable with existing systems 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Elementary version of the eHealth innovation map, showing the main parties in the Dutch health care system. 
Each of these parties and their interests in eHealth innovations are further described in accompanying fact sheets. 
 
reimburses
care
offers a
service
provides
care
develops
standards
promotes
interests
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
pays
premium
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
supervises
health care
market
regulates
publicly
insured care
advices on 
publicly
insured care
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(for instance, systems in use by general practitioners), and 
(vi) is the potential for a nationwide adoption clear.  
The criteria used by the insurer seem to be driven by a 
concern to identify early on which innovations will most 
likely be successfully implemented. However, the principal 
criterion is cost reduction by means of substitution: an 
eHealth innovation should either lead to the replacement of 
an existing form of care by a more cost efficient one; or, by 
being more effective, it should contribute to a reduced health 
care consumption in the near future. To convincingly show 
this to the health insurer, a detailed quantitative business case 
is often required. 
IV. 
FROM FINDINGS TO GUIDELINES 
During the inventory and case study phases of the project 
it had become clear that, when evaluation plans or clinical 
trials are being planned, relevant stakeholders should be 
identified and their interests taken into account. This is 
especially important because, ultimately, the evidence that is 
collected will be constituting the foundation beneath a 
business case in which all relevant stakeholders and their 
interests are accounted for. Preferably, principal stakeholders 
should be involved as early as possible, and the required 
evidence defined and collected in a cooperative effort. 
To facilitate this, eHealth SMEs required a “map”: to 
find the most promising innovation routes within the Dutch 
care system, and to identify relevant stakeholders and their 
interests. The creation of such a map, including a set of 
corresponding “fact sheets” (detailed yet concise and 
accessible information on innovation routes, relevant 
stakeholders and their interests, and types of evidence 
required) became the project’s highest priority. 
A. The eHealth innovation map 
The starting point when developing the innovation map 
was that it should provide concise yet accessible information 
for SMEs on (i) the Dutch health care system, (ii) the roles of 
the main parties within it, (iii) the interests these parties have 
in eHealth innovations, and (iv) examples of applicable 
evidence to convince them. Furthermore, the map should 
visualize the four innovation routes and so facilitate the 
identification of relevant stakeholders. The map should 
 
 
 
(a) The commercial route 
 
 
 
(b) The provider route 
 
 
 
(c) The insurer route 
 
 
(d) The government route 
Figure 2: Thematic versions of the innovation map showing the four innovation routes. Thick arrows represent subsequent steps that should be 
undertaken by the SME or other involved stakeholders. Each version is accompanied by a descriptive fact sheet. 
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
296
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

provide only an overview; detailed information with 
guidelines and best practices had to be provided in sets of 
accompanying fact sheets (of one page each): a set on the 
innovation routes, a set on the stakeholders involved, and a 
set on applicable evidence. The following paragraphs briefly 
discuss each of these elements. 
1) The innovation map 
Figure 1 shows the innovation map in its elementary 
version, displaying only the main parties in the Dutch health 
care system and the relations among them. Care has been 
taken to streamline the map without oversimplifying it. 
Three thematic versions of the innovation map (not shown 
here) display additional information: one shows the various 
stakeholders within each party, one the interests that 
stakeholders may have in eHealth innovations, and one the 
kinds of evidence (or other applicable forms of proof) that 
may be used to convince them. Furthermore, there are four 
thematic versions displaying the identified innovation routes; 
these versions are shown in Figure 2. Each version is 
accompanied by a brief description of what is shown. In this 
way, SMEs are provided with “at a glance” information 
which acts as an index to the accompanying sets of fact 
sheets. 
2) Fact sheets on stakeholders 
Each party is described in more detail in its own fact 
sheet. These fact sheets contain concise information on (i) 
the role of this party in the health care system, (ii) relevant 
stakeholders within this party that may play a role in decision 
making, (iii) their interest (or interests) in eHealth 
innovations, and (iv) general guidelines on how (and by what 
means) this party can be convinced. Table 1 shows a 
representative example of a stakeholder fact sheet, in this 
case about the insurer. 
3) Fact sheets on innovation routes 
The four innovation routes are also described in their 
own set of fact sheets. These fact sheets contain information 
on (i) situations where a particular route is applicable, (ii) 
matters to take into account when following a route, (iii) 
special circumstances or regulations that may apply, (iv) the 
main stakeholders that need to be involved, and (v) the main 
pitfalls. Table 2 shows a representative example of an 
innovation route fact sheet, i.e., the insurer route. 
4) Fact sheets on evidence 
The third set of fact sheets concerns the evidence that 
TABLE 1: EXAMPLE OF A STAKEHOLDER FACT SHEET. THIS ONE DISCUSSES THE INSURER. OTHERS DISCUSS THE CARE PROVIDER, 
THE PATIENT, THE PATIENT ASSOCIATION, THE PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATION, AND THE GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS. 
(TRANSLATED FROM DUTCH; REFERENCES TO SOURCES IN THE ORIGINAL TEXT HAVE BEEN OMITTED FOR READABILITY.) 
Fact sheet health care insurer 
 
Role 
The health care insurer is the party reimbursing the care being provided to patients with the eHealth application. Keep in mind that there will be various 
stakeholders within the insurer, all with particular interests with regard to the eHealth application: 
 
The innovation department, where potentially interesting eHealth applications are selected and evaluated. 
 
The investment fund, which backs the development of eHealth applications financially. 
 
The purchasing department, which negotiates with care providers and purchases large quantities of health care (as efficiently as possible). 
Therefore, the role of eHealth applications it often limited. 
 
The commercial department, which sets up additional insurance packages for private parties and collective insurances for organizations and which 
sees eHealth as a distinguishing feature. 
Keep in mind that any enthusiasm in the innovation department is not necessarily shared by the other stakeholders! 
 
Interests 
As far as health care insurers are concerned, what is most important is high-quality care at low cost, which translates into the following demands being 
made regarding eHealth applications: 
 
The application needs to have sufficient support among care providers and patients (through co-creation). 
 
The application must deliver health care gains (better quality care or higher quality of life). 
 
The application has to reduce health care costs (through increased independence on the part of the patient or reduced burden on the health care 
provider). 
 
The application has to lead to substitution (no extra care but substitution of existing care). 
 
The application has to lead to reduced health-related absence (prevention or quicker recovery). 
 
The application has to be in line with national agreements and purchasing policies. 
Health care insurers do business with care providers, who they see as interlocutor, which means it is important to make sure that the application is 
suggested to the health care insurer by an enthusiastic care provider (rather than by the entrepreneur). 
 
Persuasion 
Health care insurers have medical advisers who will assess the added value of an application on the basis of their expertise. Generally speaking, they will 
demand to see a business case, based on financial estimates and supported by research results (for instance a clinical trial or pilot project). 
 
A business case can be created in stages, for instance by translating the effects that have been detected in a pilot study into financial consequences for the 
health care insurer. Always determine the design of a pilot study or clinical trial (what is being measured, and how) together with the care provider and 
health care insurer. 
 
297
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

will be required to convince the main stakeholders along 
each of the four innovation routes. The information provided 
in these fact sheets is necessarily generic; details on exactly 
which evidence to collect will depend on the specific 
situation (e.g., the type of eHealth application, where it is 
being used and to what effect, and the specific interests of 
relevant stakeholders). The fact sheets therefore contain (i) a 
concise description of the kinds of effects that need to be 
demonstrated for the main stakeholders, (ii) examples of the 
kinds of evidence that may be applicable, (iii) a few generic 
guidelines and best practices on how to collect evidence, and 
(iv) references to relevant sources of information, such as the 
frameworks discussed earlier in Section III.A. Table 3 shows 
a representative example of an evidence fact sheet, i.e., 
evidence for the insurer route. 
B. Validation of the innovation map 
Validation of the eHealth innovation map and the 
corresponding fact sheets has been performed along four 
different lines. First, experts from the participating health 
care providers, patient associations, and government 
organizations have been asked to carefully check the map 
and the fact sheets for correctness and completeness of the 
provided information. Several corrections and suggestions 
have been made by them, which have subsequently been 
incorporated into the materials. 
Second, the usability and usefulness of the map and fact 
sheets have been evaluated with representatives from 
eHealth SMEs. This has been done during a series of 
workshops both within the project (as part of the regular 
project meetings) and outside of the project (e.g., at national 
and regional eHealth-related conferences and symposia). In 
these workshops the eHealth innovation map was applied to 
a range of different cases at hand (usually provided by 
workshop participants) and evaluation happened afterwards 
by 
means 
of 
questionnaires 
and 
discussions 
with 
participants. In this way, a substantial amount of valuable 
feedback was collected and used to improve the materials. 
Third, validation of the map is currently being performed 
by means of “action research”, where the research team is 
getting actively involved in a few selected cases with the aim 
to evaluate and extend the current insights. 
Fourth, a number of successful cases are currently being 
TABLE 2: EXAMPLE OF AN INNOVATION ROUTE FACT SHEET. THIS ONE DISCUSSES THE INSURER ROUTE. 
OTHERS DISCUSS THE COMMERCIAL ROUTE, THE PROVIDER ROUTE, AND THE GOVERNMENT ROUTE. 
(TRANSLATED FROM DUTCH; REFERENCES TO SOURCES IN THE ORIGINAL TEXT HAVE BEEN OMITTED FOR READABILITY.) 
Fact sheet insurer route 
 
When does this route apply? 
An eHealth application is integrated into care that is already being provided or reimbursed. The application does not alter the care being provided, only 
the form in which it is delivered. As a result, for example, the care becomes more accessible or it can be provided more efficiently.  
 
Examples 
 
An online nutrition diary that is used as part of diet advice by a dietician and promotes the patient’s self-management. 
 
A pillbox that alerts patients when they forget to take their medication. This takes place on doctor’s order and promotes patient discipline.  
Points of interest 
Make sure there is sufficient support! It is important for care providers, patients and patient organizations to be enthusiastic about the application, which 
is why it is crucial to involve them at an early stage in the development (co-creation). The specialists’ professional association plays an important role in 
nationwide up-scaling, because they determine the guidelines for good and safe care.  
 
If an application leads to cheaper or less labor-intensive care, while the quality of the provided care remains the same at least, this is interesting for the 
care provider and it may not be necessary to involve the insurer. If, on the other hand, the application makes the care being provided more expensive, it 
has to be demonstrated that the quality of the care has improved and a larger support base is needed. Do not approach the insurer yourself, but let the 
enthusiastic care provider do the negotiations. 
 
As far as insurers are concerned, it is crucial for the application to lead to a replacement of existing care (for instance through substitution or self-
management) and, ultimately, to a reduction in reimbursements. It is important to demonstrate this in a detailed business case. 
 
Special details 
If an application does not match the existing care descriptions defined by the Dutch Healthcare Authority (for example due to restrictions in the 
description or rate), the care provider and insurer together can submit an application at the Dutch Healthcare Authority. The Dutch Healthcare Authority 
can modify an existing care description or create a temporary one, giving the application time to “prove” itself. 
 
The main stakeholders 
 
Care provider and professional association 
 
Patients and patient association 
 
Care insurer 
 
Dutch Healthcare Authority (if a care description needs to be modified or a temporary one created) 
Pitfalls 
Creating insufficient support (among patients, care providers, patient associations and professional associations). Approaching the insurer yourself 
without the backing of at least one care provider. Not paying attention to the substitution of the existing care. 
 
298
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

analyzed by means of desk research and interviews with 
parties involved, to assess the innovation routes that have 
been followed and the evidence that has been collected. 
Overall, the consulted experts and participating SMEs 
had very favorable remarks. Judging from the feedback that 
was given, the innovation map does indeed manage to 
provide a concise and accessible overview of the various 
ways in which eHealth innovations can be embedded in 
routine health care. At the time of writing there is a strong 
interest in the map. It has, for instance, been made accessible 
to a large audience via the website of the Netherlands 
Organization for Health Research and Development [14] and 
a well-known website maintained by a joint initiative of four 
government organizations (the Dutch Healthcare Insurance 
Board, the Dutch Healthcare Authority, the Ministry of 
Health, 
Welfare 
and 
Sports, 
and 
the 
Netherlands 
Organization for Health Research and Development) [15]. 
The preliminary findings from the third and fourth lines 
(action research and analysis of successful cases) also 
provide support for the conclusion that the innovation map is 
a useful instrument, and that the corresponding fact sheets 
manage to capture all the essential information needed to 
guide an SME along a chosen innovation route. 
C. Consolidation and tool development 
The last phase of the project, consolidation and tool 
development, is currently nearing completion. Based on the 
eHealth innovation map a workshop protocol has been 
developed, and currently the innovation map and the fact 
sheets are being incorporated into an interactive, web-based 
tool [18]. The workshop protocol and the web-based tool 
both provide guidance to SMEs in finding a promising 
innovation route, in identifying relevant stakeholders to 
involve, and in determining which evidence they may 
require. 
Last, the project’s results are being documented in an 
accessible and illustrated booklet for SMEs. The booklet 
covers all the information contained within the innovation 
TABLE 3: EXAMPLE OF AN EVIDENCE FACT SHEET. THIS ONE DISCUSSES EVIDENCE FOR THE INSURER ROUTE. 
OTHERS DISCUSS EVIDENCE FOR THE COMMERCIAL ROUTE, THE PROVIDER ROUTE, AND THE GOVERNMENT ROUTE. 
(TRANSLATED FROM DUTCH; REFERENCES TO SOURCES IN THE ORIGINAL TEXT HAVE BEEN OMITTED FOR READABILITY.) 
Fact sheet evidence within the insurer route 
 
What needs to be demonstrated? 
A business case needs to be developed in which the interests of the care provider (see the provider route) and the health insurer are combined. Ultimately, 
health care insurers want to see a reduction in health care costs (through substitution or self-management), but they also focus on support among 
providers, scalability and compatibility with existing care processes. See the ZonMw website for a list of relevant criteria. 
 
Which evidence is suitable? 
Demonstrating a reduction in health care costs can be done in two ways: 
1. 
By replacing expensive forms of care by less expensive ones (“substitution”). This leads to “definite”, short-term cost reductions. Make clear to the 
insurer how the current care process will change and how this will lead to labor savings, process optimization, or lower costs. Pay attention to the 
aspects that will be included in the business case, and how this will be measured in a pilot or trial. Insurers will want to know how substitution is 
actually accomplished. 
2. 
More effective care will lead to a reduction in care consumption in the long term, but the cost reduction is surrounded by uncertainty. Note that 
insurers will want to see a return on investment within three years. Reduced health care consumption will need to be demonstrated with 
methodologically sound research, for instance using this three-stage process: (1) a clinical trial aimed at measuring a process measure or 
intermediary measure, (2) translation of the effects found on the process or intermediary measure into an effect on a relevant end measure, based on 
the best available scientific evidence on the relation between these two, (3) calculation of the potential cost reduction based on insurer data. The 
Achmea Health Database is a good source of information to do this. 
Some eHealth applications may be attractive for health insurer for commercial or marketing purposes (e.g., to attract or maintain subscribers). In such 
cases, contact the commercial department, which is responsible for  additional insurances for consumers and collective insurances for organizations. In 
the latter case, it should be clear how the application can lead to fitter employees or reduced sick leave. 
 
Things to keep in mind: 
 
In the case of improved efficiency, there has to be a clear (clinically relevant) improvement, which has to be demonstrated through scientifically 
sound research. 
 
Be careful about making assumptions, for instance in translating an intermediary measure (for instance, medication adherence) to an end measure 
(reduction or delay of complications). Do not add assumptions to assumptions.  
 
“Pick your battle”: using a certain application may prove more beneficial with some syndromes compared to others. Think about this carefully.  
 
“Hard” data (which can be determined objectively) have more weight than “soft” data (opinions or experiences of patients and other people 
involved), no matter how they are collected. “Hard” data can also be obtained through routine registrations of care suppliers. 
Important: 
 
Discuss as early as possible with the insurer and the care provider what evidence will be required. 
 
Involve important stakeholders, such as decision-makers, when working out the appropriate research approach. 
 
Consult experts when methodologically strong research is needed, but keep stakeholders involved. 
 
299
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

map and the fact sheets, such as the descriptions of the main 
parties in the Dutch health care system, the identified 
innovation routes, the interests of various parties in eHealth 
innovations, and various kinds of evidence that may be 
required. It is hoped that in this way, the project’s results will 
be well consolidated and accessible for all interested eHealth 
SMEs in The Netherlands. 
V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The main conclusion to be drawn from the research 
presented here, is that evidence constitutes the foundation 
underneath a business case in which all relevant stakeholders 
and their interests are accounted for. Preferably, principal 
stakeholders should be involved as early as possible when 
planning an evaluation study or a (clinical) trial. In this way, 
the criteria that will play a role later on in the decision 
process can be clarified early on, when they can still be taken 
into account. 
This insight has become the corner stone of the approach 
developed in the project “Successful Entrepreneurship in 
eHealth”. Following this approach, the chosen innovation 
route, the identified stakeholders, and their interests in the 
eHealth innovation at hand eventually determine which kinds 
of evidence will be needed and how they should be collected. 
The developed eHealth innovation map, the workshop 
protocol, and the web-based tool were all developed to 
provide guidance to eHealth SMEs, allowing them to make 
better, more informed decisions. The design, implementation 
and analysis of clinical trials will nevertheless remain the 
domain of academic experts or highly trained staff members 
working at care providers; the level of expertise that is 
required makes this simply unavoidable. 
With regard to the usefulness of the results in countries 
outside The Netherlands, the question arises how unique the 
Dutch situation really is. In other words, can the eHealth 
innovation map be generalized to other countries? When an 
early concept of the innovation map was presented at an 
international eHealth conference [4] it seemed from the 
responses given by the international audience that certain 
basic principles, such as the roles and interests of the care 
provider and the insurer, are certainly generalizable. Other 
aspects, such as the government legislation pertaining to the 
health care system, will vary. Nevertheless, judging by this 
first impression it seems that the proposed approach may be 
fruitful for parties in other countries as well. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Stichting Innovatie Alliantie 
for 
financially 
supporting 
the 
project 
Successful 
Entrepreneurship in eHealth. Furthermore, they would like 
to thank the eHealth SMEs and all other organizations who 
participated in the project: Achmea divisie Zorg en 
Gezondheid, ActiZ, Be4Care, BeagleBoxx, Bonstato, 
College voor Zorgverzekeringen, Consuming Knowledge, 
DiaDerma, Dutch IT Consultants, Eusamed, Evalan, 
EvoCare, Focus Cura, Health Valley, Installatie Techniek 
Masseling, Isala Klinieken, MS Nederland, Nederlandse 
Zorgautoriteit, Novay, Nederlandse Patiënten Consumenten 
Federatie, Nederlandse Vereniging voor eHealth, SalesSpirit, 
SymaX, Syntens, Valetudo Interpres, Vos Projectadvies 
Gezondheidszorg, VRC Telecom, and Zorgverzekeraar 
VGZ. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J.E. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, H.C. 
Ossebaard, S.M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, and E.R. Seydel, “A 
holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of 
eHealth technologies,” J. Med. Internet Res., 2011, 
13(4):e111. 
[2] F. Mair, C. May, E. Murray, T. Finch, G. Anderson, C. 
O’Donnell, P. Wallace, and F. Sullivan, “Understanding the 
implementation and integration of e-health services,” London: 
NHS Service and Delivery R and D Organisation (NCCSDO), 
2009. 
[3] F. Mair, C. May, C. O’Donnell, T. Finch, F. Sullivan, and E. 
Murray, “Factors that promote or inhibit the implementation 
of e-health systems: an explanatory systematic review,” Bull. 
World Health Organ., 2012, 90:357-364. 
[4] R. Janssen, M. Hettinga, H. Prins, S. Visser, R. Menko, I. 
Krediet, T. Haaker, and L. Bodenstaff, “Developing evidence 
guidelines for eHealth small and medium-sized enterprises,” 
Proc. eTELEMED 2013, Feb. 2013, pp. 92-95. 
[5] R. Janssen, M. Hettinga, S. Visser, R. Menko, H. Prins, I. 
Krediet, T. Haaker, and L. Bodenstaff, “Innovation routes and 
evidence guidelines for eHealth Small and Medium-sized 
Enterprises,” Int. J. Adv. Life Sc., 2013, 5(3&4).  
[6] R.E. Scott, F.G. McCarthy, P.A. Jennett, T. Perverseff, D. 
Lorenzetti, A. Saeed, B. Rush, and M. Yeo, “Telehealth 
outcomes: a synthesis of the literature and recommendations 
for outcome indicators,” J. Telemed. Telecare, 2007, 13 Suppl 
2:1-38. 
[7] K. Kidholm, A.G. Ekeland, L.K. Jensen, J. Rasmussen, C.D. 
Pedersen, A. Bowes, S.A. Flottorp, and M. Bech, “A model 
for assessment of telemedicine applications: MAST”, Int. J. 
Technol. Assess. Health Care, 2012, 28(1):44-51. 
[8] Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, 
“Guidelines 
for 
the 
economic 
evaluation 
of 
health 
technologies: Canada [3rd edition],” Ottawa: Canadian 
Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, 2006. 
[9] C.M. Cusack, C. Byrne, J.M. Hook, J. McGowan, E.G. Poon, 
and A. Zafar, “Health information technology evaluation 
toolkit: 2009 update,” Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, 2009. 
[10] M.P. Gagnon and R.E. Scott, “Striving for evidence in e-
health 
evaluation: 
lessons 
from 
health 
technology 
assessment,” J. Telemed. Telecare, 2005, 11, Suppl 2:S34-6. 
[11] H. Hyppönen, E. Ammenwerth, and N. de Keizer, “Exploring 
a methodology for eHealth indicator development,” Stud. 
Health Technol. Inform., 2012, 180:338-42. 
[12] Website Nederlandse Zorgautoriteit, www.nza.nl. [Website of 
the Dutch Healthcare Authority. In Dutch.] Last accessed: 
November 24, 2013. 
[13] Website College voor Zorgverzekeringen, www.cvz.nl. 
[Website of the Dutch Healthcare Insurance Board. In Dutch.] 
[14] Website 
ZonMw, 
www.zonmw.nl. 
[Website 
of 
the 
Netherlands 
Organization 
for 
Health 
Research 
and 
Development. In Dutch.] Last accessed: November 24, 2013. 
[15] Website Zorg voor Innoveren, www.zorgvoorinnoveren.nl. 
[Website by a joint initiative of 
four government 
organizations: the Dutch Healthcare Insurance Board, the 
Dutch Healthcare Authority, the Ministry of Health, Welfare 
and Sports, and the Netherlands Organization for Health 
Research and Development. In Dutch.] Last accessed: 
November 24, 2013. 
300
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[16] Website Nictiz, www.nictiz.nl. [Website of the National IT 
Institute for Healthcare in the Netherlands. In Dutch.] Last 
accessed: November 24, 2013. 
[17] P.M. Ho, P.N. Peterson, and F.A. Masoudi, “Evaluating the 
evidence. Is there a rigid hierarchy?” Circulation, 2008, 
118(16):1675-84. 
[18] Website 
Innovatieroutes 
in 
de 
Zorg, 
www.innovatieroutesindezorg.nl. [Innovation routes in Health 
Care, maintained by the Research group ICT Innovations in 
Health Care, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences. In 
Dutch.] Last accessed: November 24, 2013. 
301
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Assembling Goal Attainment and Collaboration  
Videoconference in Clinical Practice 
 
Anne Granstrøm Ekeland 
Norwegian Centre of Integrated Care and Telemedicine  
9038 University Hospital of Tromsø, Norway, and  
University of Tromsø, Department of Clinical Medicine 
Telemedicine and e-Health Research Group 
Email: Anne.granstrom.ekeland@telemed.no  
 
 
Abstract - Videoconferencing (VC) for clinical work at 
scale is underway at the University Hospital of North 
Norway (UNN) as a strategy to support the goals of 
integrated and coordinated care pathways and reduce 
secondary health care costs. A research project: 
“Modelling 
Videoconference 
Collaboration” 
was 
designed to investigate financial and social aspects 
following this development. The project primarily looks 
at collaboration between clinicians. This paper reports 
on the sociological aspects of the project where the 
overall objective is to explore emerging new models for 
clinical 
VC 
collaboration 
and 
analyze 
specified 
mechanisms involved in optimizing the potential of the 
service. In the paper I report results on the question: 
what theoretical resources are useful for addressing 
processes towards goal attainment and VC practices of 
collaboration? Based upon a review of scientific 
publications, policy documents and theoretical work, a 
summary of experiences with VC use in Norway is 
presented to identify results on goal attainment and 
collaboration practices. International findings are also 
briefly considered. Complexities concerning influences 
and goals were identified. This result is used to introduce 
and discuss theoretical approaches, arriving at the 
concept of assemblage for addressing complexity.  
Arguing for the use of this concept, the paper concludes 
with operational questions for further empirical 
exploration and analyses. 
 
Keywords-video-conference; 
goal 
attainment; 
clinical 
practice; collaboration and integration of care; theoretical 
resources 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Videoconferencing (VC) for clinical work as part of 
telemedicine services has been used at the University 
Hospital of North Norway (UNN) for approximately 25 
years [1]. During the last 5 years, measures to develop VC 
use at scale have been taken on  as a strategy both to support 
the goals of more integrated and coordinated care pathways 
and reduce secondary health care costs [2].   
The research project: “Modelling Videoconference 
Collaboration”, ongoing 2013 and 2014, is designed to 
investigate 
processes 
and 
outcomes 
through 
multi-
methodological approaches, including quantitative and 
qualitative methods. The overall objectives are to explore 
emerging new models for clinical VC collaboration and to 
analyze active mechanisms involved in optimizing the 
potential of the service, that is: the process of goal 
attainment. One half of the project addresses economic 
models and the other, which this paper derives from, 
examines socio-material models.  
In sociology, determining theoretical positions and 
resources normally form large portions of projects. Basic 
assumptions, research questions, analytical approaches and 
concepts are considered to be intertwined and parts of the 
production of results. Therefore, the first aim was to 
determine theoretical resources and specify analytical 
concepts. In the paper I present and discuss responses to the 
question: What theoretical resources are useful for 
addressing processes towards goal attainment and VC 
practices of collaboration?  
The resources are to be used for investigations and 
analyses of active mechanisms involved in goal attainment 
and collaborative processes, and to conceptualize socio-
material models of optimization of potential. This aim will 
involve empirical studies of ways collaboration and 
integration of care are co-produced, and made viable and 
sustainable in specific practices where videoconference is 
used.  
The paper is organized as follows: First, a section on 
methods and data for the theoretical considerations in this 
paper is presented. The following results section includes a 
presentation of published material on videoconferences, use, 
plans and anticipations in Norway, focusing on goal 
attainment and collaboration. Considering the results, 
theoretical approaches are then presented. I propose a 
concept of assemblages as a response to the findings of 
complexity of influences and goals in the research literature 
and documents. The discussion section addresses two 
questions: 1) how can goal attainment using information and 
communication technologies (ICTs) in health care be 
addressed? And 2) how can collaboration and integration of 
302
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

care be addressed? The paper concludes with questions and 
hypotheses for future work as well as data sources for the 
analyses of mechanisms and models for goal attainment, 
including collaboration.  
II. 
METHODS AND DATA 
The methods and data sources used for the sociological 
project reported here are as follows.  
 
Addressing Norwegian experiences, documents 
from the Regional Authorities of Helse Nord on 
videoconference use and priorities from 2005 were 
studied.  
 
A literature search was performed through Google 
Scholar using the terms “videoconference in 
clinical practice in Norway” and “videoconference 
use at UNN”. Selection criteria were peer reviewed 
international publications reporting experiences 
from utilization of telemedicine including VC, 
dating from 2005 onwards. Papers with a focus on 
priorities, goal attainment and collaboration were 
included. Full text papers were retrieved and 
studied.  
 
Recent Norwegian government documents on 
health care reforms were studied, focusing on 
integration, collaboration and use of ICT’s in 
health care.  
 
Peer reviewed scientific papers commenting on 
recent Norwegian reforms were studied.  
 
A literature search using PubMed was performed 
with the search term: “systematic review of use of 
videoconference in clinical practice”. Reviews 
addressing videoconference, collaboration and goal 
attainment were selected, retrieved and studied. 
 
The main focus in this paper is on developing 
theoretical resources and concepts. A selection of 
work on processes of utilization, collaboration and 
governing of ICT’s in innovation within the body 
of complexity studies was considered. This 
selection was substantiated through relevance for 
the subject area under study as argued in the paper.  
 
III. 
RESULTS 
In the results section, I present videoconference, its use in 
Norway, plans and assumptions as well as published results 
on goal attainment and collaboration.  
A. Video conference definition and use 
Although, in simple terms telemedicine refers to the 
delivery of medical and health services at a distance, there is 
no single or uniform telemedicine application. Telemedicine 
pertains to a dimension of distance that is bridged with the 
help of communications technologies, from Plain Old 
Telephone System (POTS) to satellite communications,  
ICT and networking technologies, such as the Internet,  and 
the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) [3].  
   Video conference includes different technologies [4-6] 
making it a tool for collaboration between colleagues, 
education and remote patient consultation. Videoconference 
for clinical use is a synchronous service, indicating 
discussion of clinical questions with real time use of text, 
images, and video of the patient or wherever the patient may 
be present. The project I report on has its main focus on 
collegial 
collaboration. 
VC 
has 
undergone 
vast 
development, and today mobile units may be utilized by 
doctors for collegial discussion along with traditional VC 
studios or lecture halls equipped with large screens. The 
videoconference concept itself might be under pressure as 
technologies and use situations evolve [4].  
    In late 2005, the Northern Norway Regional Health 
Authority requested an evaluation of all tested telemedicine 
services in northern Norway to clarify which were suitable 
for large scale implementation. They developed a priority 
list of medical specialties and topics.  
    The first tier priorities were teleradiology, digital 
communication and integration of patient records, and 
education. The second priorities were teledialysis, pre-
hospital thrombolysis, telepsychiatry and teledermatology. 
The third priorities were pediatrics, district medical centers, 
tele-ophthalmology and tele-otorhinolaryngology. VC was 
one type of service discussed.  
      In 2011, a report on the use and potential for 
videoconferencing in Helse Nord was commissioned as an 
internal report. The report concluded that there is great 
potential for the scale and nature of videoconferencing to 
increase. The recommendations were on pragmatic and 
operational levels and included the establishment of a new 
in-house organization to lead future videoconferencing, 
probably requiring specific expertise and resources to be 
bought in from outside companies. Rejuvenating the 
infrastructure, providing a well-resourced Service and 
Support Centre and increasing future involvement of clinical 
staff at UNN was also proposed. Strategic support at senior 
level in the University Hospital was also considered 
essential if the vision of future widespread use of 
videoconferencing for health care was to be realized.  
    Two different kinds of clinical videoconference were 
described as possible concerning inpatients and outpatients. 
Examples of the former include staff consultations about 
patients who have been discharged from the main hospitals 
to the regional and local levels. Following discharge, 
hospital staff could carry out regular case conferences with 
local staff to ensure proper follow-up. This does not take 
place on any scale at present; however, some outpatient 
video consultation already does take place including activity 
in dermatology, orthopedics and surgery, especially with 
stoma. 
    The report described considerable potential in outpatient 
follow-up by videoconference. For example, there were 
approximately 115,000 outpatient visits to the UNN per 
year. By supposing that one-quarter were from remote areas 
where videoconferencing would be preferable to travel, and 
303
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

that one-quarter of these appointments were suitable for 
videoconferencing (e.g. follow-up or "outpatient control"), 
this would represent an additional 7000 conferences per 
year, i.e. this would double the present number of 
videoconferences, and would increase the number of patient 
consultations by about ten times. Considering the latter as a 
hypothetical statement, I will address experiences from 
Norway when it comes to optimizing potentials next. Are 
operational and pragmatic strategies considered successful? 
 
B. Goal attainment:  experiences 
    Three papers have commented directly on different 
conditions for goal attainment understood as increased use 
of ICT’s in health care for Norwegian services.  
    In psychiatry for instance, videoconferencing was mostly 
used for meetings, supervision and lectures, and to a lesser 
degree clinically with the patient present. Lack of 
videoconferencing equipment in collaborating institutions 
was identified as an inhibiting factor in use. A gap between 
the potential of videoconferencing and its actual utilization 
in Norway's mental health sector was described [7]. 
    One paper accentuated user support, training, research 
potential, financial incentives and interactions between 
clinicians and ICT personnel as important factors in 
motivating health-care personnel to use telemedicine [8]. 
In another paper, factors for successful implementation    
were: usability, user participation, adequacy of training, 
potential for research, stated requirements for Mean Time 
Between Failures (MTBF) and communication between ICT 
personnel and clinicians [1]. 
 
C. Collaboration 
Motivation 
and 
good 
communicative 
interaction 
between ICT personnel and clinicians were among the 
identified heterogeneous conditions for use. The Norwegian 
health care system is considered well-organized within its 
two main sectors; primary health and long-term care on one 
hand, and hospitals and specialist services on the other. 
However, the relationship between them lacks mediating 
structures. In 2003, the work of a governmental committee 
on collaboration was commented upon by Romøren et al 
[9]. The committee was described as having a sharp eye for 
the power game between primary and secondary health care, 
with the latter as the stronger. Their report argued for 
equalization as an important prerequisite for developing 
sound collaboration and coordination, and against primary 
economic or organizational reforms as effective means to 
optimize potentials in co-ordination and collaboration.  
The new health care reform, the Coordination Reform, is 
one initiative to ensure high quality services across sectors 
and between health care levels [2]. The Coordination 
Reform represents a shift in perspective away from the 
operational to the administrative level and appeals to the 
need for economic or organizational reforms in order to 
foster collaboration and quality. The reform also represents 
a shift towards a focus on collective goal attainment, for 
instance via care pathways, as opposed to internal goal 
attainment for specific sections or institutions of health care.   
In sum, goals of collaboration between the different 
sectors of health care, including strategies ranging from 
technological, operational, administrative, economic and 
organizational reforms were described, as well as challenges 
thereof. Active mechanisms for collaboration between 
different professionals and institutions will be further 
explored and conceptualized in the remaining phases of the 
project. 
Collaboration between colleagues within the same 
profession and institution could prove to be parts of another 
conceptual model. Since the 1960s, substantial development 
in the uses of video-conferencing (VC) among medical 
personnel has been reported, including surgeons who have 
adopted the technology [10]. VC is widely used for 
telementoring surgical procedures and in trauma and 
emergency medicine. VC is also used by multidisciplinary 
teams and for the follow-up of patients after surgery. VC is 
considered a common clinical tool for surgeons, providing a 
great opportunity to alter surgical practice and to offer 
patients the best expertise despite especially great distances 
in rural areas. 
A systematic review of inter professional collaboration 
(IPC) in health care reported that videoconferencing 
compared to audio conferencing in multidisciplinary case 
conferences showed mixed results. More rigorous, cluster 
randomized studies with an explicit focus on IPC and its 
measurement, were suggested to provide better evidence of 
the impact of practice-based IPC interventions on 
professional practice and healthcare outcomes. Studies 
should include qualitative methods to provide insight into 
how the interventions affect collaboration and how 
improved collaboration contributes to changes in outcomes 
[11]. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
1) How can goal attainment, using ICTs in health care be 
addressed? 2) How can collaboration and integration of care 
be addressed? As evident, the three papers discussing goal 
attainment consider use of telemedicine as a success in 
itself, and the authors discuss conditions for obtaining more 
use. Use is a necessary condition for goal attainment. Taken 
together, coordination, collaboration, ICTs, economic 
incentives, power relations, organizational reforms and 
motivation were suggested as influencing use and goal 
attainment. These are highly heterogeneous influences. 
In addition, collaboration and coordination seem to be 
considered both conditions for use and as parts of the goal. 
The impression from publications is that goal attainment 
and collaboration is intertwined, dependent parts of a 
complex array of factors, actors and relations, ranging from 
micro processes to overall political and economic decisions. 
In the next section theoretical resources are proposed and 
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

discussed for approaching and making sense of such 
complex arrays of factors influencing use of VC in health 
care and better collaboration for goal attainment. For this 
purpose, the concept of assemblage is explored after a short 
introduction to basic assumptions about ICTs and goal 
attainment within different theoretical perspectives.  
 
A. Basic assumptions in the studied literature: ICTs and 
goal attainment  
 “Integrated care” and “improved patient pathways” are 
two main goals set by political priority through the 
Coordination Reform. These goals include operational, 
technological, organizational and economic regulations to 
foster collaboration and integration. Videoconference in 
different technological versions is one of the tools 
considered.  
How clinical VC can contribute or be a means to achieve 
the goals involves complex processes. Processes of use, 
innovation and improvement have been considered with 
different basic assumptions of the roles and power of ICTs, 
their protocols and software standards:  
 
Information and communication technologies have 
become considered an institution into themselves 
by producing cognitive, normative and regulative 
effects in specific domains [12]. This view is 
stemming from Roger’s ideas about diffusion of 
innovations first published in the 1960’s [13]. This 
is a determinist view of technologies.  
 
Information and communication technologies have 
conversely been considered as both used and 
produced through and by the meaning that actors 
attribute to them in daily practices [14]. These are 
the social constructivist views, also pointing to 
individual actors or groups of actors and their 
motivations for use.  
 
Information and communication technologies  have 
also been considered tools used by authorities or 
industry for governing behavior and institutions 
[15]. These are the instrumentalist views of ICTs. 
 
B. Assemblages 
In the papers reporting experiences and the policy 
documents referred to above, ICTs are considered with partly 
contradictory assumptions according to the perspectives 
outlined above. According to the policy documents, they are 
described as one of many factors instrumentally influencing 
goals, as having inherent regulatory effects and as strategic 
instruments. A body of research different from the 
determinist, social constructivist and instrumentalist views, 
has developed a terminology to address such complexity.  
Some main characteristics from this body of research are 
described below, and their relevance for the empirical study 
to follow will then be discussed.  
In this body of research, ICTs are described as one 
influence in heterogeneous and dynamic assemblages 
stretching from micro to macro, gaining power to influence 
goal attainment in ever changing constellations. Power is 
considered to be an empirical question in such assemblages, 
resulting from ongoing transparent negotiations, subtle 
power games and/or material, mental or scientific resource 
allocation [16-19]. 
Assemblages comprise in various mixes and connections 
a plethora of actors such as professionals, political 
authorities, technical agencies, bureaucratic organizations, 
ICT providers, service firms, regulatory bodies, software 
engineering companies, and research centers, together with 
the technical, functional and normative components with 
which they run their transactions. In different and 
unpredictable manners, these influence the faith of goals. 
All these actors are subject to being strengthened, 
disappearing or changing due to the processes.  
An assemblage constitutes a loosely structured, ever 
evolving ecology of heterogeneous elements where 
boundaries and linkages among administrative bodies 
cannot be unequivocally fixed, tending to shift and drift in 
time. Assemblages are always ad hoc, thereby needing 
constant re-conceptualization. What seems to emerge as a 
distinctive feature of this institutional ecology is that 
coordination and execution of tasks are equally dependent 
on formal, normatively-based authority structures and on 
functional linkages and communication standards and 
protocols. The overall functioning of assemblages and the 
viability of the ecology itself are based as much on 
communications and functional relations as authority and 
norms [16].  
The regulatory and enforcement capabilities are thus 
considered to be equally embodied in formal laws and 
regulations, and into technical standards and devices 
brought about by the technology, while the share of the 
latter pair is constantly growing. The combination of 
technical standards and software codes with bureaucratic 
procedures and legal codes give rise to novel institutional 
arrangements and practices, where ICTs increasingly 
provide the implicit context for the performance of practices 
and the overall operation of the administrative agencies. 
One of the visible consequences is that normativity gets dis-
aggregated into specialized sub-assemblages [17]. Control 
over goal attainment is therefore an ongoing achievement 
and not predictable. 
These assumptions and concepts are underlying an 
approach to scientific inquiry submerged under the broad 
category of complexity studies in which  the ways 
individual roles, groups and organizations emerge, evolve 
and adapt to their environment are studied [20]. 
 
C. Assemblages for studying goal attainment and 
collaboration for integration of care 
Formative 
and 
naturalistic 
methodologies 
that 
acknowledge telemedicine as an ongoing collaborative 
achievement have been recommended for assessments [21].  
305
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Such approaches engage with stakeholders, including 
patients to produce and conceptualize new and effective 
telemedicine innovations. How may collaborating clinicians 
and patients be attended to in assemblages? Motivation was 
considered an important condition for use and this subject 
area will be addressed in the continued project. In recent 
social science work, the force and power of individual 
actors’ evaluative relations to their daily activities has been 
highlighted [22]. Efforts to define and make professional 
excellence viable are considered to provide the emotional 
energy necessary to support and domesticate positive 
innovations. Involvement by clinical staff, motivation and 
communication were considered as important conditions for 
use, and are also inherent to the goal.  
From the discussion above, the research questions for 
the second part of the sociological project can be more 
precisely defined: How are operational, technological, 
organizational and economic regulations, standards and 
reforms 
accommodated 
and 
reconfigured 
in 
daily 
collaboration using VC in clinical practices to obtain goals? 
How are improvements understood?  
In order to analyze mechanisms, the project will more 
specifically consider: 
 
Which actors and factors make up the 
practices? 
 
What are their motives? 
 
What and who are enrolled? 
 
What and who are excluded and why? 
 
Which support is gained from what/who? 
 
What 
opposition 
is 
encountered 
from 
whom/what? 
 
What is changed and how are new models of 
VC collaboration enacted? 
 
How are goals of collaboration and integration 
of care understood and conceptualized? 
By including accommodation in the question, the roles 
of individual actors, their knowledge and philosophies are 
acknowledged. These may vary between different actors and 
institutions. The research project therefore also addresses 
challenges and solutions of a philosophical character. Goals 
might be differently understood and the project will take 
into consideration different opinions and constructs.  
A few challenges concerning collaboration and quality 
goals are briefly considered here. By looking at the 
combination of operational, strategic, motivational and 
material influences, the questions asked point to a deeper 
challenge for health care, for instance as described by 
Timmermans & Berg [23, 24]. They consider the dualism 
between what has been conceptualized as humanist care and 
technological standards as crucial to balance for health 
services to be sustainable 
Such contradictions have been described between 
primary care and specialized services as units, and represent 
an underlying gap when it comes to collaboration. How may 
reconfiguration of standards in domestication processes 
reconcile the dualism between standardized care and 
humanized care? Contradictions in goals of humanizing care 
with the use of technologies, standards and structures in 
health care will be addressed in the project. 
A second challenge that will be addressed within this 
perspective is discussed by Sayer [22]. Reconciling the 
dualism between normativity and values on one hand, and 
reason may prove to be an active mechanism for obtaining a 
viable practice of integration and collaboration.The project 
will address such underlying philosophical issues in case 
they are made relevant for understanding active mechanisms 
involved in goal attainment of collaboration and integration. 
The agency in everyday evaluative actions relevant to 
motivation for collaboration will be discussed additionally. 
The question is to consider how collaboration and 
improved care pathways are performed and done beneficial 
to patients, nurses and doctors, taking all aspects, 
regulations, standards and reforms into consideration or not. 
The point is to explore how VC collaboration is performed 
in practices in ways that professionals and patients 
experience as good.  
In addition this continued project will take into 
consideration deeper philosophical contradictions described 
by Timmermans and Berg, and Sayer, as they affect or are 
affected in efforts to obtain goals.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
I conclude with questions, assumptions, hypotheses and 
data sources for future work. The questions that the 
discussion point to are: How are units and dualisms 
affected? What are the vital components of viable practices? 
My assumption is that units and dualisms will be reconciled 
in situations where collaboration is performed via VC in 
ways that professionals and patients experience as good. 
The hypothesis is that the approach of heterogeneous 
assemblages will sensitize such discussions. 
For the empirical study to come, a wide range of data will 
be collected from observations, interviews, local data bases 
and existing literature. The project will provide models of 
conditions under which VC works and where goals are 
considered as obtained. The collaboration models will 
include knowledge about what clinical areas, under which 
circumstances, and for which patients VC works according 
to goals. In addition, it will include knowledge about how 
goals are obtained, that is: what are the active mechanisms 
involved? It is underscored that use in itself is not   
necessarily 
considered 
a 
success 
and 
the 
users’ 
understanding of goal attainment will be described and 
discussed. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The project was funded by the North Norwegian Health 
Authorities 2013 and 2014. 
 
 
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

REFERENCES 
[1] Hartvigsen, G., et al. Challenges in telemedicine and eHealth: 
lessons learned from 20 years with telemedicine in Tromso. In 
MEDINFO 2007: Proceedings of the 12th World Congress on 
Health (Medical) Informatics: Building Sustainable Health 
Systems. 2007. IOS Press. 
[2] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, Report no. 
47 to the Storting. The Coordination Reform, Proper 
treatment - at the right place at the right time 2009, Ministry 
of Health and Care Services: Oslo, Norway. 
[3] Sood, S., et al., What is telemedicine? A collection of 104 
peer-reviewed perspectives and theoretical underpinnings. 
Telemed J E Health, 2007. 13(5): p. 573-90. 
[4] Al-Hadithy, N. and Ghosh, S., Smartphones and the plastic 
surgeon. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg, 2013. 66(6): p. 155-
61. 
[5] Edirippulige, S., et al., A systematic review of telemedicine 
services for residents in long term care facilities. J Telemed 
Telecare, 2013. 
[6] Paul, L.A., Hassija, C.M., and Clapp, J.D., Technological 
advances in the treatment of trauma: a review of promising 
practices. Behav Modif, 2012. 36(6): p. 897-923. 
[7] Hanssen, B., Wangberg, S.C., and Gammon, D., Use of 
videoconferencing in Norwegian psychiatry. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, 2007. 13(3): p. 130-135. 
[8] Norum, J., et al., Prioritisation of telemedicine services for 
large 
scale 
implementation 
in 
Norway. 
Journal 
of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, 2007. 13(4): p. 185-192. 
[9] Romøren, T.I., Torjesen, D.O., and Landmark, B., Promoting 
coordination in Norwegian health care. International Journal 
of Integrated Care, 2011. 11(Special 10th Anniversary 
Edition). 
[10] Augestad, K.M. and Lindsetmo, R.O., Overcoming distance: 
video-conferencing as a clinical and educational tool among 
surgeons. World Journal of Surgery, 2009. 33(7): p. 1356-
1365. 
[11] Zwarenstein, 
M., 
Goldman, 
J., 
and 
Reeves, 
S., 
Interprofessional collaboration: effects of practice-based 
interventions on professional practice and healthcare 
outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2009. 3. 
[12] Kallinikos, J., The consequences of information: Institutional 
implications of technological change. 2007: Edward Elgar 
Publishing. 
[13] Rogers, E.M., Diffusion of innovations. 2010: Simon and 
Schuster. 
[14] Bijker, W., Hughes, T.P., and Pinch, T., The Social 
Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the 
Sociology and History of Technology. 1987, Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
[15] Bertot, J.C., Jaeger, P.T., and Grimes, J.M., Using ICTs to 
create a culture of transparency: E-government and social 
media as openness and anti-corruption tools for societies. 
Government Information Quarterly, 2010. 27(3): p. 264-271. 
[16] Contini, F. and Lanzara, G.F., ICT and innovation in the 
public sector [Electronic book]: European studies in the 
making of e-government. 2009: Palgrave Macmillan. 
[17] Sassen, S., Territory, authority, rights: From medieval to 
global assemblages. Vol.7. 2006: Cambridge Univ Press. 
[18] Latour, B., Reassembling the social-an introduction to actor-
network-theory. Oxford University Press, Sep 2005. pp. 316.  
[19] Law, J., Notes on the theory of the actor-network: ordering, 
strategy, and heterogeneity. Systems Practice, 1992. 5(4): p. 
379-393. 
[20] Greenhalgh, T., et al., Diffusion of innovations in service 
organizations: systematic review and recommendations. 
Milbank Quarterly, 2004. 82(4): p. 581-629. 
[21] Ekeland, A.G., Bowes, A., and Flottorp, S., Methodologies for 
assessing telemedicine: A systematic review of reviews. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 2011. 
[22] Sayer, A., Why things matter to people: Social science, values 
and ethical life. 2011: Cambridge University Press. 
[23] Timmermans, S. and Berg, M., The gold standard: The 
challenge of evidence-based medicine and standardization in 
health care. 2003: Temple University Press Philadelphia. 
[24] Timmermans, S., Berg, M., The practice of medical 
technology. Sociology of health & illness, 2003. 25(3): p. 97-
114. 
 
 
 
307
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

