PESARO 2014
The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in
Complex Systems and Applications
ISBN: 978-1-61208-321-6
February 23 - 27, 2014
Nice, France
PESARO 2014 Editors
Wolfgang Leister, Norsk Regnesentral (Norwegian Computing Center), Norway

PESARO 2014
Foreword
The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex
Systems and Applications (PESARO 2014), held between February 23rd-27th, 2014 in Nice, France,
continued the inaugural event dedicated to fundamentals, techniques and experiments to specify,
design, and deploy systems and applications under given constraints on performance, safety and
robustness.
There is a relation between organizational, design and operational complexity of organization
and systems and the degree of robustness and safety under given performance metrics. More complex
systems and applications might not be necessarily more profitable, but are less robust. There are trade-
offs involved in designing and deploying distributed systems. Some designing technologies have a
positive influence on safety and robustness, even operational performance is not optimized. Under
constantly changing system infrastructure and user behaviors and needs, there is a challenge in
designing complex systems and applications with a required level of performance, safety and
robustness.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the PESARO 2014 Technical
Program Committee. The creation of such a high quality conference program would not have been
possible without their involvement. We also kindly thank all the authors who dedicated much of their
time and efforts to contribute to PESARO 2014. We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the
final conference program consisted of top quality contributions.
Also, this event could not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the PESARO 2014 organizing committee
for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this professional meeting a success.
We hope that PESARO 2014 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas and
results between academia and industry and for the promotion of progress in the field of performance,
safety and robustness in complex systems and applications.
We are convinced that the participants found the event useful and communications very open.
We also hope the attendees enjoyed the charm of Nice, France.
PESARO Advisory Committee:
Piotr Zwierzykowski, Poznan University of Technology, Poland
Wolfgang Leister, Norsk Regnesentral (Norwegian Computing Center), Norway
Yulei Wu, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Harold Liu, IBM Research, China

PESARO 2014
Committee
PESARO Advisory Committee
Piotr Zwierzykowski, Poznan University of Technology, Poland
Wolfgang Leister, Norsk Regnesentral (Norwegian Computing Center), Norway
Yulei Wu, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Harold Liu, IBM Research, China
PESARO 2014 Technical Program Committee
Amr Aissani, USTHB - Algiers, Algeria
Salimur Choudhury, Queen's University - Kingston, Canada
Dieter Claeys, Ghent University, Belgium
Juan Antonio Cordero, École Polytechnique / INRIA, France
Nadir Farhi, IFSTTAR/COSYS/GRETTIA, France
John-Austen Francisco, Rutgers University - Piscataway, USA
Mina Giurguis, Texas State University - San Marcos, USA
Mesut Günes, FU-Berlin, USA
Charles Kamhoua Kenmogne, Air Force Research Laboratory, USA
Daniel Kosiorowski, Cracow University of Economics, Poland
Wolfgang Leister, Norsk Regnesentral (Norwegian Computing Center), Norway
Harold Liu, IBM Research, China
Olaf Maennel, Loughborough University, UK
Kia Makki, Technological University of America (TUA), USA
Stefano Marrone, Seconda Università di Napoli, Italy
Birgit Milius, Institut fuer Eisenbahnwesen und Verkehrssicherung (IfEV) /Technische Universitaet –
Braunschweig, Germany
Asoke Nandi, Brunel University, UK
Maciej Piechowiak, Kazimierz Wielki University - Bydgoszcz, Poland
M. Zubair Rafique, KU Leuven, Belgium
Roger S. Rivett, Land Rover - Gaydon, UK
Dhananjay Singh, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), South Korea
Mukesh Singhal, University of California, Merced, USA
Young-Joo Suh, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
Yuejin Tan, National University of Defense and Technology - Changsha, China
Yang Wang, Georgia State University, USA
Yun Wang, Bradley University - Peoria, USA
Jun Wu, National University of Defense and Technology, China
Yanwei Wu, Western Oregon University, USA
Yulei Wu, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Gerhard Wunder, Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institut - Technical University Berlin, Germany
Gaoxi Xiao, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Bin Xie, InfoBeyond Technology LLC - Louisville, USA
Bashir Yahya, University of Versailles, France
Nabila Zbiri, Université d'Evry Val d'Essonne, France
Yanmin Zhu, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Piotr Zwierzykowski, Poznan University of Technology, Poland

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Automatic Decomposition and Allocation of Safety Integrity Level Using System of Linear Equations
Mohamed Slim Dhouibi, Jean-Marc Perquis, Laurent Saintis, and Mihaela Barreau
1
An Evaluation Scenario for Adaptive Security in eHealth
Wolfgang Leister, Mohamed Hamdi, Habtamu Abie, and Stefan Poslad
6
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Automatic Decomposition and Allocation of Safety
Integrity Level Using System of Linear Equations
Mohamed Slim Dhouibi, Jean-Marc Perquis
Valeo Etudes Electroniques
Creteil, France
Email: {slim.dhouibi, Jean-marc.prequis }@valeo.com
Laurent Saintis, Mihaela Barreau
Universit´e d’Angers
Angers, France
Email: {laurent.saintis, mihaela.barreau}@univ-angers.fr
Abstract—In ISO-26262, the Automotive safety integrity level
(ASIL) represents the degree of rigour that should be applied in
the development, implementation and veriﬁcation of a require-
ment in order to reduce and control the risk in the ﬁnal product.
The ASILs are allocated to the safety requirements which are
inherited by the subsystems and components in a hierarchical
approach. During the allocation process, the safety requirements
could be decomposed over redundant elements. It is referred to
as ASIL decomposition and is an important feature, as it helps
to reduce the complexity and the development cost of the design.
The decomposition could lead, however, to different allocations.
In this paper, we propose an approach to ﬁnd all the possible
allocations in order to assist the analyst in reaching the optimal
allocation.
Index Terms— ASIL decomposition, ISO 26262
I. INTRODUCTION
ISO-26262 [1] is the functional safety standard for electrical
and electronic systems in road vehicles. It focuses on the
requirements, processes and methods to deal with the effects
of systematic failures and unsystematic hardware failures.
Published in 2011, this standard is an adaptation of IEC-61508
[2]. It has inherited and adapted different concepts such as the
concept of Safety integrity level (SIL) which was redeﬁned
as Automotive Safety Integrity Level (ASIL). Henceforth, the
safety integrity levels are deﬁned and ordered by criticality as
follows: Qm (not safety critical), ASIL A, ASIL B, ASIL C,
ASIL D(most stringent).
The safety requirements are attributed one of these values
and are subsequently inherited in a hierarchical approach by
the sub-systems and the components. The ASIL determines
the qualitative and quantitative levels that the element, imple-
menting the safety requirement, should meet and the necessary
safety activities to be conducted during the safety life cycle
to ensure that the risk is brought to an acceptable level.
The ASIL allocated to the safety requirements implemented
by the subsystems or components heavily impacts the concepts
and components choice. In [3], a study on the impact of the
ASIL levels on the design is conducted. It gives an overview
on the capable architecture concepts to meet each safety level.
The redundancies needed to be introduced in the concept
to meet the ASIL levels and the corresponding development
effort, let us conclude that, often, the overall development cost
depends on the requirements safety level. The Higher levels
lead to higher costs.
In Part 9 of the standard, an ASIL decomposition approach
is introduced allowing to reduce the safety levels by decom-
posing the safety requirements over redundant and sufﬁciently
independent elements. The decomposition when applied re-
sults in safety requirements with lower ASIL allocated to
the redundant elements. Since higher ASIL implies higher
cost, the ASIL decomposition can help to meet the safety
requirements without incurring excessive costs. Its application
must though veriﬁes different requirements that are detailed
in [4]. The reader can refer to [4] and [5] for examples of
application of ASIL decomposition.
The decomposition follows predeﬁned patterns. In Fig 1,
we can see the different applicable patterns. For example, an
ASIL D could be decomposed in three different ways.
Fig. 1. ASIL Decomposition Patterns
The resulting decomposed requirements could also be de-
composed subsequently, since, multilevel decomposition is al-
lowed by the standard. In the design cycle, the designers could
resort to ASIL decomposition at different levels : system, sub-
systems, software and hardware. This results in multiple pos-
sible allocations. Finding an effective allocation that answers
to the different safety goals without incurring unnecessary
development constraints is crucial. Often manually performed,
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

the complexity of the systems and the multiple failures modes
of its sub-systems make it error prone. An automatic approach
to allocate the ASIL is indeed needed to ensure the consistency
and the optimality of the solution.
In this paper, we propose an approach for an automatic
decomposition and allocation of ASILs. It allows ﬁnding all
the possible allocations not only with respect to the different
safety goals but also with respect to the analyst preferences.
The approach is based on the minimal cut sets extracted
from the fault tree for the considered safety goals. A matrix
approach is used to formulate and retrieve the solution set.
The paper is organized as follows: In the second section, we
review the previous works on the automatic allocation of safety
levels. In the third section, we present our approach with a
small example to explain the different steps. In the last section,
we present the experimental evaluation results on a generic
example.
II. ADVANCES ON AUTOMATIC SAFETY LEVELS
ALLOCATION
The SIL concept was adopted by the standards derived
from IEC 61508. The allocation and decomposition process
differs though among these standards. For a comparison of
the different concepts, the reader may refer to [16]. These
differences in the allocation approach makes the works on de-
termination of SILs such as [6],[7] and [8] unapplicable in the
ISO 26262 context. The cited works are based on probabilistic
approaches to determine the SIL. While, in the ISO 26262,
the ASIL determines the quantitative targets concerning the
random hardware failures and not the other way around.
In [9], a tool for Development Assurance Level (DAL)
allocation, i.e, DALCULATOR is proposed. The allocation
and decomposition problem is solved using a Pseudo-Boolean
logic. The allocation approach in the ARP-4754, a guideline
for development of civil aircraft and systems, seems to present
more similarities than the previous works in the fact that it
is a qualitative approach. But, such tool can not be used in
an automotive context. Unlike the ASIL decomposition, the
tool does not aim to a requirement decomposition over the
redundant elements. It aims at downgrading the DAL to the
really needed level in case of independent elements.
In the ISO 26262 context, [10] proposed an approach to
allocate the ASILs to the system components. The allocation
process and decomposition algorithm were implemented in
HIP-HOPS, a safety analysis and optimization tool [15].
The proposed algorithm exhaustively explores the different
possible ASIL allocations and leaves to the analyst the choice
of the allocation to be implemented afterwards. This algorithm
was enhanced for better performance and presented in [14].
Although the algorithm has the advantage of ﬁnding all the
possible allocations, it has a main drawback. The processing
time could reach dozens of hours for large scale systems.
The approach in [11], on the other hand, avoided the
exhaustive search by aiming to ﬁnd an optimal allocation.
In this approach, numerical values are associated to ASILs
and are used as a cost indicator. It could be considered as
a simple cost model. As for the allocation problem, it is
interpreted as a linear program. The set of MCS are interpreted
as the constraints. Whereas, the objective function is the cost
of the system, considered in this case as the sum of the
ASILs allocated to the different components of the system.
The main advantages of this approach are the simplicity of
implementation and the processing time. The approach takes
also into account the preferred ASIL for speciﬁc components,
which makes it more adapted to industrial cases where the
reused components are preferred to be allocated the same
ASIL. But, the simple cost model adopted here is the main
disadvantage. It suggests in this case that subsystems or
components with the same ASIL have the same cost or impact
on the solution rating. The result of the optimization could be
misleading since subsystems, at the same ASIL, with different
complexities or sizes have not necessarily the same cost. A
more elaborated cost model is, in this case, necessary for better
optimization results.
For large scale systems, [12] and [13] preferred the opti-
mization heuristics as an approach to reach an optimal allo-
cation. The heuristics are known to have better performance
in larger problems. The solution is found faster but there is
no guarantee that the found solution is a global optimal one.
[12] used a penalty based algorithm whereas [13] used a Tabu
search algorithm. They tested the approach using different
generic simple cost models (linear, logarithmic ...). The results
of the runs showed that the obtained solution depends tightly
on the used cost model. Though no efﬁcient cost model
that would take into account the different parameters were
proposed.
In the industry, different cost models are used. But, as far
we know, no cost model that efﬁciently take into account
the impact of the ASIL on the development cost has been
proposed. We think that in this case it would be complicated
to use the linear program and heuristics solving approaches.
On one hand, their results depend tightly on the used cost
model and on the other hand, they limit the analyst/designer
to a unique solution. Thus, we propose, here, an alternative
approach to ﬁnd the possible allocations by interpreting the
problem as system of linear equations.
III. ASIL ALLOCATION AS A SYSTEM OF LINEAR
EQUATIONS
The decomposition patterns speciﬁed by the standard can be
formalized. By assigning numerical values to the ASIL (QM
= 0, A = 1, B = 2, C = 3, D = 4), the patterns are veriﬁed by
the following equation:
X
ASILi = ASILSR
(1)
The decomposition is in respect with the patterns if the sum
of the values of the allocated ASILs are equal to the original
ASIL value of the decomposed safety requirement.
The obtained requirement from decomposition are imple-
mented by sufﬁciently independent redundant elements. These
elements ensure, each separately, the non violation of the
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

safety requirement. Thus, the safety requirement can be de-
composed over elements if their loss, only jointly, lead to the
violation of the safety requirement. In a functional architecture
of the system, these elements are functions.
When an architecture for the system is conceived, safety
analysis techniques such as FTA can then lead us to the
functions over which an ASIL decomposition could be applied.
MCS helps identifying these functions whose loss jointly
leads to the violation of the safety requirements. The safety
requirement implemented by these functions can then be
allocated ASIL values that veriﬁes equation (1).
Let us assume from this point onward that the ASIL
allocated to a function in the architecture refers to the ASIL
allocated to the safety requirement implemented by this func-
tion. In this case, for every MCS leading to violation of a
safety requirement, the functions Fi in the architecture veriﬁes
the following equation where the coefﬁcient ai is null if the
corresponding function loss is not in the MCS and equal to 1
otherwise
X
ai × ASILF i = ASILSR
(2)
Applied to all the MCS for all the safety requirements (SRi),
the allocation problem could be interpreted as a system of
linear equations. In a matrix form, a possible allocation should
be solution to the equation (3)


a11
· · ·
a1n
...
...
...
am1
· · ·
amn

 ×


ASILF 1
...
ASILF n

 =


ASILSR1
...
ASILSRn

 (3)
During this phase, the analyst could prefer a function to
be at a speciﬁed ASIL. In other cases, he could specify if
two functions are not sufﬁciently independent. It is possible
to retrieve the solutions that match these preferences. An
extra constraint could be added to the system in the form
of an equation. To avoid increasing the size of the system
and the resolution time, we take these constraints into account
by adapting the original system. To ﬁx a variable at the
preferred ASIL, we withdraw its corresponding column from
the system after extracting it from the left part of the equation
(3). In order to take into account the non dependency of two
variables, we merge their corresponding columns using logic
’OR’ operation.
Once obtained, the augmented matrix form of the system
taking into account all the constraints, we proceed to solving
it. Different solving approaches could be used to solve the
linear systems. The allocation problem, though, admits often
multiple solutions. Thus, many of these approaches could not
be applied since the obtained system’s matrix is not always
square. The simplest approach, in this case, would be to iterate
through all the possible values of the variables. Instead we
propose to use a classical approach using the Row Reduced
Echelon Form (RREF) of the system.
The RREF is generally computed using Gauss-Jordan elim-
ination. It allows to identify the basic and the free variables
which corresponds to the columns with no leading entry. In
order to ﬁnd the solutions, we proceed into allocating to these
variables a value in the the range of ASILs numerical values,
{0,..,4}, and deduce the rest of the variables accordingly.
The echelon form could also be used to test the solvability
of the system. If equations of the form 0 = Cst, where Cst is
non null, exist, we may deduce that no possible allocation can
be found. In this case, the analyst could proceed into ignoring
the preferred ASIL or review the system.
The major steps of the solving approach are described as
follows:
Algorithm 1 ASIL Allocation Solving approach
Input: Mat(m,n+1): the system augmented matrix form
m : number of MCS
n : number of FM
dependent-var : list of dependent variables
preferred-asil : list of functions and their preferred ASIL
Output: Set of possible allocations
Algorithm:
initialization;
Mat ← Merge-dependent (Mat,dependent-var)
Mat ← Fix-value(Mat,preferred-asil)
Mat ← RREF(Mat)
List-free-var ← ﬁnd-free-var (Mat)
Iterate through the possible values of the free variables
{
Fix-value(Mat, List-free-var)
if solve(Mat) in {0,..,4} then
Solution = Solution ∪ solve(Mat)
end if
}
The RREF and solve functions allows respectively, to cal-
culate the row reduced echelon form and to solve the system.
The Fix-value function, on the other hand, allows to ﬁx the
value of the variables in the systems. It consists of extracting
a new system from the original one by eliminating the ﬁxed
variables. The merge-dependent function allows to merge the
columns corresponding to dependent variables.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
A. Example
Next is an illustrative example for the decomposition. We
consider a system with two safety requirements (SR1 and
SR2) rated ASIL D and ASIL C respectively. The functional
elements F1 ... F5 implement these safety requirements. The
Fault Tree in Fig.2 describes how the loss of these functions
could lead to the violation of the safety requirements. SR1
and SR2 can be decomposed over the element whose failure
lead to the violation of the requirement. For example, SR1
can be decomposed over F2, F3 and F4. In order to ﬁnd the
different possible ASIL combinations that could be allocated
to these elements, we use the approach presented in the
previous section.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Fig. 2. FT example
We apply the algorithm described above to explain step by
step how it works.
From this FT, three MCS lead to the violation of the SRs.
• (Loss of F1) : ASIL D
• (Loss of F2, Loss of F3, Loss of F4) : ASIL D
• (Loss of F3, Loss of F4, Loss of F5) : ASIL C
We suppose that the functions F1 to F5 are sufﬁciently
independent, as required to apply the decomposition. The
ASILs allocated to these functions should verify then :
ASIL(F1) = 4
(4)
ASIL(F2) + ASIL(F3) + ASIL(F4) = 4
(5)
ASIL(F3) + ASIL(F4) + ASIL(F5) = 3
(6)
The possible allocations are thus solutions to the following
equation :


1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1

 ×



ASIL(F1)
...
ASIL(F5)


 =
4
4
3
(7)
At this level, it is possible to take into account the preferred
ASILs for a speciﬁc event.
For example, if we would like the ’F3’ to be allocated an
ASIL C. The system could be modiﬁed to take this information
into account by withdrawing the corresponding variable from
the system :
Using the augmented matrix:


1
0
0
0
0
4
0
1
1
1
0
4
0
0
1
1
1
3


we extract from the last column the third column C3
multiplied by the numerical value associated to ASIL C
C6 ← C6 − (3 × C3). C3 is then removed and the system
matrix becomes as follows :


1
0
0
0
4
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1
0


The next step is to reduce the matrix to its row echelon
form. It shows that the variables ’x4’ and ’x5’, corresponding
to the fourth and ﬁfth column in the matrix, are the only free
variables (in the case with no preferred ASIL).


1
0
0
0
0
4
0
1
0
0
−1
1
0
0
1
1
1
3


In this case, we will have 25 iterations as these variables
take the values from 0 to 4. We will limit here to the two ﬁrst
iteration where (x4 = 0, x5 = 0) and (x4 = 0, x5 = 1) . 1st
iteration : The system to solve becomes


1
0
0
4
0
1
0
1
0
0
1
3


A
ﬁrst
allocation
could
be
than
deduced
where:
ASIL(F1)=4;
ASIL(F2)=1;
ASIL(F3)=3;
ASIL(F4)=0;
ASIL(F5)=0;
2nd iteration : The system to solve becomes


1
0
0
4
0
1
0
2
0
0
1
2


A
second
allocation
could
be
than
deduced
where:
ASIL(F1)=4;
ASIL(F2)=2;
ASIL(F3)=2;
ASIL(F4)=0;
ASIL(F5)=1;
Continuing the next iterations will allow us to ﬁnd the rest
of the possible solutions.
B. Results
Applied on the example, it was possible to retrieve all the
possible allocations, 10 in total. The processing time was very
small, less than a second. We applied it also on different
generic examples along with the algorithm proposed in [14]
(Algorithm 2) to compare the results and the processing time.
The examples are inspired from VALEO project examples in
their size and the FT structure. The tests were carried out on
a machine equipped with an Intel I5 processor and 4 GB of
RAM.
Example Size
Nbr possible allocations
Alg 1
Alg 2
5 Functions, 3 MCS
10
0,01
0,1
10 Functions, 19 MCS
1
0,09
356,16
24 Functions, 30 MCS
3
0,04
0,34
48 Functions, 44 MCS
75
0,76
1,4
TABLE I
TESTS PROCESSING TIME
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Both algorithms succeeded in ﬁnding all the possible alloca-
tions. The processing time logically increased with the size of
the problem. But, the algorithms were impacted differently.
The algorithm 2 is more sensitive to the length of MCS
because of its resolution approach which is based on iterations
over the possible allocations for each MCS. With an example
where the mean length of the MCS is a little higher, a gap
appears between the performances of the two algorithm. Our
approach seems, on the other hand, less impacted by this
issue. Our approach takes also into account the independence
parameter into account, an important factor that can inﬂuence
the allocations which is not taken into account in the algorithm
2. It has also the advantage of taking into account the preferred
ASIL and the possibility of avoiding unnecessary resolution
effort if no solution exists.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In the automotive industry, the safety requirements have a
considerable impact on the safety critical systems architecture
and cost. The allocation and decomposition of ASILs in
the ISO-26262 context is crucial to reach an optimal design
whether in complexity or in development cost. Yet the size and
complexity of the architectures make the allocation process
difﬁcult and error prone if done manually. Several works pro-
posed approaches to automate the process. These approaches
provide often a unique optimal solution whereas multiple al-
ternatives are often possible. The objective of these approaches
being to assist the analyst or designer, reducing the choice to
a unique solution is limiting. Thus, we proposed in this article
an approach to interpret and solve the ASIL decomposition
problem. It is capable of providing multiple solutions with
acceptable processing time for small and medium size cases.
Interpreting the decomposition problem as a system of linear
equations allowed not only to ﬁnd all the possible allocations
but also to take into account the preferences of the analyst and
the dependency between the functions. Whereas in this paper
we focused on exploring the different possible allocations, we
think that in order to reach an optimal design, it is necessary
to investigate the allocation problem with more constraints.
Our future works will focus on the automatic allocation at
a functional level where more parameters should be taken
into account, such as the hardware allocation of the functions.
Often physical architecture may impose more constraints on
the safety level some functions can guarantee. It could also
fail to guarantee the independence requirements which lead to
developing some functionalities at higher level than previewed.
REFERENCES
[1] ISO 26262: Road Vehicles - Functional safety, International Organization
for Standardization (2011)
[2] IEC 61508: International Electrotechnical Commission. Functional Safety
of Electrical /Electronic /Programmable Electronic Safety-Related Sys-
tems. Parts 1 to 7, 1998
[3] D. Liaigre. ”ISO 26262 impact on the state of the art of actual automotive
safety concepts”, 19, (2008)
[4] D. D. Ward, and S. E. Crozier. ”The uses and abuses of ASIL decom-
position in ISO 26262.” System Safety, incorporating the Cyber Security
Conference 2012, 7th IET International Conference on. IET, 2012: 1-6.
[5] V. Izosimov, U. Ingelsson, and A. Wallin. ”Requirement decomposition
and testability in development of safety-critical automotive components.”
Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2012. 74-86.
[6] M. Sallak, C. Simon, and J-F. Aubry. ”A fuzzy probabilistic approach for
determining safety integrity level.” Fuzzy Systems, IEEE Transactions on
16.1 (2008): 239-248.
[7] J. Beugin, D. Renaux, and L. Cauffriez. ”A SIL quantiﬁcation approach
based on an operating situation model for safety evaluation in complex
guided transportation systems.” Reliability Engineering and System Safety
92.12 (2007): 1686-1700.
[8] Y. Lee, J. Kim, and I. Moon. ”A veriﬁcation of fault tree for safety
integrity level evaluation.” ICCAS-SICE, 2009. IEEE, 2009: 5548-5551.
[9] P. Bieber, R. Delmas, and C. Seguin. ”DALculusTheory and Tool for
Development Assurance Level Allocation.” Computer Safety, Reliability,
and Security. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011. 43-56.
[10] Y. Papadopoulos et al. ”Automatic allocation of safety integrity levels.”
Proceedings of the 1st workshop on critical automotive applications:
robustness and safety. ACM, 2010.
[11] R. Mader, E. Armengaud, A. Leitner, and C. Steger. ”Automatic and
optimal allocation of safety integrity levels.” Reliability and Maintainability
Symposium (RAMS), 2012 Proceedings-Annual. IEEE, 2012: 1-6.
[12] D. Parker, M. Walker, L. Azevedoet, Y. Papadopoulos and R. Araujo.
”Automatic Decomposition and Allocation of Safety Integrity Levels Using
a Penalty-Based Genetic Algorithm.” Recent Trends in Applied Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013. 449-459.
[13] L. Azevedo, D.Parker, M. Walker, Y. Papadopoulos, and R. Araujo.
”Automatic Decomposition of Safety Integrity Levels: Optimization by
Tabu Search.” Proceedings of Workshop CARS (2nd Workshop on Critical
Automotive applications: Robustness and Safety) of the 32nd International
Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability and Security. 2013.
[14] Maenad. (2012). Model-based Analysis and Engineering of Novel Ar-
chitectures Dependable Electric Vehicles.
[15] Y. Papadopoulos et al. ”Engineering failure analysis and design optimisa-
tion with HiP-HOPS.” Engineering Failure Analysis 18.2 (2011): 590-608.
[16] J. Blanquart et al. ”Criticality categories across safety standards in
different domains.” ERTS-2012, Toulouse (2012): 1-3.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

An Evaluation Scenario for Adaptive Security in eHealth
Wolfgang Leister
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
wolfgang.leister@nr.no
Mohamed Hamdi
School of Communication Engineering
Tunisia
mmh@supcom.rnu.tn
Habtamu Abie
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
habtamu.abie@nr.no
Stefan Poslad
Queen Mary University
London, UK
stefan.poslad@qmul.ac.uk
Abstract—We present a scenario and storyline that are part
of a framework to evaluate adaptive security in the Internet of
Things, also denoted as the IoT. The successful deployment of
the IoT depends on ensuring security and privacy, which need
to adapt to the processing capabilities and resource use of the
IoT. We develop a scenario for the assessment and validation of
context-aware adaptive security solutions for the IoT in eHealth.
We ﬁrst present the properties to be fulﬁlled by a scenario
to assess the adaptive security solutions for eHealth. We then
develop a home scenario for patients with chronic diseases using
biomedical sensors. This scenario is then used to create a storyline
for a chronic patient living at home.
Keywords—Internet of Things; assessment scenarios; eHealth
systems; adaptive security.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Body Sensor Networks (WBSNs) improve the
efﬁciency of eHealth applications by monitoring vital signs of
a patient using low-rate communication media and constitute
an important part of the Internet of Things (IoT) by bringing
humans into the IoT. However, the successful deployment of
the IoT depends on ensuring security and privacy, which need
to adapt to the processing capabilities and resource use of
the IoT. The “Adaptive Security for Smart Internet of Things
in eHealth” (ASSET) project researches and develops risk-
based adaptive security methods and mechanisms for IoT that
will estimate and predict risk and future beneﬁts using game
theory and context awareness by Abie and Balasingham [1].
The security methods and mechanisms will adapt their security
decisions based upon those estimates and predictions.
The main application area of ASSET is health and wel-
fare. Health organisations may deploy IoT-based services to
enhance traditional medical services and reduce delay for
treatment of critical patients. A case study will evaluate the
developed technologies for adaptive security using both sim-
ulation and implementation in a testbed based upon realistic
cases. Blood pressure, electrocardiogram (ECG) and heart rate
values will be gathered from patients and made anonymous.
The sensor data will be stored in different biomedical sensor
nodes that are capable of communicating with any of the
following connectivity options available: ZigBee, Wi-Fi, 3G,
GPRS, Bluetooth, and 802.15.4. For instance, a smartphone
with a suitable transceiver could act as an access point between
sensor nodes and a medical centre. For the evaluation in
the case study, we developed a set of scenarios to assess
the adaptive security models, techniques, and prototypes that
will be introduced in ASSET. These scenarios describe the
foreseeable interactions between the various actors and the
patient monitoring system based on IoT.
In computing, a scenario is a narrative: it most commonly
describes foreseeable interactions of user roles and the techni-
cal system, which usually includes computer hardware and
software. A scenario has a goal, a time-frame, and scope.
Alexander and Maiden [2] describe several types of scenarios,
such as stories, situations (alternative worlds), simulations,
story boards, sequences, and structures. Scenarios have inter-
action points and decision points where the technology under
consideration can interact with the scenario. This means that
the scenarios developed for a particular situation have to take
into consideration the technologies used by the different actors.
The importance of scenarios in the assessment of security
solutions has been discussed in the literature [3], [4]. This
work focuses on the development of scenarios that support
the evaluation of adaptive security techniques for the IoT in
eHealth.
In this paper, we develop a framework for the assessment
of adaptive security solutions. For this, we study a scenario
for the home environment, where different Quality of Service
(QoS) requirements, contexts and adaptive security methods
and mechanisms are analysed. We ﬁrst deﬁne the properties
that must be fulﬁlled by a scenario to assess adaptive security
schemes for eHealth. We show the interaction between the
scenarios, the threats, and the countermeasures in a global
assessment framework for the ASSET project. Second, the
scenarios that have been proposed by Leister et al. [5] are
reviewed and their adequacy to the evaluation of adaptive
security techniques for the IoT is analysed. Finally, we propose
a storyline that can support requirements analysis, as well
as adaptive security design, implementation, evaluation, and
testing.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section II
speciﬁes the requirements of adaptive security for the scenario.
In Section III, we describe the extension of a previously devel-
oped generic system model, which is used for the structure of
the scenario in Section IV. In Section V, we present a storyline
for our home scenario. Finally, Section VI offers concluding
remarks and future prospects.
II. ADAPTIVE SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
Designing the scenarios is of central signiﬁcance for the
ASSET project. They depict the operation of systems, here ap-
plied to IoT-based eHealth systems, in the form of actions and
event sequences. In addition, scenarios facilitate the detection
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

Fig. 1.
The ASSET assessment framework.
Fig. 2.
Illustration of context changes during the execution of a storyline.
of threat occurrences and the identiﬁcation of the solutions to
cope with these threats. In a scenario-based assessment, a set
of scenarios is developed to convey the design requirements.
With regard to the speciﬁc objectives of IoT-based systems,
the scenarios should capture two types of requirements:
1) Security requirements: Novel adaptive security and pri-
vacy mechanisms and methods are required that adapt
to the dynamic context of the IoTs and changing threats
to them. Thus, the scenarios should be generic enough
to capture the security needs for the data processed and
exchanged within a patient monitoring system. This is
particularly challenging because this system encompasses
multiple networking technologies, data, users, and appli-
cations, addressing varying processing capabilities and
resource use.
2) Quality of service requirements: Unlike traditional appli-
cations and services relying on communication networks,
eHealth applications have stringent QoS requirements.
Items such as the communication delay, the quality of
the communication channels, and the lifetime of the self-
powered sensor nodes are crucial context parameters that
have signiﬁcant impact on the safety of the patient. The
scenarios should highlight the needs in terms of QoS and
illustrate the dynamic interplay between these needs and
the security requirements.
The ASSET scenarios appear as a component of an assess-
ment framework that will serve to improve the applicability of
the security techniques proposed in the frame of the project.
The other components of the assessment framework are (i) a
set of threats describing the actions that violate the security
requirements, (ii) a set of security solutions that mitigate
the aforementioned threats, and (iii) a set of system states
representing the dynamic context in which the patient monitor-
ing system operates. Fig. 1 illustrates the ASSET assessment
framework. The security and QoS requirements are the output
of the scenario design activity. In other terms, the scenarios
should give information about the set of reliable states from
the security requirements and the set of states where the QoS
is acceptable. The intersection of these sets is the set of
desirable states, denoted in Fig. 1(a) by D (Desirable), where
the security and QoS requirements are balanced.
One of the intrinsic features of the ASSET scenarios is that
the sets of security requirements and QoS requirements could
vary in time and space. This will make the threats and the
security solutions also vary in time and space. Threats are
viewed as actions that generate insecure system states while
countermeasures are assumed to thwart the effects of these
threats. A threat reduces the set of secure states generated
by the scenario of interest and affects the QoS requirements.
This is represented by the region I (Impact) in Fig. 1(b). This
region represents a set of states that do not fulﬁl the security
or QoS requirements. The countermeasures reduce the size
of the set of insecure states generated by the threats. Fig. 1(c)
illustrates the effect of the security solutions through the region
M (Mitigate). This region extends the set of secure states.
Nonetheless, the security solutions can have a negative effect
on the QoS, represented by the region C (Cost), consisting of
power, processing, memory, and communication overhead.
The elements of this representation will be used in the
scenarios during the assessment of adaptive security schemes.
The scenarios allow evaluating the potential brought by the
security techniques to minimise the effect of the attacks on
the context.
For adaptive security solutions, the proposed protection
techniques will vary in time and space according to the
context. This is not conveyed by the scenario representation
of Fig. 1. To overcome this issue, we derive a set of storylines
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

from the ASSET scenarios. These can be viewed as a sequen-
tial application of the scenarios in a way that the selection of
the appropriate countermeasures must take into consideration:
• The space transition between scenarios. Space encom-
passes much useful information that affect the security
decision-making process. For instance, the location of
the WBSN might increase/decrease its vulnerability to
threats. Moreover, mobility introduces signiﬁcant chal-
lenges including horizontal and vertical handover man-
agement.
• The time transitions between scenarios (with its impli-
cations on the context). The time interplay between the
potential threats and countermeasures has a substantial
and dynamic impact on the environment where the patient
monitoring system is deployed. The amount of energy,
memory, and processing resources are crucial parameters
from the QoS perspective and the security solutions
have to adapt accordingly. In addition, the state of the
communication channel and the proper temporal interplay
in all these contexts are important in the selection of the
appropriate security decisions.
Fig. 2 illustrates the evolution of the storyline and the un-
derlying impact on the context. Of course, the sequence of
scenarios forming a storyline should be consistent so that it
translates a real-case situation.
For the assessment of adaptive security protocols and algo-
rithms we can employ multiple tools such as implementation
in a lab [6], simulation, and formal reasoning [7]. Here, the
scenarios can be connected to the arrangements, which are
sets of conﬁguration settings that inﬂuences how the formal
model operates. Moreover, the properties of a model checker
can directly be extracted from the requirements generated from
the scenarios.
In the following sections, we develop the scenarios of the
ASSET project and show how storylines can be extracted. We
also underline the role of the storyline in the assessment of
adaptive security techniques for eHealth. Before delving into
the details of scenario and storyline engineering, we highlight
the major properties that a scenario should have in order to
be useful for adaptive security.
III. EXTENDED GENERIC MODEL FOR EHEALTH
SCENARIOS
Patient monitoring systems are a major data source in
healthcare environments. During the last decade, the develop-
ment of pervasive computing architectures based on the IoT
has consistently improved the efﬁciency of such monitoring
systems thereby introducing new use cases and requirements.
It is important that these monitoring systems maintain a certain
level of availability, QoS, and that they are secure and protect
the privacy of the patient. Previously, we have analysed the
security and privacy for patient monitoring systems with an
emphasis on wireless sensor networks [8] and suggested a
framework for providing privacy, security, adaptation, and
QoS in patient monitoring systems [9]. We divided patient
monitoring systems into four Generic Levels (GLs): (0) the
Fig. 3.
Generic eHealth framework indicating the use cases in ﬁve levels
(Extended from [8]).
patient; (I) the personal sensor network; (II) devices in the
closer environment following several scenarios; and (III) the
healthcare information system.
In this work, we extend the generic model presented by
Leister et al. [9] by the deﬁnition of three new levels related
to the monitoring of chronic diseases, the communication
between multiple healthcare providers, and the communi-
cation between healthcare providers and medical research
institutions, respectively. Consequently, the extended generic
model is composed of ﬁve levels numbered from (0) to (IV)
depending on the logical distance to the patient to whom
Level (0) is assigned. Multiple types are considered at Level
(II). Note that only one of these types applies at a time.
However, it must be possible to switch between the types in
Level (II) depending on the activity of the patient. To this
purpose, the communication between Levels (II) and (III) is
two-way. The key levels of our extended generic model are as
follows, as shown in Fig. 3:
(0)
Patient. This is the actual patient.
(I)
Personal sensor network. The personal sensor net-
work denotes the patient and the sensors measuring
the medical data. These sensors are connected to each
other in a WBSN. While this sensor network can
be connected randomly, in most cases one special
WBSN node is appointed to be a Personal Cluster
Head (PCH), which forwards the collected data out-
side the range of the WBSN.
(IIa)
Paramedic. The WBSN is connected to the medical
devices of an ambulance (car, plane, and helicopter)
via the PCH. The devices of the ambulance can work
autonomously, showing the patient status locally.
Alternatively, the devices of the ambulance can com-
municate with an external healthcare infrastructure,
e.g., at a hospital.
(IIb)
Smart home. The patient is in a smart-home envi-
ronment where the personal sensor network interacts
with various networks and applications within this
environment. The smart home infrastructure might
be connected to a healthcare enterprise infrastructure
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

using long-distance data communication.
(IIc)
Mobility. The patient is mobile, e.g., using public
or personal transportation facilities. The personal
sensor network of the patient is connected to the
infrastructure of a healthcare enterprise via a mobile
device, e.g., a mobile Internet connection.
(IId)
Intensive care/surgery. During an operation the
sensor data are transferred to the PCH or directly
to the hospital infrastructure over a relatively short
distance. The sensors are in a very controlled envi-
ronment, but some sensors might be very resource
limited due to their size, so extra transport nodes
close to the sensors might be needed.
(IIe)
Pre- and postoperative. During pre- and postoper-
ative phases of a treatment, and for use in hospital
bedrooms, the sensor data are transferred from the
sensor network to the PCH and then to the healthcare
information system.
(IIf)
Chronic disease treatment. The WBSN data are
used by healthcare personnel in non-emergency treat-
ment of individual patients with a chronic disease.
(III)
Healthcare information system. This is considered
a trusted environment. It consists of the hospital
network, the computing facilities, databases, and
access terminals in the hospital.
(IVa) Inter-healthcare provider. Information is shared
between different healthcare providers concerning
medical information of an individual patient.
(IVb) Healthcare provider and research. Information is
shared between healthcare providers and medical
research organisations for the purposes of research,
new solutions development, etc.
Through the potential interactions between these levels,
notice that the model can support the elaboration of multiple
scenarios where the actors interact by switching from a level
to another. The scenarios in healthcare using biomedical
sensor networks are quite complex. Therefore, they need to
be efﬁciently structured. We consider two main scenarios
(hereafter denoted as overall scenarios) and we decompose
them into sub-scenarios (hereafter denoted as core scenarios).
A particular interest is given to the transitions between the core
scenarios since these transitions constitute substantial sources
of threats. For ASSET, we consider a home scenario (A) and
a hospital scenario (B).
Each of these overall scenarios contain a set of core sce-
narios which are denoted by the scenario identiﬁer A or B,
followed by a dash and the core scenario numbering in roman
numbers. The transitions between these core scenarios model
the interaction between the various components of the patient
monitoring system. In this paper, we focus on the Home
Scenario (A) where the patient is supposed to be monitored
outside a hospital performing normal daily actions. However,
to extract useful technical cases for the evaluation phase we
need to structure the scenario according to the patient’s actions
and situation.
A-ii
home s.
diabetes
A-i
home
situation
A-iii
moving
A-vi
shop
A-vii
caf´e
visit
A-xv
ambu-
lance
A-iv
publ.
transp.
A-v
vehicle
transport
A-ix
waiting
room
A-viii
doctor’s
ofﬁce
B
B
B
Fig. 4.
The Home Scenario with the underlying core scenarios and their
transitions.
IV. THE STRUCTURE OF THE HOME SCENARIO
Home Scenario (A) envisages that the monitored patient
can be in various contexts performing normal daily actions.
For example, for a patient with diabetes the following core
scenarios can apply:
• The patient is at home or a nursing home using monitor-
ing equipment.
• The patient uses sensors and communicates electronically
with the doctor’s ofﬁce.
• The patient uses speciﬁc monitoring equipment for dia-
betes.
• The patient visits the doctor’s ofﬁce regularly and uses
public transport or a car to get there;
• At the waiting room the patient can communicate data to
the health care infrastructure of the doctor’s ofﬁce.
• The patient regularly takes walking or jogging trips.
• The patient regularly visits a caf´e with friends; this
includes walking or commuting with public transport.
• In case of an emergency or planned surgery, the patient
may be sent to a hospital with an ambulance.
This list of situations is not yet a useful narrative. It
needs to be structured and enriched with, such as the speciﬁc
context information, the necessary devices of the IoT, the
communication channels, and actions of the involved actors.
This is done in the core scenarios that describe a speciﬁc part
of an overall scenario; e.g., a situation a patient experiences.
Each core scenarios can be part of several overall scenarios.
1) Home Situation (monitored at home) (A-i): Biomedical
sensors are employed in an environment where the patient is
at home or in a nursing home. The patient is monitored by a
WBSN, and the sensor data and alarms can be transmitted to
medical centres and emergency dispatch units.
Here, the sensors might not be monitoring or transmitting
the physiological patient data continuously in order to reduce
battery power consumption. Depending on a predeﬁned al-
gorithm, abnormal sensor data from certain sensors may be
used to activate other sensors autonomously before an alarm
is triggered, and sent to a central monitoring unit. In this
scenario, the following characteristics are given:
1) Ease of use and non-intrusiveness are important issues.
2) Very low power consumption, enabling a long life span
of the batteries, is required.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

3) A network infrastructure is available, such as access to
the Internet via LAN, WLAN, or mobile networks.
4) Limited mobility, handoff is possible, but infrequent.
Core Scenario A-i could be split up into several sub-
scenarios, if necessary, depending on the patient’s activities,
time of the day, etc. These sub-scenarios may include sleeping,
watching TV, kitchen work, or other household activities.
We created a specialised scenario for patients living at
home with diabetes monitoring (A-ii). The patient uses a
smartphone with a health-diary software that also implements
personal health records (PHR) and stores measurements. The
measurements are performed using special devices that com-
municate with the smartphone using Bluetooth. Note that such
specialisations also could be described as a part of the storyline
of a separate core scenario.
On a regular basis, the patient transmits measurements
to the doctor’s ofﬁce, thus synchronising the PHR with the
hospital information system; the patient also has an audio-
/video-conversation where medical questions are discussed.
During these sessions the patient might take pictures with the
smart phone camera or perform other measurements.
2) Moving (Walking and Jogging) Scenario (A-iii): The
patient does daily training, i.e., jogs in the nearby park, or
does shorter walks from the home to the public transport, to
the caf´e, shop, or doctor’s ofﬁce. A common feature in these
situations is that the patient needs to use a smartphone as a
device that collects sensor data, using the mobile networks
to transmit the data. When walking or jogging in the park
many other people and their devices might interfere with the
communication of the smartphone.
When walking in the woods, there might be several spots
which are not covered by a mobile network. In this case, the
signal is so weak that only an emergency calls from another
provider can be done. While data trafﬁc is not possible, SMS
messages can be used to send data with very low bandwidth,
possibly after several retries. For an average walking trip, this
outage may last for some minutes.
3) Transport Scenarios: Core Scenario A-iv presents a
situation where a patient commutes to a doctor’s ofﬁce or
to a caf´e using public transport. Here, the patient needs
to use a smartphone as a device that collects sensor data,
using the mobile networks to transmit the data. Blind spots
without connectivity to a mobile network, roaming, varying
data transmission quality, etc., are parts of this scenario. This
scenario can be applied to long-distance trains, planes, etc.
Core Scenario A-v represents the scenario where a patient
uses his own or another’s (private) car to commute to a shop,
a caf´e, or the doctor’s ofﬁce. Here, the patient needs to use
a smartphone as a device that collects sensor data, using the
mobile networks or networks installed or used in the car to
transmit the data. Blind spots without connectivity to a mobile
network, roaming, varying data transmission quality, etc., are
parts of this scenario.
4) Caf´e Scenario (A-vii): The patient visits a caf´e. Here,
the patient needs to use a smartphone as a device that collects
sensor data, using mobile networks or caf´e’s WLAN zone
for data transfer. Switching between the WLAN and mobile
networks may occur, the WLAN might be of varying quality,
many other caf´e visitors may interfere, or the WLAN might
not actually be connected to the Internet.
5) Doctor’s Ofﬁce Scenario (A-viii): The patient is in the
doctor’s ofﬁce, usually after some time in a waiting room
(A-ix). Here, the patient can have extra sensors attached.
These extra sensors, as well as the existing sensors, can
communicate with the doctor’s infrastructure either through
the smartphone of the patient, or directly, depending on the
needs. A doctor can change a sensor’s characteristics, which
requires the possibility to re-program the sensor devices.
6) Waiting Room Scenario (A-ix): The patient is in a
waiting room at a doctor’s ofﬁce or a hospital. Patients that are
known to the healthcare system can be connected from their
smartphone to the healthcare network; here, speciﬁc actions
for collecting data from the device or other preparations can
be performed. Once the patient is in the range of the waiting
room, the smartphone can transfer large amounts of stored
patient data directly to the infrastructure of the medical centre
via short-range communication, instead of using long-range
mobile communication.
7) Other scenarios: In ASSET other scenarios have been
developed which are omitted here. Most of these are speciﬁc
to the hospital scenario B. For completeness, we mention
a scenario where patients are brought to a hospital in an
ambulance (B-xv).
V. STORYLINE FOR THE HOME SCENARIO
We developed the storyline for the home scenario as follows:
Petra has both a heart condition and diabetes. In a hospital,
she had two sensors placed in her body: one heart sensor and
one blood sugar sensor. In addition, she uses external sensors
to measure blood pressure, heart beat, inertial sensors, etc., as
well as a camera. Petra is living in her home that has been
prepared for the monitoring system and is commissioned with
the necessary data connections so that her vital signs can be
periodically reported to the healthcare personnel in levels (II)
(nurse or doctor) or (III) (patient records) as introduced in
Fig. 3; several technologies can be applied to achieve this.
The patient monitoring system is set up so that the sensor
data are transmitted wirelessly (several transmission technolo-
gies are possible) to a smartphone that acts as PCH. The PCH
communicates with the hospital infrastructure (Level (III)).
1. Petra is now being monitored at home but data is acquired
remotely (A-i); the following requirements are important:
a. Petra wants her data to remain conﬁdential from neigh-
bours, i.e., people close-by, but outside her home;
b. Petra wants her data to remain conﬁdential from visitors,
i.e., people inside her home.
2. Petra takes a bath in her home (planned sensor acquisition
disruption; A-i);
a. the sensors are water-proof; the PCH is close enough to
receive signals;
b. the sensors need to be removed;
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications

i. a change in the values implicitly indicates the sensor
removal; or
ii. patient must notify the PCH about the sensors going
off-line;
3. Petra is sleeping and sensors fall off (unplanned sensor
acquisition disruption; A-i).
4. Petra leaves her home for training outdoors or a stroll in
the park nearby (A-iii).
5. Petra leaves her home to visit her friends in a caf´e (A-vii,
A-iii, A-iv, A-v).
6. Petra visits her regular doctor for a check-up; the doctor’s
ofﬁce is in walking distance from her home (A-iii, A-viii,
A-ix).
7. Petra becomes ill and is transported by an emergency
ambulance to the hospital (B-xv); transition to the Overall
Hospital Scenario B.
To conduct an efﬁcient threat analysis of this storyline,
we apply security objectives introduced by Savola and Abie
[10] and Savola et al. [11], who stated that adaptive security
decision-making should adapt requirements for privacy and
data conﬁdentiality based on the data processing needs, roles
of stakeholders, regulations and legislation, and the privacy
level of data indicated by privacy metrics. For example, the
security requirement pointed out in Step 1.a of the storyline
is related to conﬁdentiality and privacy, which are often
emphasised in healthcare. Strong conﬁdentiality algorithms,
key distribution, associated processes, and compliance to ap-
propriate privacy legislation and regulations are crucial.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We highlighted the role of the scenarios in the assess-
ment framework for IoT-based adaptive security solutions in
eHealth. This is based on a generic system model, the re-
quirements for eHealth applications, and a generic assessment
framework. The Home Scenario of the ASSET project covers
multiple core scenarios representing various situations. These
address speciﬁc requirements related to the context, the data-
communication, the devices, and the actions of the involved
actors. The core scenarios are speciﬁc to the eHealth case,
and make it possible to identify relevant cases that need to
be evaluated, such as situations where IoT devices need to
be removed or disconnected, the use ample communication
channels, or the impact of mobility.
A storyline for a home patient with chronic diseases has
been described and analysed. In the future, the overall sce-
narios, as well as the underlying core scenarios and storylines
will be used in the ASSET project to evaluate the developed
algorithms within adaptive security.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work presented here has been carried out in the project
ASSET – Adaptive Security for Smart Internet of Things
in eHealth (2012–2015) funded by the Research Council of
Norway in the VERDIKT programme. We wish to thank our
colleagues involved in this project for helpful discussions that
made this study possible.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Abie and I. Balasingham, “Risk-based adaptive se-
curity for smart IoT in eHealth,” in BODYNETS 2012
– 7th International Conference on Body Area Networks.
ACM, 2012.
[2] I. F. Alexander and N. Maiden, Eds., “Scenarios, Stories,
Use Cases: Through the Systems Development Life-
Cycle”.
John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[3] S. Faily and I. Flechais, “A meta-model for usable secure
requirements engineering,” in SESS – ICSE Workshop on
Software Engineering for Secure Systems.
Association
for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2010.
[4] H. Mouratidis and P. Giorgini, “Security attack testing
(SAT)–testing the security of information systems at
design time,” Information Systems, vol. 32, no. 1, Jan.
2007, pp. 1166–1183.
[5] W. Leister, H. Abie, and S. Poslad, “Deﬁning the
ASSET
scenarios,”
Norsk
Regnesentral,
NR
Note
DART/17/2012, Dec. 2012.
[6] Y. B. Woldegeorgis, H. Abie, and M. Hamdi, “A testbed
for adaptive security for IoT in eHealth,” in ASPI 2013 –
International Workshop on Adaptive Security & Privacy
management for the Internet of Things.
ACM, 2013.
[7] W. Leister, J. Bjørk, R. Schlatte, E. B. Johnsen,
and A. Griesmayer, “Exploiting model variability in
ABS to verify distributed algorithms,” International
Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, vol. 5,
no. 1&2, 2012, pp. 55–68. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.iariajournals.org/telecommunications/ [Accessed:
1. Dec 2013].
[8] W. Leister, T. Fretland, and I. Balasingham, “Security
and authentication architecture using MPEG-21 for
wireless
patient
monitoring
systems,”
International
Journal on Advances in Security, vol. 2, no. 1, 2009,
pp. 16–29. [Online]. Available: http://www.iariajournals.
org/security/ [Accessed: 1. Dec 2013].
[9] W. Leister, T. Schulz, A. Lie, K. H. Grythe, and I. Bal-
asingham, “Quality of service, adaptation, and security
provisioning in wireless patient monitoring systems,” in
Biomedical Engineering Trends in electronics, commu-
nications and software.
INTECH, 2011, pp. 711–736.
[10] R. Savola and H. Abie, “Metrics-driven security objective
decomposition for an e-health application with adaptive
security management,” in ASPI 2013 – International
Workshop on Adaptive Security & Privacy management
for the Internet of Things.
ACM, 2013.
[11] R. Savola, H. Abie, and M. Sihvonen, “Towards metrics-
driven adaptive security management in e-health IoT
applications,” in BODYNETS 2012 – 7th International
Conference on Body Area Networks.
ACM, 2012.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-321-6
PESARO 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Performance, Safety and Robustness in Complex Systems and Applications
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

