eLmL 2022
The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
ISBN: 978-1-61208-985-0
June 26th – 30th, 2022
Porto, Portugal
eLmL 2022 Editors
Tamara Powell, Kennesaw State University, USA
Daniela Pellegrini, R&D Manager, Piazza Copernico srl., Italy
Rachel Van Campenhout, VitalSource Technologies, USA

eLmL 2022
Forward
The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning (eLmL 2022),
held in Porto, Portugal, June 26 - 30, 2022., focused on the latest trends in e-learning and also on the
latest IT technology alternatives that are poised to become mainstream strategies in the near future and
will influence the e-learning environment.
eLearning refers to on-line learning delivered over the World Wide Web via the public Internet
or the private, corporate intranet. The goal of the eLmL 2022 conference was to provide an overview of
technologies, approaches, and trends that are happening right now. The constraints of e-learning are
diminishing and options are increasing as the Web becomes increasingly easy to use and the technology
becomes better and less expensive.
eLmL 2022 provided a forum where researchers were able to present recent research results
and new research problems and directions related to them. The topics covered aspects related to tools
and platforms, on-line learning, mobile learning, and hybrid learning.
We take this opportunity to thank all the members of the eLmL 2022 Technical Program
Committee as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a broad and high-quality conference
program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also kindly thank all the authors
who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to the eLmL 2022. We truly believe that,
thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program consists of top quality contributions.
This event could also not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the eLmL 2022 organizing committee
for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this professional meeting a success.
We hope that eLmL 2022 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas and
results between academia and industry and for the promotion of progress in eLearning research. We
also hope that Porto provided a pleasant environment during the conference and everyone saved some
time for exploring this beautiful city
eLmL 2022 Chairs
eLmL Steering Committee
Maiga Chang, Athabasca University, Canada
Alexander Mikroyannidis, The Open University, United Kingdom
Daniel Amo Filvà, La Salle - Universitat Ramon Llull, Spain
Rodica Neamtu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, USA
eLmL 2022 Publicity Chair
Laura Garcia, Universitat Politècnica de València (UPV), Spain
José Miguel Jiménez, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

eLmL 2022
COMMITTEE
eLmL Steering Committee
Maiga Chang, Athabasca University, Canada
Alexander Mikroyannidis, The Open University, United Kingdom
Daniel Amo Filvà, La Salle - Universitat Ramon Llull, Spain
Rodica Neamtu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, USA
eLmL 2022 Publicity Chair
Laura Garcia, Universitat Politècnica de València (UPV), Spain
José Miguel Jiménez, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
eLmL 2022 Technical Program Committee
Waqas Ahmed, UniKL Business School (UBIS) - Universiti Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Daniel Amo Filvà, La Salle - Universitat Ramon Llull, Spain
Luis Anido-Rifon, Universidade de Vigo, Spain
Regina Bäck, KU Eichstätt-Ingolstadt & KSH Munich, Germany
Khadidja Bakhti, Algerian Space Agency, Algeria / Beijing Institute of Technology, China
Shreyansh Bhatt, Amazon.com, USA
Tina Boyle Whyte, Marquette University, USA
Egle Butkeviciene, Kaunas University of Technology, Lithuania
Mauro Callejas Cuervo, Universidade Pedagógica y Tecnológica de Colombia, Colombia
Djordje Cantrak, University of Belgrade, Serbia
Cristina M.R. Caridade, Coimbra Polytechnic - ISEC, Portugal
Maiga Chang, Athabasca University, Canada
Niaz Chowdhury, The Open University, UK
Krzysztof J. Cios, Virginia Commonwealth University, USA
Lorraine Cleeton, Northcentral University / Walden University, USA
José Paulo Cravino, Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro / CIDTFF, Portugal
Erin Czerwinski, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Najima Daoudi, École des sciences de l’information, Morocco
Debzani Deb, Winston-Salem State University, USA
Angel P. del Pobil, Jaume I University, Spain
Rafael del Vado Vírseda, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain
Soumyabrata Dev, ADAPT SFI Research Centre, Dublin, Ireland
Federico Diano, University of Naples "Federico II", Italy
Mounim A. El Yacoubi, Telecom SudParis, France
Ramon Fabregat, University of Girona, Spain
Effat Farhana, Vanderbilt University, USA
Ivan Ganchev, University of Limerick, Ireland / University of Plovdiv "Paisii Hilendarski", Bulgaria
Leonardo Garrido, Tecnológico de Monterrey, Mexico
Odeese Ghassa-Khalil, Duquesne University, USA
Henrique Gil, Age.Comm - Instituto Politécnico de Castelo Branco, Portugal

Luca Grilli, Università degli Studi di Foggia, Italy
Alfonso Guarino, University of Foggia, Italy
Safa Hamreras, University of 20 Aout 1955, Algeria
Felix Hamza-Lup, Georgia Southern University, USA
Feifei Han, Griffith University, Australia
Oriel Herrera, Univ. Católica de Temuco, Chile
Tsunenori Ishioka, The National Center for University Entrance Examinations, Japan
Tomayess Issa, Curtin University, Australia
Katerina Kabassi, Ionian University, Greece
Keiichi Kaneko, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Japan
Jai W. Kang, Rochester Institute of Technology, USA
Ilias Karasavvidis, University of Thessaly, Volos, Greece
Komalpreet Kaur, Salem State University, USA
Neo Tse Kian, Multimedia University, Malaysia
Carsten Kleiner, University of Applied Sciences&Arts in Hannover, Germany
Laetitia Knight, University of North Texas, Denton, USA / University of Montpellier 3, France
Miroslav Kulich, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
Amruth N. Kumar, Ramapo College of New Jersey, USA
Monica Landoni, Università della Svizzera italiana, Switzerland
Cynthia Y. Lester, Perimeter College - Georgia State University, USA
Rory Lewis, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, USA
Beibin Li, Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering - University of Washington, Seattle,
USA
Yung-Hui Li, National Central University, Taiwan
Andreas Lingnau, Hochschule Ruhr West | University of Applied Sciences, Germany
George Liodakis, Hellenic Mediterranean University (formerly Technological Educational Institute of
Crete - TEI of Crete), Greece
Min Liu, The University of Texas at Austin, USA
Martin Llamas Nistal, Universidade de Vigo, Spain
Matteo Lombardi, Griffith University, Australia
Josue Aaron Lopez Leyva, CETyS University, Mexico
Luca A. Ludovico, University of Milan, Italy
Neo Mai, Multimedia University, Cyberjaya, Malaysia
Herwig Mannaert, University of Antwerp, Belgium
Sathiamoorthy Manoharan, University of Auckland, New Zealand
Daniela Marghitu, Auburn University, USA
Alke Martens, University of Rostock, Germany
Paulo Martins, INESC TEC / University of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Portugal
Bruce R. Maxim, University of Michigan-Dearborn, USA
Andrew McReynolds, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, USA
Natarajan Meghanathan, Jakson State University, USA
José Carlos Meireles Monteiro Metrolho, Polytechnic Institute of Castelo Branco, Portugal
Alexander Mikroyannidis, The Open University, UK
Begoña Montero-Fleta, Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain
Mirela Muller, University of Split, Croatia
Umberto Nanni, Universita' di Roma "La Sapienza", Italy
Rodica Neamtu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, USA
Jari Palomäki, Tampere University, Finland

Daniela Pedrosa, University of Aveiro, Portugal
Daniela Pellegrini, Piazza Copernico srl, Italy
Arna Peretz, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
Krzysztof Pietroszek, Institute for IDEAS | American University,Washington, USA
Matin Pirouz Nia, California State University, USA
Maja Pušnik, University of Maribor, Slovenia
Sonja D. Radenkovic, University of Belgrade, Serbia
Raj Ramachandran, University of the West of England, Bristol, UK
Thurasamy Ramayah, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Malaysia
Laura Rayón Rumayor,University of Alcala, Spain
Genaro Rebolledo-Mendez, Institute for Future of Education | Tecnologico de Monterrey, Mexico
Angelo Rega, University of Naples FEDERICO II - Neapolisanit srl- Rehabilitation Center, Italy
Fernando Reinaldo Ribeiro, Polytechnic Institute of Castelo Branco, Portugal
Ilaria Renna, ISEP - LISITE laboratory, France
Lisbet Rønningsbakk, UiT - The Arctic University of Norway, Norway
Marina Rui, University of Genova, Italy
Demetrios Sampson, Curtin University, Australia
Carol Savill-Smith, Education Support Partnership, UK
Daniele Schicchi, University of Palermo, Italy
Andrew Schwäbe, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
Jacopo Soldani, University of Pisa, Italy
Francesco Sovrano, University of Bologna, Italy
Thomas Staubitz, Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Engineering gGmbH, Germany
Eliza Stefanova, Sofia University St. Kl. Ohridski, Bulgaria
Monika Steinberg, Hochschule Hannover, Germany
Christian M. Stracke, Open University of the Netherlands, The Netherlands
Jakub Swacha, University of Szczecin, Poland
Krzysztof Szklanny, Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology,Poland
Pablo Torres Carrión, Universidad Técnica Particular de Loja, Ecuador
Jean-Pierre Toumazet, University Institute of Technology - Clermont - Auvergne University, France
Rachel Van Campenhout, VitalSource, USA
Carlos Vaz de Carvalho, GILT - Instituto Superior de Engenharia do Porto, Portugal
Esteban Vázquez-Cano, Spanish National University of Distance Education (UNED), Spain
Minjuan Wang, San Diego State University, USA
Ke Wang, University of California, Davis, USA
Hironori Washizaki, Waseda University, Japan
Mudasser Wyne, National University - San Diego, USA
Rihito Yaegashi, Kagawa University, Japan
Ahmed Mohamed Fahmy Yousef, Fayoum University, Egypt
Ruochen Zeng, Marvell Semiconductor, USA
Minjia Zhang, Microsoft AI and Research, USA
Jinjin Zhao, Amazon.com, USA

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Remote Working - The Webseries: Training Meets People Caring and the Liberating Power of Laughter
Elena Messore
1
Attention and Meditation Quantification Using Neural Networks
Anca O. Muresan and Felix G. Hamza-Lup
9
Designing and Implementing a Lightboard Learning Experience for Instructors Through the Learning Engineering
Process
Lauren Totino and Aaron Kessler
15
Fostering Communities of Practice: Insights from an Online Educational Robotics Professional Development Pilot
Lauren Harter and Jason McKenna
20
Multimedia Learning Principles and Instructional Design Among Teachers: A Pilot Study
Lisa Beaulieu
25
Developing Instructor Training for Diverse & Scaled Contexts: A Learning Engineering Challenge
Rachel Van Campenhout and Aaron Kessler
29
Time-Effective Logistics of Project-Based Course Electronic Instrumentation
Samuel Kosolapov
35
Using the Tools at Hand: Creative Online Course Quality Management
Brayden Milam, Julie Newell, Stephen Bartlett, Tamara Powell, Lesley Gabel, Kaylee Polk, Elly Sloman, and
Aiden Reichner
42
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Remote Working - The Webseries: Training Meets People Caring and the 
Liberating Power of Laughter 
Elena Messore 
Instructional Design and Digital Course Devepolment Area 
Piazza Copernico s.r.l 
Rome, Italy 
email: emessore@pcopernico.it  
 
 
Abstract— Adult motivation is the main issue about 
engagement, and in the recent pandemic it has been specially 
under surveillance in companies that have had to reorganize 
into remote working. People caring has rapidly become a 
strategic issue for Human Resources management, which used 
tools and training language to support organizational 
transformation, to engage people, to spread and promote the 
corporate culture even in remote working contexts, to 
recognize individual contribution and to support a sense of 
belonging. Training, therefore, even in phases of organizational 
change and transition, is a lever not only for learning, but also 
for managing people. The training experience presented in this 
paper regards best practices about WFH (Working From 
Home) in Sorgenia s.p.a. (Italian energy company) and 
highlights this double level of training objectives on learning 
and people caring. The adoption of a training approach 
oriented to known situations, practical contents and possible 
solutions, humorous video realization, characterized the 
illustrated didactic experience. Participants’ engagement 
passes through the levers of familiarity of the situations (and 
recognition of possible or already known problems), 
accessibility of the solutions provided in a light and ironic way 
enabling individual resources. Engagement is promoted by a 
serial format (the web-series), which is periodically released 
and thought a humorous language. It is also interesting that 
engagement was pursued through active participation in the 
video production process to maximize the familiarity of the 
situations also through the recognizability of places and 
colleagues.  
Keywords-Engagement; humorous video-learning; web-
series; people caring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Andragogical studies always tried to identify what 
influences adults' motivation to learn and what encourages 
greater engagement in training courses. There are two initial 
strands, one dating back to Thorndike [96] and inaugurated 
by the book "Adult Learning", in which it was 
experimentally demonstrated that adults are capable of 
learning but do it differently from children; and the other 
from 1926, with "The Meaning of Adult Learning" by 
Lindeman [58], that dealt in greater depth with how adults 
learn. 
In 
addition, 
many 
contributions 
are 
from 
psychotherapy (Freud and the subsequent), psychiatry, 
clinical psychologists and humanists, such as Maslow [61], 
who emphasized the role of a sense of security in human 
growth, and Rogers [88] who talked about learner-centered 
teaching in the same way that therapy focuses on the patient.  
Training design is based on adult learning principles both 
to create an entire course or a single training session 
(synchronous or asynchronous), to be engaging, effective 
and memorable for those who participate. It is well 
established that adults first and foremost need to know why 
they need to learn something new, the benefits they might 
gain from learning and the negative consequences of not 
learning. Adults also need their self-concept to be respected, 
to feel autonomous regarding the content to be learned.  
Adults, after all, “are the experiences they had”: they feel 
ignored or undervalued if their past experiences are not 
considered. Good training must therefore start from real 
experiences, accompany analysis and understanding, and use 
them as a starting point for improving future experiences. 
Adults are motivated to engage in training if what they are 
taught actually improves their ability to deal with tasks and 
situations in every day and working life. They ask and want 
the answer to the question: will what they learn really be 
useful to them? In line with the andragogical model, the role 
of the learner is therefore central: adults must become active 
participants in the process, supporting the trainer in the 
implementation of the whole activity, clearly in various 
forms, as summarized and rationalized in the 1980s by 
Knowles [54]. Bruner [8] distinguished between expositional 
and hypothetical modes of teaching: in the former, the 
teacher decides and exposes the contents and the student 
listens, while in the latter, teacher and student cooperate and 
the participant is not just a mere listener but a protagonist in 
the formulation of the contents. These concepts are all 
consistent 
with 
Knowles' 
andragogical 
model 
[54]. 
Andragogic theories and models on the value of engagement 
in learning have their roots unquestionably in pedagogical 
studies. Consistent with the andragogic approach, in Kolb's 
theory of Experiential Learning [56] we find not only the 
reference to the studies of Dewey, Piaget and Lewin but also 
the central role of concrete experience and reflective 
observation in the learning process. Experiential learning is a 
process in which knowledge occurs through observation and 
transformation of experience, i.e., not through the passive 
acquisition of notions, concepts and relationships. Kolb [56] 
picks up on Dewey's [34] "experience-reflection-learning" 
scheme, which highlights how the meeting point between 
personal development and education is fundamental. 
According to Piaget too, knowledge does not come from 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

perception but from action and interaction with the 
environment: a process of adaptation that oscillates between 
assimilation and accommodation. Piaget [78] also talked 
about learning as a process: the knowledge path is 
fundamental, not just the achieved result. All learning is re-
learning and constantly linking new learning to previous 
experiences. Experience and experimentation are two key 
words of training for Kolb [56]. It is also correct to highlight 
the "experiential approach in groups" in this analysis. 
According to Lewin [57] there is a relationship between 
group dynamics and the experiential approach. The group is 
unity, totality, dynamic reality: single person action modifies 
the group and vice versa. Despite its dynamism, the group 
will always tend towards balance between forces that tend 
towards disintegration. The group facilitates the integration 
of theory and practice: new learning emerges from reflection 
between the group's experience and theory. From the 
reflection on group dynamics, comes the interest in the value 
that the sense of belonging has in the engagement on 
learning paths. This view origin stems, on the one hand, from 
the deepening of positive parenting and, on the other, from 
modern approaches to learning design and gentle leadership. 
Although the concept of discipline is conceived with a view 
to raising responsible, independent and collaborative 
children, in families and schools, with respect and kindness, 
we have found in the concept of a sense of belonging 
touched on several times by the theoretical approach, a 
further confirmation of how fundamental it is, even in adults, 
to engage in participation, learning, sharing, availability, 
openness. "The primary goal of a child is: I just want to 
belong". "The child who needs love is very often the one 
who behaves in the least loving way". "An encouraged child 
does not need to behave badly". "Children behave better 
when they feel better". Trying to substitute the word child, in 
these sentences from J. Nelsen's text [74], it becomes evident 
that leveraging the sense of belonging increases engagement 
in training courses, in line with the main techniques for 
attracting attention and flipped classroom considerations. In 
his book "Happiness: a hypothesis", Haidt [47] talks about 
the human brain as an elephant and its driver. The driver is 
conscious, controlled thinking. The elephant is everything 
else and the opposite. It is gut feelings, reactions, emotions, 
visceral intuitions that make up a large part of the automatic 
system. The driver part of the brain is the rational part, then. 
The elephant wants, but the driver tends to curb the desire. 
However, if the elephant is not involved, the adult is not 
attracted, motivated, engaged. And elephants like stories, 
they like to feel like heroes of the journey, they favor the 
urgent, they are attracted by emotional resonance, by 
unexpected rewards, surprises, interesting questions, by 
collaboration and social proof, not always but sometimes by 
competition, if used sparingly. By play, by beauty, by fun. 
The project presented in this work rise in response to the 
specific need expressed by the company Sorgenia Spa, to 
train its staff on the good practices to be followed to live the 
remote working in an effective, efficient and stress-free way 
by the development of the training proposal "Remote 
working- The Webseries" (during the Covid-19 pandemic).  
In the development of the training proposal "Remote 
working - The Webseries", it was important to experiment 
how the different dimensions touched upon in the 
andragogical approaches, combined with the enhancement of 
the sense of belonging, are fundamental to raising the level 
of engagement in training initiatives. This article recounts an 
experience and is structured as follows: in section I the 
theoretical context, in section II the need and the 
methodological response with related drivers, in section III 
the subject matter of the training, in section IV the work 
phases and the professionals involved, in section V the 
elements of transferability of the project, finally in section VI 
the insights gathered for future experiences. 
II. 
TRAINING PROPOSAL "SMARTWORKING”:  
TRAINING WITH THE WEB SERIES MEETS PEOPLE CARING AND 
INCREASES ENGAGEMENT 
The training proposal "Remote working- The Webseries" 
addressed to all the staff of Sorgenia Spa (Italian energy 
company) during the Covid 19 pandemic and was motivated 
from the express desire and concern of the company to 
support its employees in the new working methods 
introduced by remote working. 
A. Format 
The Sorgenia staff were not only the recipients of the 
training intervention, but they actively participated as actors. 
This choice helped to strengthen engagement and 
identification, leveraging the need to belong, even stronger in 
a period of forced "distancing". Remote working- The 
Webseries is built on the stories of a small number of 
characters, in a familiar and ordinary environment, a block of 
flats revolutionized by the new rules generated by remote 
working. The protagonists are four condominium families, 
chosen with great attention to the values of diversity and 
inclusion. The web series, made up of nine episodes, winks 
at some typical situations of working life in remote working, 
touching on critical aspects but also on their inner value. It 
thus stages absurd, comical and yet decidedly realistic 
situations. And there is no lack of small "homages" to the TV 
series of the moment. 
 
First episode is available at 
 
https://vimeo.com/534372808/05c5b0b645  
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of a of one episode. 
A short downloadable infographic (Figure 1) at the end 
of each episode proposes a recap of good practices, as a 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

memo to keep handy to live your "connected" life with 
balance. It contains a few instructions to work better and 
smart safeguarding people's wellbeing, work-life balance, 
but also productivity, and narrated in a "typically Sorgenia" 
language that every employee could relate to. With the 
pandemic and the spread of remote working, the way 
companies communicate with their employees and the way 
they communicate with each other has also been 
transformed. The values of sharing and communication are a 
fundamental component of this new productivity paradigms, 
because they keep people together and allow them to 
overcome critical issues simply through dialogue.  Sorgenia, 
a highly innovative company that is attentive to people's 
wellbeing, is a forerunner in this sense, because it believes 
and feels strongly that people's wellbeing is a value that 
affects motivation and productivity, helping to improve 
every aspect of the business. For Sorgenia, in line with the 
values it has in common with Piazza Copernico, taking care 
of its employees and their wellbeing passes through a clear 
trajectory, which the webseries wanted to follow to become a 
symbol of a culture, a way of thinking, a way of being and 
understanding the company. In addition to the classic 
incentives for workers, such as benefits of any kind and 
economic rewards that have a limited and temporary 
influence on motivation, there is a whole series of activities 
that can be introduced by companies to take care of their 
employees and their well-being, to make them feel a 
fundamental part of the company: 
• 
offer trust, flexibility, autonomy; involve people: the 
more the employee is involved in company dynamics, 
the more productive he/she is.  
• 
spreading the company culture by training management 
first, so that they lead by example. 
• 
involve people in work strategies and objectives. 
• 
build loyalty by acting on the sense of belonging, to 
make people feel part of the company and its 
development. 
• 
improving communications, spreading and acting on 
the culture of sharing. 
B. Chosen method drivers 
Three drivers guided our methodological approach (Figure 
2):  
 
Figure 2.  Method drivers 
VIDEO EXPERIENCE: watching videos, as well as 
creating videos, is now part of everyone's experience. The 
society that has become increasingly audiovisual (Feierabend 
and Rathgeb, 2009) [36] and increasingly mobile (James, 
2016) [52]. Smartphone itself is also increasingly a tool 
aimed at learning (Giannakos, Jaccheri and Krogstie, 2014) 
[44]. Video as an educational tool has great potential: it 
involves simultaneously several senses, is direct, immediate, 
achieves direct and emotional communication. Educational 
sciences 
talk 
about 
Kirkpatrick's 
so-called 
'picture 
superiority effect' [53], referring to the greater likelihood that 
pictures 
have 
of 
being 
remembered 
than 
words. 
Neuroscience support the effectiveness of visual experience: 
about half of the resources committed by the brain at any 
given time are devoted to sight, according to Medina [63]. 
The effectiveness of video-based interventions in training 
is certain: video integrates and supports, through the visual 
dimension, practical and direct observation, the teaching-
learning of good practices otherwise explained only verbally 
(Santagata, Zannoni & Stigler [92]). Video is valuable in 
modelling practices (Santagata & Guarino, [93]) and 
contributes to the development of a specific professional 
language (Minaříková, Janík, Píšová & Kostková, [67]); 
video promotes general and personal reflection - in the case 
of self-analysis on didactics, if we think for example of the 
practice of micro-teaching (van Es & Sherin, [107]); and is 
able to focus students' attention (Franke et al, [39]; 
Santagata, Zannoni & Stigler, [92]; van Es & Sherin, [108]). 
Video supports learning (Chambel, Zahn, and Finke, [19]): 
the reconstruction of real experiences, of the high degree of 
authenticity and realism, of the visualization of dynamic 
processes, which cannot be observed live (difficult to 
reproduce, dangerous, expensive) or which are difficult to 
describe verbally. 
STORYTELLING: This does not only refer to images, 
but to the telling of stories, i.e., stories in which the viewer-
learner can recognize himself. Because storytelling connects, 
promotes, facilitates remembering.  
"Stories reshape information, transforming it into 
meaning", 
Duarte, 
[33]. 
Stories 
are 
powerful 
and 
indispensable tools of human beings to connect with other 
human beings.  As neuromarketing teaches, the primitive 
brain reacts very positively to emotional storytelling. 
Everyone learns and builds his or her own meaning system 
from an early age with stories. Life itself constitutes a 
narrative as a story, according to Bruner, [8]. Narrative is 
innate to mankind, there is no evidence of civilization that 
has not used narrative: with the emergence of sociality and 
inter-human relations, narrative was born, an attitude that has 
always been present together with rationality. Each person is 
not only the sum of his/her experiences or the relationships 
he/she establishes, but even more so the sum of his/ her 
stories and the contextual frames that are created around the 
stories (Bruner [8]). Narrative thinking is, moreover, a 
specific cognitive mode through which individuals structure 
experience and construct interaction with the external 
environment. 
Understanding 
actions, 
behaviors 
and 
experiences according to the typical mode of narrative 
thinking is a fundamental operation that guides the human 
mind in the attribution of meaning and significance (De 
Rossi, [29]). Restak [84], a neurologist who has studied the 
role of neural networks in learning processes, maintains that 
narration modifies the structure of the brain as much as 
personal experience. This claim is also supported by the 
behaviour of so-called mirror neurons, which are dedicated 
video 
experience
humor
storytelli
ng
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

to recognizing the emotions of others. Stories can be 
experienced emotionally and have meaning for each of us 
because these emotions trigger a process of identification 
with the characters who live those emotional experiences. 
Researchers including Hung [51] have now clearly 
demonstrated that storytelling used for learning has positive 
effects on motivation, knowledge consolidation and 
awareness building. 
HUMOR: and then you want to laugh and make people 
laugh. Laughing relaxes mind and opens it up to new stimuli, 
it helps to fix situations in memory and promotes learning, 
because mind does not distinguish between spontaneous and 
induced laughter. In general, laughing always produces great 
psychological and physiological benefits. According to 
Hippocrates and Galen laughter inevitably influenced the 
course of an illness. Gelotology (from the Greek ghelos= 
laughter and logos= science; the science of laughter) studies 
and applies laughter and positive emotions for the purposes 
of prevention, therapy, rehabilitation and training. This 
science has ascertained that in our bodies there are numerous 
connections between the nervous, endocrine and immune 
systems. Any alteration to one system also affects the others, 
influencing the overall health of an individual. Laughter 
activates the glands that produce endorphins, which stimulate 
and strengthen the immune system. Various studies over 
time have richly demonstrated the power of laughter in 
different areas of life. Patch Adams, the father of clown 
therapy, together with other doctors, has made great 
contributions to the study of the effects of positive emotions. 
And today, laughter therapy also enters homes and offices. 
Many coaches use laughter to facilitate the achievement of 
serenity, well-being and success in private life and at work. 
Warm cognition or warm learning undoubtedly makes it 
possible to learn better and faster, by using smile and fun. 
Irony produces solidarity, cohesion, inclusive dialogue, but 
also adaptability, resilience and questioning. Laughter is a 
fundamental aspect of antifragility. It is no coincidence that 
we are increasingly talking today about humor training or 
even humor coaching. Smile: 
• 
resizes limiting beliefs and reactivates positive 
attitudes towards potential and limits. 
• 
activates psychological and neural resources that 
awaken the body and mind from moments of 
immobility. 
• 
deconstructs habitual patterns of perception.  
This allows to see, feel and therefore experience things from 
another point of view. It stimulates lateral thinking and 
creativity, facilitates the magical synthesis of fantasy and 
reality. Davies [23] hypothesized that the origin of the forms 
of humor linked to tragedies or catastrophic events is also a 
consequence of the widespread and massive media coverage 
of such events, as was also the case during the Coronavirus 
pandemic. It seems that the continuous media narrative plays 
a significant role in how the pandemic emergency is 
perceived, generating increases in stress and anxiety (Garfin, 
Silver, & Holman, [43]). In this scenario, as in the past, 
humor has been and is a possible way of salvation (Fessell, 
[37]), "[...] the most powerful defense mechanism" (Freud, 
[41]), with different functions acting on physical and mental 
well-being, quality of life and perception of events. The use 
of humor or comedy helps to overcome stressful moments 
(Fritz, Russek, & Dillon, [40]) or to mitigate their negative 
effects (Pietrantoni & Dionigi, [79]). More generally, 
experiencing comic situations supports mental and emotional 
well-being (Borcherdt, 2002[5]), has a beneficial effect on 
health conditions and mood (Marziali, McDonald, & 
Donahue, [62]; Vagnoli & Dionigi, [106]) and allows for a 
more positive evaluation of experiences and quality of life 
(Rivista italiana studi sull'umorismo, [86]). 
III. 
CONTENT AND LEARNING PATH 
The content of the webseries was divided into 9 episodes: 
- Video call: your survival kit (episode zero) 
- Remote working- how to live it well 
- The effects of remote working 
- Video calls: how to deal with them 
- A good video presence 
- Dive into deep working 
- Video calls: instructions for use 
- Managing a team remotely 
- Healthy misunderstandings 
 
The development team was made up of different 
professionals: 
learning 
experience 
designer 
(trainer), 
scriptwriter (trainer), actors, video maker, web designer, 
graphic designer, developer, social media manager, as well 
as Sorgenia representatives and staff. 
An article in “Sorgenia Up”, the company's official 
magazine, kicked off not only the training campaign, but also 
the related social experience, to increase the interest of the 
company's population in the release of the episodes, which 
ended with the publication of the classic bloopers. In a 
difficult moment of health emergency and from the 
company's need to communicate to its employees, who had 
been remote working for months, “We are here”, and the 
idea of the dedicated web series was born. 
The proposal was a targeted training and information 
initiative, but also a people-caring operation aimed at 
providing employees with 'good practices' to deal with 
remote working positively, effectively and without stress. 
The "distance" in carrying out work activities did not affect 
the sense of belonging to the company, which continued 
unabated to take care of its employees. 
 
IV. 
WORKING METHOD 
Compared to a classical model of designing and developing 
content for digital learning, in this project some phases were 
specifically taken care to make content and method 
functional for the objective to promote participants high 
engagement. In the following, indications on the most 
peculiar phases of the project are given. 
1) Client material receipt  and demand analysis  
The project started with a careful analysis of the client's 
needs. In several meetings, the client's values, intentions, 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

objectives and received reference materials were brought to 
light. At the end of the analysis, a project document was 
produced which presented the methodology and action plan. 
2) Drafting of the macro-design (number of episodes, 
subjects, campaign calendar) 
The design work started with the analysis of the 
materials/interviews with the owners, to structure a 
preliminary map of the learning experience. The next step 
was to identify the learning objectives, as "the description of 
a performance that students must be able to show in order to 
be considered competent" by Mager [60]. Specifically, the 
learning objectives’ tree is hierarchical structure, constructed 
in relation to content, explicit in the results to be produced 
and enriched with indications of complexity according to 
Bloom's taxonomy [4]. Design and development of two 
prototypes, differing in narrative style and graphic format 
and client’s choice of prototype 
3) Script editing 
For the design of videos Piazza Copernico uses a 
storyboard model inspired by real screenplays, with 
essential editing, typical of the genre. This format is used 
indiscriminately for videos with live actors, such as video 
lessons, sketches, commercials, and for graphic videos such 
as motion graphics, whiteboard animation, etc. The script is 
divided into several columns containing: narration and 
dialogue, scene description, settings, character mimicry, 
graphic effects and text on screen, music, filming materials, 
location, etc. 
4) Script validation 
5) Casting actors and extras 
Piazza Copernico has professional actors, with experience 
in theatre and cinema/TV, who are able to perform and 
enhance the scripts at various levels. In addition to the 
actors, in order to act on engagement, enhancing the sense 
of belonging to the project and the company, Sorgenia 
workers also participated in the role of protagonists, who 
were available for filming and interpreting the scripts. 
6) Filming 
For videos played by actors, Piazza Copernico shoots in 
its own studio, or in other indoor or outdoor locations, 
depending on the needs of the script. In this case, both studio 
filming, on green screens, and in real locations were carried 
out, as well as direct screen casting to reproduce remote 
working situations and video calls. The operator/director and 
scriptwriter cooperated constantly throughout the production. 
Sorgenia's HR representatives launched a company contest 
for employees to participate as actors: the countless entries to 
the experience confirmed the interest in the initiative. A short 
casting among people was carried out and 10 employees 
were selected to participate in the filming. 
7) Design and creation of final infographics 
 
Figure 3.  Figure: Infographic example 
8) Editing and post-production 
Made by professional video makers with dedicated 
software such as Premiere and After Effect, suitable for 
editing and compositing, with the possibility of adding text, 
motion graphics and VFX elements of various kinds, 
designed and planned by the developer in consultation with 
the director and screenwriter. 
9) Tracking preparation 
10) Debug and publishing in Piazza Copernico’s LMS 
(Learning Management System) 
The episodes were assembled in a scorm package, with 
content structuring that follows a linear and sequential logic: 
it is necessary to complete the fruition of each episode, 
before being able to move on to the next one. The engine 
used, standard scorm, is accessible and mobile friendly. 
11) Serial delivery 
The training campaign lasted approximately six months 
(May - October 2021).  A calendar for the publication of the 
episodes was structured and shared with the company. The 
episodes were published every 2-3 weeks, also in 
consideration of Sorgenia's working calendar (e.g., holidays). 
V. 
RESULTS 
In the pilot phase, the results were collected from the 
point of view of the perceived impact by the management, 
since by design choice no direct ex post evaluation tools 
were included on the training experience. Instead, it is 
important to consider the impact on the working climate and 
processes, as assessed by the company, internally and 
independently from the webseries design group. 
The evaluation carried out within the company is 
summarized in the contribution of Dr. Silvia Guidi 
(Diversity, Inclusion & People Care, Innovation & 
Development Department of Sorgenia SpA) commenting on 
the experience: "Remote working - The web series was a new 
learning experience for us: thanks to our collaboration with 
the Piazza Copernico team, for the first time we used irony to 
transfer valuable content and we did it in the midst of a 
pandemic, when the context around us was anything but 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

'playful'. Hence the decision to convey instructions on how to 
best live our new 'connected life' in a light-hearted and fun 
way that was in line with our values, among which the 
principle of 'HAVE FUN' stands out, which translates as 
follows: in Sorgenia we face the challenges we face with 
enthusiasm and passion, collaborating with each other and 
encouraging self-fulfillment in everyone. In addition, we 
directly involved our colleagues through a 'contest' that 
allowed them to play a leading or co-leading role in some 
episodes of the web series, alongside the actors of Piazza 
Copernico: another aspect that generated engagement and 
helped make this training project even more interesting and 
stimulating for us at Sorgenia". 
Future corporate objectives include adopting the 
developed model as applicable to all content of universal 
interest to the corporate population, where it is essential to 
share best practices and corporate values. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The project was strongly oriented towards training 
engagement, as important factor for a broad and widespread 
participation for remote workers, and to actively promoting 
the best fundamental practices for working effectively and 
maintaining adequate wellbeing and a good quality of life.  
In transformative organizational contexts where practices 
and values need to be conveyed clearly, quickly and 
effectively, traditional training paradigms are out of place. 
engagement is the winning factor to be achieved and 
promoted. In the project, engagement was pursued at all 
stages of the project, i.e.:  
• 
in the design of real-realistic situations related to the 
working context,  
• 
in filming by involving company people and places, 
• 
in the direct, ironic and emblematic language,  
• 
in dissemination on the company's social networks. 
The fundamental lever used was the recognition/ 
identification that created closeness in single participant to 
the stories, and the sharing among the participants (who 
recognized the situations experienced from different points 
of view), as well as the ironic key to demystify the criticality 
in favor of a more solution-oriented reading. 
The project has shown multiple potential transferability 
elements, as this methodology is exportable to other 
contexts, contents and organizational change process. In 
terms of content, the episodes are built on typical work 
routines of many companies, which could benefit from the 
dissemination of good practices to experience remote 
working effectively and positively. From the point of view of 
method, its effectiveness was demonstrated precisely in its 
ability to shorten the distance between personal experience 
and organizational experience, helping to reduce the 
emotional distance from the organization, and encouraging 
involvement. In terms of development, all material was used, 
even errors (bloopers), which helped to interest people in the 
content. From the training point of view, in fact, the aim of 
this type of training material is to use formats typical of other 
contexts (e.g., television), to interest people in the topics of 
interest, then providing content (e.g., infographics, materials, 
etc.) to refocus the training meaning of the video material. 
This refocusing on training is fundamental to avoid the risks 
connected to these types of formats, which, by focusing 
attention on situations, can risk a blurring of the underlying 
training meaning. Therefore, authors suggest some caution in 
method use and dissemination, alias the reality ironical copy 
(ironical replication of reality). It is necessary to strengthen 
the collection of emblematic stories and concrete examples at 
an early stage, to strengthen the link with the reality. It is 
also strategic involving company staff more actively in the 
material production. Finally, a key winning element is to 
include tools for collecting and listening to the real effects in 
the working context (e.g., surveys, communities, focus 
groups, kpi analysis.). Only through a perceptions and 
meanings analysis on actual difficulties, it will be possible to 
design and redesign videos and the learning mix to be most 
suitable to support the organization’s objectives. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A heartfelt thanks goes to Silvia Guidi (Diversity, 
Inclusion & People Care, Innovation & Development 
Director of Sorgenia SpA) for her far-sighted vision, her 
passion, the concreteness of her values and the trust she 
places in our team. Thanks also to the whole design and 
development team of Piazza Copernico, for the dedication 
and engaging energy with which they carry out training 
initiatives that are always new, engaging, beautiful, believing 
in creativity as a group value: Claudia Falconio, Saverio 
Santulli Sanzo, Marta Federici, Daniele Consorti, Alice 
Antonello, Silvio Meconi, Teresa Orlando, Thomas 
Mezzetti. Many thanks to Daniela Pellegrini and the entire 
R&D group of Piazza Copernico for their support, 
motivation and the always stimulating exchange on 
experiences and experiments. Sincere thanks to Oliviero 
Vittori (Director) and Marco Luzzatto (Administrator) for 
allowing this initiative and all Piazza Copernico' staff who 
enthusiastically joined the research and for their rich 
contribution. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P., 
“Salute! 
Ovvero 
come 
un 
medico-clown 
cura 
gratuitamente i pazienti con l’allegria e con l’amore”, Urra, 
Milan, p. 130, 2004 
[2] M. Banzato, “Apprendere in rete”, Utet Libreria, Torino, 2002  
[3] P. L. Berger, “Homo ridens”, Mulino, Bologna, 1999 
[4] B. S. Bloom, “Tassonomia degli obiettivi educativi”, Giunti & 
Lisciani, 1983 
[5] B. Borcherdt,  “Humor and its contributions to mental health”. 
Journal of Rational - Emotive and Cognitive - Behavior 
Therapy, 
20(3–4), 
247–257,  
https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1021168527963, 2002 
[6] A. Briganti, “On line education. Formare in rete”, Consorzio 
Universitario For.com, Franco Angeli, Milan, 2002  
[7] S. Brown (eds.), “Open and distance learning: case studies 
from industry and education”, Kogan, London, 1997 
[8] J. S. Bruner, “The process of education”, Harvard U. P., 
Cambridge, Mass., 1961 
[9] J. S. Bruner, “Actual Minds: possible words”, The Jerusalem-
Harvard Lectures, 1987. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[10] J. S. Bruner, “The Narrative Construction of Reality.” Critical 
Inquiry 18, vol. 1, pp-1-21, 1991. 
[11] M. Bruscaglioni, “Per una formazione vitalizzante”, Franco 
Angeli, Milan, 2011 
[12] F. Butera and M. La Rosa, “Formazione, sviluppo 
organizzativo e gestione delle risorse umane,” Franco Angeli, 
Milan, 1997 
[13] J. Calder and A. McCollum, “Open and flexible learning in 
vocational education and training”, Kogan, London, 1998 
[14] A. Calvani and M. Rotta, “Comunicazione e apprendimento 
in Internet, Erickson”, Trento, 1999.  
[15] A. Calvani and M. Rotta, “Fare formazione in Internet. 
Manuale di didattica on line”, Erickson, Trento, 2000 
[16] A. Calvani and M. Rotta, “Progettare Multimedia”, 
Garamond, Roma, 2000. 
[17] M. Castagna, “La lezione nella formazione degli adulti”, 
Franco Angeli, 2007 
[18] C. Casula, “I porcospini di Schopenhauer. Come progettare e 
condurre un gruppo di formazione di adulti”, Franco Angeli, 
Milan, 2007 
[19] T.Chambel, C. Zahn and Finke M., “Hypervideo and 
Cognition: Designing VideoBased Hypermedia for Individual 
Learning and Collaborative Knowledge Building”, in E. 
Alkalifa (Ed.), “Cognitively Informed Systems: Utilizing 
Practical Approaches to Enrich Information Presentation and 
Transfer”, Idea Group Publishing, 2006 
[20] L. Crosta, “E-learning fra apprendimento e insegnamento: 
dimensioni etiche e linee formative”, U&Strumenti, Milan, 
2002 
[21] F. E. X. Dance, “A Helical Model of Communication, in 
Human Communication Theory”, Holt, Rinehart&Winston, 
London, 1967. 
[22] T. H. Davenport and L. Prusak, “Working Knowledg”e, 
Harvard Business School Press, 2000 
[23] C. Davies, “Jokes that follow mass-mediated disasters in a 
global electronic age”. In P. Narváez (Ed.), “Of Corpse: 
Death and Humor in Folkore and Popular Culture”, pp. 15–
34, Logan, UT: Utah State University Press, 2003 
[24] D. De Masi (eds.), “L’avvento del postindustriale”, Franco 
Angeli, Milan, 1985  
[25] D. De Masi (eds.), “L’emozione e la regola”, Laterza, 1995 
[26] D. De Masi (eds.), “Verso la formazione post-industriale”, 
Franco Angeli, Milan, 1993. 
[27] D. De Masi, “Il futuro del lavoro. Fatica e ozio nella società 
postindustriale”, Rizzoli, Milan, 1999 
[28] D. De Masi, “Ozio creativo”, Rizzoli, Milan, 2000 
[29] M. De Rossi and C. Petrucco, “Le narrazioni digitali per 
l'educazione e la formazione”, Carocci, 2013 
[30] J. Dirksen, “Learning Design. Progettare un apprendimento 
efficace”, Pearson Italia, 2017 
[31] W. Draves, “Teaching online”, River Falls, Lern Books, 
Wisconsin, 2000 
[32] N. Duarte, “Presenta storie visive che trasformano il 
pubblico”, Unicomunicazione, 2019 
[33] N. Duarte, “Slide:ology. L’arte e la scienza di creare grandi 
presentazioni”, Unicomunicazione 2019 
[34] J. Dewey, “The Training of Thought”, Kessinger Pub Co, 
2005 
[35] M. Eisenstad and T. Vincent, “The knowledge web learning 
and collaboratine on the net”, Kogan Page, London, 1998 
[36] Ebert, L., Feierabend, S., Karg, U., Rathgeb, T., 2011. JIM-
Studie 2012. “Jugend, Information, (Multi-) Media (JIM study 
2012th 
Youth, 
Information, 
(multi-) 
media). 
Medienpädagogischer 
Forschungsverbund 
Südwest”, 
Stuttgart, 2011  
[37] D. Fessell, “Laughter Leaves Me Lighter”. JAMA, 323(24), 
2476. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.9283, 2020 
[38] D. Francescato, “Ridere è una cosa seria”, Mondadori, Milan 
2002 
[39] Franke et al., “Capturing teachers’ generative change: A 
follow-up study of professional development”, American 
Educational Research Journal, vol. 38, n. 3, pp. 653- 689, 
2011 
[40] H. L. Fritz, L. N. Russek and M. M. Dillon, “Humor Use 
Moderates the Relation of Stressful Life Events With 
Psychological Distress”. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 
vol. 
43(6), 
pp. 
845–859. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167217699583, 2017 
[41] S. Freud, “Jokes and their relation to the unconscious” (J. 
Strachey, Trans.). New York, NY (ed. or. 1905): Norton,1960 
[42] R. M. Gagné, “Le condizioni dell'apprendimento”, Armando 
Armando editore 1990 
[43] D. R. Garfin, R. C. Silver and E. A. Holman, “The novel 
coronavirus (COVID-2019) outbreak: Amplification of public 
health consequences by media exposure”. Health Psychology, 
vol. 39(5), pp. 355–357, 2020 
[44] M. Giannakos, L.E. Jaccheri and J. Krogstie, “Exploring the 
relationship between video lecture usage patterns and 
students' 
attitudes”, 
British 
Journal 
of 
Educational 
Technology, vol. 47, no. 6, 2014 
[45] G. Gambirasio, “Formazione formatori”, Franco Angeli, 2014 
[46] M. Gotuzzo and F. Tassistro, “L’arte di presentare”, Edizioni 
FAG Milan, 2013 
[47] J. Haidt, “Felicità: un'ipotesi. Verità moderne e saggezza 
antica”, Codice, 2008 
[48] L. Haraism, “Learning networks: A field guide to teaching 
and learning online”, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1995. 
[49] L. Haraism, “Online education: prospectives on a new 
environment”, Praeger, New Y De Rossi, 2009ork, 1990 
[50] B. Holmberg, “Individualized distance education”, IAD, 
Anno X, n. 10-11, Tecnodid, Naples, aprile-agosto 1998. 
[51] C. M. Hung, G. J. Hwang, and I. Huang, “A project-based 
digital storytelling approach for improving students' learning 
motivation, 
problem-solving 
competence 
and 
learning 
achievement”. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 
15(4), 368-379, 2012 
[52] Rapporto_JAMES, School of applied psychology, Zurich 
University, 2016 
[53] E. A. Kirkpatrick, “An experimental study of memory”. 
Psychological Review, vol. 1, pp. 602 -609, 1894 
[54] M. S. Knowles, “The Modern Practice of Adult Education: 
Andragogy Versus Pedagogy”. Association Press, 1980 
[55] M. S. Knowles, E. F. Holton III and R. A. Swanson, “Quando 
l’adulto impara. Andragogia e sviluppo della persona”, 
Franco Angeli, 2016 
[56] D. Kolb, “Experiential Learning: Experience As The Source 
Of Learning And Development”, Prentice-Hall, 1984 
[57] K. Levin, “Frontiers in Group Dynamics: concept, method 
and reality in Social Science; social equilibria and social 
change” in Human Relations, 1947 
[58] E. C. Lindeman, “The Meaning of Adult Education”, New 
Republic, New York, 1926. 
[59] D. Lyon, “La società dell’informazione,” Il Mulino, Bologna, 
1988 
[60] R. F. Mager, “Gli obiettivi didattici”, Giunti & Lisciani, 1987 
[61] A. H. Maslow, “A theory of human motivation”, 
Psychological Review, 1943 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[62] E. Marziali, L. McDonald and P. Donahue, “The role of 
coping humor in the physical and mental health of older 
adults”, Aging & Mental Health, vol. 12(6), pp. 713–718.  
doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/13607860802154374, 2008 
[63] J. Medina, “Il cervello: istruzioni per l’uso”. Bollati 
Boringhieri, 2010 
[64] M. D. Merril, “Constructivism and Instructional Design”, in 
T. M. Duffy e D. H. Johansen “Contructivism and the 
Tecnology of Instructon: a Conversation”, Erlbaum, Hillsdale, 
1992 
[65] J. Meyrowitz, “Oltre il senso del luogo”, Bakerville, Bologna, 
1993  
[66] S. Miceli, “Imprese, reti e comunità virtuali”, Etas, Milan, 
2000 
[67] E. Minaříková, T. Janík, M. Píšová and K. Kostková, “ELF 
teachers' use of Czech and/or English language when 
commenting on EFL classroom videos”. EARLI SIG 11 
“Practice-Oriented Teacher Learning and Professional Devel- 
opment” Frauenchiemsee, Germania. 2014 
[68] P. Montero, “Individualizaciòn del aprendizaje a distanzia: un 
reto”, IAD Istruzione a Distanza, vol. X, pp. 10-11, Tecnodid, 
Naples, aprile-agosto 1998. 
[69] M. 
Morabito, 
“Online 
distance 
education: 
historical 
prospectives and pratical application”, American Coastline 
University, Dissertation.com, 1999 
[70] G. Moro, “La formazione nelle società post-industriali. 
Modelli e criteri di valutazione”, Carocci, , 1998. 
[71] P. Mottana, “Il mentore come antimaestro”, Clueb, Bologna, 
1996 
[72] R. C. Nacamulli, “La formazione, il cemento e la rete. E-
learning, management delle conoscenze e processi di sviluppo 
organizzativo”, Etas Libri, Milan, 2003. 
[73] N. Negroponte, Being Digital, Alfred Knopf, New York, 1995 
[74] J . Nelsen, “La Disciplina positiva”, Il leone verde, 2019 
[75] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, “The knowledge-creating 
company”, Guerini e Associati, Milan, 1997 
[76] R. M. Pallof and K. Pratt, “Building learning communities in 
cyberspace: effective strategies for the online classroom”, 
Jossey-Bass Publishers, S.Francisco, 1999 
[77] O. Peters, “Learning And teaching in distance education”, 
Kogan, London, 1998 
[78] J. Piaget, “The Psychology Of The Child”, Basic Books, 1972 
[79] L. Pietrantoni and A. Dionigi, “Quando ridere fa male: la 
relazione tra eventi di vita, stili umoristici e disagio 
psicologico”. Psicoterapia Cognitiva e Comportamentale, vo. 
12(3), pp. 301–316, 2006 
[80] M. Pigliacampo, “Formazione e nuovi media. Modelli 
culturali ed organizzativi per le tecnologie della formazione”, 
Armando Editore, 2003 
[81] M. Polanyi, “Personal Knowledge”, University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago, 1958 
[82] M. Polanyi, “The tacit dimension”, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
London, 1966 
[83] L. Porter, “Creating the virtual classroom: distance learning 
with the Internet”, Wile, New Jersey, 1997 
[84] R. Restak, “Think Smart: A Neuroscientist's Prescription for 
Improving Your Brain's Performance”.  Penguin Publishing 
Group, 2009. 
[85] J. Rifkin, “L’era dell’accesso. La rivoluzione della new 
economy”, Baldini&Castaldi, 1995 
[86] Italian Journal of Humour Studies, Vol. 4, Issue 1, January 
2021. Available from: https://www.risu.biz/en/volume-4-
issue-1-january-2021/ 
[87] S. Rodotà, “Tecnopolitica”, Laterza, 1997 
[88] C. R. Rogers, “Client-Centered Terapy”, Houghton-Mifflin, 
Boston, 1951 
[89] C. R. Rogers, “Freedom to Learn, Merril, Columbus, Ohio, 
1969” 
[90] P. G. Rossi (eds.), “Da testo alla rete, multimedialità e 
didattica”, Tecnodid, Naples, 2000 
[91] D. Rowntree, “Exploring open and distance learning”, Kogan 
Page, London, 1994 
[92] R. Santagata, C. Zannoni and J. W. Stigler, “The role of 
lesson analysis in pre-service teacher education: an empirical 
investigation of teacher learning from a virtual video-based 
field 
experience”, 
Journal 
of 
Mathematics 
Teacher 
Education, vol. 10,  pp. 123-140. 2007 
[93] R. Santagata and J. Guarino, “Using Video to Teach Future 
Teachers to Learn from Teaching”, ZDM The International 
Journal of Mathematics Education, vol. 43, n. 1, pp. 133-145, 
2011. 
[94] O. Scardella, “Tutorship e apprendimento”, La Nuova Italia 
Scientifica, Firenze, 1995. 
[95] M. Sykes, A. N. Malik, M. D. West, “Storytelling e visual 
design”, Edizioni FAG Milan, 2013 
[96] E. L. Thorndike, “Adult Learning”, Macmillan, New York, 
1928. 
[97] M. Tomassini, “Apprendimento continuo e formazione”, 
Franco Angeli, Milan. 1995 
[98] A. Tough, “The Adult’s Learning Projects”, Ontario istitute 
for Studies In Education, Toronto, 1979 
[99] G. Trentin, “Lo spettro dei possibili usi delle reti nella 
formazione continua e a distanza”, Lettera ASFOR. 
Formazione manageriale, vol. XII, n. 1-2  
[100] G. Trentin, “Apprendimento in rete e condivisione delle 
conoscenze”, Franco Angeli, Milan, 2004 
[101] G. Trentin, “Dalla formazione a distanza all’apprendimento in 
rete”, Franco Angeli, Milan, 2001 
[102] G. Trentin., “Didattica in rete. Internet, telematica e 
cooperazione educativa”, Garamond,1996  
[103] G. Trentin, “Insegnare e apprendere in rete”, Zanichelli, 
Bologna, 1998  
[104] G. Trentin, “Telematica e formazione a distanza: Il caso 
Polaris”, Franco Angeli, Milan, 1999 
[105] G. Trevisol, “Il tutor nei processi formativi”, Franco Angeli, 
Milan, 2002 
[106] L. Vagnoli and A. Dionigi, “I clown a sostegno del processo 
di cura: una revisione della letteratura”. Italian Journal of 
Humour Studies RISU, vol. 2 (1), pp. 7–22, 2019 
[107] E. A. van Es and M. G. Sherin, “Using Video to Support 
Teachers' Ability to Interpret Classroom Interactions”, 
Northwestern University, 2002 
[108] E. A. Van Es and M. G. Sherin. “Mathematics teachers’ 
learning to notice in the context of a video club”, Teaching 
and teacher education, vol, 24.2, pp. 244-276, 2008 
[109] T. Vescovi, (eds.), “E-learning. La formazione manageriale 
nella rete”, Il Sole 24 Ore, 2002  
[110] L. S. Vygotskij, “Pensiero e linguaggio”, Giunti, Firenze, 
1996 
[111] K. White and B. Wheight (eds.), “The online teaching guide: 
an handbook to attitudes, strategies, and techniques for the 
virtual classroom”, Allyn and Bacon, Needham Height, MA, 
1999 
 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Attention and Meditation Quantification Using Neural Networks 
Anca O. Muresan 
Computer Science 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania  
e-mail: muresan_anca95@yahoo.com 
Felix G. Hamza-Lup 
Computer Science 
Savannah, GA USA 
e-mail: fhamzalup@georgiasouthern.edu
 
 
Abstract— The advancements in dry-sensor technology have 
enabled easy brain activity data collection thorough a variety 
of 
portable 
brain 
computer 
interfaces 
based 
on 
electroencephalography 
(EEG) 
technology. 
This 
paper 
proposes a data analysis framework for evaluating the impact 
of various brainwave frequencies (delta, theta, alpha, beta, and 
gamma) on human attention. Multiple working scenarios have 
been created for the subjects targeting to enhance their level of 
attention. To properly evaluate the data by utilizing the 
artificial neural networks, several hypotheses have been 
defined. Their purpose is to group the brainwaves into low to 
medium frequency type and high-frequency type with the 
attention and meditation values and attempt to establish 
interconnections. 
Keywords-brain-computer interface; attention quantification. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The study of the brain activity is a fascinating research 
topic, due to the inherent complexity of the human brain. The 
brain has remarkable and uncharted abilities to capture, 
integrate and process data. It can be seen as an enormous 
network of neurons that enables vast data processing 
potential. It also acts as a storage center and control, where 
information coming from senses merge and undergo several 
complex processes to help in the decision-making processes. 
Although the full extent of the brain’s capacity it yet to be 
discovered, there are encouraging research avenues that 
advocate for life quality increase, recovery and rehabilitation 
for a plethora of medical conditions, such as stroke [1], 
paraplegia [2], Parkinson’s disease [3], Alzheimer disease 
[4], etcetera.  With the advent of dry sensor Brain Computer 
Interface (BCI) technology, capturing the brain’s electrical 
activity can be done on a large scale. A BCI acts like a 
platform that detects and records small fluctuation in 
electricity generated by the cerebral cortex. The electrical 
activity of the brain is monitored in real-time using an array 
of electrodes, which are placed on the head skin in a process 
known as electroencephalography (EEG). The EEG readings 
represent the user’s perception, and reaction to various 
stimuli from the surrounding environment. The brainwave 
frequencies depend upon the firing speed of the neurons and 
the number of neurons that fire simultaneously.  
BCIs connect the brain with the computer by enabling the 
brain-waves raw data transmission, called neurofeedback. 
BCIs present new methods to enhance human-computer 
interaction, and opens new avenues for augmenting human 
abilities. One promising research direction evaluates brain 
functions via BCI and cures people with brain or spinal 
injuries via micro-grains implanted into the brain [5]. 
Analyzing the brainwave data, input-output patterns can be 
established with the aid of machine learning. The subject’s 
intentions are correlated with specific outside actions.  
Attention and meditation are internal underlying 
activities that occur continuously and are manifested either in 
a conscious or unconscious manner.  Meditation does not 
have a rigid definition or live representation; however, the 
desired purpose through meditation is to reach the so-called 
“Zen” state of mind, to reduce pain or anxiety. Meditation 
aims to better the mindset and to train the mind in order to 
react properly in demanding situations. Attention is an 
internal process represented by an absolute mind state of full 
focus on a given action. Attention is the capability of 
concentrating exclusively on a specific task, while being able 
to ignore other external or internal triggers. The borderline 
between attention and meditation is shallow. One can be 
attentive while in meditation and vice versa.  
In this article, a new method is proposed to evaluate and 
objectively quantify the attention and meditation levels of the 
subject with the aid of the NeuroSky BCI as a hardware 
device and the Neural Network software. The results are 
evidencing some patterns between the type of activity the 
subject is involved in and the brainwaves at that particular 
time. Based on the EEG data collection during various 
scenarios, the aim is to decipher a nuanced understanding of 
the brain during attentive and meditative stages. 
Attention Levels: 
 
Arousal: Refers to our activation level and level of 
alertness, whether we are tired or energized. 
 
Focused Attention: Refers to our ability to focus 
attention on a stimulus. 
 
Sustained Attention: The ability to attend to a 
stimulus or activity over a long period. 
Brain signals can be classified into five basic categories, 
Delta Waves (.5 - 3 Hz), Theta Waves (3 - 8 Hz), Alpha 
Waves (8 - 12 Hz), Beta Waves (12 - 38 Hz), Gamma Waves 
(38 - 42 Hz).  
Rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
presents an overview of the evolution of BCI and their 
applicability. Section 3 depicts the software and hardware 
components utilized, alongside the deployed methodology. 
Section 4 provides the hypotheses and scenarios of the 
experiments. Section 5 outlines the captured results for all 
hypotheses and scenarios. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

II. 
RELATED WORK 
A BCI is a non-invasive approach of retrieving and 
monitoring cerebral activity (EEG recordings), and its 
methodology is seamless; as a result it has a wide range of 
applications. BCI’s and their associated data are used in 
neuroscience, cognitive science [6], psychology [7], 
psychiatric branch [8]. BCI’s area of application has 
extended over the years to neuro-management [9], neuro-
marketing [10], human interactions, and engagement. 
An impressive research effort has been conducted 
towards improving life in many aspects by utilizing brain-
controlled techniques, including the alleviation of comorbid 
psychological disorders. The employment of specific 
neurofeedback protocols serves as a remedial treatment for 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) [11] and 
Autism 
Spectrum 
Disorder 
(ASD) 
sufferers 
[12], 
normalizing irregular neural activity that occurs during high 
anxiety episodes. Therefore, in some cases neurofeedback is 
considered an alternative for the pharmaceutical treatment. 
Other groundbreaking applications of neurofeedback 
include prosthetic and robotic arms, human gait [13], 
emotion detection, and classification [14]. Newer approaches 
suggest significant advantages in employing EEG interfaces 
in workplace optimization [15] through stress recognition 
[16], in neuro-marketing [17], decision factors, and hyper 
scanning [18] that follows the brain processing, sustaining 
synchronization of actions. With the fast growing horizon in 
life quality improvement, a plentitude of EEG based 
palliative remedies occurred. Among those, BCIs are 
employed both invasively via MEA (microelectrode array)/ 
via brain micro implants and non-invasively via electrodes 
placed on the head, i.e., dry/wet biosensor technology. The 
biosensors detect minuscule amounts of electricity generated 
by the brain and drive various protocols quantifying the 
meditation and attention levels (e.g., for the Attention Deficit 
Hyperactivity Disorder and Autism Spectrum Disorder 
cases). Meditation has benefits in subsiding the severity of 
ADHD [19], ASD [12], depression, stress, anxiety, 
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD), personal disorders 
[20]. 
Although many studies focused on exploring the 
brainwave feedback via EEG in the sphere of neuroscience, 
its application realm broadened and so did the discipline 
fields as shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  Systematic mapping of EEG applications based on disciplines. 
The systematic mapping depicted in Figure 1 was carried 
out on the Springer database by using the search strings 
indicated on the left, the results were filtered on their release 
date between 2000-2022. 
Over the last two decades, the interest in the BCI 
research topic has exponentially grown. The top five activity 
fields that are tightly connected to the BCI are computer 
science, engineering, biomedicine, medicine and public 
health and philosophy refer to Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Time evolution of BCI interest based on the research topic. 
The brain produces five types of waves (Delta, Theta, 
Alpha, Beta, and Gamma) continuously and for each BCI 
recording, only one of the brainwaves will be dominant 
having the greatest intensity. In case of a single BCI dry 
sensor, its placement is significant in the securing the best 
neurofeedback. For instance, the prefrontal region of the 
brain is in charge of problem solving, generating multiple 
prosaic/routine like judgments, planning, behavior and 
emotions. The Pre-Frontal Cortex (PFC) functions are 
complex cognitive functions as well as shortsighted 
behavior, to be able to act with a goal in mind, and self-
control. It receives the sensory information, plans resources 
based upon that, and keeps close communication with other 
regions of the brain to enact a reaction. The reactions have a 
broad range, and most importantly, they include redirection 
of attention. 
Five types of brain signals are scrutinized, each of them 
epitomizing special features, such as frequency, amplitude, 
shape, activation stimuli, as well as illustrating their own 
peculiarities related to the physiological facet. The EEG 
records the brain activity in employing the operating 
principles of a differential amplifier, which collects two 
electrical inputs and displays the output as the difference 
between inputs. Extremely beneficial while addressing very 
small electrical signals, such as the ones that appear in the 
brain. 
Initially, the literature sustained the idea that the low-
frequency brainwaves directly influence the meditation level, 
and the high-frequency brainwaves are associated with high 
attention levels. As the research interest in brainwave 
activity grew, studies have shown that high-frequency 
brainwaves are also developed while meditating. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III. 
SYSTEM COMPONENTS 
The systematic sequence of processes employed in the 
paper encompass both a hardware (NeuroSky Headset) and a 
software 
component 
(MindWave 
of 
NeuroSky 
and 
NeuronalNetwork Tool of MatLab). The initial phase is the 
raw brainwave signal acquisition, followed by an intrinsic 
pre-processing step to for feature/pattern extraction. 
A. Hardware Component  
The project employed the Neurosky BCI (link), to collect 
EEG data. As depicted in Figure 3, the NeuroSky’s headset 
fundamental elements are the sensor (electrode) that records 
the EEG data, supported by the ear clip that acts as a ground 
and reference. The electrode and the ear clip of the Neurosky 
BCI record the brain activity by using the operating 
principles of a differential amplifier, which collects two 
electrical inputs and displays the output as the difference 
between them.  
 
Figure 3.  NeuroSky HeadSet. 
The placement of the dry electrode on the Pre-Frontal 
Cortex (PFC) region of the frontal lobe is due to the fact that 
the frontal lobe serves the executive function, making 
decisions and delegating the output supported by the motor 
nerves to the entire body. 
B. Pattern Extraction Neural Network Design 
The process diagram shown in Figure 4 portrays the three 
significant steps followed in pursuance of attaining ready-to-
use data for the neural network procedure. 
 
Figure 4.  Process diagram. 
For pattern extraction we employed the Neural Network 
application (NNstart) of the MatLab environment. This tool 
is designed to mimic the human neuronal system by 
artificially creating a neuronal network, modeled by multiple 
layers of neurons. There are three types of neural layers: 
input, hidden and output layer, as illustrated in Figure 5. 
Within the NNstart, neurons’ pairing is illustrated by 
connection weights of neurons, each neuron has its own 
weight and bias, which is associated with storage of 
information and is fed into the transfer function that serves as 
a liaise model and translates the input variables to output 
variables.   
 
Figure 5.  Multi layered neural network. 
The pre-processed EEG recordings (input data) are 
randomly segregated as follows: 
 
Training - used for training purposes; these are 
presented to the network during the training and the 
network is amended in accordance with its error. 
 
Validation - used to validate that the network is 
generalizing and stop training before overfitting. The 
validation data are used to measure network 
generalization, 
and 
to 
cease 
training 
when 
generalization stops improving. 
 
Testing - used as a completely independent test of 
network generalization. These have no effect on the 
training itself, however they supply an independent 
measure of network performance during and after 
the training.  
 
The input data causes the internal state of the neurons to 
change in accordance to the nature of the input and triggers 
neural activation. The target is the desired output for a given 
input. The output is as close as possible to the target by 
adapting the weights of each node in the network. The output 
of the node is the weighted sum of all inputs and is processed 
by using an activation function that determines the behavior 
of a node. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Artificial Neural Network Structure MatLab. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Figure 6 epitomizes the structure of the neural network in 
MatLab; additionally it presents the input-output connection 
scheme. 
The first part of the functional diagram is represented by 
the NeuroSky headset for  raw brainwave data acquisition; 
Followed by the NeuroSky’s embedded pre-filtering, 
improving the quality of the raw data gathered from neuronal 
activity (weak electrical signals), eye blinking (identified as 
a skin stretch response).  
The pre-processed data is subjected to multiple 
algorithms to be analyzed (feature extraction included) and 
properly interfaced for the user. The result is a document 
containing data values for each brainwave defined by the 
headset’s protocol (Delta, Theta, Alpha1, Alpha2, Beta1, 
Beta2, Gamma1, and Gamma2).  
A proprietary algorithm within the Neurosky’s software 
called NeuroExperimenter computes the levels of attention 
and meditation. For each recorded dataset, there is a time 
stamp, and the sample rate is 1Hz. The second step is to pre-
process the data and prepare it for the actual analysis in 
MatLab software. The pre-processing is represented by 
engaging the data feature engineering technique, which aids 
the prediction percentage in machine learning algorithms, 
handling null values, adequate data import into the NNstart, 
and dataset split into subsets. The third phase achieves the 
pattern extraction with the aid of the NNstart of MatLab. 
C. Parameters Configuration 
To effectively analyze the NeuroSky recordings, input 
and target variables need to be correctly defined within 
MatLab NNstart for each experiment.  The operating scheme 
of NNstart MatLab is the following:  
 
Initialize the weights  
 
Compute the error (difference between output and 
desired output)  
 
Re-compute the weights  
 
Adjust the updated weights  
 
Repeat the process for all training data until the error 
reaches an acceptable level  
 
An epoch represents one training iteration of the data 
though the network, this procedure is repeated until a 
satisfying outcome is obtained. A result that is labeled as 
satisfying entails an error that is below the threshold value or 
the minimum error (difference between the desired output 
and the achieved output). The type of network (feed-
forward), the number of neurons on the hidden layer, the 
training algorithm and inputs and targets vectors must be 
defined. After uploading the data vectors, the program 
divides it into three data categories: training, validation and 
testing, each associated with a percentage. 
The methodology featured in Figure 7 represents a 
graphical illustration of the pathway pursued in order to 
reach the appointed results. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Working methodology. 
IV. 
EXPERIMANTAL SETUP 
The following hypotheses are considered: 
 
 
H0 Both meditation and attention levels are equally 
affected by all eight types of brainwaves defined by 
the NeuroSky headset protocol (Delta, Theta, 
Alpha1, Alpha2, Beta1, Beta2, Gamma1, Gamma2).  
 
H1 The meditation level is equally affected by the 
low to middle frequency brainwaves (Delta, Theta, 
Alpha1, and Alpha2).  
 
H2 The attention level is equally affected by the high 
frequency brainwaves (Beta1, Beta2, Gamma1, 
Gamma2).  
 
H3 contrasting the H2 hypothesis, the meditation 
level is equally affected by the low to middle 
frequency brainwaves (Beta1, Beta2, Gamma1, and 
Gamma2). 
 
H4 contrasting the H1 hypothesis, the attention level 
is equally affected by the high frequency brainwaves 
(Delta, Theta, Alpha1, and Alpha2). 
 
By employing the hypotheses approach, there is a sense 
of inclusiveness, which might open new research avenues. In 
order to complete the cycle, two datasets have been gathered. 
Certain scenarios establish the data acquisition phase: 
Dataset 1: 
 
Scenario 1 - Coding - spent 11 minutes working at 
coding a math game.  
 
Scenario 2 - Simple math - spent 2 minutes doing 
simple math. 
 
Scenario 3 - Reading - spent 2 minutes spent on 
reading the article When Biking and Bears Don't 
Mix (Random article on NY times). 
 
Scenario 4 - Social Media - spent 1 minute looking 
at social media on the phone. 
 
Dataset 2: 
 
Scenario 1 - Baseline experiment for 5 minutes in a 
quiet room. The subject is required to remain silent, 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

stare straight forward at a stationary wall, do not 
move. 
 
Scenario 2 - Simple math for 2 minutes obeying the 
baseline requirements, except the fact that the 
subject must look at the computer’s screen and solve 
math exercises that consist of addition of two 
numbers, both being under 100. The math exercises 
must be taken in the subjects’ head and the solutions 
must not be said out loud.  
 
Scenario 3 - Visual experiment for 2 minutes that 
respect all the criteria mentioned into the baseline 
scenario, except the fact that now the subject will be 
looking at different GIFs or animated pictures.  
 
Scenario 4 - Audio experiment contains three sub-
scenarios that are wrapped into one; the subject will 
listen to three different audio files at different times, 
each audio listening performed by the subject must 
be followed by the brief two-minute baseline break. 
The audio files are very distinct from one another, 
the first and second files contain contrasting music 
genre and aim to determine a personal taste or a 
yes/no reaction. The third audio file is consisting of 
white noise and it is used to observe the subjects’ 
reactions to it. The duration for the first audio 
experiment is five minutes, the second one lasts six 
minutes and the third one four minutes. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The main parameter that has been closely investigated in 
the experimental analysis is the regression of the artificial 
neural network for all of the hypotheses, scenarios and 
subjects. Regression illustrates the connection between the 
output variables and input variables. The regression values 
were acquired after training the neural network for each of 
the cases.  
The first dataset represents the data from a single subject, 
that performed four scenarios, coding, reading, simple math 
and social media browsing. For this particular case, Figure 8 
portrays some trends and patterns, that can be identified with 
the assumption that the data is influenced by the physical and 
emotional state of the subject and their disposition at the time 
of the recording. The overall score for all the scenarios is the 
highest for hypothesis 0, which states that all brainwaves 
impact the levels of both the attention and meditation. One 
can notice that the highest reading was registered by 
employing hypothesis 0, for the reading scenario and the 
lowest regression score for the reading experiment is when 
employing hypothesis 2.  
Dataset 2 is comprised of the data gathered from two 
subjects that performed exactly the same activities. One 
pattern that arises is that in case of H0, all of the regression 
recordings associated to the scenarios have the highest 
values, indicating a better fit. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Dataset 1 Experimental Data Comparison Based on Hypotheses 
and Scenarios. 
 
Figure 9.  Dataset2 - Subject 1 Experimental Data Comparison Based on 
Hypotheses and Scenarios. 
 
Figure 10.  Dataset2 - Subject 2 Experimental Data Comparison Based on 
Hypotheses and Scenarios. 
Based on the results featured in Figure 9 and Figure 10, 
an appealing parallel ensues. The Baseline activity developed 
a significant regression value for both participants when 
considering hypothesis 0 and a low regression value for the 
rest of the hypotheses. The Audio scenario employing H0 
establishes that the second subject has an improved response 
to audio stimuli in regards to attention level, scoring a higher 
regression result in comparison to the first subject; The 
results for the rest of the hypotheses in the Audio scenario 
for both participants are similar. Hypothesis 0 in the Math 
scenario is still as effective as before, both subjects scoring a 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

high regression value for it in contract to the other 
hypotheses. A dichotomy is present when H3 is inspected for 
the Math experiment, the second subject's regression value 
exhibits a mismatch, scoring a low regression level, 
juxtaposing with the first subject's regression score. The 
Visual result reiterates the hypothesis 0 as being 
advantageous in the case of these two participants. The 
methodology engaged throughout the paper is an enabler. By 
enlarging the pool of subjects, the diversity of the scenarios 
and by utilizing the presented method of monitoring 
attention and meditation levels can provide instructional 
designers with knowledge for better designing the learning 
mix, evaluating required cognitive efforts to foster 
attentional processes and ensure better training results.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Objective attention quantification is a complex task. 
However, attention is an important ingredient of learning. 
BCI provide a noninvasive way to collect brain activity in 
real time and may be employed in user attention 
quantification. In this paper, we evaluate several learners as 
they perform different tasks and discuss various methods to 
analyze and compare brainwave data.  We observe common 
patterns for all users, despite the limitations faced in data 
interpretation. The goal is to expand and increase the 
experiments user base to detect patterns in user attention 
based on the audio-visual content presented. We believe that 
BCI can be employed successfully in improving the learning 
outcomes and fine tuning learning materials for adult 
learning. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. M. Young, et al., "Brain–Computer Interface Training after 
Stroke Affects Patterns of Brain–Behavior Relationships in 
Corticospinal Motor Fibers", Front. Hum. Neurosci, p. 457 
September 2016, doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00457. 
[2] S. 
Shokur, 
"Towards 
Brain-Machine 
Interface-Based 
Rehabilitation 
for 
Patients 
with 
Chronic 
Complete 
Paraplegia", SpringerBriefs in Electrical and Computer 
Engineering, Springer, pp. 
133-141, 
April 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-60460-8_14. 
[3] A. Miladinovi, et al., "Evaluation of Motor Imagery-Based 
BCI methods in neurorehabilitation of Parkinson’s Disease 
patients", Annual Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, pp. 3058-
3061, August 2020, doi: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9176651  
[4] R. Dhanush, S. R. Hemanth, N. Yashaswini,  M. K. Sachin,  
M. N. Suryakanth, "Detection of Alzheimer’s disease using 
BCI", International Journal of Progressive Research in 
Science and Engineering, July 2020, 1(4), 184–190, 
https://journals.grdpublications.com/index.php/ijprse/article/v
iew/127. 
[5] J. Lee, et al., "Neural recording and stimulation using wireless 
networks of microimplants", Nature Electronics, pp. 604-614, 
August 2021, doi: 10.1038/s41928-021-00631-8. 
[6] F. Fahimi, et al., "Inter-subject transfer learning with an end-
to-end deep convolutional neural network for EEG-based 
BCI",  Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 16, 026007, 
November 2018, doi: 10.1088/1741-2552/aaf3f6. 
[7] U. Chaudhary, N. Mrachacz-Kersting, N. Birbaumer, 
"Neuropsychological and neurophysiological aspects of brain-
computer-interface (BCI) control in paralysis", The Journal of 
Physiology, vol. 599, pp. 2351-2359, March 2020, doi: 
10.1113/JP278775. 
[8] A. S. Widge1, D. A. Malone Jr., D. D. Dougherty, "Closing 
the Loop on Deep Brain Stimulation for Treatment-Resistant 
Depression", Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 12, p. 175 , 
March 2018, doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00175. 
[9] I. Opris, S. C. Ionescu, M. A. Lebedev, F. Boy, P. Lewinski, 
L. Ballerini, "Application of Neural Technology to Neuro-
Management and Neuro-Marketing", vol. 14, p. 53, February 
2020, doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00053. 
[10] M. Aldaye,M. Ykhlef, A. Al-Nafjan, "Deep Learning for 
EEG-Based Preference Classification in Neuromarketing", 
Applied Sciences, vol. 10, p. 1525, February 2020, doi: 
10.3390/app10041525. 
[11] S. Enriquez-Geppert, D. Smit, M. Garcia Pimenta, M. Arns, 
"Neurofeedback as a Treatment Intervention in ADHD: 
Current Evidence and Practice", Current Psychiatry Reports, 
vol. 21, p. 46, May 2019, doi: 10.1007/s11920-019-1021-4. 
[12] A. Sundaresan, B. Penchina, S. Cheong, V. Grace, A. Valero-
Cabré, and A. Martel, "Evaluating deep learning EEG-based 
mental stress classification in adolescents with autism for 
breathing entrainment BCI", Brain Informatics, vol. 8, p. 13, 
December 2021, doi: 10.1186/s40708-021-00133-5. 
[13] S. Said, et al., "Experimental Investigation of Human Gait 
Recognition Database using Wearable Sensors", Advances in 
Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, vol. 
3, pp. 201-210, July 2018, doi: 10.25046/aj030418. 
[14] J.J. Bird, L. J. Manso, E.P. Ribeiro, A. Ekart, and D. R. Faria, 
"A Study on Mental State Classification using EEG-based 
Brain-Machine Interface", 9th International Conference on 
Intelligent Systems, pp. 795-800 September 2018, doi: 
10.1109/IS.2018.8710576. 
[15] M. Hassib, M. Khamis, S. Friedl, S. Schneegass, and F. Alt, 
"Brainatwork: logging cognitive engagement and tasks in the 
workplace using electroencephalography", 16th International 
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, pp. 305-
310, November 2017, doi: 10.1145/3152832.3152865. 
[16] H. Jebelli, S. Hwang, S. H. Lee, "EEG-based workers' stress 
recognition 
at 
construction 
sites", 
Automation 
in 
Construction, vol. 93, pp. 315-324, May 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.autcon.2018.05.027. 
[17] M. Yadava, P. Kumar, R. Saini, P. Roy, and D. P. Dogra, 
"Analysis 
of 
EEG 
signals 
and 
its 
application 
to 
neuromarketing", Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 
76, pp. 19087-19111, September 2017, doi: 10.1007/s11042-
017-4580-6. 
[18] N. Sinha, et al., "EEG hyperscanning study of inter-brain 
synchrony during cooperative and competitive interaction", , 
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, 
pp. 
4813-4818, 
Octomber 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1109/SMC.2016.7844990. 
[19] X. Y. Lee, et al., "Can We Play with ADHD? An Alternative 
Game-Based 
Treatment 
for Inattentive 
Symptoms 
in 
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder", 
Subconscious 
Learning via Games and Social Media. Gaming Media and 
Social Effects. Springer, pp. 69-88, April 2015, doi: 
10.1007/978-981-287-408-5_6. 
[20] Y. Yang, O. G. Sani, M. B. Lee, H. E. Dawes, E. F. Chang, 
and M. M. Shanechi, "Developing a Closed-Loop Brain-
Computer Interface for Treatment of Neuropsychiatric 
Disorders Using Electrical Brain Stimulation", Brain-
Computer Interface Research, pp. 103-106 , April 2021, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-60460-8_9. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Designing and Implementing a Lightboard Learning Experience for Instructors 
Through the Learning Engineering Process 
 
Lauren Totino & Aaron Kessler 
Residential Education, MIT Open Learning 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA, USA 
Email: ltotino@mit.edu 
 
 
Abstract—The 
Residential 
Education 
team 
at 
the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) followed the 
learning engineering process to design and implement a 
learning experience for instructors that prepares them to 
create videos for students using the Lightboard lecture capture 
system. The content of the online module was designed to 
emphasize evidence-based instructional practices, primarily 
through video examples of instructors experienced in using 
Lightboard demonstrating these best practices. A critical 
component of the learning engineering process is iteration, and 
the team navigated two major iterations to the implementation 
of the learning experience. This paper details each iteration 
highlighting 
the 
specific 
design 
decisions 
and 
design 
justifications, and forwards the practice of tracking such work 
throughout 
the 
implementation. 
Design 
decision 
and 
justification tracking is a practice that can help a team ensure 
an implementation remains learner-centered and backed by 
evidence from the learning sciences, while taking into account 
other factors in the implementation context such as constraints 
of the technology, timeline, and institutional resources. The 
paper concludes by underscoring the practical implications of 
tracking design decisions and justifications for a team 
following the learning engineering process to implement 
effective instructor learning experiences. 
Keywords—learning engineering; learning experience design; 
design process; instructor training; higher education 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the summer of 2020, the Residential Education team at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology followed the 
learning engineering process [5] [7] to design and implement 
a learning experience in the form of an online module for 
instructors that aimed to support their efforts in creating 
Lightboard videos. Lightboard videos are a form of lecture 
capture where instructors write on a lighted glass pane facing 
a camera [1]. Making explicit the underlying assumption of 
how this work supports the community of practitioners, it is 
assumed that impacting student learning begins with 
instructor preparedness to effectively utilize the Lightboard 
technology based on pedagogical actions grounded in the 
learning sciences [6]. Given this, the goal for this specific 
learning experience was to make instructors aware of best 
practices backed by evidence from the learning sciences and 
exemplified in authentic demonstrations of these practices 
enacted by colleagues from across the institution. 
The design team engaged in several key learning 
engineering practices to achieve this goal, including cycles 
of creation, implementation, and investigation [4]. This paper 
will focus on the implementation part of this process, 
specifically key design decisions that were made as the 
implementation context changed over the course of a year 
and a half and resulted in two major iterations. The initial 
design challenge was to create a learning experience to 
address the need for instructors to be supported in 
Lightboard technology in the context of COVID-19 
emergency remote instruction, where the pedagogical 
affordances of Lightboard videos could help address 
teaching and learning challenges of the time. This 
implementation context then changed as the institution 
adopted a new learning management system, Canvas. This 
led to a key pivot in the approach, and the second design 
challenge of adapting the learning experience to Canvas so 
that it increased awareness of and lowered instructors’ 
barrier to entry to the learning experience. 
Ensuring that the reworked learning experience remained 
learner-centered and effective for instructors was the central 
focus of the second iteration of design. To help navigate 
these evolving implementation conditions, the practice of 
tracking design decisions and justifying them by citing 
institutional constraints and affordances (e.g., technology, 
resources, timeline) along with heuristics and principles 
extracted from the learning sciences were used. Furthermore, 
this approach enabled iteration of the online module by 
keeping in focus the principles that underlie creating an 
effective learning experience while also addressing changes 
to the implementation context. 
This paper describes the Lightboard technology and the 
existing research on Lightboard pedagogy that influenced the 
design of the learning experience (and remained constant 
across iterations) in Section 2. Framed by the learning 
engineering process, Sections 3 and 4 discuss the practice of 
design decision and justification tracking in the context of 
the implementation across both iterations of the work. 
Finally, potentials for the next iteration of the online module 
and a recap of the practical implications of tracking design 
decisions and justifications for a team following the learning 
engineering process to implement learning experiences are 
discussed in Section 5.   
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

II. 
BACKGROUND: LIGHTBOARD TECHNOLOGY AND 
PEDAGOGICAL UNDERPINNINGS OF LIGHTBOARD 
INSTRUCTION 
A. Lightboard Technology 
Creating Lightboard videos involves both hardware and 
software. The Lightboard itself is a large panel of glass with 
LED lights around the edges, which causes the markers to 
fluoresce on the board. A camera captures the instructor and 
their writing through the glass. The result is luminous writing 
floating in front of the instructor, who faces the camera while 
writing/drawing and interacting with the material on the 
board. Through video capture software, the video is mirror-
imaged to correct left-right reversal of the visuals. At the 
institution, the Lightboard, video and audio capture system, 
and video workstation are housed in a studio on campus. The 
goal of the learning experience is to prepare instructors to 
walk into the studio for the first time and produce a 
Lightboard video that utilizes established pedagogical 
approaches that maximize the effectiveness of content 
delivery.  
B. Lightboard Pedagogy  
While instructional approaches associated with the use of 
Lightboard 
videos 
are 
not 
particularly 
new, 
the 
understanding of best practices associated with creating 
videos continues to evolve [2] [6] [11]. Despite this evolving 
understanding, many Lightboard users are mostly unaware of 
the theoretical and practical underpinnings of effective 
instruction with a Lightboard. To address this, the learning 
experience (where instructors are the learners) and the 
content within the experience (to teach instructors how 
students learn effectively through Lightboard videos) pull 
from research that has been done on the impact of 
Lightboard videos on learning, using the frameworks of 
Cognitive Load Theory, Cognitive Theory of Multimedia 
(CTML), and Social Learning Theory [8].  
Much of the research about the effectiveness of 
Lightboard is associated with the fact that Lightboard 
leverages the natural mode of lecturing at a board (a primary 
instructional approach) with the key difference—and 
affordance—being that the instructor is facing the audience 
while presenting the written and visual content. In this way, 
Lightboard facilitates teaching as a “dialogue with students,” 
where students get an unobstructed view of the instructor and 
can detect contextual and non-verbal communication cues 
that are missed when the instructor’s back is to the audience. 
This engagement, via greater visual connection with the 
instructor (i.e., as posed by Social Agency Theory) [10] 
combined with the affordances of learning through video 
(i.e., as posed by CTML) [9], informs a set of Lightboard 
best practices and behaviors. Focusing on these practices is a 
crucial way to support and encourage instructors to enact 
effective strategies on camera. 
The technical and pedagogical considerations for creating 
Lightboard videos described above heavily influenced the 
design decisions in the first iteration of the learning 
experience and comprise the content that was kept at the 
forefront during the second iteration as the implementation 
context changed. Understanding these key technical and 
pedagogical underpinnings allowed the team to be well-
started to track design decisions and justifications throughout 
the learning engineering process for this learning experience 
implementation.  
 
III. 
FIRST ITERATION: MITX PLATFORM, SUMMER 2020 
A. Implementation Context 
The three subsections below describe key contextual 
factors about the learners (instructors), the timing of creating 
the learning experience, and resources available for 
designing and building the online module, all of which 
influenced baseline design decisions for the work.  
1) Learners: The target learner population consisted of 
MIT faculty, instructors, teaching assistants, and other 
course 
team 
members 
(collectively 
referenced 
as 
“instructors” moving forward in the paper) who are 
interested in using Lightboard technology as a way to teach 
sections of content for their courses. Some instructors may 
have an understanding of instructional best practices 
associated with Lightboard, but most users are unaware of 
the theoretical and practical approaches that underlie these 
practices. While the majority of existing instructors who 
have utilized the Lightboard since it became available in 
2016 were primarily from STEM disciplines (physics, 
mechanical engineering, chemistry, etc.), the learning 
experience was designed to be inclusive of any instructor 
from any department who may want to use the Lightboard.  
2) Timing: Given a Lightboard video’s multimedia 
format and emphasis on the social presence of the instructor 
in the video, there was increased interest among instructors 
in using Lightboard during the period of emergency online 
instruction caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Supporting 
instructors with this via an online module was a primary 
reason the learning experience was created. Although the 
immediacy of this need drove some decisions, the reality 
was that the module needed to exist beyond the emergency 
situation and the content had to remain broadly applicable 
and 
amenable 
to 
future 
use 
beyond 
its 
initial 
implementation. Other initial design decisions were 
influenced by this context, including ones aimed at 
addressing the teaching and learning challenges presented 
by the period of emergency remote instruction. For 
example, it was conveyed through the content that 
Lightboard videos do not have to be perfectly “polished” 
and that producing videos where instructors present 
authentically and naturally as though giving a live lecture 
would more closely resemble the in-person teaching that 
students value but that was lost during remote instruction. 
3) Resources: The learning experience was built on the 
residential instantiation of MITx, a Massive Open Online 
Course (MOOC) platform based on Open edX. The various 
technical affordances and constraints of this platform 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

influenced the implementation context and shaped many of 
the design decisions (discussed more in Section 3 B below). 
For example, the way content could be contained and 
structured on a given page of the platform influenced how 
video clips were woven with text. Another major resource 
was access to the insights and experiences of a Lightboard 
“power user,” a lecturer in physics who has used the 
technology frequently since 2016. Following a human-
centered approach within the learning engineering process 
[4], the interview with this key stakeholder elicited 
insightful dos and don’ts of creating videos, how to use the 
studio equipment, and other tips that were valuable in 
shaping the language of the content. Additionally, the 
design team was not able to access the Lightboard studio in 
person at this time due to pandemic-related restrictions on 
campus, which limited the ability to include robust images 
and videos of the studio to accompany content pertaining to 
the workflow of creating a video in the studio. 
B. Design Decisions and Justifications 
During the design process, the team maintained a design 
decision tracker in Excel with references to design principles 
and heuristics backed by the learning sciences to help guide 
the creation of content, media to deliver the content, 
sequencing, and interactivity in the course. This tracking 
system was also used to note contextual and technological 
constraints to the project, which justified certain specific 
decisions that were made. Examples of design decisions that 
were tracked are included in Table 1.  
TABLE 1. EXCERPT FROM DESIGN DECISION TRACKER 
Design Decision 
Justification 
To illustrate Lightboard best 
practices, leverage existing 
videos featuring faculty in favor 
of recreating videos, because it 
is more authentic, engaging, and 
fosters motivation if the faculty 
“see themselves” in a variety of 
video examples. 
Based on principle of learning: 
Learners are more likely to be 
motivated if they feel capable, 
know when and who in the world 
carries out such tasks, and have 
resources that someone in the real 
world engaging in that task would 
have [3].  
The organization/flow of the 
learning experience content will 
be linear: intro → technical 
specs & process → best 
practices & pedagogies → use 
cases → additional resources 
Based on technical constraint: It’s 
challenging to weave content, as 
MITx is naturally set up to have a 
linear approach to content delivery. 
Weaving can mean making 
links/jumps to other sections, 
which should be avoided for a 
course like this as long term 
maintenance of such links will 
become impossible. 
 
Some design decisions were based on research from the 
learning sciences, such as the first item in Table 1. The team 
wanted to include video clips of someone exemplifying the 
recommended Lightboard instructional best practices (as 
informed by the theoretical frameworks discussed in Section 
2 B above) through their on-camera behavior. Ultimately it 
was decided to use clips from existing Lightboard videos 
created by instructors who had been early adopters of 
Lightboard. Informed by design principles related to learner 
engagement and motivation [3], it was decided that 
instructors seeing their peers demonstrate Lightboard best 
practices would make for a more impactful learning 
experience than alternative approaches, like having members 
of the design team create these videos.  
Other design decisions were based on constraints in the 
implementation context. As an example, the second item in 
Table 1 points to limitations with what could be done with 
the MITx platform. The platform lends itself to learners 
working through materials linearly. While this addressed the 
goal of creating a learning experience that instructors could 
work through, there was the additional goal of instructors 
being able to go back to the content at any point to reference 
or refresh on certain tips that would help them while they 
were creating videos in the studio. It was decided to keep the 
content in a linear fashion which led to the subsequent 
decision to create a one-page Quick Start Guide. This was 
meant as an additional just-in-time resource that was 
associated with the online module but gave instructors the 
ability to save or print it out with important reminders from 
the learning experience. 
C. Design Results in the Implementation 
The first iteration of the learning experience, in MITx, 
was made available to instructors in August 2020. It is 
important to note that access to the Lightboard studio at that 
time was extremely limited due to the pandemic. This 
resulted in very few new users being able to engage in the 
Lightboard onboarding process involving this learning 
experience in the first month or so of implementation. 
However, the learning experience was released to a 
preliminary group of testers from the team, which produced 
qualitative feedback that was used to inform updates to the 
design decisions that had been tracked. Given that 
implementation is not limited to a full release or full-scale 
implementation of a product or solution [4], this “mini” 
implementation still produced data that led to another round 
of improvements to the design [7]. 
The team monitored Lightboard studio usage and 
planned to continue iterating on the learning experience 
based on any feedback from the first batch of instructor 
users. These plans were given a new direction when it was 
decided the module would move platforms from MITx to 
Canvas, the learning management system adopted around 
this time. A key influence in this decision was the absence of 
data (null results) from the initial MITx implementation 
around instructor usage. The lack of users, and as a result 
usable data, indicated a need to pivot to a platform that 
would lead to increased engagement and a more reliable data 
stream about that engagement.  
 
IV. 
SECOND ITERATION: CANVAS PLATFORM, FALL 2021 
A. Implementation Context 
In the fall of 2021, the Lightboard learning experience 
was transitioned from the MITx platform to the Canvas. This 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

constituted a major change in the implementation context, 
which resulted in updates to previous choices as well as new 
design decisions. The three subsections below describe 
changes to the key contextual factors discussed in Section 3 
A above (learners, timing, resources), and how design 
decisions were iteratively updated based on these influences. 
1) Learners: The online module on Canvas was equally 
available to instructors as it had been on MITx, open to any 
instructor who self-selected to take it. The major change for 
the learning experience would be how instructors accessed 
the online module. Adapting it to a new learning 
management system increased awareness of and lowered the 
barrier to the learning experience because instructors were 
already using Canvas for their course sites and therefore did 
not have to sign up for a different platform (i.e., MITx). 
Additionally, since the online module became located 
within a “Canvas Resources for Instructors” public Canvas 
site rather than its own standalone course, instructors could 
also encounter it as an option while browsing other Canvas 
resources. 
2) Timing: While both major iterations of the learning 
experience were due to changes in instructional conditions, 
the second iteration was specifically due to the rollout of 
Canvas rather than changes resulting from a global 
pandemic. This meant new opportunities to update and 
improve the online module’s content. In addition to 
revisiting the design decisions that had been tracked in the 
first iteration—to ensure key decisions were maintained 
during platform transition—there was also the opportunity 
to revisit and address feedback from testing of the first 
iteration that had been deferred. For example, content 
pertaining to the technical workflow of creating a video in 
the Lightboard studio was improved with photos and video 
from the real studio as well as more robust explanation of 
steps. This was possible because the team was able to access 
the studio on campus this time around and walk through the 
process, making for more authentic and accurate content 
compared to the first iteration of the learning experience. 
Relocating all content onto another platform also allowed 
for the opportunity to make other edits to improve the 
learning experience, like being able to easily link to and 
cross-reference 
related 
resources 
that 
were 
already 
maintained elsewhere on the Canvas resources site. 
3) Resources: As stated above, the Lightboard learning 
experience transitioned from being a standalone course on 
MITx to becoming a module on an existing “Canvas 
Resources for Instructors” Canvas site. Working to fit the 
learning experience within the existing site while still 
functioning as a “course” resulted in revisiting design 
decisions pertaining to how the content would be outlined 
and organized. The goal of the learning experience itself 
remained aimed at preparing instructors to create Lightboard 
videos in effective and pedagogically-sound ways, but now 
the connection between Lightboard videos and Canvas as 
the instructors’ learning management system had to be made 
more explicit (i.e., Lightboard is one option in a suite of 
tools, anchored by Canvas, available to help instructors 
improve and innovate their teaching using available 
technology). 
B. Design Decisions and Justifications 
A key practice in transitioning the Lightboard learning 
experience to a new implementation context was revisiting 
and updating the design decision and justification tracker 
started for the first iteration of the module. The details 
recorded in this tracking system facilitated further decision 
making about where to improve the design and what aspects 
integral to the goal of the learning experience to maintain 
during the platform transition. Part of this systematic 
approach to tracking design decisions included certain 
decisions being flagged as priorities to revisit, giving the 
team strategic entry points to the next round of iteration 
without rehashing every decision on the tracker. Overall, 8 of 
the 19 core decisions (just under half) tracked during the 
design of the first iteration were revisited and improved for 
the second iteration.  
One such prioritized redesign decision was including 
video 
clips 
of 
instructors 
demonstrating 
effective 
instructional behaviors behind the Lightboard—a key part of 
the learning experience with a solid justification cited for 
why this was an approach to delivering content (see Table 1 
above). As such, this was not a decision that was going to 
change during the transition to Canvas. However, the 
transition afforded the opportunity to revisit which video 
clips had been chosen and to switch out some of those 
original clips with videos that even more effectively 
demonstrated the content or represented more of a variety in 
disciplines and instructors using Lightboard. For example, a 
video was added of an instructor who had not previously 
been featured using the Lightboard during a live Zoom 
session, which also represented a use case not previously 
highlighted in the module.  
The sequential organization of the content also comprised 
a key part of the learning experience, but the initial 
justification for this decision (see Table 1 above) was 
revisited because MITx was no longer the platform imposing 
technical limitations on the design. The Modules feature of 
Canvas lends more flexibility to structure the content as both 
a linear course for learners to work through as well as a 
resource where instructors can go for materials on a more ad-
hoc basis. This resulted in a revision to the original design 
decision, including adding more outline/table of contents 
pages and jump links to facilitate instructors navigating to 
specific content they may need at any given moment.  
C. Design Results in the Implementation 
As previously noted, the transition of the Lightboard 
learning experience from MITx to Canvas entailed the 
content now being nested within an existing site for 
instructors that provides resources about Canvas and other 
tools for teaching and learning. It would now serve the dual 
purpose of informing instructors how to make effective 
Lightboard videos and demonstrating and modeling Canvas 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

features and functionality by way of delivering that 
Lightboard content. The latter of these addressed the need for 
instructors to experience the more advanced capabilities of 
Canvas. For example, all video clips were embedded in 
Canvas pages via Panopto, the main video platform 
integrated with Canvas that instructors were encouraged to 
use. Similarly, the few reflection questions throughout the 
module, originally built using MITx’s specific question type 
functionality, were now built using functionality specific to 
Canvas (i.e., ungraded surveys).  
While data about how instructors have engaged with the 
learning experience on Canvas is still pending, this latest 
implementation sufficiently accounts for the new platform’s 
affordances and constraints while continuing to honor the 
well-justified design decisions made during the first iteration 
of the learning experience.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Working through iterations in the design of a learning 
experience is a hallmark of the learning engineering process. 
For the Residential Education team at MIT, two major 
iterations of a Lightboard learning experience for instructors 
occurred when the implementation context changed from one 
platform to another. Further iterations to the learning 
experience as it currently exists on Canvas are anticipated, 
particularly when Canvas releases new or updated features, 
so technological affordances and constraints will continue to 
shape future iterations. Additionally, with Canvas’s data 
stream, the collection and analysis of data about instructor 
engagement will drive future iterations. This data exploration 
will likely serve as the next entry point into strategically 
revisiting prior design decisions and tracking new design 
decisions for the third iteration.  
For practitioners and teams doing similar design work, it 
is critical to consider how design decision and justification 
tracking is a learning engineering practice that can ensure an 
implementation remains learner-centered and backed by 
evidence from the learning sciences while still addressing 
contextual factors. Such a practice directly affects the 
implementation being worked on and affords the flexibility 
to navigate changes to that implementation or context should 
they arise (through tracking). It also allows the design team 
to examine what worked and what hasn’t worked (through 
revisiting), referring back to why a design element was 
implemented in the first place (through justifications), and 
iterating while keeping learners’ needs at the forefront 
(through strategically flagging entry points into the next 
iteration). While these specific approaches to the practice of 
design decision tracking may vary depending on a team’s 
context and goals, the Lightboard learning experience case 
demonstrates how design decision and justification tracking 
across implementations ultimately helps support instructors 
in learning to use technology.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank James R. Cain for providing technical support 
with the Lightboard and access to the studio at MIT. We also 
thank the Residential Education team at MIT Open Learning 
for supporting this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. A. Birdwell and M. Peshkin, “Capturing Technical Lectures 
on Lightboard,” The American Society for Engineering 
Education Annual Conference & Exposition (ASEE), Seattle, 
WA, Jun. 2015, pp. 26.325.1-26.325.9,  ISSN: 2153-5965, 
ISBN: 978-0-692-50180-1 
[2] F. M. Fung, “Adopting lightboard for a chemistry flipped 
classroom to improve technology enhanced videos for better 
learner engagement,” J.Chem.Educ, vol. 94(7), pp. 956-959, 
Jun. 2017. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00004 
[3] J. Goodell and A. Kessler. The Science of Remote Learning, 
2020. Open Resource Published under CC. Retrieved Apr. 
2022 
from 
https://openlearning.mit.edu/mit-
faculty/residential-digital-innovations/science-remotelearning 
[4] J. Goodell and J. Kolodner (Ed.). Learning Engineering 
Toolkit: Evidence-Based Practices from the Learning 
Sciences, Instructional Design, and Beyond. New York: 
Routledge. (Forthcoming). 
[5] A. Kessler and Design SIG colleagues. Learning Engineering 
Process Strong Person, 2020. Retrieved Apr. 2022 from 
https://sagroups.ieee.org/icicle/learning-engineering-process/ 
[6] A. Kessler and J. R. Cain, “Understanding the Development 
of Instructors’ Lightboard Capacity Over Time,” paper 
presented as a Poster at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Education Research Association (AERA), San Francisco, CA, 
Apr. 2020. 
[7] A. Kessler and L. Totino. Operationalizing the Learning 
Engineering Process to Create an Online Training: An 
Example from MIT Open Learning, 2020. Open Resource 
Published 
under 
CC. 
Retrieved 
Apr. 
2022 
from 
https://openlearning.mit.edu/mit-faculty/residential-
digitalinnovations/operationalizing-learning-engineering-
process-online 
[8] M. Lubrick, G. Zhou, and J. Zhang, “Is the Future Bright? 
The Potential of Lightboard Videos for Student Achievement 
and Engagement in Learning,” EURASIA Journal of 
Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, vol. 15(8), 
em1735, Apr. 2019. https://doi.org/10.29333/ejmste/108437  
[9] R. Mayer. Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning. In R. 
Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia 
Learning (Cambridge Handbooks in Psychology, pp. 31-48). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (2005). 
[10] R. Mayer. Principles Based on Social Cues in Multimedia 
Learning: Personalization, Voice, Image, and Embodiment 
Principles. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge Handbook of 
Multimedia Learning (Cambridge Handbooks in Psychology, 
pp. 345-368). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
(2014).  
[11] A. T. Stull, L. Fiorella, M. J. Gainer, and R. E. Mayer, “Using 
transparent whiteboards to boost learning from online STEM 
lectures,” Computers & Education, vol. 120, pp. 146-159, 
May 2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.02.005
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Fostering Communities of Practice: Insights from an Online Educational Robotics 
Professional Development Pilot 
 
 
Lauren Harter and Jason McKenna 
VEX Robotics 
Pittsburgh, USA 
Email: LH@vex.com 
 
 
Abstract—Educational robotics is an effective tool for 
teaching and learning an interdisciplinary STEM 
curriculum. Yet, traditional teacher education programs 
often do not cover engineering and technology as part of 
the 
curriculum—most 
often 
excluding 
robotics 
entirely—leaving 
teachers 
underprepared 
for 
the 
application of educational robotics in the classroom. To 
help close this gap, an online professional development 
program was developed and piloted for robots and 
curriculum spanning from kindergarten through high 
school. Preliminary results from qualitative observations 
and quantitative survey data indicate that this pilot 
program helped teachers increase interest, self-efficacy, 
robotics and coding knowledge, and develop a sense of 
community. Future directions and research based on the 
results of this professional development pilot are 
discussed. 
Keywords-educational 
robotics; 
professional 
development; teaching and learning; community of 
practice. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics 
(STEM) education has become a focus in educational 
research as well as government agencies setting national 
agendas in the United States. The National Science 
Foundation [1] stated that the acquisition of STEM 
knowledge and skills will be a necessity for participation in a 
global economy and therefore everyone should have access 
to high quality STEM education. The National Science and 
Technology Council’s Committee on STEM Education [2] 
put forth a federal strategy for STEM learning that highlights 
the need for truly interdisciplinary solutions for learning and 
skill 
acquisition, 
using 
real-world 
applications, 
and 
combining skills such as critical thinking and problem 
solving with communication and collaboration. Educational 
robotics that combines robotic construction with computer 
science 
has 
become 
an 
effective 
tool 
to 
deliver 
interdisciplinary learning that includes both STEM topics, as 
well as valuable 21st century skills. A meta-analysis of 
research concluded that educational robotics increases 
student learning across STEM topics [3]. Researchers 
studying a range of student ages identified that robotics 
helped increase student attitudes and positive perceptions of 
STEM subjects [4][5][6]. When introduced to young 
students, educational robotics fosters critical thinking and 
problem-solving skills as well as positive attitudes towards 
STEM subjects [7][8][9], while robotics for high school 
students supports college preparedness and technical career 
skills [10][11][12].  
Yet, for all the benefits of educational robotics in the 
classroom, the inclusion of robotics instruction for formal 
teacher education is still lacking. Most teacher education 
programs focus on individual disciplines such as science and 
math, which leads to teachers being underprepared for 
incorporating engineering and technology [13]. Teachers 
who are not formally trained in interdisciplinary STEM feel 
less confident in those areas and have difficulty making 
connections 
across 
disciplines 
[14][15]. 
However, 
introducing robotics during teacher pre-service education 
increased teacher self-efficacy, content knowledge, and 
computational thinking skills [16].  
Teacher preparedness for teaching educational robotics 
can also be achieved through continued professional 
development as an alternative to pre-service education, 
which can be slow to change. In the span of K–12 education, 
there are many different contexts in which educational 
robotics might be applied and the teachers responsible for 
incorporating it into the classroom likely have equally varied 
backgrounds. Professional development programming could 
become not only an educational supplement for teachers, but 
a way to develop a community of practice across a diverse 
group of teachers. Lave and Wenger [17] describe a 
community of practice as members with shared interests 
gathering, sharing research and insights to further skills and 
knowledge, and forming a collective practice in that domain.  
The CoP Framework, as described by Smith et al. [20], 
focuses on three areas: the domain, the community, and the 
practice. The domain is the distinguishing factor of the group 
of people. This is the area of knowledge that gives the group 
its identity. The community is a gathering of people with 
similar ideas or interests (the domain). These individuals 
learn and grow as they interact with each other. The practice 
is engaging with others in the group around the similar topics 
that constitute the domain. For this paper, the domain is the 
area of robotics education that brings the community of 
teachers together. The practice is engaging in this 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

asynchronous flipped classroom course in order to engage 
with educational robotics and grow their knowledge and 
experiences together. 
Research on virtual robots during the COVID-19 
pandemic identified that teachers reached out to virtual 
communities to problem-solve, suggesting communities of 
practice may become a more commonplace solution for 
teachers seeking support for educational robotics [18].  
This study describes an online professional development 
pilot program for educational robotics. The goal was to 
create a structured series of synchronous learning sessions 
where teachers from anywhere could join to both develop 
their knowledge of robotics and computer science as well as 
interact with other educators using the same robotics. To 
evaluate the merits of this professional development pilot, 
participants were asked to participate in a pre- and post-
survey that included topics of interest, self-efficacy, robotics 
and coding knowledge, and community of practice. These 
topics replicate research by Jaipal-Jamani and Angeli, [16] 
who used similar survey instruments with a group of 21 
preservice teachers. While some questions were adjusted for 
this context, the goal was to identify if similar positive 
findings 
could 
be 
identified 
through 
professional 
development.  
This paper will be outlined by the following: in Section 
II, the methods for how the courses were run and data was 
collected will be explained. In Section III, the results of the 
VEX 123 and VEX IQ courses will be outlined. The paper 
will then be concluded in Section IV with a summary of 
findings, potential limitations of the study, and possible 
future research. 
II. 
METHODS 
As this online professional development pilot was the 
first of its kind, great care was taken in the design of the 
materials and delivery with the hope of providing as much 
benefit to the participating teachers as possible. The courses 
were designed using VEX Robotics. VEX Robotics is a 
company that focuses on educational and competition 
robotics. Their educational penetration offers formal, as well 
as informal, curricular solutions from pre-kindergarten to 
collegiate. One course was planned for each level of robot 
available (VEX 123, GO, EXP, IQ) but each course was 
designed in an identical fashion. The most productive 
method of delivering instruction is a flipped blended model. 
In this model, the instruction is delivered out of the 
classroom via technology, and the instructor engages the 
students in activities and feedback during class to enhance 
understanding. According to Margulieux et al. [19], this is 
the only model that improved learning outcomes of all 
surveyed in a meta-analysis. Teachers in the class were 
assigned content and activities to complete asynchronously 
between class sessions and the live class sessions were 
focused on sharing work, asking questions, providing 
feedback, and building teacher-to-teacher peer relationships. 
To develop the curriculum for the sessions, a backwards 
design was utilized. Clear, measurable learning objectives 
were created for each week’s class and content was then 
curated for each objective. Teachers were provided with a 
structured syllabus that outlined each week’s work, including 
the learning objectives, list of asynchronous lessons to 
complete, and the activities to complete prior to class. Lastly, 
at the end of the course, teachers were asked to create an 
implementation plan for how they would use educational 
robotics in their specific context. The goal of this assignment 
was to use all the previous lessons and apply them to a 
practical project that would help teachers translate what they 
had learned into their classroom.  
Synchronous class time was designed to provide teachers 
with useful feedback, given the material and activities 
completed outside of class. When possible, class time was 
spent having teachers share what they created outside of 
class with their peers, providing feedback on work teachers 
did, answering specific questions, fostering teacher-to-
teacher sharing and feedback. While a community of practice 
cannot be forced, it can be encouraged by bringing together 
teachers around a shared domain and providing opportunities 
for them to learn, build relationships, and share knowledge. 
Not only were teachers collaborating in the face-to-face 
synchronous sessions, but they were also encouraged, and 
asked as part of the weekly requirements, to post in a 
professional learning community called VEX Professional 
Development Plus (PD+). Posting on this collaborative 
platform was intentionally built into the syllabus and course 
requirements to allow teachers to learn and grow together to 
further build the community of practice. 
Teachers were asked to complete a pre-survey prior to 
the first session and again at the end of the course. The 
survey included instruments like those used by Jaipal-Jamani 
and Angeli [16] on teacher interest in STEM, robotics self-
efficacy, robotics and coding knowledge, and a new 
instrument on community of practice. Sessions were 
recorded and qualitative observations were recorded by the 
professional development leads.  
For each of four courses run, the professional 
development lead made observations of the synchronous 
class sessions on themes of self-efficacy, persistence, content 
knowledge acquisition, and community of practice. Class 
recordings were also used (with permission) to review 
conversations on these themes. This qualitative data gives 
additional insight into the performance of this educational 
robotics professional development pilot, especially when 
considered in conjunction with the survey results. There 
were 11 teachers participating across all four courses, and 
two courses are described in depth here. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. VEX 123 Course 
The VEX 123 robot and curriculum is intended for 
grades K–2, so the participants were early elementary school 
teachers. These teachers did not express any concern about 
using 123 in their classrooms. They all commented that the 
product was easy to use, and the resources provided by VEX 
(STEM Labs, Activities, VEX Library) were all very helpful. 
Most of the questions in the class revolved around how to get 
more out of 123 with their students. For example, how can I 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

use 123 in more classes, how can I get more time for STEM 
and Computer Science, how can I work with more teachers? 
The class shared many strategies to address these issues, so 
the teachers did feel more confident about those things at the 
end of class.   
Concerning 
content 
knowledge, 
the 
participants 
demonstrated increased knowledge in the concept of coding 
as a playground, meaning that coding should be a fun and 
expressive medium for students. Coding should not be just 
viewed as workforce development. The participants also 
demonstrated increased knowledge in pedagogy, specifically, 
the perils of utilizing unguided constructivism. A great deal 
of time was spent discussing the philosophical underpinnings 
of the curriculum. The teachers felt that this was empowering 
for them to create their own curriculum for their students.  
It was consistently emphasized during class that the class 
belonged to the teachers, and they could take the class into 
any direction that was most helpful for them. This helped to 
foster a sense of ownership for the participants. Teachers 
used the professional learning community site to share their 
weekly assignments. By the end of the course, the teachers 
were not only communicating on that community forum, but 
on twitter as well.  
B. VEX IQ Course 
The IQ robot and curriculum is designed primarily for 
middle school students, so the teachers in this course were 
grades six through eight. Experience levels differed between 
teachers. There were some teachers who were unfamiliar 
with IQ but had experience with 123, GO, or even V5. For 
those who did not have experience IQ, they were unsure if 
they were going to be able to build and code a BaseBot, for 
example, if they had only done 123 or GO. Once they 
followed the build instructions for the BaseBot and then 
dragged in one [Drive for] block to get the robot moving, 
they could see that the barrier of entry was not as high and 
did feel more confident about building and coding. 
Participants not only increased knowledge about building 
and coding, but about the curriculum as well. Most 
participants did not know how to get started with IQ. They 
were unaware of the STEM Labs or how the curriculum was 
designed. The biggest challenge to overcome was explaining 
how this could look and run in a classroom setting, since the 
STEM Labs are designed to be competition focused. 
Throughout the course, participants were encouraged not 
only to ask questions in the community, but also to share 
ideas they are currently using in their classroom, as well as 
images of this implementation. Teachers who had less 
experience gave feedback that they found it extremely 
helpful to be able to visualize how certain aspects of IQ were 
being implemented in a classroom. Posts from the 
professional learning community forum were shared during 
class in order to emphasize how useful it can be to not only 
talk to the VEX Experts, but also to other educators. Many 
participants realized they were from the same state or close 
by and noted to either visit each other’s schools or 
collaborate outside of class. It was also nice to see that some 
educators in the class had experience, while others did not, 
and those that did shared how they use IQ in their class, 
either through stories, images, or videos. This helped the 
participants who did not have experience yet with IQ.  
C. Teacher Surveys. 
The surveys were voluntary, and ten teachers completed 
the pre-survey instruments. However, only four teachers also 
completed the post-survey, limiting the comparison to a very 
small number of participants. Even though there were four 
courses, only four teachers from the 123 and IQ courses 
completed the post-survey, so those are the two highlighted 
courses in this paper. As a pilot, this data is still meaningful 
to review, especially in conjunction with the observations 
from the courses. The Likert scale responses were re-coded 
to numeric values in order to calculate a mean score for each 
instrument.  
The results in Table 1 show increased total mean scores 
for each of the instruments used. Participants indicated small 
increases in interest in STEM subjects. The robotics self-
efficacy instrument provided a scale from 0 to 100, and all 
respondents reported an increase of at least 10 points on that 
scale. Robotics and coding knowledge only saw a small 
increase. Follow up investigation on this instrument may be 
warranted to determine if participants truly did not feel they 
increased their knowledge, or if the Likert scale options 
limited the expression of their self-assessment. The increased 
mean results for the community of practice instrument were 
also a promising result that aligned with the qualitative data 
from the courses. It is noted that participant 1 is the only 
teacher to have a small mean decrease in CoP. This could be 
a mistake in filling out the post-survey, or intentional. One of 
the CoP questions was, “When it comes to teaching with 
educational robotics, I feel that I have colleagues and friends 
with similar interests.” This individual may have felt after 
learning more about robotics in the course, that their 
colleagues and friends do not have similar interests in 
robotics, and therefore gave this question a slightly lower 
rating. Overall, even though it is not clear as to why 
participant 1 lowered their average score on CoP during the 
post-survey, out of the four teachers who participated 
(including participant 1), the CoP total mean increased from 
3.94 to 4.38. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
While the small number of responses to both the pre- and 
post-survey limit the conclusions that can be drawn, the 
results do provide positive indications that this online 
professional development program could help teachers in 
meaningful ways. The observations from the online classes 
and survey results both show increases in teacher interest, 
self-efficacy, knowledge, and sense of community. This 
online professional development pilot also provided 
meaningful lessons in the design of the courses. The flipped-
blended format worked very well to engage educators and 
focus class time on what the teachers wanted to cover. This 
format also increased the amount of teacher-to-teacher 
interaction during the online synchronous classes. However, 
one lesson learned was that teachers may be teaching with 
multiple different robots and therefore wanted to attend 
multiple courses, which was limited by their concurrent 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

timings. Another lesson learned was to offer the surveys in 
such a way as to maximize response rates for both the pre-
survey and post-survey. Furthermore, a closer inspection of 
the robotics coding and knowledge question format may be 
warranted to ensure teachers have response options that 
allow them to adequately reflect their self-assessed 
knowledge.  
The community of practice theme is especially encouraging 
from these results. Future research that follows the continued 
interactions of teachers beyond the professional development 
course could help to evaluate if the sense of community 
fostered in this program continues to develop over time.  
Teachers who use educational robotics in the classroom 
to teach an integrated STEM curriculum likely have a wide 
range of prior experience and education specifically in this 
area. Providing teachers with support through continued 
professional development can help overcome the lack of  
 
TABLE I.  
MEAN SCORES FOR ROBOTICS SURVEY INSTRUMENTS.
Participant 
Interest 
Robotics Self-
Efficacy 
Robotics & Coding 
Knowledge 
Community of 
Practice (CoP) 
 
Pre 
Post 
Pre 
Post 
Pre 
Post 
Pre 
Post 
#1 
5 
5 
62.5 
82.5 
4 
4 
5 
4.25 
#2 
4.35 
4.65 
77.5 
87.5 
4 
4 
3.75 
4 
#3 
4.5 
4.95 
60 
72.5 
4 
4 
3.5 
4.5 
#4 
4.1 
4.95 
90 
100 
4 
5 
3.5 
4.75 
Total Mean 
4.49 
4.89 
72.5 
85.63 
4 
4.25 
3.94 
4.38 
robotics and STEM education in formal teacher education 
programs and meet teachers right where they are. Online 
professional development is a promising solution not only 
for the flexibility of content delivery and format, but also to 
bring together teachers from different locations and learning 
contexts. Facilitating a community of practice that can 
continue to support teachers long after the conclusion of the 
professional development course is a valuable outcome for 
the program. Even though again, the sample size for the pilot 
was small, the experiences and successes of teachers using 
educational robotics in the classroom should be shared 
broadly to benefit the applied pedagogy and implementation 
of STEM curriculum for teachers and students alike. There 
are many online courses using a flipped classroom model 
currently in the field of education, but many of those courses 
are not using robotics. Even if the sample size could be 
unreliable to come to any firm conclusions, sharing 
experiences and observations about the courses in general 
can benefit the field simply by example. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
National Science Board, “Revisiting the STEM workforce: A 
companion to science and engineering indicators,” National Science 
Foundation, 
2015, 
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2015/nsb201510/nsb201510.pdf [retrieved: 
May 2022].  
[2] 
National Science and Technology Council’s Committee on STEM 
Education, “Charting a Course for Success: America’s Strategy for 
STEM Education,” National Science and Technology Council, pp. 1-
35, 2018, http://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[3] 
F. B. V. Benitti, “Exploring the educational potential of robotics in 
schools: a systematic review,” Computers and Education, vol. 58, no. 
3, pp. 978-988, 2012, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2011.10.006 
[retrieved: May 2022]. 
[4] 
G. Nugent, B. Barker, N. Grandgenett, and V. I. Adamchuk, “Impact 
of robotics and geospatial technology interventions on youth STEM 
learning and attitudes,” Journal of  Research and Technology in 
Education, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1-40, 2010. 
[5] 
M. Robinson, “Robotics-driven activities: can they improve middle 
school science learning,” Bull Sci Technol Soc, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 73- 
84, 2005. 
[6] 
C. Rogers and M. D. Portsmore, “Bringing engineering to elementary 
school,” Journal of STEM Education, vol. 5, no. 3-4, pp. 17-28, 2004. 
[7] 
K.A. Renninger and S. Hidi, “Revisiting the conceptualization, 
measurement, and generation of interest,” Educational Psychologist, 
vol. 
46, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
168–184, 
2011, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2011.587723 
[retrieved: 
May 
2022].  
[8] 
A. Wigfield and J. Cambria, “Students’ achievement values, goal 
orientations, and interest: Definitions, development, and relations to 
achievement outcomes,” Developmental Review, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 
1–35, 2010, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2009.12.001 [retrieved: May 
2022]. 
[9] 
R. H. Tai, C. Q. Liu, A. V. Maltese, and X. Fan, “Planning early for 
careers in science,” Science, vol. 312, no. 5777, pp. 1143–1144, 
2006, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1128690 [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[10] N. J. Boakes, “Engaging diverse youth in experiential STEM 
learning: A university and high school district partnership,”  
International Online Journal of Education and Teaching (IOJET), vol. 
6, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
245-258, 
2019,  
http://iojet.org/index.php/IOJET/article/view/505 
[retrieved: 
May 
2022]. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[11] S. Ziaeefard, M. H. Miller, M. Rastgaar, and N. Mahmoudian,  “Co-
robotics hands-on activities: A gateway to engineering design and 
STEM learning,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 97, pp. 
40–50, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2017.07.013 [retrieved: 
May 2022]. 
[12] K. N. Vela, R. M. Pedersen, and M. N. Baucum, M. N., “Improving 
perceptions 
of 
STEM 
careers 
through 
informal 
learning 
environments,” Journal of Research in Innovative Teaching and 
Learning, 
vol. 
13, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
103–113, 
2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1108/JRIT-12-2019-0078 [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[13] D. Epstein and R. T. Miller, “Slow off the Mark: Elementary School 
Teachers and the Crisis in Science, Technology, Engineering, and 
Math Education,” Center for American Progress, pp. 1–21, 2011, 
https://www.americanprogress.org/article/slow-off-the-mark/ 
[retrieved: May 2022]. 
[14] L. S. Nadelson, J. Callahan, P. Pyke, A. Hay, M. Dance, and J. 
Pfiester, “Teacher STEM perception and preparation: Inquiry-based 
stem professional development for elementary teachers,” Journal of 
Educational Research, vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 157–168, 2013, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00220671.2012.667014 
[retrieved: 
May 
2022]. 
[15] T. R. Kelley and J. G. Knowles, J. G., “A Conceptual Framework for 
Integrated STEM Education,” International Journal of STEM 
Education, 
vol. 
3, 
no. 
11, 
pp. 
1-11, 
2016, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40594-016-0046-z [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[16] K. Jaipal-Jamani and C. Angeli, C, “Effect of Robotics on Elementary 
Preservice 
Teachers’ 
Self-Efficacy, 
Science 
Learning, 
and 
Computational Thinking,” Journal of Science Education and 
Technology, 
vol. 
26, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
175-192, 
 
2017, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-016-9663-z [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[17] J. Lave and E. Wenger, “Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral 
Participation,” 
Cambridge 
University 
Press, 
1991, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511815355 [retrieved: May 2022]. 
[18] L. Harter, J. McKenna, and R. Van Campenhout, “Insights from 
Teaching with a Virtual Robotic Solution During the Pandemic: A 
Mixed-Methods Inquiry,” Proceedings of Society for Information 
Technology & Teacher Education International Conference, pp. 
1659-1669, 2022, https://www.learntechlib.org/primary/p/220964/  
[retrieved: May 2022]. 
[19] L. E. Margulieux, W. M. McCracken, and R. Catrambone, “Mixing 
in-class and online learning: Content meta-analysis of outcomes for 
hybrid, 
blended, 
and 
flipped 
courses,” 
Computer-Supported 
Collaborative Learning Conference (CSCL), vol. 1, pp. 220–227, 
2015. 
[20] S. U. Smith, S. Hayes, and P. Shea. "A Critical Review of the Use of 
Wenger's Community of Practice (CoP) Theoretical Framework in 
Online and Blended Learning Research, 2000-2014." Online 
learning 21.1 (2017): 209-237. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Multimedia Learning Principles and Instructional Design Among Teachers  
A Pilot Study  
 
Lisa Beaulieu 
Duquesne University 
Pittsburgh, USA 
Email beaulieul@duq.edu 
 
Abstract—An online survey of 112 educators who teach in a 
variety of K-adult settings explored the extent to which 
teachers understand and implement two Cognitive Theory of 
Multimedia design principles known to reduce extraneous 
cognitive processing into their electronic slide presentation 
(ESP) designs. Results indicate that although educators 
regularly design their own slide decks, most participants have 
low knowledge of how or why they should design coherent slide 
decks that do not include redundant information. Results also 
show the instrument questions should be refined and clarified. 
Keywords—Electronic Slide Presentations; Cognitive Load 
Theory; Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning; Coherence 
Principle; Redundancy Principle 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Teachers often create their own Technology-Enhanced 
Learning (TEL) materials [1]. PowerPoint® software is used 
extensively in both virtual and face-to-face learning 
environments [2][3]. It is possible that the quality of teacher-
created TEL affects learning outcomes. Yet, it is unclear 
whether educators implement proven pedagogical practices 
in the design of instructional slides [4][5]. The application of 
the Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning (CTML) 
principles to Electronic Slide Presentations (ESP) has been 
proven to improve student learning in higher education [6]-
[10].  
The completion of a pilot study is no guarantee of the 
success of a main study, but it can result in improvement of 
the instrument [11]. This pilot was conducted to examine 
educators’ understanding of and adherence to two evidence-
based cognitive principles shown to mitigate extraneous 
mental processing (coherency and redundancy) in their 
design and use of ESP slides by seeking to answer: 1) To 
what extent do educators have a working knowledge of the 
CTML principles of coherency and redundancy? and 2) To 
what extent do educators apply the research-based 
multimedia principles of coherency and redundancy in their 
electronic slide design?  
In this paper, the CTML theory and principles under 
investigation are briefly described in Section 2, and Section 3 
explains the method and procedure. Results are reported in 
Section 4. Finally, conclusions and suggestions are presented 
in Section 5.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Mayer’s development of the CTML principles grew out 
of Cognitive Load Theory (CLT), which is based in part on 
Working Memory (WM) theory [12]. New information 
(regulated by a central executive component) is perceived 
through the ears (phonological loop) and/or the eyes 
(visuospatial sketchpad) [13]. This model is a central tenet in 
both neuroscience and cognitive psychology [14].  
CLT claims three types of cognitive load can interfere 
with learning: intrinsic, extraneous, and germane [15]. 
Intrinsic load is caused by the complexity of the information 
to be learned. The number of interacting elements dictates 
complexity, over which the instructor has no control [16]. 
However, the instructor can influence extraneous cognitive 
load, caused by items and activities that distract a learner 
from the task [17][18]. Germane cognitive load redistributes 
and mediates the cognitive load required to integrate new 
information into long-term memory [17].  
Mayer applied the CLT model to multimedia learning 
and developed the idea that people learn more from both 
pictures and words than from words alone [17]. CTML 
currently proposes fifteen multimedia principles that 
instructors can use to improve learning [12]. This pilot study 
focused only on extraneous load. Within that category, only 
two multimedia principles were investigated: redundancy 
and coherence. The essential idea is to help people learn 
more deeply by presenting information in a way that does 
not cause the visual or auditory channels to compete for 
cognitive resources [17]. 
The redundancy principle implies people will learn more 
easily from a slide with a combination of graphics (visual) 
and narration (auditory) rather than a slide with graphics 
(visual), narration (auditory), and written text (both visual 
and auditory). If a learner’s attention is divided between two 
things requiring visual processing (graphics and text), 
comprehension of both items is reduced [19]. Text on a slide 
identical in meaning to the narration is redundant and causes 
learner distraction [20]-[22].  
The coherence principle states that people learn better 
when the information presented directly pertains to the topic 
[18]. Unrelated information causes distraction and reduces 
learners’ ability to process new information. Moreno and 
Mayer [23] found that unrelated background music played 
simultaneously as narration caused competition in the audio 
channel of working memory and reduced learning. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

III. 
METHOD AND PROCEDURE 
Descriptive data were collected through an exploratory 
web-based quantitative survey by contact with the 
researcher’s schools, social media, and professional 
educational organizations. Through convenience and 
voluntary response sampling, educators were recruited as 
participants from a variety of virtual and face-to-face school 
settings in North America. The software Qualtrics® 
collected demographic data and Likert scaled responses 
concerning teacher knowledge and implementation of the 
coherence and redundancy principles to reduce extraneous 
cognitive load. Each research question was addressed three 
times. The software SPSS® (Statistical Package for Social 
Sciences) was used to analyze the results. Answers that 
positively reflected the principle were coded with a “1” and 
interpreted as high knowledge of the principle. Incorrect 
responses and I do not know responses were coded with “0” 
and interpreted as low knowledge of the principle.  
Copyright-free images of possible ESP slide decks were 
included to assess knowledge of the principles. Figure 1 
shows the two options for the coherence principle. The 
question was: “From which of the following two slides will 
student learn more deeply?” The slide option to the right 
contains an interesting but unnecessary graphic with 
extraneous text. Figure 2 shows the choices for the 
redundancy principle. The slide option to the right includes 
text redundant to the narration. 
A separate group of questions assessed teacher 
implementation of the principles in ESP deck design. 
Participants responded to questions with four possible 
responses: Always, Most of the time, Sometimes, and 
Never. Answers that showed adherence to the practice of 
implementing the multimedia principle were coded “1,” 
while those that did not indicate adherence to the principle 
were assigned a score of “0”. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Knowledge of the coherence principle choices.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Knowledge of the redundancy principle choices. 
 
. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

IV. 
RESULTS 
    Professional teachers (n = 112) who instruct students in 
different levels, environments, and content areas who use 
PowerPoint® or a similar presentation software tool 
(elementary school, n = 48; secondary school, n = 44; 
post-secondary school, n = 20) responded to the survey. 
The mean age of participants was 43.98 years, and the 
average of all respondents’ teaching experience was 15.76 
years. In all, 72 (64%) of participant educators used ESP 
software face-to-face in a brick-and-mortar classroom; 44 
(39%) in an online asynchronous environment; and 64 
(57%) used ESP software in distance, online, or virtual 
synchronous classrooms.  
A. Knowledge Questions 
    Table 1 presents the responses to the coherence 
principle questions. Overall, participants appear to have 
inconsistent knowledge levels of this principle (M = .59, 
SD = .255). About half (n = 59, 53%) correctly identified 
the definition of the principle. A majority (n = 78, 78%) 
recognized that extraneous background music can be 
detrimental to comprehension, but only about one third (n 
= 43, 38%) drew the same conclusion about unnecessary 
graphics. Most participants, however, could identify a 
visual example of a more coherent slide (n = 86, 77%). 
Several respondents indicated they did not know the 
correct answers (34% for question 1; 21% for question 2; 
and 47% for question 3).  
 
TABLE I.  
KNOWLEDGE OF COHERENCE 
Knowledge of the Coherence Principle Questions 
Question 
Response 
N 
% 
Students learn better when 
interesting but extraneous 
graphics are excluded. 
True 
43 
38% 
False 
35 
35% 
I do not know 
34 
34% 
Students learn better when 
pleasant but unnecessary 
background sounds are included. 
True 
10 
9% 
False 
78 
78% 
I do not know 
24 
21% 
The coherence principle states to 
keep students’ working memory 
from being overloaded, we 
should eliminate extraneous 
material from our presentations. 
True 
59 
53% 
False 
6 
5% 
I do not know 
47 
42% 
From which of the following 
slides will student learn more 
deeply? (Water cycle images) 
Coherent image 
86 
77% 
Incoherent image 
26 
23% 
     
 
Table 2 presents the responses to the redundancy 
questions. Fewer participants correctly identified the 
redundancy definition (n = 19, 17%) than the coherence 
definition. A slight majority (n = 68, 61%) recognized 
learning is improved when narration is conducted along 
with a graphic rather than printed text. About half of the 
participants chose the sample ESP slide with no redundant 
element (n = 57, 51%). A high proportion of participants 
indicated low knowledge by choosing “I do not know” as 
a response. 
B. Adherence Questions 
    The data indicate that educators’ slide design slightly 
adheres to the principle of redundancy (M = .52, SD = 
.315). However, two questions were criticized for 
assuming educators would show a slide with full 
paragraph of text. The first was “When showing a slide 
with a full paragraph or more of text, how often do you 
read the paragraph to the students?” and the other was, 
“When showing a slide with a full paragraph or more of 
text, how often do you give students time to read the 
paragraph in silence?” Therefore, those questions are not 
included. Only one question, “How often do you combine 
an image with a full paragraph or more of text?” (M = .71, 
SD = .457) is measured. Most participants (n = 79, 
70.5%) were rated as having high adherence to the 
redundancy principle in this question. 
 
TABLE II.  
KNOWLEDGE OF REDUNDANCY 
Knowledge of the Redundancy Principle Questions 
Question 
Response 
N 
% 
Students learn better when a 
slide has all three elements: 
written text + graphics + teacher 
narration. 
True 
90 
80% 
False 
13 
12% 
I do not know 
9 
8% 
Students learn better when 
narration is accompanied by 
graphics rather than when the 
teacher narrates the printed text 
on the screen word-for-word. 
True 
68 
61% 
False 
19 
17% 
I do not know 
25 
22% 
The redundancy principle states 
presenters should not read their 
slides aloud because words we 
read are processed in both 
auditory and visual channels, 
which can cause students to 
comprehend less. 
True 
19 
17% 
False 
33 
29.5% 
I do not know 
60 
53.6% 
From which of the following 
slides will student learn more 
deeply? (Bee images) 
Nonredundant 
image 
57 
51% 
Redundant image 
55 
49% 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

V. 
CONCLUSION 
Results of this pilot study reveal an inconsistent 
working knowledge of and adherence to the CTML 
principles of coherence and redundancy in educator ESP 
design. This lack of knowledge is concerning considering 
teachers are increasingly creating their own TEL materials, 
including slide presentations.  
The large proportion of “I do not know” responses to 
knowledge questions may indicate a need for professional 
development. However, the data indicate some educators 
may be more intuitive about identifying higher quality 
slides without having explicit knowledge about definitions. 
It may be worthwhile to evaluate teacher-created slide 
decks and compare the results with teachers’ perceptions 
of their adherence to the principles.  
One purpose of this study was to gather information to 
develop a base of understanding about teacher practices 
before determining if applying CTML principles to ESP 
decks will improve student learning. Unfortunately, the 
results were limited because of unclear question wording 
and restricted answer options. Future studies should 
include clearer questions and use a Likert scaled response 
system.  
Other suggestions for future research are to determine 
training 
requirements 
for 
virtual 
teachers, 
limit 
participation to K-12 virtual learning environments, for 
which there is a scarcity of studies, to investigate 
differences in terms of instruction for different age groups, 
and to expand the number of CTML principles to include 
contiguity and signaling, which are also used to reduce 
extraneous cognitive processing. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. McKenney, Y. Kali, and K. Voogt, “Teacher design 
knowledge for technology enhanced learning: an ecological 
framework 
for 
investigating 
assets 
and 
needs,” 
Instructional Science, vol. 43, pp. 181-202, Jan. 2015, doi: 
10.1007/s11251-014-9337-2. 
[2] S. Bolkan, “Facilitating student attention with multimedia 
presentations: 
examining 
the 
effects 
of 
segmented 
PowerPoint 
presentations 
on 
student 
learning,” 
Communication Education, vol. 68, pp. 61-79, Sept. 2018, 
doi: 10.1080/03634523.2018.1517895 
[3] F. Martin and M. Carr, “An exploratory study on K-12 
teachers’ use of technology and multimedia in the 
classroom,” 
i-manager’s 
Journal 
of 
Educational 
Technology, vol. 12, pp. 7-14, June 2019, doi: 
10.26634/jet.12.1.3431  
[4] J. Baker, A. Goodboy, N. Bowman, and A. Wright, “Does 
teaching with PowerPoint increase students’ learning? A 
meta-analysis,” Computers and Education, vol. 126, pp. 
376-387, Nov., 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2018.08.003 
[5] C. Ferreira, A. Santos, and S. Serpa, “Electronic slideshow 
presentations in the higher education teaching and learning 
process,” Journal of Education and Training Studies, vol. 6, 
pp. 120-124, Jan., 2018, doi: 10.11114/jets.v6i2.2818 
[6] N. Issa, et al., “Applying multimedia design principles 
enhances 
learning 
in 
medical 
education,” 
Medical 
Education, vol. 45, pp. 818-826, MONTH 2011 
[7] N. Issa, et al., “Teaching for understanding in medical 
classrooms using multimdia design principles,” Medical 
Education, vol. 47, pp. 388-396, March, 2013, doi: 
10.1111/medu.12127 
[8] J. Nagmoti, “Departing from PowerPoint default mode: 
applying Mayer’s multimedia principles for enhanced 
learning of parasitology,” Indian Journal of Medical 
Microbiology, vol. 35, pp. 199-203, June, 2017, doi: 
10.4103/ijmm.IJMM_16_251 
[9] J. Noyes, K. Carbonneau, C. Gotch, and S. Matthew, “Is a 
picture worth a thousand words? Evaluating the design of 
instructional animations in veterinary education,” Journal 
of Veterinary Medical Education, vol. 47, pp. 1-9, March, 
2019, doi: 10.3138/jvme.0118-002r 
[10] A. Pate and S. Posey, “Effects of applying multimedia 
design principles in PowerPoint lecture redesign,” Currents 
in Pharmacy Teaching and Learning, vol. 8, pp. 235-239, 
April,  2016, doi: 10.1016/j.cptl.2015.12.014 
[11] E. van Teijlingen and V. Hundley, “The importance of pilot 
studies,” Nursing Standard, vol. 16, June, 2002, doi: 
10.7748/ns2002.06.16.40.33.c3214. 
[12] R. Mayer, Multimedia learning (3rd ed). Cambridge 
University Press, 2020. 
[13] A. Baddeley, “Working memory: The interface between 
memory 
and 
cognition,” 
Journal 
of 
Cognitive 
Neuroscience, vol. 4, pp. 281-288, July, 1992, doi: 
10.1162/jocn.1992.4.3.281 
[14] M. D’Esposito and B. Postle, “The cognitive neuroscience 
of working memory,” Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 
66, pp. 115–142, Jan., 2015, doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-
010814-015031 
[15] J. Sweller, J. van Merrienboer, and F. Paas, “Cognitive 
architecture 
and 
instructional 
design” 
Educational 
Psychology Review, vol. 10, pp. 251-296, Sept., 1998, doi: 
10.1023/A:1022193728205 
[16] T. de Jong, “Cognitive load theory, educational research, 
and instructional design: Some food for thought,” 
Instructional 
Science, 
vol. 
38, 
pp. 
105–134, 
doi:10.1007/s11251-009-9110-0 
[17] R. Mayer, Ed., The Cambridge handbook of multimedia 
learning (Second Edition.). Cambridge University Press, 
2014. 
[18] J. Sweller, J. van Merriënboer, and F. Paas, “Cognitive 
architecture and instructional design: 20 years later,” 
Educational Psychology Review, vol. 31, pp. 261–292. doi: 
10.1007/s10648-019-09465-5 
[19] J. Hovarth, “The Neuroscience of PowerPoint,” Mind, 
Brain, and Education, vol. 8, pp. 137-143, Aug., 2014, 
doi:  10.1111/mbe.12052 
[20] O. Adesope and J. Nesbit, “Verbal redundancy in 
multimedia learning environments: A meta-analysis,” 
Journal of Educational Psychology, vol. 104, pp. 250–263. 
doi:10.1037/a0026147 
[21] R. Mayer and C. Johnson, “Revising the redundancy 
principle in multimedia learning,” Journal of Educational 
Psychology, vol. 100,  380–386. Doi:10.1037/0022-
0663.100.2.380  
[22] R. Mayer and R. Moreno, “Nine ways to reduce cognitive 
load in multimedia learning,” Educational Psychologist, 
vol. 
38, 
pp. 
43–52, 
2003, 
doi: 
10.1207/S15326985EP3801_6 
[23] R. Moreno and R. Mayer, “A coherence effect in 
multimedia learning: The case for minimizing irrelevant 
sounds in the design of multimedia instructional messages,” 
Journal of Educational Psychology, vol. 92, pp. 117–125, 
2000, 
doi:10.1037/0022-0663.92.1.117
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Developing Instructor Training for Diverse & Scaled Contexts: A Learning 
Engineering Challenge 
 
Rachel Van Campenhout 
Research and Development 
VitalSource  
Pittsburgh, PA, USA  
e-mail: rachel.vancampenhout@vitalsource.com 
Aaron Kessler 
Residential Education, MIT Open Learning 
Massachusetts Institution of Technology 
Cambridge, MA, USA 
e-mail: kesslera@mit.edu 
 
 
Abstract— Learning engineering provides both a practice and 
process for solving educational challenges. While the 
circumstances of each challenge require a unique application 
of learning engineering, the learning engineering process was 
designed in such a way to provide guidance across a broad 
range of contexts. In this paper, the learning engineering 
process is articulated from the perspective of the developers of 
online courseware used in higher education. Within this use-
case, we exemplify how an initial learning engineering process 
for the creation of the courseware provided a starting point for 
iteration, and in this instance, the beginning of an entirely new 
process on instructor enactment of that courseware. Whereas 
the initial challenge was to develop the courseware 
environment, this emergent challenge now focuses on 
understanding and addressing contextual factors that affect 
the successful instructor application of the courseware learning 
environment at scale. 
Keywords-learning 
engineering; 
learning 
engineering 
process, instructor training; teaching and learning; learning 
technology; courseware. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Learning engineering is defined by the IEEE IC Industry 
Consortium of Learning Engineering (ICICLE) [4] as “a 
process and practice that applies the learning sciences using 
human-centered engineering design methodologies and data-
informed decision making to support learners and their 
development.” Learning engineering is an interdisciplinary 
practice that incorporates the learning sciences, data science, 
curriculum research, game design, and more, providing an 
infrastructure for design research, analytics, and iterative 
improvement [2]. A learning engineering process model was 
first developed through initial work in the ICICLE design 
special interest group [6] with later iterations discussed 
herein [7]. The learning engineering process model is 
cyclical in form to reflect the concurrence of work required 
and the constant iterations that occur in trying to solve any 
educational challenge. This learning engineering process 
itself is broadly described as the applications for its use are 
equally varied. There are many types of educational 
challenges to be solved and as many groups working to solve 
them. The learning engineering process provides an 
organizational workflow that any person or team can apply 
to their challenge. As shown in Fig. 1, the challenge to 
improve learning or learning environments is at the center of 
the model. Investigation, creation, and implementation are all 
connected in the process of designing and enacting the 
solution to this challenge. Yet each of these phases of the 
cycle can also inform the challenge and solution in their own 
iterative cycles. Lastly, the context, learners, and team all 
contribute to variations in how challenge solutions can be 
scaled or not depending on the almost limitless varied 
settings such solutions might be deployed.  
 
Figure 1.  The learning engineering process (CC by Aaron Kessler). 
This process can be broadly illustrated through the 
example of courseware development at Acrobatiq (Fig. 2). 
The challenge at the center of the learning engineering 
process was to create courseware that applied established 
learning science research to provide an effective digital 
learning environment for students. The context for this 
challenge was shaped by Acrobatiq’s origins from Carnegie 
Mellon University’s Open Learning Initiative and the 
research in online learning established there (e.g., [8][9]. The 
goal was to apply that research to a courseware environment 
that could be used by students across higher education 
institutions at large. The team consisted of learning  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Figure 2.  The learning engineering process with the central challenge of 
creating online courseware. 
engineers, software engineers, subject matter experts, project 
managers, and data scientists. This team collectively 
contributed to the creation phase of the process. During this 
phase, the courseware platform and content were created—
which consisted of many iterative cycles of design, 
development, and data instrumentation.  
Once ready, the process moved on to the implementation 
phase wherein the courseware learning environment was 
used by instructors teaching at community colleges and four-
year institutions. Data were collected by the platform as 
students engaged with the courseware, and these data were 
then analyzed during the investigation phase. The data 
analysis of this investigation stage provided examples of 
effective learning methods such as adaptivity [16] and 
replication of findings of previous research on the learn by 
doing method [17]. The investigation phase also uncovered 
areas in need of improvement, which created additional 
iterations of the learning engineering process. For example, 
data analysis showed low student use of the adaptive 
activities across course subjects and educational institutions. 
Identifying this issue initiated an iterative improvement cycle 
wherein a change was made in the location and delivery 
design of the activity. This change was then re-implemented 
with students, and further data analysis showed this solved 
the challenge, and completed that iteration of the original 
learning engineering process [15]. It should be noted that 
these analyses and iterations did not occur one at a time, but 
rather as concurrent processes. 
Yet other investigations of the courseware usage 
identified a new challenge altogether. An analysis of the 
same Probability and Statistics courseware used across a 
state system of community colleges and universities 
identified that different instructor implementation policies 
and practices affected student engagement with the 
courseware [18]. This analysis revealed the need for a new 
learning engineering process where the challenge was no 
longer 
developing 
effective 
courseware, 
but 
rather 
facilitating the instructor’s application of the courseware 
across a large scale of unique learning contexts, as seen in 
Fig. 3.  
When we consider the challenge that no two educational 
settings are the same, it becomes clear that the instructor’s 
application of any learning resource, technology, or 
intervention could result in varied outcomes across settings. 
Successful practices in one specific learning situation may 
not be successful in a different environment. This work seeks 
to accomplish two goals. The first is to show how multiple 
learning engineering challenges and processes can evolve 
from a single original challenge. The second is to focus on 
the contextual factors that contribute to how instructors enact 
any learning technology, resource, or treatment and how the 
learning engineering process can be applied to solve this 
challenge. The courseware example highlights the learning 
engineering process used to design a solution to better train 
instructors in a scalable way, with the goal of supporting 
effective implementation of the courseware in diverse and 
distributed environments. Situating this case in cycles of the 
iterative learning engineering process exemplifies how one 
cycle of work can result in clear points of identifying and/or 
redefining the central challenge addressed through the 
learning engineering process. 
II. 
THE LEARNING ENGINEERING CHALLENGE: 
CONTEXT-SPECIFIC TRAINING AT SCALE 
Every opportunity a student has to learn is one in which a 
learning experience—including an instructional plan—was 
purposefully designed and implemented. Whether this occurs 
in a traditional classroom between a teacher and students, an 
after-school program, or an online training for lifelong 
learners, each learning interaction is an implementation of a 
designed learning experience. The implementation of an 
instructional plan has the potential to drastically impact how 
students engage with the learning resource and develop the 
knowledge at the core of the learning experience. Beyond 
that, it can also impact the way in which students are able to 
demonstrate their understanding through assessments and 
activities. Recent examples of research on digital learning 
resources showcase the crucial role of the educator for the 
implementation of technology in the classroom. A study 
investigating the teachers’ role implementing a cognitive 
tutor for math education for fifth to eighth graders identified 
different 
patterns 
of 
teacher/student/cognitive 
tutor 
interactions that could impact student performance in 
computer-directed learning environments [5]. Research on an 
instructor’s implementation practices of adaptive courseware 
in higher education showcased how specific changes 
to course policies and teaching practice strongly impacted 
student engagement and exam scores [3].  
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Figure 3.  The original challenge of creating courseware leads to a new challenge—supporting instructor enactment of courseware across diverse 
environments.
The discussion of implementation is not new, with efforts 
to define and describe its importance in educational research 
going back decades [1]. Implementation—and the level of 
fidelity to the intended implementation plan—is a rigorously 
applied practice in the healthcare field where adherence to a 
implementation of a treatment is highly relevant to 
outcomes, yet historically has been less frequently applied in 
education to evaluate the efficacy or effectiveness of an 
educational treatment [11]. This concept of implementation 
is relevant at its most basic level to the use of courseware as 
a learning resource in the classroom: in order to help students 
achieve the benefits of the courseware (i.e., learn by doing or 
adaptivity), they must actually use those features. However, 
unlike the example of controlled lab experiments in the 
healthcare field discussed by [11], all educational natural 
learning contexts will have variability that cannot fit a single 
prescribed implementation plan. The learning engineering 
process can help to address this challenge by unpacking the 
contextual factors surrounding the implementation of 
courseware at scale. 
Before continuing the unpacking of this learning 
engineering challenge, an issue of language must be 
addressed. 
As 
described 
in 
the 
literature 
above, 
implementation as a term is commonly used to refer to the 
application of a plan or treatment either in a controlled 
experiment or natural learning settings. However, this same 
term is used as the label for the stage of the learning 
engineering process in which the solution is deployed. In this 
work, the challenge of the learning engineering process (the 
implementation of the courseware across varied educational 
settings) and the implementation stage (in which the solution 
to this challenge is implemented) will become easily 
confused. Therefore, in this work, implementation will refer 
to the learning engineering stage, and the central challenge 
will be referred to as the instructor’s application or 
enactment of the courseware.  
A. Challenge Context: Variation in Instructor Setting 
 In the original learning engineering process discussed 
above, the central challenge was to develop courseware that 
could serve students and instructors in a wide variety of 
educational settings. Yet the variation in the implementation 
phase of the learning engineering process—wherein 
instructors utilized the courseware in their teaching practice 
in widely different ways—resulted in significant differences 
in student engagement and outcomes. This realized 
variability presents the opportunity for establishing a second 
challenge, not about the development of the courseware 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

itself, but rather the application of it in the classroom. Given 
that the courseware was designed to be agnostic to setting, it 
cannot be differentiated for each use-case. Therefore, a 
potential set of solutions to this challenge required 
exploration outside of the technology itself and as such 
involve a new learning engineering process described in 
greater detail below.  
Part of the learning engineering process is the basic 
principle that learning itself is situated within specific 
contexts. Consider first the complexities educators are faced 
with for teaching and learning. The courseware as a learning 
resource may be a new environment for instructors compared 
to traditional textbooks, or even etexts. In addition to the 
courseware, 
instructors 
likely 
also 
use 
a 
learning 
management system and other teaching and learning tools 
that make up the learning ecosystem for a course. Teaching 
models (such as traditional, blended, flipped-blended) vary 
by instructor and interact with teaching modality, which has 
expanded from face-to-face to include hybrid and fully 
online learning modes with increasing frequency. These 
options for teaching models and resources are further 
complicated once considering their interaction with the 
specific group of learners being instructed. The number of 
students as well as their characteristics all contribute to the 
unique context in which an instructor applies their 
instructional plan. The instructor’s use of courseware 
(designed to be context agnostic) within varied and 
unknowable settings is the context for the second learning 
engineering challenge (Fig. 3). 
B. Designing a Solution 
As seen in Fig. 1, the design phase of the learning 
engineering process encompasses several tasks necessary for 
the development of the solution. The relevant research from 
the learning sciences should be consulted for the design and 
development of the solution, with data instrumentation 
incorporated into both of those tasks. Finally, plans for the 
implementation of the solution are created [13].  
1) Design 
One designed solution to the challenge of effectively 
utilizing courseware across many diverse settings is 
instructor training and support. While there could be any 
number of other solutions, the influence of instructor choices 
on student participation and outcomes is an established 
relationship that can be leveraged toward optimum 
courseware usage, and the instructor is also able to adjust 
enactment plans to account for their specific setting of 
teaching and learning. Before beginning to design and 
develop this instructor training and support solution, the 
existing research and knowledge base on instructor policies 
and practices that are beneficial engagement and outcomes 
should be consulted. Research can surface a set of practices 
to consider recommending for instructors—and sometimes a 
set of practices to avoid. For example, the teaching model 
(traditional, blended, flipped-blended, etc.) is known to 
influence student outcomes [10], and therefore is a factor to 
consider for the application of courseware as the learning 
resource for a class. Simply using the courseware and 
completing the formative practice garners benefits for 
students, so assigning completion points as part of the overall 
course grade could become a recommended practice [3]. 
Another strategy to recommend could be to use the data from 
the instructor dashboards to facilitate interventions between 
instructors and students or help tailor additional instruction 
around content students struggled with. A community 
college case study of instructors using courseware identified 
that the data dashboards helped identify at-risk students and 
facilitated a flipped-blended model for in-person and remote 
learning [14]. Research on successful practices for teaching 
and learning with digital resources can provide a starting 
point for the design and development of a solution [13][7].  
2) Instrumentation 
Instrumentation in the learning engineering process is 
when 
data collection 
is 
designed, 
developed, and 
implemented. This instrumentation step is part of the 
creation phase because preparing for what data will be 
needed for analysis and how that data will be collected must 
happen concurrently with the design and development of the 
solution. While the courseware collects data as students are 
learning, this does not help address the challenge of assisting 
instructors’ use of courseware within their specific teaching 
and learning setting. Therefore, gathering data to explore and 
understand their situated learning environment should 
become part of the solution. The focus on instructors and 
their needs for teaching when instrumenting a solution is 
aligned with the human-centered approach of learning 
engineering. “Human-centered engineering design means 
designing from the perspective of humans who will be 
interacting with implemented designs” [12, p. 83]. 
Identifying core variations in teaching and learning that 
instructors have to navigate in order to instrument and 
implement the solution maintains the instructors at the heart 
of the solution. 
Instructors will need to identify factors that contribute to 
how they might enact this learning resource. This could 
include identifying the teaching model, modality, number of 
students, student characteristics, course category (major/non-
major, elective, required, etc.), and graded components of the 
course. One avenue for standardized data collection would 
be surveys for the instructor to complete prior to receiving 
their training materials (the solution in development). These 
factors all contribute to how the courseware could be most 
successfully utilized and, therefore, are necessary for 
instrumentation as inputs for tailoring training for 
instructors.  
Instrumentation should also include gathering success 
criteria and the subsequent data necessary to determine if 
those success criteria were met. This type of instrumentation 
can be easy to overlook but is key to maintaining a cohesive 
vision for the goals of using courseware as a learning 
resource across all stakeholders involved. This also means 
that this instrumentation will need to consider several distinct 
groups of stakeholders. To design for instrumentation at 
different levels, the first step is identifying the relevant 
groups. Students are the primary users of the courseware, as 
it is their learning resource, and therefore defining what 
success looks like to them is key. Depending on the situation, 
this could range from simply engaging with the courseware 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

to increased learning outcomes on assessments. Also 
consider the difference between what students would identify 
as their successful use of the courseware versus what the 
instructor would define as student success. The instructor’s 
goals likely would include success criteria for students—
such as improved grades—but may also include goals for 
themself such as shifting the teaching model, identifying and 
intervening with at-risk students, or tailoring instruction 
based on data. There may also be additional stakeholders 
further removed from the active use of the courseware who 
have a vested interest in its use and therefore additional 
success criteria, such as administrators. Their goals may be 
more broadly related to success and retention metrics. 
Identifying each group of stakeholders for the courseware 
and their goals allows for the instrumentation of data 
collection to determine how those goals are being met. 
Without 
this 
instrumentation 
planning, 
design, 
and 
development, there could be a lack of clarity as to whether 
the courseware was successfully applied in a specific context 
to meet specific goals and, furthermore, what iterative 
improvements may be needed to meet those goals in the 
future. 
3) Plan for Implementation 
 With the research base established and instrumentation 
stakeholders understood, the design and development work 
can move out of initial stages and continue concurrently. The 
challenge of how to train and support instructors to 
implement courseware effectively in incredibly varied 
settings requires a solution that can address these situational 
factors (as many as feasible) in a scalable way. As 
courseware is designed as a learning resource for students, 
training must be designed as a learning resource for 
instructors. Each major contextual factor identified could be 
addressed as a topic with successful practices established in 
educational research combined with case study successes to 
address common variability in each topic. Preparing for 
known variations in teaching environments can provide a 
stand-alone resource, but planning for unanticipated cases 
should also be part of the solution design. Direct instructor 
training would be beneficial not only for identifying these 
special cases, but also to execute the instrumentation plan 
described for collecting data on context and stakeholder 
goals. Furthermore, just as instructors need to tailor their use 
of courseware depending on whether they have 20 or 200 
students, so too would the instructor implementation training 
and support plan need to adapt depending on the number of 
instructors. Designing different training implementation 
plans depending on the number of instructors and modality 
of training is another component of the creation phase. 
C. Implementation and Investigation 
Once the instructor training solution has been designed, 
instrumented, and developed, it is time to implement it with 
instructors. The implementation of this solution may begin 
with a few instructors as a pilot or with a large number of 
instructors if delivery at scale is possible. No matter the 
scale, data collected from instructors on their unique 
teaching factors will begin to inform the investigation of the 
solution. For example, an instructor teaching a traditional 
face-to-face semester course and an instructor teaching an 
asynchronous online course will both experience the training 
solution and use it to attempt to optimize their application of 
the courseware in their unique setting. Combining the data 
collected from their teaching context with the student 
engagement and outcome data collected from the courseware 
will begin to inform how successful the training solution was 
in supporting instructors. Additionally, the contextual factors 
provided by instructors would inform new content or 
changes to the training solution to incrementally increase the 
factors covered, iteratively improving the solution. Feedback 
from instructors on success metrics would also surface 
information in the investigation phase of the learning 
engineering process that could lead to new instructor 
enactment suggestions in the training. Ideally, each 
implementation of the training would provide data to inform 
further improvements to the solution, which would hopefully 
continuously improve instructor use of courseware in their 
educational context for the benefit of student learning. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
Learning engineering as a process is used in many 
different contexts to solve many different educational 
challenges. However, it is unlikely a challenge would be 
perfectly solved after one single cycle of the learning 
engineering process. Instead, the process is designed and 
intended to support many iterations of the process to 
continuously improve the solution, while also being aware 
that sub-cycles or entirely new but related learning 
engineering challenges may arise. Clearly identifying each 
educational challenge at the center of each learning 
engineering process and how multiple separate or sub-cycles 
relate will benefit the entire learning engineering team tasked 
with solving the challenge(s) most effectively. 
The example of how multiple related learning 
engineering challenges can develop expressed here was 
chosen to highlight a related challenge often overlooked: the 
highly varied educational settings within which educational 
technology and interventions are used. In this example, the 
development of educational technology was the primary 
learning engineering challenge accomplished through the 
learning engineering process, but how to help instructors 
teaching in such varied circumstances became an entirely 
new educational challenge to be solved. The need to support 
instructors to enact learning technology or educational 
interventions in a meaningful way within their unique 
teaching and learning circumstances is a nearly universal 
challenge. Even with educational technology that conforms 
to the latest research in the learning sciences, the enactment 
of that resource in a specific educational setting will strongly 
inform student engagement and outcomes with that resource. 
This challenge is one that all creators and developers of 
educational solutions should consider carefully and attempt 
to solve using the iterations of the learning engineering 
process.  
 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

REFERENCES 
[1] M. Fullan and A. Pomfret. Research on curriculum instruction 
implementation. Review of Educational Research, 47, 1977, 
pp. 335–397. 
[2] J. Goodell, and K.-P Thai. A Learning Engineering Model for 
Learner-Centered Adaptive Systems. In: Stephanidis, C., et al. 
(eds.) HCII 2020. LNCS, vol. 12425, 2020, pp. 557–573. 
Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-60128-7 
[3] M. Hubertz  and R. Van Campenhout. Teaching and Iterative 
Improvement: The Impact of Instructor Implementation of 
Courseware on Student Outcomes. The IAFOR International 
Conference on Education – Hawaii 2022 Official Conference 
Proceedings. 
ISSN: 
2189-1036, 
2022, 
pp. 
201–210. 
Honolulu, 
Hawaii. 
https://doi.org/10.22492/issn.2189-
1036.2022.19 
[4] ICICLE. What is Learning Engineering? 2020. Retrieved 
from: https://sagroups.ieee.org/icicle/  
[5] A. Kessler, M. Boston, and M. K. Stein. Exploring how 
teachers support students’ mathematical learning in computer-
directed learning environments. Information and Learning 
Science, 
121(1–2), 
2019, 
pp. 
52–78. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/ILS-07-2019-0075 
[6] A. Kessler and Design SIG Colleagues. Learning Engineering 
Process 
Strong 
Person. 
2020. 
https://sagroups.ieee.org/icicle/learning-engineering-process/.  
[7] A. Kessler, S. Craig, J. Goodell, D. Kurzweil, and S. 
Greenwald. Learning Engineering is a Process. In J. Goodell 
& J. Kolodner (Ed.). Learning Engineering Toolkit: Evidence-
Based Practices from the Learning Sciences, Instructional 
Design, and Beyond. 2022. New York: Routledge.  
[8] K. R. Koedinger, E. A. McLaughlin, J. Z. Jia, and N. L. Bier. 
Is the doer effect a causal relationship? How can we tell and 
why it's important. Proceedings of the Sixth International 
Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge. 2016,pp. 
388-397. 
Edinburgh, 
United 
Kingdom. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883957  
[9] M. Lovett, O. Meyer, and C. Thille. The Open Learning 
Initiative: Measuring the effectiveness of the OLI statistics 
course in accelerating student learning. Journal of Interactive 
Media 
in 
Education, 
(1), 
2008, 
pp. 
1-16. 
http://doi.org/10.5334/2008-14  
[10] L. E. Margulieux, W. M. McCracken, and R. Catrambone,. 
Mixing in-class and online learning: Content meta-analysis of 
outcomes for hybrid, blended, and flipped courses. Computer-
Supported Collaborative Learning Conference, CSCL, 1, 
2015, pp. 220–227. 
[11] C. L. O’Donnell. Defining, Conceptualizing, and Measuring 
Fidelity of Implementation and Its Relationship to Outcomes 
in K-12 Curriculum Intervention. (2008). Review of 
Educational 
Research. 
78(1). 
2008, 
pp. 
33–84. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654307313793 
[12] K.-P. Thai, S. D. Craig, J. Goodell, J. Lis, J. R. Schoenherr, 
and 
J. 
Kolodner. 
Learning 
Engineering 
is 
Human-
Centered.  In J. Goodell & J. Kolodner (Ed.). Learning 
Engineering Toolkit: Evidence-Based Practices from the 
Learning Sciences, Instructional Design, and Beyond. 2022. 
New York: Routledge.  
[13] L. Totino and A. M. Kessler. Designing and Implementing a 
Lightboard Learning Experience for Instructors Through the 
Learning 
Engineering 
Process. 
2022. 
https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/y3cfb 
[14] M. L. Townsend and R. Van Campenhout. Initial findings 
moving from hybrid to online learning: How Wor-Wic 
Community College adjusted to COVID-19 with Acrobatiq 
courseware. Poster presented at Seventh ACM Conference on 
Learning@Scale. 
2022. 
https://learningatscale.acm.org/las2020/programme/ 
[15] R. Van Campenhout. Learning Engineering as an Ethical 
Framework. In: Sottilare R.A., Schwarz J. (eds) Adaptive 
Instructional Systems. Design and Evaluation. HCII 2021. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 12792, 2022, pp. 
105–119. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
77857-6_7 
[16] R. Van Campenhout, B. Jerome, and B. G. Johnson. The 
impact of adaptive activities in Acrobatiq courseware: 
Investigating the efficacy of formative adaptive activities on 
learning estimates and summative assessment scores. In: 
Sottilare R., Schwarz J. (eds.) Adaptive Instructional Systems. 
HCII 2020. LNCS, vol 12214. Springer. 2020, pp. 543–554. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-50788-6_40 
[17] R. Van Campenhout, B. G. Johnson, and J. A. Olsen. The 
doer effect: replicating findings that doing causes learning. 
Proceedings of eLmL 2021: The Thirteenth International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning. ISSN 
2308-4367, 
 
2021, 
pp. 
1–6. 
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid
=elml_2021_1_10_58001 
[18] R. Van Campenhout and M. Kimball. At the intersection of 
technology and teaching: The critical role of educators in 
implementing technology solutions. IICE 2021: The 6th 
IAFOR International Conference on Education – Hawaii 
2021 Official Conference Proceedings. ISSN 2189-1036, 
2021, 
pp. 
151–161. 
https://doi.org/10.22492/issn.2189-
1036.2021.11  
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Time-Effective Logistics of Project-Based Course Electronic Instrumentation 
Samuel Kosolapov 
Department of Electronics 
ORT Braude Academic college of Engineering 
Karmiel 21982, Israel 
e-mail: ksamuel@braude.ac.il 
 
 
Abstract—Historically, 
the 
classic 
course 
Electronic 
Instrumentation was based on analog electronics - analog 
sensors, actuators, and amplifiers - and was taught in most 
colleges and universities as the theoretical course. The 
appearance of inexpensive micro-controllers revolutionized the 
usage of sensors and actuators; hence, our days Electronic 
Instrumentation can be taught as "a classic course in the 
modern envelope": by using as analog as digital elements, plus 
by using special programming techniques. In order to make 
the content of the course closer to modern industry design 
techniques, most of the assignments were made project-based. 
It is clear that checking and grading a large number of project-
based assignments is time-consuming. To make this process 
time-effective for the educator, a set of rules and procedures 
were formulated. This article describes the time-effective 
logistics which were used during the 7 years to teach this 
course, as in "regular time", as in "COVID19 time" by using 
real electronic components, and by using TinkerCad 
simulations.  
Keywords-project-based learning; time-effective logistics; 
electronic instrumentation; TINKERCAD. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Starting from the 80s, electronic analog systems were 
gradually replaced by digital systems containing “the wonder 
chip Micro-processor” [1] [2]. Large control panels equipped 
with analog voltmeters, ammeters, and mechanical switches 
were gradually replaced by compact digital systems with 
visual display units. Programming of the Micro-processors 
has become an important part of electronic engineering 
education.  
In the past, the classic course Electronic Instrumentation 
was based on analog electronics - analog sensors, actuators, 
and amplifiers. Hence, in the majority of universities and 
colleges, this course was taught as a theoretical course – 
mostly, due to the high cost of the real-life systems utilized 
then in the industry. The appearance of inexpensive 
microcontrollers revolutionized the usage of sensors and 
actuators, hence our days Electronic Instrumentation can be 
taught as "a classic course in the modern envelope": by using 
as analog as digital elements, plus using special 
programming techniques. 
Many educators in the field of electronic instrumentation 
have emphasized that practical training is an essential part of 
the learning process. In most of the following steps: 
"conceive, experiment, design, build, test, improve" – 
practical aspects are critical for understanding the items 
learned [3]. Leading educational institutions like MIT [4] 
and others incorporate into their curricula of electrical 
engineering a substantial amount of 'hands on' lab skills, by 
using real electronics components and basic electronic 
equipment.  
Alternatively, a number of educators have experimented 
with online training technologies. Those attempts have 
become vital because of COVID19 situation. The current 
situation in education, which is still seriously dependent on 
the epidemiological situation, makes educators look for new 
ways and specific platforms as a means of implementing 
their educational programs [5]. It was necessary to provide a 
way to carry out electronic experiments and assignments, as 
in a real laboratory, as in a student’s home. An interesting 
option was to use the online TinkerCad platform for 
implementing at least some elements of the Electronics 
Laboratory activities [6].  
An additional idea was to lease to each pair of students a 
kit containing real electronic components so that students 
would be able to execute assignments at their homes – by 
using the kit and PC. Some elements of this idea were partly 
described in [7]. This article describes additional details and 
new elements introduced in the recent years. 
Section II describes “Elements of the Course” – such as 
lectures, exercises, non-obligatory “Class Micro Works”, 
homeworks and MicroProjects including details: how they 
were provided in “regular times” and in “COVID19” time. 
Section III describes implementation details of “Logistics of 
Homeworks and Micro Projects”. Those details are provided 
in two sub-sections: sub-section “A” – named “Homeworks: 
Electronic Projects executed by using real components and 
by using TinkerCad simulations” and in the sub-section “B” 
- named “Micro-Projects: description of existing designs and 
TinkerCad simulations”. Important part of any “time-
effective” logistics of that kind is time-effective grading. 
Details are described in Section IV named “Time-Effective 
logistics of reports checking and grading policies”. Section 
“V” shortly summarize results of student’ pools (partly 
published in the previous publications) and provides some 
ideas to be weighted for the implementation in the future. 
II. 
ELEMENTS OF THE COURSE 
Course Electronic Instrumentation in the new format was 
provided at the Department of Electronics of ORT Braude 
Academic College of engineering every semester starting 
from 2015. Elements of the course are: 13 two-hour frontal 
in campus lectures, 13 one-hour in campus exercises, three 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

homeworks, two Micro Projects, and 10 non-obligatory “in 
Class Micro Works” (CMW, - provided during exercise 
hours). Homeworks and Micro Projects are executed by pair 
of students at their homes by using specially prepared kits (to 
be 
described 
later). 
In 
the 
process 
of 
practical 
implementation of homework, students compiled reports by 
using specially designed PowerPoint templates and sent them 
by Gmail. To make the evaluation and grading of these 
reports time effective for the educator, special format was 
developed. The main ideas of this format (albeit for the 
course “Image Processing”) were described in [8]. After two 
Micro Projects were executed by pair of students, students 
sent compiled PowerPoint reports to the lecturer for 
preliminary evaluation. After corrections, students presented 
their Micro Projects in class. Micro-exams were individual 
assignments solved by students on paper. During three 
semesters starting from March of 2020 to August of 2021, 
this course was provided under COVID19 restrictions by 
using online tools: ZOOM, TinkerCad, and Gmail. 
Specifically: lectures were provided by using remote ZOOM 
sessions, and assignments were executed by using TinkerCad 
simulations instead of using real components. Starting from 
October 2021, the course is provided in a hybrid way: 
lectures are provided at the campus, but with ZOOM “on”, 
so that students have a choice: to visit the campus, or listen 
to the lectures by ZOOM from outside the campus. 
Homework and Micro Projects are executed by using the 
kits, but in some situations, students are asked to provide 
simulations by using TinkerCad and/or MultiSim simulation 
applications. Grading policies are described at Section IV. 
III. 
LOGISTICS OF HOMEWORKS AND MICRO-PROJECTS 
In the subsection “A” logistics of homeworks is 
described, whereas logistics of Micro-Projects is described 
in the subsection “B” is described.    
A. Homeworks:Electronic Projects executed by using real 
components and by using TinkerCad simulations  
At the beginning of the semester, pairs of students get 
from the lecturer a specially prepared kit. Specifically, in the 
frames of the course Electronic Instrumentation, students get: 
an Arduino UNO R3 board (see item 1 on Figure 1), a small-
size breadboard (marked as 2 on Figure 1), a shield with a 
small breadboard (marked as 3 on Figure 1), a short USB 
cable, set of wires, and a plastic box (marked as 4, 5 and 6 on 
Figure 1) and a 37-sensor box (marked as 7). 
Electronic modules (sensors and actuators) inside the 
“37- sensor box" are voltage compatible with the Arduino 
UNO R3 board. Some modules were extracted from the box 
– for example, the laser module – in order to prevent possible 
eye injury in case of reckless usage.  
Figure 2 presents simplify flowchart of the steps 
expected to be executed by educator and by pair of students 
in the frames of the described logistics. In the frames of 
homework assignments, students were asked to design, 
assemble, and test a simple electronic system containing a 
number of sensors and actuators that are controlled by the 
Arduino board. Additionally, students were asked to create a 
program (sketch) for the Arduino board according to the 
description provided by the educator. It is important to 
mention, that homework assignments were executed by 
students at their homes, and thus, the educator could not see 
how the required design and assembly steps were executed. 
Hence, students were asked to document the assembly of the 
system by adding a set of photos to the PowerPoint report. 
Figure 3 presents exemplary photos taken from the typical 
student’s report. By exploring those photos, an educator can 
in a number of seconds validate if students properly put the 
modules 
on 
the 
breadboard, 
properly 
executed 
interconnections on the breadboard by using colored wires, 
and properly connected pins of the Arduino board. 
Additionally, students were asked to fill a number of tables 
in which they specified all the connections by using special 
codes and specify colors of wires. It is clear that any 
discrepancy with the connections specified in the tables and 
on the photos will be immediately revealed by the educator, 
hence the requirement to add photos of the assembly steps 
and the requirement to fill the connections tables is important 
in the frames of the selected logistics. Yet, additionally, 
every pair of students were asked to physically demonstrate 
the operation of their system in the class and answer some 
questions concerning the report and system operation. 
As it was mentioned above, during three semesters 
starting from March of 2020 to August of 2021, this course 
was provided under COVID19 restrictions. During those 
semesters, the distribution of real electronic components 
became at least problematic, but working in pairs with real 
components became impossible. The possible solution was 
to use online TinkerCad simulations. An important feature of 
this simulation is that it is a free cloud service, so that no 
installation is needed. However, when COVID19 restrictions 
were pronounced, it was not immediately apparent that this 
specific TinkerCad cloud service could be used in the frames 
of this specific course. Fortunately, in less than 3 days after 
the pronouncement of COVID19 restrictions it was proved 
that only minor changes in the requirements for the 
homework assignments were required.  Figure 4 presents 
screenshots of the TinkerCad screens. The left screenshot 
demonstrates an exemplary modules layout on the 
breadboard as it was prepared by the lecturer. This 
screenshot was given to the students as a slide in order to 
demonstrate to the students that Homework 01 can be 
executed by using TinkerCad simulation. During the exercise 
provided by ZOOM, the lecturer provided a live 
demonstration of the system operation in full accordance 
with the description. However, the code of the program 
(sketch) was not revealed to the students. So, students were 
asked to do with TinkerCad simulation actually the same 
steps as with real components: to position modules and to 
connect them by wires, but, instead of real photos of real 
components, screenshots of the simulation screens were 
used. The right part of the Figure 4 presents the layout of the 
system as prepared by some pair of students. Again, the 
educator, by exploring the link to the student’s simulation, 
can very quickly validate that all the blocks were properly 
connected by color wires. The parts of the student’s report 
describing the code and testing the system were nearly the 
same as in the case of real components, so that grading of the 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

report by using a specially prepared list of requirements was 
fast and simple. Additionally, students were asked to 
demonstrate operation of the system during exercises by 
using the “share screen” feature of ZOOM. It is clear that if 
some pair of students had "copied" photos and "code" from 
the report of another pair of students, this would be 
immediately revealed. During 7 years, such "illegal copying" 
was revealed less than 10 times. 
B. Micro-Projects: description of existing designs and 
TinkerCad simulations 
In the frames of the course, students were asked to 
prepare two Micro-Projects. It is clear that students have 
limited time to implement full-scale projects containing both 
theoretical part and implementation of some system with real 
components. Hence, the name used for this assignment is 
Micro-Project.  
The first micro project was about different types of 
motors (6V DC, Servo, Stepper, and Brushless). Each pair of 
students prepared a PowerPoint presentation about a specific 
type of motor, about a specific type of electronic controller 
and, present it in the class (in the case of “regular” semester) 
or by ZOOM (in the case of “COVID19” semester). In these 
presentations, students were asked to explain the physical 
principles of the specific motor operation and explain how 
this motor can be controlled electronically by presenting the 
exemplary circuit needed to control this motor from a 
microcontroller.  
The second Micro Project was about creating an 
Automatic Measurement System (AMS). Each pair of 
students was asked to develop a different type of AMS: an 
AMS for measuring DC voltage in the different voltage 
ranges, an AMS for measuring AC voltages in the different 
voltage ranges, etc. Students were asked to prepare the 
electric circuit of the AMS, provide relevant calculations, 
and prepare a TinkerCad simulation (including the analog 
part, Arduino UNO R3 board, and Arduino sketch). In this 
case, each pair of students was asked to send a PowerPoint 
presentation and link to the TinkerCad simulation. 
IV. 
TIME-EFFECTIVE LOGISTICS OF REPORTS CHECKING 
AND GRADING POLICIES 
Considering the limited number of kits, and the typical 
size of electronic laboratory, the number of students in this 
course was limited to 24, that is, by 12 pairs of students. It is 
clear, that checking 12*(3+2) reports is a time-consuming 
job. Hence, significant efforts were made to develop time-
effective logistics (a set of formal rules) describing how 
exactly students must prepare and send their assignments. 
Our days it is obvious for most educators that reports must 
be sent electronically (and not collected physically as reports 
printed on paper). A number of pedagogic systems (like 
MOODLE) exist for collecting students' assignments. 
However, most elements of this logistics were developed 
nearly 15 years before [9]. Then the logistics were based on 
using Gmail cloud services. During the years, this service 
was proved as simple and reliable. Hence, there were no 
serious reasons to change usage of Gmail cloud services as a 
proper tool to send and store student’ reports and PowerPoint 
presentations. It is known that some educational institutions 
strictly forbid using of Gmail and other Google services. In 
that case, alternative e-mailing or messaging services can be 
used, while those services have searchable subject field and 
support attachments, so that using Gmail is not a critical 
element of the described logistics. A simple, but really time-
saving element of this logistics is the naming rule of the 
assignment materials. The same “name” was used as the 
Gmail subject, the name of the attached PowerPoint 
presentation, and the name of the attached zip file 
(containing code). This name can be described as a set of 
tokens divided by the delimiter “-“. In the course Electronic 
Instrumentation this name was:  
“ABCD-EFGH-X-YYYY-MM-DD”  
ABCD stands for the last four digits of the ID of the first 
student. EFGH stands for the last four digits of the ID of the 
second student. The obvious rule needed to prevent 
ambiguity was that ABCD < EFGH.  X – describes a type of 
assignment – HW01, HW02, and HW03 – for the 
homeworks 01, 02, and 03, and P1Z and P2Z for the Micro 
Project 1 and Micro Project 2, where Z is a number of 
assignment (typically in the range {1..6}, so that every 
assignment was typically executed and presented by two 
pairs of students. YYYY is a year, MM is a month, and DD 
is the day on which the assignment was sent. This naming 
rule enables a very fast and simple search for the specific 
report, for all the reports of a specific group, for all the 
assignments of a specific type, etc. Figure 5 presents 
exemplary screenshots of the lecturer's Gmail. On the left 
screenshot of Figure 5, an exemplary result of search for “all 
assignments of the specific pair of students” by using their 
short ID token “1576-7618” is shown.  Two items 
emphasized by BOLD exploits a known feature of Gmail: 
signaling to the educator that this specific mail was not 
opened yet, and, thus, this specific report was not graded yet. 
On the right part of Figure 5, an exemplary result of search 
for “all students that have sent reports for the homework 01” 
is shown. In this case, search was executed by using token “-
HW01-“. 
It is important, that when one student sends the 
assignment to the lecturer, he/she is asked to send a CC to 
the email of the second student. This simple rule effectively 
prevents the non-pleasant claim “lost report”. In the case of a 
problem, students were asked to send a screenshot of the 
relevant email page as solid proof that the requested report 
was sent on the specific date. Actually, during 15, years 
fewer than 5 claims of “lost report” were raised and none of 
them was found to be valid after simple search together with 
students. 
In order to provide fast, equal, and fare grading, Excel 
templates were prepared. Figure 6 presents an Excel template 
for grading homework 01 in the "COVID19 semester". Rows 
of the template contain an exact copy of the requirements as 
they are specified in the description of homework 01. Every 
row has a special code (for example, HW01.11). Students 
were requested to type this code in the title of the relevant 
slide of the PowerPoint presentation. This simple numbering 
makes grading extremely simple and clear both for the 
educator and for the students. It is important, that 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

requirements to be executed are written in a short but 
unambiguous fashion. For example, the requirement in the 
row HW01.13 on the left part of Figure 6 is “Fill Table 3 of 
the wire’ connections”. It takes some time and efforts for the 
students to properly fill this table. They cannot use the work 
of other students because every pair of students uses a 
different layout of the modules, and then the connections of 
wires must be different. While executing and documenting 
this sub-task takes some time for the students, the time that 
the educator needs to check if this specific requirement was 
executed as required is very short – less than one minute. In 
order to make grading even faster, it is recommended to use 
a PC with two monitors (or a PC with a wide monitor). The 
first monitor is used to present the Excel grading template. 
On the second monitor, the educator opens the PowerPoint 
presentation of the specific pair of students and compares the 
content of the slide labeled as, say, HW01.11, with the 
requirement. Then, by using the maximal grade for this item 
(specified on the next right column), the educator updates the 
grade for the specific pair of students. In case it is necessary, 
educator adds comments to the relevant cell, so that students 
can see why the grade was reduced.  Typically, on the 
rightmost cell of this row, typical students’ errors are listed, 
and for every “typical error” a simple number is assigned. In 
that case, it is enough to use this number in the comment - 
that is: much less for the educator to type. It is important, 
that this procedure makes grading more fair – “the same 
grade for the same error”.  The final grade of each pair of 
students for the specific report is automatically summarized 
in the row marked as “total”. The template presented at 
Figure 6 contains “non-final” grades. It can be seen that 
some pairs of students have already sent PowerPoint 
presentation, but their simulation did not work as expected. 
In that case, students were asked to demonstrate their 
simulation and answer the educator’s questions. The grading 
policy was that for the homework 01 students were permitted 
to correct their presentation. (Maximum two times). As for 
homework 02 and 03, only one version of the Report and 
simulation were permitted.   
Figure 7 presents an Excel template for grading Micro 
Project 1. The basic structure of this template is the same. 
While homeworks were the same for all pairs of students, 
Micro Projects were different for different pairs of students. 
Considering that in this specific semester six different types 
of motors were used, typically two pair of students had the 
same assignment. Again, significant efforts were made to 
formulate the requirements in a short but unambiguous 
fashion. For example, row “P1V.13” (V stands for the 
project number) clearly states that photos of two 
commercially available motors must contain explanations of 
the pins of those motors. Again, the grading policy in this 
assignment was to enable three versions of the PowerPoint 
presentation. It is clear, that in that case most of the student’s 
pairs arrived to the maximal grade. The goal of this “trick” 
was that to force students to understand the level of 
requirements 
of 
the 
nearly 
industrial-grade 
report. 
Obviously, only one version of the Micro Project 2 
presentation was permitted.  The final grade was calculated 
by Excel according to the self-explanatory formula:     
A=0.05*HW1+0.1*HW2+015*HW3+0.3*MP1+0.4*MP2; 
Final Grade = G = MAX ( 0.2*CMW + 0.8*A , A ) ; 
Where CMW stands for the grade of non-obligatory “Class 
Micro Works”.  ”.   
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  
During 10 years, different variants of this time-effective 
logistics for the different electronic engineering courses were 
tested.  Some results were published before in [7] [8] [9] and 
reported at a number of international conferences. In the 
semesters when student’ pools were provided, grades 
provided by students for this course were in the range 
{4.23...4.94} (by using 1-5 scale) and was in most cases by 
0.5 higher that mean department’ courses grade. In the 
written comments, most of the students’ remarks were 
positive, and, median grade for this course in most of the 
semesters was 5.0. 
Currently, management and processing of all the Emails 
are executed manually, mainly by exploiting email search 
utilities. Manual management and grading of the student's 
reports (by using grading templates) was found simple and 
time-effective, as for the students, as for the educators. While 
the course is provided for a group of students of limited size 
(say, up to 24 students), automatization of the above 
management by creating dedicated software scripts or by 
creating special software, does not look as important 
improvement of the logistics. However, for the large groups, 
such automation may be found instrumental.     
An additional automation option is to include elements of 
the discussed logistics as an additional module to any 
available ELM. Specifically, in the ORT Braude Academic 
College of Engineering, a number of ELM were tested. 
Currently, MOODLE system is used by most of the college 
lectures. However, in its current implementation, using 
MOODLE was found as less suited for the goals of this 
specific course than the proposed Gmail-based logistics. 
It is assumed, that by analyzing the results of the last 
student pools, more conclusions will be drawn, and some 
modifications in the logistics will be provided. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Gopalakrishnan, “Electronic Instrumentation for Control”, 
IETE Journal of Research, vol. 27, issue 2, pp 53-60, 1981. 
[2] O. Pandey, “Electronics Instruments”, chapter in the book 
“Electronis Engineerings”, Springer, 2022. 
[3] D. R. Ramos and F. Alonso-Fernandez, “A practical 
Electgronic 
Instrumentational 
course 
for 
engineering 
students” IEEE EDUCON Education Engineering 2010 – The 
Future of Global Learning Engineering Education, April 14-
16, 2010, Madrid, SPAIN, pp. 1181 – 1188.  
[4] G. Hom, “Hands-On Introduction to Electrical Engineering 
Lab 
Skills”. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from  
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses. 2008-01. [retrieved: 05, 2022]. 
[5] D. Luchaninov,  R. Bazhenov, V. Sabirova, M. Mamyrova, Z. 
Zholdosheva, “Online training of students of applied physics 
in the field of circuitry”, ICMSIT-II 2021 pp 1-6.  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

[6] F. Jacob, A. Alberto and P. Guimaraes, “Use of Tinkercad 
platform for Teaching Electronics Subject in Post-Secondary 
Technical Courses”, TEEM21, October 2021 pp. 543-547, 
Available 
from 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3486011.3486517 
[retrieved: 05, 2022]. 
[7] S. Kosolapov and N. Sabag, “Logistics of Electronic Home-
Project-Based Course", International Journal of Information 
and Education Technology”, vol. 9 no. 6, pp. 445-448. 2019 
[8] S. Kosolapov “Time-Effective Logistics of ZOOM-Based 
Image Processing Laboratory”,  ENGEDU2021, Athens, 
Greece, pp.  2-10, 2021. 
[9] S. Kosolapov and N. Sabag, “Time-Effective Logistics of 
Electronically Signed Laboratory Results Reporting”. 2009 
UB-NE ASEE Conference. Bridgeport, CT, USA, April 3-4, 
pp. 2-8, 2009. 
  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  A list of electronic components that were provided to the students for the work at their homes. 
 
Figure 2.  Simplified flowchart of the exemplary homework roadmap. 
Left: actions of the educator. Right: actions of pair of students 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Homework 01 as impmenented by pair of students by using real electronic components.: Left: A photo of the system with four modules 
positioned on the breadboard. Center: a photo of the system with colored wires added. Right: photo as proof that the system works as required.  
 
  
Figure 4.  Homework 01 impmenented as a TinkerCad simulation .Left: Exemplary layout of components as proposed by lecturer. Right: layout of 
components as created by pair of students  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Screenshots of the lecturer's Gmail. Left: Results of search for all assignments of the pair of students by using the short ID token  “1576-7618”.  
Marked as Bold : works that have not been checked and graded yet. Right: Search of all reports of the homework 01 by using token “-HW01-“ 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
 
 
Figure 6.  Excel template for grading homework 01. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Excel template for grading Micro Project 1. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

Using the Tools at Hand: Creative Online Course Quality Management 
Brayden Milam, Julie R. Newell, Stephen Bartlett, Tamara Powell, Lesley Gabel, Kaylee Polk, Elly Sloman, Aiden Reichner 
Norman J. Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences, Office of Digital Education 
Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw, Georgia, USA 
Email: bmilam3@kennesaw.edu, jnewell2@kennesaw.edu, sbartlet@kennesaw.edu, tpowel25@kennesaw.edu, lgabel@kennesaw.edu, 
kpolk7@students.kennesaw.edu, esloman@students.kennesaw.edu, areichne@students.kennesaw.edu  
 
Abstract— Post-pandemic, a requirement that online courses 
be certified for accessibility and meet federal guidelines for 
instructional equivalency created a backlog of courses that 
needed to be processed quickly and efficiently. This situation 
was particularly acute in the Norman J. Radow College of 
Humanities and Social Sciences, the largest College at 
Kennesaw State University, and its 11 component schools and 
departments. Without the availability of increased staff or 
funding, efficient workflow management systems needed to be 
established quickly and using software already available at the 
institution. Team members developed the “Bucket System” 
based on multiple components of Microsoft 365 to map and 
track workflows across multiple criteria and multiple 
reviewers. 
Keywords-course review; online course quality; project 
management; Microsoft 365. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 2018, Kennesaw State University (KSU) President 
Pamela Whitten chose to discontinue the requirement of 
Quality Matters (QM) Certification for all online classes. 
Colleges within the university could still require quality 
control, but it was left to college leadership to decide if and 
how to implement this control. The Radow College of 
Humanities and Social Sciences (RCHSS) continued to offer 
training and certification options for those departments 
requesting support. Training and certification were also built 
into compensation contracts offered by the college. Despite 
these continued options, the college decided to allow the 
requirement for instructor and course certification to lapse.  
Instead of following QM, which cost money and received 
opposition from faculty resistant to the latest version update, 
digital education experts in what was then the Distance 
Learning Center partnered with faculty to develop a set of 
standards that fit the university’s needs and aligned with best 
practices. This process ultimately resulted in the KSU 
Course Quality Checklist (KSU CQC) and was approved 
through various shared governance bodies. While some 
colleges chose to remain with QM (after memberships were 
provided through the University System) and others 
developed their own rubrics, the KSU CQC was adopted 
across multiple colleges at the university and has become the 
standard quality measure in RCHSS in instances when 
course review is required.  
When the pandemic hit in March 2020, the focus across 
KSU shifted from offering high quality courses to simply 
offering courses. Suddenly, everyone needed to be online. 
Professional development shifted with the needs of faculty 
and training facilitators as they struggled alike to adapt to the 
relatively new modality of synchronous online education. 
The nearly four-month period of online-only education at the 
start of the pandemic allowed misconceptions about online 
teaching and learning to spread as digital learning experts 
scrambled to teach basics to faculty with little-to-no online 
experience. Then, in Fall 2020, as the return to campus 
began, faculty were expected to teach in various rotational 
and hybrid formats with many having had little-to-no 
training in these new modalities. This trend continued into 
Spring 2021, with a complete return to campus planned for 
Fall 2021. By this point, the combined effects of eliminating 
required instructor and course certification for online 
offerings and unsound pedagogical approaches created by 
pandemic pandemonium were beginning to manifest in 
student complaints about the quality of online education.  
The authors first present a description of the context and 
magnitude of the challenge to be addressed. The paper then 
details the project management system developed to 
facilitate the workflow of the overall process and the 
ancillaries intended to help faculty master the skills 
necessary to have all courses certified by the university’s 
deadlines. 
II. 
THE PROBLEM 
After a change in leadership in July 2021, KSU’s Office 
of the President charged the Division of Curriculum and 
Academic Innovation (CAI) with ensuring that all digital 
course content met recently updated federal guidelines and 
the University System of Georgia Board of Regents policy 
on 
accessibility 
standards 
and 
sustained 
instructor 
interaction. Each college, in turn, was asked to submit a 
review procedure for all online and hybrid courses. While 
many colleges already possessed the requested review 
procedure, the lack of required review since 2018 meant 
RCHSS was faced with creating and implementing a new 
review process in a limited window of time.  
A. The RCHSS Proposal 
The RCHSS Office of Digital Education (ODE) solicited 
input from faculty and college administrators and created 
three plans for reviewing asynchronous online, synchronous 
or hybrid online, and template courses (defined as courses 
created in entirety by faculty designers but taught by other 
course facilitators). These processes were then vetted 
through the appropriate college faculty governance channels. 
The CAI charged each college with developing and 
implementing their plans by the start of Spring 2022, which 
gave the ODE team roughly five and a half months to solicit 
feedback, adapt the KSU CQC for hybrid and template 
courses, update faculty certification trainings, and develop 
all tools (including communication and project management 
tools) needed to implement the initial two-year review cycle. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

No new resources were provided at the university or college 
level to support this initiative.  
B. A Larger College, a Larger Problem 
The five-month implementation timeline and two-year 
review timeline were reasonable for most other colleges at 
KSU. However, RCHSS is, by far, the largest college on 
campus, with 425 faculty and 8,500 students enrolled in 
majors within the College. RCHSS is responsible for eight of 
the fourteen general education standards required for 
institutional accreditation. As shown in Figure 1, of those 
eight standards, the college offers 50 different courses that 
can be completed to fulfill the requirements, compared to 22 
courses offered by a mix of the Coles College of Business, 
the College of Science and Mathematics (CSM), and the 
College of the Arts (COTA) across the remaining six 
standards. In Fall 2021, RCHSS offered 35% of 
undergraduate course sections and 41% of graduate course 
sections, totaling 750 sections, in the online modality (Figure 
1). 
Of the eleven departments and schools in RCHSS, two 
have completely rejected the idea of template courses outside 
of use for emergency hires and two regularly use template 
courses. The remaining seven departments reserve template 
courses for adjunct or emergency use only. This practice is in 
contrast to other colleges at the university. For the most part, 
other colleges only utilize template courses or are so limited 
in size as to require one or two course builds to meet class 
section needs. Because the Radow College is focused on 
disciplines in the humanities and social sciences, RCHSS has 
dozens of sections of one course, all with unique designs, to 
allow faculty to teach to their strengths and provide their 
expertise to students. For example, many faculty teach 
American literature online, and yet each professor has a 
different specialization. When each faculty member creates 
his/her/their online course according to best practices and 
capitalizes on his/her/their area of expertise, students get the 
best instruction and experience. Additionally, bespoke course 
designs allow for continued variety in perspective and 
approach, avoiding some of the pitfalls of intellectual and 
cultural homogenization.  
The ODE team had little time to prepare for this project 
and had no formal structures or tools in place to 
accommodate a project this large. The structures and tools 
previously used needed to be adapted to accommodate a 
higher volume of course designs reviewed in a shorter 
amount of time. This article outlines the RCHSS course 
review process, how the team implemented it, where we are, 
and where we are headed. 
III. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT TOOL: THE “BUCKET 
SYSTEM” 
It takes an average of three to five hours to review each 
course, contingent on the course content and approach. 
Based upon pre-pandemic numbers, the team had anticipated 
reviewing a total of approximately 750 courses over a two-
year period. In spring 2022, we expected 135 courses to be 
submitted for review. To date, 192 courses have been 
submitted. Projected forward, we are now anticipating 
reviewing around 1000 courses over the next two years using 
a team of two instructional designers, three faculty, and four 
student assistants.  
The most comparable project undertaken by the team was 
a review of 115 partial courses across a seven-month period, 
which was tracked in an Excel spreadsheet. At the time, our 
team consisted of one instructional designer, two faculty, and 
two senior student assistants, and all were able to assist in the 
review process.  
 
RC
COLES
CSM
KSU Undergraduate Co
Curriculum Offerings
  
Hybrid
RCHSS Undergraduate Co
Sections By Modality 
Online
Hybrid
RCHSS Graduate Course Se
By Modality 
 
Figure 1. Three charts showing the division of courses across KSU and 
within the college. 
 
For the much larger challenge now faced, we developed 
what we have christened as “Bucket System.” Our system 
was devised as an easy way to physically move items along 
in a workflow and provide more flexibility than an Excel 
spreadsheet. After reading and watching project management 
tool reviews and testimonies from other higher education 
teams [1][2], the team met and compiled a list of the features 
we would need.  
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

 
Access for at least 10 people 
 
Reporting functions and the ability to connect 
files to the task 
 
Ability to assign tasks 
 
Ability to create subtasks 
 
A visual marker for where the course was in the 
review workflow.  
 
Our team also decided that we preferred a more visual 
interface, as opposed to a simple task list. Most importantly, 
all of this needed to be located in a no-cost or extremely low-
cost tool.  
Tools like Slack [3], Trello [4], and ClickUp [5] had been 
utilized by the team before but required monthly 
subscriptions for large projects. Open-source tools like 
OpenProject [6], and Focalboard [7] all had the key features 
the ODE team needed but also had annual hosting costs, 
usually upwards of $150USD. Products offered by 
ServiceNow [8], BMC [9], and IBM [10] were much more 
robust than needed for this one project, so they were not 
considered.  
The team devised a plan to build something similar to 
these systems utilizing various Microsoft applications, as the 
University had recently moved to Microsoft 365 [11]. This 
project management tool would be modeled after existing 
tools [12] but would be customized to our specific needs.  
Microsoft Planner had the tools we would need at a task-
management level (file connection, task assignment, 
reporting functions, and subtasks) and had several layout 
options. It was also integrated with Microsoft Teams—which 
would 
create 
a 
localized 
“dashboard”—and 
Power 
Automate, Microsoft’s backend automation and workflow 
application, which would be crucial in populating the 
system. Microsoft Lists had similar functions—and the 
bonus of custom metadata fields—but lacked the visual 
layout we wanted. Ultimately, the goal was to produce a 
Kanban-like system of workflow visualizations, but we did 
not have the luxury of limiting work in progress (WIP), 
required in a true Kanban system [13]. 
We had three factors to consider when developing our 
workflow [14]. First, we needed to abide by the processes 
put forth by the departments in our college. Because our 
college is so large, the RCHSS Digital Education Council 
requested that each department be allowed to submit their 
own process to us. The outcomes from this request were 
varied: seven departments decided to defer to the ODE and 
have us carry out all reviews; one department decided to do 
the same but added additional faculty support by way of a 
mentoring committee; and three departments decided to 
conduct all parts of the review, with minimal support from 
the ODE.  
Second, our undergraduate student assistants are only 
able to conduct the accessibility portion of the review, not to 
make decisions concerning content and pedagogy. One 
section of the KSU CQC is dedicated to digital accessibility. 
The review process for this section is very clinical, so it can 
be completed by students without years of instructional 
design experience.  
Third, the sheer number of courses was overwhelming to 
a team with only five people qualified to evaluate entire 
courses. Department schedulers indicated a slow return to 
pre-pandemic scheduling practices, so we estimated that we 
would need to review 135 courses across the Spring 2022 
semester. We decided to translate this process into Microsoft 
Planner. Planner utilizes columns called “buckets” and 
projects called “cards” (Figure 2). Each bucket represents a 
step in the workflow, and each card within a bucket 
represents an individual course. Thus, the “Bucket System” 
was born.  
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of the "Bucket System" dashboard. 
 
Within the cards, we initially utilized the tag feature to 
indicate whether ODE directors had access to the course in 
the LMS (and, thus, had the ability to add reviewers) and 
whether the course was undergoing a “recheck” or re-review. 
We ultimately added a tag to mark course reviews as 
finished because we initially lost courses that had been 
dismissed as “complete” (Figures 3 and 4). 
 
 
Figure 3. A screenshot of the tagging system the ODE utilizes within the 
bucket system. 
 
 
Figure 4. Screenshot showing how tasks become invisible once marked 
"complete." 
 
We also use the comment section to create a 
documentation trail regarding when communication had 
been sent to faculty. The team found that using the “start 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

date” feature did little to help prioritize courses, as Planner 
does not offer a “start date” option under the sorting tool. 
We instead pivoted to using the “due date” feature, which 
had the bonus of posting the date on the card. This all 
creates an easily accessible history of what courses have 
been reviewed, where they are in the process, and who has 
completed what (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. A course review card showing the light green “in D2L tag,” a 
completed checklist, attached documents, and comment trail. 
 
After building the process in planner, the decision was 
made to integrate the structure with Microsoft Forms, which 
would allow faculty to submit “review requests.” We 
reviewed the Certified Course Build SmartSheet developed 
by the CAI, which was designed to track courses certified 
according to quality standards and included key questions on 
our Form (Figure 6). Originally, we created one Form for all 
of RCHSS. As we tested the process, we discovered we 
needed individual Forms for all eleven departments and 
schools. This decision was made to minimize confusion, as 
we initially offered too many review-customization options 
on a single form, and to streamline the automation process. 
The automation process is as follows: a faculty member fills 
out a form, Power Automate pulls information from the 
Form to generate a Planner card in the correct bucket and 
then sends a personalized confirmation email to the faculty 
member (Figure 7).  
A key component of this process is faculty involvement. 
To initiate a review, faculty must submit their courses for 
review, request new course shells for each course review 
needed, and add the ODE directors to the new course shells. 
We wanted to streamline the process as much as possible to 
make it as simple as possible for faculty, so as not to induce 
confusion or increase their workloads. The simple form and 
automated email accomplished most of these goals. We kept 
the forms as simple as possible, included tutorials on how to 
request, copy, and add the ODE directors to the course shells 
in D2L, our learning management system; eliminated an 
additional step of communication by requesting faculty 
utilize the enrollment notification option in D2L; and added 
a layer of familiarity with personalization tools [15]. 
Ultimately, we have received positive feedback from faculty 
about how easy the process is.  
 
 
Figure 6. The first page of the Review Request Form for the Department of 
Psychological Science. 
 
Figure 7. The automated process behind the Psychological Science Request 
Form, built with Power Automate. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

After the faculty member has added the ODE directors to 
their course shell, the formal review process begins. At the 
beginning of each week, the ODE Associate Director assigns 
courses to ODE reviewers (instructional designers and 
faculty) and student assistants depending on the courses 
available for review. Instructional designers and faculty 
prioritize courses taught by departments with their own 
review 
process, 
while 
student 
assistants 
complete 
accessibility reviews for courses that are reviewed by the 
ODE in full. The instructional designers and faculty then 
complete sections A and B of the review for the courses 
assigned to them, which require greater familiarity with 
digital accessibility standards and state and federal mandates, 
respectively. They then pass the course along to the 
department liaison/representative so the department can 
finish the rest of the review. Alternately, students complete 
section A of the review, which only requires familiarity with 
standards of digital accessibility, for the courses assigned to 
them. After the accessibility review has been completed, 
students pass their reviews on to the ODE instructional 
designers and faculty, who complete the rest of the review.  
Following the completion of the initial review, the review 
documents are sent to the faculty designer. The faculty 
designer then works to make the appropriate changes and 
consults with ODE team members (or their department 
liaisons) if they need assistance. After the appropriate 
changes have been made, the course undergoes a secondary 
review. If the course passes this review, the review 
documents will then be sent to the department chair for 
approval. If the course does not pass the review, the revision 
process begins again. This revision process may be 
completed up to two times before the course is removed 
from the queue. If it is removed from the queue, the chair 
must request reactivation and the faculty designer must 
resubmit the course to be reviewed without priority.  
Once a course is approved by the chair, the ODE Director 
submits the course to the CAI’s Certified Course Design 
SmartSheet and notifies the program coordinator, who 
updates the public-facing spreadsheet maintained by the 
ODE. As of Spring 2022, this process is set to repeat on a 
five-year cycle. The initial review cycle is based on course 
level, so all existing courses will have completed the review 
process by December 2023 and been scheduled for their next 
re-review.  
IV. 
FACULTY RESOURCES: THE COURSE REVIEW 
DASHBOARD AND SYLLABUS TEMPLATES 
The ODE decided to anticipate the needs of faculty and 
create resources to aid them in the course review process. 
The primary resource was the “Course Review Dashboard,” 
which functions as a one-stop-shop for all things related to 
course reviews, including tutorials, policies and checklist 
criteria, review request forms, and contacts. This project was 
designed to be far-reaching and creative. We knew the 
website needed to be easy to navigate and user friendly, but 
we also knew how expansive the topics and resources needed 
to be. We ultimately built eight pages hosted on the site and 
built an additional site specifically for course reviewers 
within the departments. We also completely redesigned our 
tutorial library, which hosted 115 simple technology and 
software tutorials, for a cleaner interface with a more visual 
navigation structure (Figure 8).  
 
 
Figure 8. Two screenshots showing the Tutorial and Course Review 
Dashboard websites. 
 
With a great deal of the accessibility and quality-
checklist requirements focused on course syllabi, a 
significant need for an accessible syllabus template arose. 
The need to include an ever-increasing number of policies 
and links to student success tools had placed syllabi 
templates at the forefront of academic concerns of the 
university for well over a decade. The updated federal 
guidelines and University System of Georgia Board of 
Regents policy only increased the urgency in addressing this 
need. The greatest difficulty was in “locking” the template so 
that required items could not be altered or deleted while 
keeping the remainder of the document open for editing by 
the instructor. An early attempt at an electronic solution to 
the syllabus template issue ended in a costly failed attempt to 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning

partner with a professional technical company. Further 
attempts at a lockable form were abandoned.  
After consulting with the RCHSS Digital Education 
Council, the ODE found that the new emphasis on 
accessibility requirements made syllabi templates more 
desired by faculty. Again, lockability remained the greatest 
difficulty, as faculty would frequently mistakenly render 
ADA compliant syllabi inaccessible by altering certain 
document features. After many hours of research, the team 
was able to use Microsoft Word to develop a “lockable” 
template that met accreditation and accessibility standards 
but remained customizable enough for broad use. The team 
also worked with the First-Year Composition (FYC) 
program to develop two syllabi specifically for use in ENGL 
1101: Composition I and ENGL 1102: Composition II, two 
courses all students are required to complete prior to 
graduation. These templates were created with a variety of 
Developer Tools, including content controls and “lockable” 
groups, and general accessibility tools, like Styles and 
list/table structures.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
With varying requirements across the eleven schools and 
colleges that comprise the Radow College, the unexpectedly 
high number of course submissions, and the need to validate 
review practices and feedback information across reviewers, 
much fine-tuning of the Bucket System is still in progress. 
The overall system, however, is proving to be robust and 
flexible while providing consistent tracking and information 
capture.  
Because the Bucket System is built on components of 
Microsoft 365 and accessed through familiar interfaces, the 
time required to learn to use the system effectively is far 
shorter than would be the case using other software tools to 
manage the same project. Bringing new reviewers or content 
specialists online is also simplified, with no need to obtain 
additional software licenses or install additional software. It 
also bridges seamlessly across units within the College and 
across the University as needed.  
The Bucket System has been adapted across multiple 
course review efforts. Each department with their own 
review process has a system customized to their needs, 
including one built for the university-level equivalent of 
ODE. For example, the faculty member designated as the 
Hybrid Specialist in ODE is piloting an adaptation of the 
Bucket System to track and manage a grant-funded Open 
Educational Resource (OER) project. Collection of user 
feedback and its application to further refine the software is 
expected in the coming academic year. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. D. Frame, Managing Projects in Organizations: How to 
Make the Best Use of Time, Techniques, and People (3rd 
Edition), Jossey-Bass, 2003. 
[2] R. Michalak and M. D. T. Rysavy, “Managing Remote 
Projects Effectively with an Action Dashboard,” Journal of 
Library Administration, 60(7), pp. 800–811, 2020.  
[3] Slack, https://slack.com.   
[4] Trello, https://trello.com/en-US.  
[5] ClickUp, https://clickup.com. 
[6] OpenProject, https://www.openprojec.org. 
[7] Focalboard, https://www.focalboard.com. 
[8] ServiceNow, https://www.servicenow.com/products/project-
portfolio-management.html. 
[9] BMC, 
https://www3.bmcgroup.com/solutions/virtual-data-
room/difference/project-management/. 
[10] IBM, 
https://www-
50.ibm.com/partnerworld/gsd/solutiondetails.do?&solutions=
50480. 
[11] Microsoft 365, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-
365. 
[12] S. L. Catto, & E. A Maccari, “Innovation Projects 
Management: A Systematic Literature Review.” Brazilian 
Journal of Management / Revista de Administração Da 
UFSM, 14 (4), pp. 848–863, 2021. 
[13] N. Damij and T. Damij, “An Approach to Optimizing Kanban 
Board Workflow and Shortening the Project Management 
Plan,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
forthcoming, doi: 10.1109/TEM.2021.3120984, 2021. 
[14] Project Management Institute,  A Guide to the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK(R) Guide–Sixth 
Edition, Project Management Institute, 2017.   
[15] R. V. Waters & S. A. Ahmed, “Beyond the Spreadsheets: 
Quality Project Management,” Performance Improvement, 59 
(10), pp. 16–29, 2020.  
 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-985-0
eLmL 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

