HUSO 2020
The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics
ISBN: 978-1-61208-800-6
October 18 – 22, 2020
HUSO 2020 Editors
Nitin Agarwal, University of Arkansas – Little Rock, USA
Bourret Christian, University Gustave Eiffel /Paris East Marne la Vallée, France

HUSO 2020
Foreword
The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics (HUSO 2020), held between
October 18–22, 2020 continued the inaugural event bridging the concepts and the communities
dealing with emotion-driven systems, sentiment analysis, personalized analytics, social human
analytics, and social computing.
The recent development of social networks, numerous ad hoc interest-based formed
virtual communities, and citizen-driven institutional initiatives raise a series of new challenges
in considering human behavior, both on personal and collective contexts.
There is a great possibility to capture particular and general public opinions, allowing
individual or collective behavioral predictions. This also raises many challenges, on capturing,
interpreting and representing such behavioral aspects. While scientific communities face now
new paradigms, such as designing emotion-driven systems, dynamicity of social networks, and
integrating personalized data with public knowledge bases, the business world looks for
marketing and financial prediction.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the HUSO 2020
Technical Program Committee, as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a high
quality conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also
kindly thank all the authors who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to
HUSO 2020. We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program
consisted of top quality contributions.
Also, this event could not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the HUSO 2020 organizing
committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this professional
meeting a success.
We hope that HUSO 2020 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas
and results between academia and industry and for the promotion of progress in the area of
human and social analytics.
HUSO 2020 Chairs
HUSO 2020 Steering Committee
Els Lefever, Ghent University, Belgium
Dennis J. Folds, Lowell Scientific Enterprises (LSE), USA
Nitin Agarwal, University of Arkansas at Little Rock, USA
Christian Bourret, University of Paris East - Marne la Vallée (UPEM), France
Baden Hughes, Cognitiviti, Australia

HUSO 2020 Publicity Chair
Jose M. Jimenez, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Jose Luis García, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
HUSO 2020 Industry/Research Advisory Committee
Yi Shan, SDE II, Electronic Arts, Seattle, USA
Fan Yang, eBay Inc., USA
Massimiliano Zanin, The Innaxis Foundation & Research Institute, Madrid, Spain
Zhiwen Fang, Microsoft, USA
Xiaolong Jin, 靳小龙, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

HUSO 2020
Committee
HUSO 2020 Steering Committee
Christian Bourret, University of Paris East - Marne la Vallée (UPEM), France
Els Lefever, Ghent University, Belgium
Dennis J. Folds, Lowell Scientific Enterprises (LSE), USA
Nitin Agarwal, University of Arkansas at Little Rock, USA
Baden Hughes, Cognitiviti, Australia
HUSO 2020 Publicity Chair
Jose M. Jimenez, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Jose Luis García, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
HUSO 2020 Industry/Research Advisory Committee
Yi Shan, SDE II, Electronic Arts, Seattle, USA
Fan Yang, eBay Inc., USA
Massimiliano Zanin, The Innaxis Foundation & Research Institute, Madrid, Spain
Zhiwen Fang, Microsoft, USA
Xiaolong Jin, 靳小龙, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
HUSO 2020 Technical Program Committee
Paul Abbiati, Founding Fellow of the EUROPEAN LAW INSTITUTE, Austria
Rodrigo Agerri, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Spain
Harry Agius, Brunel University London, UK
Hafizi Muhamad Ali, Yanbu University College, Saudi Arabia
Balbir Barn, Middlesex University, London, UK
Chidansh Amitkumar Bhatt, FX Palo Alto Laboratory Inc., USA
Christian Bourret, University of Paris East - Marne la Vallée (UPEM), France
Dickson Chiu, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Alexandra I. Cristea, University of Durham, UK
Chen Ding, Ryerson University, Canada
Birgitta Dresp-Langley, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France
Thierry Edoh, RFW-Universität Bonn, Germany
Silvia Florea, Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu,Romania
Dennis J. Folds, Lowell Scientific Enterprises (LSE), USA
Denis Gracanin, Virginia Tech, USA
Tzung-Pei Hong, National University of Kaohsiung, Taiwan
Baden Hughes, Cognitiviti, Australia
Emilio Insfran, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

Yasushi Kambayashi, Nippon Institute of Technology, Japan
Hassan A. Karimi, University of Pittsburgh, USA
Konstantin Kuzmin, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), USA
GeorgiosLappas, UniversityofWesternMacedonia, Greece
Els Lefever, LT3 | Ghent University, Belgium
Maurizio Leotta, University of Genova, Italy
Eurico Lopes, Instituto Politécnico de Castelo Branco, Portugal
Giuseppe Loseto, Polytechnic University of Bari, Italy
Aliane Loureiro Krassmann, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul / Federal Institute Farroupilha, Brazil
Elvis Mazzoni, University of Bologna, Italy
Sandra Mitrović, KU Leuven, Belgium
Fernanda Monteiro Eliott, Vanderbilt University, USA
Akbar Siami Namin, Texas Tech University, USA
Jason R. C. Nurse, University of Kent, UK
Tihomir Orehovački, Juraj Dobrila University of Pula, Croatia
Carsten Röcker, Fraunhofer Application Center Industrial Automation (IOSB-INA), Germany
José A. Ruipérez-Valiente, University of Murcia, Spain
Floriano Scioscia, Polytechnic University of Bari, Italy
Vishal Sharma, Utah State University, USA
Seth Thorn, Arizona State University in Tempe, USA
Juan-Manuel Torres, Université d'Avignon et des Pays de Vaucluse, France
Carlos M. Travieso-González, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
L. Alfonso Ureña-López, Universidad de Jaén, Spain
Massimo Villari, Universita' di Messina, Italy
Cong-Cong Xing, Nicholls State University, USA
Feng Yu, Youngstown State University, USA
Jinjin Zhao, Amazon.com, USA

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Rebuilding Trust to Encourage the Resilience of Weakened Territories in France
Christian Bourret
1
Smart Territories: Advocating for Smart Basic Entity (SBE) and the Digital Clone Approach
Pierre Fournie, Christian Bourret, and Jean Pierre Caliste
9
YouTube Video Categorization Using Moviebarcode
Recep Erol, Rick Rejeleene, Richard Young, Thomas Marcoux, Muhammad Nihal Hussain, and Nitin Agarwal
15
An Investigation of Twitter Users Who Disclosed Their Personal Profile Items in Their Tweets Honestly
Yasuhiko Watanabe, Hiromu Nishimura, Yuuya Chikuki, Kunihiro Nakajima, and Yoshihiro Okada
20
Emoji as Sentiment Indicators: An Investigative Case Study in Arabic Text
Shatha Ali A. Hakami, Robert Hendley, and Phillip Smith
26
Modelling the Role of Social Media in Hotel Selection Using Bayesian Networks
Alexandros Bousdekis, Dimitris Kardaras, and Stavroula Barbounaki
33
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Rebuilding Trust to Develop the Resilience of Weakened Territories in France 
Elements for a New Approach to Territorial Intelligence concerning Information and Communication 
Stakes in a Context of Digital Transformation and Globalization
Christian Bourret  
Dicen-IdF Research Team 
Université Gustave Eiffel (Paris Est Marne- la-Vallée) 
Serris, France 
christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
Abstract—In an international context of globalization and 
digital transformation, social ties are in crisis, particularly in 
France. In an approach to Territorial Intelligence concerning 
information and communication stakes, we propose some ways 
to try to (re)build trust to promote resilience and sustainable 
development of weakened territories in France. This rebuilding 
of trust can be achieved through projects to develop a 
collective 
representation 
for 
shared 
understanding 
in 
communities of knowledge, associating all the actors and with a 
new role in public services. We will put forward an application 
of this approach in three sectors of activity: cultural tourism, 
local businesses, healthcare and social protection. We will 
consider the application of this approach to a specific territory 
(the ‘Couserans’), in the heart of the French Pyrenees, whose 
specificities and opportunities of resilience we will present. 
Keywords - Information; Communication; Transformation; 
Society; Trust; Weakened Territories; France. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Twenty years ago, A. Giddens outlined our « Runaway 
world » or « how globalization is reshaping our lives » [1]. 
This transformation is provoking increasingly strong 
reactions from those who feel they are victims of the 
changes.  
In France, these consequences are very important in the 
weakened territories. The main topic of this paper is to show 
how rebuilding trust may help to develop the resilience of 
weakened territories in France, especially with cooperations 
through 
knowledge 
sharing 
to 
promote 
collective 
intelligence.  
The issue of inequalities between territories is an old 
problem in France. It has taken on a new dimension with the 
crisis of social ties, in a global context of globalization and 
digital transformation [2][3]. In an approach to Territorial 
Intelligence centered on information and communication 
stakes, we propose some ways to promote the sustainable 
development of weakened territories insisting on a dynamic 
of trust based on shared projects, to (re) make society.  
After an introduction, first of all, we will present the 
context of this work, specifying our approach to weakened 
territories. In a second step, we will present our scientific 
positioning and our research methodology in the French 
interdisciplinary field of information and communication 
sciences and our new approach to territorial intelligence in a 
constructivist approach with the aim of building knowledge 
communities to promote the attractiveness and sustainable 
development of these territories. Third, we will focus our 
approach on three sectors (local companies, cultural tourism, 
healthcare and social protection) and we will apply it to the 
‘Couserans’ territory (French Pyrenees). Fourth, we will 
specify our territorial intelligence approach, based on 
interactions with and between all the inhabitants and actors. 
Furthermore, we will propose elements to develop a 
contributory intelligence around a synergy of projects. In 
addition, we will advocate for a new role of public services: 
State, local authorities and social protection organizations. 
We will end with a conclusion. 
II.
PURPOSE OF RESEARCH – SCIENTIFIC POSITIONING –
METHODOLOGY
In this section, we first present our purpose of research 
about the specificities of weakened territories in France, 
then our scientific positioning and our methodology.  
A.
Weakened Territories in France 
The issue of territorial inequalities is a long-standing one 
in France. In 1947, Gravier, in a book of great resonance, 
spoke of "Paris and the French desert" [2]. From a 
voluntarist 
perspective, 
the 
DATAR 
(Délégation 
à 
l'Aménagement du Territoire et à l'Action Régionale) was 
created in 1963, under De Gaulle’s presidence. 
The problem of weakened territories suddenly became 
apparent to the general public in France with the riots in the 
suburbs of large cities in the autumn of 2005. It reappeared 
two years ago with the Yellow Vests (Gilets Jaunes) revolt, 
in autumn 2018, this time principally concerning small towns 
or rural areas, described by Guilluy [3] as "peripheral 
France". It reflects a rupture between areas, very often 
affected by deindustrialization and unemployment, compared 
to areas where urban elites of power and wealth live, and 
between those who consider themselves to be the victims of 
globalization against those they consider to be the 
beneficiaries. According to Paugam [4], it is therefore a 
crisis of social bonds with a strong sense of abandonment or 
injustice accentuated by the isolation and withdrawal of 
public services. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

This feeling to be despised and forgotten by the power of 
the State (Paris) and by the European Union (Brussels), has 
progressively become a crisis of society [3]. This crisis of 
society is also a crisis of trust. According to Le Cardinal: 
"trust is at the foundation of society" [5]. It is built at 
different levels that interact with each other: trust in oneself, 
in others, in the future [6]. 
B.
Scientific Positioning – Methodology 
We position in a constructivist perspective (the 
construction of social reality by all actors) insisting on issues 
of meaning, interactions and social representations. We are 
part of a Research Team, DICEN IdF in a French University, 
associating 
the 
interdisciplinary 
Information 
and 
Communication Sciences that means information (data) 
perspectives with communication (links, interactions) 
perspectives. We present an approach named ICOE: 
Information and Communication Organizing Ecosystems. 
Ecosystems can be companies, organizations, social groups, 
and, of course, territories. We have an Action Research 
position (producing knowledge for action), with field 
observations and interviews with the main actors in the 
territories. 
According to Bernard [7], we stress the importance of the 
researcher's commitment and communication to understand 
change as Carayol [8]. In the constructivist perspective 
explained, we attach great importance to creativity and 
innovation in territories like Godet [9]. 
We will insist on project dynamics to build trust between 
all the actors. The aim is to produce a collective intelligence 
and to learn how to better work together. To begin with, it is 
a question of exchanging ideas to build a collective 
representation of a shared future, then, to bring together all 
the relevant skills. The trust dimension is essential, both in 
the people and in the tools used.   
We emphasize the fundamental notion of resilience. It 
originally concerned the Physical Sciences to define how a 
material could return to its original form after a shock. It was 
then used by psychology to explain how an individual could 
react to hard difficulties and get out of them. It has gradually 
taken on a collective dimension for social groups, 
organizations and also territories.   
We particularly refer to the Situational and Interactionist 
Semiotics proposed by Mucchielli [10]. This method helps 
us to understand the meaning for actors in a specific 
situation. Mucchielli proposes to divide this situation serving 
as an interpretative background in different "frames": the 
intentions and the stakes of the actors, the culture and their 
norms of reference, their positions compared to other actors, 
the quality of relationships maintained, the historical and 
temporal frame, the sensory "frame", etc. 
For us, communication may help to (re)create bonds, 
which are essential in these weakened territories. Data and its 
transformation into knowledge is also essential, with the 
issues of Big (by relying on the voluntary sector – secteur 
associatif) and Open data (institutional data) with GDPR 
(General Data Protection Regulation) challenges, with the 
new profession of Data scientist, applied to sustainable 
development and territorial marketing. But above all, it is a 
question 
of 
giving 
meaning 
to 
the 
data 
through 
intermediation tools in interface situations. According to  
Nesvijevskaia and Chartron [11], we insist on mediation 
between humans and data through interface tools.  
Therefore, we consider the importance of socio-technical 
devices: Web sites and social networks as levers of resilience 
for these weakened territories. According to Ellul [12], we 
are aware of the ambivalence of technology and particularly 
of digitalization: it cannot do everything, but can make 
possible useful changes that create economic and cooperative 
values for sustainable development.  
We focus on visibility issues (especially on social 
networks) to promote the attractiveness of these weakened 
territories, with e-reputation and territorial marketing issues. 
And additionally, with the importance of watching activities 
[13] in a Competitive Intelligence approach to anticipate and 
benchmark success stories developed in other territories.  
After a mobilization of the existing literature, the 
proposed work is based on situations of participant 
observation. The author of this communication participates 
in the activities of local associations that serve as supports of 
this work. His membership in these associations has 
facilitated interviews, particularly with their leaders or 
essential actors and access to their documentation. 
III.
AN APPROACH FOCUSING ON THREE SECTORS 
(LOCAL COMPANIES, TOURISM, HEALTHCARE AND SOCIAL 
PROTECTION) APPLIED TO ‘COUSERANS’ (FRENCH 
PYRENEES) 
In this section, we propose a Territorial Intelligence 
approach focusing on three main sectors of analysis (local 
companies, tourism and cultural heritage, healthcare and 
social protection) and its application to the Couserans area 
in the heart of Central Pyrenees.  
A.
Three Sectors of Analysis: Local Companies, 
Cultural Tourism, Healthcare and Social Protection 
Particularly interested in the territories of "la France 
profonde” or provincial France, often having a strong 
identity and worried about their future, we focus on three 
complementary converging sectors of analysis: one for 
economic development (local companies) and another for 
cultural activity and tourism, healthcare and social 
protection, with the main challenge of social and territorial 
inequalities, important for social cohesion and also for 
sustainable development. 
First of all, we are interested in the sustainable economic 
development of these territories, through local companies, 
often focusing on authenticity and home-grown products 
(gastronomy), or on technological or specific product niches, 
employing local labor, with an innovative and creative 
dimension [9]. We must also mention the little-known role of 
the National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie Nationale) in 
protecting both their physical (buildings) and their intangible 
(knowledge) assets. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

We focus next on Tourism based on culture heritage and 
nature resources as a lever for the resilience of these 
weakened territories. We outline the prospects of "slow 
tourism", focusing on authenticity, valuing cultural heritage, 
in interaction with nature and gastronomy. The use of social 
networks can be a lever, as for "geocaching" for treasure 
hunting activities, with the example of Terra Aventura in the 
New Aquitaine Region. Also, with the enhancement of 
different “routes”: long-distance hiking trails (GR), the 
different Compostela paths, the paths of the Cathars (heretic 
people in the south of France during the Middle Ages) 
Stevenson's or Jacques Coeur's “routes” etc.  
Healthcare and social protection issues (like education) 
are essential to maintain populations and attract newcomers 
(social link). We study them in a more global perspective of 
social and territorial inequalities in health: inequalities, both 
individual (poverty and isolation) and collective (remote 
territories): the question of medical deserts. We must also 
tackle the challenge of the “walls” dividing the hospital 
sector from the primary care sector [14]. New approaches 
with the development of interface organizations in healthcare 
(health networks or multi-professional healthcare houses, 
etc.), and the implementation of territorial support platforms 
for doctors in weakened territories with the construction of 
new "territorial health professional communities" can 
constitute interesting ways, particularly when they are based 
on local telemedicine projects and socio-technical devices 
(services platforms for doctors, EHR: Electronic Health 
Records, etc.). Safeguarding healthcare, as well as education 
structures (maintaining local hospitals, schools and high 
schools), implies preserving public services with a new 
approach (more in networks and with service platforms) to 
their activity. It implies also keeping public and private 
public transport to fight against the isolation of the poorest 
and most vulnerable people. 
B.
The Case of Couserans (Ariège / Pyrenees) 
Our approach is applied to Couserans, corresponding to 
the district of Saint-Girons, in the department of Ariège in 
the heart of the French Pyrenees. This territory has a very 
strong identity that the daily newspaper La Croix has 
described as "an island in the Pyrenees" [15], with a strong 
tradition of dissent that is reflected in the importance of the 
Yellow Vests (Gilets Jaunes) movement in this area. This 
territory has been heavily affected by the rural exodus: 
95,000 inhabitants in 1850 and 29,000 in 2015. Its “capital”, 
the small town (sub-prefecture) of Saint-Girons (6300 
inhabitants) has lost most of its industries (paper mills) since 
1975. 
Couserans lost its passenger railway connection to 
Toulouse as soon as 1969 and its hospital has been 
threatening to close for several years. Classes and schools are 
closing in many villages. Live shows (spectacles vivants) 
such as Autrefois le Couseran at the beginning of August 
(more than 800 volunteers and 30.000 spectators) or that of 
the Consorani association keep the nostalgia of an idealized 
past and the pride of local traditions alive. This cultural 
dimension can be a lever for development with the 
repositioning of the tourist offices and the enhancement of 
cultural heritage, nature resources (mountain hikes, rivers), 
the Pyrenean Piedmont Compostela Way, etc. These live 
shows feed the dynamics of the voluntary sector 
(associations), constituting an essential asset. During the 
summer of 2020, most of the shows mentioned above, as 
well as a large number of local celebrations with their festive 
meals, important elements of identity and interaction 
between local inhabitants and tourists, were cancelled. 
Local companies, particularly in the food sector (pork 
products, cheese dairies, cakes, jams, ice creams, etc.), 
focusing on authenticity and local products, with planned 
marketing on the Internet, constitute another important lever 
for sustainable development and local employment, also with 
competitive companies with niches and product strategies in 
industrial fields.  
In the healthcare sector, interface organizations: Echo 
Healthcare Network, Home Hospitalization, MAIA for 
Alzheimer's patients, are now integrated into a CPTS 
(Territorial Professional Health Community) with the local 
hospital  (CHAC or Hospital Community Ariege Couserans - 
Centre Hospitalier Ariège Couserans). After those existing 
in Prat-Bonrepaux, Castillon, Seix, Massat and La-Bastide-
de-Sérou, a new multi-professional healthcare home (MSP) 
is under construction in Saint-Girons and will be operational 
in a few months. Training and education are also important 
assets. Saint-Girons has three high schools or lycées (one 
general and two vocational). 
Since 2017, the 8 Communities of Communes of 
Couserans and two intercommunities unions have merged to 
create the Community of Communes "Couserans-Pyrénées" 
or "Com-Com". This now concerns 94 communes, with a 
population of around 30,000 inhabitants. It is concerned with 
a great number of sectors of local life: environment, waste, 
health, education, cultural life, healthcare, economic 
development, tourism, etc. It constitutes a major and 
federating actor for any territorial intelligence project and we 
are in contact with its main actors.  
With its isolated and heavily depopulated high valleys, 
the Couserans is nevertheless only an hour and a half away 
from Toulouse and also has other assets that its inhabitants 
insist on:  a quality of life and a rather preserved nature. 
IV.
FOR A TERRITORIAL INTELLIGENCE APPROACH IN 
INTERACTIONS WITH AND BETWEEN INHABITANTS
In this section, we propose some ways for a Territorial 
Intelligence approach focusing on interactions with and 
between all the inhabitants, all actors of these weakened 
territories, with of importance of rebuilding trust and the 
communication (relationship) and the use of data as possible 
levers. 
A.
The Importance of Territorial Intelligence 
During a seminar of the French research network Org & 
Co – Organizations and Communication (2012) devoted to 
Territorial Intelligence, Le Moënne proposed a definition to 
which we subscribe: "Territorial intelligence is a form of 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

collective intelligence developed on and around a territory in 
order to think and act there". Zara specified this notion of 
collective intelligence.  For him, "it is the intelligence of the 
link, of the relation" [16].  
We propose to insist on the dimension of cooperation, by 
involving all the actors even more. With this in mind, we 
meet 
Bernard 
and 
her 
approach 
to 
"engaging 
communication" [7], after having defined Information and 
Communication 
Sciences as 
interdisciplinary 
at the 
convergence of the four questions about creating links 
(interactions), meaning, knowledge and action [17].  Carayol 
[8] considered communication as a lever for change. We can 
also draw inspiration from Japan's "strategic knowledge 
communities", studied by Fayard and Moinet [18]. 
Bertacchini [19] considered "the territory as a collective 
intelligence enterprise to be organized towards the formation 
of local formal capital", promoting a culture of participation 
and project to federate all skills". We have considered [20] 
that the territory can be (re)constructed through a synergy of 
projects. 
B.
To Rebuild Trust 
Girardot [21] within the international network of 
territorial intelligence INTI proposed the Catalyse method to 
make emerge and federate the initiatives of the actors of the 
territories, in particular of the inhabitants, with the use of the 
existing data and the production of new ones, with the 
possibility of creating territorial observatories.   
The Catalyse method is based on many existing tools or 
tools 
to 
be 
built: 
information 
systems, 
especially 
geographical, with a strong territorial dimension, quantitative 
statistical methods or qualitative data analysis, project 
management and evaluation methods. Based on a diagnosis 
of needs and existing resources, its vocation is to build a 
territorial information system for decision support (proposal 
of indicators) of the main actors (local authorities, State 
services, associations, etc.) that can lead to the setting up of 
an observatory of the territory concerned. 
The aim is to build solutions for and with the inhabitants. 
It proposes to articulate the needs of the territories and the 
available resources around a project dynamics federating the 
maximum number of actors, relying on the citizens' initiative 
and producing data to support their actions. This method has 
already been applied in different territories: Besançon 
(France), Liège (Belgium), Huelva (Spain), Salerno (Italy), 
in Quebec, Argentina, etc.   
This method can be articulated with the FAcT - Mirror 
approach (Fears-Attractions-Temptations in Mirror method), 
proposed by Le Cardinal and his team [22], in particular to 
remove fears and develop trust around complex projects, but 
also in weakened territories such as the area of Belarus still 
affected by the Chernobyl disaster (1986) twenty years after 
the nuclear catastrophe [5]. Their challenge was to rebuild 
trust that had disappeared, as the populations had lost trust in 
the authorities, science, doctors and also in themselves. 
Rather than trusting only the experts (those who said they  
know or think they know), Le Cardinal and his team went 
directly to the inhabitants, living with them for three years. 
They listened to their needs and hopes. Trust is time: it is 
built in the quality of relationships.  Around the FAcT-
Mirror method, this building of trust, constituting an 
accumulated capital, is based on a relationship ethic focusing 
on respect, loyalty and mutual commitment. 
C.
With Communication (relationship) and New Uses 
of Data as Levers? 
Communication (relationships and co-operations) and 
new uses of data may constitute important levers of 
sustainable development of territories. “Living Labs" have 
been developed in this perspective. They insist on the project 
dimension, such as Brie Nov (Seine-et-Marne North), which 
proposes a PPPP approach (public-private partnerships and 
population), in particular to bring together and help work 
together native inhabitants and newcomers [23].   
Data can be an important support for territorial 
development. With the creation and use of data, we enter the 
vast fashionable subject of smart cities, which, in the case of 
the Couserans, or other weakened territories, we prefer to 
approach through the notion of smart villages. Like Stiegler, 
we favor the dimension of human interactions. Faced with 
the risks of data use drift ("datacracy"), we prefer his 
"contributory learning territory" approach [24]. Insisting on 
the changes induced by massive data in human activities, 
Nesvijevskaia and Chartron underlined the stakes of the 
human/data interface. For us, this aspect is essential for the 
visibility and the development of the attractiveness of the 
territories [11]. 
But, for us, the uses of data and digital devices are not an 
end in themselves. They are not a miracle solution, but they 
can be an important lever for "resilience" and territorial 
development by promoting "reliance": development of 
interactions and social links between all stakeholders to 
promote innovation and creativity in the territories, as 
recommended by the Godet and al. report [9]. The aim is 
thus to produce data for action, in particular to promote 
collaborative innovations, which are promoted by Zacklad 
[25], by also making remote areas more visible thanks to 
digital technology.  
These elements of reflection outline a cooperative and 
contributory intelligence approach that should be based on a 
synergy of local projects. 
V.
TRYING TO DEVELOP A CONTRIBUTORY 
INTELLIGENCE AROUND A SYNERGY OF PROJECTS
In this section, we propose some ways to try to develop a 
contributory intelligence around a synergy of projects, with 
narrative shared experiences to build a form of Wise 
Territory. We analyze then the impact of the Covid 
pandemic in these territories. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

A.
The Importance of the Appropriation of the 
Territory through the Narration of Experiences and 
Projects 
Following on from previous work [20], and in a socio-
constructivist approach, we consider that the territory can be 
(re)constructed through a synergy of projects, including the 
sharing of knowledge to develop intangible territorial social 
capital [19]. Of course, we know how to take advantage of 
all the potentialities of new uses of data and digital socio-
technical devices. The aim would be to foster a form of 
"resilience" of these territories, based on their assets of 
authenticity and identity around a new collective project of 
territorial dynamics, involving as many local and external 
actors as possible. In a way, "reliance" (network interactions) 
may help with "resilience", by making this territory more 
visible in the age of social networks and globalization and 
more attractive to newcomers: people and above all, 
companies. 
We believe that, as in the Catalyse method, this project 
dynamics must begin with an appropriation of the territory 
by putting experiences and projects into narratives, 
combining memory and pride in the past (traditions) with 
future prospects, as D'Almeida [26] pointed out, as 
organizations 
always 
develop between 
projects 
and 
narratives. We think it may be the same possibility for these 
weakened territories in sharing experiences to build 
collective meaning and social representations. 
B.
Which Devices for Which Projects? 
The Couserans Pyrenees Community of Communes or 
Com-Com and the Regional Natural Park of the Ariège 
Pyrenees including the Couserans and the various tourist 
offices that are in the process of merging may constitute 
interesting entry points. 
The Web can also be an important element in making 
territories visible and contributing to their resilience. The 
University of Teramo, in Abruzzo (Italy), is thus trying to 
boost a new dynamic for the L'Aquila area, victim of an 
earthquake a few years ago, by relying on a Wikimedia 
project to give visibility to this territory by promoting the 
sharing of knowledge to foster its resilience, using open data 
in particular [27]. 
C.
 A Smart or rather Wise Territory ? 
The Couserans could thus position itself as a "smart 
territory", with, by banking on the quality of life and the 
relative proximity of Toulouse, the possibility of "rural 
coworking" combining aspects of a break from the hectic life 
of today and remote work, as proposed for example by 
Mutinerie Village in the Perche (in the West France, in the 
south of Normandy), with, once again, the question of relays 
as levers for development and outreach, Mutinerie Village 
having also developed a network from Paris. This network 
operation, both internal and open to the outside world, can be 
an asset, drawing in particular on the dynamics of social 
networks.  
This also raises the whole question of the role of the 
attractiveness agencies and the repositioning of the 
Couserans tourist offices, which, like the communities of 
communes a few years ago, are in the process of being 
grouped together. We are certainly moving towards a 
hybridization of their activities, with a platform dimension 
for an offer of services (with a strong interactive dimension) 
that are increasingly personalized.  
Geocaching, which is increasingly practiced in other 
territories, can be an interesting asset if it is integrated as a 
form of tourist entertainment to help people discover local 
heritage, for example as a treasure hunt. Geocaching could 
be coupled with "slow tourism". A form of tourism, where 
one knows how to take one's time, insisting on contacts with 
nature, culture and gastronomy, favoring non-polluting 
transport (bicycles, etc.), in a sustainable development 
perspective, which seems particularly well adapted to the 
Couserans. These projects could be based on other, more 
important ones, to relay and legitimize them, such as, for 
example, giving a cross-border dimension to the ski resort of 
Guzet-Neige with a pass road relationship with the Catalan 
valleys, thus recovering old traditional relationships. 
Tourism is not the only thing, even if it can be a key 
lever for development. The local hospital or CHAC, has long 
been banking on telemedicine activities, including with 
Spain, and on a new range of networked services: Echo 
Santé Health Network, home hospitalization, etc. The 
coupling of their activities with the development of multi-
professional healthcare houses in the various valleys and 
under construction for Saint-Girons area, is essential for 
improving healthcare in Couserans. 
Rather than "Smart Territory", this term in relation to 
"Smart City", having a strong technical dimension, we prefer 
to speak of "Wise Territories", mobilizing the notion of 
"Wisdom", linked to that of experience with a strong 
collective intelligence approach associating all the actors to 
take their destiny into their own hands.  It is a question of 
(re)building trust for the resilience of these vulnerable 
territories based on a new collective dynamics (trust and 
reliance for resilience).  
D.
 The Impact of the Covid Pandemic Crisis 
The Covid pandemic crisis and in particular the long 
period of containment (confinement) in France (two months 
from mid-March to mid-May), followed by numerous 
restrictive health measures (wearing masks) and the fear of 
new waves in the months or years to come, are leading the 
inhabitants of large cities to take a different look at these 
economically vulnerable territories, from which they often 
come and where they quite often have second homes. 
As the pandemic is often carried by populations coming 
from other areas or the proximity of major airports for large 
cities, their relative isolation becomes an essential asset. 
Their quality of life can be coupled with distance working 
(teleworking) for new attractiveness in our services society, 
with the added advantage of renewed contact with nature and 
the rather low price of housing.    
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

But there is one major prerequisite for developing these 
new projects: breaking the isolation of the Couserans. 
Isolation on two levels: transport and also digital. The 
development of broadband, including in remote valleys, is 
essential to promote activities with a strong intangible 
dimension. This is one of the major objectives of the new 
president of the Ariège Departmental Council. 
VI.
WITH A NEW ROLE FOR PUBLIC SERVICES: THE 
STATE, LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND SOCIAL PROTECTION 
ORGANIZATIONS
Algan’s point of view in relation to the Yellow Vests 
revolt [28] is that the feeling of unease amongst weakened 
territories (and for us particularly in Couserans) is very 
noticeable, "wounded relationships with others", both at the 
individual and collective level, on one hand with social and 
territorial inequalities in health, and on the other, the 
individual and more collective dimension with territorial 
specificities. Moreover, with reference to Algan, it is a 
question of "creating links and trust in the territories", this 
idea of rebuilding trust which is the guiding thread of our 
work.   
The official discourse since the beginning of the Yellow 
Vests revolt is to promote new forms of public action in 
territories, especially vulnerable ones. A new National 
Agency for Territorial Cohesion (ANCT) was created in 
November 2019, bringing together former organizations, 
including the DATAR. Its coordination in the various 
departments should be ensured by the prefects (whose role is 
also 
strongly 
questioned 
by 
digital 
transformation), 
responsible for the State's deconcentrated services in the 
departments. Is this a new way of redefining the national 
State as a platform for services, particularly digital services 
(e-administration)? Is it simply a change of name? Making 
new out of old? Only time will tell us...  
This new role of the State, local and regional authorities 
and public services, particularly in the areas of healthcare 
and social protection, is essential for restoring the trust of 
local players and "rebuilding society", in a dynamic of 
animation and partnerships, by making the most of existing 
data and producing new data together, in the service of 
collective projects. 
The National Gendarmerie may also play an important 
role in protecting their buildings but also the data and 
immaterial capital of these companies, which are often 
vulnerable in terms of cybersecurity. 
Data is essential in healthcare and social protection. More 
than 20 years after Rosanvallon [29], we believe that it is no 
longer a question of rethinking the Welfare State, but rather, 
in an even more difficult way, in the current context 
(mistrust, budgetary constraints, etc.) to rebuild it, especially 
in vulnerable territories, so long forgotten. The digital 
transformation can help, as it can also aggravate the social 
disruption, by continuing to maintain them as "digital 
deserts".  
The question of infrastructures to stop isolation is 
fundamental at two levels: transport and digital. Here again, 
the role of public services (State, Occitania region, Ariège 
department, even Europe) must be essential.  
Like progress or technology [12], data can be ambivalent: 
they can help rebuild social ties and improve or enable new 
services for inhabitants, just as they can derive into 
"datacracy" [24]. Like all our society, weakened territories 
are at a crossroads ... 
VII.
CONCLUSION
This paper corresponds to a work in progress in a whole 
context of globalization, of digital transformation and 
ecological transition that involves societal disruptions but 
can also help the resilience of weakened territories 
(ambivalence of technology and progress). In this context, 
we try to propose some ways to an approach of Territorial 
Intelligence in interaction with the inhabitants to develop a 
collective intelligence around a synergy of projects to build a 
shared future and give hope to these weakened territories.  
We insist for a renewal of public services with new forms 
of presence and action in territories to be invented. It is thus 
a question of federating and creating new links to develop 
the resilience’s capacity of these weakened territories by 
associating all the actors. First of all, by making them better 
known in order to build a shared project, by focusing in 
particular on the wealth of the associative sector in these 
territories. To make them more attractive, it is also a question 
of making these territories more visible on social networks 
(websites of local authorities, such as local companies) and 
thus promoting their e-reputation in a territorial marketing 
approach.  
We try to open new ways to develop a value chain 
process of attractiveness by having all the actors working 
together to build a shared future as proposed by Le Cardinal 
with trust as a key lever [5], [6]. At the end of this work 
devoted to the resilience of weakened territories in France, 
we must come back to its main thread with the essential 
dimension of trust: in oneself, in others, in the future, 
apprehended in a constructivist approach of information - 
communication. 
We insisted on the importance of communication to 
create links and then trust in a collective intelligence 
dynamic [16] by producing new knowledge (importance of 
data) in a contributory perspective that can be part of 
strategic knowledge communities [18]. The State and public 
services of region and department have a major role to play, 
in particular with Social Security organizations, to create 
social links [4] around new forms of solidarity, by listening 
to and being at the service of all the inhabitants, by 
encouraging the emergence of situations in which trust can 
be (re)built. It is our manner, according to E. Morin [30] to 
try to build a new future. 
This work is the first step. We must now try to act in 
interactive research with decision-makers actors and with the 
inhabitants in local situations, as for example in Couserans, 
or in other weakened territories.  
Its originality and main goal is to propose to try to 
articulate new initiatives of public or private authorities and 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

citizen initiatives to create a new dynamics of resilience 
rebuilding trust around a collective intelligence for shared 
projects. The affirmation of new territorial actors in France 
with a federative vocation, such as communities of 
communes, can be an important opportunity. This is 
particularly the case of that of Couserans - Pyrenees, with 
whom we are going to work over the next few months to 
improve the visibility and attractiveness of this territory with 
a strong identity and trying to mobilize as many actors as 
possible to build a shared project together: newcomers, or 
probably more easily, native people who may now, with the 
Covid crisis, want to come back to work remotely, and 
people already living and working in these territories. 
REFERENCES
[1]
Giddens, "Runaway World. How Globalisation is Reshaping 
our Lives". London: Profile Books, 2002. 
[2]
J.-F. Gravier, "Paris and the French Desert" / "Paris et le 
désert français", Paris, Flammarion, 1947.
[3]
C. Guilluy, "Peripheral France. How the Working Classes 
were Sacrificed" / "La France périphérique. Comment on a 
sacrifié les classes populaires". Paris: Champs – Flammarion, 
2015. 
[4]
S. Paugam, "The Social Link" / "Le lien social", Paris: PUF, 
2010. 
[5]
G. Le Cardinal,  " Trust in the Foundation of Society " / " La 
confiance au fondement de la société ", Ceras - Projet n°293, 
Juillet 
2006. 
Available 
on: 
http://www.ceras-
projet.com/index.php?id=983.  
[6]
G. Le Cardinal, " Built Trust is always Fruitful " / "Une 
confiance construite est toujours féconde". Paris : La Croix, 
28 – 29 décembre, p. 9.  
[7]
F. Bernard,   " For an Engaging Communication, towards 
sustainable development  "  / "  Pour une communication 
engageante, 
vers 
un 
développement 
durable », 
In 
S. Tremblay, 
N. 
D'Almeida, 
T. 
Libaert, 
Sustainable 
development. 
Communication 
that 
stands 
out 
/ 
Développement 
durable. 
Une 
communication 
qui 
se 
démarque. Québec, Canada: Presses de l'Université du 
Québec, 2018 : 215 - 232. 
[8]
V. Carayol, "Organizational Communication. An Allagmatic 
Perspective"/"Communication 
organisationnelle. 
Une 
perspective allagmatique", Paris : L’Harmattan, 2004. 
[9]
M. Godet, P. Durance, M. Mousli,  "Unleashing Innovation in 
the Territories" /  "Libérer l’innovation dans les territoire". 
Paris : Conseil d'Analyse Economique - La documentation 
Française, 2010. 
[10] A. Mucchielli, "Situation and Communication" / "Situation et 
communication", Nice : Les éditions Ovadia, 2010. 
[11] A. Nesvijevskaia, "Big Data Phenomenon in Companies: 
Project Process, Value Generation and Human Mediation – 
Data" / "Phénomène Big Data en entreprise : processus projet, 
génération de valeur et Médiation Homme– Données", Ph D 
in Information and Communication Sciences / Doctorat en 
Sciences de l’Information et de la Communication, G. 
Chartron dir., Paris: CNAM, 2019. 
[12] J. Ellul, "The Technique or Challenge of the Century / "La 
technique ou l’enjeu du siècle", Paris: Economica, 1990. 
[13] H. Dou and S. D. Manullang, Competitive Intelligence, 
Technology Watch and Regional Development. Indonesia: 
MUC Publishing,2004.  
[14] C. Bourret, "Tackle the Challenge of Social and Territorial 
Inequalities in Health (ISTS) by Meeting Interface and 
Telehealth Organizations in a "Digital Humanism" Approach 
to Health? "/ "Relever le défi des Inégalités Sociales et 
Territoriales en Santé (ISTS) par la rencontre des 
organisations d’interface et de la télésanté dans une approche 
d’« humanisme numérique » en santé ? ", Contemporary 
Trends in Organizational Communication / Tendances 
contemporaines en communication organisationnelle, in S. 
Alemanno, C. Le Moënne, and G. Gramaccia, dir., Revue 
Française 
des 
Sciences 
de 
l’Information 
et 
de 
la 
Communication 
[En 
ligne], 
9 | 2016, 
available 
on : 
http://rfsic.revues.org/2013 ; DOI : 10.4000/rfsic 
[15] La Croix, " The Couserans, an island in the Pyrenees "/ "Le 
Couserans, une île dans les Pyrénées". 2017. Available on : 
http://www.la-croix.com/France/Le-Couserans-une-ile-dans-
les-Pyrenees-2017-01-30-1200821036# 
[16] O. Zara, The management of collective intelligence. Towards 
a new Governance / Le management de l’intelligence 
collective. Vers une nouvelle gouvernance, Paris: M21 
Editions, 2008. 
[17] F. Bernard, "Information and Communication Sciences (ICS) 
as a Discipline of Openness and Decompartmentalization"/ 
"Les 
SIC 
une 
discipline 
de 
l’ouverture 
et 
du 
décloisonnement" », in A. Bouzon dir., Organizational 
Communication in Debate. Fields, concepts, perspectives / La 
communication organisationnelle en débat. Champs, concepts, 
perspectives, Paris : L’Harmattan, 2006, pp. 33 – 46. 
[18] N. Moinet, " Territorial Intelligence between Communication 
and Strategic Kowledge Community: the example of the 
Poitou-Charentes Regional System " /  "L’intelligence 
territoriale entre communication  et communauté stratégique 
de connaissance : l’exemple du dispositif régional Poitou-
Charentes", Revue internationale d’intelligence économique, 
2009 /1, pp. 30-38. 
[19] Y. Bertacchini,  " The Territory, a Collective Intelligence 
Enterprise to be Organized towards the Formation of Local 
Formal Capital /  " Le territoire, une entreprise d’intelligence 
collective à organiser vers la formation du capital formel 
local", / Communication and Organization / Communication 
et 
Organisation. 
n° 
25, 
2004, 
Available 
on : 
http://journals.openedition.org/communicationorganisation/29
48 
[20] C. Bourret, " Elements for an Approach of Territorial 
Intelligence as a Synergy of Local Projects to Develop a 
Collective Identity " / " Eléments pour une approche de 
l’intelligence 
territoriale 
comme 
synergie 
de 
projets 
locaux pour développer une identité collective ", International 
Journal of Projectics, n° 1,  Brussels: De Boeck, 2008, pp. 79-
92. 
[21] J.-J. Girardot, " Concepts, Principles and Tools of the 
Catalysis Method " / "Concepts, principes et outils de la 
méthode Catalyse ", Proceedings o/ European Territorial 
Intelligence Network (INTI), Liège, 2005, pp. 133-137. 
Available 
on: 
mti.univ-
fcomte.fr/reit/REITDoc/docs/GirardotLiege2005.pdf – 
[22] G. Le Cardinal, J. F. Guyonnet, B. Pouzoullic, and J. Rigby, 
"Intervention Methodology for complex problems: The FAcT-
Mirror method", European Journal of Operational Research, 
Elsevier, n° 132, 2001, pp. 694-702.  
[23] I. Fasshauer, " The Living Lab, a Device to Promote the 
Resilience of Territories "/  "Le Living Lab, un dispositif pour 
favoriser la résilience de territoires ? ", Research Workshop 
DICEN IdF, Paris, Val d’Europe, 2019, June 27th.  
[24] B. Stiegler, "The philosopher Bernard Stiegler prefers 
"contributory learning territories" to "smart cities" /  " Le 
philosophe 
Bernard 
Stiegler 
préfère 
les 
"Territoires 
apprenants 
contributifs" 
aux 
"smart 
cities", 
Paris : 
iNNovaPresse, 
2018. 
Available 
on  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

https://innovapresse.com/acteurs/36375-le-philosophe-
bernard-stiegler-prefere-les-territoires-apprenants-
contributifs-aux-smart-cities.html 
[25] M. Zacklad,  "The Economics of User-Friendliness in 
Information and Service Societies" / "Les économies de la 
convivialité dans les sociétés de l’information et des 
services", Inaugural Lesson / Leçon inaugurale, Paris: 
CNAM, 2009, June 17th. 
[26] N. D’Almeida, "Organisations between Projects and Stories" / 
"Les organisations entre projets et récits", in A. Bouzon, dir., 
Organizational Communication in Debate. Fields, concepts 
and perspectives / La communication organisationnelle en 
débat. Champs, concepts et perspectives, Paris: L’Harmattan, 
2006, pp. 145 – 158.   
[27] C. Colombati and P. Valocchi, “Multifaceted Interactions 
between Local Resources and Wikimedia Ecosystem to Boost 
Abruzzo. Territory and Tourism Promotion”, Research 
Workshop DICEN IdF, Paris, Val d’Europe, 2019, June 27th. 
[28] Y. Algan, “Creating Links and Trust in the Territories to 
Reduce Populism” / “Créer des liens et de la confiance dans 
les territoires pour faire reculer les populismes”/ Public 
Actors / Acteurs publics, 2019, November 26 th. Available on 
https : //www.acteurspublics.fr/webtv/emissions/semaine-de-
linnovation-publique/yann-algan-creer-des-liens-et-de-la-
confiance-dans-les-territoires-pour-faire-reculer-les-
populismes 
[29] P. Rosanvallon, “The new social question : rethinking the 
Welfare State” / “La nouvelle question sociale : repenser 
l’Etat providence”, Paris: Le Seuil, 1998. 
[30] E. Morin, Seven complex lessons in education for the future. 
Paris: UNESCO, 1999. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Smart Territories 
Advocating for Smart Basic Entity (SBE) and the digital clone approach 
 
Pierre Fournié, Pr Christian Bourret 
Laboratoire Dicen-Idf 
Université Gustave Eiffel Paris Est Marne la Vallée 
Paris, France 
pierre.fournie@u-pem.fr christian.bourret@u-pem.fr  
Pr  Jean-Pierre Caliste 
Université de Technologie de Compiègne 
Compiègne, France 
jean-pierre.caliste@utc.fr 
 
 
Abstract—Smart cities (SC) became, for a few years, a regular 
topic in the scientific literature, and both political and 
economic agendas. Indeed, the connection between urban 
development 
and 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies (ICT) represents a large market. It is presented 
as a multi-dimension tool to face the challenges of the 21st 
century. We intend here to demonstrate that developing such a 
concept only on cities may reinforce the already existing 
fracture between rural and urban territories. The opportunity 
exists to bring smart technologies to a lower level, that we call 
the Smart Basic Entity (SBE). We advocate that, to do so, it 
could be wise, to experiment a Digital Clone Approach.  
Keywords; Territorial Intelligence, Smart City, Smart Basic 
Entity, Digital Clone, Rural Territories, Ariège, Angola 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 2009, the number of people in urban areas surpassed 
the number of people living in rural areas. Although, we 
shall keep in mind that national definition of what is “urban” 
is not uniform across the World. For the World Bank, the 
rural population registered a sharp decline during the 1960-
2018 period, from 66.4% to 44.7%. Such a figure hides huge 
disparities between regions and continents. In France, the 
rural population amounts only at 19.56% in 2018 (divided by 
2 since 1960 (38.2%)) whereas it remains at 34.49% in 
Angola (from 89.6% 58 years earlier) and at 44.68% in 
Indonesia (85.41% in 1960) [1] .The interpretation of such a 
worldwide trend shall take into accounts local and regional 
specificities [2] .  
Cities offer multiple advantages: access to electricity, 
sanitation, water, health and education. Incomes are also 
higher even they shall be related to living costs. Supported 
by infrastructures of transportation and communication, high 
density of individuals and businesses, the city is a territory 
for serendipity. Urban areas also tempt individuals fleeing 
war or environment disasters. The attractivity of towns, 
urban centres or urban clusters, do also impact the structure 
of employment as there is a shift from agriculture towards 
manufacturing or services.  
Therefore, showing disinterest for the rural population 
may, on the medium-long term, result in dramatic social, 
economic and political consequences. At the same time, an 
opportunity exists, by customizing SC concepts, to create a 
smart rural development model. We will illustrate the issues 
and solutions, we currently work at, by taking the examples 
of France, China and Angola. 
After an introduction, we present, in section II, the Smart 
cities as a dominant model. The long term debate about 
urban concentration and growth will follow (III). In a fourth 
step we will consider what makes the cities so unique before 
identifying the risks associated with abandoning the rural 
areas (V). We will study in section VI the case of Ariège 
before exploring government strategies to transform rural 
areas into attractive territories (VII). We will, by presenting 
our model, indicate how technology could support such a 
move (VIII) and develop further the digital clone approach 
(IX). Before concluding (XI), we will illustrate by our 
Angola and China experiments, the current status of our 
researchs (X). 
II. 
SMART CITIES: A DOMINANT MODEL 
Smart Data, Smart People, Smart Technology and Smart 
Governance represent the four pillars of the Smart City. SC 
has become the dominant model of development for towns in 
the 21st century. Without any restriction related to traditions, 
culture and religion, almost all aspects of urban inhabitants' 
life do enter in the SC scope.  
All over the world, political leaders need to answer to the 
combination of significant issues, namely the explosion of 
demography and the revolt of Earth. By 2025, the level of 
urbanization will reach 58.20% (4.7 Bn people) from 44.70% 
(2.57 Bn), twenty years earlier. The projections show that the 
two-third of humanity will live in an urban environment by 
2050. 
The explosion of demography and the high concentration 
of human beings into cities may have devastating effects. 
Pollution, security concerns, mental and health disorders, 
increased and concentrated needs for energy and resources 
are the most intensively documented.  Such a massive trend 
always requires more substantial storage capacities and 
efficient distribution networks. It also increases the 
vulnerability of human centres to natural (volcanoes, 
earthquakes, floods, sea elevation, high tide) and health 
disasters as well as to terrorist and cyber-attacks.  
The revolt of Earth takes multiple forms from climate 
changes to disappearance of fauna and flora species, from 
freshwater scarcity to pest invasions. It profoundly affects, 
together 
with 
human-generated 
conflicts, 
the 
living 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

conditions 
worldwide 
and 
creates 
mutations 
and 
transformations at many levels as well as migrations and 
destruction of human settlements.  In such a tense 
environment, Smart City appears as an “easy to sell” political 
tool. Expandable and flexible, it is a kind of “swiss knife 
urban concept” able to resolve all issues mentioned above.  
The political discourse is supported mainly by the 
revolution of ICT (Information and Communication 
Technologies), the one of IoT (Internet of Things) and more 
recently the fast development of AI (Artificial Intelligence). 
They allow managing ever-increasing volumes of data that 
shall grow from 33 Zettabytes (ZB) in 2018 to 175 ZB by 
2025 [3].   
For a large share of the population, those signs of 
progress are synonym of job destructions and highly tricky 
adaptation. Political discourses attempt to calm fears. Thanks 
to technology, the city would become the place where, 
through monitoring, air and water purity would remain 
unchallenged, traffic and transports efficiency would be 
enhanced, garbage would be invisible and immediately 
recycled. Criminality and terrorist risks would be assessed, 
and new services would regularly appear. A smart city is also 
a place where available jobs would be managed and fulfilled. 
Still, most of all, its development would require a high 
number of qualified technicians to support every day 
appearing positions. 
Whatever is the type of decision process (centralized or 
decentralized) used to drive the development of the Smart 
City, all insist on people empowerment. Many suggest the 
promotion of platforms 
for bottom-up participatory 
governance [4]. Then, through the access to data, the 
contribution by forwarding ideas, the development of 
software and applications by its inhabitants or local 
companies, the city of the future may appear as a new place 
for democracy. At least in the political discourse and 
notwithstanding the increased pressure and control that smart 
data and IoT may allow on the citizens. By becoming smart, 
the city will anticipate and satisfy all needs as defined by the 
Maslow Pyramid from physiological to self-actualization: 
“Cities can be the source of solutions to, rather than the 
cause of, the challenges that our world is facing today” [5]. 
III. 
URBAN CONCENTRATION AND GROWTH: A LONG-
TERM DEBATE 
Does urban concentration support growth? The question 
remains a place for fierce debates. Jane Jacobs, the well-
known author of The death and life of great American cities,  
appeared as a pathfinder when she claimed that “the 
understanding of cities, and also of economic development 
generally, has been distorted by the “dogma of agricultural 
primacy.” From initially being primary organs of cultural 
development, cities have become primary economic organs 
[6] and as such a centre of growth. As places of innovation 
and industrial production, cities offer to the rurality the 
services and products required to increase the output, to 
upgrade raw into transformed goods with added value. 
Polese [7] studies the pro and cons of such a theory 
extensively. He identifies the laudators of cities whether 
considering the relationships between per capita income and 
urbanization levels, the contribution of urban areas to 
national income and product, the definite link between 
productivity and the agglomeration of economic activities in 
cities. But he rejects a direct causal relationship as 
scientifically impossible to demonstrate. Tolley and Thomas 
conclude that “Urbanization as such is neither the source nor 
the enemy of development” [8] 
IV. 
WHAT MAKES CITIES SO UNIQUE ? 
Urbanization mainly concerns the rural-urban shift. The 
denomination is also used when population growth is 
predominantly urban. As indicated earlier, agricultural 
productivity 
directly 
impacts 
urbanization 
pressure. 
Reversely effectiveness of agriculture may lower or slower 
urban growth. Urbanization, part of the farm workforce 
becoming free, constitutes an inferred-effect of the 
agricultural revolution [9]. Castells-Quintana and Royuela 
[10] edulcorate such a proposal by stressing,that rural 
population are often expelled from the rural areas.  
The genuine attraction for cities shall be analyzed. Cities 
are the mothers of human progress [11] and, no development 
may take place without towns [12]. Often the change in 
status (from city to capital as it was the case for Jakarta in 
1961-1964); the efforts from government or municipality; 
the 
development 
of 
the 
hinterland, 
accelerate 
the 
urbanization process. Thanks to the concentration of capital 
and means, the city offers a place for innovation. [13] “The 
city promotes the monetization of the economy, facilitates 
social mobility and the adequacy between offer and demand 
for qualified manpower, expands the markets for industrial 
and agricultural productions” [14]. Even a specific size shall 
be reached to boost technological progress [15], dense and 
marge populations constitute a fertile ground able to 
welcome the exchange of ideas [16]. City diversity supports 
employment growth [17]. By limiting the distance, offering 
efficient transportation and communication networks, they 
reduce the cost of transmitting information and increase 
efficiency and productivity. [18] [19] Unsurprisingly the 
patterns have changed with time also in the 90’s “Cities with 
high levels of human capital did well, and cities with large 
numbers of the poor did poorly” [20] Environmental 
concerns also require adaptative and innovative means of 
transportation. Intermodal platforms aim at improving 
efficiency. [21] 
Cities are intricated into a complex system: the system of 
cities. For Pumain [22], cities also have an intrinsic quality to 
transform 
themselves: 
an 
evolutive 
capacity 
or 
(re)organization. Remembering the “General systems of 
cities” conceptualized by J.Reynaud in 1841; the works of 
Berry [23] and its famous “cities as systems within systems 
of cities” and the ones of Pred [24]; using analogies with 
physical systems and synergetics; Pumain compares cities 
systems to dynamic systems governed by an auto-regulation. 
She goes even further by defining an evolutional theory 
centred on the notion of “system of cities”; thus, ending the 
supremacy of a static vision of cities. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

V. 
THE RISK OF ABANDONING RURAL AREAS AND “THE 
CATASTROPHE SCENARIO” 
Could any government decently abandon 60 to 20% of its 
population? The “yellow vest” movement in France, initiated 
in October 2018 and still active as of March 2020 in some 
rural areas, constitutes, for any government, a fierce 
reminder. The images of violence in Champs Elysees, the 
groups of rioters spreading in the capital and main cities, 
made people forget that many Yellow Vest were leaving in 
rural areas and were protesting against decisions taken by the 
central government that directly impacted their living 
conditions. 
France is presented regularly as an heir of Jacobinism. 
Despite some tentative of decentralization, regionalism is 
refrained, and decisions centres are often far from the 
countryside.  
Conscious that a balance shall exist across the entire 
national territory, President Charles de Gaulle created in 
1963 the Délégation à l’Aménagement du Territoire et à 
l’Action Régionale (DATAR). Under the Prime Minister, 
such a structure had to impulse, coordinate, reequilibrate the 
actions of the state whereas in developing rural areas, 
reinforcing transportation networks, meshing the country. By 
using DATAR, the state aimed at organizing and 
modernizing France; at preserving cohesion, at making 
territories more attractive. 
On 
2014, 
DATAR 
merged 
with 
the 
Comité 
Interministériel des Villes and l’Agence Nationale pour la 
Cohesion Sociale et l’Egalité des Chances into CGET, le 
Commissariat à l’Egalité des Territoires. Such a combination 
of agencies was lately replaced by the Agence Nationale 
pour la Cohésion des Territoires (ANCT) under the ministry 
of Cohesion of Territories and Relationships with Territorial 
Collectivities.  
Terminology matters here: cohesion, equality constitute 
the fertile soil of a territory that any disorder may spoil 
forever.  
In the 1970s, DATAR prepared a prospective study 
forecasting what will be France by the end of the 20th 
century. One of the output, referred to as the “Catastrophe 
scenario”, concentrating all developments into large 
metropoles and consequently creating desertification of rural 
areas had to be avoided. Dou and Fournié [29] have shown 
that, notwithstanding expert’s advice, France has been 
developed under such a configuration. The sizeable 
interstitial space created suffers from insufficient means, 
infrastructures and is dramatically abandoned by its 
population.  
The state agency France Strategy proposed that national 
investments be channelled to the 15 largest French cities 
through metropolitan pacts of innovation. Such a policy, 
justified by a lack of resources, may lead in territories 
located at the fringe, to the reinforcement of inequalities as 
regards as public services, access to medical services, 
connectivity between others.  
France suffers from a triple fracture: a Territorial 
Fracture, a Technological Fracture and “Data-consciousness” 
fracture.  
France is not the sole country to face problems with its 
rurality. The phenomena concerns almost all countries of the 
continent. The European Union, now aware of the situation, 
initiated some action process with the Cork declaration, 
Ireland, 2016; the UE Action Plan for Smart Villages 
(11/04/2017) that aims at « investing in the viability and 
vitality of rural areas »; the Bled declaration, Slovenia, 2018. 
VI. 
THE CASE OF ARIEGE  
Separated from Spain by the Pyrenees mountains, Ariège 
is one of the 13 departments composing the Occitanie region, 
second largest province in France (72 724 sq/km). With 5.8 
million inhabitants, organized around 18 urban poles, two 
large metropoles (Toulouse and Montpellier), the region 
shelters a strong industry recognized at international level 
(aeronautics, spatial, in-vehicle systems, agro-industries, 
biotech) supported by 15 poles of competitivity and several 
large universities. 
Ariège is a department limited in size, home of 152 724 
inhabitants of which 46.04% are over 50 years old compared 
to 33.08 % in the neighbour department of Haute Garonne 
(central city: Toulouse). Largest cities in 2017 were Pamiers 
(15675 habs), Foix (9 532 habs), Saint Girons (6 383 habs) 
and Lavelanet (6 137 habs). Only 31.1% of Ariege’s 
inhabitants have a graduate-level, far from the 50.8% of 
Haute Garonne and 97% of the companies have less than 50 
employees. 
The territory, called in some media the anti-startup nation 
[25],  has suffered from the closure of few large factories (in 
particular of paper, an industry-supported by hydroelectric 
capacities and forests) and mines in the 90’s, of “green 
tourism” being impacted by fierce competition with other 
regions and international destinations since the year 2000, 
and more recently of “white tourism” being affected by 
climatic change.  
Still, Ariège benefits of several assets. A vast cultural and 
historical heritage (between others Cathar castles), an 
immaculate nature with 55 000 ha of regional Natura 2000 
park that welcomes bears and wolves, high peaks over 3000 
m, thermalism are only parts of them.  
In this French department the disappearing of state 
presence, mass transportations and private services alter the 
living conditions and destroy the efforts to promote tourism 
On the long term, they might be the synonym of exode and 
increased poverty. A feeling of exclusion may prevail that 
could be transformed into social unrest and affect social and 
national cohesion. State presence disappearance takes 
multiple forms: the closing of taxation and perception 
offices, of classes in schools and colleges, of tribunals and 
legal offices, the reorganization of beds in hospitals or health 
services. In parallel, traditional shops are impacted by slow 
local and touristic activities. Low traffic and profitability 
condemn branches of banks and post offices. Bank 
Automated Distributors are suppressed. As in many rural 
regions, people have to drive 20 to 40 km to access essential 
services. Not the least, doctors and specialists abandon those 
areas, and there is a lack of professionals in both private 
sector (-26% between 2014 and 2018) and hospitals (-16% 
for the same period). 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Moreover, new regulations made possible the absence of 
controllers in the trains creating tense situations as regards as 
security and law enforcement in transports. On many lines, 
tickets cannot be sold into trains whereas at the same time 
commercial offices are being suppressed or opened during a 
short period of the day. Automatic machines are destroyed if 
located outside of the station and remain not accessible out 
of office hours or during weekends. The law referred to as 
LOM (Loi d’Organisation des Mobilités) signed December 
24th, 2019, creates a right to mobility. It may also, despite 
allowing through open data the access to information on 
transports and reinforcing the role of region, broadly impact 
rural territories.  
As regards as communication networks, 48.3% of 
housing have access to a high-speed network whereas over 
10% still have connection problems. At the same time, only 
22.6% are eligible to optic fibre. [26] 
Thus, at the same time authorities are pushing for more 
eco-friendly 
means 
of 
transportation 
and 
numeric 
transformation, an ageing population, suffering from a lack 
of knowledge and adaptative capacities, has difficulties in 
adapting to tools not fully available and to which it has not 
been trained. Besides the rupture of equality between 
territories, such a situation may endanger- this a guess that 
shall be assessed on the field- on a large scale, mental health, 
create deep feelings of exclusion and increase the 
vulnerability of rural populations. 
VII. COULD RURAL AREAS BECOME ATTRACTIVE AGAIN? 
Could rural areas become attractive again? Or in other 
words could we, create in those regions, at a time 
environmental concerns become a priority, the conditions to 
make the soil fertile again for living, to invert the rural-urban 
shift, to attract capital and means, to transform rural areas 
into places of innovation and serendipity.  
The report of Cour des Comptes dated March 2019 and 
entitled Accessing public services in rural territories 
concludes that, despite multiple initiatives, rural areas have 
required a long-term effort and remain a permanent failure of 
the central state. Multiplication of policies, overlapping of 
competences, and lousy coordination represent only a few 
aspects of the problem. Several laws have been voted with 
little positive impact: the legislation « Montagne » 
(Mountain) of 1985; the law for the Orientation and 
Development of Territories dated 04/02/1995; the bill for the 
Development of Rural Territories (23/02/2005). Circular 
letters addressed to the prefects by the Prime Minister and 
interministerial committees for rurality took place between 
2015 and 2016 defining a set of 104 measures to promote 
rural areas and ensure local development. Were considered 
as priorities: the access to health and the fight against « 
medical desert »;  the access to services through Maisons de 
Services Publics (MSP) (Public Services Office); « Nomade 
» Public; and « mobile » Postmen Services; the fight against 
school 
weaknesses; 
the 
numeric 
coverage 
and 
implementation of networks in rural areas; the execution of « 
Contracts of Rurality ». Those committees were replaced by 
CGET soon to merge into ANCT as mentioned earlier.  
The strategy of President Macron government for rurality 
should be read in the continuation of previous initiatives. 
Still 18% of the total French population live in medical 
deserts [27], a figure to compare to the 19.56% representing 
the total rural population. The same remedies have been 
proposed over the years without success. Rural territories 
continue to see their young population disappearing, the 
closure of public and private services and the constant 
degradation of their images in a never-ending vicious circle. 
VIII. A NEW STRATEGY SUPPORTED BY TECHNOLOGY 
Boosting the attractivity of rural territories is related to 
both a change in image, the development of light 
infrastructures 
of 
utilities 
and 
communications, 
the 
development of inner innovation capacities and value, the 
acceptation of the challenge by local people. Technology 
could be a fantastic chance to invert such an ineluctable 
destiny. Whatever we call it “Smart Village” or “Smart Basic 
Entity” (SBE), we advocate that a new frame of organization 
and development shall be studied. It may become a potential 
area of growth and allow the inversion of the concentration 
process into cities. The SBE model shall, of course, and 
provided customization, benefit of the technical innovations 
and successful realizations that would be implemented in 
Smart Cities. SBE and SC models shall not be competing 
with each other, but live side by side, completing each other 
through exchanges on data, technologies and experiences, 
through existing or to be developed networks. 
What we foresee today is nothing else than a downsizing 
process; to go from mainframe (the state or the region) to a 
connected smart unit, the SBE. Such a reorganization of the 
territory underpins, on the medium term, a global rethinking 
of administrative and political organization.The SBE  could 
be defined as an evolutive and complex system, without 
exact physical limit but characterized by a logic of flows 
(persons, assets and information) always looking for 
efficiency improvement. By analogy to the system of cities; 
SBE will be connected through them as a network: the 
system of SBEs. Flows exchanges will exist within the SBE 
and with the exterior. 
A way to define Smart Cities is by using a tangible 
(Hard)/ intangible (Soft) domains approach [28]. By 
customizing such an approach, we may consider two axes:  
• 
Tangible/Hard: 
Water, 
Energy, 
Land 
and 
Environment 
Resources 
(Forests, 
Mines, 
Parks…), 
Transportation, Buildings (including health care and 
education) infrastructures, Security systems  
• 
Intangible/Soft: Governance, Education, Health, 
Economy, Culture systems and data 
And seven related applications: Utility management, 
Land and Environment Ressources management, Mobility, 
Buildings, Economy, Security, People (Cultural, social, 
education and health) 
New technology facilitates communication, remote 
financial operations, distance learning, online medicine. As a 
consequence, cities are on the way to lose most of their 
competitive advantages. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

IX. 
THE SMART DIGITAL CLONE APPROACH 
By collecting data related to the 2 axes, we shall be able 
to create a digital clone of the SBE. It shall represent its 
tangible and intangible assets and allow to analyse flows 
within the SBE as well as exchanges with outside, mainly, 
within the system of SBE. Such an approach that we call 
SMART 
(for 
Systemic 
Modeling 
and 
Advance 
Reengineering of Territory) shall facilitate improvements, 
reinforce governance efficiency 
The digital clone would allow, by simulating any 
structural or logical change, to evaluate it. It shall promote, 
as well, the definition and implementation of contingency 
plans; and make possible dynamic stress tests on all tangible 
and intangible dimensions. It appears mandatory to respect 
when implementing such an approach, several rules that we 
summarized as the HAWKS principles. H: Holistic: the 
digital clone covers all aspects and enlightens even shadow 
areas A: Accepted: by the population  W: Wise K: Creative 
S: Secured 
The digital clone terminology is used by analogy with 
recent development in medical technology. If a digital clone 
can be created to save or cure a human patient, why not 
applying the same to study, monitor, optimize the living 
conditions in a rural SBE? 
X. 
ANGOLA AND CHINA CASES 
In Southern Africa and more specifically in Angola, the 
question of the economic development based on a systemic 
(system and system of systems) approach is crucial. The 
problem is multidimensional from two different points of 
view. Multidimensional, according to the aspects which 
constitute the domains where solutions must be designed, 
developed, implemented and evaluated:  production and 
consumption of energy, wastes treatments, water control 
(drinking 
and 
wastewater), 
forest 
preservation 
and 
agriculture development, artisanal (handmade) and industrial 
activities, mobility … . Multidimensional, because at the 
same time, cultural, societal, technological, collective and 
individual. 
Under the umbrella of the DNDTI (National Direction 
for the Development of Technology and Innovation) of the 
MESCTI (Ministry for Higher Education, Sciences, 
Technology and Innovation) of Angola a “SMART Villages” 
project is close to being launched. The question is how new 
technologies can be used for assuring a real, sustainable 
development of a small city (village)? How could a global 
approach be defined and implemented? As we noticed at the 
beginning, the project aims to consider each field of 
challenge (energy, wastes, water …) as a system and to 
consider the global interactions between all these systems. 
The objective is not only to solve problems; it is more the 
optimization of different solutions under a set of balanced 
criteria (economic development, alphabetisation rate, safety 
and security …).  
This pilot project will consist of two main parallel parts. 
The first will be focused on scientific and technological 
studies to propose and implement selected solutions, for 
example, about production and consumption of energy. But 
the most original part could be the second one. This part will 
consist of developing a “digital ghost” (or digital clone) of 
the small city (village) based on the capture of data 
concerning all the aspects to take into account even the 
feelings and the opinions of the citizens, visitors tourists…. 
Also if at the origin the ”digital ghost” will be more a 
database than a real digital representation of the city, each 
development will be the occasion to reinforce the amount of 
data (information) creating step by step a new digital 
structure able to facilitate original representations of the city 
based on the selection of data according to specific criteria 
(as mobility by example).  
On the other hand, to be able to assess the project itself 
and its results, a model of excellence, as the EFQM model 
used for evaluating the efficiency of enterprises or public 
organizations will be used. This approach will allow to 
assure or to analyze the results for different stakeholders. 
According to this last point, it will be interesting to compare 
the evolutions (transformations) of the “digital ghost” of the 
city with variations of the stakeholder’s opinions reinforcing 
by this way the capacity to understand better how a SMART 
integrated development impacts positively or negatively the 
citizens’ lives.  
Another exploratory work was carried out in the city of 
Shanghai (China). In partnership with the company Mobike 
(free bicycle), students worked on the development of an 
onboard pollution capture system (integrated into the bike 
frame). The aim was to transmit this information to a 
platform to advise cyclists on "greener" alternative routes. 
XI. 
CONCLUSION 
There is no inevitable future for rural territories. We 
firmly believe that the rural-urban shift is not a fatality and 
could be inverted provided rural areas modify their image 
and become land of innovation and investment. Thanks to 
technology, distance is no more a concern as regards as 
accessing information, finance and education. Environmental 
and security issues could reinforce the position of territories 
towards cities that have lost part of their competitive 
advantages. Such a revolution could take place at the SBE 
level and that the development of SMART Digital Clones 
constitutes a significant leap into the future for rural 
territories. Its application has no frontier from China to 
Angola, from rural territories of France to the ones of 
Indonesia. And the current ongoing pandemy of Corona 
virus, that constitutes a real stress test for the economy and 
states structures at the international level may question the 
future of megapoles. Isn’t it time to invest in rural territories, 
therefore keeping in mind that their specificities and 
environment shall be preserved ? 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS 
[2] M.Pesaresi et al., “Atlas for the Human Planet 2016: Mapping 
human presence on Earth with the Global Human Settlement 
Layer”, European Commission, 2016 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[3] D.Reinsel, J.Gantz and J.Rydning, “The Digitization of the 
World: From Edge to Core”, An IDC White Paper 
#US44413318, 2018. 
[4] UN Economic and Social Council, Smart cities and 
infrastructures. Geneva, 2016.E/CN.16/2016/2. 
[5] New Urban Agenda - Habitat III. United Nations. Quito, 
Ecuador, 2016. ISBN: 978-92-1-132731-1. 
[6] J. Jacobs, “The economy of the cities”, New York, Vintage 
Books, 1969. 
[7] M.Polèse, “Cities and National Economic Growth: A 
Reappraisal”, Urban Studies, Vol. 42, 8, pp. 1429-1451, July 
2005. 
[8] G.S.Tolley and V. Thomas, “The economics of urbanization 
and urban policies in developing countries”, The World 
Bank,1987, p. 185. 
[9] J.Véron, “Enjeux économiques, sociaux et environnementaux 
de l'urbanisation du monde”, Mondes en développement, Vol. 
2008/2, 142, 2008, pp. 39-52. 
[10] D.Castells-Quintana and V. Royuela, “Malthus living in a 
slum:Urban concentration, infrastructures and economic 
growth”, St. Petersburg, Russia : European Regional Science 
Association (ERSA), Louvain-la-Neuve, 26-29 August 2014. 
[11] P.Bairoch, “De Jéricho à Mexico, Villes et économie dans 
l’histoire”, Paris, Gallimard, 1985. 
[12] N.Keyfitz, “International Migration and Urbanization”, in  P. 
Demeny and M.F. Perutz, Resources and Population, 
Clarendon Press, 1996,  pp. 269-285. 
[13] K.F.Sokoloff, “Inventive Activity in Early Industrial 
America: Evidence From Patent Records, 1790–1846”, The 
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 48, 04, 1998, pp. 813-850. 
[14] P.Bairoch, P. “Cinq millénaires de croissance urbaine” in I. 
Sachs. Quelles villes, pour quel développement ?, Paris,  PUF, 
1996, pp. 17-60. 
[15] J.Henrich, “Demography and cultural evolution: How 
adaptive cultural processes can produce maladaptive losses-
The Tasmanian case”, American Antiquity, Vol. 69, 2, 2004, 
pp. 197-214. 
[16] P.M. Romer, “Endogenous Technological Change”, The 
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, 5 Part 2, October 199., 
pp. S71-S102. 
[17] E.L.Glaeser et al., "Growth in Cities”, Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol. 100, 6, 1992, pp. 1126-1152. 
[18] A.Marshall, “Principles of Economics”, Macmillan and Co, 
New York, 1890. 
[19] G.Duranton 
and 
M.A. 
Turner, 
“Urban 
growth 
and 
transportation”, The review of economic studies, Vol. 79, 4, 
October 2012, pp. 1407-1440. 
[20] E.L. Glaeser and J.Shapiro, “Is there a new urbanism ? The 
growth of the US cities in the 1990's”, Cambridge, MA,  
National Bureau of Economic Search, 2001. Working Paper 
8357. 
[21] V.Vuchic, “Transportation for livable cities”, New York,  
Routledge, 1999. 378 pages. 
[22] D.Pumain, “Pour une théorie évolutive des villes”, Espace 
géographique, Vol. 26, 2, 1997, pp. 119-134. 
[23] B.J.L Berry, “Cities as systems within systems of cities”, 
Papers of the Regional Science Association, 1964, Cited by 
Pumain, 1997. 
[24] A.Pred, “City systems in advanced societies”, London, 
Hutchinson, 1977. 
[25] A.Rousseau, “L'Ariège, l'anti-Start-Up Nation”, March 22nd 
2019, Les Echos. 
[26] ZoneAdsl, Couverture internet de l'Ariège, retrieved 1st 
March 2020. https://www.zoneadsl.com/couverture/ariege/. 
[27] C.Maisonneuve, “Nouvelle carte des déserts médicaux : votre 
commune est-elle concernée ? ”, La gazette.fr, 2017. 
[28] P.Neirotti et al., “Current trends in Smart City initiatives: 
Some stylised facts”., Cities, June 2014, pp. 25-36. 
Articles in conference proceedings: 
[29] H.Dou and P.Fournié, “Les Smart Villages dans le contexte 
européen” ,Val d'Europe, Codata 2019: Data value chain in 
Science and Territories, 2019, pp. 19-26. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

YouTube Video Categorization Using Moviebarcode
Recep Erol, Rick Rejeleene, Richard Young, Thomas Marcoux, Muhammad Nihal Hussain, and Nitin Agarwal
Collaboratorium for Social Media and Online Behavioral Studies (COSMOS),
University of Arkansas at Little Rock,
Little Rock, Arkansas, USA
{rxerol, rrejeleene, rbyoung, txmarcoux, mnhussain, nxagarwal}@ualr.edu
Abstract—Every minute more than ﬁve-hundred hours of video
content is uploaded to YouTube, and we can only expect this
number to increase. Although YouTube is the most popular
video sharing website, studies conducted on this platform are
sparse. The lack of effective video analysis techniques presents
a tedious challenge for researchers and has hindered overall
research on this platform. Due to this, research conducted on
YouTube primarily focuses on analyzing text-based content or
video metadata. With recent advancements in the development
of moviebarcode, a technique that shrinks a movie or video into
a barcode, we have developed a tool designed to extend the
capabilities of moviebarcode as a forensic technique for system-
atically categorizing YouTube videos. We use moviebarcode to
summarize an entire YouTube video into a single image to help
users understand a video without even watching it and later
use cluster them based on similarity. We analyzed six video
collections and using moviebarcode only and without looking at
the video content, we were able to achieve an accuracy of 75%.
Using our method, an analyst can quickly group videos into bin
computationally reducing the overhead of manually doing it.
Index Terms—Moviebarcode, Video Categorization, YouTube,
Social Computing Tool
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, social media has become ubiquitous among
the lives of people who seek to consume content from social
media. With respect to content creation and data analysis, it is
fair to compare the promises of social media to a modern-day
gold rush. Although there are numerous platforms classiﬁed as
social media; videos have been proven to be the most popular
medium for sharing content among users. The most popular
platform for video-based content is YouTube.
For every minute, more than ﬁve-hundred hours of video is
being uploaded to YouTube. We can only expect that number
to grow as YouTube focuses on expanding its global reach
and making the platform more proﬁtable for content creators
[1]. As digital content and consumption is increasing at an
incredible rate all over the globe, YouTube video processing
becomes computationally intensive. Prior to 2010, YouTube
videos could not exceed a video length of 10 minutes. When
this restriction was removed, a user published a single video
with over 600 hours, which would take 24 days to watch the
video [2].
There are many available deep learning based video catego-
rization studies [3, 4]. These studies show great contribution
to the research community. However, the length of a video is
the major limitation for available video processing tools such
as computer vision and deep learning based algorithms as they
require extensive computational power, time and human effort.
In addition to cost and power requirements, currently available
video processing tools have a steep learning curve for social
computing researchers. Moreover, these tools do not directly
provide information to use in identiﬁcation of cyber activities
on videos. Due to these limitations, we extend moviebarcode,
a state of the art video summarization tool that provides linear
or close-to-linear processing time regardless of video length.
Moviebarcode is a technique that uses color theory to
summarize videos by compressing an entire video into a
single image [5]. The result of this technique is a single
barcode consisting of generated colors for every frame of
the movie. Moviebarcode shows the color transitions within
videos, gives an overall idea about the video content, and
enables comparison with other videos without watching the
video, thereby saving time.
In this paper, we extend previously described moviebarcode
into an implementation and prototype as a tool to identify
similarities among videos, capturing the visual patterns in a
video and extract insightful knowledge efﬁciently. In addition
to implementation and prototyping, our novel idea is categoriz-
ing videos with moviebarcode. For this purpose, we created six
different video collections, namely APAC, BalticOps, FifaUn-
der17Games, ManuGinobiliGames, SpongeBobSquarePants,
and HBOSiliconValleyTrailer. Using categorization algorithm
to group the moviebarcodes and got promising results that are
explained under section 4. With moviebarcode, researchers can
interact with YouTube video without watching an entire video
through summarization. A user is able to optimize important
resources such as time to condense each video. The details of
the dataset and analysis can be found in Section 4.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2,
we describe related works of moviebarcode. In Section 3, we
explain Moviebarcode, its generation process and representa-
tion. We describe our dataset, categorization of videos using
moviebarcode, discuss our ﬁndings and their signiﬁcance in
Section 4. We conclude with major contributions and future
direction for this research in section 5.
II. RELATED WORK
Moviebarcode was made popular by Clark [5], a Tumblr
blogger, who generated moviebarcode for numerous movies,
and each movie could be ﬁltered by title, director, genre, year.
Blogger would capture color patterns in a movie to summarize
it, irrespective of its length, to a single barcode.
There are several researchers that used moviebarcodes for
visual video analysis [6] such as ColorBrowser [7]. Burghardt
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Fig. 1. A moviebarcode illustration from a basketball game video.
Fig. 2. A moviebarcode illustration from a soccer game video.
et al. [6] present an approach that can automatically extract
and analyze the language and color parameters from movies
by visualizing the most frequent colors in movies. In their
approach to visualize, they used clustering algorithms and
moviebarcodes. However, we ﬁnd that there is no summariza-
tion tool provided by this research, and their idea falls short of
searching and comparing multiple videos. Another study [8]
introduced a pictorial summary that summarizes a segment of
a video for visual representations. Otto et al. [9] presented
moviebarcodes and long exposure images to visualize the
colours present in a movie by calculation color population
in a frame and stack them together in a moviebarcode format.
However, they also normalize the color values to 100. But,
their computational cost is more expensive and their research
does not include categorization.
Our work is different from aforementioned works as we
use moviebarcode for categorizing videos. Also, the method
to group videos based on similarity has been done empirically
and requires an analyst to manually watch the videos to group
them. Our method reduces the effort signiﬁcantly by using
computational methods.
III. MOVIEBARCODE
In this section, we describe moviebarcode, its generation
process and its representation as vector, matrix, tensor. We also
explain step by step process used to generate moviebarcodes
for videos on YouTube.
A. Moviebarcode
Moviebarcode is a technique to represent a video or a movie
as an image by stacking mean values of each frame. Video is
a sequence of frames, and there are approximately 30 to 60
frames in each second of a video. When the video is longer
than 10 minutes, the number of frames in a video will be
greater than 18,000 frames which makes the video analysis
even harder because of the high computation requirements.
However, Moviebarcode can easily handle any video for
analysis.
Moviebarcode is unique to each video. For instance, when
the same scene is recorded with the same camera two different
times, the moviebarcode will be different from each other.
Furthermore, if a scene is recorded from two different angles,
Moviebarcode will again be different. So, it can be said that
Moviebarcode is a good technique to catch replicated videos
or short clips within a video.
Moviebarcode gives dominant colors in each frame. From
these dominant colors, signiﬁcant information about a video
can be learned without watching it. For instance, there are
two videos; one from a basketball court, and the other from a
soccer video. Fig. 1 and 2 show the moviebarcode of a basket-
ball game and the soccer game videos, respectively, and both
moviebarcode are easily distinguishable. This is important
because getting an idea about a video requires signiﬁcant time
to watch and categorize. Moviebarcode technique eliminates
this process and shortens the time required for categorizing
and ﬁltering videos without watching them.
B. Moviebarcode generation and structure
A moviebarcode can be generated for any video or movie,
not just limited to YouTube. Since a video has a sequence of
frames, each frame is extracted from a video. Then, the mean
value of Red (R), Green (G), Blue (B) channels for each frame
is calculated. So, after getting a mean value of a frame, a vector
of three color values (RGB) is generated (Fig. 3.1). By using
RGB channels, the gray scale image can also be generated if
needed so that the moviebarcode can be represented with a
gray scale and used for quantitative analysis. After all these
vectors are stacked, we get a matrix of RGB values. So, we
can represent a video as a matrix of RGB values (Fig. 3.2).
Besides vector and matrix representations, moviebarcodes
can also be shown as a tensor. As seen in Fig. 3.3, when the
RGB matrix is converted to tensor, it can be displayed as an
image which means representing a video as an image. The
width of the image is equal to the number of frames, and the
length is to the number of pixels that a user can assign. This
number of pixels is 224 in our experiments.
The most important question to ask here is what kind of
information can be extracted from a moviebarcode. Moviebar-
codes use color theory to represent a video. Dominant colors
of each frame are stacked on a moviebarcode which means
that a moviebarcode keeps dominant colors of the video that
are easily identiﬁable. This sequence of dominant colors and
their transitions can give information about the video such as
changes in the scene, the subject, the narratives of the video
within time without watching the video.
C. Generating moviebarcodes from YouTube
For data collection and streaming, we use public data
API of YouTube [10] to download data from YouTube, and
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Fig. 3. Moviebarcode representations as a vector (1), matrix (2) and tensor (3).
OpenCV computer vision framework [11] to stream videos
from YouTube. However, due to YouTube’s policy, we do not
save the original videos. Moviebarcode of a video is generated
through a process shown in Fig. 4. If a user enters a YouTube
video URL, the procedure ﬁrst checks the availability of this
video. If the video is online and still public to download, we
stream the video and generate a moviebarcode on the ﬂy which
means that the video is not saved locally. If the URL is for a
playlist, the same steps are applied recursively for each video.
The algorithm only saves mean values of each frame of a video
as .json ﬁle.
IV. DATASETS AND CATEGORIZATION
For this study, categorization of videos using moviebarcode,
we carefully curated a dataset of six different collections
of videos. Subject Matter Experts (SME) helped us identify
and group the videos that were later collected using data
collection method described in our previous studies [12,13].
These collections of videos are “APAC”, “BalticOps”, “Fi-
faUnder17Games”, “ManuGinobiliGames”, “HBOSiliconVal-
leyTrailers”, and “SpongeBobSquarePants”. APAC collection
consists of conspiracy theories and misinformation videos
being disseminated related to various events and issues in the
Asia Paciﬁc region. BalticOps collection consists of videos
with misinformation about NATO’s 2019 BALTOPS exercise.
FifaUnder17Games collection consists of videos about soccer.
ManuGinobiliGames collection consists of videos about high-
lights from the NBA games that Manu Ginobili plays. HBOSil-
iconValleyTrailers collection consists of trailers of a hit tele-
vision series called Silicon Valley. SpongeBobSquarePants
collection comprises of videos of the cartoon show called
Sponge Bob Square Pants. The number of videos in each
collection is shown in Table 1. The lengths of videos in video
collections ranges from 3 minutes to 20 minutes.
To construct moviebarcode images, we used matrix rep-
resentation. Moviebarcodes have three channels, RGB, and
different widths. Each moviebarcode’s width is equal to the
number of frames.
TABLE I
VIDEO COLLECTION DATASET INFORMATION
Collection Name
Number of Videos
APAC
14
BalticOps
14
FifaUnder17Games
15
ManuGinobiliGames
15
HBOSiliconValleyTrailers
15
SpongeBobSquarePants
15
TABLE II
MOVIEBARCODE VIDEO CATEGORIZATION RESULTS
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
Accuracy
Red channel only
0.79
0.64
0.59
0.64
Green channel only
0.82
0.71
0.69
0.71
Blue channel only
0.83
0.75
0.73
0.75
Gray channel only
0.82
0.71
0.69
0.71
All channels together
0.8
0.68
0.64
0.68
The video categorization pipeline consists of these steps: (1)
image pre-processing to align all moviebarcodes to the same
shape in terms of width and length, (2) applying dimension-
ality reduction algorithm to all input datasets, (3) applying a
clustering algorithm to group similar moviebarcodes into the
same clusters, and (4) comparing cluster results with the video
collection labels of videos for evaluation. The performance of
the process is measured with confusion matrix [14]. We tried
using many different pre-trained convolutional neural network
models to extract features with only convolutional layers.
However, the result matrix was sparse and did not give us
good results on video categorization. Since our moviebarcode
images are not natural images like ImageNet dataset [15],
moviebarcodes require custom feature extraction algorithm.
Instead, we decided to use one of the most important features
of an image which is pixel value directly on the clustering
part of the pipeline. The ﬁne tuning of convolutional neural
networks for better feature extraction and alternative video
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Fig. 4. Algorithm used to generate moviebarcode.
Fig. 5. A sample movidebarcode image of a video from HBOSiliconValley
collection.
categorization with a moviebarcode dataset is left for future
studies.
Next, due to high dimension of images, we applied Prin-
cipal Component Analysis (PCA) dimensionality reduction
algorithm [16]. The results of this step were used during the
clustering step. Due to its simple nature to implement and run,
we utilized K-means clustering algorithm [17] with the cluster
value as the number video collections for the clustering step.
Next, we applied model evaluation with confusion matrix. We
repeated the process of k-means and model evaluation 10 times
and calculated the average of these experiments for the ﬁnal
result. The clustering results are analyzed and compared using
the collection labels of videos.
This pipeline was applied on tensor of moviebarcodes which
are all color channels together. After that, we repeated the
process for individual channels and gray scale. The all results
of moviebarcode video categorization are shown in Table 2.
Table 2 shows that red channel in moviebarcode is not
Fig. 6.
A sample moviebarcode image of a video from SpongeBob-
SquarePants collection.
a good feature to distinguish the clusters. On the contrary,
blue channel has the highest scores on all metrics including
precision, recall, f1-score, and accuracy. The scores for all
other channels and their combinations are between red and
blue channels.
Fig. 5 shows the moviebarcode of a video from the HBOSil-
iconValley collection. And in contrast, Fig. 6 shows the
moviebarcode of a video from the SpongeBobSquarePants
collection. These moviebarcodes show that it is simple to
distinguish one collection from another. Also, changes in the
scenes and patterns of similar frames can be clearly observed
from moviebarcodes.
Moviebarcodes are useful images that can be used for
information retrieval applications such as ﬁltering or grouping
images based on their color population. Additionally, the
number of different colors in a moviebarcode image can be a
good indicator of the pace of the video.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we introduced the use of moviebarcode for
video categorization and summarization. We also demonstrated
that the video processing is easier with moviebarcode for
social computing researchers, especially if they deal with
YouTube which is the most popular video sharing platform.
Our experiments focus on reducing the video to colors. Tradi-
tional techniques for video categorization are resource inten-
sive and time consuming. Moviebarcode is a great methodol-
ogy to extract insightful features by capturing visual patterns in
a video without watching, and grouping or categorizing same
or similar videos together in fast and efﬁcient manner.
Results show that using individual channels of moviebar-
code image helps video categorization by differentiating one
video from another or grouping them. Each channel carries
different features about an image. Splitting the channels of
an image increased the performance of video categorization.
Our ﬁndings suggests that analyzing only the colors within
the video without looking the video content in detail gives the
accuracy of 75%.
Video length is one of the most important features about the
video. But, it is also one of the limitations of moviebarcode
technique because it is difﬁcult to align long videos with
short videos. In this paper, we experimented with six video
collections. In order to make our model more generalized,
future research could examine the experiment pipeline of our
model on other video collections. Since we use moviebarcode
pixels directly on the categorization pipeline, it would be better
to have a custom feature extraction method to extract more
features from the moviebarcodes.
Moviebarcode technique can be used for further analysis of
videos. With the acceleration of new deep learning techniques,
it is easy to generate new videos artiﬁcially. To identify these
artiﬁcially generated videos, moviebarcode might be a great
tool to identify similar or same videos, as well as pieces of
these videos as a short clip. Even though we currently use
moviebarcod only video categorization, we could use them to
detect scene changes and narratives by detecting changes in
colors.
RGB channels are used in this study, but YCbCr or HSV
color channels could also be used to categorize videos. Each
color channel has different features about a video. Color theory
techniques show that different color channels can be used for
different purposes. With this motivation, video categorization
could be examined by using other color channels different
from RGB. Other data models such as transcription of a video
or metadata could also be combined for video categorization.
These multiple data models might boost performance of video
categorization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is funded in part by the U.S. National Science
Foundation (IIS-1636933, ACI-1429160, and IIS-1110868),
U.S. Ofﬁce of Naval Research (N00014-10-1-0091, N00014-
14-1-0489, N00014-15-P-1187, N00014-16-1- 2016, N00014-
16-1-2412, N00014-17-1-2605, N00014-17- 1-2675), U.S. Air
Force Research Lab, U.S. Army Research Ofﬁce (W911NF-
16-1-0189), U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(W31P4Q-17-C-0059) and the Jerry L. Maulden/Entergy Fund
at the University of Arkansas at Little Rock. Any opinions,
ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reﬂect the views of the funding organizations.
NOMENCLATURE
RGB: Red, Green, Blue
YCbCr: Luma, Blue-difference chroma, Red-difference
chroma components
HSV: Hue, Saturation, Value
PCA: Principal Component Analysis
REFERENCES
[1] P. Suciu. ”Is It Possible To Become The Next Big YouTube Star In 2020?,”
Forbes, 03-Jan-2020.
[2] Y. Press. ”Up, Up and Away - Long videos for more users.” YouTube.
[Online]. Available: https://youtube.googleblog.com/2010/12/up-up-and-
away-long-videos-for-more.html. [Accessed: 16-Mar-2020].
[3] Y. Jiang, Z. Wu, J. Wang, X. Xue and S. Chang, ”Exploiting Fea-
ture and Class Relationships in Video Categorization with Regularized
Deep Neural Networks,” in IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 352-364, 1 Feb. 2018, doi:
10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2670560.
[4] M. Liu, L. Nie, X. Wang, Q. Tian and B. Chen, ”Online Data Organizer:
Micro-Video Categorization by Structure-Guided Multimodal Dictionary
Learning.” in IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 28, no. 3, pp.
1235-1247, March 2019, doi: 10.1109/TIP.2018.2875363.
[5] ”Moviebarcode,”
Tumblr.
[Online].
Available:
https://moviebarcode.tumblr.com/. [Accessed: 16-Mar-2020].
[6] M. Burghardt, M. Kao, and C. Wolff. ”Beyond Shot Lengths – Using
Language Data and Color Information as Additional Parameters for
Quantitative Movie Analysis.” In Digital Humanities 2016: Conference
Abstracts. Jagiellonian University and Pedagogical University, Krak´ow,
pp. 753-755, 2016.
[7] M. Barbieri, G. Mekenkamp, M. Ceccarelli, and J. Nesvadba. ”The color
browser: a content driven linear video browsing tool.” IEEE International
Conference on Multimedia and Expo, (ICME 2001), Tokyo, Japan, pp.
627-630, 2001.
[8] M. M. Yeung and Y. Boon-Lock. “Video visualization for compact
presentation and fast browsing of pictorial content.” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Techn, vol 7, pp. 771-785, 1997.
[9] I. Otto, A. Plutino, M. Lanaro, and A. Rizzi. ”All the colours of a ﬁlm:
A study on the chromatic variation of movies.” AIC Interim Meeting,
Lisbon, Portugal, 2018.
[10] YouTube Data API. ”Add YouTube functionality to your app” YouTube.
[Online]. Available: https://developers.google.com/youtube/v3/
[11] OpenCV. [Online]. Available: https://opencv.org/
[12] J. Kready, S. A. Shimray, M. N. Hussain, and N. Agarwal. ”YouTube
data collection using parallel processing.” In 2020 IEEE International
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW).
(pp. 1119-1122), IEEE, May 2020.
[13] M. N. Hussain, S. Tokdemir, N. Agarwal, and S. Al-Khateeb. ”Analyz-
ing disinformation and crowd manipulation tactics on YouTube.” 2018
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks
Analysis and Mining (ASONAM). IEEE, 2018.
[14] S. Visa, B. Ramsay, A. Ralescu, and E. van der Knaap. ”Confusion
matrix-based feature selection.” MAICS. 710, pp.120-127, 2011.
[15] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.J. Li, K. Li and L. Fei-Fei. ”ImageNet:
A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database.” 2009 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009.
[16] Scikit Learn. ”Decomposing signals in components (matrix factor-
ization problems).” Scikit Learn. [Online]. Available: https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/decomposition.html#pca.
[Accessed:
22-Mar-
2020].
[17] Scikit Learn. ”K-means.” Scikit Learn. [Online]. Available: https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html#k-means.
[Accessed:
22-Mar-
2020].
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

An Investigation of Twitter Users
Who Disclosed Their Personal Proﬁle Items in Their Tweets Honestly
Yasuhiko Watanabe, Hiromu Nishimura, Yuuya Chikuki, Kunihiro Nakajima, and Yoshihiro Okada
Ryukoku University
Seta, Otsu, Shiga, Japan
Email: watanabe@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp, t160405@mail.ryukoku.ac.jp, t160389@mail.ryukoku.ac.jp,
nakajima.k216@gmail.com, okada@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp
Abstract—These days, many people use a Social Networking
Service (SNS). Most SNS users are careful in protecting the
privacy of personal information: name, age, gender, address, tele-
phone number, birthday, etc. However, some SNS users disclose
their personal information that can threaten their privacy and
security even if they use non-real name accounts. In this study,
we investigated tweets disclosing submitters’ personal proﬁle
items which many of us think are not true. We collected 565
tweets where submitters used non-real name accounts and made
promises to disclose their personal proﬁle items, surveyed the
details of their personal proﬁle items disclosed by themselves,
especially their ages, genders, and heights, and analyzed them
statistically, to be speciﬁc, applied the Shapiro-Wilk test of
normality and the Welch’s test to them. The results of these tests
showed that most of the submitters disclosed their ages, genders,
and heights honestly.
Keywords–personal information; Twitter; SNS; privacy risk;
Shapiro-Wilk test of normality; Welch’s test.
I.
INTRODUCTION
These days, many people use a Social Networking Service
(SNS) to communicate with each other and try to enlarge their
circle of friends. SNS users are generally concerned about
potential privacy risks [1]. To be speciﬁc, they are afraid that
unwanted audiences will obtain information about them or
their families, such as where they live, work, and play. As
a result, SNS users are generally careful in disclosing their
personal information. They disclose their personal information
only when they think the beneﬁts of doing it is greater than the
potential privacy risks. However, some SNS users, especially
young users, disclose personal information on their proﬁles,
for example, real full name, gender, hometown and full date
of birth, which can potentially be used to identify details of
their real life, such as their social security numbers. In order to
discuss this phenomenon, many researchers investigated how
much and which type of information are disclosed in SNSs,
especially, in Facebook [2] [3]. Researchers might think that
personal information disclosed in Facebook is reliable, or it is
possible to check whether personal information disclosed in
Facebook is true. This is because
•
Facebook users are required to register and disclose
their real names when they ﬁrst start using Facebook.
•
Facebook users would be criticized by their friends if
they disclose their information dishonestly.
On the other hand, a small number of researchers investigated
how much and which type of information disclosed by non-
real name account users, such as Twitter users. Researchers
Figure 1. A non-real name account user, Rina, disclosed her personal proﬁle
items in her tweets.
might think that personal information disclosed by non-real
name account users is unreliable. This is because
•
nobody criticizes non-real name account users when
they disclose their personal information dishonestly.
•
true personal information can threaten their privacy
and security even if they use non-real name accounts.
As a result, many of us think that it is natural for non-real
name account users not to disclose their personal information
honestly. Figure 1 shows tweets submitted by non-real name
account user, Rina. In these tweets, Rina disclosed her personal
proﬁle items: her age, gender, birthday, zodiac sign, and height.
Many of us think that these personal proﬁle items were not
true. However, we do not check whether Rina disclosed her
personal proﬁle items honestly because it is difﬁcult to do it.
In this paper, we collect tweets where non-real name account
users disclosed their personal proﬁle items, analyze them
statistically, and show that it is likely that most of the non-real
name account users, especially young users, disclosed their
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Figure 2. A tweet promising to disclose the same number of submitters’
personal proﬁle items as likes to it.
personal information honestly.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section
II, we survey the related works. In Section III, we show how
to collect tweets disclosing submitters’ personal proﬁle items.
In Section IV, we survey the details of submitters’ personal
proﬁle items, analyze them statistically, and show that it is
likely that most of the submitters disclosed their personal
proﬁle items honestly. Finally, in Section V, we present our
conclusions.
II.
RELATED WORK
Personally identiﬁable information is deﬁned as informa-
tion which can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s
identity such as social security number, biometric records,
etc. alone, or when combined with other information that
is linkable to a speciﬁc individual, such as date and place
of birth, mother’s maiden name, etc. [4] [5]. Internet users
are generally concerned about unwanted audiences obtaining
personal information. Fox et al. reported that 86% of Internet
users are concerned that unwanted audiences will obtain in-
formation about them or their families [1]. Also, Acquisti and
Gross reported that students expressed high levels of concern
for general privacy issues on Facebook, such as a stranger
ﬁnding out where they live and the location and schedule of
their classes, and a stranger learning their sexual orientation,
name of their current partner, and their political afﬁliations
[2]. However, Internet users, especially young users, tend to
disclose personal information on their proﬁles, for example,
real full name, gender, hometown and full date of birth, which
can potentially be used to identify details of their real life,
such as their social security numbers. As a result, many
researchers discussed the reasons why young users willingly
disclose personal information on their SNS proﬁles. Dwyer
concluded in her research that privacy is often not expected
or undeﬁned in SNSs [6]. Barnes argues that Internet users,
especially teenagers, are not aware of the nature of the Internet
and SNSs [3]. Hirai reported that many users had troubles in
SNSs because they did not mind that strangers observed their
communication with their friends [7]. Viseu et al. reported that
many online users believe the beneﬁts of disclosing personal
information in order to use an Internet site is greater than the
potential privacy risks [8]. On the other hand, Acquisti and
Gross explain this phenomenon as a disconnection between the
users’ desire to protect their privacy and their actual behavior
[2]. Also, Livingstone points out that teenagers’ conception of
privacy does not match the privacy settings of most SNSs [9].
Joinson et al. reported that trust and perceived privacy had a
strong affect on individuals’ willingness to disclose personal
information to a website [10]. Also, Tufekci found that concern
about unwanted audiences had an impact on whether or not
students revealed their real names and religious afﬁliation
on MySpace and Facebook [11]. The authors also think that
most students are seriously concerned about their privacy and
security. However, they often underestimate the risk of their
online messages and submit them. For example, Watanabe
et al. reported that many students submit tweets concerning
school events and these tweets may give a chance to other
people, including unwanted audiences, to distinguish which
schools students go to [12].
III.
A COLLECTION OF TWEETS DISCLOSING
SUBMITTERS’ PERSONAL PROFILE ITEMS
It is difﬁcult to collect tweets disclosing submitters’ per-
sonal proﬁle items, such as tweets in Figure 1, directly. To
solve this problem, we focused on tweets where submitters
promised their followers to disclose the same number of their
own personal proﬁle items as likes to their tweets. Figure 2
shows a tweet submitted by Rina on September 3, 2019. In
this tweet, Rina promised her followers to disclose the same
number of her personal proﬁle items as likes to her tweet.
Actually, Rina submitted 35 replies disclosing her personal
proﬁle items to her tweet shown in Figure 2 from September 3
to 9, 2019. The ﬁve tweets shown in Figure 1 were the ﬁrst ﬁve
replies submitted by Rina to her tweets shown in Figure 2. As
of November 20, 2019, we conﬁrmed that 37 likes were given
to her tweet shown in Figure 2. Furthermore, we found many
tweets promising to disclose the same number of their own
personal proﬁle items as likes to their tweets. As a result, it is
easy to collect tweets disclosing submitters’ personal proﬁle
items when we collect tweets promising to disclose submitters’
personal proﬁle items. The reasons why many Twitter users
submitted tweets promising to disclose submitters’ personal
proﬁle items might be
•
they thought they looked fun,
•
they wanted to draw attention, and
•
they wanted to know how much attention was paid to
their tweets.
In order to collect tweets promising to disclose submitters’
personal proﬁle items, we focused on images attached to these
tweets. This is because many submitters attached the same
image to their tweets and many personal proﬁle items were
listed in the image. As shown in Figure 2, Rina attached an
image to her tweet and showed the list of personal proﬁle items
that she promised her followers to disclose in the image. Many
twitter users attached the same image to their tweets promising
to disclose their personal proﬁle items. As a result, we used
these shared images as key to collect tweets promising to
disclose submitters’ personal proﬁle items. To be speciﬁc, we
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

(a) The number of submitters who disclosed that they were men by age.
(b) The number of submitters who disclosed that they were women by age.
Figure 3. The number of submitters who disclosed their genders clearly by age.
collected these tweets by using Twigaten [13]. Twigaten helps
us to collect tweets to which the same image is attached. By
using Twigaten, we collected 565 Japanese tweets promising to
disclose submitters’ personal proﬁle items on November 20,
2019. The obtained tweets were submitted from October 3,
2018 to November 20, 2019.
IV.
AN ANALYSIS OF TWEETS DISCLOSING SUBMITTERS’
PERSONAL PROFILE ITEMS
It is difﬁcult to determine whether an individual submitter
disclosed his/her personal proﬁle items honestly. For example,
it is difﬁcult to determine whether Rina, who submitted tweets
in Figure 1 and Figure 2, was a woman. In this study, we
discuss whether submitters disclosed their personal proﬁle
items honestly when they made promises to disclose them. In
order to discuss this problem, we analyze submitters’ genders,
ages, and heights statistically.
A. Submitters’ genders
As mentioned in Section III, we obtained the 565 tweets
promising to disclose their personal proﬁle items. We surveyed
these 565 tweets and their replies and, according to submitters’
genders disclosed in the replies, classiﬁed them into
•
282 tweets (women)
•
156 tweets (men)
•
27 tweets (unclear)
•
100 tweets (no replies)
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

(a) the histogram of submitters’ heights (disclosed genders: men).
(b) the histogram of submitters’ heights (disclosed genders: women).
Figure 4. The histogram of heights of submitters who disclosed their
genders, men or women, clearly. (bin width = 5cm)
B. Submitters’ ages
We also surveyed the 565 tweets and their replies and,
according to whether submitters’ ages were disclosed in their
replies clearly, classiﬁed them into
•
276 tweets (clearly)
•
60 tweets (unclearly)
•
229 tweets (no replies)
When submitter’s age was disclosed such as “early 20s”
and “over thirty”, we determined that submitter’s age was
disclosed unclearly. Among the 276 tweets where submitters’
ages were disclosed clearly, we found 102 and 161 tweets
where submitters’ genders were also disclosed clearly, men and
women, respectively. Figure 3 shows the number of submitters,
who disclosed their genders clearly, men and women, by age.
As shown in Figure 3, the most popular age of men and women
were 16 and 15 years old, respectively.
TABLE I. THE RESULTS OF THE SHAPIRO-WILK TEST OF NORMALITY
gender
age
sample size
W value
p-value
men
15
10
0.885
0.147
men
16
18
0.929
0.190
men
17
9
0.977
0.946
women
14
17
0.933
0.244
women
15
24
0.971
0.697
women
16
19
0.961
0.587
C. Submitters’ heights
We also surveyed the 565 tweets and their replies and,
according to whether submitters’ heights were disclosed in
their replies clearly, classiﬁed them into
•
401 tweets (clearly),
•
8 tweets (unclearly), and
•
156 tweets (no replies).
Among the 401 tweets where submitters’ heights were dis-
closed clearly, we found 131 and 244 tweets where submitters’
genders were disclosed clearly, men and women, respectively.
Figure 4 shows the histogram of heights of submitters who
disclosed their genders, men or women, clearly.
It is difﬁcult to determine whether an individual submitter
disclosed his/her personal proﬁle items honestly. In this study,
we statistically examine whether submitters disclosed their
personal proﬁle items honestly when they made promises to
disclose their personal proﬁle items and disclosed them in the
same way as Rina did.
It is well known that our heights follow a normal (Gaus-
sian) distribution [14]. As a result, if most of submitters
disclose their ages, genders, and heights honestly, their heights
would follow a normal distribution. Also, the average of their
heights would be equal to the national average height in Japan.
To solve this problem, in this paper, we conduct the statistical
analysis on
•
37 submitters who disclosed their genders (men), ages
(15-17 years old), and heights clearly, and
•
60 submitters who disclosed their genders (women),
ages (14-16 years old), and heights clearly.
As shown in Figure 3, men aged 15-17 and women aged 14-17
were the most popular segments in the submitters’ ages.
First, we discuss whether submitters’ heights followed a
normal distribution. Figure 5 shows the histograms of their
heights. In order to discuss whether submitters’ heights fol-
lowed a normal distribution, we conducted the Shapiro-Wilk
test of normality. The null hypothesis in this study was that
submitters’ heights followed a normal distribution. Table I
shows the results of the Shapiro-Wilk test of normality. As
shown in Table I, the p-value in each case was greater than
0.05. As a result, the null hypothesis in each case was not
rejected. In other words, submitters’ heights, in each case of
men aged 15-17 and women aged 14-16, followed a normal
distribution.
Next, we discuss whether the average of submitters’ heights
was equal to the national average height in Japan. Table II
shows the average of submitters’ heights. Table III shows
the national average height in Japan [15]. In order to discuss
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

(a) men aged 15
(d) women aged 14
(b) men aged 16
(e) women aged 15
(c) men aged 17
(f) women aged 16
Figure 5. The histograms of heights of submitters who disclosed that they were men aged 15-17 and women aged 14-16 (bin width = 5cm).
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE II. THE AVERAGE AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF SUBMITTERS’
HEIGHTS
sample
standard
gender
age
size
average
deviation
men
15
10
165.5
7.58
men
16
18
169.2
4.08
men
17
9
171.3
3.84
women
14
17
155.0
6.11
women
15
24
155.7
4.99
women
16
19
156.9
6.54
TABLE III. THE NATIONAL AVERAGE AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF
HEIGHTS IN JAPAN
sample
standard
gender
age
size
average
deviation
men
15
1411
168.37
5.75
men
16
1428
169.59
5.70
men
17
1427
170.46
5.82
women
14
1386
156.36
5.24
women
15
1413
156.76
5.36
women
16
1419
157.16
5.17
TABLE IV. THE RESULTS OF WELCH’S TEST
Degrees of
test
gender
age
freedom
statistic T
p-value
men
15
9.07
1.195
0.262
men
16
17.84
0.380
0.708
men
17
8.23
-0.675
0.518
women
14
16.29
0.914
0.374
women
15
23.91
1.060
0.300
women
16
18.30
0.179
0.860
whether the average of their heights was equal to the national
average height in Japan, we conducted the Welch’s test. The
null hypothesis in this study was that the average of submitters’
heights was equal to the national average height in Japan. Table
IV shows the results of the Welch’s test. As shown in Table
IV, the p-value in each case was greater than 0.05. As a result,
the null hypothesis in each case was not rejected. In other
words, in each case of men aged 15-17 and women aged 14-
16, the average of submitters’ heights was equal to the national
average height in Japan.
The results of the Shapiro-Wilk test of normality and the
Welch’s test rarely happened when many submitters disclosed
their ages, genders, and heights dishonestly. As a result, it
is assumed that most of the submitters disclosed their ages,
genders, and heights honestly. Furthermore, age, gender, and
height were important personal information. It is likely that
they disclosed not only their ages, genders, and heights but
also other personal proﬁle items honestly.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated tweets disclosing submitters’
personal proﬁle items and analyzed submitters’ ages, genders,
and heights statistically. The results of the statistical analysis
showed that it is likely that most of the submitters disclosed
their personal proﬁle items honestly. These personal proﬁle
items can threaten their privacy and security even if they
use non-real name accounts. We are investigating whether
submitters were concerned about their privacy and security
risks caused by submitting tweets disclosing their personal
proﬁle items honestly. Furthermore, we intend to conduct the
same statistical analysis on tweets in languages other than
Japanese.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Fox et al., Trust and Privacy Online: Why Americans Want to
Rewrite the Rules, The Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2000.
[Online]. Available: http://www.pewinternet.org/2000/08/20/trust-and-
privacy-online/ [accessed: 2020-09-01]
[2]
A. Acquisti and R. Gross, Imagined Communities: Awareness, Infor-
mation Sharing, and Privacy on the Facebook.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 36–58.
[3]
S. B. Barnes, “A privacy paradox: Social networking in the United
States.” First Monday, vol. 11, no. 9, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://ﬁrstmonday.org/article/view/1394/1312 [accessed: 2020-09-01]
[4]
C.
Johnson
III,
Safeguarding
against
and
responding
to
the
breach
of
personally
identiﬁable
information,
Ofﬁce
of
Management
and
Budget
Memorandum,
2007.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/memoranda/fy2007/m07-
16.pdf [accessed: 2016-10-04]
[5]
B. Krishnamurthy and C. E. Wills, “On the leakage of personally
identiﬁable
information
via
online
social
networks,”
Computer
Communication Review, vol. 40, no. 1, 2010, pp. 112–117. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1672308.1672328 [accessed: 2020-
09-01]
[6]
C. Dwyer, “Digital relationships in the ”myspace” generation: Results
from a qualitative study,” in Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, ser. HICSS ’07.
Wash-
ington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2007, p. 19.
[7]
T. Hirai, “Why does “Enjyo“ happen on the Web? : An Examination
based
on
Japanese
Web
Culture,”
Journal
of
Information
and
Communication Research, vol. 29, no. 4, mar 2012, pp. 61–71.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.org/10.11430/jsicr.29.4 61
[accessed:
2020-09-01]
[8]
A. Viseu, A. Clement, and J. Aspinall, “Situating privacy online: Com-
plex perception and everyday practices,” Information, Communication
& Society, 2004, pp. 92–114.
[9]
S. Livingstone, “Taking risky opportunities in youthful content creation:
teenagers’ use of social networking sites for intimacy, privacy and self-
expression.” New Media & Society, vol. 10, no. 3, 2008, pp. 393–411.
[10]
A.
N.
Joinson,
U.-D.
Reips,
T.
Buchanan,
and
C.
B.
P.
Schoﬁeld, “Privacy, trust, and self-disclosure online.” Human-Computer
Interaction, vol. 25, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1–24. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07370020903586662 [ac-
cessed: 2020-09-01]
[11]
Z. Tufekci, “Can You See Me Now? Audience and Disclosure Regula-
tion in Online Social Network Sites,” Bulletin of Science, Technology
& Society, vol. 28, no. 1, 2008, pp. 20–36.
[12]
Y.
Watanabe,
H.
Onishi,
R.
Nishimura,
and
Y.
Okada,
“Detection
of
school
foundation
day
tweets
that
can
be
used
to
distinguish
senders’
schools,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
Eleventh
International
Conference
on
Evolving
Internet
(INTERNET 2019), Nov 2016, pp. 30–35. [Online]. Available:
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=internet
2019 2 30 40026 [accessed: 2020-09-01]
[13]
twigaten.204504byse.info.
TwiGaTen.
[Online].
Available:
https://twigaten.204504byse.info/ [accessed: 2020-09-01]
[14]
National
Centre
for
Research
Methods
(NCRM).
Using
Statistical Regression Methods in Education Research. [Online].
Available:
http://www.restore.ac.uk/srme/www/fac/soc/wie/research-
new/srme/index.html [accessed: 2020-09-01]
[15]
the
Ministry
of
Education,
Culture,
Sports,
Science
and
Technology (MEXT). the survey on physical strength and sporting
ability
(2018).
[Online].
Available:
https://www.e-stat.go.jp/stat-
search/ﬁles?page=1&layout=datalist&toukei=00402102&tstat=0000010
88875&cycle=0&tclass1=000001133904&stat inﬁd=000031872003
[accessed: 2020-09-01]
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Emoji as Sentiment Indicators: An Investigative Case Study in Arabic Text
Shatha Ali A. Hakami
School of & Dept. of Computer Science
University of Birmingham &
Jazan University
Birmingham, UK / Jazan, Saudi Arabia
e-mails: sah624@cs.bham.ac.uk
sahakami@jazanu.edu.sa
Robert Hendley
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, UK
e-mail: r.j.hendley@cs.bham.ac.uk
Phillip Smith
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, UK
e-mail: p.smith.7@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract—With the explosion of social media usage, re-
searchers have become interested in understanding and analysing
the sentiment of the language used in textual digital commu-
nications. One particular feature is the use of emoji. These
are pictographs that are used to augment the text. They might
represent facial expressions, body language, emotional intentions
or other things. Despite the frequency with which they are used,
research on the interpretation of emoji in languages other than
English, such as Arabic, is still in its infancy. This paper analyses
the use of emoji in Arabic social media datasets to build a better
understanding of sentiment indicators in textual contents. Seven
benchmark Arabic datasets containing emoji were manually
and automatically annotated for sentiment value. A quantitative
analysis of the results shows that emoji are sometimes used
as true/direct sentiment indicators. However, the analysis also
reveals that, for some emoji and in some contexts, the role of
emoji is more complex. They may not act as sentiment indicators,
they may act as modiﬁers of the sentiment expressed in the text
or, in some cases, their role may be context dependent. It is
important to understand the role of emoji in order to build
sentiment analysis systems that are more accurate and robust.
Keywords—Emoji; Social Media; Arabic; NLP; Sentiment Anal-
ysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Natural human communication involves both verbal (natural
language) and nonverbal channels. In face-to-face communica-
tion, nonverbal cues are often the meta-messages that instruct
receivers on how to interpret verbal messages. These cues
can be either visual/mimogestual (the use of the body), like
head nodding, facial expressions, posture, mime, gaze, and
eye contact [1]; or oral/prosodic (the use of the voice), like
pitch contour, tone, stress, pause, rhythm, tempo and vocal
intonation [2]. Ambady et al. [3] also consider these nonverbal
cues as reliable indicators for attributes of the speaker, such
as gender, personality, abilities, and sexual orientation. The
main feature of nonverbal cues, however, is their “ability
to convey emotions and attitude” as well as to “emphasize,
contradict, substitute or regulate verbal communication” [4].
From a Psycholinguistic perspective, Mehrabian [5] argues that
93% of human communication takes place non-verbally.
In text-based communication, it has been argued that many
of these nonverbal cues are missed, which potentially makes
the communication ambiguous and inefﬁcient and can lead
to misunderstandings [6]. To address this issue, people often
use many kinds of text-based surrogates, such as nonstan-
dard/multiple punctuation (e.g., ‘...’, or ‘!!!’), lexical surro-
gates (e.g., ‘hmmm’, or ‘yummm’); asterisks (e.g., ‘*hug*’
or ‘*grin*’), emoticons (e.g., ‘:)’ or ‘:(’), and emoji (e.g.,
‘
’ and ‘
’). Carey [7] categorized these nonverbal cues
into ﬁve types: vocal spelling, lexical surrogates, spatial arrays
(e.g., using the textual layout to aid understanding or provide
emphasis), manipulation of grammatical markers, and minus
features. Emoticons, and later emoji, are sometimes considered
as examples of spatial arrays that are used to convey emotion
or sentiment. Sentiment analysis can be deﬁned as a process
that analyses text and builds an interpretation of the sentiment
that it is intended to convey. Usually, this is a one dimensional
measure from negative to positive and often it is quantized
to just three values: negative, neutral or positive. Sentiment
analysis has become an important tool in classifying and
interpreting text. It has important applications in social media
analysis, consultation systems, text classiﬁcation and many
other areas.
Generally, there are two broad approaches to analyzing
sentiment in text: a machine learning approach and a lexicon-
based approach. The conventional automated sentiment anal-
ysis, that takes account of emoji, especially in the Arabic
language, works as follows: the text is analysed to calculate
a value representing the sentiment of the text, any emoji are
analysed to derive their sentiment values, and then the two
values are combined to build an overall interpretation of the
sentiment of the whole text.
This conventional assumption might not always be correct.
Emoji do not always just indicate additional emotional content.
It has been noticed in [8]–[11] that emoji often play sentiment
roles other than as a direct indication. For instance, a negative
emoji (e.g., broken-heart
) can disambiguate an ambiguous
sentiment in a text (i.e., add negativity to neutral sentiment
texts), it can also complement it in a relatively positive text.
Kunneman et al. [11] discussed a similar duality of sentiment
role in the use of emotional hashtags such as #nice and #lame.
Since this information is not explicit, we assume that the role
of emoji as a sentiment signal needs to be examined using
various approaches and in different contexts, in order to build
a better understanding.
In this work, we seek to investigate the interpretation of the
sentiment expressed in informal Arabic texts, which contain
emoji and are drawn from a Twitter dataset. This is done
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

by trying to answer, from a broad perspective, the following
questions:
Q1: When is it appropriate, in sentiment analysis,
to use the conventional techniques for interpreting
emoji (i.e., when are they a true sentiment indicator
within the text)?
Q2: What are the other, unconventional, cases of
emoji in sentiment analysis, and when do they
apply?
To answer these questions, we borrow from [8] the argument
that each emoji has three different norms of sentiment within
itself. These are positivity, neutrality, and negativity. Thus, we
cannot merely consider a single emoji to be a representative
or an indicator of one absolute sentiment (positive, negative,
or neutral) unless we examine its sentiment state within that
related context. Indeed, arguably, within a textual context,
some emoji can mislead the sentiment analysis process.
Here, we propose an investigation that uses a comparison
between the sentiment of text with and without emojis as well
as of the sentiment of the emoji on its own. We apply this
approach with 496 different emojis that are used in a corpus of
5204 Arabic texts, annotated with sentiment labels. As a result,
we identify four cases for the roles of emoji as sentiment
indicators. These cases are as: true sentiment indicators, multi-
sentiment indicators, ambiguous sentiment indicators, and not
sentiment indicators.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews related work upon which we build; Section III presents
the study’s design; Section IV presents the results, analysis and
discussion. Finally, in Section V we draw conclusions from
this work along with its weaknesses and limitations as well as
some recommendations for future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Previous studies on emoji within texts have attempted
to explore their roles as nonverbal cues and as sentiment
indicators.
A. Emoji as Textual Nonverbal Cues
Emoticons are a sequence of keyboard characters (ASCII
characters) that represent nonverbal behaviors, such as facial
expressions. Emojis are, in many ways, a successor to emoti-
cons with more sophisticated rendering and a wider repertoire
but they often play a similar role. In practice, emoji are actual
icons that appear on physical or virtual keyboards and can
be used across various platforms, such as WhatsApp, Twitter,
Facebook, Instagram, and others. These icons can represent
facial expressions, body language, food, animals, places, and
natural objects like ﬂowers and trees. As discussed by Denis
[12] and Zwaan and Singe [13], the human brain instantly
analyzes image elements whilst it processes language linearly.
That is to say: the human brain processes visual elements
faster than written text. Many major technology companies,
like Apple and Microsoft, have realized this importance of
emoji and have taken considerable strides towards developing
them in their systems.
Dresner and Herring [14] and Skovholt et al. [15] have
observed that including emoticons, as well as emojis, in
text not only helps the receivers to infer some contextual
information, but it also eases understanding of the expressed
sentiment. Therefore, it has become necessary to integrate the
analysis of textual content and emoji in order to properly
undertake sentiment analysis. Accordingly, Evans [16] deﬁned
emoji as a form of developed punctuation (the way of encoding
nonverbal prosody cues in writing systems) that supplements
written language to facilitate the writers articulating their
emotions in text-based communication.
Also, Miller et al. [17] considered the use of emoji to be
understood as ”visible acts of meaning”. As deﬁned by Bavelas
and Chovil [18], visible acts of meanings are analogically
encoded symbols that are sensitive to a sender-receiver rela-
tionship, and they are fully integrated with the accompanying
words. Indeed, the sender-receiver cultural background is one
of the essential contextualization aspects that might affect
emoji-text sentiment analysis. For that, Gao and VanderLaan
[19] presented a study suggesting that Eastern and Western
cultures are different in their use of mouth versus eye cues
when interpreting emotions. According to the study, the norm
in Western cultures is to display the overt emotion while in
Eastern cultures, the norm is to present more subtle emotion to
other people. Westerners interpret facial emotional expressions
through the mouth region. Conversely, Eastern cultures focus
more on the eyes. The researchers of the study also found that
such differences extend to written paralinguistic signals such
as emojis and, consequently, this has implications for digital
communication.
B. Emoji as Textual Sentiment Indicators
Studies on emoji within textual context mainly focus on
three directions: the usages of emoji, their meaning and the
sentiment they convey. Researchers have found that emoji can
be used to disambiguate the intended sense [20], manipulate
the original meaning [21][22], or add sentiment to a message
[23].
Regarding sentiment analysis, some studies’ ﬁndings sug-
gest that the level of sentiment perceived from a text increases
with the inclusion of facial-emojis [8][23][24] and [25]. More-
over, Rathan et al. [26] considered facial-emoji as a direct
sentiment indicator. In their approach, they used emoji as a
sentiment source to evaluate social media messages containing
particular brands’ names. Furthermore, Riordan [20] found
that even non-facial emoji can increase the sentiment and
improve the clarity of texts.
Going a step further, many studies have assumed emoji to
be a reliable ground truth for the sentiment. For example,
researchers in the work [27]–[29] followed the same approach
by constructing datasets for sentiment prediction and using a
set of emoji to label their datasets automatically. Despite its in-
tuitiveness, this assumption seems insufﬁcient since it ignores
that the emoji-text sentiment correlation is context-sensitive.
Therefore, approaches relying on such an assumption might
yield arbitrary and inaccurate sentiment annotation. Besides, it
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Figure 1. Examples of the Most Representative Emoji for Each Sentiment in Emoji-Text Dataset. The Percentage (%) Shows the Relative Frequency of the
Sentiment Class of the Text within Which Each Emoji Occurs.
has been shown that the sentiments of surrogates for nonverbal
cues (like emoji) and verbal messages (the accompanying text)
are not isolated, and they should be integrated as a whole
forming a context with a particular sentiment [30][31].
In line with this hypothesis, Novak et al. [8] conducted
a study, which considers context-sensitivity when analyzing
the sentiment of emoji and texts. In the study, the researchers
annotated a collection of tweets containing at least one emoji,
with sentiment labels (negative, neutral, positive). From that
textual content, the researchers computed and presented senti-
ment ranking scores for 751 emoji. Their work illustrated that
while some emoji have very high sentiment scores with little
variance, others were often used to denote both positive and
negative sentiment. These observations suggest that treating
emoji as a direct sentiment signal is misleading because
they are often full of nuanced details that are highly context
dependent.
Overall, it is clear that the conventional approach of per-
forming separate sentiment analysis of text and emoji and then
combining the two to generate an overall value, is inadequate.
Sometimes this approach will work. However, often and in
particular with some frequently used emoji and in some critical
cases, this approach fails. Furthermore, in some language such
as Arabic, there is little research and also there is evidence that
emoji play an especially strong sentiment indication role. The
aim of this research is to close that gap.
III. STUDY DESIGN
We argue that each emoji can have a different sentiment ef-
fect on a text, depending upon the context in which it appears.
This is a micro-level linguistic phenomenon so, along with
the standard natural language processing approach (sentiment
analysis), we also used a technique from computer-mediated
discourse analysis: “Coding and Counting” [32]–[34]. This is
deﬁned by Herring et al. [35] as consisting of three phases:
observe, code, and count. It starts with purely qualitative
observation and ends with a set of relative frequencies.
A. Data for Observation
To observe how emoji behave as a sentiment indicator for
a text, content with speciﬁc criteria is needed. The content
should be from a social media platform, written in the Arabic
language, multi-dialect, multi-aspect, and, more importantly,
should contain emoji. Therefore, the main focus of our obser-
vation was on 5402 texts (tweets from the Twitter platform),
each with at least one emoji. These were extracted from seven
different public datasets of Arabic social media [36]–[43]. We
refer to this as the Emoji-Text dataset.
Then, we extracted all of the emoji from the Emoji-Text
dataset to form a collection of 496 unique emoji. We refer to
this as the Emoji-only dataset.
Lastly, a third dataset was constructed, which consists of all
the texts in the Emoji-Text dataset, with the emoji removed.
We refer to this dataset as the Plain-Text dataset.
B. Coding with Sentiment
In order to understand the way in which the emoji affects the
interpretation of the sentiment of each text, we need to have
a sentiment annotation for each item in each of the datasets.
All of the texts in the Emoji-Text dataset were human
annotated with either sentiment labels (negative, positive, or
neutral), or emotional labels (angry, sadness, or joy). For
simplicity, we uniﬁed all the labels to be in the sentiment label
form. The negative emotional labels ‘angry’ and ‘sadness’
were labelled as negative, and the positive emotional label
‘joy’ as positive.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE I. THE TOP 5 EMOJI IN EMOJI-ONLY DATASET WITH SENTIMENT FREQUENCY (Fr.) AND RELATIVE FREQUENCY (RelFr.).
Emojis
Name
Class
Sentiment
Total
W/ Negative Texts
W/ Neutral Texts
W/ Positive Texts
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Face with Tears of Joy
Facial Expression
Positive
2,270
1,229 (54.14%)
92 (4.05%)
949 (41.80%)
Red Heart
Heart
Positive
765
45 (5.88%)
20 (2.61%)
700 (91.50%)
Saudi Arabia
Flag
Positive
733
89 (12.14%)
29 (3.95%)
615 (83.90%)
Smiling Face with Heart-Eyes
Facial Expression
Positive
426
21 (4.93%)
15 (3.52%)
390 (91.55%)
Broken Heart
Heart
Negative
410
286 (69.75%)
16 (3.90%)
108 (26.34%)
TABLE II. THE FREQUENCY (Fr.) AND RELATIVE FREQUENCY
(RelFr.) OF SENTIMENTS IN THE PLAIN-TEXT, EMOJI-TEXT AND
EMOJI-ONLY DATASETS.
Sentiment
Plain-text
Emoji-text
Emoji-only
Label
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Negative
2045 (39%)
1885 (36%)
4016 (31%)
Neutral
1119 (22%)
965 (19%)
2547 (20%)
Positive
2040 (39%)
2354 (45%)
6244 (49%)
Total
5,204
5,204
12,807
For the emoji, each emoji in the Emoji-only dataset was
manually annotated. This was done independently by three
native Arabic speaking annotators, two females and one male.
To test the reliability of this coding process, we used the inter-
rater Fleiss’ Kappa agreement test [44]. The test resulted in k =
0.85, which is interpreted as a general high agreement among
the three annotators. In cases where two annotators disagreed
on a speciﬁc sentiment, the annotation from the third annotator
was considered to determine the decision.
Lastly, for the text only, we labelled each text in the Plain-
text dataset with sentiment. An automatic sentiment annotation
process was applied using the Python based Arabic sentiment
analysis model, Mazajak [45].
C. Frequency and Relative Frequency Counting
To understand how each emoji is associated with each
sentiment class, we undertook a frequency analysis of the
Emoji-Text dataset. This identiﬁes the frequency with which
each emoji is associated with (human annotated) text labelled
as negative, neutral and positive. We calculate two measures,
the frequency (Fr), which is the absolute number of times that
that emoji occurred within text of that sentiment class and
also the relative frequency (RelFr), which is the proportion of
the occurrences of that emoji that fall into that class. Table I
shows the results for the 5 most common emojis in our data.
A similar process was repeated for each of the datasets
Emoji-Text, Plain-Text and Emoji-only, in order to understand
how the distribution of the sentiment annotation varied be-
tween the three sentiment classes. The results are shown in
Table II.
TABLE III. THE FREQUENCY (Fr.) AND RELATIVE FREQUENCY
(RelFr.) OF SENTIMENTS IN THE EMOJI-TEXT DATASET WITH
DIFFERENT EMOJI LOAD.
Emoji
Total Text
Neg. Text
Neut. Text
Pos. Text
Load
Fr(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
1
2283 (44%)
908 (40%)
436 (19%)
939 (41%)
2
1358 (26%)
467 (34%)
233 (17%)
658 (48%)
3
652 (12%)
261 (40%)
77 (12%)
314 (48%)
4
393 (8%)
112 (28%)
94 (24%)
187 (48%)
5 or more
518 (10%)
137 (26%)
125 (24%)
256 (49%)
Finally, the number of emoji occurring in each text is
counted. This is referred to as the “emoji load” of that text.
The Fr and RelFr distributions of each emoji load for each of
the three sentiment norms is then calculated to explore how
sentiment varies with emoji load. This is shown in Table III.
IV. RESULTS ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
Table II shows the results of counting the frequency of texts
in each sentiment class, both with and without emoji, besides
the counting of the emoji only. The results show that for the
negative and neutral classes there was a decrease in frequency
of 3% when the emoji were included in the text. However,
the number of texts classiﬁed as positive was increased by
6% when the emoji were included. In Table III, we show the
emoji load across all texts and broken down by sentiment class.
It is clear that the most usual usage is to include just one or
sometimes two emoji in a text. The number of texts in the
dataset with three or more emoji is much lower. It is also
clear that, as the number of emoji in a text increases, the
balance between the sentiment classes changes signiﬁcantly.
The proportion of negative texts is much lower when there
are 3 or more emoji than when there are just 1 or 2. Similarly,
the proportion of neutral or positive texts increases. This may
reﬂect that, for negative texts, it is sufﬁcient to use one emoji
to signal the negative sentiment in Arabic. Whereas, for a
positive sentiment, additional emoji are used to provide more
emphasis.
Based on this quantitative observation, we analyzed the
emoji textual behavior as sentiment indicators and noticed the
following signiﬁcant cases.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE IV. EXAMPLES FROM EMOJI-TEXT DATASET (1).
A. True Sentiment Indication
In Figure 1, the analysis shows the relationship between
particular emoji and the sentiment of the text. The table uses
the most representative examples of each sentiment class for
illustration. It is clear that some emoji are overwhelmingly
negative indicators, for instance:
,
,
and
. Others
are mostly positive indicators, like
,
,
and
. With
this kind of emoji, the indicated sentiment is usually explicit
and clear, for two reasons:
First, the messages delivered within the text are, themselves,
clear and unambiguous. So, these messages do not express
irony, sarcasm or other more complex phenomena. Moreover,
most of the cases in our dataset where these emoji occur,
include sentiment words or phrases, like the words: “love”,
“hate”, or the phrases: “I agree with” or “I am against”. We
ﬁnd that Arabic speakers (perhaps, like others) usually use
these emoji to directly articulate their feelings of sadness
or anger (example 1) or love, cheerfulness, and satisfaction
(example 2) in Table IV.
The second reason is that these emoji often co-occur with
other emoji from the same sentiment class (i.e., positive with
positive and negative with negative). Thus, the combination
of these emoji works together to strengthen the sentiment
indication (examples 3, and 4) in Table IV.
TABLE V. EXAMPLES FROM EMOJI-TEXT DATASET (2).
Note that, in examples 1 and 3, the sentiments of the text-
only, the emoji-only, and the text with emoji (i.e., the tweet)
are identical, and they all are negative. The same occurs in
examples 2 and 4, but with positive sentiment. This means that
when all the components of a tweet (i.e., text and each emoji)
share the same sentiment class, they will end up reinforcing
the effect and so the result will, clearly, belong to that same
sentiment class. Therefore, in this condition, emoji can be
considered as direct (true) sentiment indicators for a tweet.
B. No-Sentiment Indication
For some of the emoji in our dataset, they do not appear to
convey any sentiment indication. This is the case for examples
5 and 6 in Table IV. This may be because, in our examples,
the sentiment of the text (i.e., the sentiment of the words) or
of the other emoji in the same text dominates.
However, often these emoji are used randomly with some
other emoji in a way that is not intended to convey any
sentiment. For instance, they may be used as ’decoration’
rather than to serve any real purpose. Example 7 in Table
IV, which uses the emoji
, is an example.
C. Multi-Sentiment Indication
In Figure 1, there are examples of emoji that we classify
as ”Mixed Sentiment”. We considered emoji, like
,
,
,
and
as multi-sentiment indicators.
These emoji can be considered as being true sentiment
indicators, but with cases with two opposite sentiments, ex-
empliﬁed in Table V. As positive indicators, these emoji
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

have been found playing a signiﬁcant role in cases similar
to example 8 where the
emoji indicates being funny. In
example 9, the
emoji indicates being proud, and example
10 where the
emoji indicates being a positive adviser.
In other cases, the same emoji as in examples 8, 9 and 10
are found playing the opposite sentiment role (i.e., a negative
sentiment). This can be seen, in Table V, in example 11 where
the
emoji indicates being a mocker, example 12 where the
emoji indicates being arrogant, and example 13 where the
emoji indicates embedded threatening advice.
D. Ambiguous Sentiment Indication
Beyond the cases mentioned above, there can also be an
ambiguous sentiment indication for a text arising where an
emoji exists, not only as a single, stand-alone emoji, but
also in combination with emoji with different sentiments. For
instance, in example 14 in Table V, human annotators agreed
on annotating this tweet with negative sentiment. However,
when re-reading the tweet, it could also be interpreted as a
positive tweet, depending on context.
This confusion in judging the tweet sentiment is because
of the complexity of the sentiment of the text itself. In this
example, the sentence “Hey girl, I am already scared” is
negative, while the following sentence, “Good night and say hi
to the one behind you”, is positive. Besides, the combination
of the negative emoji (i.e.,
), the positive emoji (i.e.,
),
and the multi/mixed-sentiments emoji (i.e.,
) increase the
complexity of deciding the sentiment of the tweet as a whole.
Hence, none of the involved emoji can be considered the
true/direct sentiment indicator for this tweet.
V. CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS, AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have undertaken an empirical investigation
of the phenomenon of emoji as a sentiment indicator within
text. We have applied this in a study of an Arabic, social media
corpus using the “Coding and Counting” approach.
Emoji can be a true sentiment indicator, which is the
conventional assumption of existing sentiment analysis ap-
proaches with emoji. This is the approach used by most of
the existing work and implementations of software to perform
sentiment analysis of text with embedded emoji. There are
many cases in our data where this interpretation is the correct
one.
However, some of the most frequently used emoji also
occur in many other, unconventional, cases. They may either
act as multi-sentiment indicators or as ambiguous sentiment
indicators. This is because, according to the context, emoji
sometimes are very negative, and sometimes are very positive.
Besides, in some cases, our investigation identiﬁed examples
where the sentiment of an emoji can be neglected within a
text. They may be dominated by the sentiment of the text
or be dominated by the sentiment of the other emoji in that
text. In this case, we considered such emoji as No-sentiment
indicators.
It is worth mentioning that the emoji sentiment indications
stated above have been found within the dataset that we
collected and sampled for this investigation. We are aware
that the sentiment behavior of emoji is context-sensitive. This
means that in a different context, (for instance, in a different
country or in a different social group), the emoji sentiment
might reﬂect the sentiment or usage of that context. Therefore,
one of the weaknesses of this work is that, if the same
investigative approach was applied on a different dataset, from
a different context, then these emoji may be found to behave
differently as sentiment indicators.
What is clear, is that the sentiment role of emoji in Arabic
social media is complex. Our analysis shows that the con-
ventional approach is sometimes appropriate. However, it also
shows that (especially for some of the most frequently used
emoji) the conventional approaches are inadequate and that a
more sophisticated technique is needed.
Another constraint of this work is the source of the text
that was analysed. Whilst Twitter provides a useful source for
data, there may be differences between different social media
platforms. Furthermore, different classes of conversation (e.g.,
purely social, political, business and so on), may have an
inﬂuence upon how emoji are used. Again, further research
is required to investigate this.
In conclusion, using emoji solely, as a feature of sentiment
indication for text is not a reliable approach, and it might yield
arbitrary, noisy, and incorrect sentiment annotation. For that,
we need to understand, in detail, the different sentiment states
in which emoji can occur, and also the associated sentiment
roles that emoji can play within different textual and social
contexts.
In the future, our work will expand upon the analysis
presented here, develop a model based upon this understanding
and then evaluate it, empirically, against human annotated
text, and compare the performance of this approach against
existing methods. Also, the focus of the work presented here
has been on the interpretation of the sentiment effect of emoji
in Arabic text. We would expect that similar phenomena would
be found in other languages. However, there are likely to be
some differences with language and culture. Further work is
necessary to conﬁrm whether this is true.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Kendon, “Gesticulation and speech: Two aspects of the”, The
relationship of verbal and nonverbal communication, no. 25, p. 207,
1980.
[2]
B. Altenberg, Prosodic patterns in spoken English: Studies in the cor-
relation between prosody and grammar for text-to-speech conversion.
Lund University Press Lund, 1987, vol. 76.
[3]
N. Ambady, F. J. Bernieri, and J. A. Richeson, “Toward a histology of
social behavior: Judgmental accuracy from thin slices of the behavioral
stream”, in Advances in experimental social psychology, vol. 32,
Elsevier, 2000, pp. 201–271.
[4]
A. Chen Yuet Wei, “Emoticons and the non-verbal communication:
With reference to facebook”, PhD thesis, Christ University, 2012.
[5]
A. Mehrabian, Silent messages, 152. Wadsworth Belmont, CA, 1971,
vol. 8.
[6]
S. Kiesler, J. Siegel, and T. W. McGuire, “Social psychological as-
pects of computer-mediated communication.”, American psychologist,
vol. 39, no. 10, p. 1123, 1984.
[7]
J. Carey, “Paralanguage in computer mediated communication”, in
18th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
1980, pp. 67–69.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[8]
P. K. Novak, J. Smailovi´c, B. Sluban, and I. Mozetiˇc, “Sentiment of
emojis”, PloS one, vol. 10, no. 12, 2015.
[9]
L. Rezabek and J. Cochenour, “Visual cues in computer-mediated
communication: Supplementing text with emoticons”, Journal of Visual
Literacy, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 201–215, 1998.
[10]
E. Braumann, O. Preveden, S. Saleem, Y. Xu, and S. T. Koeszegi, “The
effect of emoticons in synchronous and asynchronous e-negotiations”,
in Proceedings of the 11th Group Decision & Negotiation Conference
(GDN 2010), 2010, pp. 113–115.
[11]
F. Kunneman, C. Liebrecht, and A. van den Bosch, “The (un) pre-
dictability of emotional hashtags in twitter”, 2014.
[12]
M. Denis, “Imaging while reading text: A study of individual differ-
ences”, Memory & Cognition, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 540–545, 1982.
[13]
R. A. Zwaan and M. Singer, “Text comprehension”, in Handbook of
discourse processes, Routledge, 2003, pp. 89–127.
[14]
E. Dresner and S. C. Herring, “Functions of the nonverbal in cmc:
Emoticons and illocutionary force”, Communication theory, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 249–268, 2010.
[15]
K. Skovholt, A. Grønning, and A. Kankaanranta, “The communicative
functions of emoticons in workplace e-mails::-”, Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 780–797, 2014.
[16]
V. Evans, The emoji code: The linguistics behind smiley faces and
scaredy cats. Picador USA, 2017.
[17]
H. Miller, D. Kluver, J. Thebault-Spieker, L. Terveen, and B. Hecht,
“Understanding emoji ambiguity in context: The role of text in emoji-
related miscommunication”, in Eleventh International AAAI Confer-
ence on Web and Social Media, 2017.
[18]
J. B. Bavelas and N. Chovil, “Visible acts of meaning: An integrated
message model of language in face-to-face dialogue”, Journal of
Language and social Psychology, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 163–194, 2000.
[19]
B. Gao and D. P. VanderLaan, “Cultural inﬂuences on perceptions of
emotions depicted in emojis”, Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, 2020.
[20]
M. A. Riordan, “The communicative role of non-face emojis: Affect
and disambiguation”, Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 76, pp. 75–
86, 2017.
[21]
G. Donato and P. Paggio, “Investigating redundancy in emoji use:
Study on a twitter based corpus”, in Proceedings of the 8th Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social
Media Analysis, 2017, pp. 118–126.
[22]
K. Njenga, “Social media information security threats: Anthropomor-
phic emoji analysis on social engineering”, in IT Convergence and
Security 2017, Springer, 2018, pp. 185–192.
[23]
M. Shiha and S. Ayvaz, “The effects of emoji in sentiment analysis”,
Int. J. Comput. Electr. Eng.(IJCEE.), vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 360–369, 2017.
[24]
N. Na’aman, H. Provenza, and O. Montoya, “Varying linguistic pur-
poses of emoji in (twitter) context”, in Proceedings of ACL 2017,
Student Research Workshop, 2017, pp. 136–141.
[25]
D. Rodrigues, D. Lopes, M. Prada, D. Thompson, and M. V. Garrido,
“A frown emoji can be worth a thousand words: Perceptions of emoji
use in text messages exchanged between romantic partners”, Telematics
and Informatics, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1532–1543, 2017.
[26]
M. Rathan, V. R. Hulipalled, K. Venugopal, and L. Patnaik, “Consumer
insight mining: Aspect based twitter opinion mining of mobile phone
reviews”, Applied Soft Computing, vol. 68, pp. 765–773, 2018.
[27]
B. Guthier, K. Ho, and A. El Saddik, “Language-independent data set
annotation for machine learning-based sentiment analysis”, in 2017
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
(SMC), IEEE, 2017, pp. 2105–2110.
[28]
H. Abdellaoui and M. Zrigui, “Using tweets and emojis to build tead:
An arabic dataset for sentiment analysis”, Computaci´on y Sistemas,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 777–786, 2018.
[29]
W. A. Hussien, Y. M. Tashtoush, M. Al-Ayyoub, and M. N. Al-Kabi,
“Are emoticons good enough to train emotion classiﬁers of arabic
tweets?”, in 2016 7th International Conference on Computer Science
and Information Technology (CSIT), IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[30]
J. B. Walther and K. P. D’addario, “The impacts of emoticons on
message interpretation in computer-mediated communication”, Social
science computer review, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 324–347, 2001.
[31]
D. Derks, A. E. Bos, and J. Von Grumbkow, “Emoticons and social in-
teraction on the internet: The importance of social context”, Computers
in human behavior, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 842–849, 2007.
[32]
M. T. Chi, “Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical
guide”, The journal of the learning sciences, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 271–315,
1997.
[33]
D. W. Shaffer, Quantitative ethnography. Lulu. com, 2017.
[34]
J.-W. Strijbos, R. L. Martens, F. J. Prins, and W. M. Jochems, “Content
analysis: What are they talking about?”, Computers & education,
vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 29–48, 2006.
[35]
S. C. Herring, S. Barab, R. Kling, and J. Gray, “An approach to
researching online behavior”, Designing for virtual communities in the
service of learning, vol. 338, pp. 338–376, 2004.
[36]
M. Salameh, S. Mohammad, and S. Kiritchenko, “Sentiment after
translation: A case-study on arabic social media posts”, in Proceedings
of the 2015 conference of the North American chapter of the asso-
ciation for computational linguistics: Human language technologies,
2015, pp. 767–777.
[37]
S. Rosenthal, N. Farra, and P. Nakov, “Semeval-2017 task 4: Sentiment
analysis in twitter”, in Proceedings of the 11th international workshop
on semantic evaluation (SemEval-2017), 2017, pp. 502–518.
[38]
S. Mohammad, F. Bravo-Marquez, M. Salameh, and S. Kiritchenko,
“Semeval-2018 task 1: Affect in tweets”, in Proceedings of the 12th
international workshop on semantic evaluation, 2018, pp. 1–17.
[39]
F. Barbieri et al., “Semeval 2018 task 2: Multilingual emoji prediction”,
in Proceedings of The 12th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation, 2018, pp. 24–33.
[40]
R. Baly, A. Khaddaj, H. Hajj, W. El-Hajj, and K. B. Shaban, “Arsentd-
lev: A multi-topic corpus for target-based sentiment analysis in arabic
levantine tweets”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01830, 2019.
[41]
H. Mulki, H. Haddad, C. B. Ali, and H. Alshabani, “L-hsab: A
levantine twitter dataset for hate speech and abusive language”, in
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abusive Language Online, 2019,
pp. 111–118.
[42]
S. N. Alyami and S. O. Olatunji, “Application of support vector
machine for arabic sentiment classiﬁcation using twitter-based dataset”,
Journal of Information & Knowledge Management, vol. 19, no. 01,
p. 2 040 018, 2020.
[43]
A. Elmadany, H. Mubarak, and W. Magdy, “Arsas: An arabic speech-
act and sentiment corpus of tweets”, OSACT, vol. 3, p. 20, 2018.
[44]
J. L. Fleiss et al., “The measurement of interrater agreement”, Statisti-
cal methods for rates and proportions, vol. 2, no. 212-236, pp. 22–23,
1981.
[45]
I. A. Farha and W. Magdy, “Mazajak: An online arabic sentiment
analyser”, in Proceedings of the Fourth Arabic Natural Language
Processing Workshop, 2019, pp. 192–198.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Modelling the Role of Social Media in Hotel Selection Using Bayesian Networks 
Alexandros Bousdekis 
Business Informatics Lab, Department of 
Business Administration, School of 
Business 
Athens University of Economics and 
Business 
Athens, Greece 
e-mail: albous@mail.ntua.gr 
Dimitris Kardaras 
Business Informatics Lab, Department of 
Business Administration, School of 
Business 
Athens University of Economics and 
Business 
Athens, Greece 
e-mail: dkkardaras@yahoo.co.uk 
Stavroula G. Barbounaki 
Merchant Marine Academy of 
Aspropyrgos, 
Aspropyrgos, Greece 
e-mail: sbarbounaki@yahoo.gr 
 
Abstract— Consumers increasingly use social media to search 
for information, compare alternative products and services, 
and make decisions for activities, such as travel planning and 
hotel selection. In this context, social media have gathered the 
research interest as a major form of electronic Word-Of-
Mouth (eWOM) to prospective travelers. Existing literature is 
rich on research works about the influence of travel-oriented 
online media, such as TripAdvisor, to consumers’ decisions 
with several approaches for sentiment analysis. However, 
travelers are also widely affected by online comments posted 
on social media, such as Facebook, Twitter, etc. This paper 
proposes a methodology for modelling the role of social media 
in hotel selection using Bayesian Networks (BN). Specifically, it 
enables identifying the relationships between the way travelers 
use social media and the criteria for selecting hotels. The 
proposed approach is demonstrated on a dataset of 360 social 
media users. 
Keywords-belief network; data mining; e-tourism; tourism 
management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Consumers increasingly use online media to search for 
information, compare alternative products and services, and 
make decisions for activities, such as travel planning and 
hotel selection [1][2]. Not surprisingly, high ratings in social 
media have a direct impact on sales [3][4]. Due to the 
experiential nature of travel-related products and their 
instantaneous nature, online reviews have become an 
increasingly popular information source in travel planning 
and have a profound effect on consumers’ buying decisions, 
particularly in hotel booking [5]. According to Travel 
Industry Association of America, the evidence shows that 
64% of travelers use search engines for their travel planning 
[6][7]. 
In this context, social media have gathered the research 
interest as a major form of electronic Word-Of-Mouth 
(eWOM) to prospective travelers facilitating the sharing and 
seeking of experiences [5,8,9,10]. Hotel-related decision-
making has fundamentally changed, as social media are used 
in every stage of the consumers’ decision-making process. 
They play a key role before, during and after the trip [11]. 
Prospective tourists are influenced by social media, as 
content from other travellers can shape, guide and redirect 
their initial decisions [12][13].  
In the business perspective, social media are perceived as 
effective tools and fruitful platforms for deepening customer 
engagement and enhancing customer–business interactions 
[14]. In fact, they have provided a new distribution channel 
for businesses to communicate with their customers [7].  In 
the consumer perspective, consumers use social media for a 
wide spectrum of scenarios, e.g., sharing their travel-related 
experiences, engaging with others, connecting with people 
from different destinations and buying travel-related 
products and services [15][16]. 
Existing literature is rich on research works about the 
influence of travel-oriented 
online media, such as 
TripAdvisor, to consumers’ decisions. However, travelers 
are also widely affected by online comments posted on social 
media, such as Facebook, Twitter, etc. as well as by hotels’ 
marketing campaigns [17]. Therefore, the identification of 
the relationships between the way travelers use social media 
and the criteria for selecting hotels is of outmost importance. 
This paper proposes a methodology for modelling the role of 
social media in hotel selection using Bayesian Networks 
(BN). To the best of our knowledge, despite their 
applicability in a wide range of problems and scenarios, BNs 
have not been used for identifying the influence of social 
media to the decisions of travelers about the hotel selection. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents the related work on methods and approaches for 
evaluating the effect of online reviews on social media on 
hotel 
booking. 
Section 
III 
describes 
the 
research 
methodology and the proposed approach for modelling the 
role of social media in hotel selection using BNs. Section IV 
presents the results from the adoption of the proposed 
methodology on a dataset of 360 users. Section V concludes 
the paper and outlines our plans for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Online comment has become a popular and efficient way 
for sellers to acquire feedback from customers and improve 
their service quality [18]. These online reviews generate an 
eWOM effect, which influences future customer demand and 
hotels’ financial performance [19]. However, apart from the 
hotels’ websites and official social media pages, prospective 
travelers are increasingly interacting through social media in 
order to gather and share information about hotels and to 
select the one that matches their criteria. To this end, a vast 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

amount of research has focused on travel-oriented platforms 
and social media, such as TripAdvisor, aiming at 
investigating their influence to hotel booking decisions 
[7][11][14][20][21]. Moreover, such works are conducted 
from a tourism management perspective resulting in the use 
of descriptive statistical methods instead of exploiting the 
advancements of data analytics and machine learning. On the 
other hand, the role of social media such as Facebook and 
Twitter on hotel selection is rarely investigated [8]. 
In [22], the authors examined the effects of traditional 
customer satisfaction relative magnitude and social media 
review ratings on hotel performance and explored which 
online travel intermediaries’ review ratings serve as the most 
reliable and valid predictor for hotel performance. The 
results of this study indicate that social media review rating 
is a more significant predictor than traditional customer 
satisfaction for explaining hotel performance metrics. The 
research work in [23] assessed social media content 
produced by customers and related review-management 
strategies of domestic and international hotel chains with the 
use of descriptive statistics and multilevel regression.  
In [11], the authors proposed the use of multi-criteria 
ratings provided by the travelers in social media networking 
sites for developing a new recommender system for hotel 
recommendations in e-tourism platforms. Reference [3] 
applied multilevel regression analysis in order to quantify the 
extent to which differences in client satisfaction with hotels 
can be attributed to the destination in which the hotels are 
located. They measured this through ratings provided 
through social media outlets. In [24], the authors also 
investigated the influence of social media on destination 
choice. In [5], the presented work is based upon homophily 
and similarity-attraction theory in order to prove that review 
valence significantly affects hotel booking intention, and that 
reader-reviewer demographic similarity moderates this 
effect. This three-way interaction reveals a substituting 
moderation effect between demographic similarity and 
preference similarity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In [12], the authors explored how social media influence 
the way consumers search, evaluate and select a hotel within 
the ‘evaluation stage’ of the wider hotel decision-making 
process, i.e., in the pre-travel stage during which social 
media unfold their most critical role. In [6], the authors 
examined tourists' knowledge sharing behavior in social 
media for two different types of social media: Facebook and 
TripAdvisor. They proposed a structural model that connects 
homophily and knowledge sharing through posting. Finally, 
the research work in [13] investigated the influencing role of 
social media in the consumer’s hotel decision-making 
process and identified the advantages and disadvantages. 
They concluded that the advantages of utilizing social media 
in hotel selection outperform the disadvantages. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
A. Data Collection and Structuring 
The data was collected in the form of a questionnaire 
completed by 360 social media users. The questions lay on 
three categories: generic questions, questions related to the 
reasons of searching information on social media, and 
questions related to the criteria according to which the users 
select a hotel for vacation. The first category of questions 
was in the form of multiple choice, while the last two were in 
the form of Likert scale. 
B. Modelling the Relationships between Social Media and 
Hotel Selection Criteria Using Bayesian Networks 
In order to model the relationships between the reasons 
of searching information on social media and the criteria 
according to which the users select a hotel for vacation, we 
applied BNs. A Bayesian Network (BN) [25], also known as 
belief network, is defined as a pair B = (G, Θ). G = (V, E) is 
a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) where V = {v1, …, vn} is a 
collection of n nodes, E ⸦ V × V a collection of edges and a 
set of parameters Θ containing all the Conditional 
Probabilities (CP) of the network.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Demographic and Internet 
use information
Reasons for 
searching to social 
media
Criteria for 
hotel selection
 
Figure 1.  The Bayesian Network structure for modelling the role of social media in hotel selection. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

       Each node v ϵ V of the graph represents a random 
variable XV with a state space XV which can be either discrete 
or continuous. An edge (vi, vj) ϵ E represents the conditional 
dependence between two nodes vi, vj ϵ V where vi is the 
parent of child vj. If two nodes are not connected by an edge, 
they are conditional independent. Because a node can have 
more than one parent, let πv the set of parents for a node v ϵ 
V.  
      Therefore each random variable is independent of all 
nodes V \ πv. For each node, a Conditional Probability Table 
(CPT) contains the CP distribution with parameters θxi|πi 
:=P(xi|πi) ϵ Θ for each realization xi of Xi conditioned on πi. 
The joint probability distribution over V is visualized by the 
BN and can be defined as  
 
 
 
(1) 
 
With BN, inference for what-if analysis can be 
supported, either top-down (predictive support) or bottom-up 
(diagnostic support). If a random variable which is 
represented by a node is observed, the node is called an 
evidence node; otherwise, it is a hidden node [26]. Based on 
the categories of the questions included in the questionnaire, 
a BN with three layers was developed, as shown in Figure 1. 
The nodes per each layer of the BN are presented in Table I.  
The top layer of the BN includes 4 nodes related to 
generic information (A1-A4). These nodes along with their 
alternative values are: the respondent’s age group = {15-20, 
21-25, 26-30, 31-35, 36-40, 41-45, 46-50, >50), the 
frequency of vacations = {once per 2 years, once per year, 
twice per year, three times per year, more than three times 
per year}, the frequency of staying at hotel in vacations = 
{always, very often, often, rarely, never}, and the frequency 
of using social media for hotel information = {always, very 
often, often, rarely, never}.  
The intermediate layer includes nodes related the reasons 
of searching information on social media in general and 
consists of 9 nodes (R1-R9). In other words, it indicates the 
behaviour and the attitude of the users with respect to the use 
of social media.  
The bottom layer includes nodes related to the criteria 
according to which the users select a hotel for vacation and 
consists of 14 nodes (C1-C16). Their candidate values are 
{Strongly Agree, Agree, Neutral, Disagree, Strongly 
Disagree}.  
Based upon this structure, the BN is subject to reasoning 
in order to compute all the CPTs. The BN was constructed in 
a way that all the nodes of the intermediate and the bottom 
layer are potentially affected by all the nodes of the top and 
the intermediate layer respectively. Therefore, the CPTs are 
calculated accordingly.  
The outcome of the proposed methodology indicates the 
probability assigned to each selection criterion (bottom 
layer) given the reasons a user searches for information in 
social media (intermediate layer) and some generic 
information (top layer).  
 
TABLE I.  
BAYESIAN NETWORK NODES PER LAYER 
Layers 
Nodes 
 
Node Values 
Top Layer 
 
(General Information) 
A1 
Age group 
{15-20, 21-25, 26-30, 
31-35, 36-40, 41-45, 46-
50, >50} 
A2 
Frequency of 
vacations 
{once per 2 years, once 
per year, twice per year, 
three times per year, 
more than three times 
per year} 
A3 
Frequency of staying 
at hotel in vacations 
{always, very often, 
often, rarely, never} 
A4 
Frequency of using 
social media for hotel 
information 
{always, very often, 
often, rarely, never} 
Intermediate Layer 
 
(Reasons of searching to social media) 
R1 
Trust the social media 
users 
 
 
 
 
 
 
{Strongly Agree, Agree, 
Neutral, Disagree, 
Strongly Disagree} 
R2 
Possibility of asking 
opinions 
R3 
Search engines are not 
helpful 
R4 
Socializing 
R5 
Quick responses 
R6 
Easy procedure 
R7 
Better quality of 
responses 
R8 
Costless 
R9 
Funny 
Bottom Layer 
 
(Criteria for hotel selection) 
C1 
Personnel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
{Strongly Agree, Agree, 
Neutral, Disagree, 
Strongly Disagree} 
C2 
Reliable booking 
procedure 
C3 
Fast check-in / check-
out 
C4 
Immediate service 
and problem solving 
C5 
Hotel security and 
privacy assurance 
C6 
Cleanliness 
C7 
Reasonable price 
C8 
Convenient parking 
C9 
Comfortable bed 
C10 
Comfortable public 
spaces 
C11 
Interior design 
C12 
Location 
C13 
External environment 
C14 
Quality of hotel 
restaurant 
C15 
Availability of mini 
bar in the rooms 
C16 
Belonging to a 
reputable hotel chain 
 
Therefore, the model can answer questions such as: 
“What is the probability that a user will select a hotel 
according to the criteria of the reliable booking procedure 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

(C2) and the cleanliness (C6) given that he/she uses the 
social media for socializing (R4) (referring to node values 
“Strongly Agree” and “Agree”) and for receiving better 
quality of responses (R7), while he/she belongs to the age 
group 31-35 (A1), he/she goes for vacations once per year 
(A2), he/she stays at a hotel often (A3) and he/she often uses 
social media for hotel information (A4)?”. In order to answer 
such questions, the model computes all the CPTs for all its 
nodes and for all their alternative values. 
The model is able to identify, represent and store in the 
database complex relationships aiming at supporting 
marketing and hotel operations in response to different 
customers’ profiles. Upon request, the model can compute 
the CPTs of every possible relationship based upon the 
resulting CPT in order to provide insights on the hotel 
selection criteria. In this way, the hotels can focus on specific 
target groups according to their strengths as well as to 
improve their operations that result in lower rating of certain 
criteria. Moreover, it is able to serve as a model for 
predicting the criteria according to which a social media user 
will select a hotel among various alternatives. The model is 
extensible to additional nodes per each layer in case more 
information needs to be incorporated. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The proposed approach was applied on a dataset of 360 
social media users. The implementation and execution of the 
experiments were performed using the BN functionalities of 
the pgmpy (Probabilistic Graphical Models using Python) 
package in Python [27]. We developed the associated BN 
and we calculated the CPTs for all the nodes.  
Table II presents the criteria (Ci) and their associated 
values with the highest CPs, given the values of the reasons 
of searching information in social media (Ri) and the generic 
information (Ai). Table III presents the criteria (Ci) and their 
associated values with the lowest CPs, given the values of 
the reasons of searching information in social media (Ri) and 
the generic information (Ai).  
For this specific analysis, we have grouped the values 
Strongly Agree and Agree in order to identify the most 
probable criteria in the first columns of the aforementioned 
Tables. The results show that the criterion C6 given the 
values of the Ri and Ai nodes that are shown in the first row 
of Table II is the one with the highest CP, which is equal to 
39.5%. The criterion C15 given the values of the Ri and Ai 
nodes that are shown in the first row of Table III is the one 
with the lowest CP, which is equal to 1.2%.  
Based upon these results, the hotels are able to identify 
the most important criteria according to which a social media 
user selects a hotel given some generic information, such as 
the age group, the frequency of vacations, etc., and their 
attitude towards the use of social media for searching 
information. In this way, the hotels may design more 
specialized marketing strategies, e.g., focusing on specific 
target groups, and to improve their operations in order to 
achieve higher service quality and increased customer 
satisfaction with respect to certain criteria. 
 
TABLE II.  
CRITERIA CI WITH THE HIGHEST CPS GIVEN RI AND AI 
Criteria 
(Child 
Nodes) 
Parent Nodes 
 
 
CP 
Ci 
Ri 
Ai 
C6 
R1={Neutral}, 
R2={Agree}, 
R3={Disagree}, 
R4={Agree}, 
R5={Strongly Agree}, 
R6={Neutral}, 
R7={Disagree}, 
R8={Neutral}, 
R9={Strongly Disagree} 
Α1={36-40}, 
Α2={once per 
year},  
A3={very 
often}, 
A4={often} 
 
 
 
 
0.395 
C1 
R1={Disagree}, 
R2={Agree}, 
R3={Strongly Disagree}, 
R4={Strongly Disagree},  
R5={Agree}, 
R6={Neutral}, 
R7={Neutral}, 
R8={Agree}, 
R9={Strongly Disagree} 
A1={46-50}, 
A2={twice per 
year},  
A3={very 
often}, 
A4={rarely} 
 
 
 
 
0.362 
C7 
R1={Agree}, 
R2={Strongly Agree}, 
R3={Disagree}, 
R4={Agree},  
R5={Agree}, 
R6={Strongly Agree}, 
R7={Neutral}, 
R8={Neutral}, 
R9={Agree} 
A1={31-35}, 
A2={once per 2 
years}, 
A3={often}, 
A4={very 
often} 
 
 
 
 
0.294 
C12 
R1={Strongly Agree}, 
R2={Strongly Agree}, 
R3={Neutral}, 
R4={Strongly Agree}, 
R5={Neutral}, 
R6={Neutral}, 
R7={Neutral}, 
R8={Neutral}, 
R9={Agree} 
A1={26-30}, 
A2={once per 
year}, 
A3={rarely}, 
A4={always} 
 
 
 
 
0.285 
C11 
R1={Neutral}, 
R2={Agree}, 
R3={Disagree}, 
R4={Neutral}, 
R5={Agree},  
R6={Agree}, 
R7={Disagree}, 
R8={Agree}, 
R9={Neutral} 
A1={41-45}, 
A2={twice per 
year}, 
A3={very 
often}, 
A4={often} 
 
 
 
 
0.239 
C2 
R1={Neutral}, 
R2={Strongly Agree}, 
R3={Neutral}, 
R4={Agree}, 
R5={Strongly Agree}, 
R6={Neutral}, 
R7={Disagree}, 
R8={Neutral}, 
R9={Neutral} 
A1={36-40}, 
A2={once per 
year}, 
A3={very 
often}, 
A4={often} 
 
 
 
 
0.217 
C4 
R1={Disagree}, 
R2={Agree}, 
R3={Neutral}, 
R4={Agree}, 
R5={Strongly Agree}, 
R6={Agree}, 
R7={Neutral}, 
R8={Agree}, 
R9={Neutral} 
A1={36-40}, 
A2={twice per 
year}, 
A3={very 
often}, 
A4={very 
often} 
 
 
 
 
0.208 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE III.  
CRITERIA CI WITH THE LOWEST CPS GIVEN RI AND AI 
Criteria 
(Child 
Nodes) 
Parent Nodes 
 
 
CP 
Ci 
Ri 
Ai 
C15 
R1={Strongly Agree}, 
R2={Neutral}, 
R3={neutral}, 
R4={Strongly Disagree},  
R5={Agree}, 
R6={Neutral}, 
R7={Neutral}, 
R8={Disagree}, 
R9={Agree} 
A1={21-25}, 
A2={three 
times per year}, 
A3={never}, 
A4={very 
often} 
 
 
 
 
0.012 
C14 
R1={Strongly Agree}, 
R2={Strongly Disagree}, 
R3={Neutral}, 
R4={Agree}, 
R5={Neutral}, 
R6={Strongly Disagree}, 
R7={Disagree}, 
R8={Neutral}, 
R9={Strongly Disagree} 
A1={26-30}, 
A2={once per 
year}, 
A3={rarely}, 
A4={always} 
 
 
 
 
0.023 
C3 
R1={Strongly Agree}, 
R2={Strongly Agree}, 
R3={Neutral}, 
R4={Agree},  
R5={Agree},  
R6={Agree}, 
R7={Disagree}, 
R8={Strongly Agree}, 
R9={Neutral} 
A1={21-25}, 
A2={once per 2 
years}, 
A3={rarely}, 
A4={rarely} 
 
 
 
 
0.025 
C10 
R1={Agree},  
R2={Agree}, 
R3={Strongly Disagree}, 
R4={Neutral}, 
R5={Neutral}, 
R6={Strongly Agree}, 
R7={Disagree}, 
R8={Agree},  
R9={Agree} 
A1={31-35}, 
A2={once per 2 
years}, 
A3={rarely}, 
A4={often} 
 
 
 
 
0.031 
C16 
R1={Strongly Agree}, 
R2={Agree}, 
R3={Neutral}, 
R4={Strongly Agree}, 
R5={Agree},  
R6={Agree}, 
R7={Neutral}, 
R8={Agree}, 
R9={Strongly Agree} 
A1={21-25}, 
A2={once per 2 
years}, 
A3={rarely}, 
A4={very 
often} 
 
 
 
 
0.044 
C8 
R1={Disagree}, 
R2={Neutral}, 
R3={Disagree}, 
R4={Neutral}, 
R5={Agree}, 
R6={Strongly Agree}, 
R7={Strongly Agree}, 
R8={Agree}, 
R9={Neutral} 
A1={21-25}, 
A2={once per 
year}, 
A3={very 
often}, 
A4={often} 
 
 
 
 
0.046 
C5 
R1={Agree}, 
R2={Neutral}, 
R3={Strongly Disagree}, 
R4={Neutral}, 
R5={Strongly Agree}, 
R6={Agree}, 
R7={Strongly Agree}, 
R8={Agree}, 
R9={Neutral} 
A1={36-40}, 
A2={three 
times per year}, 
A3={rarely}, 
A4={always} 
 
 
 
 
0.052 
 
TABLE IV.  
CONFUSION MATRIX 
 
Predicted Positive 
Predicted Negative 
Actual 
Positive 
True Positive (TP) = 41 
False Negative (FN) = 9 
Actual 
Negative 
False Positive (FP) = 3 
True Negative (TN) = 32 
 
As already mentioned, the model can also serve as a 
classifier for predicting the class attribute of criteria (Ci) as 
soon as new records of Ri and Ai are inserted into the 
database. In order to evaluate its classification effectiveness, 
we inserted additional records, derived from more 
questionnaires addressed to social media users, and we 
created the confusion matrix according to Table IV in order 
to estimate the precision and the recall of the classifier using 
the (2) and (3) [28]. 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
 
(3) 
 
The Precision results are quite satisfactory, while the 
Recall results can be further improved. The BN model sticks 
to the initially identified relationships, i.e., the ones that have 
been mined during the model training. Therefore, when new 
relationships, not previously identified, are added, they are 
not classified correctly. These records include values that are 
not frequent (e.g., A1={>50} and A4={always}), so they are 
not critical for decision making.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Consumers increasingly use social media to search for 
information, compare alternative products and services, and 
make decisions for activities such as travel planning and 
hotel selection. In this context, social media have gathered 
the research interest as a major form of eWOM to 
prospective travelers. In this paper, we proposed a BN model 
for modelling the role of social media in hotel selection. 
More 
specifically, 
we 
developed 
a 
3-layered 
BN 
corresponding to generic information, reasons for searching 
information to social media, and criteria for hotel selection 
respectively. In this way, the model is able to mine 
relationships and to compute the CPTs in order to reveal 
meaningful insights and predictions about the criteria of 
hotel selection given the use of social media and other 
information.  
The BN model was applied to a dataset of 360 social 
media users, derived from an associated questionnaire. 
According to the defined BN structure, all the CPTs were 
computed. We presented indicative examples of the 
outcome, i.e., the criteria with the highest and the lowest 
CPs. We also validated the model in terms of its precision 
and recall in predicting the most important hotel selection 
criteria when new records are inserted into the database. 
Regarding our future work, we plan to use more data 
analytics and machine learning methods and algorithms in 
order to mine hidden relationships among various attributes. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Moreover, we aim to use fuzzy pattern matching methods for 
mining also online review comments, as well as clustering 
and fuzzy sets qualitative analytics algorithms for extracting 
user profiling insights of hotel customers. These directions 
have the potential to further enhance decision making 
process in hotel management from both a marketing (e.g., 
revealing key groups of customers and target groups) and an 
operations management (e.g., for improving service quality if 
it receives negative review rating) perspective. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. A. Sparks, K. K. F. So, and G. L. Bradley, “Responding to 
negative online reviews: The effects of hotel responses on 
customer inferences of trust and concern,” Tour. Man., vol. 
53, pp. 74-85, 2016. 
[2] T. Radojevic, N. Stanisic, and N. Stanic, “Inside the rating 
scores: a multilevel analysis of the factors influencing 
customer satisfaction in the hotel industry,” Cornell Hosp. 
Quart., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 134-164, 2017. 
[3] J. Bulchand-Gidumal, S. Melián-González, and B. G. Lopez-
Valcarcel, “A social media analysis of the contribution of 
destinations to client satisfaction with hotels,” Int. J. of Hosp. 
Man., vol. 35, pp. 44-47, 2013. 
[4] W. G. Kim and S. A. Park, “Social media review rating versus 
traditional customer satisfaction,” Int. J. of Cont. Hosp. Man., 
vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 784-802, 2017. 
[5] I. C. C. Chan, L. W. Lam, C. W. Chow, L. H. N. Fong, and R. 
Law, “The effect of online reviews on hotel booking 
intention: The role of reader-reviewer similarity,” Int. J. of 
Hosp. Man., vol. 66, pp. 54-65, 2017. 
[6] S. Okazaki, L. Andreu, and S. Campo, “Knowledge sharing 
among tourists via social media: A comparison between 
Facebook and TripAdvisor,” Int. J. of Tour. Res., vol. 19, no. 
1, pp. 107-119, 2017. 
[7] M. Nilashi, O. Ibrahim, E. Yadegaridehkordi, S. Samad, E. 
Akbari, and A. Alizadeh, “Travelers decision making using 
online review in social network sites: A case on TripAdvisor,” 
J. of Comp. Sc., vol. 28, pp. 168-179, 2018. 
[8] W. Duan, Y. Yu, Q. Cao, and S. Levy, “Exploring the impact 
of social media on hotel service performance: A sentimental 
analysis approach,” Cornell Hosp. Quart., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 
282-296, 2016. 
[9] P. De Pelsmacker, S. Van Tilburg, and C. Holthof, “Digital 
marketing strategies, online reviews and hotel performance,” 
Int. J. of Hosp. Man., vol. 72, pp.  47-55, 2018. 
[10] Q. Ye, R. Law, B. Gu, and W. Chen, “The influence of user-
generated content on traveler behavior: An empirical 
investigation on the effects of e-word-of-mouth to hotel 
online bookings,” Comp. in Hum. Behav., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 
634-639, 2011. 
[11] M. Nilashi, E. Yadegaridehkordi, O. Ibrahim, S. Samad, A. 
Ahani, and L. Sanzogni, “Analysis of Travellers’ Online 
Reviews in Social Networking Sites Using Fuzzy Logic 
Approach,” Int. J. of Fuz. Sys., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1367-1378, 
2019. 
[12] E. Varkaris and B. Neuhofer, “The influence of social media 
on the consumers’ hotel decision journey,” J. of Hosp. and 
Tour. Tech., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 101-118, 2017. 
[13] V. Gupta, “The influencing role of social media in the 
consumer’s hotel decision-making process,” Worl. Hosp. and 
Tour. Them., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 378-391, 2019. 
[14] X. Y. Leung, B. Bai, and M. Erdem, “Hotel social media 
marketing: a study on message strategy and its effectiveness,” 
J. of Hosp. and Tour. Tech., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 239-255, 2017. 
[15] A. M. Munar and J. K. S. Jacobsen, “Motivations for sharing 
tourism experiences through social media,” Tour. Man., vol. 
43, pp. 46-54, 2014. 
[16] B. Zeng and R. Gerritsen, “What do we know about social 
media in tourism? A review,” Tour. Man. Persp., vol. 10, pp. 
27-36, 2014. 
[17] Z. Xiang, Q. Du, Y. Ma, and W. Fan, “A comparative 
analysis of major online review platforms: Implications for 
social media analytics in hospitality and tourism,” Tour. 
Man., vol. 58, pp. 51-65, 2017. 
[18] X. Wei, X. Luo, X., Q. Li, J. Zhang, and Z. Xu, “Online 
comment-based hotel quality automatic assessment using 
improved fuzzy comprehensive evaluation and fuzzy 
cognitive map,” IEEE Trans. on Fuzzy Sys., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 
72-84, 2015. 
[19] K. L. Xie, C. Chen, and S. Wu, “Online consumer review 
factors affecting offline hotel popularity: evidence from 
tripadvisor,” J. of Trav. & Tour. Mark., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 
211-223, 2016. 
[20] S. Molinillo, J. L. Ximénez-de-Sandoval, A. Fernández-
Morales, and A. Coca-Stefaniak, “Hotel assessment through 
social media: The case of TripAdvisor,” Tour. & Man. Stud., 
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 15-24, 2016. 
[21] M. L. Yadav and B. Roychoudhury, “Effect of trip mode on 
opinion about hotel aspects: A social media analysis 
approach,” Int. J. of Hosp. Man., vol. 80, pp. 155-165, 2019. 
[22] W. G. Kim and S. A. Park, “Social media review rating versus 
traditional customer satisfaction,” Int. J. of Cont. Hosp. Man., 
vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 784-802, 2017. 
[23] M. Schuckert, S. Liang, R. Law, and W. Sun, “How do 
domestic and international high-end hotel brands receive and 
manage customer feedback?,” Int. J. of Hosp. Man., vol. 77, 
pp. 528-537, 2019. 
[24] A. Tham, G. Croy, and J. Mair, “Social media in destination 
choice: Distinctive electronic word-of-mouth dimensions,” J. 
of Trav. & Tour. Mark., vol. 30, pp. 144-155, 2013. 
[25] J. Pearl, “Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: 
networks of plausible inference,” Elsevier, 2014. 
[26] T. D. Nielsen, and F. V. Jensen, “Bayesian networks and 
decision graphs,” Springer Science & Business Media, 2009. 
[27] A. Ankan, and A. Panda, “pgmpy: Probabilistic graphical 
models using python,” in Proceedings of the 14th Python in 
Science Conference (SCIPY 2015), Citeseer, vol. 10, 2015. 
[28] C. Goutte and E. Gaussier, “A probabilistic interpretation of 
precision, recall and F-score, with implication for evaluation,” 
in European conference on information retrieval, pp. 345-
359), Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

