ACCESS 2013
The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks
ISBN: 978-1-61208-286-8
July 21 - 26, 2013
Nice, France
ACCESS 2013 Editors
Alessandro Bogliolo, Università di Urbino, Italy

ACCESS 2013
Foreword
The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks (ACCESS 2013), held between July 21
and July 26, 2013 in Nice, France, continued a series of conferences dealing with access networks,
services and technologies based on the previous NEUTRAL and HOWAN workshop treating particular
access aspects. ACCESS 2012 aimed to provide an international forum by researchers, students, and
professionals to present recent research results on advances in networking access.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the ACCESS 2013 Technical
Program Committee, as well as all of the reviewers. The creation of such a high quality conference
program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also kindly thank all the authors
who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to ACCESS 2013. We truly believe that,
thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program consisted of top quality contributions.
Also, this event could not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the ACCESS 2013 organizing committee
for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this professional meeting a success.
We hope that ACCESS 2013 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas and
results between academia and industry and for the promotion of progress in the field of access
networks.
We are convinced that the participants found the event useful and communications very open.
We hope that Nice, France provided a pleasant environment during the conference and everyone saved
some time to enjoy the charm of this city.
ACCESS 2013 Chairs:
ACCESS Advisory Committee
Alessandro Bogliolo, Università di Urbino, Italy
Mark Perry, University of Western Ontario/Faculty of Law/ Faculty of Science - London, Canada
Abdulrahman Yarali, Murray State University, USA
ACCESS Special Area Chairs
Technical/Legal
Mark Perry, University of New England in Armidale, Australia
Wireless
Ljiljana Trajkovic, Simon Fraser University - Burnaby, Canada

ACCESS 2013
Committee
ACCESS Advisory Committee
Alessandro Bogliolo, Università di Urbino, Italy
Mark Perry, University of Western Ontario/Faculty of Law/ Faculty of Science - London, Canada
Abdulrahman Yarali, Murray State University, USA
ACCESS Special Area Chairs
Technical/Legal
Mark Perry, University of New England in Armidale, Australia
Wireless
Ljiljana Trajkovic, Simon Fraser University - Burnaby, Canada
ACCESS 2013 Technical Program Committee
Hojjat Adeli, The Ohio State University, USA
Konstantin Avratchenkov, INRIA, France
Michael Bahr, Siemens AG - Munich, Germany
Andrzej Beben, Warsaw University of Technology, Poland
Alessandro Bogliolo, Università di Urbino, Italy
Fernando Boronat Seguí, Polytechnic University of Valencia - Gandia, Spain
Alejandro Cordero, Amaranto Consultores, Spain
Istvan Frigyes, Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Hungary
Emiliano Garcia-Palacios, Queens University - Belfast, UK
Antonis M. Hadjiantonis, University of Cyprus, Cyprus
Tauseef Jamal, University Lusofona - Lisbon, Portugal
Georgios Karagiannis, University of Twente, The Netherland
Deepak Kataria, IPJunction Inc. - Bridgewater, USA
Gul Muhammad Khan, University of Engineering and Technology Peshawar, Pakistan
George Korinthios, COSMOTE - Mobile Telecommunications S.A. - Athens, Greece
Pandelis Kourtessis, University of Hertfordshire, U.K.
Trung-Thanh Le, Hanoi University of Natural Resources and Environment, Vietnam
Gyu Myoung Lee, Institut Telecom / Telecom SudParis, France
Yunxin (Jeff) Li, IP Australia, Australia
Enjie Liu, University of Bedfordshire, UK
Olaf Maennel, Loughborough University, UK
Amin Malekmohammadi, University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus, Malaysia
Zoubir Mammeri, IRIT - Paul Sabatier University - Toulouse, France
Elsa María Macías López, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
Jon Matias, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Spain

Jogesh K. Muppalla, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
Armando Nolasco Pinto, Instituto de Telecomunicações / Universidade de Aveiro, Portugal
Ronit Nossenson, Jerusalem College of Technology, Israel
George Oikonomou, University of Bristol, UK
Fragkiskos Papadopoulos, Cyprus University of Technology, Cyprus
Mark Perry, University of New England in Armidale, Australia
Serena Elisa Ponta, SAP Lab - Mougins, France
Germán Santos-Boada, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya-Barcelona TECH (UPC), Spain
Zsolt Saffer, Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BUTE) - Hungary
Bruno Sericola, INRIA, France
Dimitrios Serpanos, ISI / University of Patras, Greece
Xu Shao, Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
Eduardo James Pereira Souto, UFAM, Brazil
Álvaro Suárez Sarmiento, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
Ljiljana Trajkovic, Simon Fraser University - Burnaby, Canada
Rob van der Mei, CWI - Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Dario Vieira, EFREI, France
Wu Zhanji, Beijing University of Post and Telecommunication, China
Zuqing Zhu, University of Science and Technology of China, China

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Minimizing the Power by using Genetic Algorithms for Multi-User OFDM Systems
Abdourahmane Ndiaye, Samuel Ouya, Gervais Mendy, and Sidi Mohamed Farssi
1
Impact of Voice Payload Size on Behaviour of the Field Network of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic
Zuzana Vranova and Antonin Mazalek
6
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Minimizing the Power by using Genetic Algorithms
for Multi-User OFDM Systems
Ndiaye Abdourahmane, Ouya Samuel, Mendy Gervais and Farssi S. Mohamed
Ecole Sup´erieure Polytechnique de Dakar
Universit´e Cheikh Anta DIOP de Dakar
Dakar, Senegal
Email: rahabdou2003@yahoo.fr, samuel.ouya@gmail.com, gervaismendy@ucad.edu.sn, farsism@yahoo.com
Abstract—This paper considers the problem of minimizing
power consumption of the base station in the downlink of the
multi-user OFDM cellular network, characterized by frequency
selective transmission channel. The channel gain is variable and
speciﬁc for each user. In this case, the resources allocation must
be determined so that the total power consumption is as low as
possible. To solve this problem, we proposed an implementation
ofsome genetic algorithms and we obtained a better solution than
currently applied well-known methods.
Keywords—OFDM; Genetic Algorithms; Multi-User; Frequency
Selectivity; Resources Allocation
I.
INTRODUCTION
The second and third generation of cellular network are
characterized by single carrier transmission. For each user, one
subcarrier is used during the communication that often causes
lost of signal in the context of channel frequency selective.
However, in 4G cellular systems [13], the multi-carrier trans-
mission’s technique OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency Division
Multiplexing) [24] is used in order to ﬁght against multipath
phenomena and to provide a signiﬁcant throughput to users.
In the OFDM transmission technique, the total available band-
width is split into many narrow bands subchannels at equidis-
tant frequencies [21]. Each subchannel has approximately a
constant channel gain and the bit loading can be adjusted
according to the level of the channel gain.
The orthogonality of the subcarriers permits to reduce the
width of the transmission subchannels; thereby, increases the
spectral efﬁciency. The high number of the subcarriers makes
possible to perform a more effective management, by adapting
the subcarriers allocation according to the channel gain of the
users [22].
In the context of frequency selective channel, where the
channel gain is variable and speciﬁc for each user, the optimal
resources allocation is an optimization problem. The adaptive
resources allocation is a proposed method to improve the
performance of cellular systems. The adaptive allocation can
give 20dB of Signal-to-Noise-Ration in contrast to random
allocation [2].
In multi-users OFDM cellular systems, the resources al-
location consists in solving an optimization problem with
constraint. It takes the channel estimated characteristics. In
practice, the channel gain is given by receiver in logic channel
CQIH (Channel Quality Indicator Channel) [8]. Note that,
this optimization problem is highly nonlinear; therefore, it
is unlikely that the algorithm with polynomial complexity be
used [15].
Thus, several algorithms are developed for solving the
resources allocation problem. The water-ﬁlling algorithm pro-
posed by Tu et al. [23] proved to be optimal for solving
the power-minimizing problem in the single-user case. Im-
provements have been introduced by Qi et al. [3], and Munz
et al. [6], in order to reduce complexity of the water-ﬁlling
algorithm. The Greedy algorithm proved to be optimal to solve
the bit loading algorithm in single-user case [12]. However,
the problem of resources allocation becomes very complex
in multi-user OFDM systems. Wong et al. [4] proposed a
suboptimal method to allocate subcarriers, but the method
requires iterative process and the foreknown required number
of subcarriers allocated to users [9]. Kim et al. [14] converted
the non-linear optimization problem into a linear one with
integer variables. The optimal solution can be achieved by
integer programming (IP), but its computation is still very huge
[9].
In this context, the evolutionary approach inspired by
natural phenomena are introduced to improve the resources
allocation [7]. Among this methods, we propose in this paper
to solve the optimization problem with GAs (Genetic Algo-
rithms). The main objective of this work is to propose an
implementation of some GAs in order to have better results.
In Section 2, the related work about resources allocation
is described. In Section 3, the modeling system and the
formulation of the optimization problem are presented. In
Section 4, the principle of genetic algorithms is given and
in Section 5, the proposed algorithm is described. Finally, in
Section 6, we compare the results of the proposed algorithm
to others algorithms.
II.
RELATED WORK
Genetic algorithms belong to the family of evolutionary
algorithms inspired by biology. It is ﬁrst introduced by H.
Holand [11] and implemented by D. Goldberg [7] for solving
optimization problems. Since the GAs is an effective search
technique, it has been applied to wireless communications
recently [1][5][20][17].
Most of the work based on the genetic algorithms use the
same procedure. However, the difference lies in the imple-
mentation and the method of GAs’s operators. In the work
proposed by Zhu et al. [18], the natural selection’s method
is used, while it accelerates the algorithm but not ensure
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks

converging towards the global optimum [16]. In this paper,
we used the method of selection by tournament, that keeps
diversity of the population during the process and allows a
better exploration of the search domain [10].
In many proposed implementation, the constraint of the
optimization problem is considered in the evaluation of the
ﬁtness (objective function) of individual. This can deplete the
population and limits the exploration of the search domain.
In our proposed implementation, the ﬁtness is only based on
the power according to equation (4). To meet the constraints
of the optimization problem, we deﬁned the function named
adjust allocation so as to balance the throughput of users.
III.
SYSTEM MODELING AND FORMULATION OF THE
PROBLEM
A. System modeling
We consider an OFDM multiple access system, in which
the characteristics of transmission channel are assumed known
by the transmitter and the receiver. The channel is assumed to
be linear and stationary, with additive white gaussian noise of
zero mean. It is decomposed into N ﬂat subchannels and each
of which is characterized by a constant gain, speciﬁc for the
nth subcarrier and the kth user.
The transmission channel is frequency selective, and we
assume that the users are in micro-mobility; therefore, the
Doppler effect is ignored. We note that, there are no inter-
symbol interferences, since subcarrier is allocated to a single
user. We consider the mono cellular system. The number of
users and subcarriers is constant during the GAs process.
B. Formulation of the problem
The channel of transmission is frequency selective. It can
be considered as a ﬁlter, characterized by the transfer function
varying with frequencies and of each user. The magnitude of
the transfer function corresponds to the gain of the transmis-
sion channel.
Let Hk,n the channel gain of the kth user on the nth
subcarrier. The required power is given by Proakis [19]:
pk,n = f(ck,n)
H2
k,n
(1)
where
f(ck,n) = N0
3 (2ck,n − 1)[Q−1(BERk
4
)]2
(2)
ck,n is the number of bits for the kth user on the nth
subcarrier. N0 is the power spectral density of the noise.
BERk is the bits error rate of the kth user. Q(x) = erfc(x)
is the complementary error function.
Note that, when the channel gain Hk,n increases, the power
required decreases. Thus, the nth subcarrier will be allocated
in preference to the kth user having the smallest power to
achieve the required throughput. As the number of subcarriers
is high, it is not necessary that many users share the same
subcarrier (Time Division Mutliplexing). In addition, the inter-
symbol interferences can be avoided when one subcarrier is
exclusively allocated to one user.
Let ρk,n the allocation factor of the nth subcarrier to the
kth user deﬁned by:
ρk,n =

1
if the nth subcarrier is allocated to the kth user
0
else
(3)
The total power allocated to the kth user is given by:
Pk =
N
X
n=1
pk,n.ρk,n =
N
X
n=1
f(ck,n)
H2
k,n
.ρk,n
(4)
Thus, the total power allocated to all users is given by:
PT =
K
X
k=1
Pk =
K
X
k=1
N
X
n=1
f(ck,n)
H2
k,n
.ρk,n
(5)
The total bits for the kth user is given by:
rk =
N
X
n=1
ck,n.ρk,n
(6)
The equation (1) shows that the required power for the
kth user on the nth subcarrier is inversely proportional to the
channel gain Hk,n. Therefore, it is more efﬁcience to allocate
the nth subcarrier to the kth user which presents the smallest
channel gain Hk,n. Thereby, the power can be minimized while
the constraints of QoS are satisﬁed.
Thus, the problem of resources allocation can be written:
min(PT )
subject to
rk > r0
where r0 is the minimal rate for the kth user.
IV.
GENETIC ALGORITHMS
Genetic algorithms are inspired by Darwin’s theory of evo-
lution and by Mendel’s works about recombination of species
[16]. GAs are used to solve many problems of optimization.
Robustness is the main advantage of genetic algorithms
relative to traditional resolution methods of optimization pro-
blems [7]. In other words, we can see the four major diffe-
rences between the two methods:
1)
GAs work with a coding of the set of parameters,
while the classical methods use directly the parame-
ters.
2)
The solution given by GAs is a set of points (chro-
mosomes) and the solution for a classical methods is
a single point.
3)
GAs use the objective function and the standards
methods often use derivatives of function or other
auxiliary knowledge.
4)
Gas use probabilistic transition rules when the tradi-
tional methods use deterministic rules.
The principle of GAs is based on the evolution of an initial
population under the effect of operators such as selection,
mutation and crossover. At the end of the GAs’s process, the
best individual in the population will be the solution of the
optimization problem.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks

The different phases of the GAs are:
•
Coding of chromosome
A chromosome of the population represents a resource
allocation scheme. The coding of the chromosome is
to provide a structure corresponding to the resource al-
location problem. In our implementation, chromosome
is represented by an array of structure, containing a
ﬁxed number of subcarriers, numbered in increasing
order, from 0 to N − 1. In the nth cell, there are
the index of the user to which the corresponding
subcarrier is allocated. The required power and the
quantity of bits are calculated from this allocation for
every user. All chromosomes have the same ﬁxed size
which corresponds to the total number of subcarriers.
The following table shows an example of the structure
of the chromosomes .
TABLE I.
STRUCTURE OF CHROMOSOME
Subcarrier
1
2
- - -
N
User
5
3
- - -
10
•
Initialization of the population
It consists to set the size of the population and
to generate all chromosomes of the population. In
this work, the chromosomes of the population are
randomly generated and their size is the same and
stays constant during the GAs process.
•
Evaluation
In this function, the total required power and the
total throughput are calculated for each chromosome.
The required power corresponds to a ﬁtness (objective
function) of the chromosome. The ﬁtness or the objec-
tive function represents the criterion of the selection
of chromosomes.
•
Selection
After evaluating the power of all chromosomes, the
selection consists to retain the best chromosome by di-
rectly sorting (natural selection) or by organizing tour-
nament between two chromosomes arbitrary selected
(selection by tournament). The best chromosome of
the population is the one that the requires power is the
smallest while respecting the constraint of throughput.
•
Mutation
It consists to bring changes to the resources allocation
scheme in order to have a better exploration of the
search domain. In this work, the number of mutations
and the index of the mutated subcarrier are randomly
determined for each chromosome. Note that, all chro-
mosomes will not be affected by the mutation.
•
Crossover
In this step, a new chromosome is created from two
chromosomes in order to take advantages of their
best characters. Two points of crossover are randomly
chosen and two parts of the ﬁrst chromosome are
concatenated with one part of the second chromosome.
So, a new chromosome is created from this concate-
nation.
V.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
input:
NCarrier: number of subcarriers
NUser: number of users
Sizepop : size of the poplutation
Ngen:number of generation of the GAs process
Step 1: Coding of chromosome
Structure subcarrier{
user
power
bit
}
chrom[NCarrier] //vector of subcarriers
Step 2: Initialization population
for t = 1 to Sizepop
for n = 0 to NCarrier − 1
{
k ← rand(NUser)
chrom[t].user ← k
chrom[t].bit ← c[k][n]
chrom[t].power ← f(c[k][n], H[k][n]) // According to equa-
tion 1.
} Step 3: Evaluation chromosome
for i = 1 to Sizepop
{
Pchrom(i) ← 0 // Initialization the power of the chromosome
for n = 0 to NCarrier − 1
{
Pchrom(i) ← Pchrom(i) + chrom[n].power
}
}
Step 4: Selection by tournament
c1 ← rand(Sizepop)
c2 ← rand(Sizepop)
p1 ← Pchrom(c1)
p2 ← Pchrom(c2)
if p1 < p2 then // chrom c1 better than chrom c2
population next generation ← chrom[c1]
else // chrom c2 better than chrom c1
population next generation ← chrom[c2]
Step 5: Mutation
nchrom ← rand(Sizepop) // number of chromosome
to mutate
for i = 0 to nchrom
{
c1 ← rand(Sizepop) // chromosome’s index
nmutation ← rand(Sizepop/8) // number of mutation
for j = 1 to nmutation
{
n ← rand(NCarrier)
chrom[i].user ← rand(NUser) // changes of user allocation
}
Step 6: Crossover
c1 ← rand(Sizepop)
c2 ← rand(Sizepop)
pc1 ← rand(NCarrier) // ﬁrst crossover point
pc2 ← rand(NCarrier) // second crossover point
offspring ← concatenate(chrom[c1], chrom[c2], pc1, pc2)
Step 4 to 6 are repeated until the number of generation Ngen
is reached
Step 7: Search best chromosome
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks

best chrom ← 1
for k = 2 to Sizepop
{
if Pchrom(k) > Pchrom(best chrom)
best chrom ← k
}
Step 8: Adjust allocation
In this step, the best allocation scheme resulting from the
GAs process, is adjusted in order to achieve the throughput
constraint. In this paper, the throughput constraint is not
considered in the calculation of the objective function. Here,
the proposed solution of the genetic algorihms is only based
on the criterion of the power and requires to be eventually
adjusted.
VI.
SIMULATION
A. Parameters simulation
•
BER (Bit Error Rate): 10−2 to 10−4
•
M-QAM: M in {4, 8, 16, 32, 64} M is the parameter
of the modulation QAM (Quadrature Amplitude Mo-
dulation). It corresponds to the number of symbols of
the modulation. M equal to 2n where n is the number
of bits per symbol.
•
Power spectral density of the noise: N0 = 0.01
•
Number of subcarriers: 128
•
Size of the population: 200
•
Symbols rate: 14kbauds (3GPP Standard)
•
Minimal user’s rate: r0 = 750kbits/s. It is calculated
according to the number of subcarriers and the number
of users.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
frequency index
channel gain
0.0
0.4
0.8
Figure 1. Variation of channel gain of one user
B. Results of simulation
50
100
150
200
0.080
0.090
Nb. of Generations
Total Power (Watts)
Figure 2. Convergence of our algorithm with 8 users, 128
subcarriers and N0 = 0.0001.
50
100
150
200
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
Nb. of Generations
Total Power (Watts)
Figure 3. Convergence of our algorithm with 8 users, 128
subcarriers and N0 = 0.01.
0
50
100
200
300
5
6
7
8
9
Population’s size
Total Power (Watts)
Figure 4. Variation of total power with different size of the
population with 8 users, 128 subcarriers and N0 = 0.01.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks

TABLE II.
COMPARISON OF OUR ALGORITHM AND THE ALGORITHM
PROPOSED BY AHMADI ET AL. [1] WITH N0 = 0.0001
2 users
4 users
8 users
Our algorithm
0.01w
0.022w
0.061w
Ahmadi and Chew
0.03 w
0.05 w
0.12 w
TABLE III.
COMPARISON OF OUR ALGORITHM AND THE ALGORITHM
PROPOSED BY REDDY ET AL. [20] WITH N0 = 0.01
2 users
4 users
6 users
8 users
Our algorithm
0.98 w
2.09 w
3.77 w
5.68 w
GaReddy
5w
8 w
12w
15w
C. Analysis of results
The study of the evolution of the power, according to
the number of generations (Figure 2), shows that the power
remains relatively constant from the 80th generation and the
corresponding resources allocation scheme is the solution of
the optimization. Figure 4 shows some problems of conver-
gence of the proposed algorithm; however, the total power
decreases when the size of population increases. We also note
that the result is better with large population size. The GAs that
we implemented, gives better results than baseline algorithms
met in the literature. The Tables II and III above, compare the
consumption of the power for different numbers of users of the
algorithm proposed in this work to the algorithms developed
by Ahmadi et al. [1] and by Reddy et al. [20].
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have implemented the genetic algorithms
to solve the problem of resources allocation in a frequency
selective transmission channel. The implementation of the
GAs that we proposed is characterized by the function named
adjusted allocation which permits to balance the resources
allocation scheme of the obtained solution. The implementa-
tion of the proposed GAs in this paper gives better result than
the algorithm proposed by Ahmadi et al. [1] and the algorithm
proposed by Reddy et al. [20]. We have implemented the
proposed GAs in this paper in C language, which gives us
a good modeling. We hope that the execution of our model
will be faster than others tools as Matlab or Scilab. In future
works, we will try to improve the convergence of the proposed
GAs.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Ahmadi and Y. Chew.
”Adaptive subcarrier-and-bit allocation in
multiclass multi-user ofdm systems using genetic algorithms”. In Proc.
IEEE Symp. Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, pp.
1883–1887, Tokyo, Japan, Sept. 2009.
[2]
M. Alouini and A. Goldsmith. ”Adaptive m-qam modulation over nak-
agami fading channels”. In IEEE Global Communications Conference,
pp. 218–223, 1997.
[3]
Q. An and Y. Yang.
”Efﬁcient water-ﬁlling algorithm for power
allocation in ofdm-based cognitive radio systems”.
In International
Conference on Systems and Informatics, pp. 2069–2073, Yantai,China,
May 2012. IEEE.
[4]
C. Wong, K. Lataef, R. Cheng and R. March. ”Multi-user ofdm with
adaptive subcarrier, bit, and power allocation”. vol. 17, pp. 1747–1758,
Oct. 1999.
[5]
C. Ergun and K. Hacioglu.
”Multi-user detection using a genetic
algorithms in cdma communications systems”. In IEEE Transmission
Communication, vol. 48, pp. 1374–1383, Aug. 2000.
[6]
G. Munz, S. Pleftschinger and J. Speidel.
”An efﬁcient waterﬁlling
algorirhm for multiple access ofdm”. In Proc. Global Telecommunica-
tions, vol. 1, pp. 681–685, Stuttgart Germany, 2002. IEEE.
[7]
D. E. Goldberg.
Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and
Machine Learning. MA Addison Wesley, USA, 1th edition, 1989.
[8]
GRETSI.
Rappot colloque gretsi sur l’ofdm.
Technical report,
Laboratoire ETIS CNRS, Universit´e de Cergy-Pontoise, France, 2007.
[9]
H. Gong, W. Ye, S. Feng and H. Song.
”A subcarrier allocation
algorithm for efﬁciently reducing power in multi-user ofdm systems”.
In Springer, Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 40, pp. 233–243,
Jan. 2007.
[10]
R. Haupt and S. Haupt. Pratical Genetic Algorithms. John Wiley and
Sons, New Jersey, 2th edition, 2004.
[11]
J. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial systems. Univ. Michigan
Press, USA, 1th edition, 1975.
[12]
D. Hughes-Hartogs and M. Hill.
Ensemble modern structure for
imperfect transmission media. USA, 1989. US patent 4833706.
[13]
I. Akyildiz, D. Estevez and E. Reyes. ”A subcarrier allocation algorithm
for efﬁciently reducing power in multi-user ofdm systems”. vol. 3, pp.
217–244, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, United
States, Dec. 2010.
[14]
I. Kim, B. Kim, H. Lee and H. Lee. On the use of linear programming
for dynamic subchannel and bit allocation in multi-user ofdm. In IEEE
Global Telecommunications Conference, vol. 6, pp. 3648–3652, Nov.
2001.
[15]
T. Ibaraki and N. Katoh. Ressource Allocation Problems Algorithmic
Approches. 1988.
[16]
M. Melanie. An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms. MIT Press, USA,
1th edition, 1999.
[17]
N. Surajudeen, Z. Xu, G. Jingbo, and A. Nandi. ”Genetic algorithms
based equalization for direct sequence ultra-wideband communications
systems”. In IEEE WCNC 2009, pp. 1–5, Budapest, Apr. 2008.
[18]
N. Zhou, X. Zhu,
and Y. Huang. ”Genetic algorithms based cross-
layer resource allocation for wireless ofdm networks with heterogeneous
trafﬁc”. In 17th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO
2009), pp. 1656–1659, Glasgow, Scotland, Aug. 2009.
[19]
J. G. Proakis. Digital Communications. McGraw Hill, New York USA,
4th edition, 2001.
[20]
Y. Reddy and N. Gajendar. Evolutionary aproach for efﬁcient resource
allocation in multi-user ofdm systems. Journal of Communications, vol.
2, No. 5, pp. 42–48, Aug. 2007.
[21]
H. Rohling. OFDM: Concepts for Future Communications Systems.
Springer, Hamburg Germany, 2011.
[22]
H. Schulze and C. Luders.
Theory and Apllication of OFDM and
CDMA. John Wiley and Sons Ltd, Germany, 1th edition, 2005.
[23]
J. Tu and J. Ciofﬁ. ”A loading algorithm for the concatenation of coset
codes with multichannel modulation method”. In IEEE GLOBECOM,
vol. 2, pp. 1183–1187, Dec. 1990.
[24]
Y. Bouguen, E. Hardouin and F. Wolff. LTE et les r´eseaux 4G. Groupe
Eyrolles, 1 edition, 2012.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks

Impact of Voice Payload Size on Behaviour of the Field Network of the Armed 
Forces of the Czech Republic 
 
Zuzana Vranova, Antonin Mazalek 
Faculty of Military Technology 
University of Defence 
Brno, Czech Republic 
zuzana.vranova@unob.cz; antonin.mazalek@unob.cz 
 
 
Abstract - This article deals with a choice of voice payload size 
and its impact on the behavior of the field network of the 
Armed Forces of the Czech Republic. The contradictory 
requirements for a high throughput and at the same time a 
high quality of transmitted voice are discussed. First, a 
theoretical analysis of the problem is carried out. The 
theoretical assumptions were compared with those obtained in 
experiments in laboratory conditions. The result of the 
experiments is to determine the optimal size of the voice 
payload size with regard to the specific characteristics and 
requirements on the battlefield. According to the results we 
can recommend an optimal voice payload size with respect to 
the G.114 Recommendation. Thus up to 80 % of bandwidth 
saving will be achieved.   
Keywords – VoIP; voice payload size; network bandwidth; 
battlefield 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Army of the Czech Republic has recently completed 
modernization of communication infrastructure of the field 
network. According to current trends in the world 
communications, the backbone of battlefield is based on the 
transmission of information using the IP protocol, published 
by Postel [1]. After overcoming primary difficulties, the 
modernization brought a stable network enabling the use of a 
number of new advanced services. A major benefit of the 
field network modernization with regard to its specific 
character is a possibility of an easy and secure encryption of 
a data and voice traffic. The basic building components of 
the backbone are Cisco 2800 and 3800 series routers that use 
the services of Cisco CallManager Express (CCME) [2] for 
the providing of voice services on the VoIP principles. 
Particular communication nodes are connected by radiorelay 
links realizing the E1 interface [3]. 
With 
today's 
technical 
possibilities 
of 
digitized 
battlefield, a bigger focus is getting on the network 
bandwidth. In addition, a number of applications require a 
real-time operation. With regard to this trend, the E1 
interface with a capacity of 2 Mb/s represents a weak point 
of the network. Therefore, it is necessary to find a solution to 
make the transmission of the required information more 
efficient. 
There are many possibilities on how to solve the problem 
always with regard to the specifics of the analyzed network. 
Choudhury and Gibson [4] deal with the issue of 
effectiveness of multimedia transport in wireless access 
networks. Specifically, the work deals with the possibility of 
optimizing the efficiency of transmission, depending on the 
choice of transmission rate and payload length in IEEE 
802.11 network. Bhanu, Chandrasekaran, and Balakrishnan 
[5] solve security of the required quality of services in VoIP 
802.11 environment. A Bandwidth Data rate Moderation 
(BDM) algorithm has been proposed which correlates the 
data rate specified in IEEE 802.11b with the free bandwidth. 
Payload size is one of the input parameters of the BDM 
algorithm. The way to make the data transfer at a tactical 
command level more efficient by a header compression 
technique is addressed in the article of Yoon, Park, Lee, 
Kim, and Jee [6]. Nowadays, modern VoIP networks place 
attention to safety issues and therefore the voice encryption. 
Epiphaniou [7] addresses among others the influence of the 
used encryption and voice payload size on the delay and 
packet loss. All considered changes need to be addressed 
with regard to the required voice quality. For example, the 
voice quality expressed in Mean Opinion Score (MOS) in 
dependence on voice payload size and packet loss is engaged 
in the publication of Becvar, Vondra, and Novak [8].  
Unlike those publications, we examine specific real 
network with sufficiently dimensioned HardWare (HW) 
because of increased requirements on network reliability. We 
need not, therefore, deal with the impact of packet loss on 
speech quality. In addition, the network uses external 
encryption equipment with sufficient packet throughput. 
These facts allow us to simplify the initial conditions for the 
experiments.  
The weak point of the analyzed network are the 
radiorelay links realizing the E1 interface. So, the main goal 
of our work is to optimize efficiency of transmission of VoIP 
data on E1 links. Furthermore, we use the fact that the E1 
interface uses specific data link layer protocols different 
from the protocols considered in the above publications.  
The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, 
we present factors affecting the level of savings in 
bandwidth. In Section 3, there is explained a principle of 
bandwidth calculation for one call in VoIP environment 
when voice payload size is explored. In Section 4, results of 
voice payload size optimization in battlefield conditions are 
shown. In Section 5, we outline our conclusions and we 
mention our future work. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks

II. 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE LEVEL OF SAVINGS IN 
BANDWIDTH 
Nowadays, there are many views how to optimally solve 
existence of two contradictory requirements on the most 
efficient use of bandwidth on one hand, and, on the other 
hand, provision of the high quality voice in the VoIP 
environment. The rule is that a codec type significantly 
affects the quality of provided services and the required 
bandwidth. Its parameters, such as a codec sample interval 
(CSI), a codec sample size (CSS), are given the same as a 
value of Mean Opinion Score (MOS) for the default type of 
codec. Based on the codec, CSI is a sample interval at which 
the codec operates and CSS is the number of bytes captured 
by the Digital Signal Processor (DSP) at each codec sample 
interval. From these two parameters, we can derive another 
parameter. It is a codec bit rate (CBR) (1) 
 
CBR = CSS / CSI  [b/s]. 
(1) 
MOS is a result of subjective or objective methods of 
speech quality assessment as Bestak, Vranova, and Ondryhal 
refer [9]. Its values and interpretation are shown in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
MOS SPEECH QUALITY CLASSIFICATION 
MOS 
Quality 
Note 
5 
Excellent 
Excellent speech quality 
4 
Good 
Quality comparable to analogue phone networks 
3 
Fair 
Fair speech quality 
2 
Poor 
Poor speech quality 
1 
Bad 
Unintelligiblecall 
 
If we use two of the most common codec types, thus 
G.711 and G.729 codecs, the MOS can reach values up to 
4.1 and 3.9.  
Note: Due to complexity of nowadays networks, the 
MOS parameter is no longer sufficient and has been replaced 
by R-factor, which is more suitable for IP networks. The R-
factor is the output of the E-model (according to ITU-T 
G.107). 
In the next step, it is needed to consider a possibility of 
application of header compression mechanisms or Voice 
Activity Detection (VAD) techniques. Header compression 
is possible only when the point-to-point communication 
occurs. By default, the use of the efficient compression of 
IP/UDP/RTP headers is used according to Casner and  
Jacobson in RFC 2508 [10] and Bormann, et al. in RFC 3095 
[11]. It reduces the headers up to 2 or 4 bytes. It is not 
suitable to use this mechanism directly over the Ethernet. 
However, we can use encapsulation using a Point-to-Point 
Protocol (PPP) according to Simpson [12]. PPP provides 
standard services for transmission of different formats of 
datagrams through serial lines (RFC 1661). PPP is one of the 
Layer 2 protocols which can also compress the headers in 
some cases. 
VAD is a mechanism that certainly saves bandwidth. 
However at the same time, it places greater demands on 
implementation in the terminal equipment. In many cases, 
the active VAD can result in losses of beginnings of call 
segments, which greatly decrease quality of voice services. 
For more complex services, the VAD implementation can 
even bring errors and cause problems with operation of more 
complex services. We had such specific experience when we 
deployed faxes in the field VoIP network.  
Another factor that must be considered when optimizing 
the size of the payload is loading of a router. A large number 
of short packets are right for real-time applications with 
respect to small delay but it increases an overhead and 
computational demands imposed on the routers. A large 
number of shorter packets and necessity of their processing 
in nodes paradoxically leads gradually to an increase of the 
total delay in transmission, in the next step to packet losses 
and thus to further deterioration of the voice quality and to 
the flooding of the nodes and a link failure. 
Other parameters describing transmission conditions in 
the particular VoIP network are Voice Payload Size (VPS) 
(By), Voice Payload Interval (VPI) (ms) and Packets Per 
Seconds (PPS). The voice payload size represents the 
number of bytes (or bits) that are filled into a packet. The 
voice payload size must be a multiple of the codec sample 
size. The voice payload interval is processed length of a 
voice segment inserted into one sent packet. PPS represents 
the number of packets that need to be transmitted every 
second in order to deliver the codec bit rate. Just these 
parameters can be varied to optimize network throughput and 
the voice quality, respectively to look for the best 
compromise with regard to specifics of the analysed 
network. 
With regard to the facts mentioned above, there can be 
defined initial conditions for optimization of transfer 
characteristics of the analysed field network as follows: the 
mechanism of headers compression is not used, VAD is set, 
the G.729 codec is used. A computing power of routers with 
regard to the adequate field network dimensioning is not 
discussed. A weak point of the field network is the E1 lines. 
Of possible solutions, we focus on the influence of payload 
size on the behaviour of the analysed network in our work. 
We will examine effectiveness of transfer on Layer 3 with 
respect to the payload size. For now, we will not consider the 
influence of Layer 2 to which is applied the High Level Data 
Link Control (HDLC) protocol. Whether the results are 
relevant even after consideration of the characteristics of 
HDLC protocol will be verified in the next part of the 
project. 
A. Characteristics of the G.729codec 
The G.729 codecs are often deployed in VoIP networks 
in order to save the bandwidth. For example, Cisco 
technology uses them as a default set in the outgoing 
direction from the network. In order to save the bandwidth, 
the G.729 codec is also used as a default set in the analysed 
army field network. 
The G.729 codec is specified in ITU-T Recommendation 
G.729 [13]. Coding of speech is at 8 kbit/s using Conjugate 
Structure – Algebraic Code Excited Linear Prediction (CS-
ACELP). A reduced – complex vision of the G.729 
algorithm is specified in Annex A to Rec. G.729. The speech 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks

coding algorithms in the main body of G.729 and in G.729 
Annex A are fully interoperable with each other. An 
implementation that signals or accepts use of the G.729 
payload format may implement either G.729 or G.729A. The 
G.729 and G.729 Annex A codecs were optimized to 
represent speech with high quality where G.729 Annex A 
transmits some speech quality for an approximate 50% 
complexity reduction. For all data rates, the sampling 
frequency (and RTP timestamp clock rate) is 8000 Hz. The 
Voice Activity Detector (VAD) and the Comfort Noise 
Generator (CNG) algorithm in Annex B of G.729 are 
recommended for digital simultaneous voice and data 
application. An example of G.729 and G.729A bit packing 
according to ITU-T Recommendation G.729 is in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.   Example of G.729 and G.729A bit packing. 
 
The transmitted parameters of a G.729/G.729A are 10 
ms frame, consisting of 80 bits. The mapping of these 
parameters is given on the Figure 1. The bits of each 32-bit 
word are numbered from 0 to 31, with the most significant 
bit on the left and numbered 0. The octets (bytes) of each 
word are transmitted with the most significant octet first. 
 
III. 
CALCULATION OF ONE CALL BANDWIDTH IN VOIP 
ENVIRONMENT 
In theoretical calculations of bandwidth required for one 
call, it is necessary to know particular operating technology, 
including protocols employed in each level of the 
communication model. 
Bandwidth calculation formulas in general [14]: 
 
TPS = L2H + OH + VPS  [By], 
(2) 
 
PPS = CBR / VPS  [1/s], 
(3) 
 
Bandwidth = TPS * PPS  [b/s], 
(4) 
where: L2H 
is Layer 2 header 
TPS  
is Total Packet Size 
 
OH 
is overhead of IP/UDP/RTP headers. 
 
Since different systems differ in Layer 2 protocols the 
most frequently, an operational efficiency is evaluated at 
Layer 3. Here, we are dealing with overhead of IP/UDP/RTP 
headers. Layer 2 has often a major impact on the efficiency 
of transmission. We considered the effect of Layer 2 in the 
previous work [15], when we analysed the effect of network 
load on the voice quality. We interconnected two LAN 
networks using 2811 Cisco routers. The routers were 
connected through the Catalyst 2950 Switch via Ethernet in a 
mode of full duplex at 10 Mb/s. This link represents a critical 
point of the network because of its slow speed. We 
calculated the theoretical value of how many simultaneous 
calls can be transferred over a tested line, so we needed to 
know the bandwidth required for one call. 
In this case, we used (see Figure 2): 
• 
G.711 codec 
• 
Sampling frequency = 8000 Hz 
• 
VPI = 30 ms 
• 
VPS = 240 By 
• 
Layer 3 headers = IP header 20 By  + UDP header 8 
By + RTP header 12 By = 40By 
• 
Layer 2 (Ethernet) header = 38 By (8 By of preamble, 
14 By of the source and destination MAC addresses 
and the length, 4 By of CRC, 12 By of interframe 
gap). 
Note: Possibility of VAD usage and header compression 
is not considered. 
 
 
Figure 2.   Necessary overhead for transmissionof one 30 ms voice 
segment. 
 
According to (2), (3) and (4), we need bandwidth for 
transmission of one voice channel: 
TPS = (38 + 40 + 240) = 318 By, 
PPS = 64000 / 240 * 8 =  33.333  1/s, 
One call bandwidth = 318 * 8 * 33.333 = 84800 b/s. 
 
We get interesting results to the effectiveness of 
bandwidth usage when using the G.729 codec and the same 
VPI = 30 ms, so VPS = 30 By: 
TPS = (38 + 40 + 30) = 108 By, 
PPS = 8000 / 30 * 8 = 33.333  1/s, 
One call bandwidth = 108 * 8 * 33.333 = 28800 b/s. 
 
Thus by changing of the codec type will be saved about 
2/3 of the bandwidth with slight deterioration of the voice 
quality (measured by MOS or R - Factor). 
IV. 
RESULTS OF VOICE PAYLOAD SIZE OPTIMIZATION IN 
FIELD NETWORK CONDITIONS 
In the previous section, we set the initial conditions for 
the theoretical part and following experiments. Relations   
(2-4) allowing calculation of required bandwidth for a single 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks

call at Layer 3 are the starting point.  VPS is one of variable 
parameters. Cisco routers allow setting of different values of 
VPS within 10 to 240 ms [10]. Figure 3 shows the 
dependence of the required bandwidth for one call with the 
G.729 codec on selected VPS. 
 
 
Figure 3.   Dependence of one call bandwidth on VPS – G.729 codec. 
 
The curves are not linear. Comparing low values of VPS 
to higher ones, it is evident that the significantly larger 
bandwidth to transfer one call is needed for low values.  
From the values of VPS = 100 ms, use efficiency of 
transmission line is almost the same. In this case, the 
required bandwidth for one call ranges around value of 11,2 
kbit/s. 
The default VPS value for Cisco equipment is VPS = 20 
ms which corresponds to the bandwidth = 24 kbit/s. Thus, an 
appropriate setup of VPS can significantly affect the level of 
use of the transmission line. 
Dependence of number of packets generated by end-
terminal on the value of VPS is shown on Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.   Dependence of number of sent packets on VPS. 
 
Again, dependence is not linear. The VPS increase 
causes a significant reduction in the computational load of 
network nodes. As stated previously, we solve two 
contradictory requirements, saving of the bandwidth and 
minimum delay to obtain the good voice quality. It is logical 
that increase of the VPS takes effect in the increase of round 
trip delay. Round trip delay consists of the sum of the 
specific delays. VPS resize directly affects two of them and 
that packet delay and delay in buffers of end-terminals. (The 
buffers eliminate jitter.) 
The VPS increase of 10 By corresponds to the VPI 
change to 10 ms. Therefore, delay in one channel (packet 
delay and delay in buffers) is increased by 20 ms, in the loop 
by 40 ms. G.114 recommendation sets the maximum round 
trip delay = 300 ms. The increase by 40 ms for each VPS 
increase by 10 By cannot be ignored. The dependence of rise 
of round trip delay on VPS is shown on Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.   Dependence of rise of round trip delay on VPS. 
 
With regard to the obtained results, we recommend 
choosing a compromise between the size of the VPS and the 
considered delay as follows: VPS = 60 By saves bandwidth 
by 80% with predictable delay in the loop = 240 ms. 
Therefore, we keep a sufficient reserve for possible increase 
of delay in the nodes and transmit delay. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
When analysing the field network, we focused on its weak 
points. One of them is the bandwidth of E1 links. Although, 
the network uses the VAD mechanism and efficient G.729 
codec to reduce the load generated by voice streams, we 
were looking for other options to streamline the voice 
traffic. We focused on verification of bandwidth depending 
on the voice payload size. From the calculations, it is clear 
that for small values of VPS, operation is very inefficient. In 
the next step, we evaluated a relation between VPS and 
round trip delay. We recommended VPS = 60 ms as the 
optimal value with respect to the G.114 Recommendation. 
Bandwidth saving up to 80 % can be done by this setting 
compared to the VPI default value = 20 ms. All 
consideration were carried out only at Layer 3 protocols.  
Since transmission protocols of the Layer 2 have a 
significant impact on efficiency, we will focus our future 
work on this issue. In particular, we will test the operation of 
the field network for HDLC and PPP protocols. 
 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks

REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Postel, “Internet protocol,” Network Working Groupe, 
Request for Comments: 791, September. 1981. 
[2] “Cisco Unified Communications Manager Express System 
Administrator Guide,” Cisco, Document ID: OL-10663-03, 
March. 2013. 
[3] “Physical/electrical characteristics of hierarchical digital 
interfaces,” ITU-T, G.703, November. 2001. 
[4] S. Choudhury and J. D. Gibson, “Payload length and rate 
adaptation for multimedia communications in wireless 
LANs,” 
in 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communications, vol. 25, no. 4,  May. 2007, pp. 796–807. 
ISSN 07338716. 
[5] S. Vijay Bhanu, RM. Chandrasekaran, and V. Balakrishnan,  
“Effective Bandwidth Utilization in IEEE802.11 for VOIP,” 
in Internation Journal of Computer Science and Information 
Security, vol. 8, no. 1, April. 2010, pp. 68-75. ISSN 1947-
5500. 
[6] Y. Yoon, S. Park, H. Lee, J. S. Kim, and S. B. Jee, “Header 
compression method and its performance for IP ovet tactical 
data link,” in International Journal of Energy, Information and 
Communications, vol. 2, issue 2, May. 2011, pp. 61-77. ISSN 
2093-9655. 
[7] G. Epiphaniou, “Iterative Block Ciphers’ Effects on Quality 
of Experience for VoIP Unicast Transmissions under 
Different Coding Schemes,” University of Bedfordshire, 
Luton, UK, 2010 (Thesis). 
[8] Z. Becvar, M. Vondra, and L. Novak, “Assessment of Speech 
Quality in VoIP,” In VoIP Technologies. Rijeka: InTech, 
2011, pp. 27-44. ISBN: 978-953-307-549-5.  
[9] R. Bestak, Z. Vranova, and V. Ondryhal, “Testing of 
transmission channels quality for different types of 
communications 
technologies,” 
in 
Communications 
in 
Computer and Information Science, vol. 166. 2011, pp. 13-23. 
ISSN 1865-0929.  
[10] S. Casner and V. Jacobson, “Compressing IP/UDP/RTP 
headers for low-speed serial links,” Network Working 
Groupe, Request for Comments: 2508, February. 1999. 
[11] C. Bormann, et al., “Robust header compression (ROHC) : 
Framework and four profiles: RTP, UDP: ESP, and 
uncompressed,” Network Working Groupe, Request for 
Comments: 3095, July. 2001. 
[12] W. Simpson, “The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP),” Network 
Working Groupe, Request for Comments: 1661, July. 1994. 
[13] “Coding of speech at 8 kbit/s using conjugate-structure 
algebraic-code-excited 
linear-prediction 
(CS-ACELP),”       
ITU-T, G.729, January. 2007. 
[14] “Voice over IP – per call bandwidth consumption,” Cisco, 
Document ID: 7934, February. 2006. 
[15] Z. Vranova and A. Mazalek, “Testing of the effect of load on 
voice quality in VoIP networks,” Proc. International 
Conference on Telecomunication Systems – Modeling and 
Analysis (SCIS 07), Czech technical university in Prague, 
May. 2012, pp. 198-205. ISBN 978-0-9820958-6-7. 
 
 
 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-286-8
ACCESS 2013 : The Fourth International Conference on Access Networks
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

