SENSORCOMM 2014
The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
ISBN: 978-1-61208-374-2
November 16 - 20, 2014
Lisbon, Portugal
SENSORCOMM 2014 Editors
Tapio Saarelainen, National Defence University, Finland
Reinhardt Karnapke, BTU Cottbus, Germany
Muhammad Shakeel Virk, Narvik University College, Norway

SENSORCOMM 2014
Foreword
The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
(SENSORCOMM 2014), held between November 16-20, 2014 in Lisbon, Portugal, continued a
series of events covering related topics on theory and practice on wired and wireless sensors
and sensor networks.
Sensors and sensor networks have become a highly active research area because of
their potential of providing diverse services to broad range of applications, not only on science
and engineering, but equally importantly on issues related to critical infrastructure protection
and security, health care, the environment, energy, food safety, and the potential impact on
the quality of all areas of life.
Sensor networks and sensor-based systems support many applications today on the
ground. Underwater operations and applications are quite limited by comparison. Most
applications refer to remotely controlled submersibles and wide-area data collection systems at
a coarse granularity.
Underwater sensor networks have many potential applications such a seismic imaging
of undersea oilfields as a representative application. Oceanographic research is also based on
the advances in underwater data collection systems.
There are specific technical aspects to realize underwater applications which can not be
borrowed from the ground-based sensors net research. Radio is not suitable for underwater
systems because of extremely limited propagation. Acoustic telemetry could be used in
underwater communication; however off-the-shelf acoustic modems are not recommended for
underwater sensor networks with hundreds of nodes because they were designed for long-
range and expensive. As the speed of light (radio) is five orders of magnitude higher than the
speed of sound, there are fundamental implications of time synchronization and propagation
delays for localization. Additionally, existing communication protocols are not designed to deal
with long sleep times and they can't shut down and quickly restart.
In wireless sensor and micro-sensor networks, energy consumption is a key factor for
the sensor lifetime and accuracy of information. Protocols and mechanisms have been
proposed for energy optimization considering various communication factors and types of
applications. Conserving energy and optimizing energy consumption are challenges in wireless
sensor
networks,
requiring energy-adaptive protocols,
self-organization,
and balanced
forwarding mechanisms.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the SENSORCOMM
2014 Technical Program Committee, as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a
high quality conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We
also kindly thank all the authors who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to
SENSORCOMM 2014. We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the final conference
program consisted of top quality contributions.
Also, this event could not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the SENSORCOMM 2014

organizing committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this
professional meeting a success.
We hope that SENSORCOMM 2014 was a successful international forum for the
exchange of ideas and results between academia and industry and for the promotion of
progress in the area of sensor technologies and applications.
We are convinced that the participants found the event useful and communications very
open. We hope Lisbon provided a pleasant environment during the conference and everyone
saved some time for exploring this beautiful city.
SENSORCOMM 2014 Chairs:
SENSORCOMM Advisory Chairs
Jean Philippe Vasseur, Cisco Systems, Inc., France
Petre Dini, Concordia University, Canada / China Space Agency Center, China
Jaime Lloret Mauri, Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain
Jens Martin Hovem, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway
Pascal Lorenz, University of Haute Alsace, France
Sergey Yurish, IFSA, Spain
SENSORCOMM 2014 Industry Liaison Chairs
Sarfraz Khokhar, Cisco Systems, Inc., USA
Harkirat Singh, Samsung Electronics Co., Korea
Javier Del Ser Lorente, TECNALIA-Telecom - Zamudio (Bizkaia), Spain
Michael Niedermayer, Fraunhofer IZM, Germany
SENSORCOMM 2014 Research/Industry Chairs
Hristo Djidjev, Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA Teng Rui, National Institute of Information
and Communication Technology, Japan
S. Biju Kumar, Philips Research - Eindhoven, The Netherlands
SENSORCOMM 2014 Special Area Chairs
Embedded systems
Joshua Ellul, Imperial College, London, UK
Security
Yenumula Reddy, Grambling State University, USA
Body networks
Alessandro Pozzebo, Università degli Studi di Siena, Italy
Underwater systems
Mylène Toulgoat, Communications Research Centre - Ottawa, Canada
Applications
Elena Gaura, Coventry University, UK
Performance
Canfeng Chen, Nokia Research Center - Beijing, China

Atmospheric Icing and Sensing
Muhammad Shakeel Virk, Narvik University College, Norway

SENSORCOMM 2014
Committee
SENSORCOMM Advisory Chairs
Jean Philippe Vasseur, Cisco Systems, Inc., France
Petre Dini, Concordia University, Canada / China Space Agency Center, China
Jaime Lloret Mauri, Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain
Jens Martin Hovem, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway
Pascal Lorenz, University of Haute Alsace, France
Sergey Yurish, IFSA, Spain
SENSORCOMM 2014 Industry Liaison Chairs
Sarfraz Khokhar, Cisco Systems, Inc., USA
Harkirat Singh, Samsung Electronics Co., Korea
Javier Del Ser Lorente, TECNALIA-Telecom - Zamudio (Bizkaia), Spain
Michael Niedermayer, Fraunhofer IZM, Germany
SENSORCOMM 2014 Research/Industry Chairs
Hristo Djidjev, Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA Teng Rui, National Institute of Information and
Communication Technology, Japan
S. Biju Kumar, Philips Research - Eindhoven, The Netherlands
SENSORCOMM 2014 Special Area Chairs
Embedded systems
Joshua Ellul, University of Malta, Malta
Security
Yenumula Reddy, Grambling State University, USA
Body networks
Alessandro Pozzebo, Università degli Studi di Siena, Italy
Underwater systems
Mylène Toulgoat, Communications Research Centre - Ottawa, Canada
Applications
Elena Gaura, Coventry University, UK
Performance
Canfeng Chen, Nokia Research Center - Beijing, China

Atmospheric Icing and Sensing
Muhammad Shakeel Virk, Narvik University College, Norway
SENSORCOMM 2014 Technical Program Committee
Saied Abedi, Fujitsu Laboratories of Europe LTD. - Middlesex, UK
Abdalrahman Al-Qubaa, Newcastle University, UK
Mothanna Alkubeily, Université de Technologie de Compiègne, France
Boushra Alkubily, Université de Technologie de Compiègne, France
Maykel Alonso Arce, CEIT and Tecnun (University of Navarra), Spain
Tariq Alsboui, Manchester Metropolitan University, UK
Adil Al-Yasiri, University of Salford, UK
Isabelle Augé-Blum, INSA Lyon - Laboratoire CITI -Villeurbanne, France
Reza Azarderakhsh, The University of Western Ontario, Canada
Sebastian Bader, Mid Sweden University, Sweden
Valentina Baljak, National Institute of Informatics & University of Tokyo, Japan
Dominique Barthel, Orange Labs Division R&D - Meylan, France
Novella Bartolini, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Italy
Majid BayaniI Abbasy, Universidad Nacional de Costa Rica, Costa Rica
Rezaul K Begg, Victoria University, Australia
Paolo Bellavista, University of Bologna, Italy
Stephan Benecke, Technische Universitaet Berlin | Fraunhofer Institut Zuverlässigkeit und
Mikrointegration, Germany
Ali Berrached, University of Houston-Downtown, USA
Karabi Biswas, Indian Institute of Technology - Kharagpur, India
Alessandro Bogliolo, University of Urbino, Italy
David Boyle, Imperial College London, UK
Lina Brito, University of Madeira, Portugal
Ioannis Broustis, AT&T Labs Research, U.S.A
Tiziana Calamoneri, “La Sapienza” Università di Roma, Italy
Maria-Dolores Cano Baños, Technical University of Cartagena, Spain
Juan Vicente Capella Hernández, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Spain
Alexandru Caracas, IBM Research - Zurich, Switzerland
Berta Carballido Villaverde, United Technologies Research Centre, Ireland
Amitava Chatterjee, Jadavpur University, India
Canfeng Chen, Nokia Research Center - Beijing, China
Shu-Ching Chen, Florida International University - Miami, USA
Harsha Chenji, University of Texas at Dallas, USA
Hugo Coll Ferri, Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain
Daniel Curiac, "Politehnica" University of Timisoara, Romania
David Cuartielles, Malmö University, Sweden
Juarez Bento da Silva, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Brazil
Debabrata Das, International Institute of Information Technology - Bangalore, India
Danco Davcev, University for Information Science & Technology "St. Paul the Apostle" - Ohrid, Republic
of Macedonia
Javier Del Ser Lorente, TECNALIA-Telecom - Zamudio (Bizkaia), Spain
Jerker Delsing, Lulea University of Technology, Sweden
Behnam Dezfouli, University Technology Malaysia (UTM), Malaysia

Akshaye Dhawan, Ursinus College, USA
Vincenzo Di Lecce, Politecnico di Bari, Italy
Mari Carmen Domingo, Barcelona Tech University, Spain
Wan Du, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
Juan Carlos Dueñas López, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spain
Sylvain Durand, LIRMM/Université Montpellier II, France
Imad H. Elhajj, American University of Beirut, Lebanon
Joshua Ellul, University of Malta, Malta
Xiang Fei, Coventry University, UK
Sándor Fekete, Braunschweig Institute of. Technology, Germany
Paulo Felisberto, Institut for Systems and Robotics-Lisbon / Universidade do Algarve, Portugal
Gianluigi Ferrari, University of Parma, Italy
Armando Ferro Vázquez, Universidad del País Vasco - Bilbao, Spain
Paul Fortier, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, USA
Leonardo Franco, Universidad de Malaga, Spain
Pedro Furtado, University of Coimbra, Portugal
Miguel Garcia Pineda, Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain
Elena Gaura, Coventry University, UK
Hamid Gharavi, National Institute of Standards and. Technology (NIST) - Gaithersburg, USA
Chris Gniady, University of Arizona, USA
Stephane Grumbach, INRIA, France
Jayavardhana Gubbi, University of Melbourne, Australia
Jianlin Guo, Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories - Cambridge, USA
Malka N. Halgamuge, The University of Melbourne, Australia
Mohammad Hammoudeh, Manchester Metropolitan University, UK
Vincent Huang, Ericsson Research - Stockholm, Sweden
Muhammad Ali Imran, University of Surrey, U.K.
Abhaya Induruwa, Canterbury Christ Church University, UK
Vasanth Iyer, International Institute of Information Technology, India
Shaghayegh Jaberi, Islamic Azad University - Tehran, Iran
Imad Jawhar, United Arab Emirates University - Al Ain, UAE
Zhen Jiang, West Chester University, USA
Miao Jin, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, U.S.A.
Adrian Kacso, University of Siegen, Germany
Aravind Kailas, University of North Carolina - Charlotte, USA
Kyoung-Don Kang, Binghamton University, USA
Riad Kanan, The Institute of Engineering Sciences, Switzerland
Reinhardt Karnapke, Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus – Senftenberg, Germany
Dimitrios A. Karras, Chalkis Institute of Technology, Hellas
Fotis Kerasiotis, University of Patras / Rio-Patras, Greece
Yaser Khamayseh, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Jordan
Abdelmajid Khelil, Huawei European Research Center, Germany
Sarfraz Khokhar, Cisco Systems Inc., USA
Kwangsoo Kim, Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), Korea
Boris Kovalerchuk, Central Washington University, USA
Thorsten Kramp, IBM Research Zurich, Switzerland
Evangelos Kranakis, Carleton University, Canada
Srđjan Krčo, Ericsson Research, Ireland

Dilip Krishnaswamy, Qualcomm Research - San Diego, U.S.A.
Danny Krizanc, Wesleyan University - Middletown, USA
Sisil Kumarawadu, University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka
Erlend Larsen, The Norwegian Defence Research Establishment (FFI) - Kjeller, Norway
Seongsoo Lee, Soongsil University - Seoul, Korea
Pierre Leone, University of Geneva, Switzerland
Jacek Lewandowski, Coventry University, UK
Xiuqi Li, University of North Carolina at Pembroke, U.S.A
Chiu-Kuo Liang, Chung Hua University - Hsinchu, Taiwan
Qilian Liang, University of Texas at Arlington, USA
Weifa Liang, Australian National University - Canberra, Australia
Chun-Lung Lin, Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI) Hsinchu, Taiwan
Thomas Lindh, STH/KTH - Stockholm, Sweden
André Luiz Lins de Aquino, Federal University of Ouro Preto, Brazil
Aihua Liu, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy & Bioprocess Technology - Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Hai Liu, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
Jaime Lloret Mauri, Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain
Elsa María Macías López, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
Abdallah Makhoul, Université de Besancon - Belfort, France
Gianfranco Manes, University of Florence, Italy
Vladimir Marbukh, NIST, USA
Andrew Markham, University of Oxford, UK
José Ramiro Martínez de Dios, University of Seville, Spain
Francisco Martins, University of Lisbon, Portugal
Alireza Masoum, Twente University, The Netherlands
Kovatsch Matthias, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Natarajan Meghanathan, Jackson State University, USA
Fabien Mieyeville, Ecole Centrale Lyon - INL (Institute of Nanotechnology of Lyon), France
Nader Faisal Jaafar Mohamed, UAEU, UAE
Jose M. Moya, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
Mohammad Mozumdar, California State University, Long Beach, USA
Abderrahmen Mtibaa, Texas A&M University, U.S.A.
Umair Najeeb Mughal, Narvik University College, Norway
Mohamad Y. Mustafa, Narvik University College, Norway
Deok Hee Nam, Wilberforce University, USA
Enrico Natalizio, INRIA Lille - Nord Europe, France
Mahmuda Naznin, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology - Dhaka, Bangladesh
Sarmistha Neogy, Jadavpur University, India
Edith C.-H. Ngai, Uppsala University, Sweden
Michael Niedermayer, Fraunhofer Institute for Reliability and Microintegration, Germany
Gregory O'Hare, University College Dublin (UCD), Ireland
Brendan O'Flynn, Tyndall National Institute/University College Cork, Ireland
Cyril Onwubiko, Research Series Ltd., UK
Knut Øvsthus, Bergen University College, Norway
Carlos Enrique Palau Salvador, Universidad Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Sung-Joon Park, Gangneung-Wonju National University, South Korea
Lorena Parra Boronat, Universitat Politécnica de Valencia (UPV), Spain
Eros Pasero, Politecnico di Torino, Italy

Leonidas Perlepes, University of Thessaly, Greece
Dirk Pesch, Cork institute of Technology, Ireland
Patrick Pons, CNRS-LAAS, France
Miodrag Potkonjak, University of California - Los Angeles, USA
Shrisha Rao, International Institute of Information Technology - Bangalore, India
Shahid Raza, Swedish Institute of Computer Science (SICS) – Stockholm, Sweden
Yenumula Reddy, Grambling State University, USA
Mark Reed, Yale School of Engineering & Applied Science, USA
Juan Reig Pascual, Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain
Càndid Reig, University of Valencia, Spain
Tor Arne Reinen, SINTEF ICT, Norway
Biljana Risteska Stojkoska, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Macedonia
Joel Rodrigues, University of Beira Interior, Portugal
Laura Rodríguez, Universidad Popular Autónoma de Puebla (UPAEP), Mexico
Lorenzo Rubio-Arjona, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Spain
Ulrich Rückert, Bielefeld University, Germany
Teng Rui, National Institute of Information and Communication Technology, Japan
Jorge Sá Silva, University of Coimbra, Portugal
Sicari Sabrina, University of Insubria, Italy
Husnain Saeed, National University of Sciences & Technology (NUST), Pakistan
Addisson Salazar, Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain
Ioakeim Samaras, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
Francisco Javier Sánchez Bolumar, ADIF, Spain
Olga Saukh, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Kamran Sayrafian, National Institute of Standards & Technology, USA
Elad Michael Schiller, Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
Leo Selavo, University of Latvia, Latvia
Sandra Sendra Compte, Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain
Kuei-Ping Shih, Tamkang University - Taipei, Taiwan
Simone Silvestri, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
Francesco Simeone, University "Sapienza" of Roma / INFN-Roma, Italy
Jasvinder Singh, Cork Institute of Technology, Ireland
Andrzej Skowron, University of Warsaw, Poland
K M Sunjiv Soyjaudah, University of Mauritius, Mauritius
Arvind K. Srivastava, NanoSonix Inc. - Skokie, USA
Grigore Stamatescu, University Politehnica of Bucharest, Romania
Yannis Stamatiou, University of Patras, Greece
Razvan Stanica, National Polytechnic Institute of Toulouse, France
Kris Steenhaut, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium
Julinda Stefa, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
David Stork, Rambus Labs, USA
David Sundaram, University of Auckland, New Zealand
Ewa Szynkiewicz, Warsaw University of Technology, Poland
Zahra Taghikhaki, University of Twente, the Netherlands
Muhammad Tariq, Waseda University - Tokyo, Japan
Kerry Taylor, CSIRO Canberra, Australia
Lothar Thiele, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Rolf Thomasius, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany

Bin Tong, Microsoft Corp. - Redmond, USA
Vassilis Triantafillou, Technological Educational Institution of Messolonghi, Greece
Neeta Trivedi, Aeronautical Development Establishment- Bangalore, India
Wilfried Uhring, University of Strasbourg, France
Fabrice Valois, INRIA SWING / CITI, INSA-Lyon, France
Jean Philippe Vasseur, Cisco Systems, Inc., France
Roberto Verdone, Università di Bologna, Italy
Manuela Vieira, UNINOVA/ISEL, Portugal
Muhammad Shakeel Virk, Narvik University College, Norway
Michael Walsh, Tyndall National Institute, Ireland
Wenwu Wang, University of Surrey, UK
You-Chiun Wang, National Chiao-Tung University, Taiwan
Zhibo Wang, University of Tennessee, USA
Chih-Yu Wen, National Chung Hsing University - Taichung, Taiwan
Andreas Wombacher, University of Twente, Netherlands
Fang-Jing Wu, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
Hui Wu, University of New South Wales, Australia
Dongfang Yang, National Research Council Canada - London, Canada
Rehana Yasmin, University of Birmingham, UK
Chih-Wei Yi, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
Norihiko Yoshida, Saitama University, Japan
Nicolas H. Younan, Mississippi State University, USA
Sergey Y. Yurish, IFSA - Barcelona, Spain
Yifeng Zhou, Communications Research Centre, Canada
Tanveer Zia, Charles Sturt University, Australia

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Electrocardiogram Collection, Pattern Recognition, and Classification Sensor System Supporting a Mobile
Cardiovascular Disease Detection Aid
Paul Fortier, Patrick DaSilva, and Kristen Sethares
1
A Novel ID Anonymity Preserving Scheme (ID-APS) for Hierarchical Wireless Sensor Networks
Ahmed Al-Riyami, Ning Zhang, and John Keane
7
Enhanced Sensitivity in the VIS-NIR Range Under UV Light in a-SiC Pinpin Device
Vitor Silva, Paula Louro, Manuel Augusto Vieira, Isabel Rodrigues, and Manuela Vieira
17
WiFi Monitoring Embedded System for Electrical Microgeneration using Renewable Energy Sources
Sandro C. S. Juca, Paulo C. M. Carvalho, and Renata I. S. Pereira
21
Feasibility of Charge Transfer Based Atmospheric Ice Sensing
Taimur Rashid, Umair Najeeb Mughal, and Muhammad Shakeel Virk
27
Evaluation of Torque and Axial Loading Physics for Atmospheric Icing Sensors
Umair Najeeb Mughal and Muhammad Shakeel Virk
32
Using CFD-Based Virtual Sensor Data to Study the Structure of Air Flow behind A Porous Fence
Yizhong Xu and Mohamad Mustafa
39
Improving Distance Estimation in Object Localisation with Bluetooth Low Energy
Georgia Ionescu, Carlos Martinez de la Osa, and Michel Deriaz
45
Assessment of Sensor Technologies for Gate-Based Object Counting
Colin Lelsie, Alex Vakaloudis, Kostas Anagnostopoulos, Nikolaos Chalikias, and Jian Liang
50
Wide Area Surveillance Using Limited-Flying-Time Helicopters
Kenichi Mase
54
BuckshotDV - A Robust Routing Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks with Unstable Network Topologies and
Unidirectional Links
Reinhardt Karnapke and Jorg Nolte
60
Ultra Wideband Positioning: An Analytical Study of Emerging Technologies
Suheer Alhadhrami, AbdulMalik Al-Salman, Hend Al-Khalifa, Abdulrahman Alarifi, Ahmad Alnafessah, Mansour
Alsaleh, and Mai Al-Ammar
66
Integrating Smart Items and Cloud Computing in Healthcare Scenarios
Sarfaraz Ghulam, Johannes Schubert, Gerrit Tamm, and Vladimir Stantchev
75

The Impact of Link Lengths on Energy Consumption in Wireless Sensor Networks
Knut Ovsthus, Espen Nilsen, Anne-Lena Kampen, and Oivind Kure
82
Towards a Generic Cloud-based Sensor Data Management Platform: A Survey and Conceptual Architecture
Vincent C. Emeakaroha, Kaniz Fatema, Philip Healy, and John P. Morrison
88
Towards Tactical Military Software Defined Radio
Tapio Saarelainen
96
Small and Low Side Lobe Beam-forming Antenna Composed of Narrow Spaced Patch Antennas for Wireless
Sensor Networks
Yosuke Sato and Shuzo Kato
107
Accuracy Enhancements in Indoor Localization with the Weighted Average Technique
Grigorios G. Anagnostopoulos and Michel Deriaz
112
60GHz Radio Hose for Wireless Harness Communication Systems
Yosuke Sato, Vannsith Ith, and Shuzo Kato
117
An Analysis of the Need for Dedicated Recovery Methods and Their Applicability in Wireless Sensor Networks
Running the Routing Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy Networks
Anne-Lena Kampen, Knut Ovsthus, and Oivind Kure
121
Domain Specific Modeling Language for Object Localization in Marine Observatories
Charbel Geryes Aoun, Iyas Alloush, Yvon Kermarrec, Joel Champeau, and Oussama Zein
130
A Formal Graph-Based Model Applied to Cluster Communication in Wireless Sensor Networks
Laura Margarita Rodriguez Peralta, Lina Maria Pestana Leao de Brito, and Eduardo Ismael Hernandez
137
High Deployability of IEEE 802.15.4k DSSS Systems in Interference Dominated Bands
Yasutaka Tada, Yosuke Sato, and Shuzo Kato
147
A Real-Time Bridge Pier Scouring Monitoring System Based on Hall-Effect Sensors
Chen-Chia Chen, Ssu-Ying Chen, Wen-Ching Chen, Gang-Neng Sung, Jin-Ju Chue, Chih-Ting Kuo, Yi-Jie Hsieh,
Chih-Chyau Yang, Chien-Ming Wu, and Chun-Ming Huang
152
Building Automation: Experience with Dynamic Reconfiguration of a Room
Maxime Louvel, Francois Pacull, Safietou Raby Thior, Maria Isabel Vergara Gallego, and Oussama Yaakoubi
157
An Integrated Ambient Intelligence System in the Monitoring and Rehabilitation of the Disorder of Consciousness
Francesco Riganello, Luigi Piscitelli, Luigi Flotta, Calogero Pace, Giuliano Dolce, and Walter G. Sannita
163

Accurate Sled Velocity on a Short-Inclined Track Using Accelerometer Data
Mark Gaffney, Michael Walsh, Brendan O’Flynn, and Cian O Mathuna
169
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Electrocardiogram Collection, Pattern Recognition, and Classification Sensor 
System Supporting a Mobile Cardiovascular Disease Detection Aid 
 
 
Patrick R. DaSilva, Paul J. Fortier 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department 
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth 
North Dartmouth, Massachusetts, USA 
pdasilva@umassd.edu, pfortier@umassd.edu 
Kristen Sethares 
Adult and Child Nursing Department 
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth 
North Dartmouth, Massachusetts, USA 
ksethares@umassd.edu
 
 
Abstract— Current mobile monitoring solutions do not offer 
the ability to recognize cardiac problems without human 
interpretation. A combination of electrocardiogram (ECG) 
detection and classification software running on a mobile 
cardiovascular disease detection sensor is proposed to replace 
the need for human interpretation. The ECG is filtered using 
the Wavelet Transform; the ECG wave points detected using a 
modified version of the Pan Tompkins rule set and the cardiac 
rhythm is classified using an N-ary tree. The wireless mobile 
application is designed on a custom printed circuit board 
(PCB). Testing results show autonomous classifications are 
possible using a three lead ECG system while the patient is at 
rest. The proposed solution serves as a stepping stone towards 
a fully reliable patient disease management teaching tool with 
the potential to serve as an aid to the cardiovascular healthcare 
industry. 
Keywords-embedded ECG sensor; real-time algorithm; ECG 
classification. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) Division of Vital Statistics, 24.2% of 
total deaths in 2010 were directly related to heart diseases 
[1]. Preliminary 2011 data shows this lethal disease 
continues to be the number one leading cause of death for 
596,339 Americans [2]. 
Studies have shown as heart failure (HF) symptom 
severity increased, patient symptom uncertainty levels 
decreased [3] correlating with previous studies suggesting 
HF patients delay seeking timely treatment for symptoms 
[4]. Dedicated nurse staffed care facilities have helped 
decrease levels of patient symptom uncertainty [5], but a 
real-time mobile monitoring and motivational solution is 
desired [6]. 
Advancements in science and technology have made it 
feasible to continuously shrink signal processing systems 
aiding in the development of wearable biometric monitoring 
equipment and replacing systems that rendered the user with 
limited mobility. Mobile monitoring systems [7]-[11] are 
not new, but systems that monitor and interact with users in 
ways that improve health management are evolving [6][12]. 
The Electrocardiogram (ECG) subsystem is described as 
an important part of the overall cardiac wellness system’s 
ability to aid patients in learning to recognize disease 
specific symptoms and understand the effect on their health 
[12]. The purpose of this paper is to describe the 
development of a mobile cardiovascular disease detection 
sensor that combines wavelet transformation filtering 
processes with a modified version of the Pan Tompkins 
detection rule set and using an N-ary tree for classification 
of ECG arrhythmias. Research using these three methods 
has been performed before [13]-[21], but nothing combining 
all three methods applied to ECG arrhythmia detection and 
classification in support of a mobile cardiovascular disease 
detection aid has been. 
In Section 2, this paper will discuss ECG raw data 
collection, waveform extraction, waveform classification 
and describe the testing process the system underwent. 
Section 3 will discuss the testing results. A conclusion and 
recommendation for future work will be presented in 
Section 4. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The ECG subsystem can be broken down into three serial 
processes (see Figure 1); collection, extraction, and 
classification. Each process feeds into the next resulting in a 
heart health classification. Each process is briefly described 
below. 
 
Figure 1. ECG subsystem process representation. 
A. ECG Raw Data Collection 
An ECG is the measured electrical activity representing 
the heart’s conduction system typically recorded on a 1 by 1 
millimetre (mm) gridded paper representing 40 milliseconds 
(ms) by 0.1 millivolts (mV). This paper’s ECG sensor was 
designed using a three lead chest only concept since 
abnormalities of interest are detected using 3 leads. 
Abnormalities of interest include normal sinus rhythm, atrial 
arrhythmias (bradycardia, tachycardia, flutter), conduction 
abnormalities (1st degree AV block, 2nd degree AV block, 
3rd degree AV block), and ventricular abnormalities 
(premature complex, tachycardia, fibrillation).   
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The differential voltage between two silver chloride 
(AgCl) electrodes placed on the right and left side of the 
chest is measured with reference to body ground, amplified 
by a gain of 1000, and fed to an analogue to digital 
converter (ADC) on board an Atmel 32-bit UC3 
microcontroller (MCU). The Atmel UC3 MCU uses a 12-bit 
analogue comparator sampling the ECG at 250Hz with a 
reference at 60% of the supply voltage. Sampling at 250 Hz, 
creates 1 sample every 0.004 seconds. Using a 12-bit ADC 
with an analogue circuit gain of 1000 creates 100 ADC units 
for every 1 mm or 0.1 mV of ECG signal strength prior to 
amplification. 
B. ECG Waveform Extraction 
An ECG waveform is described by its principally 
important points (PIPs) (see Figure 2). In basic terms, the 
PIPs are the onset, offset, and peak height of the P wave, T 
wave, U wave and QRS complex. In total there are twelve 
PIPs. From these PIPs an ECG’s P wave, T wave, U wave, 
QRS complex, PR Interval, Atrial Rate, Ventricular Rate, 
and Rhythm can be calculated. With the PIPs known an 
ECG waveform can begin to be classified. 
 
Figure 2. ECG waveform showing principally important point with widths 
calculated in seconds and heights calculated in millimetres. 
To extract the PIPs, the ECG signal is passed through a 
bank of filters equivalent to the Dyadic Quadratic Spline 
Wavelet Transform focusing on the time frequency analysis 
of the signal. Using the dyadic wavelet allows for faster 
computations on an ECG signal to extract characteristic 
points by distinguishing between the sharp variations 
translated into local maxima and minima on different filter 
scales. 
The wavelet transform (WT) equivalent filter described 
by Li [16] was derived using the work of Mallat [22]. Li 
derived the WT as a series of high-pass and low-pass filters, 
used to deduce the equivalent filter as an antisymmetric FIR 
digital filter with generalized linear phase.  
To sync the output of the filters and avoid busy wait 
loops, an individual delay was added to each filter through 
the use of the translation property of the Fourier Transform. 
This caused an overall unified filter bank delay of 62 
milliseconds and produced the signal output shown in 
Figure 3. 
The Wavelet Transform equivalent filter has the ability to 
separate the different characteristic points of an ECG onto 
various scales, allowing use of individual filter outputs to 
find each waveform’s peak, onset and offset.  
The amplitude-frequency response of the WT filters (see 
Figure 4) shows the first five filters in the bank, used to 
cover the frequency spectrum of an ECG signal sampled at 
250 Hz. 
To find the QRS complex, originally all five filters were 
used as discussed by Bahoura [17].  Preliminary testing 
indicated that filters 21 through 23 are the minimum needed. 
A QRS complex peak is found by locating the zero crossing 
of a set of modulus maximum peaks with different polarities 
on the output of the first three filters simultaneously 
[18][19][20]. 
 
 
Figure 3. Equivalent WT filter bank output. ECG signal is top line and 
filter bank out are bottom 5 signals. Dashed line corresponds to QRS 
complex peak. Dash double dot corresponds to P, T, or U wave peak. 
 
Figure 4. WT filter bank amplitude frequency response. 
Once a possible QRS peak is found, all other QRS 
detections are ignored for a period of 200 milliseconds. An 
autonomous thresholding technique [23] is employed to find 
the local minima and maxima peaks on each filter output, 
allowing the detection algorithm to adjust to a patient’s 
ECG signal strength. The idea behind the technique was to 
capture as much of the possible QRS complexes without 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

low noise with the first threshold and then apply a second 
threshold to capture missing lower amplitude QRS 
complexes due to the initialization process. If no QRS 
complex is found within a 4 second interval, the thresholds 
are reset [23]. 
After the QRS peak is found, filter 22 is used to find the 
onset and offset pair using the location of the local minima 
onset and maxima offset respectively. From preliminary 
testing using the MIT-BIH databases [24], it was noticed the 
Q and S waves periodically appear on the filter 22 output, so 
the onset was shifted to the beginning of a second modulus 
peak found immediately before the first with opposite 
polarity and the same with the offset, looking at the end of a 
second modulus peak found immediately after the original 
offset. Once the QRS complex onset, offset, peak and peak 
polarity data points are found (see Figure 5), these PIPs are 
passed to a post-detection scheme to prepare for the 
classification stage. 
Current methods to find P, T, and U waves require first 
locating the QRS complex and then traversing the ECG 
signal forwards and backwards in time. The problem with 
this solution is it’s not real-time and does not take into 
consideration arrhythmias that do not always include a QRS 
complex for each P and T wave in the ECG, such as Atrial 
Fibrillation.  
Instead, ‘blips’ which are possible P, T, U waves or just 
noise, are detected and then categorized in the post-
detection scheme. This allows QRS complexes and P, T, U 
waves to be detected in parallel similar to Bahoura [17]. 
Preliminary testing proved 23 through 25 are the only filters 
required to find blip waves. A blip peak is found by locating 
the zero crossing of a set of modulus maximum peaks with 
different polarities on the output of either 23 and 24 or 24 and 
25  filters, but not necessarily all three filters simultaneously.  
Once a possible blip peak is found, the location is saved 
for 100 ms before reporting to ensure the blip wave is valid 
and not a QRS complex or noise. If the blip wave is found 
to be a QRS complex, the information for the wave is 
transferred to the QRS complex detection to be categorized 
as such. Again, a thresholding technique is used to find the 
local minima and maxima peaks on each filter output, 
except lower than the thresholds used by the QRS. The 
thresholds adjust to P/T wave amplitudes based upon a pre-
calculated ratio between P/T waves and QRS complexes and 
are re-adjusted every time a new QRS complex is detected.  
After the blip peak is found, filter 24 is used to find the 
onset and offset simply because a blip wave will always 
show on filter 24. The onset/offset pair is found using the 
location of the local minima onset and maxima offset 
respectively on filter 24 similar to QRS onset/offset 
detection.  
In post-detection, a detected blip is run through a set of 
test and checks to verify its validity based upon the last 
detected blip and QRS complex before it is categorized as a 
P, T, or U wave. 
 
Figure 5. Detected QRS complex (green dots, red stars) and blip waves 
(black dots) on record 100 from MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database. 
This nine point rule set for the test and check is used to 
construct a finite state machine running on the MCU. 
1. Upon start-up, if a blip is detected first, then it is 
immediately categorized as a P wave and saved in the 
‘ekgWaveHistory’ buffer. 
2. Upon start-up, if a QRS complex is detected first, then 
it is immediately saved in the ‘ekgWaveHistory’ buffer. 
3. A detected blip is invalid and discarded if its onset 
and/or offset overlap that of the previously detected blip 
or QRS complex. 
4. A detected valid blip is a T wave if its peak is located 
within 50-75% of the current ventricular heart rate from 
the offset of the last detected QRS complex and if no 
other T wave has been detected as of that moment. 
5. A detected valid blip is a U wave if its peak is located 
within 50-75% of the current ventricular heart rate from 
the offset of the last detected QRS complex, if a T wave 
has already been detected, and no other U wave has 
been detected as of that moment. 
6. A detected valid blip is a P wave if its peak is located 
outside 50-75% of the current ventricular heart rate 
from the offset of the last detected QRS complex or if 
within that time frame, then it will be a P wave if a T 
wave and U wave has already been found. 
7. A detected QRS complex is always considered valid. 
8. A detected QRS complex can invalidate the last 
detected blip if that blip overlaps the QRS complex in 
any way. 
9. A detected QRS complex can re-categorize a detected P, 
T, U wave as a T wave that came after the newly 
detected QRS complex if the last detected blip does not 
overlap the QRS complex AND comes after the newly 
detected QRS complex. 
Upon type validation, each wave is saved in an ECG 
buffer by its type, onset, offset, peak and polarity. When the 
buffer contains one QRS or two P waves, the saved 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

waveform is sent to classification the next time a third valid 
P wave is detected or after a second QRS complex has 
arrived. 
The maximum QRS complex detection delay is 462 ms 
before a QRS complex is detected to when it happened and 
similarly is 362 ms for a P/T wave detection. This 
corresponds to 129 beats per minute (bpm) and 165 bpm for 
a QRS complex detection and P/T wave detection 
respectively before a lag is seen after each wave occurs. 
These delays can be attributed to a standard 62 ms filter 
delay, 200 ms QRS blanking window, 100 ms blip blanking 
window, and a 200 ms future value collection window. 
C. ECG Waveform Classification 
Classification is done similar to how a physician 
classifies an ECG. First the rates are examined, followed by 
the rhythm, intervals and wave morphology. When a new 
waveform is detected it’s appended to the end of a three 
waveform historic buffer, shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. Historic ECG buffer. 
The ECG rates are calculated by measuring the lapsed 
time between each QRS (ventricular) or P (atrial) wave in 
milliseconds and then dividing that number into sixty 
thousand milliseconds or equivalently 1 minute to obtain a 
value in beats per minute (bpm). 
The waveform buffer passes through each branch of an 
N-ary tree (see Figure 7), first eliminating all rhythms that 
do not correlate. The tree uses cardiac rhythms and 
classifications along with normal ECG characteristics from 
best evidence practice literature to determine a waveform’s 
classification. 
If there is at least one P wave in the buffer and all 
available P waves are upright (see Figure 7, branch 00000), 
then the waveform falls into a Normal Sinus Rhythm (NSR), 
Atrial Arrhythmia, Conduction Abnormality, Premature 
Ventricular Contraction (PVC), or Asystole. In this group 
for a waveform to be considered NSR it must have is a 1:1 P 
wave QRS complex ratio with normal morphology, PR 
interval, and ventricular rate. 
If there is at least one P wave in the buffer, all available P 
waves have a negative polarity, are followed by a normal 
QRS complex with a short PR interval, and all available T 
waves have normal morphology (see Figure 7, branch 
00001), then the waveform could either be Supraventricular 
Tachycardia (SVT) or a Junctional Rhythm. In this case, the 
ventricular rate would be used to differentiate between the 
two. 
If there are no P waves available in the buffer (see Figure 
7, branch 00010), then the waveform could be classified as a 
Ventricular Arrhythmia, Atrial Fibrillation, or SVT. In this 
group, the morphology of the QRS complex and ventricular 
rate are used to determine which arrhythmia is present. 
By default, if the waveform is unclassifiable, then it is 
most likely abnormal or if an underlying sinus rhythm is 
present, but the waveform cannot be classified in the given 
tree, it is classified as an Abnormal Sinus Rhythm. 
 
 
Figure 7. Classification N-ary tree. 
The delay between when the heart beats and when that 
beat waveform is classified by the ECG subsystem is 
equivalent to one heartbeat. The way the N-ary tree is built 
takes into account the length of the history buffer in which 
the algorithm analyses an entire ECG waveform three beats 
in length at a time. Therefore an NSR classification will 
only occur when there are three normal heart beats in a row. 
D. ECG Sensor System Testing 
Testing took place in two stages, the first known canned 
events followed by live system testing. For the known 
canned events, ECG signals from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia 
and Normal Sinus Rhythm databases [24] were resampled at 
a frequency of 250 hertz and fed through the algorithm. The 
results were recorded, reconstructed and analysed using 
MATLAB. 
Only ten minutes of each ECG was used starting at 20 
seconds into the signal with results categorized into five 
areas, positive abnormal classification (PC), positive 
unknown classification (PU), positive normal classification 
(PN), negative or missed abnormal classifications (NC), and 
negative or missed normal classifications (NU). The 
classifications were cross checked with the annotations 
included with each signal. If the abnormal annotation 
matched the abnormal classification, then the result was 
categorized as a positive abnormal classification. If they 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

didn’t match, but the abnormality was not looked for and the 
classification wasn’t normal, then the result was a positive 
unknown classification. If neither case, then the result was a 
negative abnormal classification. In the normal case if the 
annotation and classification agreed on normal, then the 
result was a positive normal classification. If the annotation 
said normal and the classification said anything other than 
normal, then the result was a negative normal classification. 
The ECG records picked from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia 
database reflected the classifications the software was 
attempting to identify. With the exception of records 100, 
101, and 222, each record contained PVCs mixed in with 
various other arrhythmias and normal sinus rhythms. 
Arrhythmias included Atrial Premature beats, Bundle 
Branch Blocks, Junctional Premature Beats, Ventricular 
Tachycardia, Ventricular Flutter, Atrial Fibrillation, Atrial 
Flutter, and Second Degree Blocks. How well the 
algorithms could classify normal sinus rhythms mixed with 
abnormalities and Paced Beats was of interest. 
 
Figure 8. Known canned event testing results. Records 1xx and 2xx are 
from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia database. Records 16xxx are from the MIT-
BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm database. 
In general, the algorithm was able to distinguish between 
a normal ECG and an arrhythmia (see Figure 8). An analysis 
of the results showed not one arrhythmia classified as 
normal, though some were classified as unknown abnormal. 
Normal classification results shows room for improvement. 
Majority if not all of the reasons why a given normal 
rhythm was not classified as such are due to invalid P and T 
wave detections and increased heart rate from movement.  
The results from known canned events testing were 
collected and analysed and are depicted in Figure 8. To 
verify the accuracy of the normal sinus rhythm, records 
from the MIT-BIH Normal Sinus Rhythm database were 
also run (see Figure 8). Each of those signals mixed with 
additional noise originating from movement such as running 
or jogging. 
For live system testing and implementation, the ECG 
algorithms were compiled using the Atmel Studio IDE and 
uploaded to a custom designed printed circuit board (see 
Figure 9), running an Atmel 32-bit UC3 microcontroller. 
 
Figure 9. ECG subsystem printed circuit board. 
The crucial point of live testing was to ensure the ECG 
signal collected by the algorithm was the same signal 
measured and not skewed by the algorithm run time. Using 
a 2 channel oscilloscope, measurements were initiated 
during system initialization, when a classification is not 
found or found using a 16MHz clock source for the MCU. 
The relative accuracy of the classification process was also 
studied using a healthy normal ECG by illuminating a series 
of LEDs corresponding to various classifications. 
III. 
TESTING RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
In some instances, a normal ECG was classified as PVC 
or could not be identified. This was mainly due to high 
frequency noise such as in records 108 and 222 or falsely 
identified and/or unidentified P waves due to wave 
morphology and P wave proximity to QRS complexes such 
as in record 222. In other instances a normal ECG would be 
classified as an Abnormal Sinus Rhythm or Sinus 
Tachycardia. An Abnormal Sinus Rhythm came about 
because wave morphology did not fit textbook normal such 
as in records 100, 101, 103, 106, 223, 16265, 16272, and 
16773. Altering the default normal setting in the algorithm 
would fit this very well. Sinus Tachycardia came about 
because of an altered heart rate with normal morphology. In 
a doctor’s office, if the patient was running, this would be 
considered normal, which was the case with records 16265 
and 16773. 
PVCs in records 106 and 109 were classified as 
Unknown Arrhythmias because of incorrect QRS polarity 
detections. In the case of records 109 and 219, PVCs were 
classified as Unknown Arrhythmias because P waves and 
underlying sinus rhythm was not detected, both required for 
a PVC classification. In record 124, the QRS complexes 
were too wide for this algorithm to be able to detect them 
and classify the waveform as PVC, but instead classified it 
as an Unknown Arrhythmia. 
The fibrillatory waves’ amplitude was too low to detect 
an atrial rate in records 219 and 222 in order to classify 
them as Atrial Fibrillation. In record 222, the P waves were 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

back to back causing incorrect polarity detections to classify 
the record as Atrial Flutter. 
While testing a live healthy and normal ECG signal, the 
classification was normal for the majority of the test while 
the user was at rest. The algorithm proved to be resilient to 
small amounts of movement and noise, but failed as 
expected when the user began to jog calling for a need to 
supress invalid classifications with the addition of an 
accelerometer and front end smoothing filter. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Overall a new method of autonomously measuring, 
detecting, and classifying ECG arrhythmias for use in a 
mobile cardiovascular disease detection sensor system was 
introduced through combining the Wavelet Transform 
filtering method with a modified Pan Tompkins detection 
method and classifying with an N-ary Tree. The main 
algorithm modifications needed to continue this work would 
be in the P and T wave detection method and adding an 
algorithm training method to learn a user’s normal sinus 
rhythm wave morphology. 
The training system would include the same detection 
scheme used throughout the system, but instead of 
classifying 
detected sequences, 
would 
examine the 
frequency of the morphology of each P wave, PR interval 
and QRS complex to determine a proper normal setting 
within the classification system. Training would be done in 
the presence of a professional to ensure that a normal ECG 
is actually occurring rather than an abnormal ECG. 
The ECG subsystem would also benefit from a user 
movement indicator to inform the algorithm that the user is 
engaged in activity that raises the ventricular heart rate. This 
battles false classifications of Sinus Tachycardia during a 
Normal Sinus Rhythm. Movement artifact removal would 
also be taken care of outside the subsystem by the main 
monitoring system using motion sensors for scaling. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. L. Murphy, J. Xu, and K. D. Kochanek, "Deaths: Final Data for 
2010," National Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD, National 
Vital Statistics Reports, vol. 61, no. 4, May 2013. 
[2] D. L. Hoyert and J. Xu, "Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2011," National 
Center for Health Statistics, Hyattsville, MD, National Vital Statistics 
Reports, vol. 61, no. 6, Oct. 2012.  
[3] K. A. Sethares, "Predictors of Uncertainty in Adults with an Acute 
Exacerbation of Heart Failure," Heart & Lung: The Journal of Acute and 
Critical Care, vol. 39, no. 4, Jul. 2010, p. 357.  
[4] C. Y. Jurgens, "Somatic Awareness, Uncertainty, and Delay in Care-
Seeking in Acute Heart Failure," Research in Nursing & Health, vol. 29, 
no. 2, Apr. 2006, pp. 74-86.  
[5] A. Stromberg et al., "Nurse-led Heart Failure Clinics Improve Survival 
and Self-care Behaviour in Patients with Heart Failure: Results from a 
Prospective, Randomised Trial," European Heart Journal, vol. 24, no. 11, 
Jun. 2003, pp. 1014-1023.  
[6] P. J. Fortier, B. Puntin, and O. Aljaroudi, "Improved Patient Outcomes 
through Collaborative Monitoring and Management of Subtle Behavioral 
and Physiological Health Changes," in 2011 44th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), Kauai, Jan. 2011, pp. 1-10.  
[7] Alive Technologies Pty Ltd, "Alive Heart and Activity Monitor," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.alivetec.com/alive-bluetooth-heart-
activity-monitor. [retrieved: September 2014]. 
[8] 
CardioNet, 
"CardioNet," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.cardionet.com/index.htm. [retrieved: September 2014]. 
[9] eCardio, "Arrhythmia Monitoring and Solutions," [Online]. Available: 
http://www.ecardio.com/PS/. [retrieved: September 2014]. 
[10] SHL Telemedicine, "SHL Telemedicine," [Online]. Available: 
http://www.shl-telemedicine.com/. [retrieved: September 2014]. 
[11] M. K. Suh et al., "An Automated Vital Sign Monitoring System for 
Congestive Heart Failure Patients," in IHI '10 Proceedings of the 1st ACM 
International Health Informatics Symposium, New York, Nov. 2010, pp. 
108-117.  
[12] P. J. Fortier and B. Viall, "Development of a Mobile Cardiac Wellness 
Application and Integrated Wearable Seansor Suite," in SENSORCOMM 
2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and 
Applications, France, Dec. 2011, pp. 301-306.  
[13] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, "A Real-Time QRS Detection Algorithm," 
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 32, no. 3, Mar. 1985 
pp. 230-236.  
[14] V. X. Afonso, "ECG QRS Detection," in Biomedical Digital Signal 
Processing, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1993, pp. 236-264. 
[15] P. S. Hamilton and W. J. Tompkins, "Quantitative Investigation of 
QRS Detection Rules Using the MIT/BIH Arrhythmia Database," IEEE 
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 33, no. 12, Dec. 1986, pp. 
1157-1165.  
[16] C. Li, C. Zheng, and C. Tai, "Detection of ECG Characteristic Points 
Using 
Wavelet 
Transforms," 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Biomedical 
Engineering, vol. 42, no. 1, Jan. 1995, pp. 21-28.  
[17] M. Bahoura, M. Hassani, and M. Hubin, "DSP Implementation of 
Wavelet Transform for Real Time ECG Wave Forms Detection and Heart 
Rate Analysis," Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, vol. 52, 
no. 1, Jan. 1997, pp. 35-44. 
[18] M. Niknazar, B. V. Vahdat, and S. R. Mousavi, "Detection of 
Characteristic Points of ECG using Quadratic Spline Wavelet Transform," 
in 2009 International Conference on Signals, Circuits and Systems, Djerba, 
Nov. 2009, pp. 1-6.  
[19] P. Sasikala and R. WahidaBanu, "Extraction of P wave and T wave in 
Electrocardiogram using Wavelet Transform," International Journal of 
Computer Science and Information Technologies, vol. 2, no. 1, Feb. 2011, 
pp. 489-493.  
[20] P. Ranjith, P. Baby, and P. Joseph, "ECG Analysis Using Wavelet 
Transform: Application to Myocardial Ischemia Detection," ITBM-RBM, 
vol. 24, no. 1, Feb. 2003, pp. 44-47.  
[21] G. K. Prasad and J. S. Sahambi, "Classification of ECG Arrhythmias 
using Multi-Resolution Analysis and Neural Ndtworks," in TENCON 
2003. Conference on Convergent Technologies for the Asia-Pacific 
Region, Oct. 2003, pp. 227-231.  
[22] S. Mallat, "Zero-Crossings of a Wavelet Transform," IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 37, no. 4, Jul. 1991, pp. 1019-
1033.  
[23] P. S. Hamilton, "Open Source Arrhythmia Detection Software," 
[Online]. Available: http://www.eplimited.com/software.htm. [retrieved: 
September 2014]. 
[24] A. L. Goldberger et al., “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: 
Components of a New Research Resource for Complex Physiological 
Signals,” Circulation, vol. 101, no. 23, Jun. 2000, pp. 215-220. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A Novel ID Anonymity Preserving Scheme (ID-APS)
for Hierarchical Wireless Sensor Networks
Ahmed Al-Riyami, Ning Zhang and John Keane
School of Computer Science
The University of Manchester
Manchester, UK
Email:{ahmed.al-riyami,ning.zhang,john.keane}@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract—Node ID anonymity is a critical aspect of privacy in
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs). Exposing node IDs can help
adversaries to learn the underlying network infrastructure and to
mount more serious attacks, such as attacks on important nodes
(e.g., cluster heads). Therefore, providing ID anonymity should
be an integral part of the solution to secure WSNs, and should
not hinder other security properties such as accountability and
intrusion detection. However, the latter requires that communica-
tion nodes be identiﬁable globally in a dynamic WSN where there
is no ﬁxed infrastructure support. Achieving these contradicting
security properties effectively and efﬁciently is challenging. This
paper proposes a method, termed ID Anonymity Preserving
Scheme (ID-APS), to preserve node ID anonymity with a global
node identiﬁcation capability in hierarchical WSNs. Evaluation
results show that ID-APS achieves these properties at a lower level
of costs (computational, communication and memory overheads)
than comparable methods.
Keywords–Wireless Sensor Networks; privacy; ID anonymity;
pseudonym.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A critical aspect of privacy in Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSNs) is node ID anonymity. By knowing the IDs of the
nodes in a WSN, an adversary may obtain information about
the communication relationships among the nodes, and infer
the network topology which can help to launch successful
attacks on important nodes such as cluster heads. Inference
of network topology through analysis of node IDs is known
as ID analysis attack [1].
Passive adversaries launch ID analysis attacks by eaves-
dropping on network communications; they overhear messages
exchanged over wireless media and view source and desti-
nation IDs in the message headers. Active adversaries launch
ID analysis attacks through node compromise; they physically
capture a node and access data stored in its memory (e.g.,
clustering information), identifying the network topology.
Eavesdropping and node compromise attacks are hard to
thwart due to the nature of WSNs, e.g., open wireless media
and unattended nodes. Existing solutions address these attacks
by using dynamic pseudonyms [2]–[5]. These solutions assign
a unique pseudonym ID to each node in each transmission,
disguising the node’s real ID. However, there are a number
of issues with these solutions. The ﬁrst issue is that some
solutions, e.g., [3], [4], only consider anonymising node IDs in
unicast communications; communication among sensor nodes
involves broadcasts as well. If ID anonymity is only provided
in unicast communications, then an adversary may still be able
to identify nodes through broadcasts. The second issue is how
to reduce costs incurred in preserving ID anonymity. Take
pseudonym updating and synchronization as an example, some
solutions, e.g., [4], [5], require each pair of communication
nodes to use acknowledgments to convey and synchronise the
values of a set of pseudonym parameters after each packet
transmission between the pair. This raises two further issues.
One is that acknowledgments consume network bandwidth
and sensor node energy, and increase network trafﬁc levels
causing congestions and packet collisions. The second is
that acknowledgments are impractical for broadcast trafﬁc, as
the resulting acknowledgments will ﬂood the entire network.
However, if no mechanism exists to allow communicating
nodes to synchronise broadcast pseudonyms, a corrupt or
lost message could lead to unsynchronized parameter values
hindering further anonymous communication.
Further, preserving node ID anonymity should be accom-
panied by a secure node global identiﬁcation facility. This is
because the system will also provide other important security
properties, e.g., intrusion detection and node compromise
detection where a monitoring node needs to report suspicious
nodes to the base station. Providing node ID anonymity should
enable, rather than hinder, these properties.
This paper proposes a secure solution, the ID Anonymity
Preserving Scheme (ID-APS) for hierarchical WSNs. ID-APS
offers anonymity and efﬁciency improvements over the Cryp-
tographic Anonymity Scheme (CAS) [2], the most relevant
existing solution. It provides a trade-off between ID anonymity
level and computational costs, while minimising communica-
tion overheads and memory consumptions. Further, ID-APS
also provides an additional built-in functionality to support
controlled global node identiﬁability, i.e., each node in ID-
APS can be globally identiﬁed by authorised entities. Such
ﬂexibility makes ID-APS highly suitable for a wider range of
applications as compared with previous solutions.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: related work
is discussed in Section II; the CAS scheme is described in
Section III; Section IV discusses how ID-APS improves CAS;
Section V presents design preliminaries; the ID-APS scheme
is described in Section VI; Section VII analyses the scheme
and ﬁnally, Section VIII concludes the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
Misra and Xue [2] address anonymity through dynamic
pseudonyms in clustered WSNs. They proposed two anonymity
schemes, Simple (SAS) and Cryptographic (CAS). In SAS,
each node is assigned a randomly distributed set of pseudonym
sub-ranges selected from a large space. The node chooses a
different pseudonym to identify itself in each transmission.
SAS is efﬁcient as it does not involve complicated compu-
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

tations; however, it requires space to store the pseudonym
sub-ranges. CAS reduces the high memory usage of SAS by
generating pseudonyms on a per-message basis at run-time
by key hashing a sequence number and a pre-deﬁned seed
shared between communicating nodes. CAS is more efﬁcient
than SAS in terms of memory consumption but at the cost of
additional run-time computation. Nevertheless, if an adversary
compromises a node in CAS, the adversary may compute the
previous IDs of the node using the compromised secret key
and the current sequence number.
To protect past used pseudonyms against node compromis-
ing attacks, Ouyang et al. [3] proposed the Hashing based ID
Randomization (HIR) scheme. Similar to CAS, HIR uses a
keyed hash function to generate dynamic pseudonyms. Each
outgoing message is identiﬁed by a new pseudonym that is
generated by key hashing the pseudonym used in the previous
message. After each message transmission, the sender creates
a new pseudonym and deletes the old one. So, if an adversary
obtains the current pseudonym and the secret key, it is still
difﬁcult to derive the previous used pseudonyms because of
the one way property of the hash function. However, the
adversary can still compute the next pseudonym ID and hence
impersonate the compromised node to send future messages
once the key is captured. To resist such attacks on future
messages, the same authors proposed the Reverse Hashing ID
Randomization (RHIR) scheme. In RHIR, the one-way hash
chain is used in the reverse order, i.e., pseudonyms are assigned
backwards from the end of a pre-generated hash chain. This
method is more secure against impersonation attack, however,
RHIR consumes more memory to store the hash chain and
provides each node with a limited number of pseudonyms. In
addition, both HIR and RHIR only address anonymous unicast
communication not broadcast.
Another scheme to support node ID anonymity is the
Anonymous Path Routing (APR) scheme [4]. It hides node
IDs using dynamic pseudonyms and uses per-message keys
to encrypt each transmitted message. APR only provides
node ID anonymity for unicast. For broadcast, (e.g., when
a node broadcasts an anonymous path routing request), the
broadcasters’ IDs are exposed. Hence, an adversary can learn
a source node ID from broadcast messages.
Chen and Fang [5] proposed the Efﬁcient Anonymous
Communication (EAC) scheme. Unlike other solutions, EAC
supports both anonymous unicast and broadcast. Once a mes-
sage is sent, the sender and receiver generate the next message
pseudonym independently using a hash function. The hash
function input includes the current message pseudonym and a
parameter value shared between the two nodes. To synchronize
the unicast pseudonyms used by the two communicating nodes,
EAC uses anonymous acknowledgments. After receiving an ac-
knowledgment sent by the receiver, the sender updates the next
message pseudonym. However, this work does not mention
how local broadcast pseudonyms, which are used between a
sender and all its direct neighbours, are synchronised. Without
a broadcast pseudonym synchronization solution, the use of
anonymous broadcasting may not be practical in areas where
message loss and transmission errors are probable.
III.
THE CAS SCHEME
Pseudonyms in CAS are generated on a per-message basis
using a keyed hash function and a number of parameter
values. The parameters include keys, random seeds and mes-
sage sequence numbers. Each node maintains a pseudonym
table containing the parameter values for each other node
in its neighbourhood. Two phases are involved: during the
setup phase, nodes exchange and update the parameter values;
during the operational phase, they use the values to compute
and verify pseudonyms for anonymous unicast and broadcast
communications.
A unicast message from node u to the base station
via node v is composed as: Muv
=
SID
∥
RID
∥
EncryptedPayload ∥ sequv where SID is the end-to-end
mutual pseudonym, SID = Indexv ∥ HKBu(aBu ⊕ sequv)
and RID is the next-hop mutual pseudonym, RID
=
Indexv ∥ HKuv(auv ⊕ sequv), Indexv is the index used to
index node u’s parameter values in node v’s pseudonym table,
KBu and aBu are the hash pairwise key and the random seed
shared between node u and the base station, respectively, Kuv
and auv are the hash pairwise key and the random seed shared
between node u and node v, respectively and sequv is the
current message sequence number for mutual communication
between nodes u and v. When v receives message Muv, it
retrieves Indexv and searches its pseudonym table for a match.
If a match is found, node v uses the corresponding values of
Kuv and auv to compute HKuv(auv ⊕sequv). If the computed
value equals the received value, node v accepts the message,
otherwise it drops the message. When node v forwards the
message to the base station, it includes the received sequence
number sequv. When the message reaches the base station, the
base station computes HKBi(aBi ⊕ sequv) where i refers to
every node in the network. Then, it compares the computed
hash values with the hash value received in the message to
identify its original source.
A local broadcast from cluster head u to its neighbours is
composed as: Mu∗ = SID ∥ RID ∥ EncryptedPayload ∥
seqcu where SID and RID are both pseudonyms used to
identify the sender, u, SID = Sentinel ∥ HKcu(acu ⊕seqcu)
and RID = Sentinel ∥ HKcu(bcu ⊕ seqcu), where Sentinel
is a special character indicating that the broadcast is sent by
the cluster head, Kcu is the cluster key, acu and bcu are random
seeds shared between the cluster head and all other nodes in
the cluster and seqcu is the current message sequence number.
Upon receiving the broadcast, a cluster member node identiﬁes
the Sentinel to conﬁrm that the message is a broadcast from
the cluster head. The node then retrieves the parameter values
related to the cluster head from its own pseudonym table and
uses the values to compute new hash values HKcu(acu⊕seqcu)
and HKcu(bcu ⊕ seqcu). If the computed hash values match
with the received ones, then the node conﬁrms that the message
is from the respective cluster head.
IV.
PROPERTIES OF ID-APS
CAS can be improved on three fronts: (i) integrate global
node identiﬁability with ID anonymity, (ii) strengthen the
ID anonymity protection level, and (iii) reduce overheads in
achieving these properties. These improvements are accom-
plished using the following ideas:
-
For (i), this is achieved by a hybrid combination of
ﬁxed (static) and dynamic pseudonyms. Each node can be
globally identiﬁed using a ﬁxed pseudonym, while their
communications are carried out by using per-message
dynamic pseudonyms.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

-
For (ii), two measures are used. The ﬁrst is to break any
association between a currently used pseudonym and the
pseudonyms used in the past. So, the use of a random
number attribute is introduced in dynamic pseudonym
generations. In this way, if the current pseudonym is
compromised, the previously used pseudonyms remain
safe. The second measure is to hide any patterns or
hints that may help adversaries to identify a particular
node or a node performing a particular function. For
example, CAS uses special characters (Sentinel) to
identify cluster heads in broadcasts. These sentinels may
be used to identify cluster heads as only cluster heads use
them. To hide any patterns, we use the same mechanism
(indexes) for unicasts and broadcasts and these indexes
are randomly picked by the node concerned during the
setup phase of the network. We also make the structure of
the broadcast pseudonyms identical to that of the unicast
pseudonyms, making it harder for an adversary to learn
any identiﬁable information in the network.
-
For (iii), inspired by [6], the sequence number (i.e.,
message counter) is divided into two parts: one part is
explicitly sent as part of the pseudonym in a message and
the other part is hidden from transmission (i.e., stored in
the node’s memory). In this way, the sender and receiver’s
counters do not need to be tightly synchronized. As long
as the number of consecutively lost messages does not
exceed a certain threshold, the receiver can still verify
the dynamic pseudonym, learn the message sender and
synchronise its counter value with the sequence value
received. This, along with the reduction in the number of
overhead bits each message has to carry, can lead to both
bandwidth and node battery savings.
V.
PRELIMINARIES
This section presents the system model, assumptions and
requirement speciﬁcations used in the design of ID-APS.
A. System Model
The WSN consists of a number of homogeneous resource-
constrained static sensors and a single resource-rich base
station (BS). All network links are assumed to be bidirectional.
The network is partitioned into a set of clusters, each with an
elected cluster head (CH). Sensor nodes periodically collect
measured data and locally aggregate the collected data within
each cluster before sending the aggregated data to the BS.
Communication modes in this setting include:
-
Broadcasts from the BS to all network nodes.
-
Unicasts between the BS and any other network node.
-
Broadcasts from a node to all its one-hop neighbours.
-
Broadcasts from the CH to all cluster member nodes.
-
Unicasts among nodes in the same cluster (or tier).
To maximise security, the principle of separation of duties
is adopted to establish cryptographic (i.e., symmetrical) keys.
In other words, different keys are used for different purposes
as follows:
-
Network key (kN): This is the network-wide key shared
between the BS and all nodes in the network. It is used
for securing messages broadcast by the BS.
-
Individual Key (kBi): Each node i shares a unique indi-
vidual key with the BS. The key is used to secure pairwise
unicasts between the node and the BS.
-
Pairwise Key (kij): Each node i shares a unique pairwise
key with each of its one-hop neighbours, j. This key is
used by node i to secure unicast messages to node j and
vice versa.
-
Broadcast Key (k∗
i ): Each node i shares a unique broad-
cast key with each of its one-hop neighbours. This key
is used to secure local broadcasts by node i to its
neighbours.
-
Cluster Broadcast Key (k⊙
i ): This key is shared by a CH
i and other member nodes in the cluster. It is used by the
CH to secure all local broadcasts to cluster members.
kN and kBi are generated by the BS and pre-loaded into
each node prior to its deployment. kij and k∗
i are established
using the Energy-efﬁcient Distributed Deterministic Key man-
agement scheme (EDDK) [7]. In addition to key establishment,
EDDK is also used for node discovery and periodic secure
updates of kij and k∗
i . k⊙
i is established by the CH. The CH
generates the key using a pseudorandom function and securely
unicasts it to every cluster member using the pairwise keys.
Adversaries try to identify the nodes and the communica-
tion relationships among them. To do this, they try to access all
available information by any means (passive or active attacks).
The notations used in this paper are summarised in Table I.
B. Assumptions
-
Each node i ∈ N has a unique identity, IDi.
-
The BS is always available, trustworthy and protected
against physical attacks.
-
The clocks of the BS and all the sensor nodes are
synchronized.
-
Broadcasts from the BS are done by using the µTesla
authenticated broadcast method [8].
-
Sensor nodes are able to obfuscate address ﬁelds in
their Medium Access Control (MAC) layer header. This
assumption is necessary to scope our work without losing
generality. A solution to prevent sensor nodes from
leaking their MAC level IDs is to use the dynamic
pseudonyms at the MAC level as well.
-
Each node i maintains a pseudonym table Ti. Ti stores
the attribute values associated with the BS and each of
the node’s neighbours as shown in Table II.
C. Design Requirement Speciﬁcations
(a) Node ID anonymity:
-
NIP-1: A passive adversary should be unable to learn the
identity of the source or destination of a unicast message.
-
NIP-2: A passive adversary should be unable to learn the
identity of the source of a broadcast.
-
NIP-3: An active adversary should be unable to learn
the identities of uncompromised nodes through eaves-
dropping on their unicast communication.
-
NIP-4: An active adversary should be unable to learn the
past identities of a compromised node.
(b) Node Global Identiﬁcation:
-
GLB-1: A sensor node should be able to globally identify
other network nodes without exposing the node IDs to an
eavesdropping adversary.
(c) Message Security:
-
MSE-1: All messages transmitted should be conﬁdential.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.
ID-APS NOTATION
Notation
Deﬁnition
N
Set of all nodes in WSN where total number of nodes |N| = N.
Ti
The pseudonym table of node i.
Ni
Set of all nodes that have their details stored in Ti.
Ai
Subset of Ni which includes all nodes that node i is allowed to
communicate with based on node i’s role.
α
Secret only known by the BS.
β
Shared secret known by the BS and all network nodes.
HID
k
(.)
Keyed one-way hash function with output of lID bits long.
Hk(.)
Keyed one-way hash function with output of lH bits long.
⊕
Bitwise exclusive-or (XOR) operation.
IDB
Real identity of BS. All IDs are lID bits long.
IDi
Real identity of node i exclusively known to node i and BS.
ID
′
i
Fixed initial pseudonym assigned to node i.
ID
′′
i
Fixed operational pseudonym created for node i.
IDi→B
Dynamic pairwise pseudonym computed by node i; it is used in
unicast messages sent to BS.
IDi→j
Dynamic pairwise pseudonym computed by node i; it is used in
unicast messages sent to node j.
IDi→∗
Dynamic broadcast pseudonym computed by node i; it is used in
broadcast messages sent to neighbours.
kN
Network key shared by BS and all network nodes. All keys used are
lk bits long.
kBi
Individual key shared between node i and BS.
kij
Pairwise key shared between nodes i and j.
k∗
i
Broadcast key shared between node i and all its one-hop neighbours.
k⊙
i
Cluster broadcast key shared between a CH node i and all member
nodes in the cluster.
indi→j
Unicast index shared between nodes i and j. All indexes are li bits
long.
indi→∗
Broadcast index of node i shared between node i and its neighbours.
Hi→j
Pairwise hash value used for the construction of dynamic pseudonyms
in messages sent from node i to node j.
Hi→∗
Broadcast hash value used for the construction of dynamic
pseudonyms in messages broadcast by node i to its neighbours.
hi→j
Implicit counter of messages sent by node i to node j. hi→j is lh
bits long.
si→j
Explicit counter of messages sent by node i to node j. si→j is ls
bits long.
Ci→j
Unicast counter. This is the counter of messages sent by node i to
node j. It consists of two parts: the implicit counter, hi→j, and the
explicit counter, si→∗, ( i.e., Ci→j = hi→j ∥ si→j).
Ci→∗
Broadcast counter of node i. It is the counter of messages broadcast
by node i to its neighbours.
Ci→⊙
Cluster broadcast counter of node i. It is the counter of messages
broadcast by node i to other member nodes in the cluster.
ri→j
Random number generated by node i for the construction of dynamic
pseudonyms in messages sent from node i to node j. The random
number is lr bits long.
ri→∗
Random number generated by node i for the construction of dynamic
pseudonyms in messages broadcast from node i to its neighbours.
MAC
Message authentication code.
ST
Threshold value representing the number of lost messages that can be
tolerated by the WSN.
TABLE II.
THE PSEUDONYM TABLE (Ti) OF NODE i
BS
CH
Other neighbours
Fixed Pseudonym
ID
′′
B
ID
′′
j
ID
′′
u
ID
′′
v
. . .
Pairwise key (k)
kBi
kij
kiu
kiv
. . .
Broadcast key (k)
kN
k∗
j
k∗
u
k∗
v
. . .
Cluster broadcast key (k)
k⊙
j
Outbound unicast index (ind)
indi→B
indi→j
indi→u
indi→v
. . .
Outbound unicast counter (C)
Ci→B
Ci→j
Ci→u
Ci→v
. . .
Inbound unicast index (ind)
indB→i
indj→i
indu→i
indv→i
. . .
Inbound unicast counter (C)
CB→i
Cj→i
Cu→i
Cv→i
. . .
Broadcast index (ind)
indB→∗
indj→∗
indu→∗
indv→∗
. . .
Broadcast counter (C)
CB→∗
Cj→∗
Cu→∗
Cv→∗
. . .
Cluster broadcast counter (C)
Cj→⊙
-
MSE-2: The authenticity and integrity of a transmitted
message should be ensured.
-
MSE-3: A replay attack on a message should be de-
tectable.
(d) Minimizing Overhead Costs:
-
MOC-1: Minimize computational costs.
-
MOC-2: Minimize communication overheads.
-
MOC-3: Minimize memory requirements.
VI.
THE ID-APS SCHEME
This section provides an overview of the design of ID-APS
including different pseudonyms and protocols used.
A. Pseudonyms
As shown in Figure 1, ID-APS uses a hybrid combination
of ﬁxed (initial and operational) and dynamic (pairwise and
broadcast) pseudonyms. These pseudonyms are discussed in
more details below.
Fixed Pseudonyms 
Initial 
Dynamic Pseudonyms 
Node Real ID 
Network Initialization 
Network Operation 
𝑰𝑫𝒊
′ = 𝑯𝒌𝑵
𝑰𝑫(𝑰𝑫𝒊⨁ 𝜶) 
𝑰𝑫𝒊 
Operational 
𝑰𝑫𝒊
′′ = 𝑯𝒌𝑵
𝑰𝑫(𝑰𝑫𝒊
′⨁ 𝜷) 
Clustering 
Node Discovery 
Clustered Topology 
Broadcast 
𝑰𝑫𝒊→∗ = 𝒊𝒏𝒅𝒊→∗ ∥ 𝒔𝒊→∗ ∥ 𝒓𝒊→∗ ∥ 𝑯𝒊→∗ 
Pairwise 
𝑰𝑫𝒊→𝒋 = 𝒊𝒏𝒅𝒊→𝒋 ∥ 𝒔𝒊→𝒋 ∥ 𝒓𝒊→𝒋 ∥ 𝑯𝒊→𝒋 
𝑯𝒊→𝒋 = 𝑯𝒌𝒊𝒋(𝑰𝑫𝒊
′′⨁𝑰𝑫𝒋
′′⨁𝓒𝒊→𝒋⨁𝒓𝒊→𝒋) 
𝓒𝒊→𝒋 = 𝒉𝒊→𝒋 ∥ 𝒔𝒊→𝒋 
where 
𝑯𝒊→∗  = 𝑯𝒌𝒊
∗(𝑰𝑫𝒊
′′⨁𝓒𝒊→∗⨁𝒓𝒊→∗) 
𝓒𝒊→∗ = 𝒉𝒊→∗ ∥ 𝒔𝒊→∗ 
where 
… 
… 
… 
… 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
Pseudonym Table (𝑻𝒊) 
Figure 1.
Pseudonym structure used in ID-APS.
(a) Fixed Pseudonyms
•
Initial pseudonym ID
′
i: A unique identiﬁer of the node
used during the initial node discovery and key establishment
phase. ID
′
i is computed by the BS as ID
′
i = HID
kN (IDi ⊕ α)
and loaded into each node before its deployment.
•
Operational pseudonym ID
′′
i : A unique global identiﬁer
of the node used after the initial phase. It is used when
the node should be identiﬁed by authorized entities. It is
also used to generate dynamic pseudonyms for the node.
The conﬁdentiality of this pseudonym is always protected in
transit. It is computed as ID
′′
i = HID
kN (ID
′
i ⊕ β).
(b) Dynamic Pseudonyms
•
Pairwise pseudonym IDi→j: This is a dynamically
generated pseudonym used as a per-message pseudonym
identifying both node i (as a sender) and j (as a receiver)
in each message ﬂowing from node i to j. Similarly,
node j will use IDj→i for its unicast to node i. Only
the intended recipient of the unicast can recognise this
pseudonym. The pairwise pseudonyms are used in all unicast
communications taking place after the initial phase. IDi→j
is constructed as IDi→j = indi→j ∥ si→j ∥ ri→j ∥ Hi→j
where
Hi→j
=
Hkij(ID
′′
i
⊕ ID
′′
j ⊕ Ci→j ⊕ ri→j),
Ci→j = hi→j ∥ si→j and,
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

-
indi→j is an outbound unicast index value shared be-
tween nodes i and j. It is also called the inbound unicast
index of node j for messages from node i. This value is
ﬁxed for the life-time of node i. It is used by node j (the
recipient) to verify the potential senders of a received
message. This veriﬁcation is designed to ﬁlter out any
unauthentic messages as soon as they are received, i.e.,
before more accurate and expensive veriﬁcations need to
be performed. A recipient only accepts a message if the
index value contained in the message matches with one
of those recorded in its pseudonym table. Node j will use
another index indj→i to send unicasts to node i. These
indexes are established as follows: assume that the length
of indi→j is li bits, node i picks indi→j at random from
the range of 2li values and sends it to node j encrypted
with the pairwise key. Node j does the same to establish
indj→i with node i.
-
Ci→j is used to generate sequence numbers to be car-
ried in messages from node i to node j. It is called
an outbound unicast counter by node i and inbound
unicast counter by node j. It consists of two parts: an
implicit counter hi→j and an explicit counter si→j, (i.e.,
Ci→j = hi→j ∥ si→j). The implicit counter hi→j is not
included in the pseudonym; rather it is one of the input
items used in generating the keyed hash value Hi→j.
The explicit counter si→j is explicitly transmitted as part
of the pseudonym. si→j increments with each message
transmission while hi→j increments each time si→j
reaches its maximum value, at which point si→j is set to
0. Ci→j is maintained by both nodes in their pseudonym
tables and its value is incremented by the sender after
each message transmission and by the receiver after each
message reception. Typically, the counters start from 0.
However, to increase the anonymity level, each node
establishes a random start to its counter value with the
receiver. The purpose for using this counter is two-fold:
(i) to ensure uniqueness of the pseudonyms carried in
each message; (ii) to assure the freshness of a received
messages (i.e., for detecting replayed messages).
-
ri→j is a random number generated by node i to break the
link between the pseudonyms used in different messages
sent from node i to j, i.e., to make it harder for an
adversary to compute node pseudonyms used previously
once the current pseudonym is compromised. ri→j is
regenerated before each message transmission and sent as
part of the pseudonym but not stored in the pseudonym
tables of the communicating nodes.
-
Hi→j is an outbound hash value carried as part of the
pseudonym in a unicast from node i to node j. It is used
by the sending node to (i) further obfuscate the identities
of the sender and receiver of the unicast; (ii) to ensure
the authenticity of the pseudonym. Upon reception, this
hash value will also be used by the recipient to verify the
pseudonym.
To generate a pairwise pseudonym, the source node ﬁrst
retrieves kij, indi→j and Ci→j from its pseudonym table,
picks a random number ri→j, computes Hi→j and constructs
IDi→j. The node then increments the counter value to make
it ready for the next message.
•
Broadcast
pseudonym
IDi→∗:
This
pseudonym
is
dynamically generated by node i for each message it
broadcasts to its neighbours. IDi→∗ can only be identiﬁed
by nodes that have node i in their pseudonym tables and are
located within the transmission range of node i. The generation
of a broadcast pseudonym is similar to that of a pairwise
pseudonym, except that a different set of attribute values are
used based on whether the node is broadcasting within its
own cluster or outside the cluster. If the node is broadcasting
within the cluster, then the node uses its broadcast index
indi→∗, cluster broadcast key k⊙
i
and cluster broadcast
counter Ci→⊙ to construct IDi→∗. The parameters, indi→∗,
k⊙
i
and Ci→⊙ are shared among all the nodes in the cluster
and maintained in each node’s pseudonym table. IDi→∗ is
constructed as IDi→∗ = indi→∗ ∥ si→⊙ ∥ ri→∗ ∥ Hi→∗
where Hi→∗ = Hk⊙
i (ID
′′
i ⊕ Ci→⊙ ⊕ ri→∗). However, if
the node is broadcasting outside its cluster, then it uses its
broadcast index indi→∗, broadcast key k∗
i
and broadcast
counter Ci→∗ to construct IDi→∗ where k∗
i and Ci→∗ are
shared among all the neighbouring nodes and maintained
in each node’s pseudonym table. IDi→∗ is constructed
as IDi→∗
= indi→∗
∥ si→∗
∥ ri→∗
∥ Hi→∗ where
Hi→∗ = Hk∗
i (ID
′′
i ⊕ Ci→∗ ⊕ ri→∗).
(c) Dynamic Pseudonym Veriﬁcation (DP-Ver)
When a message is received by a node, say j, the node
executes algorithm DP-Ver (Figure 2) to conﬁrm the validity
and authenticity of the pseudonym contained in the message.
DP-Ver consists of three veriﬁcations, DP-Ver.1, DP-Ver.2 and
DP-Ver.3. If the outcome of DP-Ver.1 is negative, node j will
discard the message, otherwise it performs DP-Ver.2. If the
outcome of DP-Ver.2 is positive, then the node conﬁrms the
validity of the received pseudonym, otherwise it performs DP-
Ver.3. Similarly, if the outcome of DP-Ver.3 is positive then
the node conﬁrms the validity of the pseudonym, otherwise,
it discards the message. The three veriﬁcations are detailed
below.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DP-Ver.1  
 DP-Ver.2  
 DP-Ver.3 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
𝑰𝑫𝒓𝒆𝒄 
matchUni 
matchBro 
𝑰𝑫′′ 
𝐦𝐞𝐬𝐬𝐚𝐠𝐞 𝐭𝐲𝐩𝐞 
𝐤𝐞𝐲 
Discard  
message 
𝑰𝑫𝒓𝒆𝒄 
Figure 2.
DP-Ver algorithm.
•
DP-Ver.1 - Index Value Veriﬁcation: Used to verify the
received index value by searching for a match in the receiver’s
pseudonym table. DP-Ver.1 is a computationally cheap veriﬁ-
cation that is used to ﬁlter out unauthentic messages as soon
as possible. Node j maintains a set of nodes with which node
j is allowed to communicate, Aj where Aj ⊂ Nj. Each node
belongs to one cluster and is only allowed to communicate
with the nodes (CH and other members) in the same cluster.
Only the CH is allowed to communicate outside the cluster
with other CHs. Therefore, when node j receives a message,
it retrieves index indrec from the received message and checks
it against the index values of the nodes belonging to Aj. As
node j does not know whether the received message is a
unicast or broadcast, it has to check against the unicast and
broadcast indexes of all nodes in Aj. If matches are found
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

within Aj, then DP-Ver.1 returns two sets of potential senders,
one for the unicasts (matchUni) and the other for broadcasts
(matchBro). Otherwise, it returns empty sets, which means
that node j is not the intended recipient of the message or
the message is not authentic, in which case the node should
discard the message.
•
DP-Ver.2 - Keyed hash value veriﬁcation (no message
loss): Used to verify the keyed hash value where there are no
lost messages (i.e., the received explicit counter = the explicit
counter maintained in the receiver’s pseudonym table). If either
of the two sets, matchUni or matchBro is not empty, then
DP-Ver.2 is used to verify the received keyed hash value Hrec.
To do this, the algorithm veriﬁes the nodes in matchUni ﬁrst
and if the result is negative it continue verifying the nodes in
matchBro. For each ID
′′
i ∈ matchUni, node j retrieves kij
and Ci→j from Tj and checks if si→j = srec. If they are equal,
then node j computes H
′ = Hkij(ID
′′
i ⊕ID
′′
j ⊕Ci→j ⊕rrec)
and checks if H
′ = Hrec. If they are equal, this means that
node j is the intended recipient of the unicast message, the
message is fresh (not replayed), and it is sent by node i. Node
j then increments Ci→j, updates Tj with this incremented
value and terminates the algorithm returning the operational
pseudonym of the sender ID
′′
i , the type of the message (i.e.,
unicast) and the pairwise key. If the two keyed hash values are
not equal, the execution of the algorithm continues by verifying
the ID
′′s in matchBro. The veriﬁcation here is similar to
that for matchUni. If this veriﬁcation is negative, then node
j proceeds to execute DP-Ver.3.
•
DP-Ver.3 - Keyed hash value veriﬁcation (with message
loss): Used to verify the keyed hash value where there are
lost messages (i.e., the received explicit counter ̸= the explicit
counter maintained in the receiver’s pseudonym table). The
maximum number of lost messages that can be tolerated
equals to a threshold value, ST . The algorithm starts with
verifying the nodes belonging to matchUni. First, it retrieves
kij and Ci→j from Tj for each ID
′′
i ∈ matchUni, computes
SD = |si→j −srec| and checks if SD < ST . If true, then node
j increases Ci→j based on SD value, i.e., temporarily creates a
new counter CT emp = Ci→j+SD and uses CT emp to compute
H
′ = Hkij(ID
′′
i ⊕ ID
′′
j ⊕ CT emp ⊕ rrec). Then, it checks if
H
′ = Hrec. If they are equal, node j conﬁrms that it is the
intended recipient of the unicast message. It increases Ci→j
based on the computed number of lost messages and updates
Tj with this value, thus, synchronising the counter value with
the sender. Then, node j terminates the algorithm returning
the operational pseudonym of the sender ID
′′, the type of the
message (i.e., unicast) and the pairwise key. If H
′ ̸= Hrec,
then, node j continues verifying if the sender is one of the
ID
′′s in matchBro. If the outcome of this veriﬁcation is
negative, then node j discards the message.
B. Anonymous Communication Protocols
There are three communication protocols in ID-APS:
anonymous one-hop unicast (AOHU), anonymous multi-hop
unicast (AMHU) and anonymous local broadcast (ALBR).
(a) Anonymous one-hop unicast (AOHU)
This protocol consists of AOHU-Send and AOHU-Receive
procedures. A node i sends data to its one-hop neighbour,
node j, by executing AOHU-Send, for which node i generates
a pairwise pseudonym IDi→j, encrypts the data using kij,
generates a MAC of the pseudonym and the encrypted data,
and constructs a message mi→j = IDi→j ∥ Payloadi→j ∥
MACi→j where Payloadi→j is the encrypted data. Then,
node i sends mi→j to node j. Node j executes AOHU-Receive
to receives mi→j, for which it veriﬁes the pseudonym using
DP-Ver to ﬁnd the source of the message, veriﬁes the MAC
and decrypts the payload using kij.
(b) Anonymous multi-hop unicast (AMHU)
This protocol is built on AOHU. It consists of AMHU-
Send, AMHU-Forward and AMHU-Receive procedures. When
node i is to send data using a unicast to the BS multi-hops
away (e.g., through an intermediate node j), node i executes
AMHU-Send for which it generates an end-to-end pairwise
pseudonym IDi→B, encrypts the data using kBi and generates
a MAC of the pseudonym and the encrypted data. Next, node
i constructs a message mi→B = IDi→B ∥ Payloadi→B ∥
MACi→B. As the BS is not a direct neighbour of node i, node
i checks its routing table for the next hop (i.e., node j) in the
route to the BS. Next, node i uses the AOHU-Send procedure
to send a unicast, which wraps mi→B to the one-hop neighbour
j. Upon receiving the one-hop unicast message from node i,
node j executes AMHU-Forward to forward node i’s message
to the BS. First, it retrieves mi→B using the AOHU-Receive
procedure. Then, it checks its routing table for the next hop
(i.e., the BS). After that, it uses the AOHU-Send procedure to
forward node i’s message to the BS. When the BS receives the
one-hop unicast from node j, the BS executes AMHU-Receive
procedure to retrieve the data sent by node i. This is done by
executing AOHI-Receive ﬁrst to retrieve mi→B. After that, the
BS veriﬁes IDi→B using DP-Ver to ﬁnd the original source of
the message. Then, it veriﬁes the received MAC and decrypts
the payload using kBi to retrieve the data sent by node i.
(c) Anonymous local broadcast (ALBR)
This protocol consists of ALBR-Send and ALBR-Receive
procedures. When node i is to send a broadcast to its one-
hop neighbours, it executes the ALBR-Send procedure. In this
procedure, node i ﬁrst reads the respective broadcast key from
its memory, depending on whether it is broadcasting within
the cluster or outside it. Then, node i generates the broadcast
pseudonym IDi→∗, encrypts the data and generates a MAC of
the pseudonym and the encrypted data. Next, node i broadcasts
the message mi→∗ = IDi→∗ ∥ Payloadi→∗ ∥ MACi→∗
to the neighbours. Upon receiving the broadcast by a neigh-
bouring node j, node j executes ALBR-Receive for which it
veriﬁes the pseudonym using DP-Ver to ﬁnd the source of
the broadcast, veriﬁes the MAC and decrypts the payload to
retrieve the data sent by node i.
C. ID-APS in Action
There
are
three
phases
in
ID-APS:
sensor
node
initialization, network initialization and network operation.
(a) Sensor Node Initialization
Prior to deployment of the network, each sensor node is
initialized with speciﬁc parameter values and functions. For
each node i ∈ N, the BS generates the following parameter
values: IDi, ID
′
i, β, kN, kBi, indB→i, indi→B, indB→∗,
CB→i, Ci→B and CB→∗. The indexes and starting counter
values are picked at random for each node. The installed
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

functions are two keyed hash functions, HID
K (.), Hk(.) and
a pseudorandom function.
(b) Network Initialization
In this phase, nodes discover their neighbours, establish
pairwise and broadcast keys and perform clustering, preparing
for normal network operation. In the node discovery and key
establishment phase, the nodes use EDDK methods to discover
their neighbours, and establish broadcast and pairwise keys.
In this process, the nodes identify their neighbours using the
initial ﬁxed pseudonyms and populates a pseudonym table
that includes the initial ﬁxed pseudonym and the established
keys for each neighbour. The nodes also pick the indexes
(indi→∗, indi→j) and starting counter values (Ci→∗, Ci→j) at
random and exchange these values with their neighbours. Then,
each node generates an operational pseudonym for itself and
for each neighbour in the node’s pseudonym table and deletes
the initial pseudonyms. By the end of this process, each node
should have updated its pseudonym table and be ready for the
clustering process to be performed. During clustering, nodes
organise themselves into clusters and elect CHs. To ensure
that the clustering process is done in a secure and anonymous
way, we utilise the Private Cluster Head Election (PCHE) [9]
protocol. This protocol is designed to hide the identities of the
CHs from an adversary who can monitor the clustering process.
To further increase the protection level of the ID anonymity,
we use our ALBR protocol for all broadcast messages involved
in the PCHE. Upon completion of clustering, each node should
know if it is a CH or a cluster member. After that, the elected
CH in each cluster generates a cluster broadcast key and picks
a cluster broadcast counter at random and unicasts both values
to each member in its cluster. It is worth noting that the elected
CHs will also need to establish their routes to the BS. ID-APS
is independent of the routing mechanism; however, ID-APS
requires that each CH uses the dynamic pseudonyms when
sending the route request and route update messages. Once
clustering is complete and the routes to the BS established,
the nodes are ready to perform normal network operation.
(c) Network Operation
In this phase, the nodes start to carry out their normal
functional operations such as data collection and aggregation.
Cluster member nodes can only communicate with the CH and
other cluster members (intra-cluster communication). Commu-
nication outside the cluster (inter-cluster communication) is
carried out via the CH.
In intra-cluster communication, each node senses the phys-
ical phenomenon at a pre-deﬁned sampling period and sends
its reading to the CH. The CH waits for the readings to be
received from different cluster members before applying an
aggregation function to compute an aggregate value for the
readings. Intra-cluster communication can either be unicast or
broadcast among cluster members as follows:
-
Intra-cluster unicast is carried out using the AOHU pro-
tocol and the pairwise keys to secure the communication.
-
Intra-cluster broadcast is carried out using the ALBR
protocol and the cluster broadcast key to secure the
communication.
In inter-cluster communication, each CH forwards the
locally aggregated data within its cluster to the BS through
other CHs. CHs which are closer to the BS may collect the
aggregated data from other CHs that are further away and
aggregate the received data before sending them to the BS.
The inter-cluster communication encompasses the following:
-
Inter-cluster unicast between a CH and the BS is carried
out using the AOHU protocol if the CH is a direct
neighbour of the BS or the AMHU protocol if the CH
is multi-hops away from the BS. In both protocols the
pairwise keys are used to secure the communication.
-
Inter-cluster unicast among neighboring CHs is carried
out using the AOHU protocol and the pairwise keys to
secure the communication.
-
Inter-cluster broadcast from the BS is done through the
authenticated broadcast protocol µTesla [8].
VII.
ANALYSES AND EVALUATION
The effectiveness and efﬁciency of ID-APS are analysed
based on the parameter values presented in Table III.
TABLE III.
ID-APS EVALUATION PARAMETER VALUES
Sensor mote
CrossBow TelosB [10]
Block cipher
RC5 [11] (CBC mode)
Message authentication
CBC-MAC-RC5
Key length lk
8 bytes
ID length lID
8 bytes
Index length li
1 byte
Counter length (lh + ls)
(3+1) bytes
Pseudonym random number length lr
2 bytes
Pseudonym Hash value length lH
4 bytes
A. ID Anonymity
NIP-1: As described earlier, a single pairwise pseudonym
IDi→j = indi→j ∥ si→j ∥ ri→j ∥ Hi→j is used to identify
both the sender (node i) and the receiver (node j) of a unicast
message, where Hi→j = Hkij(ID
′′
i ⊕ ID
′′
j ⊕ Ci→j ⊕ ri→j).
It is hard for an adversary to gain any identity information
regarding the source or destination of the message from the
hash value. This is because (i) it is computationally hard to
reverse the hash value due to the one-way property of the
hash function and (ii) to compute a matching hash value,
the adversary needs to know the pairwise key that was used
in the computation, which is only known by the message
sender and receiver, and in addition, the adversary needs to
guess the correct values of ID
′′
i , ID
′′
j and hi→j to succeed.
The probability of guessing the correct values of all these
parameters is: (1/2lK+2lID+lh = 2−216), which is sufﬁciently
low if the values of lK, lID and lh are sufﬁciently large.
NIP-2: The analysis of NIP-2 follows that of NIP-1. The
hash value in a broadcast is computed as Hi→∗ = Hk∗
i (ID
′′
i ⊕
Ci→∗ ⊕ ri→∗). The probability of guessing the correct values
of k∗
i , ID
′′
i and hi→∗ is (1/2lK+lID+lh = 2−158).
NIP-3: For a neighbourhood of n nodes where an active
adversary is present, we analyse the impact on ID anonymity
when the adversary compromises m nodes where m ≤ n − 3.
Let us consider the worst case scenario when the adversary
compromises all the nodes except three nodes a, b and c
(i.e., there are n − 3 colluding nodes). The adversary may
learn ID
′′
a, ID
′′
b and ID
′′
c assuming that each of the non-
compromised nodes lies in the transmission range of at least
one compromised node. When node b for example sends a
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

unicast to node c, node b constructs the dynamic pseudonym
as IDb→c = indb→c ∥ sb→c ∥ rb→c ∥ Hb→c where,
Hb→c = Hkbc(ID
′′
b ⊕ ID
′′
c ⊕ Cb→c ⊕ rb→c). The additional
information available to the adversary through overhearing the
message is sb→c and rb→c. However, the adversary does not
know kbc and hb→c which are only known to nodes b and
c. Therefore, from the adversary’s point of view, each of the
three non-compromised nodes has equal probability to be the
sender or receiver of the message. To learn the exact sender
or receiver of the message, the adversary needs to guess the
values of kbc and hb→c and apply the keyed hash function to
get the correct Hb→c. The probability to get the correct hash
value is 1/2lK+lh = 2−88.
NIP-4: ID-APS uses a random number, r, to break the link
between different pseudonyms used by the same node for the
same destination. If a node i is compromised, the adversary
may obtain all the necessary items (i.e., crypto keys, indexes,
operational ﬁxed pseudonyms and counters) to compute node
i’s pseudonyms. Let us denote the current pseudonym of node
i in its unicast communication to node j as IDm
i→j. If IDm
i→j
is compromised, then to learn the pseudonym used in the
previous unicast message to node j, i.e., IDm−1
i→j , the adversary
has to decrement the current counter value and guess the
random number used in the previous message. As the length
of ri→j is lr bits, the probability of guessing the correct
random number used by the node in the previous message
is 1/2lr = 2−16. If higher anonymity is required, the length
of ri→j can be set to a higher value.
B. Degree of anonymity vs. computational costs analysis
The anonymity level of ID-APS is analysed and quantiﬁed
based on the concept of degree of anonymity [12]. The entropy
of a system is calculated after the attack and compared with the
maximum entropy of the system. This provides a measure of
information gained by the adversary after the attack. Assuming
a WSN with a total number of N nodes distributed uniformly
in a ﬁeld, if an eavesdropping adversary is present while a mes-
sage is being sent, then the only ﬁxed part of the pseudonym
that the adversary can identify a sender by is the index value.
However, this index value may also be used by several other
nodes while sending messages to their neighbours. As the
index values are picked at random, the probability of a node i
picking a certain index (inda) to identify itself as a sender to
one of its neighbours is 1/2li. Let the average size of |Ni| = n,
then the node will pick n indexes at random to identify itself
in unicast communications and another index for broadcast
communications. As broadcasts and unicasts messages have
similar structure, the total probability, Pinda, of a node using
index inda to identify itself in any message sent by the node
is given by (1).
Pinda = 1 −
2li − 1
2li
n+1
(1)
This also implies that approximately NPinda nodes in
the network will be using inda to identify themselves when
communicating with other nodes (assuming large network).
Through continuous monitoring of the index values appended
to messages exchanged in the network, the adversary may
assign certain probability to each node as being the sender
of an eavesdropped message. Let X be the discrete random
variable with probability mass function Pi = P(X = i), where
i represents a single sender in a set of potential senders, N. Let
us assume that, in the worst case scenario, the adversary is able
to identify all the nodes that are using inda as identiﬁer. So,
the adversary assigns a probability of (1/NPinda) to NPinda
nodes as being the senders of a message that has an index
value = inda and a probability of 0 to the rest of the nodes
in the network. The probability Pi is given by (2).
Pi =
(
1
NPinda
for NPinda nodes
0
for N (1 − Pinda) nodes
(2)
From [12], the entropy of the system after the attack is
computed as E(X) = − PN
i=1 Pilog2(Pi), hence:
E(X) = log2
  
1 −
2li − 1
2li
n+1!
N
!
(3)
The maximum entropy of the system EM is achieved when
the adversary assigns a probability Pi = 1/N to each node in
the network as being the sender of a message, i.e., EM =
log2(N). Hence, the degree of anonymity d is estimated as:
d = E(X)
EM
=
log2

1 −

2li−1
2li
n+1
N

log2(N)
(4)
We see that the degree of anonymity depends on three
parameters N, n and li. As N and n are ﬁxed values, then the
only parameter that can affect the anonymity of the nodes is
li. Figure 3 shows the impact of li for a WSN with N = 1000
and n = 100. It is clear from the ﬁgure that as li increases, the
degree of anonymity decreases. According to [12], to achieve
an acceptable level of anonymity, the degree of anonymity
should be greater than 0.8. Therefore, li should be selected as
(≤ 8 bits) in the above example.
0
5
10
15
20
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Length of the index value in bits
Source degree of anonymity
Figure 3.
The impact of the length of the index value on the source degree
of anonymity for N=1000 and n=100.
Let us now analyse the computational costs of receiving a
message. Depending on the number of matches of the received
pseudonym with those contained in a receiver’s pseudonym
table, the receiver may need to execute more than one keyed
hash operation before successfully conﬁrming the validity of
the pseudonym. Suppose that each node i has an average size
of |Ai| = m. The value of m is directly proportional to the
size of the cluster. The pseudonym table of node i, Ti, includes
an inbound unicast index and a broadcast index for each node
in Ti. Therefore, when node i receives a message, it has to
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

ﬁnd a match within (2m) indexes in Ti. As described earlier,
the inbound unicast indexes and broadcast indexes are picked
at random during the node discovery and key establishment
phase. Based on this, there is a probability that more than one
index in Ti could match the index of the received dynamic
pseudonym. The probability of getting exactly r indexes in Ti
that matches the index of a received pseudonym (indrec) is
given by (5).
Pmatch(r) =
2m
r

(Pind)r(1 − Pind)2m−r
(5)
Figure 4 shows the probability Pmatch(r) against different
r values for m = 100 nodes and li = 8 bits. It can be seen from
the ﬁgure that the probability beyond 3 matches is very low.
In other words, in 99% of the cases, the pseudonym matches
occurs in less than 3 matches. Therefore, in 99% of the cases,
the veriﬁcation of a pseudonym involves less than 3 keyed
hash operations.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of matching indexes (r)
Probability of getting (r) matches
Figure 4.
The probability of getting exactly r indexes in Ti that matches
indrec for m = 100 and li = 8.
This computational cost may be further reduced by tuning
the parameter values in (5) as follows:
-
Reduce the size of the cluster and therefore the value of
m drops: This will result in a reduction in the list of
potential indexes. Figure 5 depicts the three cases where
m = 100, 50 and 10 nodes, respectively. As can be seen,
reducing the cluster size from 100 to 10 nodes reduces
the likelihood of matching indexes from 3 to 1 in 99%
of the cases.
-
Increase the size of the index: Figure 6 shows the
probability of getting r matches when li is set to 8, 10 and
12, respectively, where m = 100. As shown in the ﬁgure,
the probability Pmatch(r) drops when li increases from
8 to 12 bits. For li = 12, the receiver need to compute
less than 2 hash values in 99% of the time.
From the above we can see that by reducing the cluster size
and/or increasing the bit length of the index, we may reduce
the computational costs incurred as a result of anonymity pro-
tection. However, increasing the bit length of the index reduces
the degree of anonymity as illustrated by (4). Therefore, for
an acceptable level of anonymity, we may cut computational
costs by reducing the size of a cluster.
C. Performance Evaluation
In this section, the performance of ID-APS is evaluated in
terms of computation, communication and memory consump-
tion and compared to the performance of CAS and EAC.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of matching indexes (r)
Probability of getting (r) matches
 ← m=100
 ← m=50
 ← m=10
 
 
m=100
m=50
m=10
Figure 5.
The probability of getting exactly r indexes in Ti that matches
indrec for li = 8 and different m values.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of matching indexes (r)
Probability of getting (r) matches
 ← li=8
 ← li=10
 ← li=12
 
 
li=8
li=10
li=12
Figure 6.
The probability of getting exactly r indexes in Ti that matches
indrec for different li values and m = 100.
MOC-1: In ID-APS, each message construction prior to
transmission involves the following computational costs: one
random number generation, one dynamic pseudonym gen-
eration using keyed hash function, one payload encryption
and one MAC generation protecting the pseudonym and the
encrypted payload using a keyed hash function. Based on
the experiments with RC5 execution time for TelosB motes
[13], constructing a message in ID-APS with a maximum
payload size of 29 bytes, as suggested by TinyOS [14], takes
less than 20 ms. According to [8], sensor nodes support
a maximum throughput of twenty 30-bytes messages/s with
the microcontroller being idle for about 50% of the time.
Therefore, our scheme is able to anonymize the node IDs,
encrypt and generate a MAC for every message sent by the
sensor node. The computational costs of receiving the message
at the receiver side are comparable to that of the sender.
Table IV shows a comparison of computational costs with CAS
and EAC.
TABLE IV.
COMPUTATIONAL COSTS COMPARISON
Scheme
Sender
Receiver
Other
neighbours
CAS
One keyed hashing
operation
One keyed hashing
operation
One keyed
hashing operation
EAC
Two hashing operations
One hash operation
-
ID-APS
One random number
generation and one
keyed hashing operation
One keyed hashing
operation
-
As can be seen from Table IV, the computational costs of
ID-APS are comparable to that of EAC and better than CAS.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

This is because with the optimization of li and cluster size in
ID-APS, there are negligible computational costs involved by
other nodes in the neighbourhood.
MOC-2: A pseudonym in ID-APS is 8 bytes in size and
it is used to identify both the sender and the receiver of a
message. Table V shows the comparison between the three
schemes in terms of message overheads. It can be seen that
ID-APS exhibits the least communication costs in comparison
with the CAS and EAC schemes. EAC has the highest message
overheads as the receiver in EAC is required to send an
acknowledgment to the sender to synchronise the pseudonym
parameters.
TABLE V.
MESSAGE OVERHEADS COMPARISON
Scheme
Sender
Receiver
Total
CAS
18-byte (ID+Index+Seq)
-
18-byte
EAC
32-byte (2 IDs)
20-byte (Ack)
52-byte
ID-APS
8-byte (ID)
-
8-byte
MOC-3: The memory requirements for the parameters
used in ID-APS are shown in Table VI in comparison with
CAS and EAC. In this table, n denotes the size of the node
neighbourhood. Figure 7 shows a comparison of memory
consumption between the three schemes for different n sizes.
TABLE VI.
MEMORY CONSUMPTION COMPARISON
Scheme
Parameters
Memory consumption
(byte)
CAS
Key size K = 8 bytes
Other parameters size P = 8 bytes
Index size I = 2 bytes
Sequence number size S = 8 bytes
2K + 3P + S +
n(2K + 2I + 3P + 2S)
EAC
Pseudonym size ID = 16 bytes
Key size K = 16 bytes
Other parameters size P = 16 bytes
Link direction size L = 0.25 byte
3ID + 2K + 2P +
n(3ID + 2K + 2P + L)
ID-APS
ID/pseudonym size ID = 8 bytes
Key size K = 8 bytes
Index size I = 1 byte
Counter size C = 4 bytes
3ID + 4K + 4I + 5C +
n(ID + 3K + 3I + 4C)
20
50
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Number of neighbouring nodes (n)
Memory size (KB)
 
 
CAS
EAC
ID−APS
Figure 7.
Comparison of memory consumption for different n values.
There are two observations from Figure 7. The ﬁrst is that
the memory requirements of ID-APS can be easily accom-
modated in the sensor memory. This is because TelosB mote
has an architecture where the entire memory (48KB of ﬂash
memory, 10KB of RAM and 1MB of external EEPROM) is
accessible for code and data. The second observation is that
ID-APS consumes least memory space compared to the other
two schemes.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has presented the design and evaluation of a
novel ID anonymity scheme, ID-APS. The scheme is designed
to achieve a high level of ID anonymity with as less overhead
costs as possible in terms of computation, communication
and memory space. ID-APS provides ID anonymity in unicast
and broadcast communication against passive adversaries and
against attacks on past used pseudonyms by active adversaries.
Theoretical evaluation of the anonymity level provided by the
scheme has been carried out using the concept of the degree
of anonymity, and the scheme has also been compared with
two most relevant schemes in literature. The evaluation and
comparison results have shown that ID-APS achieves a good
level of ID anonymity protection with least level of overhead
costs in comparison with related solutions. However, with ID-
APS, if a node is compromised, the adversary may be able
to impersonate the node and compromise the privacy of other
nodes. Our future work will examine this issue in depth.
REFERENCES
[1]
X. Luo, X. Ji, and M.-S. Park, “Location privacy against trafﬁc
analysis attacks in wireless sensor networks,” in Information Science
and Applications (ICISA), 2010 International Conference on.
IEEE,
2010, pp. 1–6.
[2]
S. Misra and G. Xue, “Efﬁcient anonymity schemes for clustered
wireless sensor networks,” International Journal of Sensor Networks,
vol. 1, no. 1, 2006, pp. 50–63.
[3]
Y. Ouyang et al., “Providing anonymity in wireless sensor networks,”
in Pervasive Services, IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2007,
pp. 145–148.
[4]
J.-P. Sheu, J.-R. Jiang, and C. Tu, “Anonymous path routing in wireless
sensor networks,” in Communications, 2008. ICC’08. IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 2728–2734.
[5]
J. Chen, X. Du, and B. Fang, “An efﬁcient anonymous communication
protocol for wireless sensor networks,” Wireless Communications and
Mobile Computing, vol. 12, no. 14, 2012, pp. 1302–1312.
[6]
M. Gouda, Y.-r. Choi, and A. Arora, “Antireplay protocols for sensor
networks,” Handbook on Theoretical and Algorithmic Aspects of Sen-
sor, Ad Hoc Wireless, and Peer-to-Peer Networks,(ed. Jie Wu), CRC,
2005.
[7]
X. Zhang, J. He, and Q. Wei, “Eddk: energy-efﬁcient distributed
deterministic key management for wireless sensor networks,” EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2011, 2011,
p. 12.
[8]
A. Perrig, R. Szewczyk, J. Tygar, V. Wen, and D. E. Culler, “Spins:
Security protocols for sensor networks,” Wireless networks, vol. 8,
no. 5, 2002, pp. 521–534.
[9]
L. Butty´an and T. Holczer, “Private cluster head election in wireless sen-
sor networks,” in Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems, 2009. MASS’09.
IEEE 6th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1048–1053.
[10]
Crossbow,
“Telosb
datasheet,”
April
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.willow.co.uk/TelosB Datasheet.pdf
[11]
R. L. Rivest, “The rc5 encryption algorithm,” in Fast Software Encryp-
tion.
Springer, 1995, pp. 86–96.
[12]
C. Diaz, S. Seys, J. Claessens, and B. Preneel, “Towards measuring
anonymity,” in Privacy Enhancing Technologies.
Springer, 2003, pp.
54–68.
[13]
D. He et al., “An enhanced public key infrastructure to secure smart grid
wireless communication networks,” IEEE NETWORK, vol. 28, no. 1,
2014, pp. 10–16.
[14]
P. Levis et al., “Tinyos: An operating system for sensor networks,” in
Ambient intelligence.
Springer, 2005, pp. 115–148.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Enhanced Sensitivity in the VIS-NIR Range Under UV Light in a-SiC Pinpin Device 
 
V. Silva, P. Louro, M.A. Vieira, I. Rodrigues, 
M. Vieira  
Electronics Telecommunication and Computer Dept. 
ISEL – Instituto Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa 
Lisboa, Portugal 
vsilva@deetc.isel.ipl.pt, plouro@deetc.isel.ipl.pt, 
mvieira@deetc.isel.pt irodrigues@deetc.isel.ipl.pt, 
mv@isel.pt 
V. Silva, P. Louro, M. A. Vieira, M. Vieira  
 
CTS-UNINOVA, 
UNL - Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 
Caparica, Portugal. 
vvd.silva@campus.fct.unl.pt, plouro@deetc.isel.ipl.pt, 
mvieira@deetc.isel.pt, mv@isel.pt 
 
 
Abstract—The use of ultra-violet (UV) steady state illumination 
increases the spectral sensitivity of a pi’npin photodiode 
beyond the visible spectrum. Increased sensitivity in the range 
of 400-850 nm is experimentally demonstrated. The pi’npin 
photodiode can be illuminated back and front sides. Under 
front irradiation and low power intensity the gain is high and 
presents a well defined peak at 750 nm and strongly quenches 
in the visible range. As the power irradiation increases the 
peak shifts to the visible range and can be deconvoluted into 
two peaks, one in the red range and another in the green range. 
Under back irradiation the gain is high in the violet/blue 
ranges and strongly quenches for wavelengths higher than 550 
nm, whatever the intensity of the background. Results show 
that, front background UV illumination enhances the light-to-
dark sensitivity of the medium, opening a window in the visible 
and near infrared range (VIS-NIR). Background illumination 
with UV at the back enhances only the magnitude in short 
wavelength range opening a window in the UV and blue 
ranges. 
Keywords-UV; VIS-NIR; Visible Light Communication; SiC 
technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Light-emitting Diode (LED) is a very effective lighting 
technology due to its high brightness, long life, energy 
efficiency, durability, affordable cost, optical spectrum and 
its colour range for creative use. Their use as communication 
devices with a photo-diode as receptor, has been used for 
many years in hand held devices, to control televisions and 
other media equipment, and with higher rates, between 
computational devices [1]. This communication path has 
been used in the near infra-red (NIR) range, but due to the 
increasing LED lighting in homes and offices, the idea to use 
them for visible light communications (VLC) is present in 
many working groups. The Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers  (IEEE) task group 7 has come up with 
the IEEE 802.15.7 VLC PHY/MAC standard proposal for 
the physical (PHY) and medium access control (MAC) for 
VLC communications [2]. The Internet use and its most 
popular protocols also have been studied for their 
performance over VLC [3]. Economic issues that will 
eventually guide the VLC outcome are also on the run [4]. 
The sensor presented in this paper, is based on amorphous 
silicon carbon technology (a-SiC:H) [5], it consists of a 
pi’npin structure. The front pi’n is thinner and has carbon a-
SiC:H in the intrinsic layer while the back pin is based on a-
Si:H. Two electrical optically transparent contacts interface 
the sensor at the front and back. Due to the asymmetric 
lengths of each pin structure and to their difference in 
materials, the sensor has interesting properties, namely a 
light selective filter [6]. The sensor is capable of 
discriminating different wavelength signals and with 
convenient signal modulation has the capability of logic 
transformations (AND, OR, NOT and XOR) over the input 
signals [7], which may play an important function in specific 
VLC applications. A multiplexing / demultiplexing function 
has been identified using the sensor with 4 different channels 
allowing WDM applications [8]. The study of UV and IR 
response of the sensor is important for the possible use of 
these wavelengths as communication channels for out-of 
visible band information interchange. In this paper, we 
demonstrate the use of near-UV steady state illumination to 
increase the spectral sensitivity of the a-SiC/Si pi’npin 
photodiode beyond the visible spectrum. Section II describes 
the pi’npin structure. Section III presents the theoretical 
optoelectronic model and linear state equations. Section IV 
shows in graphical plots the experimental spectrum of the 
pi’npin photocurrent, and the photocurrent output for input 
signals in the visible and NIR spectrum ranges. Section V 
presents the results and their discussion. The conclusions and 
acknowledgement close the article. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
The sensor is composed by two stacked p-i-n structures 
(p(a-SiC:H)- i’(a-SiC:H)-n(a-SiC:H)-p(a-SiC:H)-i(a-Si:H)-
n(a-Si:H)) sandwiched between two transparent contacts at 
each end. The thicknesses and optical gap of the i’- (200 
nm; 2.1 eV) and i- (1000 nm; 1.8 eV) layers are optimized 
for light absorption in the blue and red ranges [9]. The 
working range of the sensor is in the visible spectrum, 
although light sources within the ultra-violet (350-400nm) 
and near infra-red (700-880nm) ranges are also used.  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

This 1cm2 structure can be seen in Figure 1, where the 
wavelength arrows indicate the absorption depths during 
operation [10] and the digital light signals λV, λB, λG, λR, λIR, 
where the V index is in the UV range, R,G,B in the Visible 
and IR in the NIR range. 
 
Figure 1. Device structure and operation. 
General purposes LEDs are used as light sources. These 
light sources are used as digital signals and background 
lighting. The signals are impinged on the front side of the 
sensor. The background lighting is either at the back or at 
the front side. The intensity of the signal sources is very low 
when compared to the background intensity. The LEDs that 
shine on the front surface, signal and background, are set at 
a distance of 3cm, while the back led is almost touching the 
surface. Different wavelength signal sources are used: violet 
(400 nm), blue (470 nm), green (524 nm), red (626 nm) and 
infra-red (850 nm). For background lighting a 390 nm violet 
wavelength is applied. The signals are thus subject to 
constant background lighting and sampled at the midpoint 
of each bit. To change the background intensity different 
currents were used to drive the LED (0 < ILED < 30 mA). 
The sensor working point is set at -8 V. 
III. 
THEORY 
Based on the device configuration and experimental 
results an optoelectronic model was developed [11] and 
upgraded to include several inputs. The model is shown in 
Figure 2 as an ac equivalent circuit. 
 
Figure 2. ac equivalent circuit of the pi’npin photodiode. 
The corresponding block diagram of the ac equivalent 
circuit of the pi’npin photodiode, and the linear state 
equations, are displayed in Figure 3. Input signals, λIR,R,G,B,V 
model the input channels, and i(t) the output signal. The 
amplifying elements, α1 and α2 are linear combinations of the 
optical gains of each impinging channel, respectively into the 
front and back phototransistors, and provide gain (α>1) or 
attenuation (α<1) depending on the background effect.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Block diagram and linear state equations. 
The control matrix takes into account the enhancement or 
reduction of the channels, due to the steady state irradiation: 
front irradiation α2>>α1 and back irradiation α1>>α2. This 
affects the reverse photo capacitances, (α1,2 /C1,2) that 
determines the influence of the system input on the state 
change (control matrix). 
 
Figure 4. Simulation example of the MUX signal with and without front 
=390 nm irradiation. 
A graphics user interface (GUI) computer program was 
designed and programmed with MATLAB® to ease the task 
of numerical simulation. This interface allows the selection 
of model parameters, and plots the photocurrent results of the 
simulated and experimental data. The simulation uses as a 
solver, one of two alternative algorithms: a one-step solver 
based on an explicit Runge-Kutta formula and an 
implementation of the trapezoidal rule using a "free" 
interpolant. An example is presented in Figure 4. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
A. Spectral measurement  
Using a monochromator with 1mm slits and a chopper 
frequency of 3500 Hz, the spectrum measurements were 
made from 400 to 800 nm in 10 nm steps in three 
conditions: dark, front, and back. In the dark condition, the 
sensor is only subjected to the monochromator’s light 
source.  
a)
 
b) 
 
Figure 5. Photocurrent spectrum with different background lighting 
intensities at the a) front and b) back side of the device. 
These measurements (dark) are considered as a reference. 
The back or front conditions refer to a steady illumination of 
the back or front side of the sensor.  
a)
 
b) 
 
Figure 6. Photocurrent gain with a) front and b) back illumination 
Several measurements were made with different 
background illumination intensities by applying currents in 
the 0.25 mA to 30 mA range, to the background LEDs with a 
wavelength of 400 nm. The results are presented in Figure 5. 
Experimental output plotted in Figure 5a), shows that 
with increasing front illumination (see arrow) by the violet 
LED there is an increase in the gain, from 470 to 750 nm. 
This increase is very effective, as a current of 0.5 mA is 
enough to produce an output 5 times higher than the dark 
level, which is represented in both Figure 5a) and b) by a 
thick black curve. The influence of the back lighting in 
Figure 5b) with the same violet wavelength reduces the 470-
750 
nm 
bandwidth 
with 
increasing 
LED 
current. 
Photocurrent gain is defined as the ratio of the output in 
relation to the dark curve. The spectral gain for the different 
LED currents is shown in Figure 6. 
B. Visible / Infrared tuning 
Several monochromatic (850 nm, 697 nm, 626 nm, 524 
nm, 470 nm, 400 nm) individually pulsed lights (input 
channels) at 12000 bps, and then combined (MUX signal), 
illuminated the device while steady state 390 nm bias at 
different intensities (0 < ILED < 30 mA) were superimposed 
separately, from either side of the sensor, and the 
photocurrent was measured. 
a)
 
b) 
 
Figure 7. a) Front and b) back optical gain at =390 nm irradiation and 
different input wavelengths. 
For each individual channel the photocurrent was 
normalized to its value without irradiation (dark), and the 
photocurrent gain determined. Figure 7 displays the 
different gain as a function of the drive currents of the 
lighting LED under front and back irradiation. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

a)
 
b)
 
Figure 8. a) Optical gain at 390 nm front irradiation with different 
intensities. b) Combined polychromatic signal with and without 390 nm 
front irradiation and different bit sequences. 
To exemplify, in Figure 8a), the gain of the 850 nm input 
channel, under front irradiation at different intensities, is 
displayed. In Figure 8b), the MUX signal due to the 
combination of the 850 nm, 697 nm, 626 nm and 524 nm 
input channels, is presented. At the top of the figure, there 
are the signals used to drive the input channels, and are 
shown to guide the eyes into the on/off states. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Results show, that background illumination of the front 
side, Figure 3a), reduces the 400-470 nm spectral range 
while it augments the 470-800 nm range. It acts as a 
selective filter for the long pass wavelengths. Background 
illumination of the back, Figure 3b), enhances the 400-470 
nm range and reduces the 470-800 nm wavelengths. It also 
acts as a selective filter but for the short pass wavelengths. 
This fundamental behaviour is the basis of the other 
possible functions that can be derived from it, besides a low 
pass or a long pass filter. Observing the gain values of the 
850 nm IR wavelength presented in Figure 7a) and b), there 
is a significant difference that distinguishes the background 
lighting at the back or front side of the device by a 
wavelength of 390 nm. This allows for the recovery of a 
NIR channel by a UV background illumination which 
permits a communication channel outside the visible range. 
The individual magnitude of each input channel without 
background lighting (ILED=0 in Figure 7), was used to 
simulate the input channels, and for each bit sequence 
shown in Figure 8b), the corresponding gain at the 
simulated background intensity is presented in Figure 7. The 
results of the numerical simulation and the experimental 
results for the same sequence are presented in Figure 4, and 
show that a good fitting between experimental and 
simulated results was achieved, showing the robustness of 
the proposed optoelectronic model. 
CONCLUSIONS 
An increased sensitivity in a SiC pi’npin device in the 
VIS-NIR range under UV light was experimentally and 
theoretically demonstrated. Results show that under front 
390 nm irradiation the sensor sensitivity was enhanced in 
the red/infrared ranges, leading to linearly profiled 
collection areas that allow the incoming wavelength 
recognition. An optoelectronic model was presented to 
explain the observed data, and allow decoding of 
multiplexed data in the visible/infrared range. The results of 
the numerical simulation are coherent with the experimental 
results for the same input sequence. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by FCT (CTS multi annual 
funding) through PIDDAC Program funds and PTDC/EEA-
ELC/111854/2009 and PTDC/EEA-ELC/120539/2010. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Komiyama, K. Kobayashi, K. Watanabe, T. Ohkubo, and 
Y. Kurihara, “Study of visible light communication system 
using RGB LED lights,” in Proceedings of SICE Annual 
Conference, IEEE, 2011, pp. 1926–1928. 
[2] S. Rajagopal et al, “IEEE 802.15 Wireless Personal Area 
Networks,” , 2009, pp. 1–121. 
[3] V. Mai, N. Tran, T. Thang, and A. Pham, “Performance 
analysis of TCP over visible light communication networks 
with ARQ-SR protocol,” 2014, pp. 1–9. 
[4] H. Chowdhury, H. Bagheri, I. Ashraf, S. Tamoor-ul-hassan, 
and M. Katz, “Techno-Economic analysis of Visible Light 
Communications,” Proc. Tenth Int. Symp. Wirel. Commun. 
Syst. (ISWCS 2013), 2013, vol. 9, pp. 96–100. 
[5] G. De Cesare, F. Irrera, F. Lemmi, F. Palma, and M. Tucci, 
“a-Si:H/a-SiC:H 
Heterostructure 
for 
Bias-Controlled 
Photodetectors,” MRS Proc., Feb. 2011, vol. 336, p. 885. 
[6] M. A. Vieira, “Three Transducers for One Photodetector : 
essays for optical communications,” 2012, p. 222. 
[7] V. Silva et al, “Logic functions based on optical bias 
controlled SiC tandem devices,” Phys. Status Solidi, vol. 11, 
no. 2, Feb. 2014, pp. 211–216. 
[8] M. A. Vieira, M. Vieira, P. Louro, A. Fantoni, and A. Garção, 
“Demux operation in tandem amorphous Si-C devices,” i-
ETCISEL Acad. J. Elect. Comput., vol. 2-1, 2013, p. ID–13. 
[9] M. A. Vieira et al, “Double Pin Photodiodes with Two 
Optical Gate Connections for Light Triggering.,” Sensors & 
Transducers, vol. 10, no. Special issue, 2011, pp. 96–120. 
[10] A. Fantoni, M. Vieira, and R. Martins, “Simulation of 
hydrogenated 
amorphous 
and 
microcrystalline 
silicon 
optoelectronic devices,” Math. Comput. Simul., vol. 49, no. 
4–5, Sep. 1999, pp. 381–401. 
[11] M. Vieira, P. Louro, M. Fernandes, and M. A. Vieira, “Three 
Transducers Embedded into One Single SiC Photodetector,” 
in Advances in Photodiodes, vol. March Ch19, G. F. D. Betta, 
Ed. Intech, 2011, pp. 403–426. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

WiFi Monitoring Embedded System for Electrical Microgeneration using 
Renewable Energy Sources 
 
Sandro C. S. Jucá 
Telematics Area 
Federal Institute of Ceará – Maracanaú Campus 
Maracanaú, Brazil 
E-mail: sandrojuca@ifce.edu.br 
Paulo C. M. Carvalho, Renata I. S. Pereira 
Electrical Engineering Department (DEE) 
Federal University of Ceará (UFC) 
Fortaleza, Brazil 
E-mail: {carvalho, renata}@dee.ufc.br 
 
 
Abstract— The present paper describes how to design and 
assemble a low cost online monitoring and WiFi data 
acquisition 
system 
using 
free 
software 
applied 
to 
microgeneration 
based 
on 
renewable 
energy 
sources 
worldwide. The development of online monitoring systems for 
microgeneration plants based on renewable energy sources is 
becoming more important, considering that monitoring and 
data acquisition systems are applicable in stages of the 
microgeneration process. The monitoring and data acquisition 
WiFi system was developed using an embedded WiFi modem 
(Wifly) coupled to a microcontrolled board based on the free 
tool SanUSB. This monitoring system was applied to a 
photovoltaic (PV) water pumping plant without batteries, so as 
the control system and the wireless communication with the 
online server, which is also autonomous and powered by PV 
panel. The free software for online monitoring and WiFi data 
acquisition allows the analysis of stored data and charts 
through 
mobile 
devices 
as 
notebooks, 
tablets, 
and 
smartphones.  
Keywords- WiFi monitoring; Data acquisition systems; 
Microgeneration; Renewable energy sources. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Based on the advent of Brasilian Electricity Regulatory 
Agency (ANEEL) resolution 482 [1], establishing general 
conditions for the connection of microgeneration plants 
(power up to 100 kW) in the Brazilian distribution grid, 
makes more relevant the development of online monitoring 
systems [2] of microgeneration plants based on renewable 
energy sources, like solar, wind, and biomass. Therefore, 
monitoring and data acquisition systems are applicable in 
various stages of the microgeneration process, for example, 
in the energy resource evaluation, generation failures 
prognosis, practical verification of project data and 
efficiency of generation. 
As a first positive reaction, in August 2013 started 
working in Rio de Janeiro a PV microgeneration plant 
connected to the grid, able to produce 50% more than the 
total house electricity consumption [3].  
Data acquisition and online monitoring systems are found 
in Brazil mainly at large power plants, with complex 
monitoring and relatively high costs, making impracticable 
the incorporation into domestic clients and in other clients 
that are inside the range of microgeneration power. In this 
way, the present article intends to develop efficient 
techniques for online monitoring with open source software, 
sensing and WiFi data transmission to contribute with the 
diffusion and installation of microgeneration systems based 
on renewable energy sources. Until the 90s, Internet was 
used as a file, news and electronic messages exchange tool, 
used by students in academy and universities [4]. After the 
90s, the World Wide Web started to draw the user attention, 
changing the way people interact with other people.  
The Web offers a colorful and easy way to navigate in 
graphic interface, with a content not limited to text and 
hypertext, also offering icons, lines, drawing, maps and 
pictures. Additionally, there are also hypermedia contents, 
hypertext pages with sound and video. The Web content can 
be visualized via a browser, which verifies the files and 
displays the contents stored on the server, as the open source 
software for online monitoring developed in the present 
research. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
the hardware and software of the WiFi microcontrolled 
system, followed by the description of the WiFi 
communication protocol in Section III. Section IV provides 
information about the open source software and the 
principles of the WiFi acquisition system implemented to 
receive data from the photovoltaic (PV) microgeneration 
plant described in Section V, including sensing and 
conditioning. This section contains also charts obtained from 
the values of the microgeneration plant. Finally, conclusions 
are presented in Section VI. 
II. 
WIFI ACQUISITION SYSTEM 
This section describes the developed data acquisition 
board with WiFi connection, shown in Figure 1. The WiFi 
embedded system programming is based on open source and 
free software, which is an advantage of the proposed system. 
The board sends monitored data to an online server also 
programmed in open source software. 
This modulated hardware consists of a microcontrolled 
board, called as SanUSB, connected to an WiFi modem via 
an adapter board that was developed for this application in 
order to adjust the pin connections, as well as to convert the 
voltage from 5 V to 3.3 V. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 1. Acquisition data board and WiFi modem. 
 
After coupling the embedded WiFi modem to the 
microcontroller pins (VCC, GND, Rx, and Tx), it is 
necessary to program the microcontroller with the firmware 
developed by Wifly configuration commands. In this way, 
support libraries were programmed to develop the firmware 
available as an Android application [5]. The users can also 
improve the open source firmware in order to adapt for a 
specific monitoring system. 
A wireless system using RF signal to power a 
temperature sensor for on-body temperature monitoring is 
shown in [6]. There are also other studies on remote wireless 
sensing, such as those developed by [7] and [8]. 
Wireless sensor nodes inside buildings are used to read 
out sensor data and to control actuators by a reference value 
in [9]. The nodes need to operate for a long time with a 
single battery. When using a standard WiFi connection, the 
node battery would be depleted after a few hours due to idle 
currents in receive state. The use of sensor nodes with 
included wake-up receivers can prolong the lifetime of the 
sensor network to several years, because the sensor measure 
data and send information only when a command is received 
from the Internet. 
The developed data acquisition board, based in a 
microcontroller USB programmable tool and using open 
source software, is patented by National Institute of 
Industrial Property (INPI) with register number 088503, 
executable in multiplatform like Linux, Mac OSX and 
Windows® and available in the files from the SanUSB group 
[10]. This tool is composed by a preprogrammed bootloader 
in the embedded system and a graphic interface used to 
program the microcontroller via USB. 
SanUSB tool allows a friendly interface and also debugs 
directly through the virtual serial emulation via USB. This 
step can be implemented in a fast and efficient way when the 
microcontroller is connected to a computer via USB. A 
developed equipment for specific applications tend to be 
cheaper, have better cost benefit relation and make possible 
an easy understanding and operation. With this same data 
acquisition board, a monitoring system was developed for 
implementation of a device for high temperature control 
applied to thermoelectric microgenerators [11]. Figure 2 
shows the program process using the designed embedded 
system. 
 
 
Figure 2. Program process using the designed embedded system. 
 
 
Also using SanUSB tool, students were champions of: 
 
IFCE Robotics Competition (2007, 2008, and 2009) 
in the Location category, Brazil; 
 
Brazilian 
Science 
and 
Engineering 
Fair 
(FEBRACE-2009) at Federal University of São 
Paulo (USP),Brazil, in Engineering category; 
 
Innovation Award for Technology Application at 
the Feria Explora Medellin in Colombia in 2009; 
 
International Forum of Science and Engineering 
2010 in Chile in the Supranivel Category; 
 
FEMECI IFCE 2010 in labyrinth robotics category, 
Ceará, Brazil. 
 
The mentioned open source software is based on 
contributions of Internet developers throughout the world. 
This software offers a better performance, encourages 
creativity, allows dedicated applications and stimulates 
finding and correcting code errors faster than private 
software [12]. It is important to emphasize that USB ports 
are used as power source by the tool microcontroller only in 
the code development phase. The data acquisition system is 
autonomous; that means, a battery or a PV panel is used as 
an external power source. 
III. 
WIFI COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL 
WiFi nets use radio wave technology with Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) standards, such 
as IEEE 802.11a, 802.11b, and 802.11g. These standards 
provide reliable and safe wireless connectivity. WiFi nets 
can be used for connection between computational devices 
and also to connect these devices to Internet [13]. WiFi net 
operates in the not licensed radio waves 2.4 GHz, in the 
IEEE 802.11b and IEEE 802.11g technologies and in the 5 
GHz frequency of the 802.11a technology [14].  
The WiFi modem (Figure 3) is based in the RN-171 
module to promote connection to the wireless networks. The 
connection of this modem needs only four pins designated 
to power and WiFi communication. This device has an 
independent antenna to increase its reach and offers stronger 
signal and support for the most common communication 
protocols like Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP), and File Transfer Protocol 
(FTP).  
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 3. Online monitoring process via WiFi modem. 
 
If more than one WiFi modem or computational device is 
connected on the Internet in a home network using a 
broadband router or a gateway, most of the time only this 
router will contain an Internet IP address and each device in 
the internal net utilizes an IP local address given by the 
router.  
The intranet IP local address is usually created 
dynamically 
via 
a 
service 
called 
Dynamic 
Host 
Configuration Protocol (DHCP) of the gateway, or defined in 
a static way by the user, according to the network. 
In the proposed case, the gateway is 192.168.1.1. 
Therefore, a fixed static IP address was defined for the WiFi 
embedded modem, i.e., 192.168.1.195. The proposed 
embedded system can be, with this firmware, server (e.g., 
switching a load through the instruction "192.168.1.195/YT" 
in address bar) or also client (e.g., a sensor value is posted to 
an online databank server). 
IV. 
PROPOSED CONFIGURATION OF ONLINE MONITORING  
In this item, the open source software and the principles 
of WiFi acquisition are described. In the present study, a PV 
powered pumping plant without batteries is used, in which 
the control and communication system with the online server 
is also autonomous and powered by a PV panel.  
In this case, information that is sent to the online data 
bank is configured with remote access over WiFi without 
charging, different from the applications that use General 
Packet Radio Service (GPRS) protocol.  
In this context, the development, programming and 
application of a WEB monitoring system and wireless data 
acquisition using open source software are described.  
The online data bank can be queried by any 
computational device connected to the Internet by using a 
personal password. The query can be made at any time, 
updated every minute. Figure 4 shows the online monitoring 
development in two stages: 
 
Sensing, conditioning and data transmission; 
 
Data bank uploading from an online server and 
presentation to the user. 
The first stage establishes communication between the 
sensors connected to the data acquisition board. The second 
stage, i.e., the user presentation layer, was developed in PHP 
with MySQL database. In this way, a free option for online 
monitoring applied to renewable energy sources is 
introduced. 
The first stage of sensing, conditioning, and wireless 
acquisition reads the data from the sensors every minute and 
saves the information in an internal Electrically-Erasable 
Programmable Read-Only Memory (EEPROM). 
Every ten minutes, the average value of the sensor 
measurement is calculated and sent to the stage two. It is 
important to mention that the actuators may be also 
connected to the board, allowing WiFi load control through 
the server. In the server, a communication interface to the 
acquisition system and another one working in parallel to the 
user communication were developed.  
The first interface is responsible for data receiving, to 
store them in the persistent database and to send a 
confirmation to the board. The user interface delivers a 
friendly front-end that allows data visualization in the form 
of list or chart. 
The embedded firmware was programmed using a digital 
filter to identify and exclude abnormal values that differ by 
more than 100% of the maximum and minimum values of 
the variable reference measured every minute. 
V. 
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) MICROGENERATION PLANT 
DESCRIPTION 
The microgeneration plant used in the present study is 
installed on the laboratory of alternative energy (LEA) at the 
Federal University of Ceará (UFC). This plant consists in a 
water pumping system powered by PV panels, with a 
maximum power (Pmax) of 87 Wp, open circuit voltage of 
21.7 V (Voc) and short-circuit current of 5.34 A (Isc).  
The motor-pump has a voltage of 12 Vdc, a maximal 
pressure of 20 psi and a pump flow of 5.9 liters per minute 
(2,205 rpm) and a nominal current of 4.2 A. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 4. Steps of the open source software monitoring system. 
 
The 
developed 
online 
monitoring 
and 
wireless 
acquisition open source software was installed to record PV 
panels voltage and current, motor-pump pressure and flow, 
ambient temperature and solar irradiance. The electronic 
devices were located in plastic boxes in order to avoid the 
influence of thermal variation. 
A. Sensing, conditioning and data acquisition 
 To adapt the sensor signal to the analog-to-digital 
converter (AD) from the data acquisition system is used the 
principle of conditioning by voltage division, when the 
measured value is greater than the maximum voltage of the 
AD converter. There is also the principle of signal 
amplification 
with 
circuits 
that 
use 
instrumentation 
amplifiers to adjust the voltage or current of the sensor signal 
to the voltage full scale of the microcontroller AD converter.  
 Furthermore, the instrumentation amplifiers are also 
used to read sensors, with minimal or virtually no signal 
interference due to the high impedance input amplifiers, 
functioning as a signal insulator, since the amplifier output 
voltage is supplied by the amplifier power and not by the 
input voltage. For amplification of the signal from the 
current sensor of the PV panels, conditioning circuit for 
difference amplifying is used. This configuration responds to 
the difference between voltage signals applied to the input 
and ideally rejects signals that are common to both inputs. 
Regarding the PV panel voltage, it was necessary to deploy a 
board with conditioning circuit by voltage division to collect 
the data, because the signal exceeds the AD converter 
threshold voltage. In the case of voltage, the PV panel used 
provides maximum voltage of ca. 19 V. 
B. Open source software for online monitoring 
The Web Monitor is an application developed on online 
server with the PHP programming language, in conjunction 
with a structured database in Database Management System 
(DBMS), in order to serve as visualization of monitoring 
data (signals sensors) from renewable energy sources and to 
send them via a wireless communication (GPRS or WiFi). 
Figure 5 shows the initial login screen of the data 
monitoring system. 
 
 
To access the monitoring system, it is necessary to enter 
the website link in PHP; after that, the system main 
authentication page appears, containing an authentication 
form (username and password). In this way, only pre-
registered users can access the system. After entering the 
data access in the authentication step, the user is redirected 
to the system home page. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Monitor WEB login screen. 
 
Through the WEB monitor, the user can query the stored 
data in the online database via smartphones or PC whereas 
the Ethernet standard is the solution currently used in 
private systems to promote network interconnectivity; the 
cost of monitoring systems for microgeneration in wireless 
network with open source software tends to be dwindling. 
At the submenu Monitoramento (monitoring), there are 
two submenus: Gráfico (chart) and logs, as shown in Figure 
6. By clicking the submenu Gráfico a chart of the sensor 
values stored in the database is generated, for example the 
chart showed in Figure 7, with voltage, current and electrical 
power data. 
 
 
Figure 6. Menu screen expanded. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure. 7. PV voltage, current, and electric power. 
 
 
To generate the charts, a library called Highcharts, 
written in Java Script, was used. The chart automatically 
restarts every 30 seconds. To display the sensors values 
involved in the chosen application in a specific day, it is 
necessary to inform or to select a valid date and then click 
the magnifying glass icon. Shortly after, the chart will be 
updated showing for each point a representative value 
averaged over the sensor values every 10 minutes.  
In order to view the corresponding logs to the current 
values displayed in the chart, it is necessary to click the logs 
button. The system also provides the option to print or 
export (PNG, JPEG, PDF, and SVG) the entire structure of 
the chart view. 
C. Charts of the open source software for online 
monitoring  
In this topic, charts obtained from the open source 
software for online monitoring related to voltage, current 
and power will be presented. The PV panel voltage shape 
remains stable in sunny days, with a maximum of 19.3 V at 
noon and remaining around 19 V from 6 am to 5 pm. 
The PV current chart showed in Figure 7 tends to follow 
the solar irradiance, reaching a maximum of 3.7 A at 12 pm, 
a peak of irradiance. The electrical power is obtained by 
multiplying the voltage and the current of the PV generator. 
The power is maintained around 70 W, for a voltage of 19.29 
V and a current of 3.64 A.  
The flow sensor has a signal from 0 to 10 V for a range 
from 0 to 25 liters per minute. In order to perform the sensor 
reading, it is necessary that the variation is from 0 to 5 V, 
due to the full scale voltage of the microcontrolled data 
acquisition system. Thus, the l/min value for a voltage range 
from 0 to 5 V is 0 to 12.5 l/min (1 liter per minute 
corresponding to 0.06     ).  
In the present study, a pressure sensor PN20 (2005) was 
deployed. Considering a 5 V maximum voltage of the 
analog-to-digital converter and a digital maximum value of 
255, the sensor shows 70 psi. For a reading in kPa, the 
conversion factor from psi to kPa is 6.895; then the value of 
the actual pressure (PR) related to read digital value (Vd) is 
given by 
             
1,893 Vd
PR
6,895
255
Vd
70
PR






    
(1) 
Q x H product, measured in      is defined as the 
product of water flow (in cubic meters per hour) and 
pressure (in meters of water column); this product 
multiplied by constants indicate the hydraulic power in 
different units. Pressure, flow, and Q x H product of a 
monitoring day are shown in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Pressure, flow, and Q x H product. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

In the flow chart of Figure 8, the pumping system begins 
operation with a mean value of 0.5      at 6 am and 
reducing the flow at 3 pm. This water flow reduction is due 
to the decrease in solar irradiance.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
As financial resources in developing countries are 
generally limited, solutions dedicated to monitoring and 
identification of local energy resources and for real-time 
monitoring of decentralized plants using renewable energy 
sources can contribute to a policy of decentralization of 
electric power generation in these countries. The present 
paper proposed a wireless data acquisition system, online 
monitoring applied to decentralized microgeneration of 
electrical power from renewable energy sources. 
With the advent of ANEEL normative resolution n. 482 
introducing 
general 
conditions 
for 
electrical 
microgeneration connected to the grid using units up to 100 
kW, it becomes more important to develop online systems 
for monitoring processes of microgeneration based on 
renewable energy sources, such as solar, wind, and biomass. 
The monitoring and data acquisition system proposed 
was developed in open source software and multiplatform 
(Linux, Windows®, and Mac OSX) in order to facilitate the 
dissemination of the computational tool developed for 
different user profiles. The open source monitoring software 
proposed enables monitoring the microgeneration plant via 
smartphones, tablets or other mobile devices with Internet 
access. As a case study for the monitoring system, a water 
pumping plant powered by PV panels was used. 
The online database can be queried by any computing 
device connected to the Internet via password. Queries can 
be made at any time by updating the database every 10 
minutes, which is usually the maximal time step for data 
acquisition systems of renewable energy plants. The WEB 
monitoring and designed data acquisition system of the 
microgeneration plant was efficient because of the online 
query possibility and real-time operation of the electrical 
microgeneration plant, showing a behavior according to the 
project. The use of tools based on open source software for 
online monitoring applied to microgeneration systems 
allows greater accessibility to general users. The online 
monitoring and data acquisition model proposed can be 
expanded to record data from other types of analog or 
digital sensors, as well as other types of microgeneration 
plants using renewable energy sources. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank CNPq and Vale for the 
financial support through the Forma-Engenharia program, 
CAPES and Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst 
(DAAD) for research grants awarded, and UFC and IFCE for 
the availability of laboratories and equipment. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] ANEEL, Resolution nº 482. [Online]. Avaiable from: 
http://www.aneel.gov.br/cedoc/ren2012482.pdf/ 2014.05.19. 
[2] D. G. Costa, L. A. Guedes, F. Vasques, and P. Portugal, 
“Partial Energy-Efficient Hop-by-Hop Retransmission in 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” International Conference on 
Industrial Informatics, Jul. 
2013, pp. 146-151, doi: 
10.1109/INDIN.2013.6622873. 
[3] Energy Journal, Light interconnects first microgeneration 
system. 
[Online]. 
Avaiable 
from: 
http://jornaldaenergia.com.br/ler_noticia.php?id_noticia=1446
4&id_secao=8/ 2014.04.10 
[4] F. J. Kurose and K. W. Ross, Computer networks and 
Internet: a new approach. São Paulo, SP: Addison Wesley, 
2003. 
[5] S. Jucá, “SanUSB IP access Wifly”. [Online]. Avaiable from: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=appinventor.ai_
sandro_juca.Wifi_SanUSB/ 2014.07.25. 
[6] G. C. Martins and F. R. de Sousa, “An RF-Powered 
Te perature Sensor Designed for Bio edical Applications,” 
26th Symposium on Integrated Circuits and Systems Design 
(SBCCI), 
Sept. 
2013, 
pp. 
1-6, 
doi: 
10.1109/SBCCI.2013.6644861. 
[7] M. S. Durante and S. Ma lknec t, “An Ultra Low Power 
Wakeup Receiver for Wireless Sensor Nodes”, The Third 
International Conference on Sensor Technologies and 
Applications (SENSORCOMM), Jun. 2009, pp. 167-170, doi: 
10.1109/SENSORCOMM.2009.34. 
[8] H. Raisigel, G. Chabanis, I. Ressejac, and M. Trouillon, 
“Autono ous Wireless Sensor Node for Building Cli ate 
Conditioning Application”, Fourth International Conference 
on Sensor Technologies and Applications (SENSORCOMM), 
Jul. 2010, pp. 68-73, doi: 10.1109/SENSORCOMM.2010.17. 
[9] G. U. Gamm, S. Sester, and L. M. Reindl, “SmartGate – 
connecting wireless sensor nodes to the Internet”. [Online]. 
Avaiable 
from: 
http://www.readcube.com/articles/ 
10.5194/jsss-2-45-2013/ 2013.03.27. 
[10] SanUSB Group, SanUSB tool. [Online]. Avaiable from: 
http://tinyurl.com/SanUSB/ 2014.05.15. 
[11] S. C. S Jucá, P. C. M. Carvalho, R. I. S. Pereira, D. Petrov, 
and U. Hilleringmann, “Design and Implementation of a High 
Temperature 
Control 
Monitoring 
Applied 
to 
Micro 
Thermoelectric 
Generators”. 
[Online]. 
Avaiable 
from: 
http://www.icrepq.com/icrepq'13/425-juca.pdf/ 2014.06.05 
[12] J.W. Paulson, G. Succi, and A. Eberlein, “An e pirical study 
of open-source and closed-source software products,” IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering, Apr. 2004, pp. 246-
256, doi: 10.1109/TSE.2004.1274044. 
[13] G. S. V. Radha, K. Rao, and G. Radhamani, WiMAX: A 
Wireless Technology Revolution. New York, NY: Auerbach 
Publications, 2007. 
[14] IEEE802, Official IEEE 802.11 working group timelines. 
[Online]. 
Avaiable 
from: 
http://www.ieee802.org/11/ 
2014.04.17. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Feasibility of Charge Transfer Based Atmospheric Ice Sensing
Taimur Rashid, Umair N. Mughal & Muhammad S. Virk
Atmospheric Icing Research Team
Narvik University College
Narvik, Norway
Email: unm@hin.no
Abstract—The atmospheric icing parameters are being measured
nowadays with the aid of more customized yet limited commercial
equipment. The parameters include atmospheric ice detection,
icing load and icing rate. The robustness of such equipment is
usually under scrutiny when it comes to cold/harsh environment
operations. This phenomenon was experienced consistently by
the atmospheric Icing research team at Narvik University College
during data retrieval exercises from its atmospheric icing stations
installed at Fargnesfjellet during 2012-13. In this paper it is
aimed to address the potential feasibility to produce a robust
hardware addressing the icing measurements signals, which
includes instrumentation hardware giving icing indications, icing
type and icing rate measurements in a single platform (not
commercially available till date).
Keywords–Atmospheric Icing Sensor; Icing Type; Icing Rate;
Charge Transfer; Zero Crossover; Cold Regions.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Charge transfer method adhere to the capacitive prin-
ciple and can detect anything that is either conductive or
has different dielectric properties than the sensors electrodes
surroundings. Any object, conductive or non-conductive, that
is brought in the vicinity of the electrode, has its own dielectric
properties that will alter the capacitance between the electrode
and the sensor housing and, in turn, will produce a measurable
response. Also, certain sensor gauge the change by generating
an electric ﬁeld (e-ﬁeld) and measuring the attenuation suffered
by this ﬁeld. The prime area of focus is to detect the ice at the
ﬁrst instance based on its physical properties. The measured
signal is then required to be calibrated in order to achieve
reasonably wide range of measurements; differentiated based
on the liquid water content in the ice. This would enable to
lay the foundation of measuring icing thickness and icing rate.
Atmospheric icing on structures occurs in conditions where
cooling of an air mass causes super cooling of water droplets
resident in the air mass. Water droplets in the earth atmosphere
can remain in the liquid state at air temperature as low as
−40◦[C], before spontaneous freezing occurs [2][3]. Generally
an icing event is deﬁned as periods of time where the temper-
ature is below 0◦[C] and the relative humidity is above 95%.
According to ISO 12494 standard [4], ice accretion can be de-
ﬁned as any process of ice build-up and snow accretion on the
surface of the object exposed to atmosphere [4], [5]. Primarily
Atmospheric icing can be classiﬁed in two main categories on
the basis of the physical properties of atmospheric ice. These
will vary depending upon the meteorological conditions and
are termed as precipitation icing (freezing precipitation and
wet snow) and in-cloud icing (rime/glaze, including fog). In
Northern part of Europe particularly in Norway, it is primarily
freezing fog which causes ice accumulation on structures and
this occurs mainly at high altitudes [6]. The ice accretion relies
heavily on temperature, liquid water content and droplet size.
The ice appearance and its physical properties are inﬂuenced
by the atmospheric and weather conditions. Table I mentions
these affecting parameters, whereas other elements such as
compressive strength (yield and crushing), shear strength, etc.,
might describe the nature of ice accretion on the subject
item exposed in the environment. The object exposed will
have different ice accretion based on its dimensions and its
orientation to the direction of icing wind blowing. Table I
shows major outline of the basic meteorological parameters
handling the ice accretion process.
TABLE I. TYPICAL PROPERTIES OF ACCRETED ATMOSPHERIC ICE [5]
Type of ice
Density (kg/m3)
Cohesion
General appearance
Colour
Shape
Glaze
900
strong
transparent
evenly
distributed/icicles
Wet snow
300-600
weak, strong
white
evenly dis-
tributed/eccentric
Hard rime
600-900
strong
opaque
eccentric, pointing
windward
Soft rime
200-600
low to
medium
white
eccentric pointing
windward
This paper is divided in six sections. Section II is an
overview of different ice sensing techniques followed by
section III, which outlines the critical reasons of system failure
in cold region domains. Section IV deals with a detailed
description of Charge Transfer Scheme whereas section V
deals with the associated tradeoff. This paper is ended with
conclusion section VI.
II.
ICE SENSING TECHNIQUES
The ISO issued in 2001 a standard for ice accretion
on all kinds of structures, except for electric overhead line
conductors. In this recommendation, a standard ice-measuring
device is described in ISO 12494 [4] as a smooth circular
cylinder having diameter of 30 mm placed vertically in the axis
and rotating around the axis. The cylindrical length should be
of 0.5m, but, in case of heavy ice accretion expectation, the
length should be altered to 1m. If the cylinder cannot rotate
freely due to wind drag, it may be provided with a motorized
mechanism to force the rotation. The speed of rotation is not
critical in terms of vertical collection. The vertical cylinder
is not fully appropriate for freezing rain in the wet growth
stage. To achieve this, it is preferred to use sets of horizontal
collectors (rods), which are oriented orthogonally as in case of
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Soviet standard ice collector Popov [9] or the Canadian Passive
Ice Meter (PIM) as described in IEC 60826 [10]. Ice Sensing
techniques come under the umbrella of icing instrumentation.
To know about Ice sensing it is required to comprehend the
phenomena of icing caused by the Meteorological parameters.
Drage [6] describes the complexity of Meteorological Icing
based on the factors such as object shape, wind speed, air
temperature, liquid water content and droplet size distribution.
There is a lot of room to improve these measurements
as new developments being carried out on focusing on these
parameters, Makkonen [11]. Different research institutes and
industries are involved in ice detection instruments manu-
facturing. But it is important to notice that many of them
are still in the prototyping phase and few amongst those
have launched their products in the market. The ISO 12494
standard ice sensor has been manufactured in one version in
Swedish Combitech: automatic weighing, free rotation) and
two in Finland (Digita: automatic weighing, forced rotation,
Lehtonen [12], FMI: manual weighing, forced rotation). The
devices/instruments identical with ISO ice collector have been
used in the past at some locations as well Rothig [13]. For the
purpose of the meteorological icing detection, few market sys-
tems (Rosemount Goodrich) and few prototypes are available
in the name of Holo Optics, Infralytic, Vibrometer/Boschung.
Also some available prototypes available for the ice rate
analysis uses active infra-red techniques but the robustness
and reliability of the equipment under harsh conditions is still
questionable. The electrical impedance and weight measure-
ment based icing equipment are more specialized, focusing
on a speciﬁc parameter. There is a deﬁnite need of an icing
system capable of measuring the instantaneous icing rate and
thickness along with the ice type detection mechanism. This
could provide an advantage to anticipate the ice accretion and
load based on the valid detection of icing type.
III.
GENERAL REASONS OF SYSTEM FAILURE IN COLD
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
As mentioned in Rashid et. al. [26] that the dimension of
operational problems faced in cold climate is quite different
from the operations in normal atmospheric conditions. More
often the factors not signiﬁcant at all in the normal conditions
become extremely critical in cold climate regions. Investiga-
tions were carried out to track down possible reasons of the
HiN icing station’s components failure from operational point
of view. Analysis showed that in addition to the harsh weather
conditions, a combination of various design and operational
aspects could also lead to the system’s failure in harsh condi-
tions. Following are some noteworthy causes in this regard.
A. Intermittent Power Source
The system installed at the location takes power from the
available commercial facility, where high load machines are
being operated. Due to the demographic location of the site
in terms of accessibility and complicated power infrastructure
available in terms of maintenance, several power breakdowns
have been frequently reported. The instantaneous power surge
could be one reason that has affected the sensors operations.
B. Electrostatic Discharge
The electrostatic discharge phenomena could not be fully
neglected in weather station breakdown. For snowstorms,
temperature gradients in the ice particles produce charge
separation because the concentration of H+ and OH− ions
in ice increases rapidly with increasing temperature. H+ ions
are much more mobile within the ice crystal than OH− ions.
As a result, the colder part of an ice particle becomes positively
charged, leaving the warmer part charged negatively [21].
The resulting electrostatic phenomena due to blizzard can be
hazardous for the control circuitry inside the sensor module,
provided the said consideration is not catered for in the design.
Over and above this fact, the proper maintenance of earthing
at the site becomes all the more critical in this perspective.
C. Data Links / Interfaces Winterization
Interface links between the components are data and power
based. Data links might include the Ethernet/serial links with
supporting routing cables or interface panels, whereas, power
links have distribution panels, supplying power requirements
to the computing and sensing equipment. Interface links along
with power support systems have direct and/or indirect expo-
sure to cold climatic conditions and they are under sudden
transitional states, hence are most vulnerable to degradation
and failure.
D. Power Cable Insulation
Electrical insulation of external power cables can be an-
other possible cause of system failure. Many of the insulations
normally used on electrical wires and cables are not compatible
with colder temperatures. Cracking of the insulation exposes
the conductor to the environment creating a serious hazard.
This is particularly a problem for the extension cords used
outdoors. Several polyvinylchloride (PVC) insulations that
are commonly used as electrical insulation do not withstand
ﬂexing at low temperatures, in the range of or below −30◦[C],
PVC insulations crack and peel off leaving exposed conduc-
tors, which can cause short circuiting or develop grounding
problems making data unreliable [24], [25].
E. Material & Winterization
The sensitivity of problems encountered in cold regions is
largely a function of materials used in the sensor construction
and degree of stress, under which they are operated. Some
materials get stronger at cold temperatures while other mate-
rials can be altered to become more cold tolerant [24], [22].
Similarly, sensor winterization can be another possible reason
for this failure. Sensors must be properly winterized to make
them possible to use during winter and reduce cold related
wear and breakage [23].
IV.
CHARGE TRANSFER CAPACITANCE BASED ICE
DETECTION
It can be said that a diversiﬁed sensing technique is
required for ice detection, which is robust enough to face the
harsh environmental conditions. The reliability and consistency
of the measured results add on to the signiﬁcant requirements
during the measurement process. The ice detection and mea-
surement through its capacitive properties could be a viable
option in this scenario as suggested by Mughal et. al. [14].
Capacitive sensors are considered amongst the reliable and
robust sensing options. A capacitive ice detector for monitoring
ice formation in power lines has been reported in Michael J.
Moser [17]. Furthermore, charge induction based ice detectors
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

is reported in [16] (mounted in the surface of the road). This ice
detector can detect the presence of icing over the road/runway
without measuring the icing rate and type of the ice.
To consider other viable options, proximity and touch
sensing techniques can be considered. These are widely used in
sensing human capacitance. Most of the daily home appliances,
mobiles, industrial applications and gadgets use this detection
principle as an integral part of their system design. The
technique for proximity or nearness detection of human skin
has matured over the years and customized microelectrome-
chanical systems MEMS devices are available for integration
as per the requirement of the design. However, use of this
approach is not tested for the purpose of ice detection and has
not been reported yet. This technique could be applied for ice
detection including the water layer along with icing because of
its advantages based on implementation ﬂexibility and design
robustness.
A. Working Principle
The nearness of the ice on the surface can be measured
with the appropriate use of selection of dielectric material
and charge transfer process. The ﬁeld generated due to charge
transfer can be thought of as a forced ﬁeld applied, which
ultimately can be measured in return when the presence of
ice is detected on the surface. To amicably use this technique
sensor’s electrode should be adequately designed for detecting
the proximity of the target material with a quantiﬁed output.
The ﬁeld is self-generated through any type of conductive
material and the response is processed in a customized way to
compute the changes in the measurement. The technique can
be thought of as an active measurement methodology where
self-generated ﬁeld is repeated to a known threshold level and
de-activated to analyze the properties of the material during
the silent phase ﬁeld generated. The charge transfer technology
can be implemented / tested for two different schemes based
on capacitive sensing
i Self-capacitance oriented
ii Mutual capacitance oriented
In Self-Capacitance approach, the electrode used for sens-
ing is a single conductive plate; second plate of capacitor is
in fact the circuitry or earth ground. The sensing electrode
is merely an open circuit plate or alternatively describing we
can measure the self-capacitance of this plate. Electrode is
underneath the dielectric panel so there is no direct galvanic
connection to measuring circuit in the presence of ice or other
substance. This technique is aimed to make detection measure-
ments in case of external object presence near electrode. The
detection is made because of the effect that its presence has
on the capacitance of the electrode. The equivalent circuit of
the self-capacitance circuit is shown in Figure 1.
Here, GND is the printed circuit board PCB ground and
EARTH is earth ground. The coupling capacitance between
ground and earth is few tens of pico-farad. Sampling capacitors
store the charge during burst of pulses applied to the electrodes
and normally have recommended values in nano-farads, which
are further tuned to the design requirement to achieve larger
detection threshold. Therefore, key highlights are
•
Assuming Cs >> Cx, and Cf >> Cx and Ct
•
Cx and Ct are of parameters of interest
Figure 1. Self Capacitance Equivalent Circuit, [1]
•
Increasing Cs = Increased differential sensitivity and
makes the burst length longer and improves resolution
In Mutual capacitance approach, each sensing electrode
pair contains a ﬁeld drive electrode and a receive electrode
as shown in Figure 2.
Influencing Object 
Source 
Control 
Circuitry 
Dielectric 
Electrodes 
Figure 2. Ice Detection by Mutual Capacitance (Broad Scope)
Figure 3. Mutual Capacitance Equivalent Circuit, [18]
Signal that couples through the mutual capacitance of the
electrode structure is collected onto a sample capacitor, which
is switched by the chip synchronously with the drive pulses.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A burst of pulses is used to improve the signal to noise ratio;
the number of pulses in each burst also affects the gain of the
circuit, since more pulses will result in more collected charge
and hence will provide more signal [18].
By modifying the burst pulse length, the gain of the circuit
can be easily changed to suit various electrode sizes, panel
materials, and panel thicknesses. After the burst completes,
the charge on the sample capacitor is converted using a slope
conversion resistor which is driven high, and a zero crossing
is detected to result in a timer value, which is proportional to
the pair electrode charge coupling, which also reﬂects charge
absorption caused by external intruding material. The presence
of intruding object absorbs charge, so the measured signal
decreases with its presence. The burst phase causes the charge
on the sample capacitor to ramp in a negative direction, and the
slope conversion causes a ramp in the positive direction on the
capacitor; the net effect is that the conversion process is dual
slope, and is largely independent of the value of the sample
capacitor and is highly stable over time and temperature [19].
B. Cold Climate Implications & Performance
Both capacitive mechanism are majorly comprised of elec-
trode sets and PCB hardware. The electrode design has the
ﬂexibility to adopt any shape as it is ﬂexible enough to be
mounted on any type of support. The electrode plate can
be covered with different types of dielectric material much
more resistant to harsh weather and climatic effects; since
there are large number of thin dielectric materials available
commercially nowadays. Figure 4 shows the simple operational
scheme of the overall charge transfer based icing sensor design.
Figure 4. Operational Scheme of Charge transfer Ice sensing
The only exposed part is the electrode, which may be
the copper trace on a printed circuit board covered with
weather resistant dielectric material of known parameters. The
weather resistant dielectric coating/covering can ensure the
protection required to avoid corrosion of the plate. The low
voltage requirement [milli-volts] of the MEMS devices makes
the design feasible for battery operated system in a remote
location.
1) Electrode Panel Selection: The ﬂexibility of electrode
conﬁguration provides different schemes in terms of shapes
and forms. The layout of the electrode for charge transfer
scheme is focused on the maximum transferring of charge
either to the adjacent electrode (receive) or provide effective
ground loading. Common electrode materials include copper,
carbon and silver ink. The lower the [Ω/sq] resistivity of
the material, the better as it makes control of any RC time
constants (which play key role in detection measurement)
much easier. The [Ω/sq] rating choice is coupled with the
shape and size of the electrode. Larger in length and thin
electrodes or traces build up resistance extremely quickly, even
for relatively low resistivity. Common front panel materials in-
clude glass, plexiglass and polycarbonate. The panel thickness
and its dielectric constant εr play a large part in determining
the strength of electric ﬁeld at the surface of the control panel.
Glass has higher εr than most plastics as higher numbers
deduce the ﬁelds to propagate more effectively. Thus a 5[mm]
panel with εr of 8 will perform similarly in sensitivity to a
2.5[mm] panel with an epsilon of 4, considering all other
factors equal. A panel up to 10[mm] thick is quite usable,
depending on electrode spacing and size [17]. The circuit sen-
sitivity needs to be adjusted during development to compensate
for panel thickness, dielectric constant and electrode size. With
increase in thickness of material signal to noise ratio SNR
worsens hence always thickness of the front panel material is to
be kept small. Materials with high relative dielectric constants
are also preferable for front panels as they help to increase
SNR.
V.
TRADE-OFF
The self and mutual charge transfer techniques are pri-
marily differentiated based on the electrode conﬁguration.
The single electrode and its multiple scheme implanted on
a single surface adheres to ground loading inﬂuence for the
measurement, which eventually will attributes to the sensitivity
of the ice measurement. The main tradeoffs amongst the self
and mutual capacitance techniques are sensitivity, range, noise
rejection, ground loading and probability of false detection.
The self-capacitance design is more sensitive in nature. The
ﬁeld is spreads outwards the electrode in the dielectric en-
vironment and ground loading is provided by the external
inﬂuencing of the object, in our case will be ice or a water
ﬁlm. But with increase in sensitivity comes the inclusion of the
noise in the circuitry, which is un-desirable. The noise in self
capacitance might be increased so sensitivity tuning is the vital
for design based on this methodology. The sensitivity in case
of capacitive based design has several factors ranging from
the electrodes design to the charging/discharging mechanism
affecting the sensitivity of the sensor. This includes electrode
dimensions and shape, ground loadi ng, return path, supply
voltage and charging pulses duration.
VI.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The atmospheric icing detection and measurement in harsh
cold climate is a demanding challenge. The need is more
demanding with the latest developments in the high north
regions to explore for energy ventures, which have initiated the
infrastructure and channelizing of resources. The ice accretion
and winterization factors can be very easily overlooked during
the development process, which has the lasting impact in cost
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

related damages. Therefore, icing parameters like rate, type,
thickness could play vital role in areas for instance deicing
feed-back mechanism for efﬁcient ice removal, creation of
geographical ice maps of the particular region and many
more. The icing parameters discussed need reliable sensing
methodology for acquisition and measurement in the harsh
cold regions.
A preliminary series of experimentation were performed in
Cold Room Chamber of Narvik University College. The ice
samples used were collected from the freezing process of the
commercially available freezers. The charge transfer technique
outputs zero crossover due to the dielectric variation between
different samples shows clear potential this effective/potential
technique for Cold Regions. The zero crossover is a real time
technique and hence the delays associated with this technique
are minimum. The results can be seen in Fig. 5.
Figure 5. Ice and Water Detection Ranges
The charge transfer based techniques well known for
human capacitance application can be utilized for icing rate,
type and thickness. The self or mutual capacitance basics can
be employed in the design based on charge transfer method.
The electrode conﬁguration schemes can be used in pairs
or as an individual based on the optimum tradeoff amongst
the design options. A small printed circuit board aided with
the speciﬁc electrode conﬁguration can be manufactured as a
basic prototyping icing sensor. The beneﬁt of reshaping the
electrodes and design to any form with capability to change
different dielectric material suitable to harsh environment can
be used as a starting point to develop a robust prototype. This
would enable to detect and measure the icing parameters in
real time embedded platform with low power consumption;
which is ideal for remote installations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the research funding from Research
Council of Norway, project no. 195153/160 and partially by
the consortium of the ColdTech RT3 project - Sustainable Cold
Climate Technology.
REFERENCES
[1]
http://www.ineltek.com/ru/ﬁles/Capacitive Touch Intro 2011 05.pdf.
Last accession date 23rd March 2014.
[2]
K. F. Jones and K. Z. Egelhofer, “Computer model of atmospheric ice
accretion on transmission lines”, CRREL Report, 1991.
[3]
L. J. Battan, “Cloud physics: A Popular Introduction to Applied
Meteorology”, Dover Publications, ISBN 978-0486428857, 2003.
[4]
H. F. Foder, “ISO 12494 - Atmospheric icing on structures and how
to use it”, ISO 12494:2001, ISBN 1-880653-51-6, June 2001.
[5]
S. Fikke, G. Ronsten, A. Heimo, S. Kunz, M. Ostrozlik, P. E.
Persson, J. Sabata, B. Wareing, B. Wichura, J. Chum, T. Laakso,
K. Santti, and L. Makkonen, “Cost 727 - Atmospheric icing on
structures; measurement and data collection on icing”, ISSN 1422-
1381, MeteoSwiss, 2007.
[6]
M. Drage, “Atmospheric icing and meteorological variables - Full
Scale Experiments and Testing of Models”, Phd Thesis, Department
of Geophysics, Bergen University, Norway, 2005.
[7]
J. Martinec, “Expected snow loads on structures from incomplete
hydrological data”, Journal of Glaciology,1977, pp. 185195.
[8]
W. Gareth, “Remote sensing of snow and ice”, Chapman & Hall
Publishers, ISBN 978-0415298315, 2006.
[9]
N.I. Popov and V. V. Holodov, “On the applicability of icing measure-
ments (in russian)”, Trudy GGO 408, 1978, pp. 4448.
[10]
, “Design criteria of overhead transmission lines”, IEC 60826, 2003.
[11]
L. Makkonen, “Analysis of rotating multicylinder data in measuring
cloud droplet size and liquid water content”, Journal of Atmospheric
and Oceanic Technology, 9(3), 1992, pp. 258263.
[12]
P. Lehtonen, “Experience on the iso reference collector”, Experience
on the iso reference collector. 8th IWAIS,Reykjavik, Iceland, 2000,
page 357.
[13]
H. Rothig, “A device for continuous measuring and recording of
ice accretion”, Abhandlungen-Meteorologische Dienst DDR 107 (in
German), 1973, pp. 2630.
[14]
U. N. Mughal, T. Rashid, M. S. Virk, and P. O. Nyman, “E driven
technology for Cold Regions”, CogInfo Comm, ISBN 978-1-4799-
1546-0/13, 2013, pp. 683686.
[15]
J. M. Moser, B. George, and H. Z, “Icing detector for overhead power
transmission lines”, IEEE I2MTC, 2009, pp. 11051109
[16]
A. Troiano, E. Pasero, and L. Mesin, “New system for detecting road
ice formation”, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measure-
ment, 60(3), March 2011, pp. 1091 1101.
[17]
http://www.atmel.com/Images/doc10752.pdf. Last accession date 2rd
May 2014.
[18]
http://www.atmel.com/images/qmatrix white paper 100.pdf. Last ac-
cession date 25th Feb 2014.
[19]
http://www.atmel.com/Images/qt60240 r8.06.pdf. Last accession date
25th March 2014.
[20]
K. B. Shravan, U. N. Mughal, and M. S. Virk, “Experimental study
of relative permittivity of atmospheric ice”, International Journal of
Energy and Environment, 4(3), 2013, pp. 369-376,
[21]
J. Latham, “The electriﬁcation of snowstorms and sandstorms”, Journal
of Royal Meteorological Society, 90(383), January 1964, pp. 91-95.
[22]
P. K. Dutta, “Behavior of materials at Cold Region Temperatures”,
U.S Army Corps of Engineers, Cold Regions of Engineering Lab
(CRREL), Hanover, 1988.
[23]
D. Diemand, “Winterization and winter operation of automotive and
construction equipment”, U.S Army Corps of Engineers, Cold Region
Research and Engineering Lab. Hanover, 1992.
[24]
D. R. Freitag and T. T. McFadden, “Introduction to Cold Regions
Engineering”, ASCE Press. 75, 1966.
[25]
D. Rosato and R. T. Schwartz, “Environmental effects on polymeric
materials”, John Wiley and Sons, 1968.
[26]
M. S. Virk, T. Rashid, U. N. Mughal, K. Zaman, and M. Y. Mustafa,
“Multi Sensor Atmospheric Icing Station Performance in Cold Climate
- A Case Study”, The Seventh International Conference on Sensor
Technologies and Applications, ISBN 978-161208-296-7, August 25-
31, 2013, pp. 220:224.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Evaluation of Torque and Axial Loading Physics for Atmospheric Icing Sensors
Umair N. Mughal and Muhammad S. Virk
Atmospheric Icing Research Team
Narvik University College,
Narvik, Norway
Email: unm@hin.no
Abstract—Measuring icing load and icing rate are important
parameters for an atmospheric icing sensor. A new icing sensor
has recently been designed and developed at Narvik University
College for measuring atmospheric icing rate, icing load and icing
type. Unlike the existing atmospheric icing sensors commercially
available in market, which uses the axial loading for measuring
icing load and icing rate, this new sensory system measures icing
load and icing rate using the torque loading physics. The per-
formance of this new icing sensor has been tested and validated
at cryospheric environment simulator Japan. This research work
focus upon the lab based experimentation and evaluation of axial
loading and torque loading sensory physics during an icing event.
Results show a signiﬁcant performance difference between torque
and axial loading physics for atmospheric icing sensors.
Keywords–Atmospheric Icing Sensor; Icing Load; Icing Rate;
Axial Loading; Torque Loading
I.
INTRODUCTION
A. Atmospheric Ice
Atmospheric icing primarily occurs due to the accretion of
ice on structures or objects under certain conditions. Gener-
ally an icing event is deﬁned as periods of time where the
temperature is below 0◦[C] and the relative humidity is above
95%. Ice accretion can be deﬁned as, any process of ice build
up and snow accretion on the surface of objects exposed to
the atmosphere [4]. Liquid below 0◦[C] is called supercooled
liquid, which creates atmospheric icing. This accretion can
take place either due to freezing precipitation or freezing fog.
It is primarily freezing fog that causes this accumulation,
which occurs mainly on mountaintops, which is particularly
dominant in Norway [1]. It depends mainly on the shape
of the object, wind speed, temperature, liquid water content
(amount of liquid water in a given volume of air) and droplet
size distribution (conventionally known as the median volume
diameter). Sometimes ice crystals have a thin coating of water
even at temperatures well below freezing, which form clouds.
These ice crystals join together to form ﬂakes and reach
ground as snow via air passage with temperature less than
zero [5]. Snow crystal forms when tiny supercooled cloud
droplets (about 10[µm] in diameter) freeze. However, if the
outer coating of water freezes of the combined ice crystals
during its path via a air passage with temperature less than
zero then they form snow pellets, which are sometimes called
as graupel. Also, if there is a hot layer of air just below the
cold layer of air then they reach ground assleet. Sometimes
these small droplets with water coating are not successful in
combining with other droplets and they get affected by the
surrounding air currents but eventually they fall on the surface,
they are called drizzle, which is different than fog as it doesn’t
fall. Drizzle drops are of 0.5[mm] but drops larger than this are
raindrops. Hail is another form of ice. Ice crystals when drop
towards the surface they are sometimes passed through very
moist air passage due to which they are coated with liquid
water, which by strong wind is moved upward where water
freezes and then then they move down and get covered by
liquid water and then moves up to become solid. This process
is continued and then it becomes to fall. Cloud formation is
motivated by a seed or crystalline skeleton on which very tiny,
supercooled water droplets can freeze to form snowﬂakes or
soft ice (graupel). Naturally, these seeds are random particles
of soil, dust, sand, and salt. Artiﬁcially they are of two types
glaciogenic (ice forming e.g., silver iodide or dry ice crystal)
or hygroscopic (water attracting e.g., small salt particles as
potassium chloride) [8].
B. Applications of Atmospheric Icing Sensors
Atmospheric icing is a natural phenomenon, which cannot
be avoided in Cold Regions. However, it deﬁnitely has some
physical loading characteristics on human activities and their
associated inventories. On the basis of its loading aspects we
can distinguish the effects of atmospheric ice on three classes
[8], which are
a Static Loads: Atmospheric ice, particularly (rime and glaze)
is when deposited on some static structure, it increases
its mechanical weights. Hence it constrains, the design
characteristics (particularly factor of safety) of any civil or
mechanical structure to be developed in Cold Regions.
b Dynamic Loads: This atmospheric ice, when deposited on
the dynamic structures e.g., free dynamic structure as like
power cables and motorized dynamic structures as like
wind turbines or automobile or ships/boats create additional
dynamic loads on these surfaces, which need to be overcome
by either anti/de icing techniques in case of free dynamic
structures or through increasing the power delivered to such
systems.
c Wind Action on iced structure: It is expected that if the struc-
ture is iced, its effective geometry will be altered, which in
turn reduces the aerodynamic efﬁciency of structures. This
additional drag cannot be completely controlled, however
efﬁcient anti/de icing techniques through a good feedback
from atmospheric icing sensor may reduce the losses.
Atmospheric ice can be a big problem for different in-
dustries working in Cold Regions. The potential affected
stakeholders can be [8],
i Wind Turbine Industry: One can improve the efﬁciency of
Wind Turbines by installing an atmospheric icing sensory
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

network, which should control turbine pitch by providing
feedback to ﬁlter out the atmospheric icing loading and
rate errors
ii Oil and Gas Industry due their Onshore and Offshore
Installations: These sensors can be utilized in the big
installations of oil and gas platforms in Arctic Region.
The output from these sensors can be a good feedback
for active monitoring of atmospheric icing activities and
its remedies through a good anti/de icing system
iii Automobiles Industry: In Automotive industry these sen-
sors are required to be installed in order to sense the real
time atmospheric icing activity on the road surfaces. These
sensors can be interconnected with the Road Services via
GPS so that accelerated responses for road maintenance
can be conducted.
iv Power Industry due to the ice on the long power networks:
On power networks, one cannot completely calculate the
icing load (which can be very critical). This load if it
remains on the power line can be less dangerous than
if it suddenly falls its reaction can damage the system.
However, active monitoring of icing rate and icing load
may reduce this problem if it is connected with some semi
active dampers (e.g., magnetorheological damper) mounted
on the power cable connections on the pole.
This paper is divided in ﬁve sections. In section II, it
is aimed to discuss the atmospheric icing load measurement
techniques through International Standards/Recommendations
and some details about the commercially available atmospheric
icing load sensors along with their necessary physics. Section
III deals with the torque loading basics and the need to
utilize this technique for measuring atmospheric icing load
and rate. Section IV starts with an introduction of Cryospheric
Environmental Simulator and leads towards performing series
of experiments to validate the usefulness of torque loading
over axial loading. The concluding section V is divided into
smaller parts to comment on various aspects of experimental
results.
II.
ATMOSPHERIC ICING LOAD MEASUREMENT
To design a new atmospheric icing sensor, in order to
measure icing load and icing rate, it is important to understand
the existing atmospheric icing rate and icing load sensors.
Power requirements for the removal of snow and ice is different
hence to distinguish between snow and ice can be considered
to be a limiting factor for de-icing system, because most
devices for the removal of snow are normally ineffective for
the efﬁcient removal of ice or hard packed snow [3]. It is
therefore important to distinguish between different types of
atmospheric ice. Presently as found, there are commercially
available atmospheric icing load sensors, which are only based
upon axial loading physics e.g., Ice Load Monitor and Ice
Meter [2]. As recommended in international standard ISO
12494 [7], a standard way of measuring ice accretion is to
measure the load of atmospheric ice on a steel rod that is
0.5[m] high (1[m] if heavy icing is expected) and has the
diameter of 30[mm]. The rod must be freely rotating or forced
to rotate at a constant speed. When ice accumulates on the
steel rod, aerodynamic drag will cause it to rotate in the case
of free rotating icing load monitor, always facing the least
amount of the iced part towards the wind. This doubling of
length of the steel rod due to heavy icing is primarily aimed
to uniform the drag distribution along its proﬁle. By measuring
the weight of the iced steel rod with the help of load cells, the
amount of ice that has accreted can be determined. Two ice
sensors (ice monitor & ice meter) have been developed on
the basis of this technique. The following sections describes
these two sensors. However, till date none of the atmospheric
icing sensor is utilizing torque loading physics, which is also
recommended in ISO 12494 [7].
A. The Ice Monitor
The Ice Monitor measures the mass of accumulated ice
gravimetrically. The working element is a freely rotating steel
pipe resting on a rod placed on a load cell. As ice accumulates
on the freely rotating steel pipe, the ice load is weighed by
the load cell, see Figure 1. The Ice Monitor is manufactured
by SAAB Technologies and was initially developed for power
line surveillance systems. It can measure the rate because the
readings from the load cell are recorded with time. The Ice-
Monitor is not able to detect ice over a wide area and cannot
distinguish between the two types of in-cloud icing.
Figure 1. Ice Load Monitor [13]
B. Ice Meter
The ice meter was developed by the Institute of Atmo-
spheric Physics, Prague, Czech Republic. It measures the mass
of icing accumulated on the surface of the collector. It has a
horizontal rod, which is coupled with a cylindrical collector to
the tensometric. The cylinder is orientated vertically in order
to eliminate the detection of wet snow as much as possible but
the orientation of this cylinder can be changed to horizontal, if
required, see Figure 2. In this sensor, the mass of accumulated
ice is measured by means of a tensometric bridge (strain gauge
load sensor) the output of which is tied to the precise AD con-
verter. The digital signal is preprocessed by a micro-controller,
which assigns the time and stores the data into the device
memory. In order to prevent the freezing of the horizontal
rod, which couples the cylindrical collector to the tensometric,
which is located together with the electronics in the housing.
The passage through the housing may be heated depending
on the passage temperature. A test electromechanical impulse
is applied each hour to verify the free force transition to the
tensometric, and thus to check whether the acquired data are
reliable or not [6].
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. Ice Meter [6]
C. Study of the Physics of Axial Load Based Ice Sensing
Methodology
The load is normally described by the way they are applied.
If the line of action of the loads is applied parallel to the
surface they are called shear loads and when they are applied
perpendicular to the surface they are called axial loads, see
Figure 3. Although there are many techniques to measure these
loads but the most common are associated with piezoelectric
sensor and strain gauge sensing elements.
Figure 3. Axial and Shear Load (a). Typical clevis joint, (b). FBD of bolt,
(c). FBD of section mnqp, (d). Shear Force on Section mn
D. Piezoelectric Sensing
This sensing technique works by converting the force
or strain by converting it into electric charge. Its primary
application is in the vibration industry, however it can also
be used for load sensing. Piezoelectricity is a property, which
is possessed by some materials, which is activated when are
acted by some force. Piezoelectric materials have a recoverable
strain of 0.1 % under electric ﬁeld; they can be used as sensors.
They may be polymers (e.g., polyvinylidene ﬂuoride PV DF)
or ceramic materials (e.g., Lead Zirconate Titanate PZT).
If you apply a static force to a piezoelectric force sensor,
then the charge output generated initially will leak away and
the output of the sensor will ultimately return to zero. This
discharging rate of the charge is exponential and is based on
the sensor’s discharge time constant, DTC. Mathematically
the charge characteristics can be described as [9],
Qx = dxyFy b
a
qx = Qxe−
t
RC
(1)
where Qx is the amount of charge stored in the piezoelec-
tric material due to the orthogonal force Fy, a and b are the
characteristic dimensions of the sensor parallel and orthogonal
to the Fy respectively, dxy is the characteristic piezoelectric
coefﬁcient (or calibration coefﬁcient of the material), q is the
instantaneous charge, R resistance prior to ampliﬁed and C is
the total capacitance prior to ampliﬁer.
Figure 4. Piezoelectric Sensing [9]
E. Strain Gage Sensors
This technique is more suitable for precise measurement
of static loads or a quasi dynamic loads. Within the elastic
limits of the material, when a stress is applied to an electric
conducting material its electrical conductance Rx changes due
to the change in its geometry. This change in conductance is
then further measured using a wheatstone bridge (special com-
bination of resistors), which is then further used to measure the
load. The resistance change in the wheatstone bridge delivers
a voltage, which deliver the strain and hence the force. This
special combination of wheatstone bridge is shown in Figure
5b.
qx = Qxe−
t
RC
R2
R1 = Rx
R3
Rx = R2
R1 Rx
VG =

Rx
R3+Rx −
R2
R1+R2

Vs
(2)
This concept has been utilized in the Ice Load Moniter
Sensor by SAAB Technologies, see Sec. II-A.
F. Problems with existing Ice Load and Icing Rate Measure-
ment Systems
1) Measurements in Czech Republic [7]: The icemeter has
been operated on the Milesovka peak from 2000. Although
icemeters installed in the site measured correctly most of
the time, but there were also some time periods when the
instruments gave obviously wrong negative values. These times
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a) Strain Guage [10]
(b) Wheatstone Bridge [11]
Figure 5. Strain Guage Sensing
can usually be associated with the periods when the horizontal
rod coupling the tensometric with the vertical collector became
icebound to the instrument housing. Thus there was no free
force transition, which can be identiﬁed by not observing
a proper electromechanical pulse in the data. The following
changes are expected to be made in icemeter for its better
performance,
i Possibility to build an instrument with a rotating collector.
ii More focus on the sensors that measure accumulated icing.
III.
TORQUE MEASUREMENTS
An analytical expression between mass moment of inertia
and the supplied current (3) was developed (for more see
Mughal et. al. [14]),
J = aIin − b
(3)
where a = αVin/βγω3
m and b = η/βγω3
m will be constant.
The (3) relation was further modiﬁed to take the form (4) in
order to compare the results of this new sensor with a standard
ice load sensor.
δmice = AδIin(ice) + B
(4)
Where A =
a
R2
ice and B = aIin−J−b
R2
ice
. The (4) relation is
named as MuVi Current-Mass (δI − δm) Relation.
A. Requirement of Torque Loading
As it is understood from [7] that presently their is no
atmospheric icing sensor in the commercial market that can
measure the icing load, which is uniformly distributed along
the sensory surface. All the commercially available sensors
(e.g., Ice Load Monitor), measure the non uniform loading on
a freely rotating surface, however it is recommended in [7] that
a rotary sensory system will be more suitable. A new sensor
have been developed by the authors to measure icing load and
icing rate. This sensor is based upon the rotary dynamics where
the collector rotates at a constant speed in order to allow ice
to uniformaly distribute around the rotary collector.
IV.
CRYOSPHERIC ENVIRONMENT SIMULATOR CES,
SHINJO JAPAN
Cryospheric Environmental Simulator is an experimenta-
tion facility of NIED at Shinjo, Japan. They provide the
capacity to perform basic and applied studies related with snow
and ice disasters using a snow fall machine and icing wind
tunnel. For this experimentation to evaluate the performance
of this new sensor, Cryospheric Environmental Simulator CES
was the most suitable choice, which had the facility to test
this sensor both in Icing Wind Tunnel and Snow Simulator.
The facilities and speciﬁcations of CES are provided in Table
I, which are taken from [12],
TABLE I. FACILITIES AND CONTROLLABLE PARAMETERS IN COLD ROOM
AT CES, NIED JAPAN
Facilities
Speciﬁcations
Variables
Limitations
Comments
General Conditions in the Cold Room
Temperature
−30◦ →
+25◦
−
Snowfall Machine A
Snowfall
Intensity
0 −
1[mm/h]
water
equivalent
Crystal
Type
Dendrities
0.5 →
5[mm]
Area
3 × 5[m]
−
Snowfall Machine B
Snowfall
Intensity
0 −
5[mm/h]
water
equivalent
Crystal
Type
Sphere
Diameter
0.025[mm]
Area
3 × 5[m]
−
Rainfall Machine
Rainfall
Intensity
0 −
2[mm/h]
−
Area
3 × 5[m]
−
Solar Simulator
Solar
Radiation
0 −
1000[W/m2]
−
Area
3 × 5[m]
−
Experiment Table
Size
3 × 5[m]
−
Inclination
0 → 45◦
−
Wind Tunnel
Wind
Speed
0 →
10[m/s]
−
A. Calibration of Ice Load Monitor and new atmospheric
Icing Sensor
1) Ice Load Monitor: It is found that this standard sensor
have never been tested in any standard icing tunnel or snow
simulator as like Cryospheric Environmental Simulator and if
it is tested then it is not published/reported (the details of CES
Simulator will be discussed in Sec IV). The Ice Load Monitor
deliver a current output as a measure of icing load. This sensor
was calibrated at Narvik University College and the calibration
equation is given by (5). For more details on this calibration,
see Mughal and Virk [15].
I = 0.0017δδmILMcal + 4.435
(5)
2) New Atmospheric Icing Sensor: This was calibrated
using standard rotary masses on the sensor shaft and measuring
the output current as a measure of mass moment of inertia. The
electronic setup for calibration can be seen in Figure 6c. The
calibration equations thus obtained is given by (6) (for more
details on this, see Mughal et. al. [14]),
I = 2.91 × 10−7JMuV ical + 328.64
(6)
Where J is in

gm mm2
and Imeasured is in [mA].
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(a) Experimental Table - Top View
(b) Experimental Table - Side View
(c) Electronic Setup
Figure 6. Experimental and Electronic Setup, CES Japan [15]
B. Experiment performed at CES, Japan
The experiment was performed in Icing Wind Tunnel using
three different sensors, arranged on the sensory table as can
be seen in Figure 7a where Sensor 1 is the rotary sensor
with complete electronics of this new sensor, Sensor 2 is the
additional sensor, which is just a geometric shape to understand
the deposition of atmospheric ice in order to optimize the non
rotary parts parts of new sensor. The experimental conditions
during the experiment can be seen in Table II, which is
followed by Figure 7b reﬂecting the measurement setup under
the experimental table. The graphical results of this experiment
are shown in Figure 8 [8].
TABLE II. EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS FOR EXPERIMENT 1
Before Experiment
Condition/Variables
Speciﬁcations
Date of Experiment
17/02/2014
Experiment Number
1
Experimental Facility
CES Icing Wind Tunnel
Sensor 1
Rotating hexagon with plates
Sensor 2
Non rotating cylinder
Sensor 3
Freely rotating Ice Load Monitor
Tunnel Temperature
−15◦
Time of Experiment
170[min]
Wind Speed for ﬁrst 60[min]
6[m/s]
Wind Speed for next 110[min]
10[m/s]
Mass of Sensor 1 (without ice)
8936[gm]
Mass of Sensor 2 (without ice)
591[gm]
Mass of Sensor 3 (without ice)
0[gm]
After Experiment
Mass of Sensor 1
9735[gm]
Mass of Sensor 2
866[gm]
Mass of Sensor 3
480[gm]
(a) Sensors Arrangement in Icing Tunnel - Front View
(b) Sensors Arrangement in Icing Tunnel - Side View
Figure 7. Experimental Setup in Icing Tunnel
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The icing rate on this new sensor can be determined using
the relation (7) whereas the icing rate on Ice Load Monitor can
be determined using the relation (8). The associated curves for
these equation are shown in Figure 8a, which clearly reﬂect
that this new sensor, have more capability of holding uniform
distribution of atmospheric ice then a freely rotating Ice Load
Monitor. Also, the manufacturers of Ice Load Monitor claim
that after 40[gm] their sensor will be able to predict icing
load and icing rate and as found by experiments this 40[gm]
on ice load monitor is collected in around 30[min] whereas
the same 40[gm] of mass on new sensor is collected in ﬁrst
5[min] and that too uniformly. This uniform distribution is
very important for additional mass moment of inertia on the
sensor to deliver additional current as a measurable quantity.
The calibrated relation between mass moment of inertia and
current loading is given by (6) whereas the experimental mass
moment of inertia and current loading equation is given as (9)
and graphical results are shown in Figure 8b. The experimental
section was bounded by walls (in icing wind tunnel), and
it may be one of the possible reason of deviation between
calibrated and experimental I − JRelation but nevertheless
this can be adjusted through proper calibration. The additional
mass and additional current calibrated equation of Ice Load
Monitor is given by (5) and the experimental relation is
given by (10) and the results are shown in Figure 8c. These
results of Ice Load Monitor shows that for a mass range of
0 → 500[gm] the current variation is around 4.5 → 5.3[mA]
ideally and 5 → 6.8[mA] experimentally, which have more
potential of noise interference. The mass current relation of
this new sensor was also determined experimentally and is
given by (11) and the graphical representation can be seen in
Figure 8d. This equation of this new sensor was then compared
with the (10), which clearly reﬂect that this new sensor for a
mass domain of 40 → 800[gm] was having a current range
of 0 → 150[mA], which is quite reasonable to ﬁlter noise
and other calibration errors. The R2 value reﬂect that linear
relations of experimental of this new sensor are 96% whereas
for Ice Load Monitor this value is 88% linear.
δmMuV i = 4.480t + 54.519
(7)
δmILM = 2.716t − 54.725
(8)
I = 2.84 × 10−6JMuV iexp + 349.87
(9)
δI = 0.0031δmILM + 5.259
(10)
δI = 0.1936δmnewsensor − 7.21
(11)
(a) Atmospheric Ice Growth Rate (Mass-Time Curve)
(b) Current Mass Moment of Inertia Curve (I-J Curve) of New Sensor at 6rpm
(c) Current Mass (I-m Curve) of Ice Load Monitor
(d) Additional Current Additional Mass (δI − δm Curve)
Figure 8. Graphical Results of Experiment 1 in Icing Wind Tunnel [15]
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

V.
CONCLUDING DISCUSSIONS
1) RPM Fluctuations: The rotational speed of this sensor
was selected to be 6rpm. It is found that if the rpm was
5 there were current ﬂuctuations in the range of mA during
rotation without any change in load. Also, during experiment
it was found that if the rpm was increased to 8 chances of
non uniform deposition of ice on the sensor, which may lead
to additional errors.
2) Sensitivity: The results of experiment clearly reﬂect that
new sensor provide sufﬁcient deposition of atmospheric ice ice
at an optimized rpm of 6. Also, the current range to measure
icing load and icing rate is quite reasonable to determine the
required parameters. This new sensor is more sensitive than
Ice Load Monitor because if it is said that 40[gm] of mass for
Ice Load Monitor as the starting mass for new sensor than it is
collected within ﬁrst 5 → 10[min] on new sensory unit and it
is more than 30[min] for Ice Load Monitor. The reason of this
mass deposition is due to the rotary physics associated with
new sensor and the surface area of Ice Load Monitor is around
50 × 103[mm2] and new sensor is around 112 × 103[mm2].
3) Saturation: The saturation limit for the motor was
adjusted to be around 1[A]. If the demand in current from the
rotary unit of new sensor exceeds 1[A] than the motor would
stop. The maximum mass for new sensor was tested for a mass
of 800[gm] for a time period of 170[min] and it is found that
new unit have still more potential to hold the ice mass.
4) Performance:
The sensor have been tested in the
Cryospheric Environmental Icing Simulator at a temperature
of −15◦[C] and have performed satisfactory without any error
signal. This sensor have not been tested in the ﬁeld, however it
is aimed to test this sensor in the ﬁeld in the upcoming Winter
2014 − 15. The calibration error may have been associated
with the poor performance of the sensor, however this have
been true if the results of experiment were not linear. The
experimental results show that the new sensor have a good
performance potential than Ice Load Monitor, however Ice
Load Monitor is already in use by industry in the ﬁeld whereas
new sensor still has not yet been commercialized.
5) Error Diagram: The error diagrams from experiment 1
to experiment 4 reﬂect that new sensor have very low error in
the start but it increases linearly due to the deviation between
the experimental slope and calibrated slope of new sensor but
nevertheless it can be improved by adopting proper calibration.
The error is calculated using the following (12),
%Error =

Iexp − Ical
Ical
 × 100.
(12)
The error diagram of Experiment between new sensor and
Ice Load Monitor as calculated by (12) is shown in Figure 9.
The error results shows that the % error range of new sensor
is starts from 0% and increases linearly because experimental
slope of J-I Relation of new sensor (9) is one order higher than
the calibrated slope of (6). The error on Ice Load Monitor is
around 10 − 30%. These all results reﬂect new sensor as a
good solution for measuring Icing and Snow Load Rate if
properly calibrated as it has more potential to deposit ice and
give reasonable reading count, which is required to ﬁlter the
cold climate current errors.
Figure 9. Experiment 1 Percentage Error Diagram
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the research funding from Research
Council of Norway, project no. 195153/160 and partially by
the consortium of the ColdTech RT3 project - Sustainable Cold
Climate Technology.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. C. Homola, “Atmospheric Icing on Wind Turbines”, Doctoral
Theses at NTNU 2011:259, 2011.
[2]
U. N. Mughal and M. S. Virk, “Atmospheric icing sensors - An in-
sight”, The Seventh International Conference on Sensor Technologies
and Applications, ISBN 978-161208-296-7, August 25-31, 2013, pp.
191-199.
[3]
C. D. Kuhumonen, “Ice removing machine”, U.S. Patent 4186967,
1980.
[4]
H. F. Foder, “ISO 12494 - Atmospheric icing on structures and how
to use it”, ISO 12494:2001, ISBN 1-880653-51-6, June 2001.
[5]
S. W. Trimble, “Encyclopedia of Water Science - 2nd Edition”, CRC
Press, ISBN 978-0-8493-0-9627-4, 2008.
[6]
http://www.ufa.cas.cz/html/upperatm/chum/namraza/Icingmeasczech2.pdf,
Last Access date: September 10, 2014.
[7]
S. Fikke, “Cost 727 - Atmospheric icing on structures; measurement
and data collection on icing”, ISSN 1422-1381, MeteoSwiss, 2007.
[8]
U. N. Mughal, “Design and Development of Robust Atmospheric
Icing Sensor”, PhD Thesis submitted at the Department of Physics,
University of Oslo, July 2014.
[9]
http://migyanesfertecno.blogspot.no/2012/01/piezoelectricidad.html,
Last Access date: September 10, 2014.
[10]
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strain gauge, Last Access date: Septem-
ber 10, 2014.
[11]
http://www.allaboutcircuits.com/vol 1/chpt 9/7.html,
Last
Access
date: September 10, 2014.
[12]
http://www.bosai.go.jp/seppyo/jikkentou/jikkentou syoukai e.html,
Last Access date: September 10, 2014.
[13]
http://www.combitech.com/Documents/IceMonitor Produktblad Combitech.pdf,
Last Access date: September 10, 2014.
[14]
U. N. Mughal, M. S. Virk, K. Kosugi, and S. Mochizuki, “Experi-
mental Validation of Icing Load Using Rotary Physics”, Manuscript
submitted in International Journal of Cold Regions Science and
Technology, August 2014.
[15]
U. N. Mughal and M. S. Virk, “Performance Evaluation of MuVi-
Graphene and Ice Load Monitor in icing conditions”, Manuscript
submitted in International Journal of Cold Regions Science and
Technology, August 2014.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Using CFD-Based Virtual Sensor Data to Study the Structure of Air Flow behind A 
Porous Fence 
 
Yizhong Xu and Mohamad Y. Mustafa 
Atmospheric Icing Research Team 
Narvik University College 
Narvik, Norway 
Yizhong.Xu@hin.no and MohamadYazidF.Mustafa@hin.no 
 
 
Abstract— Physical experiments have difficulties to thoroughly 
investigate the full structure of air flow behind a porous fence. 
Physical measurement sensors have their limitations of data 
acquisitions in turbulent air flow. Computational Fluid 
Dynamics (CFD) technique provides an infinite number of 
virtual sensors that allows producing quantitative CFD-based 
virtual sensors data for users. In this paper, a 3D CFD model is 
assessed by the physical sensors data, and the simulation has 
provided 
comprehensive 
information 
for 
studying 
the 
structure of airflow in a 3D domain. 
Keywords-physical 
sensor; 
virtual 
sensor; 
wind 
tunnel 
experiment; 3D CFD model; CFD-based virtual sensor data 
I. 
 INTRODUCTIONS  
In cold regions like Norway, the outdoor environment can 
be extremely hostile towards human activities. Porous fence 
is one of common devices widely applied in these regions. It 
serves as windbreaks to effectively mitigate the damages 
caused by strong wind and transported sediments. Therefor 
it can create an operable and habitable space for human 
needs.  
The structure of air flow behind a porous fence is complex 
due to the presence of the bleed flow passing through the 
pores in the fence and the displaced flow passing over the 
fence. Figure 1. shows a comparison of flow regimes behind 
porous fences as porosity above and under critical porosity, 
where ß is porosity of fence, and       is critical porosity of 
fence. 
 
 
Figure 1. Comparison of flow regimes behind porous fences as porosity 
approaches critical porosity 
Critical porosity       is defined as the maximum fence 
porosity below which flow separation and reversal occurs  
[1]. Above the critical porosity, the airflow in the leeward is 
dominant by bleed flow and there is no flow separation 
(Figure1, a). Below the critical porosity, the leeward airflow 
directly behind the fence reverses, resulting in a region of 
recirculating air (Figure1, b). In general, fence porosity in 
the range of 0.20-0.50 is considered to give noticeable 
changes of flow structures behind fences [2] [3] [4] [5].  
Physical experiments to investigate the structure of air flow 
behind porous fences are quite challenging, due to the 
presence of turbulence. Conventional cup-type anemometer 
is the earliest device to give a rough estimate of turbulence 
intensity in the field tests [6]. Hot-Wire anemometer (HWA) 
and Pulsed-Wire anemometer (PWA) must be positioned at 
specific measurement points to obtain results, that will 
distort the airflow field. Laser Doppler anemometer (LDA) 
and Phase Doppler anemometer (PDA) are non-intrusive to 
the measured airflow field. However, like HWA and PWA, 
LDA and PDA only provide time-averaged velocity and 
turbulence intensity values at discrete measuring points, and 
have difficulties to measure the near-wake regions behind 
fences. Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) and Particle 
Tracking Velocimetry (PTV) as recently developed non-
intrusive measurement techniques can obtain instantaneous 
velocity measurements and are related properties in a target 
area. The air is seeded with tracer particles, which must be 
sufficiently small to be assumed to faithfully follow the air 
dynamics. In practice, PIV and PTV are costly, and usually 
are not applied in field measurements. Overall, the above 
physical sensors have their limitations, and have difficulties 
to obtain a high-resolution data set within a space of airflow 
influenced by a porous fence. 
Over the last three decades, with the rapid development of 
computer technology and Computational Fluid Dynamics 
(CFD) 
techniques, 
numerical 
simulation 
has 
been 
increasingly 
employed 
in 
porous 
fence 
researches. 
Wilson[7] introduced a momentum sink involving the fence 
resistance coefficient to simulate a porous fence solved by 
Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equation. His 
results demonstrated a promising prediction in terms of the 
flow structure around the fence. Under different fence 
porosities and different turbulence models, Packwood [8] 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

examined 
numerical 
results 
against 
wind 
tunnel 
experimental results through a 2D thin fence model in a 
thick boundary layer. He found that the k-ɛ incorporated a 
Preferential Dissipation Modification (PDM) model worked 
better. Bourdin and Wilson [10] confirmed the suitability of 
CFD with regard to windbreak aerodynamics, based on the 
comparison of the numerical data (2D and 3D model 
simulation) against the experimental data. Alhajraf [9] 
introduced a CFD model for 2D and 3D simulations of 
drifting particles at porous fences. His model showed good 
agreement with the field observations and the wind tunnel 
measurements.  
Virtual sensor is a smart sensor, it can be used for 
computing estimating complex variables that otherwise 
should require very expensive equipment or laboratory tests 
[11]. Recently CFD-based virtual sensor data as alternatives 
to physical sensor data are increasingly adapted by 
researchers. Jang et al. [12] implemented CFD-based virtual 
sensor data in a micro-scale air quality management system. 
Sun and Wang [13] used CFD-based virtual sensor data to 
control indoor environment and space ventilation.  
In this paper, a porous fence with porosity of 0.23 has been 
selected for the case study that ensures recirculating air 
occurred in the flow regime behind the porous fence. 
Section 2 is the theoretical framework discussed about the 
novelty and robustness of the CFD-based virtual sensor 
data. Section 3 and Section 4 are the case study  carried out 
in physical wind tunnel and virtual wind tunnel (numerical), 
where the detailed procedures of physical test and numerical  
simulation are presented.  In Section 5, the  3D CFD model 
has been assessed against wind tunnel experiment, and the 
simulation results have been demonstrated and discussed. 
Finally, the capability of CFD-based virtual sensor data to 
study the structure of airflow behind a porous fence has 
been concluded in Section 6.  
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Blocken [14] reviewed a perspective on the past, present, 
future of Computational Wind Engineering (CWE), and 
made a statement: “CFD offers some particular advantages 
compared with on-site measurements and reduced-scale 
wind tunnel measurements. They can provide detailed 
information on the relevant flow variables in the whole 
calculation domain, under well-controlled conditions and 
without similarity constraints.”  CFD technique is an 
efficient, flexible and relatively cheap alterative to physical 
experiment that has been widely recognized in the porous 
fence research industry nowadays.  Effective application of 
CFD is the combination of knowledge in domain physics 
and numeric. When adequate physical models are selected 
and supplied with the correct data, essentially, CFD allows 
for an infinite number of virtual sensors to assess the 
performance of a unit.  
Reynolds-averaged-Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations are 
the most popular governing equations to describe turbulence 
flow behind porous fences so far, which are mathematically 
expressed as follows: 
   
      
 
 
(1) 
 
   
     
   
      
 
 
  
     
 
 
    
       
 
   (  
   
 )     
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
where    is the j component of velocity, t is the time,    is 
the j coordinate, ρ is the air density, µ is the dynamic 
viscosity, and    is the gravitational body force. 
The RANS are time-averaged equations of motion for 
airflow that need to solve a closure problem because of the 
non-linear term from the convective acceleration, known as 
the Reynolds stress.  For the porous fence research, k-
Epsilon and k-Omega are the two most popular turbulence 
closure models used in CFD simulations [7] [8] [15] [16].  
The main difference between them is that k-Epsilon model 
solves kinetic energy and turbulence dissipation, while the 
k-Omega model solves kinetic energy and turbulence 
frequency. Although it is well acknowledged that the 
selection of turbulence models is sensitive to the accuracy of 
numerical results, the suitability of turbulence models varies 
individually.  It is still open to debate the issue of turbulence 
model selections in the research field.  
The main limitation of RANS modeling is incapable to 
simulate the inherently transient features of the airflow field 
such as separation and recirculation downstream of 
windward edges and vortex shedding in the wake. Large-
eddy simulation (LES) can explicitly resolve these large-
scale features. However, LES increases computational 
requirements and has the difficulty in specifying appropriate 
time-dependent inlet and wall boundary conditions. 
Nevertheless, mathematical model based on the RANS 
equations has been used successfully for studies of the 
structure of airflow behind porous fences. 
CFD simulation provides virtual sensor data to estimate 
product properties or process conditions based on 
mathematical models. These mathematical models use other 
physical sensor readings to calculate the estimations. Inlet 
velocity profile and boundary conditions are those of 
physical sensor data that will be introduced into the 
mathematical model as the pre-set data, which reflects to the 
real scenario. Consequently, CFD simulation creates a 
channel through which a virtual system (CFD-based virtual 
sensor data) has communicated with a natural system 
(physical sensor data and empirical knowledge) in a way 
that improves understandings for researchers. 
Care for high quality and reliability of CFD simulations is 
crucial. Numerical and physical modeling errors must be 
assessed. Without validation against physical experiments, 
the robustness of CFD-based virtual sensor data is 
questionable.  
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

III. 
CASE STUDY SETUP 
The physical experiment for this case was conducted in a 
closed return wind tunnel at Narvik University College. A 
porous fence was placed at the center of the cross section of 
the wind tunnel with a distance of 1000mm from the leading 
edge of the test section (upstream). The configuration of the 
fence is 650mm width * 200mm height * 3mm thickness, 
and it is oval holed with porosity of 0.23. The CFD 
simulation domain was configured by the exact size of the 
physical domain, which makes the 3D domain with 
dimensions: 655mm height, 4000mm length and 1160mm its 
maximum width.  Figure 2 shows the physical wind tunnel 
experiment setup. Figure 3 displays the 3D virtual wind 
tunnel domain. 
 
 
Figure 2. Physical wind tunnel experiment setup 
 
 
Figure 3. 3D virtual wind tunnel simulation domain 
 
The physical wind tunnel experiment is designed to 
investigate the structure of airflow behind the fence under 
free upstream velocities of 15m/s and 20m/s respectively. A 
Pitot static tube was placed at the entrance of the test section 
to monitor the upstream velocities, and a traverse attached 
with a Hot-Wire Anemometer (HWA) was positioned at a 
longitudinal distance of 925 mm downstream of the fence. 
Test data were taken by moving the traverse at steps of 0.2 
inch in the vertical direction. To improve the accuracy of the 
data, 50 readings have been taken for each step, and then 
time averaged data were recorded. 
The physical experiment revealed the inlet velocity profiles 
were fully developed and obeyed the power law profile: 
 
         (  
⁄ )                                   (3) 
 
Where the       is the free stream inlet velocity which is 
measured 15m/s and 20m/s here respectively.   is the 
boundary layer thickness which is equal to 10mm. The 
exponent   is 0.11. 
Equation (3) was written in program C language and was 
interpreted into the CFD model. As such, the real sensor 
data have been transferred into the numerical simulations.  
IV. 
NUMERICAL SIMULATION 
The CFD simulations were performed under ANSYS 14.0 
Fluent workbench package. To optimize resources the 
meshed domain was reduced down to half since it was 
symmetrical in the YZ plane and an air box (length * width 
* height = 3000mm * 400mm * 300mm with the upstream 
length of 500mm) was created to dense the elements around 
the fence. Figure 4 demonstrates the creation of the CFD 
domain and its meshed symmetry wall. 
 
 
Figure 4. CFD domain & its meshed symmetry wall 
 
In this paper, realizable k-Epsilon turbulence model with 
Non-Equilibrium Wall Function is employed, as it is in 
remarkable agreement with the considerable testing results 
[17]. 
Mesh sensitivity study was carried out under the same 
simulation conditions, where tetrahedral and polyhedral 
elements have been performed through 6 different meshing 
scales. The parameters selected to check the mesh 
independent condition of grid were velocity magnitudes and 
turbulent kinetic energies (TKEs).  It was examined that the 
mesh with 6.3 million tetrahedral elements was desirable. 
Turbulent intensity ratio and viscosity ration were set at 1% 
and 10% respectively after the inlet velocity profiles were 
hooked. The gauge pressure at the pressure outlet was set at 
0 Pascal with the backflow turbulent intensity ratio and 
viscosity ratio as 5% and 10%. All of the rest boundary 
conditions were treated as no-slip stationary wall with 1mm 
roughness height and 0.5 roughness constant. The solution 
method was the pressure-velocity coupling the Semi-
Implicit Method for Pressure-Linked Equation (SIMPLE) 
scheme, since the scheme has been extensively used for 
atmospheric flows [16] [17]. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The convergence criteria were set the scaled residuals below 
1*10-4, and mass flow rates between velocity inlet and 
pressure outlet have been checked afterwards. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
A. Assessment of 3D CFD model 
 The comparisons of velocity magnitudes between the 
numerical and experimental results is presented in Figure 5, 
where H/h is the ratio of the measuring height to the fence 
height. The acquired data were taken along a vertical line 
925mm downstream of the fence in the symmetry wall, 
which is correspondent to the exact position of the 
experimental measurement line.  
 
 
Figure 5. Comparisons between CFD and wind tunnel results 
 
It is observed that the numerical results are in good 
agreement with the experimental results especially within 
the range of H/h = 1.2. Beyond the range of H/h = 1.8, 
velocity magnitude in the CFD grows faster than that in the 
experiment. The reason can be attributed to the fact that the 
blockage ratio of the wind tunnel in the current setting is 
9.8%. It is slight high that increases the effects of the top 
wall boundary layer on the regional velocities in the 
physical test, while for the case of CFD, the roughness 
height of the top wall is set to 1mm. 
The CFD simulation over-predicted the reduction of 
velocity when compared to the physical measured results. In 
general, it is describable. 
B. Domain structure of air flow 
The 3D CFD simulation provides an infinite number of 
virtual sensor data to form a comprehensive structure of air 
flow in the targeted domain. It allows assessing the 
performance of any unit. Figure 6 and Figure 7 display the 
contours of velocity magnitude and kinetic energy 
respectively, where the free stream velocity is at 20m/s, 
plane-1is parallel to the symmetry wall with x = 11mm, 
plane-2  is parallel to the floor with y = 0mm, and plane-3 is 
parallel to the velocity inlet with z = 1500mm. The domain 
structure of air flow is agreed to the descriptions of other 
researchers [1] [18]. 
 
 
Figure 6. Velocity magnitude contours in the 3 planes 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. TKE contours in the 3 planes 
C. Shear stress distributions in fence porous zone 
One of advantages in 3D CFD simulation is that it allows 
scrutinizing shear stress and pressure distributions in porous 
fence zone. Unlike 2D model, 3D model can directly reflect 
this information in detail without modifying momentum and 
inertial loss within the porous zone. Figure 8 shows the 
shear distribution in the porous zone. These data are not 
possible to be obtained by the real sensors equipped in the 
current wind tunnel experiment. 
 
 
Figure 8. Contour of wall shear stress in porous zone 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
Velocity (m/s) 
H/h 
Comparisons among CFD and experimental results 
15m/s
test
20m/s
test
15m/s
CFD
20m/s
CFD
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

D. Position of  the reattachment point 
Reattachment point is determined by examining the 
horizontal velocity component at ground level to determine 
the point, where the horizontal velocity changes sign from 
upwind (negative) to downwind (positive) [1]. It is an 
important parameter to assess the shelter distance of a 
porous fence. It is unlikely to accurately capture a 
reattachment point under the current setup of wind tunnel 
experiment, since the sensor produced time averaged data 
that it is no possible to generate negative data. 
 
 
Figure 9. Reattachment point in the domain 
 
In CFD simulation, as the time averaged bed shear stress 
reflects the velocity in the cell next to the boundary, then the 
reattachment is defined as the point where the near-wall 
velocity is zero. Therefor it can conveniently allocate the 
position of reattachment point in the domain. Figure 9 
displays the red-cross is the position of the reattachment 
point, which is at x, y, z = 3.1e-5, 0, -1668mm. 
E. Algorthmic outputs of CFD-based vritual sensor data 
A power feature of CFD simulation is to generate 
algorithmic outputs of CFD-based virtual sensor data for 
analysis. It takes CFD generated data of dynamic head as an 
example, since dynamic head is a variable commonly used 
in the fluid dynamics research. Calculating dynamic head is 
based on the following formula: 
 
     (| |)    
 
      (4) 
 
Where q is the dynamic head,   is the air density, and | | is 
the velocity magnitude. 
In ANSYS Fluent, Using the Define command by opening 
the Custom Field Functions, the formula is easily to be 
written into the model. Figure 10. shows the contours of 
dynamic head in the symmetry wall. 
CFD simulation can also generate its virtual sensor data by 
defining algorithm in its User Defined Functions. Outputs of 
data can be written to files by applying XY plot. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Contours of dynamic head 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, the CFD model has been assessed and its data 
of velocity magnitudes are in desirable agreement with the 
physical sensor data. Through an infinite number of virtual 
sensors, the model provides quantitative CFD-based virtual 
sensor data to comprehensively study the structure of air 
flow behind a porous fence. Comparing with physical 
experimental test, the CFD model has shown its strength 
with regard of flexibility, efficiency, relatively low cost and 
productivity. The model can be used in evaluating and 
designing porous fences. 
It must be pointed out that CFD-based virtual sensor data 
are valid only after the model has been proved sound, which 
means that CFD modeling has to be examined and assessed 
by essential physical sensor data. 
Future work on this research will apply this model for two-
phase flow simulation (wind driven sediments like sands 
and snows).  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Norwegian Research Council financed this work under 
project number 195153 (ColdTech). The authors would also 
like to acknowledge the contribution of the industrial 
partner in this task: IKM dsc AS, Norway. 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1]  Z. Dong, W. Luo, G. Qian, P. Lu and H. Wang, "A wind tunnel 
simulation of the mean velocity field behind upright porous wind 
fences," Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, vol. 146, pp. 82-93, 
2007.  
[2]  M. Jensen, Shelter effect: investigations into Aerodynamics of shelter 
and its effects on climate and crops, Copenhagen: Danish Tech. Press, 
1954.  
[3]  N. Tani, "On the wind tunnel test of the model shelter hedge," in 
Bulletin of the Natinal Institute for Agricultural Sciences, 1958.  
[4]  J. Raine and D. Stevenson , "Wind protection by model fences in 
simulated atmospheric boundary layer," Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

2, pp. 159-180, 1977.  
[5]  S. Lee and H. Kim, "Laboratory measurements of velocity and 
turbulence field behind porous fences," Wind. Eng. Ind. Aerodyn., vol. 
80, pp. 311-326, 1999.  
[6]  L. Hagen and E. Skidmore , "Turbulent velocity fluctuations and 
vertical flow as affected by windbreak porosity," in Trans.ASAE, 
1971A.  
[7]  J. Wilson, "Numerical studies of flow through a windbreak," Wind 
Eng. Ind. Aerodyn, vol. 21, pp. 119-154, 1985.  
[8]  A. Packwood, "Flow through porous fences in thick boundary layers: 
comparisons between laboratory and numerical experiments," Wind 
Eng. Ind. Aerodyn., vol. 88, pp. 75-90, 2000.  
[9]  S. Alhajraf, "Comutational fluid dynamic modelling of drifting 
particles at porous fence," Environmental Modelling and Software, 
vol. 19, pp. 163-170, 2004.  
[10]  P. Bourdin and J. Wilson, "Windbreak aerodynamics: is computatinal 
fluid dynamics reliable?," Boundary-Layer Meteorology, vol. 126, pp. 
181-208, 2008.  
[11]  E. Wilson, "Virtual sensor technology for process optimization," in 
Symposium on Computers and Controls in the Metals Industry in Iron 
and Steel Socirty, 1997.  
[12]  A. Jang, A. S. Man, J.-J. Kim, H. W. Choi, K. Hong, S. B. Lim, H. 
Kim and J.-H. Woo, "Implementation of CFD, senor network, and 
distributed data management in support of micro-scale air quality 
management," in 6th International Conference on Computer Sciences 
and Convergence Information Technology (ICCIT), Seogwipo, 2011.  
[13]  Z. Sun and S. Wang, "A CFD-based test method for control of indoor 
environment and space ventilation," Building and Environment, vol. 
45, pp. 1441-1447, 2010.  
[14]  B. Blocken, "50 years of Computational Wind Engineering: past, 
present and future," Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 
vol. 129, pp. 69-102, 2014.  
[15]  P. Richards and R. Hoxey, "Appropriate boundary conditions for 
computational wind engineering models using the k-e turbulence 
model," Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn., vol. 46 (47), pp. 145-153, 1993.  
[16]  J. Wilson and C. Mooney, "A numerical simulation of boundary-layer 
flows near shelterbelts comments," Boundary-Layer Meteorology, vol. 
85, pp. 137-149, 1997.  
[17]  J. Santiago, F. Martin, N. Bezdenejnykh and A. Sanz-Andres, 
"Experimental and numerical study of wind flow behind windbreaks," 
Atmospheric Environ., vol. 41, pp. 6406-6420, 2007.  
[18]  N. Zhang, J.-H. Kang and S.-J. Lee, "Wind tunnel observation on the 
effect of a porous wind fence on shelter of saltating sand particles," 
Geomorphology, vol. 120, pp. 224-232, 2010.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
                                  
 
                                                                


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Improving Distance Estimation in Object Localisation with Bluetooth Low Energy
Georgia Ionescu, Carlos Mart´ınez de la Osa and Michel Deriaz
Institute of Services Science
University of Geneva
Switzerland
Email: {georgia.ionescu, carlos.martinez, michel.deriaz}@unige.ch
Abstract—The arrival of Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) creates
opportunities for great innovations. One possible application is
object localisation. We present our unique software that can
track objects and help ﬁnding their location within a house
perimeter. With the help of Bluetooth beacons that can be
attached to different items, we can estimate the distance between
the mobile device and the object with an accuracy of less than
one meter. In this paper, we describe our system and the
techniques we use, the experiments we conducted along with the
results. In addition, we brieﬂy present some work in progress
using an indoor positioning system that helps locating the objects.
Keywords—object localisation; mobile application; Bluetooth
Low Energy
I. INTRODUCTION
Improving the quality of life of elderly people with the help
of technology is a key topic in the current research. There are
numerous advantages of using technology in order to complete
tasks that otherwise would be very difﬁcult for a human.
Technology can help elderly overcome different challenges.
One particular problem that we try to solve is ﬁnding lost
personal items. Locating objects has a wide variety of practical
applications, not only for elderly people. On a daily basis
people deal with losing important items (like wallets, keys,
etc.). Having your phone telling you where a desired item is,
or giving you information about how far the object is from you,
could save a lot of time and effort for a person. Additionally, it
would help people for which it is difﬁcult to remember where
they keep such items.
Currently, there exists a wide range of systems and tech-
nologies that provide real-time locating. Different technologies
include WiFi [1], RFID (Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation) [2],
ZigBee [2], etc. They all differ in terms of cost, infrastruc-
ture complexity, availability, maintenance costs, etc. These
differences make each of them more appropriate for certain
problems with different characteristics, further presented.
We describe distance estimation improvements when locat-
ing lost objects using the Bluetooth Low Energy technology.
We developed a unique approach to reduce the noise and lower
the error up to 1 meter for short distances and below 3 meters
for long distances.
In this paper, we present ﬁrstly previous work that is
relevant to our research along with some of the existing
systems used for locating objects. Next, we provide a detailed
description of our proposed model, and the techniques we use.
In Section IV, we describe the results of our experiments.
Finally, in Section V, we discuss several directions of current
and future research along with the conclusions.
II. RELATED WORK
Locating objects is not a new problem. Over the past years,
there were many attempts to ﬁnd a generic solution and
currently there are numerous approaches and technologies that
address this issue. Each of them is more suitable for certain
contexts and constraints that we present below.
One of the most common approaches is tracking objects and
their movements in a video sequence, using a camera. This is
well suited for trafﬁc, surveillance and robots that need to
identify objects based on images [3][4][5]. The vision-based
techniques are not ideal in a mobile context, due to several
reasons. Firstly, the lost object might be visually inaccessible,
despite the fact that it can be close to the person. Secondly,
these techniques are very computationally expensive, which
makes it not suitable for a mobile device.
A different category of Real-Time Location System is based
on WiFi. The main components are the tag (active or passive)
that is attached to the object, and the reader, that can establish a
wireless communication with the tag. It has been successfully
used for autonomous mobile robots [6] and for locating people
in the underground (subway) [7]. However, WiFi is better
suited to locate smart devices rather than objects.
Although RFID is primarily used for identifying objects,
real-time location based on RFID has been studied extensively
over the past years, with applications in health-care [8] and
warehouse operations [9]. However, RFID id not a technology
accessible to most of the people, expensive devices (RFID
readers) are required.
Bluetooth Low Energy has a lot of potential for object
tracking. It is a mainstream technology available on latest
mobile devices. The distance between the tags and the readers
can reach up to 50 meters.
Bluetooth has been successfully used for indoor positioning.
L. Pei et al. [10][11] present their system that ﬁnds the location
using ﬁngerprinting. The position is calculated using the RSSI
(Received Signal Strength Indication) probability distribution
combined with the Weibull distribution. The accuracy obtained
has a standard deviation of 10 meters. A different approach
is proposed by F. Subhan et al. [12] that use trilateration for
computing the position. The distance is estimated based on the
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

radio propagation model combined with the Gradient ﬁlter for
reducing the noise. The accuracy obtained using this method
is 2.67 meters.
In contrary, the technology proposed in our paper is based
on BLE, as most portable devices come already equipped with
it, hence we can beneﬁt without additional cost and effort.
The system setup cost is low which makes it more affordable
in comparison to above mentioned solutions. In addition, the
accuracy of the distance we achieve in our system is proven
to be higher than in previous approaches.
There are several recent commercial products that offer the
hardware and software to help ﬁnding objects [13][14], based
on BLE. However, they all give only information regarding
the intensity of the communication, or whether the object is
in range or not.
III. SOLUTION OVERVIEW
Our goal is to provide a mobile application that helps
people ﬁnd their belongings, without the need of expensive
infrastructure. Secondly, the set-up must be minimal and easy
to use by a person without technical background. Thirdly, the
technology must be accessible to everyone who owns a smart
device.
Based on all these criteria, Bluetooth Low Energy was
chosen. Our system uses the StickNFind [14] beacons which
can be attached to the objects. Their battery lasts up to one
year based on 30 minutes a day use [14].
The distance between the emitter and the receiver can be
estimated using the Log Normal Shadowing model (LNS)[15]
detailed in (1).
Pd = P0 − 10n log( d
d0
) + Xσ
(1)
• Pd represents the power of the signal strength (RSSI),
• P0 is the offset (the signal strength at the reference
distance d0),
• n is a coefﬁcient characteristic to the device and the sur-
rounding environment, d represents the distance between
the emitter and the receiver,
• X is the noise added to each measurement.
The parameters that can be tuned are P0 and n. These are
speciﬁc to the environment and the layout of the room. Using
the appropriate values of P0 and n we can estimate the distance
between the receiver and the emitter, using (1). Computing the
distance is not just a simple estimation. The process consists
of several steps showed in Figure 1.
A. Data Acquisition
The StickNFind beacons broadcast data one time per second
when they are not paired with the smart device. Once paired,
they broadcast every 100 milliseconds. The RSSI (Received
Signal Strength Indication) value of the Bluetooth signal
received by the mobile device is used for estimating the
distance between the beacon and the mobile device.
Fig. 1. Diagram
B. Data Sampling
The Bluetooth signal is not sufﬁciently stable to estimate
the distance based solely on one measurement. In Figure 2,
we show an example of different measurements of the RSSI
for the same distance between the emitter and the receiver. In
order to reduce the noise and attenuate the extreme values, we
use a sample of ten measurements for computing the distance,
instead of a single one. For every value of the distance, we
use the last ten measurements to which we apply ﬁltering
techniques which we detail later.
Fig. 2. RSSI variation for a ﬁxed distance
C. Outliers Removal
The experiments (Figure 2) show that the signal is very un-
stable. Due to noise, spikes appear in the signal which should
not be taken into consideration. We remove the outliers with
the help of Chebyshev Outlier Detection based on Chebyshev’s
theorem detailed in (2). We apply the inequality for k=2,
which was proven to be a good choice according to other
researchers [16]. As a consequence of (2), 75% of the data
must be in the range of maximum two times standard deviation
distance from the mean value. Based on this probability, we
remove all the values that fall outside the domain. The values
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

inside the domain are used to calculate the mean value.
Pr(|X − µ| ≥ kσ) ≤ 1
k2
(2)
D. Filtering
We consider the mean value calculated above as the current
value of the signal strength. We use the Kalman ﬁlter [17] to
better estimate the mean, which is proven to add more stability
to signal.
E. Discretisation
The ﬁnal step is to approximate the value of the distance
with the closest value from a predeﬁned set. From a human
point of view, the little variation of the value creates more difﬁ-
culty in interpreting the distance. For instance, we approximate
all the values between 0.76 and 1.25 to 1, all between 1.26
and 1.75 to 1.5, etc. This gives better stability to the estimated
distance displayed to the user. In the same time, the little error
added does not create an impediment in the process of ﬁnding
the object.
IV. RESULTS
A. Tuning the parameters
The distance can be estimated based on the RSSI value as
shown in (1). The different parameters described in (1) can be
tuned, in order to acquire a good accuracy of the estimation.
We conducted measurements at distances up to 25 meters.
A set of measurements contains 20 values of the RSSI for
every value of distance. The average of the set is calculated.
The parameters are further calculated using linear regression,
that minimize the error of the measurements. The parameters
are used in estimating the distance between the beacons and
the mobile device. The best values of these parameters were
found to be P0 = −63.506 and n = 1.777. We used this
values in all our experiments.
B. Experimental setup
The experiments were conducted in two different ways.
For the ﬁrst set of experiments the beacon was placed at a
distance of 0 meters from the mobile device, and moved with
a constant speed from 0 to 18 meters away from the target. The
RSSI was measured and the distance computed based on (1),
and following the steps presented in Section III. The results
obtained are shown in Figure 4, Figure 5 and Table I.
For the second set of values, we performed different mea-
surements of the RSSI at distances from 0 to 25 meters. In
Figure 3 we show the distance computed based on the RSSI
value, the estimation using our method, along with the actual
measured distance.
C. Results
We can clearly see an improvement of the distance estima-
tion as a result of applying Chebyshev’s theorem combined
with the Kalman ﬁlter. Moreover, the discretisation of the
distance values adds stability and reduces the noise as shown
in Figure 4.
In Figure 3, we plot the estimated distance against the
measured distance between the tag and the smart device.
The points tend to be closer to the ﬁrst diagonal (pictured
in green) when the distance is smaller which shows that we
obtain a smaller error for a shorter distance. This has a direct
implication on the process of ﬁnding an item. The closer we
are to the object, the more accurate the distance becomes,
which makes it easier to ﬁnd the object.
Fig. 3. Estimated distance against measured distance
In order to have a numerical quantiﬁcation of the error,
we deﬁned 3 domains of accuracy for which we compute the
average error in meters, and as a percentage. The ﬁrst chosen
range (4 meters) is based on the average room size in the
typical elderly residence we collaborate with. This will give us
an indication of the efﬁciency of our system, in the perimeter
of a room. The second domain (4-10 meters) corresponds to
the average overall length of the whole apartment. The last
range (10-18 meters) represents the size of bigger, non typical
household.
We show the results in Table I. The ﬁrst two rows of
the table show the error produced when we estimate the
distance based on the signal measurement without any ﬁlters
applied. Although the absolute value seems to increase with
the distance, the percentage decreases. On the other hand,
the use of our techniques produce different results, as we
can see in the third and fourth row. The average error is
roughly 3 times better after applying the ﬁlters, with an
average error below one meter for distances up to 4 meters.
Even though an error of 43% can be considered not reliable
in certain circumstances, it is a signiﬁcant improvement in the
context of our application. While searching for a lost item,
this accuracy gives a good indication on how close the object
is. Additionally, the average error obtained with our approach
is proven to be smaller than the previous approaches found in
the literature [12].
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. Error results
Distance
0-4 meters
4-10 meters
10-18 meters
Error Measured %
182%
127%
111%
Absolute value Measured
3.61 m
8.95 m
8.95 m
Error Filtered %
43%
34%
36%
Absolute value Filtered
0.865 m
2.45 m
2.90 m
Fig. 4. Distance over time
In Figure 4 and Figure 5, we show the evolution of estimated
distance for a moving receiver, as described in Section IV-B.
On the x-axis we have the number of discrete values for
which we measured the RSSI. The green straight line shows
in both pictures the measured distance between the beacon
(receiver) and the emitter (the tablet in our case). In Figure 5
the estimated distance based on the RSSI is shown in grey,
while the value computed with our method is displayed in dark
blue. Our method is clearly improving the distance estimation.
We show the results for short distance (lower than 4 meters)
in Figure 4. Similar to Figure 5, the green line represents the
actual distance, and the grey one shows the estimated value
based on one RSSI value. In red we show the values computed
using our method. The stability is clearly improved with our
method, and the extreme values affect very little the distance
estimation.
It is important to mention some limitations that our system
still has, which will be addressed in the future. Firstly, the
effect of the battery level of the beacons is not studied yet.
Additionally, the setup of our experiments didn’t include walls
or other obstacles that can interfere and increase the noise.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented our model that can successfully guide people
into ﬁnding their lost items. As opposed to the currently
available products which give only a non quantiﬁable informa-
tion about how close the object is, our application can locate
objects by estimating the distance between the BLE beacons
with a good accuracy. We showed that Chebyshev inequality
combined with the Kalman ﬁlter can be successfully applied to
Bluetooth. In addition, discretising the distance adds a certain
stability to the signal, which makes the application easier to
use from a human-machine interaction point of view.
We are currently working on a more advanced version of
the application that is able to locate the object in the perimeter
Fig. 5. Distance over time
of the home. We use an indoor positioning system to locate
the user, and based on the person’s movement (location at
different moments) and using the different distance between
the person and the object we can determine the location of
the object. The location is displayed as an area and not as a
point.
Lastly, we will study the impact that the battery level and
the interference of obstacles have on the distance estimation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work of this paper was supported by the AAL EDLAH
project (aal-2012-5-062). The authors would like to thank
Anastasija Collen who helped to improve the quality of this
paper.
REFERENCES
[1] ”WIFI”, 2014, URL: http://standards.ieee.org/about/get/802/802.11.html
[accessed 2014, 09, 19].
[2] ”PANs”, 2014, URL: http://standards.ieee.org/about/get/802/802.15.html
[accessed 2014, 09, 19].
[3] M. Irani, B. Rousso, and S. Peleg, ”Detecting and tracking multiple
moving objects using temporal integration”, Computer Vision
ECCV
1992, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Volume 588, 1992, pp. 282-
287.
[4] A. Gilbert and R. Bowden, ”Tracking Objects Across Cameras by
Incrementally Learning Inter-camera Colour Calibration and Patterns of
Activity”, Computer Vision
ECCV 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Volume 3952, 2006, pp. 125-136.
[5] F. Fayad and V. Cherfaoui, ”Tracking objects using a laser scanner in
driving situation based on modeling target shape”, Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium, 2007.
[6] B. G. Amidan, T. A. Ferryman, and S. K. Cooley, ”Data outlier detection
using the Chebyshev theorem”, Proceedings of Aerospace Conference,
2005.
[7] N. Kawaguchi, et al., ”Underground Positioning: Subway Information
System using WiFi Location Technology”, Tenth International Confer-
ence on Mobile Data Management: Systems, Services and Middleware,
2009.
[8] P. Najera, J. Lopez, and R. Roman, ”Real-time location and inpatient
care systems based on passive RFID”, Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, Volume 34, Issue 3, May 2011, pp. 980989.
[9] H. K. H. Chowa, K. L. Choya, W.B. Leea, and K.C. Lau, ”Design of
a RFID case-based resource management system for warehouse opera-
tions”, Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 30, Issue 4, May 2006,
pp. 561576.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[10] L. Pei, et al., ”Inquiry-based Bluetooth Indoor Positioning via RSSI
Probability Distributions”, Second International Conference on Advances
in Satellite and Space Communications, 2010, pp. 151-156.
[11] L. Pei, et al., ”Using Inquiry-based Bluetooth RSSI Probability Distri-
butions for Indoor Positioning”, Journal of Global Positioning System,
Volume 9, Issue 2, 2010, pp. 122-130.
[12] F. Subhan, H. Hasbullah, A. Rozyyev, and S. T. Bakhsh, ”Indoor
Positioning in Bluetooth Networks using Fingerprinting and Lateration
approach”, International Conference on Information Science and Appli-
cations, April 2011, pp. 1-9.
[13] ”TrackR”, 2014, URL: http://www.thetrackr.com/ [accessed 2014, 09,
19].
[14] ”StickNFind”, 2014, URL: https://www.sticknﬁnd.com/ [accessed 2014,
09, 19].
[15] T. S. Rappaport, ”Wireless communications principles and practices”,
Proceedings of Aerospace Conference, 2002.
[16] B. G. Amidan, T. A. Ferryman, and S. K. Cooley, ”Data outlier detection
using the Chebyshev theorem”, Proceedings of Aerospace Conference,
2005.
[17] R. E. Kalman, ”A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction
Problems”, Transaction of the ASMEJournal of Basic Engineering, 1960,
pp. 35-45.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Assessment of Sensor Technologies for  
Gate-Based Object Counting 
Colin Leslie,  Alex Vakaloudis, Kostas Anagnostopoulos, Nikolaos Chalikias, Jian Lang 
Nimbus Centre Cork Institute of Technology 
 Cork Ireland 
{colin.leslie,  alex.vakaloudis, kostas.anagnostopoulos, nikolaos.chalikias, jian.liang }@cit.ie
 
 
Abstract— On the area of automating object counting, we 
concentrate on uniform, disposable products stored on a pile, 
queue or a stack (e.g., a shelf) and examine a number of 
different technologies for sensing input and output through a 
gate to the storage area. We define a set of comparison criteria 
with practical flavor in order to examine and evaluate twelve 
different types of sensors. The intention for our study is to 
form a baseline for anyone needing to implement gate-based 
input/output control. 
Keywords: sensor evaluation; gate control; evaluation of 
sensor technologies 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Product counting is an important aspect of stock control 
and may take many forms depending on the material being 
stocked and counted [4]. Automating this process of object 
counting can bring many benefits by simplifying the renewal 
process, eliminating errors etc. [2].  
In this paper, we concentrate on the context of a gate-
based, disposable material placed in a casing, stored in a pile 
or queue in and examine the case-study of detecting the 
addition or removal of a product and consequently 
calculating reliably the number of items in stock. The 
question this paper deals with is assessing the different types 
of sensors available for automating this process. Towards 
this objective a set of criteria with a practical orientation is 
defined [5].  
Under this perspective, the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II describes current techniques in Supply-Chain 
Management (SCM) and Section III records the factors for 
sensor assessment. Section IV discusses the different types 
of sensors giving a brief definition and listing their 
advantages and disadvantages with reference to the 
assessment factors. This critique is subsequently summarized 
and we finish with outlining a case study and listing 
conclusions and pointers to future work. 
II. 
RELATED  WORK 
Most of the today’s stock control systems use extensive 
use of Radio-frequency identification (RFID) technology [1] 
[2] due to the effective way of recording movement of 
objects within a networked system [3]. In these systems the 
stock control is achieved automatically by the information 
system that supports the Supply-Chain Management (SCM) 
and unauthorized removal of an object is detected by 
electronic gates that monitor continuously the physical entry 
points of the area that the system is installed. To add system 
intelligence, traditional RFID based SCM are integrated with 
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) [4] [5]. These systems 
incorporate advanced sensing technologies while for the 
monitoring of the position of an object, we could use 
localization techniques. 
The above practices though, are applied in large scale 
deployments and are not cost effective for ad hoc or small 
scale deployments. They require changes in the existing 
physical infrastructure and the deployment of sophisticated 
Information Systems for which the support cost is not 
insignificant.  
SCM systems are expensive because of the nature of the 
sensors (RFID) that are deployed and the extensive features 
that are available nowadays. The cost of the SCM is high and 
the problem we set in this paper is the monitoring of stock in 
a pile or queue. The basic requirements are  
 
1. low cost solution,  
2. easily deployable, and  
3. no 
modifications 
in 
the 
existing 
physical 
infrastructure.   
III. 
SENSOR EVALUATION FRAMEWORK 
As mentioned above our assessment has a practical 
orientation and envisages the scenario when products such as 
cans or bottles are stores on shelves, stacks or piles. The 
main, driving requirement of our assessment is to be able to 
count adding or removing products in a reliable way defined 
as  
1. Reject false positives, for example the hand of 
the carrier is not measured as a product. 
2. Spot attempts of cheating, for instance trying to 
extract a product from an input-only entrance. 
3. Work 
under 
environments 
that 
can 
be 
cold/warm  and/or wet (e.g., freezer) 
 
Under this context, we define the assessment factors of 
Table 1 under which the different types of sensors are 
evaluated and consider two main areas namely, usability and 
technology.  The rationale behind this partition is that in an 
industrial setting the decision makers are usually business 
people who are interested in the costs of the sensors and the 
installation process and technical personnel who focus on 
suitability of the sensor from a technical perspective. We 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

decided not to assign weights to these criteria in order to 
leave the decision making open to each case-study.  
TABLE I.  
CONSIDERATIONS DRIVING EVALUATION 
Usability Considerations 
Cost 
 
Installation procedure 
Purchase 
pricing 
per 
unit 
of 
coverage, e.g., per shelf 
Proven in Industry 
Technical 
expertise 
and 
time 
required contributes to ease of use 
Technical Considerations 
Power consumption 
Influences simplicity of installation 
and ease of use 
Form Factor 
Could 
turn 
particular 
choices 
inappropriate 
for 
certain 
applications 
Robustness 
Working in diverse (e.g., wet, 
warm) environments 
Reliability 
Detecting false positive/negatives, 
e.g., human hand 
Integration  
 
 
IV. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
This section lists twelve different types of sensors we 
identified as suitable for gate-based object counting.  Due to 
space constraints, it outlines the way each sensor operates, 
where our survey has revealed that it is mainly used and 
what are the main advantages and disadvantages.  
A. Capacitive Sensors 
Capacity sensors detect changes in their electric field to 
estimate proximity. Industrial Style Sensors detect objects 
passing under/past them. They are widely used in large Form 
Factors and appear in a number of different packages, 
suitable mostly for manufacturing lines. They are relatively 
cheap and can operate under harsh environments. They rely 
on power supply and while they can be in due course 
accurate, their calibration can be very tricky and lengthy 
process requiring software intelligence. 
B. Capacitive array sensors 
Capacitive Arrays are placed on the “floor” side and 
sense an object placed on it. A modern analogy on how they 
operate is how a Smart Phone screen detects touch. They are 
a fairly novel technique and being innovative they are not yet 
industry proven and therefore risky. Occupying a whole side, 
they could be an accurate solution and filter false positives. 
However, they may not work well in potentially wet 
environment and would require employing a clever 
grounding mechanism.  
C. Inductive Sensors 
In a method similar to capacitive sensors, inductive 
sensors employ changes in their magnetic field to pinpoint 
proximity to detect proximity and hence measure distance of 
metal objects. Industrial variants have the same type of form 
factors as capacitive sensors and for all intents and purposes, 
operate the same as Industrial Capacitive Sensors but only 
detect metal objects.  
They are also proven in industry, are accurate, come in 
robust packaging and large form factors, suitable mostly for 
manufacturing lines. Most important could only work with 
products of a metal element like metal caps. 
D. Ultrasonic Sensors 
Ultrasonic sensors transmit a sound wave (“Ping”) of 
ultrasonic frequency and measure the time it takes for the 
wave to return in order to measure distance. They are widely 
used in both industrial and hobby circles and come in 
different form factors. A simple everyday day example of the 
technology is reversing sensors on modern cars.  
They are accurate and cheap but potentially inaccurate 
since they would for example count employee hands. 
E. Camera-based Sensors 
A camera can be paired with a smart controller to detect 
patterns, shapes or colours to detect objects entering a 
storage area. The camera could be trained to watch for a 
distinctive feature of the object, for instance a branding logo, 
a characteristic shape or a specific colour.  
With the appropriate software processing, cameras could 
be extremely accurate. Nevertheless they are a complex 
solution. Cameras are an expensive and sensitive component 
and they would need a more powerful MCU to process 
images while also being susceptible to environmental 
changes, such as lighting. 
F. Switch Technologies 
The usage of simple mechanical switches positioned in a 
way that they switch and count objects as they enter or exit 
the storage area. They are scalable; one can use just 1 on 
each point of entry/exit or an array of switches to reduce the 
chance of false switching and infer direction.  
An interesting aspect is a rotary encoder to detect 
direction as well as actuation. Switches are reliable and 
simple, proven in industry and a very cheap solution. Since 
they require power only when activated, they consume 
minimum power. Although they cannot differentiate between 
object and detect false positives if placed in clever way they 
can minimize such occurrences. They are easy to install and 
replace. 
G. Magnetic switches 
These can be described as small, mechanical switches 
encapsulated in a small glass or plastic enclosure, activated 
by changes in the magnetic field. They are more reliable and 
space efficient to the simple mechanical switches and are 
used in industrial applications. They are cheap, however 
could be fragile especially the ones with the glass enclosure. 
H. Hall-effect switches 
They come in the form of integrated circuits, also 
activated by changes in a magnetic field. They are smaller 
and more sensitive than the magnetic switches and therefore 
can achieve better performance. They are available in analog 
and digital form providing higher resolution and can detect 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

not only presence but also distance and speed (through 
change). Also proven in industry, they add a degree of 
complexity compared to other solution since they are an 
electronic 
component 
with 
power 
and 
enclosure 
requirements.  
I. 
Optical Sensors 
There are various types of optical sensors, two of which 
are applicable in our domain of interest. The first are 
Interrupt Beam type sensors, where the transmitting beam 
and receiving sensor are placed opposite each other. When 
the object passes the beam the interrupted beam would cause 
a switch. 
The other choice are  reflected Beam type Sensors, where 
the transmitter and receiver are next to each other and the 
changed angle of the reflected beam is detected when an 
object passes through it. 
Optical sensors have no mechanical parts, so virtually 
there is no wear. They have many industrial variants that are 
well proven and can be easily simplified to a light source and 
photodiode. They may have very small form factors. Their 
performance though, may be erratic not be able to detect 
different opacities or false positives. 
J. 
Strain gauge 
Load cells are a practical application of Strain Gauges. 
Ultimately, they measure weight; they consist of an array of 
piezoelectric materials that generate a voltage proportional to 
the stress applied. There exist three types worth considering: 
a. 
Bending Beam  
b. Shear Beam 
c. 
Pancake Cell  
This solution would be the most accurate representation 
of how many objects are in a storage area if these objects 
have uniform weight. Since it counts objects individually, it 
would have the least number of false positives. They are in 
cheap price if bending or shear beam but they need to be 
customized for different products. 
K. Barcode 
A barcode is an optical machine-readable representation 
of data relating to the object to which it is attached. 
Originally barcodes systematically represented data by 
varying the widths and spacing of parallel lines, and may be 
referred to as linear or one-dimensional (1D) [6]. In order to 
use barcode sensors extensive rework must happen to the 
mechanical part of the system in order the items to leave 
from a particular exit and with a certain orientation so that 
the sensor would be able to identify them correctly. The 
implementation of the sensors is cost effective since low-end 
microcontrollers have the necessary processing power to 
cope with the algorithm of the barcode decoding [7].  
L. QR code 
A QR code [8] consists of black modules (square dots) 
arranged in a square grid on a white background, which can 
be read by an imaging device (such as a camera) and 
processed using Reed–Solomon error correction until the 
image can be appropriately interpreted; data is then extracted 
from patterns present in both horizontal and vertical 
components of the image [7]. The need for a camera in order 
to capture the image makes the technique expensive, while 
the algorithms in order to decode the QR code are quite 
sophisticated [9]. 
V. 
CASE-STUDY AND DISCUSSION  
Our survey outlines twelve different types of sensors. 
Table 2 presents in an organised format our findings which 
generated the following outcomes: 
1. Although some are relative to each other (e.g., QR and 
Barcode), the number of different available approaches 
makes evident that even in quite specialised situations, 
an optimum solution could be achieved exactly because 
of the sheer quantity of solutions. 
2. Cost does not appear to be a forbidding factor for any of 
the technologies, switch-based approaches seem to be 
the most suitable when cost and simplicity are the main 
requirements.  
3. Sensors are available in three forms, namely, 
mechanical, magnetic mechanical and half-effect 
providing different levels of sensitivity.   
4. As Internet of Things (IoT) grows in importance, 
choosing the right technology of sensor to link to the 
communication module of an IoT device will also be 
pivotal.  
5. Requirements, such as power consumption and 
durability will player a major role as well as 
compatibility among modules and the existence of a 
communication protocol or a feasibility to create one. 
 
This research is currently investigating the applicability of 
these solutions using as a case-study shelves in which objects 
embedded in a cylinder shaped boxes are stored. The setup is 
located in the lab setting and is used to organize and store 
any material used by the Nimbus centre researchers, ranging 
from chips to small mechanical and wooden tools. Placing 
them inside a cylinder box ensures uniformity and eases 
stock control. Moreover it is a shape that is compatible with 
switches, capacitive arrays, QR code and optical sensors. 
Different shelves with the twelve sensors are used to 
measure their reliability, endurance, easiness of installation 
and sensitivity.   The results up to now indicate that the 
mechanical switches suit better. They perform better in the 
sense of minimum cases of false positives and false 
negatives especially when they are used in numbers to verify 
each other’s triggering. The capacitive arrays also provide 
accurate measurements however their installation process is 
longer and need to be refitted for every new shelf.  The 
optical sensors require the usage or development of extra 
software to filter out hand movements of the hand placing 
objects in our out of the shelf.   Finally, the QR and barcode 
choices need special care from the user to scan the code and 
from the system to give feedback (e.g., sound). 
This case-study, while installed in a lab environment can 
be classified as pre-production because of the volume of use 
and the number of users. However, we acknowledge that 
additional levels of testing are needed to extract more results 
and also test different setups.   
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper examined the applicability of twelve different 
types of sensors in facilitating gate input/output control of 
simple, every day products. As requirements and their 
gravity vary on each application, there is no single preferred 
solution. It is remarkable however how technologies of 
diverse orientation could be applied to solve a single 
problem. 
Current and future research work involves not only the 
further specification of the assessment factors but the 
application of techniques, such as fuzzy logic with sets 
associating factors and sensors and different fuzzy rules to 
apply in order to get a qualitative or quantitative marking. 
This will enable to objectify the suitability of every sensor 
technology for specific application needs. We also intend to 
extend this study and perform quantitative analysis with 
specific application domains. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Engel, S. Lunow, J. Fischer, F. Kobler, S. Goswami, H. 
Krcmar. “Value Creation in Pharmaceutical Supply Chains 
using Customer-Centric RFID Applications”, Proceedings of 
2012 European Conference on Smart Objects, Systems and 
Technologies, 2012. pp 1-8. 
[2] Y. Miaji, M.A.A Mohamed, and N. B. Daud, “RFID Based 
Improving Supply Chain Traceability”, Proceeding of the 
2013 IEEE International Conference on RFID Technologies 
and Application, 2013, pp. 1-6. 
[3] Y. Wu, D. Ranasinghe, Q. Sheng, S. Zeadally, J. Yu, “RFID 
enabled traceability networks: a survey”, Distributed and 
Parallel Databases October 2011 vol. 29 pp. 397-443. 
[4] L. Evers, P. Havinga, J. Kuper, and M.E.M. Lijding,   
“SensorScheme: Supply Chain Management Automation 
using Wireless Sensor Networks”, IEEE Conference on 
Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation, 2007  pp. 
448-455. 
[5] S. Vellingiri, A. Ray and M. Kande, “Wireless Infrastructure 
for Oil and Gas Inventory Management”, 39th IEEE Annual 
Conference of Industrial Electronics IECON 2013 pp. 5461-
5466. 
[6] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barcode, June 2014 
[7] X. Wang, J. Liu, H. Yi, “Design of Multifunctional Barcode 
System Based on MEGA128L”, Automation and Systems 
Engineering (CASE) 2011 International Conference on 
Control pp. 1-4. 
[8] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QR_code , June 2014 
[9] Y. Liu, J. Yang, M. Liu, “Recognition of QR Code with 
Mobile Phones” Chinese Control and Decision Conference 
2008 pp. 203-206. 
 
Table II.  SYNOPSIS OF SENSORS AND THEIR FEATURES 
 
Sensor 
Costing 
Installatio
n 
Industry 
Power 
Form  
Robustness 
Reliability 
Capacitive Sensor 
Cheap 
medium 
complexity 
Bottling and 
Manufacturing plants 
High 
Small to 
Medium 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
Capacitive Array 
Cheap 
complex / 
difficult 
None 
High 
Small to 
Large 
Medium 
Unproven 
Inductive Sensor 
Cheap 
medium 
complexity 
Manufacturing 
Bottling  
High 
Small to 
Medium 
High 
High 
Ultrasonic Sensor 
cheap to 
medium 
medium 
Diverse 
Medium 
to High 
Small to 
Large 
Low to 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
Optical Interrupt 
Beam 
medium to 
expensive 
medium 
People Counting 
Bottling and 
Manufacturing plants 
Medium 
to High 
Medium 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
Optical Reflected 
Bean 
medium to 
expensive 
medium 
Bottling and 
Manufacturing plants 
Medium 
to High 
Medium 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
QR 
Expensive 
Medium 
Diverse 
High 
Medium 
Low to 
High 
High 
Optical Camera 
expensive 
difficult 
None 
High 
Big 
Low to 
High 
High 
Mechanical 
Switch 
Cheap 
easy 
Diverse, Variety of 
equipment and 
applications 
No  
Small 
Low to 
High 
High if no unpredicted 
obstacles 
Magnetic Switch 
Cheap 
easy 
Diverse, Variety of 
equipment and 
applications 
No  
Small 
Low to 
Medium 
High 
Hall-effect Switch 
Cheap 
easy 
Diverse, Variety of 
equipment and 
applications 
No 
Small 
Medium to 
High 
High 
Weight Load Cell 
cheap to 
expensive 
difficult 
Weighing scales, Mini 
Bar fridges,  
Low 
Small to 
Large 
Low to 
High 
High 
Barcode  
cheap to 
expensive 
medium 
Diverse 
High 
Small to 
Medium 
Low to 
High 
High 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Wide Area Surveillance Using Limited-Flying-Time Helicopters 
 Kenichi Mase 
Academic Assembly 
Niigata University 
Niigata-Shi, Japan 
e-mail: mase@ie.niigata-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Sensor networks can be useful for disaster recovery. 
It is essential how to realize time-efficient and pervasive 
surveillance over a wide disaster-affected area. A surveillance 
architecture based on collaboration among multiple electric 
helicopters is presented. Area division principles are used 
considering cost minimization as well as considering the 
requirements of allowable surveillance time, and transmission 
range and effective bandwidth of the wireless link. A simple 
model and methodology for area division considering the 
battery-capacity-limited flying range are presented. Numerical 
examples show the feasibility of the area division approach.  
Keywords-disaster; surveillance; ad-hoc network; wireless; 
electric vehicle. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Information and Communication Technology (ICT) can 
contribute to the creation of disaster-resilient societies in two 
ways. One way is to increase the resilience and tolerance of 
communication infrastructure toward disasters. Second way 
is to develop new ICT technologies for promoting disaster 
recovery activities. In this study, we focus on use of ICT for 
surveillance of wide areas such as disaster-affected areas.  
A disaster, such as big earthquake, hurricane, etc. can 
affect quite a large area, e.g., as large as 100 km square. It 
would take enormous time to perform close, detail, and 
pervasive surveillance to cover the entire area and deliver the 
obtained surveillance results in real-time to the remote 
disaster recovery headquarter.  It is thus essential how to 
realize time-efficient and pervasive surveillance over a wide 
disaster-affected area.  
Surveillance can be performed on the ground or from the 
air. The latter provides a wider field of vision than the former, 
and is, therefore, especially efficient when the disaster-
affected area is wide. For realizing aerial surveillance, a 
single aerial vehicle such as air plane or helicopter can be 
used to cover the entire disaster-affected area. However, this 
solution may not be acceptable since it would take much 
time to complete one-round surveillance for a large area due 
to speed limit of the aerial vehicle. Furthermore, it is also a 
problem how to deliver the obtained surveillance results to 
the disaster recovery headquarter in real-time and 
continuously. An alternative approach using a number of 
very small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) with fixed or 
rotary wings is attractive from the viewpoints of the 
investment required and operational ease. Indeed, this 
approach can be applied in various applications including 
surveillance and forms an active research area [1]-[16]. 
Multiple UAVs working in parallel may be required for 
monitoring a wide area. An approach called “three-
Dimensional Mobile Surveillance (3DMS),” was proposed in 
[15], where multiple Electric Vehicles (EVs) and very small, 
lightweight unmanned UAVs with rotary wings (helicopters), 
termed “Electric Helicopters (EHs),” were cooperatively 
engaged in surveillance over a wide area.  
 The contributions of this paper are as follows: 
1) A 
time-efficient 
and 
pervasive 
surveillance 
architecture based on the collaboration of multiple EHs, 
each with its partner EV, is presented. 
2)  Area division principles are given based on cost 
minimization, as well as considering requirements of 
allowable surveillance time and transmission performance. 
3) A simple model and methodology for area division 
devised by considering the battery-capacity-limited flying 
range are presented. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II summarizes related works. Section III 
discusses surveillance strategies for designing wide-area 
surveillance architectures. Section IV outlines the basic 
approach and surveillance architecture of the proposed 
system. Section V presents a surveillance area division 
scheme, and Section VI presents numerical examples. 
Finally, the conclusions of this paper are presented in Section 
VII. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There exist many studies on Vehicular Ad hoc 
NETworks (VANETs) [17]. In these studies, vehicles with 
engines consuming fuels such as oil and gas were assumed 
implicitly, and applications useful during driving were 
extensively explored and developed. The benefits of using 
EVs in a disaster-affected area for providing emergency 
communication networks have been discussed [18]. 
UAVs can be used for improving the connectivity and 
performance of ad hoc networks on the ground [8]-[10]. It is 
easier to control UAV position in air given the lack of 
obstacles or physical boundaries. Therefore, UAV relay 
positioning methods have been studied extensively [11]-[14]. 
When multiple UAVs work in tandem for surveillance in 
a disaster-affected area, inter-UAV coordination for task 
assignment and responsibility is essential to improve 
surveillance efficiency. Coordination among helicopter 
UAVs for forest-fire surveillance was explored; here, the 
focus was on observing the fire’s expanding perimeter and 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

devising a parallel, non-overlapping, uniformly time-
consuming patrolling task assignment method [6]. In disaster 
surveillance, all areas should be monitored continuously, and 
repeatedly. This problem has not been fully discussed in the 
previous works. 
III. 
SURVEILLANCE STRATEGY 
A. Ground-based vs. Air-based 
Ground-based surveillance is indispensable for close, 
detailed, and pervasive surveillance, as well as the 
subsequent rescue activities. Rescue team members should 
be equipped with means of transportation such as vehicles 
that enable them to quickly move around the wide area 
within limited time. In addition to surveillance using ground 
vehicles, surveillance can be performed from the air. It is 
easier to view the entire disaster-affected area from the air. 
Aerial vehicles can monitor locations that ground vehicles 
cannot access owing to a lack of roads or the presence of 
obstacles. 
B. Manned vs. Unmanned 
Aerial vehicles can be either manned or unmanned. The 
former type is expensive, and the availability of human pilots 
is limited. Focusing on UAVs, the need for a human pilot on 
the ground should be avoided. In principle, the UAV can fly 
and work through autonomous piloting or remote automatic 
control by computer without human manual operation.  
C. Fuel vs. Electricity 
Both ground vehicles and UAVs can be powered by fuel 
oil or electricity. The use of EVs and electric UAVs is 
attractive in the disaster recovery phase because their 
batteries can be recharged using local power generation 
facilities such as solar panels, even under long blackouts, 
whereas fuel-based vehicles and UAVs cannot be refueled 
under a shortage of oil stock in a disaster-affected area. 
Focusing on UAVs, the spare battery can be immediately 
substituted for the spent battery, while it takes some time to 
refuel the oil tank. 
D. Supply of EV 
EVs can reduce the air pollution due to automobile 
exhaust gases. The EV market has recently experienced 
significant growth. 
Moreover, a very small EV with one or two seats, called 
a mini-EV, can potentially grow EV market in the near 
future, achieving significantly greater penetration in the 
community, especially in aging societies [18]. In such an 
environment, in the event of a large-scale disaster, it would 
be easy to divert EVs available in the community toward 
disaster recovery activities, thus reducing the reserves 
required for disaster recovery. Therefore, the supply of EVs 
for disaster recovery is expected economically feasible. 
E. UAV options 
UAVs include airships, helicopters, and airplanes. 
Airships allow for relatively long flying and hovering times 
over the disaster-affected area, which are desirable for 
continuously monitoring the same area in disaster 
surveillance. However, support services such as the 
supplementing of helium gas are required. Helicopters can 
hover as well, but require a greater amount of energy and 
have limited continuous operation times. Airplanes find it 
difficult to both hover as well as to adapt to the route 
according to the situation. In addition, similar to helicopters, 
their continuous operation times are limited. An airship 
requires a relatively large space for periodic topping-up of its 
helium gas, takeoff, and landing, and an airplane needs a 
long runway or special care for takeoff and landing. These 
support services are unnecessary for a helicopter. 
IV. 
SURVEILLANCE ARCHITECTURE 
A. Overview 
In the proposed architecture, an EV–EH pair is the key 
component for the surveillance of disaster-affected areas. 
Each EV functions as the carrier of its partner EH during the 
round trip to the designated destination and surveillance, 
providing its roof area for accommodation, takeoff, and 
landing of the EH. It also may support automatic piloting for 
its partner EH. Each EV and EH are equipped with sensing 
and wireless communication devices. For conducting time-
efficient and pervasive surveillance activities over a wide 
disaster-affected area, a number of EV–EH pairs may be 
used for simultaneous and parallel surveillance over said area. 
To start surveillance, each EV accompanied by its partner 
EH is driven to and parked at its target point in the disaster-
affected area. During this phase, the EH may get and provide 
information useful for EV driving, e.g., existence of 
obstacles and traffic congestion on streets, to the EV driver.  
A designated EV within the area is assigned the role of 
the data collection node (simply center EV, hereafter). The 
sensed data are delivered from each source EV or EH by 
means of wireless multi-hop communication relayed by a 
number of EVs or EHs on the way to the center EV, and then 
to the remote disaster recovery headquarter, using, for 
instance, a satellite communication link. Disaster-affected 
area surveillance by EVs on the ground and that by EHs in 
the air can work in a complementary, cooperative manner, 
thus significantly improving the efficiency and accuracy of 
surveillance. 
B. Area division requirements 
Area division is useful for coordinating and assigning 
surveillance activities among multiple EV–EH pairs, where 
the entire surveillance area is divided into multiple non-
overlapping sub-areas filling the entire area and an EV–EH 
pair is assigned to each sub-area. Surveillance activities are 
independently and simultaneously performed in parallel 
within each sub-area. In general, the greater the number of 
EV–EH pairs, the less is the time required for one round of 
surveillance of the entire area; the required time can be 
reduced further, although at the cost of EV–EH pair 
resources. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

C. Wireless multi-hop data delivery 
Upon reaching the target point in the assigned sub-area, 
each EV remains at this initial position during the following 
surveillance activities as the support station, while its partner 
EH flies over the entire assigned sub-area for surveillance 
and sends the gathered surveillance data to its partner EV, 
which works as the temporal data storage point. The EV then 
forwards the data to the neighbor EH flying over the adjacent 
sub-area, which is located on the designated path toward the 
center EV. The neighbor EH receives this data and forwards 
it to its partner EV, in addition to the data gathered by itself. 
This process is repeated and the data obtained by the source 
EH are eventually delivered to the center EV. In addition to 
EHs, EVs may gather and transmit surveillance data. Area 
division needs to be performed to ensure that an EH and its 
partner EV, and an EV and its upstream EH in the adjacent 
sub-area on the designated path toward the center EV are 
within the transmission range (Requirement 1). Each EV and 
EH may have multiple down-stream EHs and EVs, 
respectively. Simultaneous packet transmission to the same 
EH and EV may result in interference, and, thus, the use of 
non-overlapping 
channels 
is 
desirable 
for 
avoiding 
interference. 
D. Line-of-sight transmission using flying EH 
It is noteworthy that data packets can be transmitted 
between the EV and the EH in the proposed architecture, 
thereby avoiding EH–EH or EV–EV transmission. In the 
EH-EH, packet transmission could be unstable due to 
variations in the EH position or attitude in air even in the 
hovering state. In the EV-EV, line-of-sight may not be 
assured due to the obstacles on the ground, thus resulting in 
poor packet transmission performance. In contrast, it is easier 
to assure line-of-sight in the EH–EV packet transmission. 
Moreover, a directional antenna can be attached to the side 
of the EV, which can significantly extend the packet 
transmission range [19]. 
E. Flight time and range requirement 
To minimize EH total weight, the weight of the battery is 
strictly limited. This means that the EH’s battery capacity is 
also limited, allowing only relatively short continuous flight 
times and ranges. The EV’s battery can be used for 
recharging the partner EH’s spent battery, thus allowing the 
EH to engage in airborne surveillance repeatedly [15]. This 
functionality is termed as “on-EV charging.” A carrier EV 
can be equipped with spare EH batteries. By substituting a 
spare EH battery for the landed EH’s spent battery, the 
waiting time for on-EV charging can be shortened as 
mentioned in Section III.C. The spent battery from the EH is 
recharged on the EV for reuse. EH flight time must be set at 
least longer than the round trip time between the positions of 
its partner EV as the on-EV charging station and the farthest 
part within the sub-area (Requirement 2). 
V. 
SURVEILLANCE SCHEME 
A surveillance area is a square of size              , which is 
uniformly  divided  into              square  sub-areas, each  of  
size           , as shown in Figure 1. An EV–EH pair is 
Figure 1. Example of area division in square area modeling. 
assigned to each sub-area. Each EV is positioned in the 
center of the respective assigned sub-area. The center EV is 
positioned in the center sub-area. A sub-area is further 
divided into uniform squares, each of which, termed “a 
surveillance unit,” is the field of vision, with the length of 
each side,   , closest to and no greater than the given value,   , 
to make uniform division. Each surveillance unit can be 
surveyed by an EH flying over the center line crossing the 
center of the surveillance unit without approaching the edges 
of the surveillance unit. Let     be the maximum flight 
distance divided by the side length of the surveillance unit 
(normalized flight distance) of an EH. Requirement 2 in 
Section IV.E can then be represented by  
 
 
 
 
 
where  
Because the EH needs to return to its partner EV before 
running out of battery for on-EV charging to continue further 
surveillance, the normalized flight distance,  , required for 
completing one-round surveillance of a sub-area is 
represented as the following function of     and    : 

 
The upper bound of    ,     , is then given by substituting 
     with its lower bound in (1) 
 


    
In contrast, if there is no limit on the battery capacity, the 
EH can continue surveillance by taking an optimum route 
over the sub-area without returning to its partner EV. The 
lower bound of      ,       , is thus obviously given by 
1
6
1
4
1
6
1
4
( n = 6 )
( k = 4 )
2
3
5
4
2
3
2
3
5
4
2
3
L
Area
Sub-area
Surveillance Unit
nn
L n
L n
/
/ 
d
L
L
d
max
F
)
( :
even
k
)
( :
odd
k
k
F
2
max 

1 ,
2


k
D
D
ub
D
)
( :
even
k
)
( :
odd
k

k
f k
Dub
, 2

D
max
F

 .
,
f k Fmax
D 
max
F
k
lb
D



1  .
, 2


k
k
f
.
/
/
L n d
k 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
 
(4) 
The time required for completing one-round surveillance 
of a sub-area (one-round surveillance time),      is given as 
                                
 (5) 
where   is time required to cross the side length of the 
surveillance unit in flight. It is noteworthy that the time of 
on-EV charging is not included in (5) based on the remark in 
Section IV.E. The surveillance time,    , should be designed 
to be no greater than its upper bound     , which may be 
given as the design target parameter in surveillance system 
development, as shown below. 
 
 (6) 
Let    (MB/km2) be surveillance data size per unit area. 
The total surveillance data size of the surveillance area is 
then    . As described in IV.   , a designated path toward the 
center EV should be set for data transfer from each sub-area 
to the center area. Because surveillance data from each sub-
area are merged at each relay EV and EH, the transmission 
load increases for the upstream EVs and EHs closer to the 
center EV. Four most-upstream EHs are adjacent to the 
center EV in the square area modeling considered in this 
section. Assuming that the set of designated paths for the 
area is designed to balance the transmission load among the 
links, and neglecting the transmission overhead, the 
maximum link load,     (Mbps), can be represented as  
 
 
 
(7) 
 
 
An example of the designated path configuration is given 
in Figure 2. 
The transmission range of a wireless link can be defined 
as the maximum distance over which the packet loss rate is 
no greater than the given threshold. In general, the 
transmission range becomes shorter as the effective 
bandwidth increases; thus, the transmission range is a 
function of   , represented by        . The transmission 
distance can be the longest when the EV in the center of each 
sub-area transmits packets to the upstream EH at the far-end 
corner of the adjacent sub-area on the designated path to the 
center EV. For satisfying Requirement 1 in Section IV.C, the 
following relationship should be satisfied.  
 




In contrast, the number of EV–EH pairs covering the 
surveillance area should be maintained as low as possible for 
 
 
 
cost saving. 
An area division solution for the square area and sub-area 
models should thus obtain the minimum value of  for 
satisfying conditions (6) and (8), where    is substituted by  
(7). 
VI. 
NUMERICAL EXAMPLES 
Investigation of the characteristics of the function in (2) 
is an interesting research issue, but is out of the scope of this 
study. Instead, the upper bounds of the normalized flight 
distance,      , in (3) can be given numerically using the flight 
path configuration obtained by a heuristic approach (See 
Figure 3). The results, including the      of (4), are shown in 
Figure 4. The ratio of        to       is also shown in Figure 4. It 
is expected that the ratio roughly converges to around 1.2. 
The upper bounds of the one-round surveillance time are 
obtained by substituting     with       in (5) and shown in 
Figure 5, where L and EH velocity are 50 km and 60 km/h, 
respectively. As expected, the one-round surveillance time 
decreases with an increase in the number of divisions or the 
field of vision. Similarly, the transmission range requirement 
given in (8) decreases with an increase in the number of 
divisions, as shown in Figure 5. 
Assuming use of an adequate transmission system 
meeting required effective bandwidth and transmission range 
for each EH–EV or EV–EH link, link quality such as packet 
delivery ratio can be assured, while end-to-end path quality 
degrades as the number of divisions of sub-area increases. To 
improve end-to-end path quality, packet retransmission 
mechanism either in link or end-to-end may be required. 
 Figure 4.  Lower and upper bounds of normalized flight distance, D and 
ratio of upper bounds to  lower bounds. 
)
( :
even
k
)
( :
odd
k
T
D ,
T 

T
max
T

C
)
( :
even
n
)
( :
odd
n
B
(B)
R
B
2  2 .
 k
T
L
B
2 2


2L
k2
Dlb 
Tmax .
T 
)1 .
(
2
2
2
2
Tn
L n



Figure 2. Example of designated path 
configuration to center EV. 
Figure 3. Example of flight 
path configuration. 
( ) .
2
10
R B
n
L 
B
ub
D
lb
D
Dub
lb
D
D
ub
D
Sub-area
R1-R4: Flight routes
Area
n: even
Area
n: odd
R1
R2
R3
R4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
50
100
150
200
250
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Ratio
Lower and upper bounds
Number of divisions of field of vision
Upper bounds
Lower bounds
Ratio of upper and lower bounds
n
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Figure 5. Upper bounds of one-round surveillance time and transmission 
range requirement with regard to number of divisions, n. 
The number of divisions,   , meeting the given one-round 
surveillance time requirements is obtained from (3), (5) and 
(6) and shown in Figure 6. The higher the one-round 
surveillance time requirement, the lower is the number of 
divisions of a sub-area. The corresponding maximum link 
load in (7) and transmission range requirements in (8) are 
shown in Figure 7. As the one-round surveillance time 
requirements rise, the surveillance data transmission 
frequency decreases, resulting in a decrease in the maximum 
link load. By contrast, the transmission range requirements 
increase owing to an increase in the sub-area size. Therefore, 
given the one-round surveillance time requirements, an 
adequate transmission device should be selected based on the 
requirements of decrease in the maximum link load and 
increase in the transmission range.  
In summary, the numerical examples in Figure 6 show 
that wide area as large as 100 km square can be monitored 
pervasively in one hour or so, operating a few hundred EV–
EH pairs. Transmission devices meeting the requirements as 
shown in the numerical examples in Figure 7 can be in the 
scope of the existing technologies. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
20
40
60
80
100
Number of divisions of sub-areas
One-round surveillance time requirement (min)
L = 50 km     d = 1 km   
L = 50 km     d = 2 km
L = 100 km   d = 1 km
L: Area width
d: Field of vision width 
 
Figure 6.  Number of divisions, n, meeting given one-round surveillance 
time requirement. 
Figure 7.  Maximum link load and transmission range requirement meeting 
given one-round surveillance time requirement. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A time-efficient and pervasive surveillance architecture 
based on the collaboration of multiple EHs was presented. A 
wide area is divided into a number of sub-areas. An EH and 
its partner EV, which supports automatic piloting and battery 
charging for the EH, are assigned to each divided sub-area. A 
wireless link is established between an EH and its partner EV, 
as well as between an EV and its immediate upstream EH for 
forming a wireless multi-hop path toward the data collection 
node in the area. Area division principles were used 
considering cost minimization as well as considering the 
requirements 
of 
allowable 
surveillance 
time, 
and 
transmission range and effective bandwidth of the wireless 
link. A simple model and approach for area division based 
on explicit flight route distances of an EH considering the 
battery-capacity-limited 
flying 
range 
were 
presented. 
Numerical examples showed the feasibility of the area 
division approach. 
Further studies on this subject include the development 
of a general algorithm for obtaining the explicit flight route 
of EHs for not only simple square area models but also for 
geographical areas of any shape under flight distance 
limitations. Communications aspects, such as performance 
evaluation 
and 
improvement 
of 
wireless 
multi-hop 
communication path composed of multiple EH–EV and  
EV–EH links, are also included in the further study issues. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by the JSPS Grants-in-
Aid for Scientific Research (KAKENHI) under Grant 
24246068. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Kingston, R. Beard, T. McLain, M. Larsen, and W. Ren, 
“Autonomous Vehicle Technologies for Small Fixed Wing 
UAVs,” In AIAA 2nd Unmanned Unlimited Systems, 
Technologies, and Operations-Aerospace, Land, and Sea 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
50
100
150
200
250
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Transmission range requirement 
(km)
One-round surveillance time  
(min)
Number of divisions of sub-areas
Width of the field of vision d = 1 km
Width of the field of vision d = 2 km 
Transmission range
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
20
40
60
80
100
Transmission range requirement 
(km)
Maximum link load  (Mbps)
One-round surveillance time requirement 
(Min)
Surveillance data size per area 0.5 MB/㎢
Surveillance data size per area 1 MB/㎢
Transmission range
n
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Conference and Workshop &Exhibit, San Diego, CA. Paper 
no. AIAA-2003-6559, pp. 1-10, 2003. 
[2] R. Beard, D. Kingston, M. Quigley, D. Snyder, R. 
Christiansen, W. Johnson, T. McLain, and M. A. Goodrich, 
“Autonomous Vehicle Technologies for Small Fixed-Wing 
UAVs,” AIAA Journal of Aerospace Computing, Information, 
and Communication, vol. 2, pp. 92-108, 2005. 
[3] D. W. Casbeer, D. B. Kingston, R. W. Beard, T. W. McLain, 
S. Li, and R. Mehra, “Cooperative Forest Fire Surveillance 
Using a Team of Small Unmanned Air Vehicles,” 
International Journal of Systems Science, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 
351-360, 2005. 
[4] G. M. Saggiani and B. Teodorani, “Rotary wing UAV 
potential applications: An Analytical Study through a Matrix 
Method,” Aircraft Engineering and Aerospace Technology, 
vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 6-14, 2004. 
[5] T. J. Koo, D. H. Shim, O. Shakernia, B. Sinopoli, Y. Ma, F. 
Hoffman, and S. Sastry, “Hierarchical Hybrid System Design 
on 
Berkeley 
UAV,” 
International 
Aerial 
Robotics 
Competition, 1998. 
[6] K. Alexis, G. Nikolakopoulos, A. Tzes, and L. Dritsas, 
“Coordination of Helicopter UAVs for Aerial Forest-Fire 
Surveillance,” 
Applications 
of 
Intelligent 
Control 
to 
Engineering Systems, pp. 169-193, 2009. 
[7] F. N. Webber and R. E. Hiromoto, “Assessing the 
Communication Issues Involved in Implementing High-Level 
Behaviors in Unmanned Aerial Vehicles,” IEEE Military 
Communication Conference (MILCOM), pp. 1-7, 2006. 
[8]  I. Rubin, A. Behzad, H. Ju, R. Zhang, X. Huang, Y. Liu, and 
R. Khalaf, “Ad hoc wireless networks with mobile 
backbones,” Proc. 15th IEEE Int’l Conf. on Personal, Indoor 
and Mobile Radio Communications, vol. 1, pp. 566-573, 2004. 
[9]  D. L. Gu, H. Ly, X. Hong, M. Gerla, G. Pei, and Y. Lee, “C-
ICAMA, a centralized intelligent channel assigned multiple 
access for multilayer ad-hoc wireless networks with UAVs,” 
Proc. 2000 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking 
Conference, vol. 2, pp. 879-884, 2000. 
[10]  Z. Han, A. L. Swindlehurst, and K. J. R. Liu, “Smart 
Deployment/Movement of Unmanned Air Vehicle to Improve 
Connectivity in MANET,” In Proceedings of WCNC 2006, 
vol. 1, pp. 252-257, 2006. 
[11]  P. Zhan, K. Yu, and A. L. Swindlehurst, “Wireless Relay 
Communications 
with 
Unmanned 
Aerial 
Vehicles: 
Performance and Optimization,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. 
Electron. Syst., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 2068-2085, 2011. 
[12]  S. Gil, M. Schwager, B. Julian, and D. Rus, “Optimizing 
Communication in Air-Ground Robot Networks Using 
Decentralized Control,” IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1964-1971, 2010. 
[13] O. Burdakov, P. Doherty, K. Holmberg, J. Kvarnstrom, and 
P-M. Olsson, “Positioning Unmanned Aerial Vehicles as 
Communication 
Relays 
for 
Surveillance 
Tasks,” 
In 
Proceedings of the 5th Robotics: Science and Systems 
Conference (RSS), 2009.  
[14] C. Dixon, E. W. Frew, “Optimizing Cascaded Chains of 
Unmanned Aircraft Acting as Communication Relays,” IEEE 
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 30, no. 5, 
pp. 883-898, 2012. 
[15] K. Mase and T. Saito, “Electric-vehicle-based Ad Hoc 
Networking in Cooperation with Electric Helicopters and 
Surveillance for Disaster Recovery,” The Ninth International 
Conference on Networking and Services, pp. 87-94, 2013. 
[16] K. Mase, “Wide-Area Disaster Surveillance Using Electric 
Vehicles 
and 
Helicopters,” 
The 
24th Annual 
IEEE 
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile 
Radio Communications (PIMRC), pp. 3466-3471, 2013. 
[17] H. Hartenstein and K. P. Laberteaux, “A Tutorial Survey on 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 164-171, 2008. 
[18] K. Mase, “Information and Communication Technology and 
Electric Vehicles—Paving the Way towards a Smart 
Community,” IEICE Trans. Commun., vol. E95-B, no. 6, pp. 
1902-1910, 2012. 
[19] H. Okada, H. Oka, and K. Mase, “Network Construction 
Management 
for 
Emergency 
Communication 
System 
SKYMESH in Large Scale Disaster,” IEEE International 
Workshop on Management of Emerging Networks and 
Services, pp. 875-880, 2012. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

BuckshotDV - A Robust Routing Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks with Unstable
Network Topologies and Unidirectional Links
Reinhardt Karnapke, J¨org Nolte
Distributed Systems/Operating Systems Group
Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus - Senftenberg
Cottbus, Germany
Email: {Karnapke, Jon}@informatik.tu-cottbus.de
Abstract—Experiments have shown that the number of asym-
metric and unidirectional links often exceeds the number of
bidirectional ones, especially in the transitional area of the
communication range of wireless sensor nodes. Still, most of
today’s routing protocols ignore their existence or try to remove
their implications. Also, links are not stable over time, and
routes become unusable often, resulting in a need for new
routing protocols that can handle highly dynamic links and use
unidirectional links to their advantage. In this paper, we present
BuckshotDV, a routing protocol which is resilient against link
ﬂuctuations and uses the longer reach of unidirectional links to
increase its performance. Furthermore, its distance vector nature
makes it scalable for large sensor networks.
Keywords–wireless sensor networks; routing; unidirectional
links
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, asymmetric and unidirectional links have
been shown to be common in wireless sensor networks.
Depending on the used hardware and the distance between
nodes, different regions (transitional region [1], grey area [2])
have been deﬁned, in which unidirectional links are common
and can even represent the majority of links. Also, most links
are not stable over time [3].
In traditional routing protocols, unidirectional links and
unstable links are ignored and not used for forwarding pur-
poses. Bidirectional, stable links make routing decisions much
easier. Unfortunately, this approach neglects a lot of potential
optimizations, as unidirectional links often have a greater reach
than bidirectional ones. Thus, unidirectional links reduce the
number of hops needed to deliver a message to its destination.
However, using unidirectional links is often considered to
induce too much overhead [4]. An example for this overhead
is the need to inform upstream nodes of their outgoing links.
In this paper, we present BuckshotDV, a routing protocol
speciﬁcally designed to use unidirectional links implicitly.
The overhead which results from the need to inform up-
stream neighbors of their outgoing unidirectional links in
other protocols is eliminated. BuckshotDV is based on a multi
path approach, enabling the usage of unidirectional links and
making it resilient against link changes and node failures.
Moreover, a node implicitly updates its routing table each time
a message is received.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: the
nature of unidirectional links and their commonness in wireless
sensor networks are presented in Section II. Selected state
of the art routing protocols that were used in the evaluation
are presented in Section III, followed by the description
of our protocol BuckshotDV in Section IV. In Section V
the evaluation of BuckshotDV and selected state of the art
protocols in simulations and real experiments is shown before
concluding remarks are given in Section VI.
II.
UNIDIRECTIONAL LINKS IN WIRELESS SENSOR
NETWORKS
Different classiﬁcations of link quality are used in liter-
ature. Examples are included in [1][2][3][5], which all use
different classiﬁcations (see below).
The most commonly used classiﬁcations divide links into
bidirectional links, asymmetric links and unidirectional links.
A bidirectional link is always deﬁned as a link between
two nodes which can be used to transmit a message from
either of those two nodes to the other one. In contrast, the
terms asymmetric link and unidirectional link are not always
deﬁned clearly, and sometimes used synonymously. Common
deﬁnitions for asymmetric links focus on a variation of either
Received Signal Strength Indication (RSSI) values or packet
loss (delivery ratio). When the delivery ratio is used, unidi-
rectional links can be seen as a subclass of asymmetric links
where the delivery ratio in one direction is 0. However, this
deﬁnition requires quite a lot of message transmissions in order
to evaluate the delivery ratio. For this paper, a unidirectional
link is deﬁned as follows: a link from node A to node B is
unidirectional, if node B can receive messages from A, but not
vise versa.
Woo et. al. focus on link quality estimation in [1]. They
measured link quality for a sensor network deployment con-
sisting of 50 Mica Motes from Berkeley. All nodes within a
distance of about 10 feet (about 3 meters) or less from the
sender received more than 90% of the transmitted packets
(called the effective region). It is followed by the transitional
region which reaches roughly from 10 feet to 40 feet (between
3 and 13 meters) distance. Nodes in this region cannot be
uniformly characterized as some of them have a high reception
rate while others received no packets at all. The last region is
the clear region and contains only nodes that did not receive
any transmissions.
Zhao and Govindan measured the properties of wireless
sensor networks on the physical and medium access control
layers [2]. These measurements were conducted using up
to 60 Mica motes, which were placed in three different
environments: an ofﬁce building, a parking lot and a habitat.
The experiments for the physical layer were realized with a
single sender and multiple receiver nodes, and have shown the
existence of a grey area in reception which can consist of up
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

to one third of the network (similar to the transitional region
described above). Another result described by the authors is
that in the parking lot and indoor environments nearly 10% of
measured links were unidirectional (called asymmetric links in
the paper).
The Medium Access Control (MAC) layer evaluation used
a simple Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision Avoidance
(CSMA/CA) protocol, which is the default implementation
for TinyOS. It was augmented with a retransmission scheme,
to make use of the link-layer acknowledgments that were
being transmitted anyway. The authors have deﬁned the packet
loss difference for two nodes as the difference between the
packet delivery efﬁciency of both nodes. Unidirectional links
are quite common: more than 10% of the surveyed links have
a difference of more than 50%.
Ortiz and Culler studied the feasibility of using multiple
channels in wireless sensor networks [5]. They evaluated
link quality in three different testbeds: a machine room, a
computer room and an ofﬁce building, using up to 60 sensor
nodes. During the experiments, each node transmitted 100
messages and each other node recorded the number of received
messages, enabling easy calculation of the packet reception
rate.
The authors found that unidirectional links were indeed
common in their testbeds. In the machine room 32 - 36% of
links were unidirectional, 18 - 34% in the computer room and
10 - 46% in the ofﬁce building.
In previous work [3], we described connectivity measure-
ments conducted using eZ430-Chronos sensor nodes from
Texas Instruments. We evaluated different placements (desk,
lawn, stones), different heights (ground or poles) and two radio
channels. Connectivity graphs were gathered every minute, for
60 minutes in each experiment. The results show that unidi-
rectional links were extremely common in those experiments,
there were always more unidirectional than bidirectional links.
Also, the increased communication range that resulted from
the higher placement on the poles led to a stronger increase
of unidirectional links than of bidirectional ones. On average,
we measured about four to ﬁve times more unidirectional
than bidirectional links. Furthermore, we found that all links
were extremely unstable, with lots of link changes between
measurements (minutes).
All these experiments show that unidirectional links are
normal in wireless sensor networks and should be taken into
account when routing decisions are made. Using them can
increase connectivity, which may prevent network separation
and increase performance.
III.
RELATED WORK
AODVBR [6] is an enhancement of Ad-Hoc On Demand
Distance Vector Routing (AODV) [7][8], that uses a mesh
structure to supply multiple paths. The main achievement
of the protocol is to build multiple routes without sending
additional control messages. This is possible because of the
broadcast character of the medium. Every node that overhears
a route reply packet and is not the addressed next hop discards
this packet in AODV. In AODVBR, these nodes enter the
node from which the route reply was received as next hop to
the destination into their routing cache. This way, a structure
similar to a ﬁsh bone is constructed.
When a link breaks, the node that detected the break
(re-)broadcasts the data packet with a ﬂag indicating that
this message should be sent using an alternative route. A
neighboring node that receives this message and has overheard
the route reply that created this route forwards the message to
the next hop. This way, a detour of one hop is taken, which
may enable the delivery of the data packet. Also, a route error
packet is transmitted to the source, so that a new and possibly
better route can be established. However, the message still has
to traverse all nodes that are on the original route.
Dynamic Source Routing [9][10][11] is one of the ﬁrst
routing protocols that took unidirectional links into account.
The authors specify two different modes of operation for DSR:
one for the usage of only bidirectional links, and another
which should be used when unidirectional links are common
(used here). In this version, route request messages (RREQ)
are ﬂooded in the usual way. Route reply messages (RREP)
however, are not sent back the inverted path of the RREQ
message. Instead, the destination (D) inserts the path the RREQ
has taken into a RREP message, which is also ﬂooded. Once
this message has arrived at the originator of the RREQ message
(the source, S), S inserts the path taken by the RREQ into its
routing table and transmits an additional routing message to
node D, which contains the path taken by the RREP. Once
the destination has received this message, the routes from S
to D and from D to S, which can differ strongly, have been
established.
Virtual coordinates are used by ABVCap Uni [12] to
enable the usage of geographic routing in networks without
location information. ABVCap Uni uses clusters and rings
to enable the usage of unidirectional links. The overhead of
maintaining clusters and rings is high, though. When links
change often, the performance of ABVCap Uni decreases
drastically.
In previous work, we introduced Buckshot Routing [13], a
source routing protocol for dense ad-hoc networks. It uses a
multi path approach to circumvent broken links, unidirectional
links or dead nodes. These multiple paths are implemented by a
limited directional ﬂooding: when a node receives a message,
the forwarding decision differs from that used in traditional
source routing protocols. Normally, a node that receives a
message only checks if it is the intended next hop. In Buckshot
Routing, only the one after that is important, the next-but-one
hop. All nodes that have this next-but-one hop in their neighbor
table forward the message.
IV.
BUCKSHOTDV
Buckshot Routing and BuckshotDV are both based on a
limited directional ﬂodding. When a node S wants to transmit
a message to a node D and a path is already known, messages
are not only sent along this path, but also within a certain
tunnel around the original route.
An example of the forwarding mechanism is depicted in
Figure 1. The original path from node S to node D is a straight
line in the middle of the ﬁgure. Where in traditional routing
protocols a node only forwards the message if it is the intended
next hop, nodes forward it if they have the hop after the next
in their neighbor table in Buckshot Routing and BuckshotDV.
This results in a higher message load, but also adds redundancy
to the forwarding mechanism.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

D
S
Figure 1. Multiple paths taken by a message in Buckshot Routing and
BuckshotDV
The usefulness of the created redundancy can also be seen
in Figure 1. The dashed link between the second and the third
node on the path is now broken, which would usually result in
a delivery failure. In Buckshot and BuckshotDV, this broken
link is implicitly circumvented, removing the need for a new
route discovery.
Buckshot Routing and BuckshotDV are based on the same
forwarding mechanism. However, while Buckshot Routing
works quite well in networks with a small diameter, wireless
sensor networks are assumed to consist of thousands of nodes
in the future. The source routing character of Buckshot Routing
means that the size of messages grows with the route length,
which can become a problem in state of the art wireless sensor
networks where the upper bounds for message size can be
quite low (e.g., 64 Byte on the eZ430-Chronos from Texas
Instruments [14]).
To make the forwarding principle of our Buckshot Routing
usable in large scale networks, we developed its distance vector
version called BuckshotDV, which reduces the message size
while at the same time increasing the robustness of the routing
protocol and increasing the delivery ratio.
In traditional distance vector routing algorithms like DSDV
[15] or AODV [7], each node maintains a routing table, with
entries consisting at least of the ID of the destination, the
distance, and the next hop. Using the same entries in Buckshot
Routing with Distance Vectors (BuckshotDV) is simply not
possible. As described in [13], Buckshot Routing needs to
know the next-but-one hop, which means that this value has
to be determined and kept in the routing table, too.
In BuckshotDV, a node enters its own ID along with the
ID of the node from which it received a RREQ message into
the RREQ before retransmitting it. A node that receives a
RREQ message now knows its neighbor’s neighbor, and thus
the next-but-one hop on the reversed path, which it enters into
its routing table in the form (source of RREQ, next-but-one
hop, distance).
Figure 2(a) shows an example of a RREQ message in
BuckshotDV. The ﬁrst value in the RREQ is the type of
message, followed by the sequence number of the originating
node and its identity, which are used for duplicate suppression
and to build the reversed route. The destination ID is of course
necessary to terminate the route discovery once the destination
has been reached. All of these values are ﬁxed throughout the
lifetime of a RREQ message.
The ﬁrst value being subject to change is the hop count
which is incremented by one on each hop. Please note that of
course any other weight function, e.g., energy, would also be
possible. The hop count is followed by the identities of the
previous and the current hop.
When a node receives a RREQ and determines that it is
the destination of this packet, it creates a routing entry for
the source of the RREQ message and transmits a route reply
(RREP). RREP messages also contain the ID of the node from
which the RREP was received and the identity of the next-
but-one hop in BuckshotDV (Figure 2(b)). The next-but-one
hop is needed to ﬁnd the route to the source of the RREQ
message, the identity of the previous node is needed to build
the backward route. Thus, contrary to Buckshot Routing in its
source routing variant, RREP messages are also used to build
new routes. Nodes that receive a RREP message check their
neighbor table for the next-but-one hop listed there, which is
the next hop from their perspective. If and only if there is an
entry, they look up the next-but-one hop from their perspective
in their routing table, adjust the values in the RREP message
and retransmit.
Please note that the forwarding mechanism of BuckshotDV
results in a spreading of messages across neighboring nodes
(nodes adjacent to the initial path). This redundancy is what
makes BuckshotDV resilient against link breaks and node
failures. It is also the reason, why unidirectional links are
implicitly circumvented.
Once the RREP message has arrived at the source and the
routing table entry has been created, the DATA packet can
be transmitted. As no new route needs to be learned from a
data packet, the identities of the previous and current hop are
omitted in DATA packets, resulting in a smaller header.
The data packet format used in BuckshotDV is shown in
Figure 2(c). Just like when forwarding a RREP message, each
node that receives a DATA message checks its neighbor table
for the next-but-one hop listed in the message and replaces it
with its own next-but-one hop for the listed destination if and
only if it has found the neighbor in its neighbor table.
When compared to pure Buckshot Routing, BuckshotDV
is complicated and requires more computation and copying on
each node. Still, when comparing it to protocols like AODV,
it remains simple. Its main advantage compared to Buckshot
Routing is its scalability. In Buckshot Routing, as in all source
routing protocols, the message headers grow with increasing
network diameter. In BuckshotDV the header size is constant
for each type of packet, making it usable in large networks.
V.
EVALUATION
The evaluation includes simulations using the OMNeT++
framework [16], as well as outdoor experiments on 36 eZ430-
Chronos sensor nodes from Texas Instruments [14]. These fea-
ture an MSP430 micro controller with an integrated CC1101
sub-gigahertz (868MHz) communication module [17].
Figure 3 shows the used eZ430-Chronos sensor nodes in
three different placements which were used in the experiments.
An external battery pack has been soldered to the nodes, which
replaces the internal coin cells. This enables the usage of
freshly charged batteries for each protocol.
Apart from the modiﬁcation for the batteries, the sensor
nodes were used as they were delivered, no calibration was
made. The transmission power was also left at the preset level
of 0 dBm, which lead to a small transmission range. This small
transmission range is also due to the absence of a real antenna
on the eZ430-Chronos: the metal surrounding the display acts
as antenna.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Type = RREQ = 1
Source Seq. Num.
Destination
Source
Hop Count
Previous Hop ID
Current Node ID
(a) RREQ
Type = RREP = 2
Source Seq. Num.
Destination
Source
Hop Count
Next-but-one Hop
Previous Hop
Current Node ID
(b) RREP
Type = DATA = 3
Source Seq. Num.
Destination
Source
Next-but-one Hop
DATA
(c) DATA
Figure 2. Packet formats in BuckshotDV
(a) afﬁxed to poles
(b) placed on the lawn
(c) on a stone pave-
ment
Figure 3. A modiﬁed eZ430-Chronos sensor node from Texas Instruments
Five different routing protocols were chosen as competitors
for BuckshotDV in the evaluation: Flooding, Tree Routing,
AODVBR, DSR and Buckshot Routing.
A. Simulation
The simulated networks consisted of four different sizes
of grids: 100 nodes (10x10), 400 nodes (20x20), 900 nodes
(30x30) and 1600 nodes (40x40). A grid alignment was chosen
to represent applications that need area coverage, where each
node is equipped with sensors that have a range of one distance
unit. To simulate a certain connectivity between nodes, we
used the matrix-based simulation approach presented in [18].
As the largest networks, consisting of 1600 nodes, needed to
be simulated for the longest time, they also needed the highest
number of connectivity matrices: for a single simulation 17761
connectivity matrices were needed. In each of these matrices,
a (directed) link from node A to node B exists with a
probability of α/d6 where d is the distance between node A
and node B. The inverse link, from node B to node A, exists
with the same probability. Therefore, the link is bidirectional
with a probability of (α/d6) × (α/d6), unidirectional (in any
one direction) with α/d6 × (1 − (α/d6)) and non existing
with (1 − (α/d6))2. The quotient (d6) reﬂects the dampening
induced by the distance between nodes while α represents the
probability that a link between geographically adjacent nodes
exists. Nodes that are directly above, below, right or left of a
node are called direct neighbors and their distance was deﬁned
as 1. α was varied between 0.9, 0.95 and 1, and for each
value of α ten sets of matrices with different seeds for the
random number generator were generated, leading to 30 sets
of matrices per network size, and a total of 996120 connectivity
matrices containing between 10.000 and 2.560.000 entries.
Please note that due to the fact that connectivity matrices were
generated randomly, there is no guarantee that there always
was a path from sender to destination. Therefore, no upper
limit can be calculated, but Flooding is used as reference
protocol: the number of application messages delivered by
Flooding is taken as 100% and the delivery ratio of all other
protocols calculated accordingly.
The delivery ratio of Buckshot Routing, BuckshotDV, DSR,
AODVBR and Tree Routing is shown in Figure 4(a). For a
small network containing only 100 nodes, the delivery ratio
of Buckshot Routing in its source routing version and that
of BuckshotDV are still close to each other. However, when
the number of nodes and thus the network diameter and route
length increase, the performance of Buckshot Routing declines
while that of BuckshotDV improves.
Indeed, the performance of all protocols declines, except
for BuckshotDV. This is due to the forwarding mechanism of
BuckshotDV, which always uses the next-but-one hop from
the perspective of the node which is currently handling a
message. As this next-but-one hop might be different for
different nodes, the limited directional ﬂooding gets broader
with increasing network diameter, increasing redundancy and
robustness against unidirectional links and link breaks.
However, this increase in robustness comes at a price: the
increased redundancy means that a higher number of messages
is transmitted. Figure 4(b) shows the number of messages
transmitted by each protocol. While Flooding naturally trans-
mitted the most messages, BuckshotDV nonetheless transmit-
ted about twice as many messages as Buckshot Routing. The
least number of transmitted messages can be seen on Tree
Routing as expected: when a link breaks, two retransmissions
are tried before the message is discarded, keeping the cost of
delivery failure low. In the case of DSR, a failure to deliver a
message to the next hop results in a route error message being
transmitted to the originator of the message, and a subsequent
new route discovery, which includes two ﬂoodings of the whole
network. AODVBR should in theory be robust against message
losses due to the ﬁsh bone structure it uses to reclaim lost data
messages. However, this reclaiming mechanism is only used
for data messages, meaning that AODVBR needs a completely
bidirectional path during route discovery.
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Number of Nodes
Delivery Ratio
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
AODVBR
Buckshot Routing
BuckshotDV
DSR
Flooding
Tree Routing
100
400
900
1600
(a) Delivery Ratio
Number of Nodes
Transmitted Messages
5.0e+07
1.0e+08
1.5e+08
2.0e+08
2.5e+08
AODVBR
Buckshot Routing
BuckshotDV
DSR
Flooding
Tree Routing
100
400
900
1600
(b) Transmitted messages
Number of Nodes
Messages/Data
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
AODVBR
Buckshot Routing
BuckshotDV
DSR
Flooding
Tree Routing
100
400
900
1600
(c) Transmissons per application message
Figure 4. Performance of all evaluated protocols achieved in the simulations
The cost of delivering a single application message to
the destination measured in transmitted messages is shown in
Figure 4(c). With a delivery ratio of 40% and a low number
of overall transmissions, Tree Routing can be a good choice
for small networks if network load is more important than
delivery ratio. DSR represents the other end of the spectrum
- the low number of delivered application messages compared
to the fairly high number of transmitted messages results in a
very bad cost ratio. Therefore, DSR should not be used in such
dynamic environments. The ratio of AODVBR is also worse
than that of Flooding, therefore it should not be used for the
resource constrained sensor networks. The ratios of Buckshot
and BuckshotDV are close to each other, with BuckshotDV
a little worse. The decision which of these two should be
used in a certain scenario depends on the importance of data
and network load: if the delivery ratio is more important,
BuckshotDV should be chosen, and the increased network
load tolerated. If network load needs to be reduced, Buckshot
Routing should be used.
B. Experiments
In the experiments, four different placement were used:
a desk, a lawn, poles, and stones. The desk placement is a
one hop environment with all 36 nodes lying directly next to
each other. In the other experiments, nodes were placed one
meter from each other, on the grass of a lawn, on a stone
pavement or afﬁxed to poles at a height of 20 cm above
ground. Each placement has different radio characteristics. In
the experiments the delivery ratio was deﬁned as the number
of received application messages divided by the number of
application messages handed to the routing protocol.
The delivery ratio of each protocol, divided by different
placements, is shown in Figure 5. The ﬁgure shows that all
protocols work well on the desk, and fairly well in the pole
experiments. But when the sensor nodes are placed on the
ground, AODVBR and DSR show a steep decline in delivery
ratio. Tree Routing works much better, but still not as good
as Buckshot Routing or BuckshotDV. Even Flooding shows a
strong decline, which is due to problems with the MAC layer.
However, BuckshotDV outperforms all protocols chosen for
comparison.
environment
Delivery Ratio
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
AODVBR
95
85
9
19
Flooding
100
65
60
53
Desk Pole LawnStones
DSR
100
88
6
3
Buckshot Routing
100
99
64
59
Desk Pole LawnStones
Tree Routing
100
85
48
46
BuckshotDV
93
99
95
70
Desk Pole LawnStones
Figure 5. Delivery ratio of each protocol achieved in the experiments
The total number of messages transmitted by each protocol
is shown in Figure 6. It can be seen that Flooding transmits
the most messages in all placements, with Buckshot Routing
and DSR following for the placements on the ground (Lawn,
Stones). Tree Routing transmitted the lowest number of mes-
sages in the placements on the ground. However, the number
of transmitted messages needs to be correlated to the delivery
ratio.
The cost of delivering a single application message to
its destination measured in transmitted messages is shown
in Figure 7. DSR performs worst due to the high number
of transmissions and low number of delivered application
messages. However, BuckshotDV performs at least as well as
all other protocols, often outperforming its competitors. Even
TreeRouting which has a better cost function in the stones
placement has a lower delivery ratio for that same scenario. In
the desk and pole placements Buckshot Routing has the same
ratio of 1 as BuckshotDV and in the lawn placement Tree
Routing and BuckshotDV share a value of 7. When the delivery
ratio is taken into consideration, this means that BuckshotDV
always outperforms its competitors, even for our relatively
small testbed consisting only of 36 nodes.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

environment
Messages
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
AODVBR
14688 15494 13851 16480
Flooding
73415
63241 65047
57223
Desk Pole LawnStones
DSR
6652
20975
31466
24812
Buckshot Routing
2136
2169
47192
33923
Desk Pole LawnStones
Tree Routing
5496
4768
7394
8988
BuckshotDV
2136
2168
14129
26571
Desk Pole LawnStones
Figure 6. Number of messages transmitted by each protocol in the
experiments
environment
Messages/Data
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
AODVBR
7
9
74
40
Flooding
35 47 52 51
Desk Pole LawnStones
DSR
3
11
238 394
Buckshot Routing
1
1
35 27
Desk Pole LawnStones
Tree Routing
3
3
7
9
BuckshotDV
1
1
7
18
Desk Pole LawnStones
Figure 7. Number of messages transmitted to deliver a single application
message in the experiments
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented BuckshotDV, a distance vector
routing protocol for wireless sensor networks which uses
unidirectional links implicitly. We evaluated its performance
and compared the results to those achieved by AODVBR, DSR,
Tree Routing, Flooding, and our original source routing version
of Buckshot Routing. The experiments that we conducted with
36 sensor nodes from Texas Instruments show the feasibility of
our approach, while the simulations of up to 1600 nodes were
used to evaluate the scalability. Simulation results indicate that
while Buckshot Routing can only be used for sensor networks
with a moderate diameter, BuckshotDV can indeed be used
in large scale networks. However, we did not posses enough
hardware to prove this indication in large scale experiments.
The evaluation shows that BuckshotDV can operate in
sensor networks with unidirectional links, and use them to
increase its delivery ratio without introducing additional over-
head. BuckshotDV does not need to inform upstream nodes of
unidirectional links. Rather, those links are used implicitly. The
implicit usage of multiple links makes BuckshotDV resilient
against link changes and node failures, and removes the need
for explicit route maintenance. Routing tables are implicitly
updated with each received message, introducing no commu-
nication overhead and only negligible computation overhead
on the nodes. The fact that the route maintenance overhead is
marginal in BuckshotDV shows its usability for networks with
frequent topology changes.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Woo, T. Tong, and D. Culler, “Taming the underlying challenges
of reliable multihop routing in sensor networks,” in SenSys ’03:
Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Embedded networked
sensor systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM Press, 2003, pp. 14–27.
[2]
J. Zhao and R. Govindan, “Understanding packet delivery performance
in dense wireless sensor networks,” in SenSys ’03: Proceedings of the
1st international conference on Embedded networked sensor systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM Press, 2003, pp. 1–13.
[3]
S. Lohs, R. Karnapke, and J. Nolte, “Link stability in a wireless sensor
network - an experimental study,” in 3rd International Conference on
Sensor Systems and Software, 2012, pp. 146 – 161.
[4]
M. K. Marina and S. R. Das, “Routing performance in the presence of
unidirectional links in multihop wireless networks,” in Proceedings of
the 3rd ACM international symposium on Mobile ad hoc networking
& computing, ser. MobiHoc ’02.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2002,
pp. 12–23.
[5]
J. Ortiz and D. Culler, “Multichannel reliability assessment in real world
wsns,” in IPSN ’10: Proceedings of the 9th ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 162–173.
[6]
S.-J. Lee and M. Gerla, “AODV-BR: Backup routing in ad hoc
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference (WCNC 2000), Chicago, IL, Sepember 2000,
pp. 1311–1316.
[7]
C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer, “”ad hoc on-demand distance vector
routing.”,” in Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications, New Orleans, LA, FEB 1999,
pp. 90–100.
[8]
C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, “Ad hoc on-demand distance
vector (aodv) routing, http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3561.txt,” 2003.
[9]
D. Johnson, D. Maltz, and J. Broch, DSR The Dynamic Source Routing
Protocol for Multihop Wireless Ad Hoc Networks.
Addison-Wesley,
2001, ch. 5, pp. 139–172.
[10]
D.
Johnson,
H.
Yu,
and
D.
Maltz,
“The
dynamic
source
routing
protocol
(dsr)
for
mobile
ad
hoc
networks
for
ipv4,
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4728.”
[Online].
Available:
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4728 last accessed September 2014
[11]
D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, “Dynamic source routing in ad
hoc wireless networks,” in Mobile Computing.
Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1996, pp. 153–181.
[12]
C.-H. Lin, B.-H. Liu, H.-Y. Yang, C.-Y. Kao, and M.-J. Tsai, “Virtual-
coordinate-based delivery-guaranteed routing protocol in wireless sen-
sor networks with unidirectional links,” in INFOCOM 2008. 27th
IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications, Joint
Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies, 13-
18 April 2008, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 351–355.
[13]
D. Peters, R. Karnapke, and J. Nolte, “Buckshot routing - a robust
source routing protocol for dense ad-hoc networks,” in Ad Hoc Net-
works Conference 2009, Niagara Falls, Canada, 2009, pp. 268–283.
[14]
“Texas
instruments
ez430-chronos.”
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://focus.ti.com/docs/toolsw/folders/print/ez430-
chronos.html?DCMP=Chronos&HQS=Other+OT+chronos
last
accessed September 2014
[15]
C. E. Perkins and P. Bhagwat, “Highly dynamic destination-sequenced
distance-vector routing (dsdv) for mobile computers,” in SIGCOMM
’94: Proceedings of the conference on Communications architectures,
protocols and applications.
New York, NY, USA: ACM Press, 1994,
pp. 234–244.
[16]
A. Varga, “The omnet++ discrete event simulation system,” in Proceed-
ings of the European Simulation Multiconference (ESM’2001), Prague,
Czech Republic, Jun. 2001, p. 185.
[17]
“Texas instruments cc430f6137,
http://focus.ti.com/docs/prod/folders/print/cc430f6137.html.”
[Online].
Available:
http://focus.ti.com/docs/prod/folders/print/cc430f6137.html
last accessed September 2014
[18]
R. Karnapke, S. Lohs, A. Lagemann, and J. Nolte, “Simulation of
unidirectional links in wireless sensor networks,” in 7th International
ICST Conference on Simulation Tools and Techniques, Lisbon, Portu-
gal, 2014, pp. 118–125.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Ultra Wideband Positioning:
An Analytical Study of Emerging Technologies
Suheer Alhadhrami,
AbdulMalik Al-Salman
and Hend S. Al-Khalifa
Computer Science Department,
King Saud University,
Riyadh, KSA
Email: 430204094@student.ksu.edu.sa
salman@ksu.edu.sa
hendk@ksu.edu.sa
Abdulrahman Alariﬁ,
Ahmad Alnafessah
and Mansour Alsaleh
Computer Research Institute,
King Abdulaziz City for
Science and Technology,
Riyadh, KSA
Email: aarifi@kacst.edu.sa
aalnafessah@kacst.edu.sa
maalsaleh@kacst.edu.sa
Mai A. Al-Ammar
Department of Computer Science,
Al-Imam Mohammad bin Saud
Islamic University,
Riyadh, KSA
Email: mai.alammar@ccis.imamu.edu.sa
Abstract—In recent years, indoor positioning has emerged
as a critical function in many end-user applications; including
military, civilian, disaster relief and peacekeeping missions. To
cope with this surge of interest, much research effort has focused
on meeting the needs of these applications and overcoming
their shortcomings. Ultra WideBand (UWB) is an important
technology in the ﬁeld of indoor positioning and has shown
great performance compared to others. In this work, we identify
and analyze existing ultra wideband positioning technologies
and present a detailed comparative survey. We also provide
a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT)
analysis, a method generally used in management science to
evaluate the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats
involved in a product or technology, to analyze the present state
of UWB positioning technologies.
Index Terms—Ultra wideband; localization; positioning; in-
door positioning; wireless sensor networks; networking; SWOT
I. INTRODUCTION
Positioning is the process of determining a position of
people, equipment, and other objects. Recently, it has been
an active research area where much of the research focuses
on utilizing existing technologies to address the problem of
positions’ determination. Positioning can be classiﬁed, accord-
ing to the environment where the positioning is conducted,
into two types: outdoor positioning and indoor positioning.
Outdoor positioning is performed outside buildings and indoor
positioning is performed inside buildings such as houses,
hospitals, malls and others. Different applications may re-
quire different types of positioning technologies that ﬁt their
needs and constraints. For example, Global Positioning System
(GPS) is a technology that is suitable and efﬁcient for the
outdoor rather than the indoors since satellite radio signals
cannot penetrate solid walls and obstacles [1][2][3][4].
Indoor Positioning Systems (IPSs) determine the position
of something in a physical space continuously and in real-
time [5]. IPSs use numerous positioning approaches, which
vary greatly in terms of accuracy, cost, precision, technology,
scalability, robustness and security [2]. There are ﬁve main
quality metrics of the indoor positioning systems, which
should be considered: (1) accuracy and precision of the sys-
tem; (2) coverage and resolution of the coverage; (3) latency
in producing location updates; (4) impact of a building’s
infrastructure; and (5) effect of random errors on the system
such as errors caused by signal interference and reﬂection [6].
Indoor positioning has many applications such as indoor
navigation systems for blind and visually impaired people,
locating devices through buildings, aiding tourists in museums,
ﬁnding an emergency exit in a smoky environment, tracking
kids in crowded places, and tracking expensive equipment.
Indoor positioning applications may require different quality
attributes and thus IPSs should be carefully selected to meet
the requirements of the application.
Indoor location-based services are an important application
of indoor ubiquitous computing. Accurate position measure-
ment is a critical requirement for indoor positioning tech-
niques. Given that UWB is one of the key techniques that is
proven effective in indoor positioning, a comparative analysis
of the state-of-the-art UWB indoor positioning systems is
indeed required. Furthermore, due to the U.S. Federal Commu-
nications Commission (FCC) recent allowance for the use of
unlicensed UWB communications, UWB civilian applications
have been studied and explored intensively worldwide. Also,
the development of international wireless communication stan-
dards that adopts UWB technology has encouraged research
and development efforts on UWB. Consequently, developing
new algorithms to improve UWB positioning performance is
becoming an active research area [7].
This work is motivated by the fact that UWB is the most
promising technology for indoor positioning and tracking.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Further, to the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst
analytical study of the state-of-the-art UWB indoor positioning
systems. Our study analyzes a wide range of positioning al-
gorithms that have empowered UWB positioning systems and
tackle different aspects of applications needs and requirements.
The nature of the application in question plays a major role
in determining the appropriate solution for achieving certain
quality attributes. Hybrid positioning approaches have future
potentials as they combine features of different approaches to
improve the performance.
Our contributions in this paper are twofold.
• We provide an updated literature review for existing
and recent research in UWB positioning systems (see
Sections II and III).
• We conduct a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and
Threats (SWOT) analysis for UWB technology, which
provide new directions and deeper insights into the state
of this technology beyond its well-known pros and cons
(see Section IV).
II. UWB POSITIONING
UWB is one of the most recent, accurate, and promising
technologies [8]. The precursor technology of UWB is referred
to as a base-band, impulse, and carrier-free technology. The
US Department of Defense is the ﬁrst to use the term ultra
wideband. At the late of 1990, the UWB was commercially
available [8]. UWB radio is a method of spectrum access
that can provide high speed data rate communication over the
personal area network space. UWB is based on transmitting
extremely short pulses and it uses techniques that cause a
spreading of the radio energy over a wide frequency band with
a very low power spectral density [8]. This high bandwidth
offers high data throughput for communication. The low
frequency of UWB pulses enables the signal to effectively
pass through obstacles such as walls and objects.
There are three main application areas for using UWB,
namely (1) communication and sensors; (2) positioning and
tracking; and (3) radar [8][9]. UWB positioning techniques
can provide real time indoor precision tracking for many
applications such as locator beacons for emergency services
and mobile inventory, indoor navigation for blind and visually
impaired people, people or instruments tracking, and military
reconnaissance. The characteristics of UWB signals provide
the potential of highly accurate position and location estima-
tion for indoor environments [10][8].
A. Why UWB has recently gained attention?
In general, UWB has different features that are explored
in the literature [8][3][11]. The high data rate of UWB can
reach 100 Megabits per second (Mbps), which makes it
a good solution for near-ﬁeld data transmission. Also, the
high bandwidth helps in reducing the effect of multipath
interference, which makes UWB a more desirable solution for
indoor positioning than other technologies [12]. In fact, UWB
provides a high accuracy rate in which error can be minimized
to sub-centimeters. Therefore, UWB is considered to be one of
the most suitable choices for critical positioning applications
that require highly accurate result.
UWB technology, unlike other positioning technologies
such as infra-red and ultrasound sensor, does not require
line-of-site and does not get affected by the existence of
other communication devices or external noise due to its high
bandwidth and signal modulation [13][14]. Furthermore, the
UWB equipment cost is low and it consumes less power
compared with other competitive solutions.
Many IPSs were implemented commercially using UWB.
One of the most known positioning systems that use UWB is
Ubisense system. In Ubisense system, a user carries tags that
transmit UWB signals to ﬁxed sensors that use the signals to
determine the user’s positions using Time of Arrival (TOA)
method [15].
B. Signal Modulation
Signal modulation is the process of carrying information
on the impulse signal (the carrier signal) by modifying one or
more of the signal properties. In general, signal modulation can
be categorized based on the signal state into three categories;
binary modulation, ternary modulation, and M-ary modulation.
Also, signal modulation can be categorized based on signal
properties that need to be modiﬁed into four categories; am-
plitude modulation, frequency modulation, phase modulation,
and hybrid modulation.
Signal modulation is a crucial phase in signal transmission,
which can greatly improve the quality of transmitting signals
to achieve certain quality criteria. For example, UWB signals
are usually transmitted in the existence of other signals in
the air as well as reﬂected signals which may cause multi-
path interference. Thus, UWB must have high modulation
efﬁciency as signals must be recognized correctly in the
presence of noise and interference [9].
There are various signal modulations that are used for
UWB, such as Pulse Position Modulation (PPM), On-Off
Keying (OOK), Pulse Amplitude Modulation (PAM), and
Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) [9][16]. Signal modulation
is utilized to enhance the accuracy of UWB localization [9].
In UWB, Time-Hopping Spread Spectrum (TH-SS) impulse
radio could be used to solve multipath problems and generate
UWB signals with relatively computational cost. There are
other modulations that are used by UWB such as Pseudo
Random (PR) time-modulation, Binary Phase Shift Keying
(BPSK), Time-Hopping Binary Phase Shift Keying (TH-
BPSK), Time-Hopping Pulse Position Modulation (TH-PPM),
and Minimum-Shift Keying (MSK) [6][17]. Further details
about using these modulation technologies in positioning are
presented in the next sections.
III. UWB POSITIONING ALGORITHMS
UWB technology is well-suited for indoor positioning
applications. In order to employ this technology, different
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. COMPARISON OF UWB SYSTEMS
No.
Authors
Year
Accombined Technology
Algorithm
Environment
1
Ch’oliz et al.[26]
2011
TOA
LOS/NLOS
2
Guangliang Cheng[10]
2012
TOA
LOS/NLOS
3
Gunter et al.[27]
2010
TOA
LOS/NLOS
4
Sivanand et al.[14]
2007
TDOA
NLOS
5
Rowe et al.[29]
2013
TOA
LOS
6
Jiang et al.[34]
2010
GPS
AOA, TDOA
NLOS
7
Jiang et al.[34]
2010
TDOA, TDMA
LOS
8
Pittet et al.[31]
2008
MEMS
AOA, TDOA
9
Shahi et al.[11]
2012
AOA, TDOA
LOS/NLOS
10
Segura et al.[12]
2012
TOA, TDOA and TDMA
LOS/NLOS
11
Cao and Li[47]
2012
ROA, TDOA and DOA
12
Mucchi et al.[37]
2010
AOA, TOA
LOS
13
Liu et al.[48]
2012
GPS
TDOA, RSS
NLOS
14
Kuhn et al.[17]
2011
GPS, RFID and WLAN
15
Zhang et al.[49]
2010
TDOA
16
Deissler et al.[38]
2012
TOA
17
Tuchler et al.[50]
2005
TOA
LOS
18
Digel et al.[39]
2013
LOS/NLOS
19
Jiang et al.[40]
2012
TOA,RSS
LOS/NLOS
20
Tome et al.[28]
2010
TOA
LOS
21
Arias-de-Reyna and Mengali[13]
2013
TOA
LOS
22
Kilic et al.[51]
2013
TOF
LOS
23
Mahfouz et al.[52]
2011
TDOA
LOS
24
McCracken et al.[53]
2013
RSS Sensor
RSST
25
Jiang et al.[54]
2013
TOA, TDOA
26
Yang et al.[55]
2013
STBCS-TDOA
LOS/NLOS
27
Mirza et al.[56]
2012
Ultrasound sensor and compass
AOA,TDOA
28
Ubisense[57]
2010
AOA,TDOA
LOS/NLOS
29
Ubisense[58]
2011
TOA,TDOA
LOS/NLOS
30
Ubisense[59]
2010
TOA,TDOA
LOS/NLOS
31
Ubisense[60]
2010
TOA/TDOA
LOS/NLOS
positioning algorithms have been developed in which position
information is extracted from radio signals traveling between
the target node and the reference nodes as well as position
information of the reference nodes. There are many positioning
algorithms that can be classiﬁed into ﬁve main categories
based on estimating measurements: (1) Angle of Arrival
(AOA); (2) Time of Arrival (TOA); (3) Time Difference of
Arrival (TDOA); (4) Received Signal Strength (RSS); and (5)
hybrid algorithm. In this section, we give a detailed review
of these algorithms for UWB indoor positioning. Also, we
compare the algorithms in different aspects such as accuracy,
environment, estimation technique, range, purpose of use and
others. A summary and comparison of UWB positioning
algorithms is presented in Table I.
A. AOA-based Algorithms
In AOA technique, the estimation of the signal reception
angles from at least two sources are compared either with
signal amplitude or carrier-phase across multiple antennas.
From the intersection of the angle line for each signal source,
the location can be found. AOA estimation algorithms are
very sensitive to many factors, which may cause errors in
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

their estimation of target position. Furthermore, AOA estima-
tion algorithms have a higher complexity compared to other
methods. For instance, the antenna array geometry has an
important role in the estimation algorithm [18]. Increasing
the distance between the sender and receiver may decrease
the accuracy [19]. AOA technique can be used with other
techniques to increase the accuracy [20].
AOA based algorithms have been used in many literatures.
Xu et al. presented a new cooperative positioning method
based on the AOAs, which utilizes pairwise AOAs information
among all the sensor nodes rather than relying only on anchor
nodes [21]. Lee proposed the using of signal model and
weighted-average to estimate AOA parameters for Low data
Rate UWB (LR-UWB) [22]. A Kalman ﬁlter based AOA
estimation algorithm was introduced by Subramanian, which
rely on a new linear quadratic frequency domain frequency
invariant beamforming strategy [23].
Furthermore, many studies have been conducted to evaluate
the performance of AOA for different applications, environ-
ments, hardware, and conﬁgurations. Mok et al. studied the
feasibility and performance of AOA for UWB in Ubisense
Real-Time Location System (RTLS) when integrated with
GPS to facilitate resource management in underground railway
construction sites [24]. The inﬂuence of UWB directional
antennas on the performance of AOA estimation was presented
in detail by Gerok et al. [25]. Gerok et al. presented a corrected
AOA estimation algorithm, which mitigates the error resulting
from the UWB directional antenna.
B. TOA-based Algorithms
TOA is based on the intersection of circles for multiple
transmitters. The radius of those circles is the distance between
the transmitter and receiver. This distance is calculated by
ﬁnding one-way propagation time between them [19]. The
time synchronization of all transmitters is required while the
receiver synchronization is unnecessary so that any possibility
of signiﬁcant delays must be accounted for during calculation
of the correct distances.
Choliz et al. identiﬁed a realistic indoor scenario, deﬁned
by a layout of walls and corridors, and a speciﬁc indoor
UWB ranging model to evaluate different kinds of TOA based
algorithms for UWB such as Trilateration, Weighted Least
Square with Multidimensional Scaling (WLS-MDS), Least
Square with Distance Contraction (LS-DC), Extended Kalman
Filter (EKF) and Particle Filter (PF) [26].
TOA based algorithms have been used to locate targeted
objects for various applications and environments. Cheng et
al. designed TOA-based personnel localization system for coal
mine using UWB technology, which can be very helpful
to locate workers effectively in case of accidents [10]. For
mobile robot tracking, Segura et al. proposed a novel UWB
navigation system for indoor environment, which employ a
TOA based estimation algorithm to accurately locate mobile
robot [12]. Fischer et al. designed a monolithic integrated
transceiver chipset for UWB to use them in indoor localization
systems where TOA techniques have been used for position
estimation [27]. The system was implemented for Line-of-
Sight environment and its accuracy was estimated to be 8.3
cm. On the other hand, Tom’e et al. designed and built a large-
scale deployable UWB-based Local Positioning System (LPS)
in which TOA is used for position estimation [28].
C. TDOA-based Algorithms
TODA is based on measuring the time difference of arrival
of a signal sent by an object and receive by three or more re-
ceivers. In this manner, the location of the object (transmitter)
will be determined. Also, the scenario can be ﬂipped where a
single receiver can determine the target location by measuring
the difference in arrival times of two transmitted signals [19].
Typically, only one transmitter is available that requires the
multiple receivers to share the data and cooperate to determine
the location of the transmitter. This cooperation requires
signiﬁcant bandwidth in comparison with other algorithms.
Krishnan et al. have used TDOA for UWB indoor posi-
tioning system where the site has been divided into cells and
each cell has four UWB readers mounted on the top corners
to have line-of-sight with user tag. In this manner, the readers
will be able to receive the signals from the user tag then send
the time of arrival to a central processing unit to determine
TDOA and ﬁnd user location [14]. Rowe et al. designed
one dimensional system with two sensors and one tag using
TDOA based algorithm to determine the tag location [29].
On-Off Keying (OOK) modulation was used to overcome the
collision deduced by synchronous tag transmission, increase
the performance, and decrease the cost and power at the same
time.
D. RSS-based Algorithms
In RSS-based algorithms, the tracked target measures the
signal strength for received signals from multiple transmitters
in order to use signal strength as an estimator of the distance
between the transmitters and receiver. This way, the receiver
will be able to estimate its position relative to the transmitter
nodes. Although RSS is sensitive to multipath interference and
small scale channel effect, which cause a random deviation
from mean received signal strength, it is used frequently
with unrealistic assumptions such as transmitted power and
path loss exponent are known, and transmitter antennas are
isotropic [19][30]. According to Pittet et al., the accuracy of
RSS for Non-Line-Of-Sight (NLOS) and multipath environ-
ment is low, which shows clearly that RSS is not the right
estimation method for indoor positioning systems [31]. Gigl et
al. explored the performance of RSS algorithms for positioning
using UWB technology [32]. They also studied the effect
of small scale fading on the system accuracy; however, a
simulator based on the UWB channel model 802.15.4a was
used to evaluate the algorithms rather than relying on real
scenarios for indoor environments.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

RSS based algorithms can be classiﬁed into two main types:
trilateration and ﬁngerprinting [33]. Trilateration algorithms
use RSS measurements to estimate the distances to three dif-
ferent reference node and hence estimate the current location.
On the other hand, ﬁngerprinting requires collecting a dataset
of RSS ﬁngerprints of a scene, which is later used to match
on-line measurements with the closest ﬁngerprint in the dataset
in order to estimate the location.
E. Hybrid-based Algorithms
When multiple positioning techniques are used, they can
complement each other or target different parts of the site that
ﬁt with their strengths. Overall accuracy will increase and the
complexity and cost will increase, too. Jiang et al. presented a
tracking system for staff, patients, and instruments in a hospital
environment [34]. They used GPS for outdoor tracking and
UWB for indoor tracking. Furthermore, the site was divided
into cells where each cell has at least 4 UWB readers and GBS
repeater. They used PDA, which has built-in GPS receiver and
it was connected to UWB tag in order to work with both GPS
and UWB at the same time. The UWB subsystem uses both
AOA and TDOA received by UWB readers to estimate the user
position. Similarly, Kuhn et al. designed a multi-tag access
scheme for UWB localization system, in which Minimum-
Shift Keying (MSK) modulation was used with 2.40-2.48,
5.40-10.6 Gigahertz (GHz) frequency and refresh rate of 1-
20 Hz in the range of 1m-100m [17]. Also, they have used
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) for channel access
control. TDOA was used to discover new tags and identify its
position in 3D. Experimentally, it uses two tags and switches
between them 20 times per second.
A new pedestrian navigation solution has been introduced
by Pittet et al., which combines UWB localization system and
Micro Electro Mechanical Sensors (MEMS) to improve the
performance of pedestrian positioning [31]. AOA and TDOA
were used to know the presence of multipath and position
estimation. Furthermore, they used an Extended Kalman Fil-
ter (EKF) based algorithms to couple the measurement of
these two subsystems in order to combine the complementary
advantages of UWB and MEMS. Another system has been
introduced by Shahi et al., which consists of a network of
tags and receivers communicating over 68 GHz signals [11].
The path from transmitter to receiver is measured to locate the
tag. The true location is determined by the direct path signals;
however, the error was produced by reﬂections of the signals.
The direct path signal can be distinguished from reﬂection
using UWB, so the accuracy increases. The computation is
calculated in one master server, which uses AOA and TDOA
for estimation. Also, FuCheng and MingJing designed UWB
localization and tracking system based on Kalman, linear H
and extended H ﬁlters to accurately estimate the target position
using DOA and TOA [35]. Their system was implemented in
30x30 meter cell with one access point, which is equipped
with 4 elements array and noise statistics.
Several other systems have been developed for critical
missions to help in tracking people and object. An UWB
indoor/outdoor NLOS localization system has been imple-
mented for disaster aid, in which GPS is used for outdoor
localization while UWB is used for indoor localization [36].
TDOA and RSS are used to improve localization performance.
Another UWB tracking system for athlete has been presented
by Mucchi et al. in order to determine the athlete’s speed
and acceleration and analyze his/her performance after med-
ical surgery [37]. They have implemented their system for
outdoor environments with different cell sizes and for indoor
environments using 4 sensors. The system was implemented
for Line-Of-Sight (LOS) environment setup and uses TOA and
AOA for positions’ estimation with good accuracy. Another
system was designed by DeiBler et al., which tackles the
problem of simultaneous localization and mapping in an
emergency like an earthquake, ﬁre, or terrorist attacks [38].
The system was designed to perform UWB indoor mapping
using a mobile antenna array with two receiver antennas and
one transmitter between them. DeiBler et al. used Kalman
ﬁlter for position estimation and Rao-Blackwellized particle
ﬁlter for data association and initialization of new objects.
Furthermore, a new UWB indoor navigation system was
proposed by Segura et al., which includes two sub-systems: the
location system and Mobile Robot (MR) control system [12].
They detect the ﬁrst arrival of signal by designing a novel
dynamic threshold crossing algorithm and using TOA/TDOA
for estimation. Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) is
used to avoid multi-users interference.
Several other efforts have been done to improve positioning
in UWB using hybrid based algorithms. Digel et al. designed
and improved a digitizer of no-coherent Impulse Radio Ultra
WideBand (IR-UWB) [39]. Jiang et al. designed a technique to
mitigate NLOS error by using Biased Kalman Filtering (BKF)
and Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) where both AOA
and RSS were used [40]. Srimathi and Kannan made a
comparison between Time-Hopping Spread-Spectrum (TH-
SS), Time-Hopping Binary Phase-Shift Keying (TH-BPSK),
and TH-SS coded and un-coded scheme UWB systems [41].
Zebra is a commercial UWB positioning system, that offers
a UWB Real-Time Location System (RTLS) integrated with
other RTLS, which can use technologies, such as GPS, Radio
Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) and Wireless Local Area
Network (WLAN) [17].
IV. SWOT ANALYSIS
SWOT analysis is a useful analysis tool to understand and
evaluate a technology, solution or business. SWOT analysis
aims to identify the key internal (strengths and weaknesses)
and external (opportunities and threats) factors that may affect
the success of an analyzed target. SWOT analysis has been
applied in many areas such as; industry, management and
engineering. Here, we apply the SWOT analysis to evaluate
UWB in terms of strength, weakness, opportunities and threats
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE II. SUMMARY OF SWOT ANALYSIS FOR UWB TECHNOLOGY
Internal
Strengths
Weaknesses
• License free
• Low power consumption
• Does not interfere with most of the existing radio
systems
• High level of multipath resolution
• Large bandwidth
• High data rate communication
• High processing gain in communication system
• Involve very short pulses
• Carrierless transmission property offers the advantage
of hardware simplicity.
• Work well with low SNR
• Low Probability of Intercept and Detection
• Resistance to jamming
• Penetration through different kinds of material
• Potential interference to the existing systems ( ex
Wimax in USA)
• Affect GPS and aircraft navigation radio equipment.
• Potential interference to the existing systems
• Very short pulses in UWB may take long time for
synchronization
External
Opportunities
Threats
• Robot guidance
• Tracking systems
• Medical and surgeries that require sub-millimeters of
accuracy
• Indoor localization systems
• UWB short pulses. This short pulses signals can be
utilized in non-communication purposes
• Sensor, positioning, and identiﬁcation network (SPIN)
• Industrial warehouses applications
• Shipboard environment application
• Military applications.
• Application for noisy environments
• Video streaming
• Commercially expensive compared to other technolo-
gies
• They are in some cases not totally immune to multipath
effects
• Design and implementation of UWB antennas can be
more challenging
to have a deep understating of UWB. A summary of SWOT
analysis is shown in Table II.
A. Strength
One advantage of using UWB is being licensed free because
of its low power. UWB is not classiﬁed as a radio equipment
as its low power signal does not interfere with most of the
existing radio systems [42]. In addition, UWB has a very high
level of multipath resolution because of its large bandwidth.
Large bandwidth provides frequency diversity that makes Time
Modulated Ultra WideBand (TM-UWB) signal resistant to the
multipath problems and interference [42]. Time Modulated
UWB has a low probability of interception and detection,
which it is used in some applications, particularly in the
military.
The large bandwidth is the main feature of the UWB wire-
less systems. This feature offers an improved channel capacity
and high data rate communication in digital communication
systems [43]. The channel capacity is deﬁned by Shannons
law, where is the channel capacity is proportional to the
bandwidth (B) and the log of Signal to noise ratio
S
N plus
one.
C = B log2

1 + S
N

(1)
In addition to the advantage of large bandwidth, it is
potential for high processing gain in communication systems.
Processing gain for real Direct-Sequence of UWB (DS-UWB)
modulation systems is deﬁned as two times ratio of noise
bandwidth at the front end of the receiver to the noise
bandwidth of symbol rate. Here is the formula of DS-UWB
processing gain [43]:
PG = 2 × Noise Bandwidth
Symbol Rate
(2)
The large processing gain offers a greater immunity distortion
and noise. It allows negative Signal to Interference and Noise
Ratio (SINR) to be recovered [43].
UWB signals have greater penetration of obstacles (such as
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

walls) than conventional signals, and they achieve same data
rate [44]. Furthermore, UWB transmissions involve very short
pulses, which have recently received signiﬁcant interest. Very
short pulses offer an advantage in terms of resolvability of
multipath components [44]. Many received signals in an envi-
ronment that are characterized by multipath is a superposition
of the delayed replicas of the signal. This has been avoided
in UWB because the reﬂection from objects and surfaces near
the path between transmitter and receiver tend to not overlap
in time because of the very short pulses of UWB. This means
UWB has a desirable direct resolvability of direct multipath
components.
UWB technologys carrierless transmission property offers
the advantage of hardware simplicity and small hardware.
UWB transceivers can be built with much simpler radio fre-
quency architecture than narrowband systems with fewer com-
ponents. Also, there is no need for power ampliﬁer because of
its low power consumption [44]. In general, UWB hardware is
considered to be simple and the hardware simplicity depends
on the application and operational scenario. For example, the
transmitter does not need Analog to Digital (A/D) converter,
digital pulse shaping ﬁlter, or equalizer to correct carrier phase
distortion [44].
B. Weakness
Although UWB has many strengths for different applica-
tions, it has some weakness. One of these weaknesses is the
possibility of interference with nearby systems [43]. In the
United States, the UWB frequency range for communication
applications is 3.1 to 10.6 GHz, which is operating in the
same frequencies as popular communication products such as
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX)
and digital TV. In some countries, it may also interfere
with some systems such as third-generation 3G wireless
systems [43]. There are some concerns that several UWB
devices may cause harmful interference to GPS and aircraft
navigation radio equipment [44]. To overcome those concerns,
different techniques have been developed to eliminate harmful
interference with other sensitive services, such as Detection
and Avoidance (DAA) [43].
Also interference may happen from the existing system to
the UWB system. The UWB systems signals may spread
over other bandwidths that contain existing frequency of
narrowband systems [44]. This interference can be elevated
by using Minimum Mean-Square Error (MMSE) multiuser
detection schemes to reject strong narrowband interference.
Although using very short pulses in UWB has many advan-
tages, the UWB receiver requires signal acquisition, synchro-
nization and tracking to be done with very high precision in
time relative to the pulse rate. These steps of processes are
time-consuming and take a long time to be performed [44].
There are some techniques for reducing this time such as using
preamble sequence for rapid acquisition.
C. Opportunities
UWB becomes a choice for many systems that require high
accuracy such in building robot guidance and tracking systems
to utilize its advantages. Furthermore, UWB is used for medi-
cal applications that require sub-millimeters of accuracy [15].
In addition, UWB is used in radars in order to improve their
high performance [45].
For indoor localization systems, there are multipath reﬂec-
tions from objects inside rooms, which negatively impact radio
signals. However UWB signals have time resolution, which
offers a high resolution positioning applications to solve the
multipath problems [43].
As mentioned before, UWB communication signals have
short pulses. Those short pulse signals can be utilized in non-
communication purposes [44]. For instance, the low power
UWB RFID tag transmitters have been used to locate objects
with an accuracy proportional to the inverse of the signal
bandwidth.
UWB could be beneﬁcial for industry and service providers
in many applications such as Sensor, Positioning, and Identi-
ﬁcation Network (SPIN) systems [46]. These systems need
a large number of devices (sensors and tags) in industrial
warehouses to transmit low-rate data combined with position
information. This allows the devices to operate over long
distance (around 100m) between mobile tags and sensors of
UWB.
There are some challenges for using Radio Frequency (RF)
operation for the shipboard environment. Using UWB and
network analyzer measurements offers good opportunities for
NLOS communication for indoor and on ships [44]. It allows
signals to propagate well aboard ships and around objects,
which provide reasonable accuracy to determine positions.
UWB is used in radar in order to improve its high perfor-
mance [45].
D. Threats
UWB usually does not have a negative impact on the
neighbor’s devices because there are some techniques that
are used to avoid the interference with other devices [15].
However, UWB is still commercially expensive compared to
other technologies (see [9] for further limitations).
While UWB systems are known to be robust against multi-
path reﬂection issues, they are not totally immune to multipath
effects [46]. One of these cases is when there is an extreme
ratio of link distance to antenna height. This may result in
signal losses and propagation delay that lasts to tens or even
hundreds of nanoseconds.
The design and implementation of antennas for UWB sys-
tems can be more challenging than the bandwidth and variable
conditions of operation [46]. This may add some limitations
to UWB systems in comparison with conventional RF.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Positioning is one of the most important and challenging
phases in navigation systems where different technologies have
been developed to improve performance. In this paper, we
presented an analytic study of UWB positioning, in which a
detailed and updated overview of UWB indoor positioning
techniques has been presented. Furthermore, we presented
a SWOT analysis of UWB technology, focusing mainly on
positioning applications, in which internal factors (strengths
and weaknesses) as well as external factors (opportunities
and threats) have been identiﬁed and analyzed. UWB systems
have emerged as one of the leading technologies for indoor
positioning and have been used in many more applications
than before.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This project was supported by NSTIP strategic technologies
program number (11- INF1855-02) in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Hightower and G. Borriello, “Location systems for ubiquitous comput-
ing,” IEEE computer, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 57–66, 2001, ISSN: 0018-9162.
[2] H. Huang and G. Gartner, A survey of mobile indoor navigation systems.
Springer, October 2010, chapter 20, pp. 305–319, ISBN: 978-3-642-
03293-6.
[3] H. Liu, H. Darabi, P. Banerjee, and J. Liu, “Survey of wireless indoor
positioning techniques and systems,” Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part C: Applications and Reviews, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 37, no. 6,
pp. 1067–1080, 2007, ISSN: 1094-6977.
[4] S. Ram and J. Sharf, “The people sensor: a mobility aid for the visually
impaired,” in Second International Symposium on Wearable Computers.
IEEE Society, October 1998, pp. 166–167.
[5] Y. Gu, A. Lo, and I. Niemegeers, “A survey of indoor positioning
systems for wireless personal networks,” Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 13–32, 2009, ISSN: 1553-877X.
[6] H. Wu, A. Marshall, and W. Yu, “Path planning and following algorithms
in an indoor navigation model for visually impaired,” in Internet
Monitoring and Protection, 2007. ICIMP 2007. Second International
Conference on.
IEEE Society, July 2007, pp. 38–38.
[7] M. Al-Ammar et al., “Comparative Survey of Indoor Positioning Tech-
nologies, Techniques, and Algorithms,” in Cyberworlds (CW), 2014
International Conference on.
IEEE Computer Society, October 2014,
pp. 1–8.
[8] M. Ghavami, L. B. Michael, and R. Kohno, Eds., Front MatterUltra
Wideband Signals and Systems in Communication Engineering.
John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, February 2006, ISBN: 9780470867532.
[9] K. Siwiak and D. McKeown, Eds., Ultra-Wideband Radio Technology.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2005, ISBN: 978-04-70-85-93-39.
[10] G. Cheng, “Accurate toa-based uwb localization system in coal mine
based on wsn,” Physics Procedia, vol. 24, pp. 534–540, 2012, ISSN:
1875-3892.
[11] A. Shahi, A. Aryan, J. West, C. Haas, and R. Haas, “Deterioration
of UWB positioning during construction,” Automation in Construction,
vol. 24, pp. 72–80, 2012, ISSN: 0926-5805.
[12] M. Segura, V. Mut, and C. Sisterna, “Ultra wideband indoor navigation
system,” IET Radar, Sonar & Navigation, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 402–411,
2012, ISSN: 1751-8792.
[13] E. Arias-de Reyna and U. Mengali, “A maximum likelihood UWB
localization algorithm exploiting knowledge of the service area layout,”
Wireless personal communications, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 1413–1426, 2013,
ISSN: 0929-6212.
[14] S. Krishnan, P. Sharma, Z. Guoping, and O. Woon, “A uwb based
localization system for indoor robot navigation,” in Ultra-Wideband,
2007. ICUWB 2007. IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE Society,
September 2007, pp. 77–82.
[15] U. Company, “Ubisense website,” 2009, URL: http://www.ubisense.net/
en/ [accessed: 2014-04-01].
[16] S. Cui, “Modulation and multiple access techniques for ultra-wideband
communication systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Cleveland State University,
2011.
[17] M. Kuhn, M. Mahfouz, J. Turnmire, Y. Wang, and A. Fathy, “A
multi-tag access scheme for indoor UWB localization systems used in
medical environments,” in Biomedical Wireless Technologies, Networks,
and Sensing Systems (BioWireleSS), 2011 IEEE Topical Conference on.
IEEE Society, January 2011, pp. 75–78.
[18] S. Al-Jazzar, A. Muchkaev, A. Al-Nimrat, and M. Smadi, “Low com-
plexity and high accuracy angle of arrival estimation using eigenvalue
decomposition with extension to 2D AOA and power estimation,”
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol.
2011, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2011, ISSN: 1687-1499.
[19] N. Reddy and B. Sujatha, “TDOA Computation Using Multicarrier
Modulation for Sensor Networks,” International Journal of Computer
Science & Communication Networks, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 85–90, 2011,
ISSN: 2249-5789.
[20] S. Gezici et al., “Localization via ultra-wideband radios: a look at posi-
tioning aspects for future sensor networks,” Signal Processing Magazine,
IEEE, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 70–84, 2005, ISSN: 1053-5888.
[21] J. Xu, M. Ma, and C. Law, “AOA Cooperative Position Localization,”
in Global Telecommunications Conference, 2008. IEEE GLOBECOM
2008. IEEE.
IEEE Society, November 2008, pp. 1–5.
[22] Y. Lee, “Weighted-Average Based AOA Parameter Estimations for LR-
UWB Wireless Positioning System,” IEICE transactions on communi-
cations, vol. 94, no. 12, pp. 3599–3602, 2011, ISSN: 1745-1345.
[23] A. Subramanian, “UWB Linear Quadratic Frequency Domain Frequency
Invariant Beamforming and Angle of Arrival Estimation,” in Vehicular
Technology Conference, 2007. VTC2007-Spring. IEEE 65th.
IEEE
Society, April 2007, pp. 614–618.
[24] E. Mok, L. Xia, G. Retscher, and H. Tian, “A case study on the
feasibility and performance of an UWB-AoA real time location system
for resources management of civil construction projects,” Journal of
Applied Geodesy, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 23–32, 2010, ISSN: 1862-9024.
[25] W. Gerok, M. El-Hadidy, S. El Din, and T. Kaiser, “Inﬂuence of the real
UWB antennas on the AoA estimation based on the TDoA localization
technique,” in Antennas and Propagation (MECAP), 2010 IEEE Middle
East Conference on.
IEEE Society, October 2010, pp. 1–6.
[26] J. Ch´oliz, M. Eguizabal, A. Hernandez-Solana, and A. Valdovinos,
“Comparison of Algorithms for UWB Indoor Location and Tracking
Systems,” in Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), 2011 IEEE
73rd.
IEEE Society, May 2011, pp. 1–5.
[27] G. Fischer, O. Klymenko, D. Martynenko, and H. Luediger, “An impulse
radio UWB transceiver with high-precision TOA measurement unit,” in
Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), 2010 International
Conference on.
IEEE Society, September 2010, pp. 1–8.
[28] P. Tome et al., “UWB-based Local Positioning System: From a small-
scale experimental platform to a large-scale deployable system,” in
Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), 2010 International
Conference on.
IEEE Society, September 2010, pp. 1–10.
[29] N. Rowe, A. Fathy, M. Kuhn, and M. Mahfouz, “A UWB transmit-only
based scheme for multi-tag support in a millimeter accuracy localization
system,” in Wireless Sensors and Sensor Networks (WiSNet), 2013 IEEE
Topical Conference on.
IEEE Society, January 2013, pp. 7–9.
[30] S. Wang et al., “System implementation study on RSSI based positioning
in UWB networks,” in Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), 2010
7th International Symposium on.
IEEE Society, September 2010, pp.
36–40.
[31] S. Pittet, V. Renaudin, B. Merminod, and M. Kasser, “UWB and MEMS
based indoor navigation,” Journal of Navigation, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 369–
384, 2008, ISSN: 0373-4633.
[32] T. Gigl, G. Janssen, V. Dizdarevic, K. Witrisal, and Z. Irahhauten,
“Analysis of a UWB Indoor Positioning System Based on Received
Signal Strength,” in Positioning, Navigation and Communication, 2007.
WPNC ’07. 4th Workshop on.
IEEE Society, March 2007, pp. 97–101.
[33] N. Kodippili and D. Dias, “Integration of ﬁngerprinting and trilateration
techniques for improved indoor localization,” in Wireless And Optical
Communications Networks (WOCN), 2010 Seventh International Con-
ference On.
IEEE Society, September 2010, pp. 1–6.
[34] L. Jiang, L. Hoe, and L. Loon, “Integrated UWB and GPS location
sensing system in hospital environment,” in Industrial Electronics and
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Applications (ICIEA), 2010 the 5th IEEE Conference on. IEEE Society,
June 2010, pp. 286–289.
[35] F. Cao and M. Li, “An Algorithm for UWB Signals Tracking Based
on Extended H Filter,” Physics Procedia, vol. 33, pp. 905–911, 2012,
ISSN: 1875-3892.
[36] J. Liu, Q. Wang, J. Xiong, W. Huang, and H. Peng, “Indoor and Outdoor
Cooperative Real-Time Positioning System,” Journal of Theoretical &
Applied Information Technology, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 1066–1073, 2013,
ISSN: 1992-8645.
[37] L. Mucchi, F. Trippi, and A. Carpini, “Ultra Wide Band real-time
location system for cinematic survey in sports,” in Applied Sciences
in Biomedical and Communication Technologies (ISABEL), 3rd Inter-
national Symposium on.
IEEE Society, November 2010, pp. 1–6.
[38] T. Deissler, M. Janson, R. Zetik, and J. Thielecke, “Infrastructureless
indoor mapping using a mobile antenna array,” in Systems, Signals and
Image Processing (IWSSIP), 2012 19th International Conference on.
IEEE Society, April 2012, pp. 36–39.
[39] J. Digel et al., “Integrator and Digitizer for a non-coherent IR-UWB
Receiver,” in Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems
(SiRF), 2013 IEEE 13th Topical Meeting on.
IEEE Society, January
2013, pp. 93–95.
[40] X. Jiang, H. Zhang, and W. Wang, “NLOS error mitigation with
information fusion algorithm for UWB ranging systems,” The Journal
of China Universities of Posts and Telecommunications, vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 22–29, 2012, ISSN: 1005-8885.
[41] S. Srimathi and P. Kannan, “Literature Survey for Performance evalu-
ation of various time hopping ultra-wideband communication system,”
International Journal of Scientiﬁc & Engineering Research, vol. 4, no. 2,
pp. 1–3, 2013, ISSN: 2229-5518.
[42] M. H¨am¨al¨ainen, V. Hovinen, and M. Latva-aho, “Survey to Ultra
Wideband Systems,” European Cooperation in the Field of Scientiﬁc
and Technical Research, vol. 262, pp. 1–7, 1999.
[43] R. Aiello and A. Batra, Eds., Ultra wideband systems: technologies and
applications.
Newnes-Elsevier, June 2006, ISBN: 978-0750678933.
[44] L. Miller, “Why uwb? a review of ultrawideband technology,” Tech.
Rep., 2003, technical Report to NETEX Project Ofﬁce, DARPA by Wire-
less Communication Technologies Group, National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, URL: http://www.ntis.gov/
search/product.aspx?ABBR=PB2012113101 [accessed: 2014-08-01].
[45] S. Ye, J. Chen, L. Liu, C. Zhang, and G. Fang, “A novel compact UWB
ground penetrating radar system,” in Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR),
2012 14th International Conference on.
IEEE Society, June 2012, pp.
71–75.
[46] D. Porcino and W. Hirt, “Ultra-wideband radio technology: potential and
challenges ahead,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 41, no. 7, pp.
66–74, 2003.
[47] F. Cao and M. Li, “An Algorithm for UWB Signals Tracking Based
on Extended H Filter,” Physics Procedia, vol. 33, pp. 905–911, 2012,
ISSN: 1875-3892.
[48] J. Liu, Q. Wang, J. Xiong, W. Huang, and H. Peng, “Indoor and Outdoor
Coperative Real-Time Positioning System,” Journal of Theoretical and
Applied Information Technology (JATIT), vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 1066–1073,
2012, ISSN: 1875-3892.
[49] “Realtime non-coherent UWB positioning radar with millimeter range
accuracy: theory and experiment,” Microwave Theory and Techniques,
IEEE Transactions, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 9–20, January 2010, ISSN: 0018-
9480.
[50] M. Tuchler, V. Schwarz, and A. Huber, “Location accuracy of an UWB
localization system in a multi-path environment,” in Ultra-Wideband,
2005. ICU 2005. 2005 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE
Society, September 2005, pp. 414–419.
[51] Y. Kilic, H. Wymeersch, A. Meijerink, M. Bentum, and W. Scan-
lon, “UWB device-free person detection and localization,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1303.4092, 2013.
[52] M. Mahfouz, M. Kuhn, Y. Wang, J. Turnmire, and A. Fathy, “Towards
sub-millimeter accuracy in UWB positioning for indoor medical envi-
ronments,” in Biomedical Wireless Technologies, Networks, and Sensing
Systems (BioWireleSS), 2011 IEEE Topical Conference on.
IEEE
Society, January 2011, pp. 83–86.
[53] M. McCracken, M. Bocca, and N. Patwari, “Joint ultra-wideband and
signal strength-based through-building tracking for tactical operations,”
in Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks (SECON),
2013 10th Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference on. IEEE
Society, June 2013, pp. 309–317.
[54] H. Jiang, Y. Zhang, H. Cui, and C. Liu, “Fast three-dimensional node
localization in UWB wireless sensor network using propagator method
digest of technical papers,” in Consumer Electronics (ICCE), 2013 IEEE
International Conference on. IEEE Society, January 2013, pp. 627–628.
[55] D. Yang, H. Li, Z. Zhang, and G. Peterson, “Compressive sensing based
sub-mm accuracy UWB positioning systems: A space–time approach,”
Digital Signal Processing, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 340–354, 2012, ISSN:
1051-2004.
[56] R. Mirza, A. Tehseen, and A. Kumar, “An indoor navigation approach
to aid the physically disabled people,” in Computing, Electronics and
Electrical Technologies (ICCEET), 2012 International Conference on.
IEEE Society, March 2012, pp. 979–983.
[57] C.
Brown,
“Real-time
location
of
Jena’s
buses
and
trams
with
Ubisense
RTLS,”
April
2010,
ubisense
Report,
URL:
http://www.ubisense.net/en/news-and-events/press-releases/real-time-
location-of-jenas-buses-and-trams-with-ubisense-rtls.html
[accessed:
2014-09-01].
[58] M. Baum, “RTL in Longueuil selects bus yard management solution pro-
vided by Solotech, ISR Transit and Ubisense,” Oct 2011, ubisense Re-
port, URL: http://www.ubisense.net/en/news-and-events/press-releases/
rtl-in-longueuil-selects-bus-yard.html [accessed: 2014-09-01].
[59] C. Brown, “Ubisense launches Intrinsically Safe location tracking tags
for personnel safety in the Oil and Gas industry,” May 2010, ubisense
Report,
URL:
http://www.ubisense.net/en/news-and-events/press-
releases/ubisense-launches-intrinsically-safe-location-tracking-tags-in-
the-oil-and-gas-industry.html [accessed: 2014-09-01].
[60] U. Cambridge, “Ubisense tag combines uwb and gps for ’best-of-both
worlds’ tracking named as csr location summit fast-pitch ﬁnalist,”
Oct. 2010, ubisense Report, URL: http://www.ubisense.net/en/news-
and-events/press-releases/ubisense-tag-combines-uwb-and-gps-.html
[accessed: 2014-09-01].
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Integrating Smart Items and Cloud Computing in Healthcare Scenarios 
Sarfaraz Ghulam, Johannes Schubert, Gerrit Tamm, Vladimir Stantchev 
Institute of Information Systems (IIS) 
SRH Hochschule Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
e-mail: opsit@srh-hochschule-berlin.de 
 
Abstract-Use of cloud computing in healthcare is a promising 
trend, particularly in utilization of smart items. Access, 
affordability and quality to proper healthcare is a great 
challenge in world society. With the utilization of smart 
sensors, there are possibilities to improve the quality of 
healthcare services whenever needed. Hence, such smart 
items services lead to economic advantages for the whole 
healthcare system. Keeping in mind these opportunities as 
well as challenges such as security or legal issues, it is 
important to bring healthcare and IT together. As a result, 
healthcare business processes need to be modeled in order to 
provide 
IT 
solutions 
tailored 
for 
practice-oriented 
applications. In this paper, we present a three-level 
architecture for a smart healthcare infrastructure. Our 
approach is based on recent literature work and results from 
conducted expert interviews with healthcare specialists and 
IT professionals. To demonstrate the applicability of this 
architecture model, we provide an example use-case as a 
template for any kind of smart sensor-based healthcare 
infrastructure. 
Keywords-sensors; cloud computing; smart healthcare; 
business processes; reference model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
During the time of its emergence, it was believed 
that cloud computing might not be successful for long. 
But against all the predictions made by IT pundits, 
cloud computing turned into a big success and kept 
benefitting different sectors which is continue till 
today [1]. Cloud computing is the focus of interest for 
institutions with different backgrounds, including 
pharmaceuticals, healthcare outfits and medical 
researches where institutions are highly engage in 
finding cure and solutions for chronic diseases. 
Integration of cloud computing with smart items which 
allows healthcare professionals to monitor the 
patients’ treatment is a significant achievement, which 
was difficult a decade ago. One reason for its success 
is the economical features. Sophisticated Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) is often 
expensive and not affordable for medium size 
businesses including hospitals, where smaller budget 
hinder the adaptation of latest ICT [2]. Contrary to 
other ICT, cloud computing and smart items are 
relatively cost effective and easily adaptable [3]. 
Adopting cloud services can relatively reduce the 
burden of infrastructure and save the maintenance cost 
and 
provide 
relieve 
while 
maintaining 
the 
infrastructure. The usage of smart items like 
collaborative radio frequency identification (RFID) 
solutions in the textile and medical industry have 
already shown a positive impact, such as continuous 
quality improvement [4]. Furthermore, patients can 
privately maintain it in a private environment which is 
supportive to medical adherence. A report issued by 
world health organization (WHO) states that there is a 
majority of patients who do not adhere with their 
medical prescriptions as they are supposed to which 
results in delay or failure in the treatment of the 
diseases [5]. In such scenarios smart healthcare items 
can support in monitoring patient adherence and 
support the better treatments by providing solutions to 
such challenges like smart pill boxes, which come up 
 
Figure 1. OpSIT architecture prototype 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

with solutions like opening at accurate time and 
recording of pill time. Furthermore smart healthcare 
items like physiological parameter monitors can 
automatically record the health parameter and update it 
to the cloud, which become available for patient and 
the healthcare staff who can make comparison with 
record history and can take corrective decisions on 
behalf it. 
While the economic opportunities of cloud 
computing in healthcare are quite promising and often 
subjects of recent research [6], optimization of smart 
items infrastructure for healthcare processes is 
underrepresented 
in 
research 
[7]. 
There 
exist 
approaches that define composability for such 
embedded architecture [8] with a specific focus on 
dependability in distributed environments [9]. In this 
regard the approach of architectural translucency [10] 
[11] aims to offer standardized ways of controlling 
such architectural properties via an architecture-wide 
view while using standardized measures such as 
replication [12] [13]. Applications range from position 
sensing [14] to project portfolio management [15] and 
consider applications in the healthcare domain 
specifically [16] [17]. 
The project “Optimaler Einsatz von Smart-Items-
Technologien in der Stationären Pflege”, Germany 
(OpSIT) builds on these existing works and is 
conducting literature research, workshops, and expert 
interviews with healthcare specialists as well as IT 
professionals to model reference processes for 
practice-oriented cloud applications in the healthcare 
domain. Figure 1 shows an overview of the working 
mechanism of the project. In smart environment, smart 
sensors are responsible for monitoring different vital 
signs of human health, and upload and update it to the 
respective cloud server where the data become 
available and accessible for individuals who are 
involved in the treatment process or directly related to 
the patient. 
The aim of this paper is to introduce an 
architectural approach for smart items in healthcare 
environments that is being developed as part of the 
research objectives of the OpSIT project. In Section II, 
we will introduce the benefits of sensors in healthcare. 
Subsequently, we will explain how sensors are used in 
cloud computing environments (Section III). As a 
consequence, in Section IV, we will define eHealth in 
the context of cloud computing. Section V presents our 
architecture model, including an application example 
and how it can be modified for individual purposes. 
Managerial implications will be presented in Section 
VI for smart homecare and in Section VII for smart 
stationary care. We will finish the paper with a 
compact conclusion in Section VIII. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The use of smart items has successfully been 
practiced in the hospitals and other healthcare 
institutes. Nowadays, sensors are embedded in a 
variety of instruments for use at home, elderly houses, 
clinics, and hospitals and providing a critical 
evaluation of physiological, physical and mental state 
of the patients. Most of the diagnosis will not be 
possible nor affordable without using even simple 
sensors, such as thermometer, blood glucose monitors, 
electrocardiography, electro-encephalography etc.  
These sensors are composed of transducers and 
capable of detecting electrical, thermal, optical, 
chemical, genetic and other signals with physiological 
origin.  Signal processing algorithms can help to 
calculate, forecast and measure different features of 
human health based on input from these sensors. 
Measuring the vital state of a patient is also important 
for devices like pacemakers and insulin pumps [18]. 
The dimensions which are helping in advancing 
computer technologies in healthcare can be structured 
as follows: 
 
Sensing: Involvement of new, effective and cheap 
technologies with the ability to diagnose and 
provide immediate results and solutions to the 
healthcare and public sectors on promising basis. 
For example, a non contact electrocardiogram can 
be helpful in detecting the symptoms like heart 
diseases, [19]. 
 
Cost: During past few years, mostly available 
sensors 
were 
quite 
expensive 
and 
hardly 
affordable for small clinics. But now, the 
revolution in this industry and availability of 
cheap sensors, such as RFID, made it possible for 
clinics to afford it even making personalized 
treatment possible. 
 
Size: The sensors are quite handy and easily 
adjustable in pockets which facilitate to carry 
them anywhere. These devices are available in 
different shapes and types like blood pressure 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

monitors, pulse reading wrist watches, blood 
glucose monitors, etc. 
 
Data: Data collected by the sensors are relatively 
in mass, and require proper evaluation by experts 
from time to time. The only solution in this regard 
is to transfer it to the cloud, which is the best 
solution to handle and maintain the big data. 
 
Cloud services: The three fundamental cloud 
services models which are available to any type of 
businesses are also available to healthcare to 
support the industry in their information systems 
management [19]: 
a) IaaS: Enables the healthcare service provider 
to rent the fundamental cloud resources like 
storing, processing, and networking. 
b) PaaS: Helps the healthcare service providers to 
deploy their own or rented applications, software, 
libraries and tools on cloud infrastructure. 
c) SaaS: Configured software running on cloud 
infrastructure is available where healthcare 
institutes can subscribe under the management of 
the cloud contractor. 
III. 
CLOUD COMPUTING AND SMART ITEMS 
A large variety of definitions for cloud computing 
exists, but there is no single universal upon agreed 
definition. Authors and experts define cloud according 
to their own understandings. The most commonly used 
definition comes from NIST (National institutes of 
standard and technology) “Cloud computing is a model 
for enabling convenient, on-demand network access to  
a shared pool of configurable computing resources 
that can be rapidly provisioned and released with 
minimal management effort or service providers 
interaction“ 
e.g., 
networks, 
servers, 
storage, 
applications, and services that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management 
efforts or service providers interaction [20]. The 
utilization of the word "cloud" gives reference to the 
two essential concepts [21]: 
 
Abstraction: The notion of the technology is not 
disclosed to the users and developers. Unspecified 
physical systems are used to run the applications, 
location of the data is undisclosed, further it 
allows to delegate the administration of the 
infrastructure while maintaining ubiquitous access 
of the users.  
 
Virtualization: It is a pool of resource sharing. 
Centralized storage capability offers storage 
provisioning and can be done when required. The 
cost model is similar to utility model. Moreover it 
offers multi tenancy, while providing dynamic 
resource allocation. 
When we speak about cloud computing in 
healthcare, it becomes very obvious that like for other 
industries, healthcare can also take full advantage out 
of it. Internally it can ease the burden of the 
infrastructure and number of people associated with it 
[22] and allows the institutes to focus on their core 
competencies. Synergistically cloud computing and 
smart items are helping patients, clinics and insurance 
providers to access the health records of the patient 
whenever needed. As a result, the development in 
smart 
healthcare 
technologies 
such 
as 
mobile 
healthcare, wireless sensors and cloud computing 
lessen the requirement for visiting medical facilities 
and consultation, which can be remotely fulfilled and 
significantly reduce the manpower requirements, while 
providing quality treatment to the patient by making 
remote treatment and consultancy possible and 
achievable [19]. However, the implementation of such 
technologies implicates different challenges such as 
security and privacy issues [23], technological 
restrictions, or management and governance issues [6]. 
On one side, it's highly important to understand the 
evolving business processes occurring in healthcare 
environments before developing a cloud and smart 
items infrastructure. On the other side the technical 
possibilities and requirements needs to be understood 
to create an architectural approach for smart 
healthcare. 
Wireless sensors can easily be deployed in any 
environment and with the help of cloud computing, the 
information can be gathered and saved from these 
sensors at any time. Smart devices are evolving at a 
rapid pace in health monitoring, while meeting the 
needs and demands of assisted living and healthcare 
providers. This system focuses on the different 
features for a mobile healthcare system. 
The active smart systems with the help of mobile 
devices collect physiological signals such as body 
temperature, pulse rate, etc. Once the data collection is 
completed, it will be transmitted through Wi-Fi or 
another compatible system network, which will be 
stored, synchronized, and shared instantaneously on a 
server. 
Health 
symptoms 
can 
be 
diagnosed 
continuously and immediately. The collected health 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

data can be consolidated and accessed with a cloud 
service in order that health professionals can analyze 
the information and continue patient treatment on the 
conclusion of the collected data. 
IV. 
EHEALTH AND CLOUD GOVERNANCE 
WHO defined health as a "state of complete, 
physical, mental and social well-being and not merely 
the absence of infirmity" [24]. As a consequence, 
healthcare can be defined as the maintenance of 
physical and mental well-being, supported by available 
medical services. Finally, eHealth is the maintenance 
of physical and mental well-being while employing 
computer technology resulting in improved and better 
quality of services. 
Cloud Governance denotes the idea of applying 
corporate governance concepts to the world of cloud 
computing [25]. This can be of particular relevance for 
healthcare, due to the complex requirements regarding 
data 
privacy 
and 
information 
security 
[26]. 
Furthermore, aspects of performance evaluation [27] 
or ensuring the reliability of systems, e.g., through 
replication [12] [13]. 
V. 
COMMUNICATION IN A SMART ITEM ENVIRONMENT 
Communication among the devices is empowered 
by proper communication channels between them. In 
the past, when sensors’ connectivity was isolated to an 
integrated user interface, it was difficult to connect 
with. Contrary to that, modern day sensors are capable 
of connecting with a large number of interfaces, such 
as wired, RS 232, USB and Ethernet as well as 
wireless ones, including Bluetooth, Zigbee, UWB for 
short distance and Wi-Fi, radio frequency, or ZigBee 
for longer range [18] [28]. Some devices come with 
the capability of connecting directly to Smartphones 
and computers allowing sensors to save data in the 
non-volatile memory and make them available for later 
usage.   
It is a recursive process, where the respective 
sensors remain active and observe even minor changes 
in the pattern of human body which human cannot 
easily observe. As shown in Figure 2, this process is 
divided in three different levels. In each level, devices 
are responsible to perform the assigned tasks and 
forwarding the data to the further level, or triggering 
directly an output process. The entire process 
accomplish in a short period of time (in nanoseconds) 
making it very fast while helping human to have good 
control over their health and take corrective measures 
and steps as soon as possible. 
In general, Figure 2 shows the process flow 
modeled with Business Process Modeling Notation 
(BPMN) based on the working mechanism of smart 
 
Figure 2. BPMN Model of process steps of the application scenario  
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

sensors architecture from the OpSIT project. As 
BPMN is an established way to analyze and design 
operational process flows regarding multiple kinds of 
resources [29] it is utilized in the presented 
architecture which aims to enhance current healthcare 
processes. Moreover, the architecture model can be 
seen as a process flow template for any specific use-
case, importing it and revising its tasks with modeling 
software such as Modelio. 
As a very basic example use-case, we consider a 
blood pressure measurement process in home care. To 
analyze the traditional process, it is important to keep 
in mind three different levels matching with the levels 
presented in our approach. Hence, the “smart items 
level” can be entitled in the traditional process as 
“measuring device level” where a patient uses the 
blood pressure gauge that directly outputs the data on a 
display. The “gateway level” can be compared with a 
“short-term storage level” where the patient will be 
manually note down the value shown on the display. 
The “cloud level” illustrates permanent access and 
evaluation of the data, while its equivalent in the 
traditional process may be called “evaluation level”, 
when the doctor receives the patients’ data in order to 
evaluate whether medical intervention is necessary or 
not. This simple comparison points out the disruption 
within the traditional process flow. Obviously, every 
level in the traditional process ends with an output task 
and is not directly connected to the next level. 
Analyzing this problem is made possible by 
considering the proposed BPMN model even at the 
stage of modeling the status quo process. 
VI. 
SMART HOMECARE 
Mobile networks give rapid access to the patient 
data provided by the servers of the healthcare cloud 
computing environment. 
Smart healthcare items benefits are broad range 
and dual natured (benefiting healthcare providers as 
well as the patients). These are the physically 
interconnected hardware performing 
their tasks 
seamlessly through a network. For 
healthcare 
providers, it is valuable for several reasons: At first, it 
reduces the number of labor due to the replacement of 
human based monitoring. Moreover, it reduces the 
chance of human error. Secondly, wearable sensors are 
capable of sensing even very small changes in vital 
signs and recording it, which a human cannot easily 
observe, such as pulse and blood oxygen level. 
Thirdly, on-time measurement can help in saving lives 
while collected health data of the patient stored in the 
cloud can support in decision making process 
whenever needed as enabling the doctor in making 
well informed decisions. And last but not least human 
physicians will be able to get valuable assistance from 
the "electronic physician" [30]. 
Patients will be benefitted in several ways. They 
can get quality healthcare treatment at home within 
their own private environment while living close to 
their family members while feeling more comfortable 
and relaxed resulting in less mental stress. Other 
significant 
factors 
involved 
are 
dignity 
and 
convenience which are highly supported while the 
patient gets treatment at home. 
VII. 
SMART STATIONARY CARE 
Most of the smart items available in the healthcare 
sector can be utilized in stationary care scenarios as 
well. Due to cost pressure, hospitals as well as 
intensive care units or other patient care facilities, are 
facing challenges like less financial resources. As a 
result, reduction of labor cost becomes the critical 
criterion for the implementation of smart items 
infrastructure in a stationary setting. 
According to a study conducted by the European 
Commission, the large majority (81%) of the hospitals 
within the EU are connected to the internet and two 
third (66%) of all surveyed hospitals have an in-house 
wireless infrastructure, an increase of twelve percents 
points within two years. Moreover, most of the used IT 
services are managed in-house which means that 
qualified IT staff is generally available [31]. 
Consequently, the basic infrastructure for smart items 
implementation is already provided in the majority of 
hospitals. The ongoing challenge is the integration of 
IT professionals and medical experts to realize smart 
items solutions supporting healthcare processes in a 
proper way. 
VIII. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Cloud computing based smart healthcare solutions 
and stationary items can play a vital role in improving 
the quality of health services in near future by 
remarkably supporting care staff in fulfilling their 
tasks in a well managed manner. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Wireless 
communication 
channels 
between 
sensors, 
gateways 
and 
other 
devices 
enables 
continuous data transfer to the cloud and making it 
available for doctors, care staff and patient to access 
the health status and maintain the records time to time. 
Hence, 
synergistic 
combinations 
among 
smart 
healthcare solutions and cloud help the doctors and 
other care staff in making highly informed decision 
and produce better output with quality of care service 
provided. 
Understanding healthcare processes and modeling 
them for IT application is an inevitable task to create 
practice-oriented cloud solutions with the aim of 
providing high quality smart healthcare services. The 
approach presented in this paper can be used as a basic 
design for further developments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This publication is based on the research project 
“OpSIT” which received financial funding from the 
ministry 
of 
education, 
science, 
research 
and 
technology (BMBF) under the funding sign 16SV6048 
within the program „IKT 2020 – Forschung für 
Innovationen“ and by the German Federal Ministry of 
Economics 
and 
Technology 
through 
project 
PrevenTAB (KF3144902DB3). The authors are 
responsible for the content.  
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Sultan, "Making use of cloud computing for 
healthcare provision:Opportunities and challenges," 
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 
34, no. 2, pp. 177-184, 2014. 
[2] European Commission, "Benchmarking deployment of 
eHealth services," Luxembourg, 2013. 
[3] Y. Han, "On the clouds: a new way of computing," 
Information Technology and Libraries, vol. 29, no. 2, 
pp. 87-92, 2013. 
[4] C.M. Birkmeyer et al., "Will Electronic Order Entry 
Reduce Health Care Costs?," Eff Clin Pract., vol. 5, no. 
2, pp. 67-74, 2002. 
[5] World Health Organization, "Adherence to long-term 
therapies: evidence for action," Geneva, Study ISBN 
9241545992, 2003. 
[6] A. M.-H. Kuo, "Opportunities and challenges of cloud 
computing to improve health care services," Journal of 
medical Internet research, vol. 3, no. 13, 2011. 
[7] Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, 
"Technical Report TR-08-05," Harvard University, 
2005. 
[8] M. Werner et al., "Composability concept for 
dependable embedded systems," in Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Dependable Embedded 
Systems in conjuction with SRDS, 2003. 
[9] P. Ibach et al., "CERO: CE RObots Community," IEE 
Proceedings Software, vol. 152, no. 5, pp. 210-214, 
2013. 
[10] V. Stantchev, Architectural Translucency, 8th ed. 
Berlin: GITO mbH Verlag, 2008. 
[11] V. Stantchev and M. Malek, "Architectural translucency 
in service-oriented architectures," IEE Proceedings-
Software, vol. 153, no. 1, pp. 31-37, 2006. 
[12] V. Stantchev, "Effects of replication on web service 
performance in WebSphere," International Computer 
Science Institute, Berkeley, 2008-03, 2008. 
[13] V. Stantchev and M. Malek, "Addressing web service 
performance by replication at the operating system 
level," in Internet and Web Applications and Services, 
2008, pp. 696-701. 
[14] P. Ibach, V. Stantchev, and C. Keller, "DAEDALUS–A 
Peer-to-Peer Shared Memory System for Ubiquitous 
Computing," in Euro-Par 2006 Parallel Processing, 
2006, pp. 961-970. 
[15] V. Stantchev, M.R. Franke, and A. Discher, "Project 
portfolio management systems: Business services and 
web services," in Fourth International Conference on 
Internet and Web Applications and Services, 2009, pp. 
171-176. 
[16] V. Stantchev, "Intelligent systems for optimized 
operating rooms," in New Directions in Intelligent 
Interactive Multimedia Systems and Services - 2. Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2009, pp. 443-453. 
[17] V. Stantchev, "Enhancing health care services with 
mixed reality systems," in The Engineering of Mixed 
Reality Systems. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, 2009, ch. 
17, pp. 337-356. 
[18] J.G. Ko et al., "Wireless Sensor Networks for 
Healthcare," in Proceedings of the IEEE 98.11, 2010, 
pp. 1947-1960. 
[19] E.-M. Fong and W.-Y. Chung, "Mobile Cloud-
Computing-Based Healthcare Service by Noncontact 
ECG Monitoring," Sensors, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 16451-
16473, 2013. 
[20] NIST. (2011) The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing. Special Publication 800-145. 
[21] B. Sosinsky, Cloud computing Bible. Indiana: Willey, 
2011. 
[22] Hitachi Data Systems, "How to Improve Healthcare 
with Cloud Computing," California, 2012. 
[23] J. Schubert et al., "Datenschutzrechtliche 
Rahmenbedingungen für die Datenerhebung durch 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

AAL-Infrastruktur bei der Pflege," in Wohnen–Pflege–
Teilhabe–"Besser leben durch Technik", Berlin, 2014. 
[24] World Health Organization. (1948, Apr.) WHO 
website. [Online]. 
http://www.who.int/about/definition/en/print.html 
(Accessed: 20 September 2014) 
[25] K. Petruch, V. Stantchev, and G. Tamm, "A survey on 
IT-governance aspects of cloud computing," 
International Journal of Web and Grid Services, vol. 7, 
no. 3, pp. 268-303, 2011. 
[26] S. Dzombeta et al., "Governance of Cloud Computing 
Services for the Life Sciences," IT Professional, vol. 
16, no. 4, pp. 30-37, 2014. 
[27] V. Stantchev, "Performance evaluation of cloud 
computing offerings," in Advanced Engineering 
Computing and Applications in Sciences, 2009, pp. 
187-192. 
[28] J.-S. Lee, Y.-W. Su, and C.-C. Shen, "A Comparative 
Study of Wireless Protocols: Bluetooth, UWB, ZigBee, 
and Wi-Fi," in The 33rd Annual Conference of the 
IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (IECON), Taipei, 
2007, pp. 46-51. 
[29] W.M.P. van der Aalst et al., "Business process 
management: A survey," in BPM 2003 Proceedings, 
Eindhoven, 2003, pp. 1-12. 
[30] J.A. Stankovic et al., "Wireless Sensor Networks for In-
Home Healthcare: Potential and Challenges," in High 
confidence medical device software and systems 
(HCMDSS) workshop, Virginia, 2005, pp. 2-3. 
[31] European Commission, "European Hospital Survey: 
Benchmarking Deployment of eHealth Services," 
Brussels, 2014. 
[32] M.H. Baeg et al., "Building a Smart Home Environment 
for Service Robots Based on RFID and Sensor 
Networks," in International Conference on Control, 
Automation and Systems, Seoul, 2007, pp. 1078-1082. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The Impact of Link Lengths on Energy Consumption in Wireless Sensor Networks
Knut Øvsthus1, Espen Nilsen1 
1. Dep. Electrical Engineering 
Bergen University College 
Bergen, Norway 
kovs@hib.no, espen.nilsen.no@gmail.com 
Anne-Lena Kampen1,2, Øivind Kure2 
2. ITEM, NTNU 
Trondheim, Norway 
alk@hib.no, okure@item.ntnu.no 
 
Abstract— Conservation of energy is one of the main 
challenges in designing a wireless sensor network (WSN). The 
reason is that these large scaled networks cannot be arranged, 
configured, or 
maintained manually. Thus, automated 
deployment and configuration are required. One important 
factor determining the total energy consumption is the network 
topology. This article evaluates the relation between the 
maximum distance (link lengths) between the nodes in a WSN 
and the total energy consumed. The optimal topology for the 
two most commonly used medium access control (MAC) 
protocols were found. A WSN based on a Time Division 
Multiple Access (TDMA) protocol is limited by the maximum 
available or allowed emitted radio power. Thus, the criterion 
for optimal link lengths is related to the expected number of 
transmissions over the links. By including the retransmissions 
over the links we found an optimal internode distance. A 
Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA) based WSN, on the 
other hand, is limited by the consumed energy of the 
overhearing nodes. In an analysis including only the 
overhearing nodes, the link lengths should be as short as 
possible and the connectivity of the network limits the link 
length used. However, we found that in a sparsely populated 
WSN, the total energy consumption increased for shorter link 
lengths as they were decreased from the optimal link length. 
Keywords; WSN; Energy Efficiency; Multi-Hop Routing; 
Hop Length; Network’s Life Time. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A typical wireless sensor network (WSN) consists of 
several battery powered autonomous devices. The devices 
are equipped with a unit for sensing targeted environmental 
attributes 
and 
a 
communication 
unit 
that 
enables 
communication with a designated node, that provide data 
collection (sink). The communication capability of a sensor 
node mainly serves two tasks: transmitting the sensor data 
generated by the node and relaying packets on behalf of 
other nodes. This article focuses on the transmission and 
transport of data packets through the WSN.  
The characteristics of radio units in a WSN differ from 
traditional radios. Many find it strange that the receiver 
consumes approximately the same amount of energy 
receiving (RX) a packet as the sender consumes in 
transmitting (TX) the packet. The reason is the low power 
emitted from the sender, as explained in [1][2].  The 
datasheet of the RF Transceiver CC2420 [3] verifies the 
statement. Due to the equality in energy consumption, it is 
very important to reduce the number of overhearing nodes. 
Overhearing nodes are in the reception range of the sender, 
but they are not the destination or next hop node. However, 
they learn this after receiving the packet and analyzing the 
packet’s Medium Access Protocol (MAC) address. The 
conclusion in [4] was that for a WSN using a Carrier Sense 
Multiple Access (CSMA) protocol the energy consumption 
is dominated by the overhearing nodes. In a WSN using the 
time division multiple access (TDMA) protocol it was found 
[4] that the distance between two communicating nodes (the 
terms internode distance and link lengths are also used) 
should be as long as feasible. Alternative solution would 
include for example a relay node. It would consume much 
energy during reception and retransmission. 
Based on published data, this article first proposes a 
function that relates the packet delivery ratio (PDR) and the 
distance between two communicating nodes. Next, an 
expression is derived for the expected number of 
transmissions required along a path. Simulations are used 
for validating and comparing the statistical result. Finally, 
we analyzed a 2-D WSN. Following the randomly node 
deployment, a routing protocol defines the topology. The 
routing protocol had the core functionality of RPL [5] with 
an object function [6] that limited the candidate link 
according to a link quality requirement. We used the 
expected number of transmissions as requirement. Finally, 
the energy consumption in a WSN with different link 
lengths is found for WSN using CSMA and TDMA. We 
found that both protocols have an optimum internode 
distance. 
The novelty of the article is a more realistic function 
relating the packet loss probability and the node distance. 
Currently, most publications are based on a model where the 
packet loss probability is zero if the node distance is less 
than the transmission range, and if the mode distance is 
greater the losses are 100%. Although this is not a good 
model, it is used mainly due to a lack of alternatives. The 
second contribution is that the model is applied for 
determine the optimum link distance in WSNs using TDMA 
and CSMA. 
The paper first presents related works, and then the 
model for packet losses is introduced and applied for 
assessing packet losses over a single path. Next, the model 
is applied for a real WSN, where energy optimum link 
lengths are found for a WSN using TDMA and a WSM 
using CSMA. Finally, the paper presents the conclusion.  
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

II. 
RELATED WORK 
Energy saving in WSN is vital for the operation of the 
network and many publications have assessed this issue. This 
article revisits the challenges addressed in [4]. In [4], no 
lower optimum transmission range was found for a WSN 
using a CSMA MAC protocol. Another result was that in a 
WSN using a TDMA MAC protocol, the transmission 
should be as long as possible and no upper limit was found. 
In addition to the related publications presented in [4], this 
section supplements related works.  
Several publications have addressed the topic of 
transmission power in WSN. The conclusion found in the 
survey [7] was that the transmission power should be as low 
as possible to reduce the energy consumption in overhearing 
nodes. This conclusion has been the starting point of several 
publications on transmission power control. Several earlier 
publications have stated the opposite conclusion, as in [8]. It 
lists twelve reasons for having long internode distances 
(using high transmission power). One reason is that longer 
hops are more efficient as they are closer to the Euclidean 
distance between source node and sink. The same results are 
found in [9][10], where sparsely populated random networks 
were shown to cause long paths. Our simulation confirms 
these results. A general observation regarding transmission 
power is that the conclusion depends on whether the 
assessment has included all effects that determine the total 
energy consumption. The effects are the physical radio, the 
link quality, the MAC layer, and the routing layer. 
Furthermore, the conclusion depends on the technology used, 
for example which MAC technology that is used. The 
conclusion of [8] is valid for a TDMA, but as the MAC layer 
is not included in the assessment the conclusion is not valid 
for a CSMA. However, the conclusion found in [7] is valid 
for CSMA as the overhearing nodes dominate the total 
energy consumption. 
Statistical analyses of WSN paths are presented in several 
publications [11]-[14]. Several of these articles consider path 
reliability under high traffic loads where the queuing of 
packets is included in the intermediate nodes. Our analysis is 
of WSNs with low traffic load, which is a valid assumption 
for many WSN that reports data at a low duty cycle.  
Another contribution of this article is the proposal of 
applying a Fermi-Dirac function for expressing the relation 
between PDR and distance between the two communicating 
nodes. Based on this model we derive an expression for the 
losses along a path in a WSN. The model for the link 
properties was also used in assessing an ordinary randomly 
deployed WSN. We found that the Fermi-Dirac function was 
proposed as a function relating the packet losses and 
Receiver Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) in [15]. Our 
proposal is to use this function for relating distance and 
PDR. 
III. 
PACKET LOSS RATE FOR A LINK 
The performance of the individual radio links determines 
much of the overall network performance in a WSN. This 
section presents the fundamental performance issues related 
to a single radio link. The radio used follows the 
characteristics of the RF Transceiver CC2420 [3].  
Some publications present measured performance of 
sensor nodes [15]-[18], like the PDR as a function of 
distance. The observed relation between packet loss and 
RSSI are presented in [15]. In [15], the Fermi-Dirac 
function is proposed as a function relating the packet losses 
and RSSI. Here, we propose to use the same function for 
relating the 
PDR and the distance between two 
communicating nodes:  

 ( )  
 
   
    
  


Figure 1 show data extracted form [17] and the 
approximated function. The internode distance is x, and x0 
and x1 are fitting parameters. The PDR1, for a single trial of 
transmitting a packet between two nodes is: PDR1(x) = f(x). 
The packet loss rate (PLR) is PLR1(x) = 1 – f(x).  
Radio links are made more robust by retransmitting 
packets that are not acknowledged. However, the number of 
retransmissions has to be limited. Without an upper limit, a 
high number of retransmissions depletes the node’s energy 
and causes large, unpredictable delays over the links.  
Therefore, a maximum number, m, of transmission trials are 
permitted each packet before the sender discards it. This 
means that the sender tries to retransmit the packet a 
maximum of (m-1) times. Based on the PDR1 for a single 
packet, it is possible to estimate the PDR(m) of a link: 
PDR(m) = p1*Sum[ (1-p1)i,{i, 0, m-1}] = 1- (1- p1)m 
(2) 
where p1 = PDR1 and the summation of the series is written 
using the notation:  Sum[ai,,{i, 1,m-1}] = a1 + a2 + …+ am-1. 
Solving for the packet loss rate, PLR(m), over the link:  
PLR(m) = (1- p1)m 
IV. 
PACKET ERROR RATE FOR A PATH 
A WSN is a two dimensional (2-D) network as shown in 
the example in Figure 2. Each node, depicted as blue dots, 
may produce data destined for the sink located in the lower 
left corner. As can be seen in this example WSN, not all 
nodes were directly connected to the sink and they required 
 
Figure 1. Packet delivery ratio (PDR) as a function of distance between 
sender and receiver. The red dots are measured data adopted from [17]. 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

help of neighboring nodes to relay their packets. The pattern 
of arrows was found by a routing protocol. Each link was 
chosen among a set of candidate links. Routing is explained 
in the next section.  
In this section, we present the results of data packet 
transmission along a single path. This one-dimensional 
network (1-D network) of N nodes is illustrated in Figure 3.  
In our assessment, the data-producing node, Node1, was to 
the left and the sink (the destination) was to the right. 
Between these two nodes were a number of relaying nodes. 
Their only task was to relay the data packet produced by 
Node1.  
Our goal was to forward a data packet using as little 
energy as possible. The comparison was between different 
node arrangements using different link lengths. We sought 
the node arrangement that consumed least energy. The only 
energy consumption that differed between the node 
arrangements was due to the difference in the number of 
packet transmitted and received (TX/RX). The network was 
designed according to common WSN principles where only 
the communicating nodes (that is the current sender and 
receiver) were consuming TX or RX energy. Nodes not 
participating in the communication were in sleep mode. The 
number of packet TX/RX for a given node arrangement was 
proportional to the energy difference between the node 
arrangements, this comparison is commonly used [11]. The 
MAC protocol used in the 1-D WSN was TDMA. In 
TDMA, each pair of communicating nodes was assigned a 
time slot. The optimal node arrangement was found as the 
configuration that required least packet treatments. The 
assessment of the 1-D network was based on a statistical 
description of the link performance and simulated 
performance.  
The statistical analysis was based on the performance of 
the individual links. The distance from the source node 
(Node1) to the sink was Ltot. Ltot was a fixed parameter in 
our assessment. The distance between the nodes was Llink. 
Llink was assumed to apply for all inter node distances, 
except the last link to the sink, which may be shorter, as 
explained below. Given the distance between nodes (Llink), 
the number of nodes required to connect the source and sink 
was found as Ceiling[Ltot/Llink]. The Ceiling[x] operator 
returns the smallest integer greater than or equal to x.  
The expected performance of the 1-D network 
depending on Llink is: Short internode distances will have 
few retransmissions at each link, but the path will consists 
of a higher number of links compared to a path of longer 
internode distances. However, as the link distances 
approaches the zone of less quality, retransmission over the 
individual links starts to limit the gained benefit of reduced 
hop counts. In the end no packets get through, when the link 
distance causes disconnected links. Then the sender at 
Node1 only transmits the packet m times over the first link, 
before discarding the packet. The description given above is 
supported in the following statistical derivation of the 
expected performance.  
 
1) Number of transmissions along a path 
The expected number of transmission (ETX) over a 
single link, allowing maximum m transmissions is: 
ETX(m)  = (1-q1) Sum[{n  q1
n-1}, {n, 1, m}] + m q1
m, 
 using the notation q1 = PLR1. The summation gives the 
following result: 
 
ETX(m) = (1- q1
m )/(1- q1) 
(3) 
Along the path shown in Figure 3, the probability of 
reaching node number z (Nodez) is: 
 
P[Packet reaching Nodez] =  (1- q1
m)(z-1) 
(4) 
We assume statistically independent links. Thus, the 
expected number of transmissions along the path is: 
ETXpath(N) = ETX(m)*Sum[(1- q1
m)(i-1),{i, 1,N-1}] 
 
ETXpath(N) = {1- q1
m – (1- q1
m )N}/{q1
m (1- q1)} (5) 
The performance of a 1-D network can be derived from 
(5). If only high quality links are used, PDR1 approaches 
one (q1 approaches zero). Then the number of transmissions 
required is N-1, which equals the hop count. However, if 
disconnected links are used, PDR1 approaches zero (q1 
approaches one). Then it is found from (5) that the number 
of transmissions equals the maximum transmissions of the 
first link, which is m.   
Figure 4 illustrates the average number of transmissions 
required to reach the sink from a node located 500 meters 
away. The parameter that was changed was the distance 
between the nodes. Both theoretical and simulated results 
are presented. The effect of discontinuous changes in the 
 
Figure 2. A WSN with 100 nodes (blue dots), including the sink in the  
lower left corner. The paths are show as arrows. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. A path from source node to the sink represented as a 1-D 
network. 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

number of links appears as discontinuous changes in the 
number of transmissions. Fewer transmissions are needed 
when longer link lengths are permitted since fewer hops are 
required. However, poor link quality caused retransmission. 
This can be seen by the increase in number of transmission 
at link lengths above 70 meters. The theoretical results are 
given by (5) while the simulation results were produced 
using the OMNeT++ [20] simulation framework and 
simulation models available in the MiXiM simulator [21].  
To mimic a real world sensor node the theoretical and 
simulation were according to the CC2420 datasheet [3] and 
the IEEE802.15.4 standard [19].  
V. 
OPTIMAL TOPOLOGY IN A WSN 
The previous analyses established some fundamental 
understanding of the performance of packet transfer along a 
path subjected to packet errors. In this section, the 
performance of the individual links are used to find the 
optimal network configuration in terms of link length that 
minimize the total energy consumption in a two-
dimensional (2-D) WSN. The comparison follows the 
method presented earlier where the performance is 
according to the energy consumption for different network 
configurations. The difference is presented in number of 
times packets transmitted and received (TX/RX). Here, all 
nodes, except the sink, generate data. This implies that the 
nodes are both data generators and some are also relay 
nodes.  
The simulation was done by randomly deploying the 
nodes in a 400x400m2 area, establish routing based on link 
criteria, and then count the number of times each packet had 
to be transmitted and received in order to get to the sink. 
The sink was placed, as shown in Figure 2, in the lower left 
corner. The motivation was that we wanted to investigate 
the consequences of long paths. For a given maximum 
internode distance, each node arrangement was repeated at 
least 200 times in order to gain statistical confidence. The 
nodes were interconnected as the routing protocol 
determined which links each node should use to forward 
their data. However, not all node configurations produced a 
connected graph. These arrangements were not included in 
our results. Especially for the short maximum internode 
distances (producing sparsely WSN), it was difficult to 
produce a fully connected WSN.  
The number of transmission permitted at each link was 
introduced above as the number m. In our analyses of a 
single path, it was also pointed out that when link lengths 
become 
too 
large 
the 
end-to-end 
performance 
is 
compromised, as the packets do not get through to the sink. 
A low value for m would produce an optimum network with 
disconnected links. Therefore we used m=100 in our 
simulations. 
Before the number of TX and RX was found the nodes 
had to be arranged and interconnected. The nodes were 
arranged by randomly positioning them in the area. The next 
step was to interconnect the nodes using a routing protocol. 
Here, we used the selection criteria of the RPL routing 
protocol [5], with an object function that selected only links 
fulfilling the defined EXT requirement [6]. The requirement 
is given in the following text. The ETX was found from the 
proposed function relating PDR and internode distances and 
the ETX of the individual links derived above. Thus, this 
selection criteria and the random node positioning produced 
links with different lengths, but with an upper limit with 
respect to internode distance. This means there was a 
maximum link length (or internode distance).  
Different MAC protocols produce different results. 
Therefore, the two most popular MAC protocols were 
evaluated according to their characteristic performance as 
presented below. In the 1-D network, it was assumed that 
only the communicating nodes were active. In our analyses 
of the 2-D WSN we used the same assumption. The first 
MAC protocol analyzed was a TDMA protocol, where the 
two communicating nodes were assigned a time slot. Time 
slots were assumed allocated during network establishment 
(as in, e.g., WirelessHART™ [22]). The overhead due to 
network configuration is not included in our assessment. 
The motivation for omitting this is that the total energy 
consumption is determined by the long-term operation. 
Furthermore, several assumptions would have had to be 
made regarding signaling and initial connections. The 
second MAC protocol analyzed was a CSMA MAC 
protocol. In CSMA, all nodes in the reception area of the 
sender decoded the packet in order to determine if the 
packet was destined to them. Since all nodes in the sensing 
range overheard the messages, it was concluded in [4] that 
the transmission range (link length) should be as short as 
possible.  
Before the energy consumption results are presented, 
some observations are given regarding paths length in WSN. 
      
 
Figure 5. Maximal hop count (left) as a function of maximal permitted 
node distance. The figure to the right shows the estimated probability 
distribution function (pdf) of maximal hop for a node distance of 45m 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Number of transmission as a function of node separation. 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The reason for this discussion is that the characteristics of 
the paths in WSN determine the performance of the 
network. It was pointed out in [9][10] that short link length 
in randomly deployed networks results in long paths. This 
was clearly observed in our simulations. In Figure 5, the 
maximum number of hops is presented for a network of 200 
nodes. The figure shows that the variation in maximum hop 
count is larger for networks using short link lengths. In 
addition, as illustrated in the graph on the right side in 
Figure  5, the distribution of maximum length has a tail 
towards long paths. These long paths demand many 
transmissions in order to forward packets to the sink. 
Clearly this is negative as they consume much energy, and 
in a CSMA based WSN the long paths will have many 
overhearing nodes along the paths. 
A. Optimal topology for TDMA 
The TDMA simulations are based on a radio with a 
fixed transmission power. The motivation was that in 
TDMA, the link length should be as large as possible, 
following the conclusion in [4]. However, the emitted power 
cannot be increased beyond a limit. The limit is determined 
by the design of the radio and/or the regulations.  
In the TDMA simulations, we 
sought optimal 
performance with respect to optimum internode distance. 
The limitation on the distance was the ETX of the individual 
links. ETX is proposed as an alternative metric to filter out 
only links fulfilling a defined quality determined by the 
object function [6]. In our model there is a direct relation 
between ETX and the distance between the nodes, as 
presented above. The challenge of estimating the ETX was 
thus avoided, and the routing protocol did not have to 
establish this information based on over the air 
communications. The assumption was according to the 
assumption stated earlier that the management traffic was 
not included. 
In Figure 6, a typical result is presented. Starting with 
the shortest allowed link length, it can be seen that by 
allowing longer links the total energy is reduced as the paths 
get shorter. However, the reduced energy consumption 
reaches a minimum, in the figure at approximately 60m. 
Further increase in allowed hop length causes increased 
total energy consumption. The reason is that longer 
internode distance causes higher ETX. The probability of 
retransmission 
over 
the 
links 
increases 
and 
this 
retransmission consumes energy.  
B. Optimal topology for CSMA 
The CSMA simulations were performed differently from 
the TDMA simulations. Here, the emitted power of the 
sender is changed. The reason is that for a CSMA WSN, we 
seek the optimal link lengths for the radio as in [4]. Change 
in the TX power causes changes in the parameters x0 and x1, 
in (1). In our simulation, x0 was increased and the original 
ratio between x1 and x0 determined the new x1. Thus, the 
grey zone increased with increasing TX power according to 
observations [17]. 
The ETX was used as a criterion for link selection in the 
CSMA simulations. Only links having a PDR1 equal to or 
better than 90% were considered candidates for routing. The 
derived relations above defined the relation between ETX 
and PDR1. Clearly, nodes outside the link length overheard 
the transmission. These nodes were in the sensing range 
(gray zone), where they received packets, but most often 
with bit error. However, the nodes consumed energy in 
receiving the packets and this energy was included in our 
analyses. The node’s sensing range was set equal to x0. It 
might be argued that this is too short, but here we used this 
as a first approximation.   
Figure 7 presents the results for a WSN based on 
CSMA. In the figure, the left graph shows all data points in 
addition to the average result of number of TX/RX. The 
curve to the right shows only the average number of TX/RX 
required (it is similar curve as the line in the left graph). The 
interesting observation is that there is a point where the 
number of required TX/RX starts to increase if the 
transmission range is decreased beyond an optimal hop 
length. The reason for this increase is the long paths that are 
likely to occur as the network is operated close to its 
connections limits. A second, interesting observation is the 
variation in number of TX/RX that is shown for the short 
internode distances. From the figure, it can be seen that for a 
maximum link length of 45m, there are some very low 
values and some very high values for the maximum hop 
count. From these results it can be concluded that it is 
advantageous to use long-hop also for CSMA. 
   
 
Figure 7. Total number of TX and RX packets handling as function of 
maximum link distance. The figure to the left shows both average and all 
simulated results while the figure on the right, average numbers are given. 
 
 
 
Internode distance [m] 
Figure 6. Number of packets transmitted as a function of maximum 
allowed link length through a TDMA WSN.  
Total TX packets  
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
A Fermi-Dirac function was suggested for relating the 
packet delivery ration (PDR) and the distance between the 
nodes. The function enables analytical evaluation of WSN. 
The parameters of the function were found by curve-fitting 
to published results. Next, the Fermi-Dirac function was 
applied in estimating the total number of transmissions 
along a path. The estimated number of transmissions 
showed good correlation to simulated results.  
In a WSN with randomly deployed nodes, the link 
quality of candidate links available for routing was 
evaluated for a TDMA based WSN. The consequences of 
having too strict requirement on the links caused higher 
energy consumption due to the long paths. However, 
beyond an optimal point the total energy consumption 
increased rapidly as each link had to retransmit the packet 
due to the reduced link quality.  Thus, it was found that 
TDMA based WSN has an optimal internode distance.  
An optimal node distance was also found for a CSMA 
based WSN. This is contrary to an intuitive conclusion, 
where the maximum link length should be as short as 
possible in order to reduce the unnecessary energy 
consumption in the overhearing nodes. The increasing total 
energy consumption for short link lengths was found to be 
due to the long, none optimal paths that occurred when short 
link lengths were used. 
Our findings can be used as a tool for designing a WSN 
as a more realistic description of the relation between the 
link quality and node distance is found. It was found that an 
optimum node distance exist for WSN based on both CSMA 
and TDMA.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Min and A. Chandrakasan, "Top Five Myths about the 
Energy Consumption of Wireless Communication", ACM 
Mobile Computing and Communication Reviews, vol. 7, No 
1, Jan. 2003, poster 
[2] H. Karl and A. Willig, "Protocols and Architectures for 
Wireless Sensor Networks", ISBN: 978-0-470-51923-3,John 
Wiley & Sons, 2007 
[3] CC2420, 
Chipcon Products from 
Texas Instruments,  
http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cc2420.pdf, 
visited 
July 
2014 
[4] A-L. Kampen, K. Ovsthus, L. Landmark, and O. Kure, 
“Energy Reduction in Wireless Sensor Networks by 
Switching Nodes to Sleep During Packet Forwarding” , The 
Sixth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and 
Applications, SENSORCOMM 2012, Italy, 2012, ISBN 978-
1-61208-207-3. s. 189-195 
[5] T. Winter, et al., “RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low-
Power and Lossy Networks”, RFC 6550, Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF), 2012 
[6] JP. Vasseur, M. Kim, K. Pister, N. Dejean, and D. Barthel, 
"Routing Metrics Used for Path Calculation in Low-Power 
and Lossy Networks", RFC6551, Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF), 2012 
[7] I. Khemapech, A. Miller, and I. Duncan, "A Survey of 
Transmission Power Control in Wireless Sensor Networks", 
The 8th Annual Postgraduate Symposium The Convergence 
of Telecommunications, Liverpool John Moores University, 
28th-29th June 2007 
[8] M. Haenggi, "Twelve reasons not to route over many short 
hops", VTC2004-Fall. 2004 IEEE 60th Vehicular Technology 
Conference , Vol. 5, 2004, pp. 3130 – 3134. 
[9] P. Szczytowski, A. Khelil, A. Ali, and N. Suri, "TOM: 
Topology oriented maintenance in sparse Wireless Sensor 
Networks",  8th Annual IEEE Communications Society 
Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications 
and Networks (SECON), 2011, pp. 548 – 556. 
[10] S. Vural and E. Ekici, "On Multihop Distances in Wireless 
Sensor Networks with Random Node Locations", IEEE 
TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 9, 
NO. 4, 2010, pp. 540 – 552. 
[11] Z. Rosberg, R.P. Liu, T. L. Dinh, Y. F. Dong, and S. Jha, 
"Statistical reliability for energy efficient data transport in 
wireless sensor networks", Wireless Netw, 16, 2010, pp. 
1913-1927. 
[12] R P. Liu, Z. Rosberg, I. B. Collings., C. Wilson, A. Y  Dong, 
and S. Jha, "Energy Efficient Reliable Data Collection in 
Wireless Sensor Networks with Asymmetric Links", Int J 
Wireless Inf Networks, 16, 2009, pp- 131-141- 
[13] T. Zheng, E. Kamel, and S. Wang, "Node performance model 
of wireless sensor networks", 2013 9th Asian Control 
Conference (ASCC), 2013, pp. 1 – 6. 
[14] N. Farzaneh and M. H. Yaghmaee, "Probability based hop 
selection approach for resource control in Wireless Sensor 
Network", 
2012 
Sixth 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Telecommunications (IST), 2012, pp. 703 – 708. 
[15] A. Bildea, O. Alphand, F. Rousseau, and A. Duda, "Link 
quality metrics in large scale indoor wireless sensor 
networks", IEEE 24th International Symposium on Personal 
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2013, 
pp. 1888 – 1892. 
[16] J. Zhao and R. Govindan, "Understanding Packet Delivery 
Performance 
In 
Dense 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks", 
Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Embedded 
networked sensor systems, SenSys '03,  Pages 1 - 13, ACM 
New York, USA 2003, pp. 1 – 13. 
[17] Y-D. Lee, D-U. Jeong, and H-J. Lee, "Performance analysis 
of wireless link quality in wireless sensor networks", 5th Int. 
Conf. on Computer Sciences and Convergence Information 
Technology (ICCIT),  2010, pp. 1006 – 1010. 
[18] L. Siyu and G. Hongju, "Propagation characteristics of 
2.4GHz wireless channel in cornfields", IEEE 13th 
International Conference on Communication Technology 
(ICCT),  2011, pp. 136 – 140. 
[19] Available at http://www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG4.html  
[20] OMNeT++,  http://www.omnetpp.org/, visited July, 2014 
[21] MiXiM, http://mixim.sourceforge.net/, visited July 2014 
[22] WirelessHART™, 
IEC 
62591 
ed1.0, 
http://webstore.iec.ch/webstore/webstore.nsf/ArtNum_PK/43
964, visited July 2014 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Towards a Generic Cloud-based Sensor Data Management Platform: A Survey and
Conceptual Architecture
Vincent C. Emeakaroha, Kaniz Fatema, Philip Healy, John P. Morrison
Irish Centre for Cloud Computing and Commerce (IC4)
University College Cork, Ireland
Email: {vc.emeakaroha, k.fatema, p.healy, j.morrison}@cs.ucc.ie
Abstract—With the increasing numbers of sensors and smart de-
vices being deployed worldwide, the volume of data they generate
is becoming difﬁcult to store and process on local platforms.
Cloud computing provides scalable resources that could address
these issues. However, platform-independent methods of gathering
and transmitting sensor data to Clouds are not widely available.
This paper presents a survey of Cloud-based sensor monitoring
and data gathering platforms. It reviews the state-of-the-art and
discusses their strengths and weaknesses. Informed by the survey,
the paper further proposes a generic conceptual architecture
for achieving a platform-neutral Cloud-based sensor monitoring
and data gathering platform. We also discuss the objectives,
design decisions and the implementation considerations for the
conceptual architecture.
Keywords–Sensor Monitoring Platforms; Sensor Data Gather-
ing; Cloud Computing; Generic Sensor Cloud Platform; Interop-
erable Communication
I.
INTRODUCTION
Data gathering IT techniques such as those underlying
entity tracking and control systems, for example, have shown
the commercial value of real-time control of real-world de-
vices. Based on this, more generalised applications for sensor
devices are becoming signiﬁcant in real world usages. Sensors
enable access to remote objects and environmental information
providing the raw materials from simple monitoring through to
next-generation applications such as smart cities. The gather-
ing, storage and processing of sensor data locally is becoming
very costly due to the increase in the number of sensors and
the volume of data they generate.
In a similar manner, the Internet of Things (IoT) [1], which
promise to connect objects, devices and humans, generate large
volumes of data. Harnessing these data by organisations can
be a complex process due to heterogeneous operating systems,
varying connectivity protocols and legacy application compat-
ibility. Furthermore, the ability to draw meaningful insights
from the volume of data unleashed by these technologies is
another challenge.
Cloud platform offers scalable compute and storage re-
sources to support the management of these data [2]. However,
solutions [3]–[6] available today are mostly customized for
particular usages. To unlock the business potential in this area,
generic solutions are required to address the core challenges
such as communication bottle-neck, data interchange formats,
security and interoperability.
This paper presents a survey reviewing the state-of-the-
art of Cloud sensor monitoring platforms and data gath-
ering techniques. Based on the survey ﬁndings, it further
proposes a platform-neutral architecture providing a generic
Cloud interface that addresses the identiﬁed challenges. The
main contributions are (i) a survey of industrial, commercial
and open source sensor monitoring and data management
platforms; (ii) analysis of the platforms to identify trends,
issues and challenges; and (iii) the proposal of a generic
architecture utilising standardised data interchange formats and
interoperable communications.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section
II presents the related work. The state-of-the-art analysis is
performed in Section III. Section IV discusses the identiﬁed
challenges and objectives for a platform-neutral architecture
while Section V presents the proposed architecture and its
implementation considerations. In Section VI, we conclude the
paper and discuss the follow-up work.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this area, previous efforts have been focused mostly on
particular issues like the virtualisation of physical sensors on
Clouds, data privacy and security or the provision of efﬁcient
platforms for sensor data storage and processing. Catrein et
al. [7] propose a Cloud design for user-controlled storage and
processing of sensor data to ensure privacy. They identiﬁed
the importance of using the Cloud for sensor data processing.
However, their approach focuses on security-related issues
such as data privacy and access control. Aoki et al. [8] present
a Cloud architecture to enable fast response to real world
applications in spite of the ﬂood of sensor data. The authors
used the strategy of reducing network latency to achieve this
goal but they did not consider creating a generic interface for
the diverse sensor data gathering.
Piyare et al. [9] propose an architecture for integrating
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) into Cloud services for real
time data collection. In their approach, WSN is considered an
important paradigm for Internet of Things since they consist of
smart sensing nodes with embedded Central Processing Units
(CPU) and sensors for monitoring different environments.
This work concentrated on connecting WSNs to Clouds and
does not consider other sensor types. The authors in [3] [4]
discuss particular approaches for gathering medical sensor
data. Alamri et al. [10] present a survey on sensor-Cloud,
architecture, applications and approaches. The survey analyses
the current efforts and challenges in this area. It shows that
many of the existing efforts are geared towards creating virtual
sensors from physical ones on Clouds.
Salehi et al. [11] present Global Sensor Network (GSN),
which is a middleware to interconnect diverse sensor network
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

technologies. This work focus on providing a mechanism
for easy integration of existing sensor networks. With this
approach, the management of sensor networks are simpliﬁed.
For example, changing or updating components within a
sensor network does not interfere or hinder communications
with other sensor networks. However, it does not consider
the gathering of single sensor data. Other efforts like the
Sensor Observation Service (SOS) [12] provide standards in
accordance with the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) for
discovery and retrieval of real-time data from diverse sensors
in the context of geospatial data processing and sharing.
Thus, to the best of our knowledge, none of the existing
work provide a generic Cloud-based monitoring platform for
gathering sensor data. In the next section, we present our
analysis of the state of the art.
III.
STATE-OF-THE-ART ANALYSIS
This section details the survey of the existing tools and
platforms for monitoring, gathering and processing sensor
data. It highlights their characteristic features and practical use
cases.
A. IBM Mote Runner
Mote Runner is IBM’s infrastructure for WSNs [13]. It
is based on a virtual machine targeted to resource-constrained
hardware environments and consists of two parts: a run time for
mote-class hardware, such as Libelium Waspmote or MEMSIC
Iris motes, and a development environment for WSN applica-
tions.
At its core, Mote Runner is designed to run on very
small, standard, embedded controllers, including low-power
8-bit processors, thereby reducing both initial investments as
well as post-deployment and maintenance costs. It has been
shown to be light in energy consumption [14]. It provides
a high-level, language-friendly, resource-efﬁcient and high-
performance Virtual Machine (VM) that shields portable ap-
plications from hardware speciﬁcs. In addition, Mote Runner
allows programmers to use object-oriented programming lan-
guages such as Java and a development environment based
on Eclipse to develop portable WSN applications that may be
dynamically distributed. Its features include [15]:
•
Low-power,
•
Support for harvesting solar power as a source of
energy,
•
Wirelessly connected embedded systems,
•
Provides Software Development Kits (SDK) for de-
velopers,
•
Supports multiple high-level languages such as Java
and C#,
•
Runs on 8 bit micro-controllers with as little as 4 KB
of Random Access Memory (RAM) and 32 KB of
ﬂash memory,
•
Leverages integrated development environments such
as Eclipse, Visual Studio and MonoDevelop.
This tool focuses on WSN related applications and mote
actuators. However, little or no information was available about
its support for wired or other sensor types. The details about
the used data interchange formats are not publicly available.
B. SensorCloud Platform
MicroStrains SensorCloud offers a sensor data storage,
visualisation and remote management platform that leverages
Cloud computing technologies to provide data scalability and
rapid visualisation [16]. It was initially designed to support
long-term deployments of MicroStrain wireless sensors. How-
ever, it now supports any web-connected third party devices,
sensors, or sensor networks through a simple OpenData Ap-
plication Programming Interface (API). It aims to provide
virtually unlimited storage for the sensor data [17]. Its features
include:
•
Presumedly
unlimited
data
storage
with
triple-
redundant reliability,
•
A time series visualisation and graphing tool,
•
A MathEngine analytic tool facilitating quick user
application development using their data on the Cloud,
•
Provides Short Message Service (SMS) and Electronic
mail (E-mail) alerting capabilities,
•
Provides OpenData API and Representational State
Transfer (REST) API for data transport,
•
Supports only eXternal Data Representation (XDR)
and Comma Separated Value (CSV) data interchange
formats.
Some of its usage scenarios include structural health mon-
itoring and condition based monitoring of high value assets
where commonly available data tools are often not capable
in terms of accessibility, data scalability, programmability,
or performance. All communication with the SensorCloud is
performed over Secure HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTPS),
which is secure. It restricts however, other forms of interactions
such as low-level communication thereby forcing the use of
HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)-capable middleware to
connect the devices and the platform. Furthermore, XDR and
CSV are the only data interchange format types currently
supported.
C. Ostia Portus Platform
Ostia Portus is designed to mediate between multiple ven-
dor technologies where each vendor has particular platforms,
databases and programming languages. It achieves this by
taking the isolated data sets from individual systems and
packaging them into a standard service [18]. This platform
connects a variety of devices including sensors, networks and
platforms. Its features include:
•
Support for relational databases,
•
Uses Secure Socket Layer (SSL) over HTTP to
achieve security,
•
Supports Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP),
REST, Publication/Subscription (PUB/SUB) proto-
cols,
•
Supports Java Message Service (JMS), RabbitMQ,
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)/Internet Proto-
col (IP), Message Queue (MQ) transport protocols,
•
Easy installation and use.
Portus is built using open technologies and exploits open
standards in accessing organisations data and presenting them
using business deﬁned views. Its core components are: (i)
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

server written in C and C++ and hosted by Apache; (ii) control
centre for administration that is written in Java and built to run
with the Eclipse Framework and (ii) front-end providing web
services.
D. TempoDB Platform
TempoDB is a database as a service aiming to store and
analyse time series data from sensors, smart meters, servers
and automotive telematics. It is a commercial tool consisting
of the following features [19]:
•
Simple REST API for data storage and retrieval,
•
Allows data storage at full resolution (no downsam-
pling),
•
Guarantees data availability with its three times data
replication,
•
Offers SSL encryption for all data transfer,
•
API clients available in multiple programming lan-
guages like Java, .Net, Python, Ruby,
•
Supports Internet of things.
The primary aim of TempoDB is the management of time
series data sets with timestamps in ISO8601 format [20]. In
querying data from TempoDB storage using a client API, the
returned data is formatted only as JavaScript Object Notation
(JSON). Other data interchange formats are currently not
available.
This platform is currently expanded and renamed into
TempoIQ [21]. It now offers ﬂexible sensor data monitoring
and alerting mechanism. The alerts are based on thresholds
and informs the user about the status of its applications that
are using the sensor data.It offers also analytic tools to support
user applications.
E. FreshTemp Temperature Monitor
FreshTemp is a Cloud-based monitoring system for per-
ishable goods [5]. It automates temperature collection during
production, transportation and storage of any perishable prod-
uct by providing the capability of integrating with the different
temperature sensors monitoring such products. It offers real-
time data logs, conﬁgurable alerts and online Dashboard. It
is a commercial tool aiming to provide solutions for food
services, transportation, health care and industrial usages. Its
core features include:
•
Wireless temperature monitoring,
•
Bluetooth food probes,
•
Bluetooth data loggers,
•
Real time data logs,
•
Alerting mechanism with SMS E-mail and phone,
•
Online dashboard.
This tool focuses solely on temperature sensors, which
limits its usability for managing and controlling other sensor
device types. Furthermore, it does not offer any programming
API for application development or any means of accessing
the data stored on the platform by developers.
F. SensaTrack Monitor
SensaTrack is a multi-platform independent monitoring
service that is ideal for Machine-to-Machine (M2M) sensor
monitoring. It is developed by Cannon Water Technology Inc.
and released in November 2012 [6]. The SensaTrack Cloud-
based monitoring software solution allows users to visualize
sensor data from any web enabled device. It is designed for en-
terprises with distributed assets like chemical storage facilities,
bulk storage tanks, bins and silos. Its features include:
•
Ability to quickly scan multiple locations,
•
Secure data servers,
•
Wireless data gateways,
•
Track trends and ﬁnd problems early,
•
Easy installation by non-technical personnel.
SensaTrack
uses
wireless
communications
equipment
based on Zigbee protocols developed by the Digi Corporation.
It also supports hybrid networks of wired and wireless sensors.
This tool has no support for application developments and does
not provide an API for external access.
G. Bluwired S-Cloud Platform
Bluwired S-Cloud provides a platform for sensor data
exploration, interaction and analysis [22]. It facilitates the
management of sensor and device data from any web enabled
location in the world, and to deploy data processing and
analysis applications that rely on gathered data on the Cloud.
Its features include:
•
A platform for sensor data exploration, interaction and
analysis,
•
Management of wireless sensor data from any web
enabled location in the world,
•
Support for user development and deployment of data
processing and analytic applications using their data
on the cloud,
•
Facilitates real-time data storage and retrieval,
•
Provides alerting mechanism for abnormal events,
•
Provides visual management interface.
Bluwired S-Cloud promises to offer reliable storage, track-
ing and analysis of sensor data that comes from monitoring
and control solutions for most applications, including: Fac-
tory Automation, Process Control, Agriculture and Irrigation
monitoring, Patient Monitoring Systems, Oil and Gas. It is a
commercial tool and does not offer an open source API for
accessing the platform.
H. Xively Platform
Xively is a Cloud Service platform that harnesses the power
of IoT to quickly and easily transform connected product
vision into market reality. It was formerly known as “pachube”
and later as “COSM” [23]. Xively is currently a division of
LogMeln Inc. and strives to provide business solutions through
the IoT. It offers a platform that connects devices and products
with applications to provide real-time control, management and
storage. Its features include:
•
Secure real-time messaging,
•
Time series data storage,
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

•
Selective data sharing,
•
Provides easy connection to external Cloud services
like Twitter and Facebook,
•
Encryption with Transport Layer Security (TLS) and
SSL,
•
Real-time message bus based on Message Queue
Telemetry Transport (MQTT).
An example use case for Xively is the “Park-A-Lot” project
[24], which is designed to support an automated parking
management system. Although it is a commercial product,
but, it provides open APIs and libraries for easy usage by
developers to create smart applications and interacts with the
platform. Xively provides effective means to reason about
devices and actuators at high level but fails to provide detailed
context information within which all these devices are being
placed, especially when it comes to small scale setups such as
individual houses.
I.
Nimbits Platform
Nimbits is a platform as a service (PaaS) for developing
software and hardware solutions that seamlessly connect to
the Cloud and each other. It has the ability to record and share
sensor data on the Cloud [25]. Within Nimbits, sensor data are
stored as data points using textual, JSON or eXtensible Markup
Language (XML) formats. It provides REST web services for
logging and retrieving time and geo stamped data (such as a
reading from a temperature sensor). Nimbits servers can run on
both powerful Cloud platforms like Google App Engine and
on the smallest Raspberry Pi device. Its graphic user interface
is tree structured having parent and child structures, which
allow user content to be organised according to a parent-child
structure and could be dragged and dropped as desired [26].
Its features include:
•
Ability for recording and sharing data,
•
Data storage as data points,
•
Easy connection of data to analytic tools,
•
Graphic user interface for visualisation,
•
Ability to generate alerts based on deﬁned thresholds
or events.
Nimbits is an open source platform for the Internet of
things. It is freely available and provides libraries, APIs and
documentations for different programming languages.
J. ThingSpeak Platform
ThingSpeak is an open source Internet of things platform
that provides API to store and retrieve data from things using
HTTP over the Internet or via a Local Area Network [25].
It has the ability to facilitate the creation of sensor logging
applications, location tracking applications, or a social network
of things providing status updates.
In excess to its ability to store and retrieve numeric
data and alphanumeric data, its API allows for numeric data
processing such as time scaling, averaging, median, summing
and rounding. ThingSpeak is organised in Channels, which
is where a user application can store and retrieve data. Each
Channel supports data entries of up to 8 data ﬁelds. The
channel feeds support JSON, XML, and CSV data formats
for integration into applications. Its features include [27]:
•
Open API for developers,
•
Real-time data collection,
•
Geolocation data gathering,
•
Data processing and analytic tools,
•
Data visualisations on web and mobile devices,
•
Device status messages and event alerting,
•
Supports diverse programming languages like Java,
JavaScript, .Net, Ruby,
•
Allows easy plugins integrations.
ThingSpeak offers also a hosted service that is different to
the open source version. Open.Sen.se [9] is another Internet of
Things tool that is very similar in characteristics and features
to ThingSpeak.
K. Microsoft Azure Intelligent System Service
The Microsoft Azure Intelligent Systems Service aims
to securely connect, manage and capture machine-generated
data from industry devices, sensors and other line-of-business
(LoB) assets across a range of operating system platforms.
The intelligent service represents the efforts of Microsoft to
address the challenges of IoT and to help businesses utilise its
potentials.
This tool promises to offer enterprises the ability to extend
their Microsoft Azure Cloud across connected devices and
sensors in order to capture vital data, analyze them with
familiar Microsoft tools like HD Insight and Power BI for
Ofﬁce 365 in order to facilitate taking quick and appropriate
actions that drive impact. Its features include [28]:
•
Secure connection and management of devices and
data,
•
Support for real-time control of heterogeneous envi-
ronments and accelerated implementations,
•
Supports efﬁcient capture, store, join, analyse, visu-
alise and share data,
•
Provide a trusted platform that can be extended easily
for industrial speciﬁc requirements,
•
Improve operations and unlock new business oppor-
tunities by harnessing machine-generated data from
connected sensors and actuators.
The intelligent service is a fully commercial software as
the other Microsoft services however, it is not yet production
ready. A limited preview version was released in April 2014.
L. Paho Platform
The Paho project aims to provide scalable open-source
implementations of open and standard messaging protocols to
facilitate new, existing, and emerging applications to enable
machine-to-machine and Internet of things usage scenarios. it
is a part of the Eclipse foundation and its features include:
•
Enables levels decoupling between devices and appli-
cations,
•
Encourages the growth of scalable web and enterprise
middleware and applications,
•
Supports resource constrained embedded platforms,
•
Based on MQTT,
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

•
Provide
MQTT
client
implementations
in
Java,
Python, C, C++,
•
Provide open libraries, API and client implementa-
tions,
•
Enables integration of wide range of middleware,
programming languages and messaging models.
Paho strives to be a software for constrained networks,
devices with limited processing resources and embedded plat-
forms [29].
M. Platform Summary and Comparison
This section presents a summary of the identiﬁed platform
features in a table, which enables a quick comparison. The
analysis offers an opportunity to identify trends and the gaps in
technological advancements in this area. A goal of this analysis
is to organise our thoughts and to see what is available in order
to design a conceptual architecture.
The described and analysed platforms represent the current
efforts towards addressing the challenges of Cloud-based sen-
sor monitoring and data gathering, and their real-time analysis
in order to facilitate informed decision making and smart
applications. This information is summarised in Table I.
As shown in Table I, the analysed platforms exhibit some
similar characteristics in terms of data storage, support for
web technologies and availability of a REST API. The com-
mercial platforms are closed source, thus, details regarding
programming languages, API, data interchange formats were
not accessible. It can be observed that the platforms have
poor support for resource constrained deployments, energy ef-
ﬁciency, communication protocol implementation, software de-
velopment environments and data interchange formats. These
issues represent the challenges facing the existing platforms.
The commercial tools promise many features and func-
tionalities, but details of their implementations are completely
hidden from the public, which slows down technical know-
how establishment and thereby makes it difﬁcult for developers
to leverage such functionalities when creating applications.
This problem obstructs market growth and poses challenges to
technology adoption. Furthermore, it hinders the realisation of
portable solutions facilitating interoperability among different
platforms. This shows the need for generic solutions with
open implementations. Openness is a means to mitigate this
problem. Providing open source APIs and interfaces enables
easy creation of interoperable software and assures adherence
to deﬁned standards.
Another interesting point is that most of the open source
tools are developed in the context of Internet of Things. This
means that they could be easily used in designing generic
solutions. We therefore view the open source tools as providing
a good basis for the development of open solutions supporting
standardised interfaces and data interchange formats.
According to Table I, most of the open source analysed
tools are using textual data interchange formats, which have
the advantage of being human readable and easy to understand.
However, the serialised data in those formats are not very
compact in size for efﬁcient transportation without consuming
large amounts of bandwidth. This identiﬁes the need for
integrating standardised binary data interchange formats that
have the ability to achieve compact serialisation of data.
In general, the commercial solutions tend to surface many
features. But, they are mainly closed source and implement
proprietary technologies instead of the standardised ones. Most
of them also do not provide open-source API for the general
public, which could enable quick adoption and development
of generic solutions. On the side of the open source solutions,
they provide basic features and are not quite advanced. But
they offer basis for further developments and possible realisa-
tion of generic solutions.
IV.
ISSUES AND OBJECTIVES
In this section, we discuss the challenges informed from
the state-of-the-art analysis and present our objectives for the
proposed architecture.
A. Challenges and API Requirements
As can be observed in Table I, none of the analysed
platform provides a complete set of features representing a
generic and open solution. The implementation of such generic
platform is complex and difﬁcult. Many challenges exist in this
spectrum especially regarding the heterogeneity of the targeted
hardware and software components. At the lower levels, there
is a plethora of sensor devices out there, which gather data in
different formats. To design a generic interface for these data
types requires a comprehensive study of the existing data types
and how they could be aggregated or adapted/converted to a
standard format.
At the higher levels, another challenging factor is the
security and data access control on the Cloud platform. The au-
thentication of a gateway server before allowing the forwarding
of the sensor data to the Cloud platform is not enough. Many
customers worry more about the privacy of their data and what
the Cloud providers might do with them on the Cloud. To
address these issues, different levels of security assurances are
required for securing the data on the Cloud and controlling
their usage.
Furthermore, the communication mechanism for transfer-
ring the sensor data and the actuator control information is
challenging as shown in Table I. Such a mechanism must be
simple, pluggable and reliable in order to ensure, robust and
reliable communications.
B. Objectives
Currently, the ability to gather data from different sensor
devices and feed them into Cloud platforms in a uniﬁed manner
is lacking. This hinders the availability of raw data on com-
putational capable platforms that can quickly and efﬁciently
analyse the data to derive knowledge, which could support nu-
merous usage scenarios such as real-time critical applications
in health and medicine. Therefore, the goals of the generic
Cloud-based sensor monitoring and data processing platform
are to provide standard and open mechanism for collecting
diverse remote sensor data and processing them irrespective
of the sensor devices or usage platform. Furthermore, we aim
to achieve:
1)
Easy setup and portability,
2)
Platform-neutral data formatting and serialisation,
3)
Interoperability among heterogeneous Cloud plat-
forms and
4)
Simple conﬁgurations and ease of usage.
In the next section, we describe our proposed architecture.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. SURVEYED PLATFORM FEATURES
Capability/ Features
IBM
Mote
Runner
SensorCloud
Portus
TempoDB
FreshTemp
SensaTrack
Bluwired
S-
Cloud
Xively
Nimbits
ThingSpeak
MS
Intelligent
Service
Paho
API/Library
SDK for im-
plementations
OpenData
API,
REST API
No
REST
API,
client API
No
No
No
RESTful
API,
client
libraries
REST API, li-
braries
Open API and li-
braries
No
Open
API,
client
libraries
Data Formats
N/A
XDR, CSV
JSON, XML,
IDoc
JSON
N/A
N/A
N/A
JSON, XML,
CSV
Textual,
JSON, XML
JSON,
XML,
CSV
N/A
N/A
Programming
Language
Java, C#
Python, Java, C#,
C++
C, C++, Java,
PHP
Java,
.Net,
Ruby, Python
N/A
N/A
N/A
Objective
C,
C,
Java,
JavaScript,
Ruby
Java,
JavaScript
Java,
JavaScript,
Python,
Ruby,
.Net, node.js
.Net
Python, Java,
JavaScript, C,
C++
Open Source / Com-
mercial
Commercial
with
open
SDK
Commercial solu-
tion
Commercial
Solution
Commercial
with
open
source client
Commercial
Solution
Commercial
So-
lution
Commercial
Solution
Commercial
with
Open
API libraries
Open
source
solution
Open source with
hosted version
Commercial
solution
Open
source
solution
Visualisation
No
Yes and graphing
tool
No, but with
external
web
clients
Yes
Online
dashboard
Web enabled
Visual
management
interface
Management
console
Graphic
user
interface
Web capable de-
vices
Yes
N/A
Analytic Tool
No
MathEngine
No
Yes, for time
series data
No
No
Blu Automa-
tion Studio
Yes
No
Yes
HD
Insight,
Power BI
No
Messaging Protocol
N/A
No
RabbitMQ,
JMS, TCP/IP,
IBM MQ
No
No
No
No
MQTT
N/A
N/A
N/A
MQTT
Notiﬁcation / Alert
No
SMS and email
No
No
SMS,
email,
phone
Text
message,
email
Custom mes-
sages
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
N/A
Energy Efﬁciency
Low
power,
harvest
solar
power
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
N/A
Connection Type
wireless
Http
Http
Http
Wireless
Wireless gateway,
Zigbee, Wired
Wireless
N/A
Http
Http,
wireless,
Zigbee
N/A
Http
Platform
Resource
Requirement
Resource
constrained
devices,
embedded
controllers
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Resource
constrained
devices,
embedded
platforms
Software
Development Tool
Eclipse,
Visual Studio,
MonoDe-
velop
N/A
Eclipse
N/A
No
No
No
Developer
workbench
Arduino, Java
compatible
tools
Arduino,
Java
compatible tools
N/A
Eclipse
Security
N/A
Https, SSL
SSL over http
SSL
encryp-
tion
N/A
Secure
data
servers
N/A
Encryption
with TLS and
SSL
Keys, oAuth
Write API Keys
Enterprise-
grade security
Authenti-
cation, SSL
Database Type
N/A
N/A
Relational
databases
Relational
databases
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Storage Space
Yes, limited
Seemingly unlim-
ited with triple re-
dundant
Yes
Yes,
with
3
times replica-
tions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes, time se-
ries archiving
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes, limited
V.
GENERIC CLOUD-BASED SENSOR MONITORING
PLATFORM
The details of our proposed generic Cloud-based sensor
monitoring platform is presented in this section. We discuss the
conceptual architecture and its implementation considerations.
A. Conceptual Architecture
The conceptual architecture is designed to address the iden-
tiﬁed challenges posed by the existing platforms. Ease of use,
portability, openness and interoperability are the key factors
driving this design. This architecture is further motivated by
what we think could be of value to customers with a system
of distributed sensors and actuators.
Visualiza(on	  
Analy(c	  
Triggers	  
Control	  Panel	  
Load	  Balancer	  
Compute	  
Compute	  
Middleware/	  DB	  Technologies	  
Storage 
Generic	  Cloud	  	  
Interface	  
Transport 
protocol 
Sensors	  
Actuators	  
Generic	  Cloud	  
Interface	  
Data 
Generic	  Cloud	  
Interface	  
Control 
	  Actuators	  
 Control/
Analysed data 
Configuration 
Devices 
Providers  
 
	  Server	  
	  Server	  
Sensors	  
Data 
Figure 1. Conceptual Architecture
Figure 1 presents the proposed architecture. As shown
on that ﬁgure, it is a distributed environment designed to
accommodate efﬁcient sensor monitoring, data gathering and
sending of control information based on analysed data to
actuators. Different usage scenarios are considered in this
conceptual architecture such as:
Dual interactions: In this case, a local or public server
is attached to both sensors and actuators thereby making it
capable of forwarding the captured sensor data and as well
receiving the control information to be passed on to the
actuators.
Data gathering: This scenario includes situations where the
aim is to store and analyse the sensor captured data in
the Cloud. This could also be to make the data public for
applications to use or to use the analysed data results to derive
control decisions for actuators.
Controller actuating: This represents the cases where the
stored sensor data are directly being used by applications or
to control an actuator.
As shown in Figure 1, the conceptual architecture consist
of different components. However, we focus on the key ones
due to space constraints.
Database Technologies
The storage of the sensor data on a Cloud platform requires
efﬁcient management for inputting and querying the data. This
process is supported by appropriate database technologies.
In our design, we aim to make this component pluggable
so as to support diverse DB types depending on the usage
platform. This enables the use of both SQL and NoSQL
databases. The relational SQL database types would provide
easy compatibility since most of the existing applications,
according to our review and experiences, are based on this
technology. The NoSQL databases are aimed for quick and
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

less complex scaling of the data storage system.
Generic Cloud Interface
The generic Cloud interface shown in Figure 2 is responsible
for mediating between the sensor servers and the Cloud
platform. It provides a simple interface and supports numerous
formats for time series and alphanumeric data coming from
the sensor servers. On the side of the Cloud platforms, it uses
platform-neutral data interchange formats to achieve interop-
erability among heterogeneous Cloud environments.
Generic Cloud Interface 
 
Security	  
Authen-ca-on	  
Communica-on	  Message	  
Bus	  
Data	  interchange	  Format	  
Figure 2. Generic Cloud Interface
As shown in Figure 2 the generic Cloud interface
includes three essential components - i) security, ii) data
interchange format and iii) communication message bus.
These components provide the core functionalities of this
interface and therefore deserve more explanations.
Security
This component ensures the privacy of the data interactions
and guarantees their authenticity. It provides authentication
mechanism to validate the access credentials of the sensor
servers to access and transfer data to the Cloud platform. It
also enforces data location constraints speciﬁed as a policy by
the sensor data owners. This policy controls the location of
the sensor data storage in the Cloud. It also informs the data
owner whenever their data are being copied to some other
location.
Data Interchange Format
The format of the sensor data impacts how they can be
transported and analysed. This component plays the role
of formatting the sensor data into a platform-neutral data
interchange format enabling portability, interoperability and
efﬁcient transportation. The data interchange formats can
be categorised into two groups: (i) self-describing data
interchange formats such as XML and JSON and (ii) binary
(schema-based) data interchange formats like MessagePack
& Protocol Buffers. Based on our previous ﬁndings [30],
the two format groups have their advantages and drawbacks.
The self-describing data interchange format group has the
strength of being human readable and easy to understand. But,
from the transmission perspective, they contain redundant
components, which affects the size of data transfers. The
binary data interchange format group is not human readable.
But, they are more efﬁcient for transmission according to
the performance results in [30]. For this generic interface,
we propose a hybrid data interchange format combining the
strength of self-describing and binary data interchange formats.
Communication Message Bus
This component provides the communication mechanism for
transferring the sensor data to the Cloud platform and also for
sending control information to the actuators. It uses the data
interchange formats for formatting and serialising the data.
The message bus consist of three internal components: (1)
Producer, (2) Messaging infrastructure and (3) Consumer
The producer feeds in the data to be transmitted by
connecting to the external data producing devices. It integrates
the data interchange formats to appropriately prepare the data
for transmission. The messaging infrastructure provides the
functions of a message broker by asynchronously delivering
messages from the producer to the consumers (synchronisation
decoupling). The producer does not need to know the nature or
location of a consumer. It simply delivers its messages to the
broker, which in turn routes them to the appropriate consumer
(space decoupling). The broker therefore enables space, time
and synchronisation decoupling [31]. This feature facilitates
the necessarily loose relationship between a producer and
a consumer, which is essential in distributed systems like
Clouds. To realise the messaging infrastructure, we base our
implementation on the well established Advanced Message
Queuing Protocol (AMQP) [32]. The consumer connects the
receiving end of the communication. It ensures that the data
is appropriately deserialised for the end target platform.
B. Implementation Considerations
For a prototype implementation of this proposed architec-
ture, we suppose the following considerations to be important.
Software artifacts: We envision the use of well established
open source software components and standardised technolo-
gies as the basis for the implementation. As shown by our
survey, there are some promising open source projects that
could be considered. This would support the vision for an open
and generic solution. Furthermore, it would avoid unnecessary
re-implementations.
Component interactions: The generic interface is designed to
interact with sensors, actuators and servers mediating between
remote sensors and actuators in different fashions. In imple-
menting these interactions, care has to be taken in choosing
the data interchange format and communication mechanism
since these two factors are very relevant in achieving a wide
portability and interoperability of a solution.
Openness: Efforts should be made to make any implemented
solution accessible to the general public. This would support
quick adoptions and provide demos to the industry to encour-
age uptake among startup enterprises.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented a survey of the current Cloud-based
sensor monitoring and data gathering platforms. It analysed
the state-of-the-art and identiﬁed open challenges. Both open
source and commercial solutions were reviewed to provide
a comprehensive survey. We used a table to compile all the
features of the analysed platforms, which created a basis for
quick comparisons and identiﬁcation of trends.
According to our survey, the commercial solutions are gen-
erally closed source and implement proprietary technologies,
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

which hinders portability and interoperability of their solutions.
Furthermore, there is poor support for messaging protocols,
energy efﬁciency and resource constrained environments by the
analysed platforms. Also, the platforms use mostly textual data
interchange formats, which are not very compact in size for
efﬁcient transportation. To address these identiﬁed challenges,
we proposed a generic Cloud-based sensor monitoring and
data gathering platform. The goal is to provide an open
solution implementing standardised technologies to promote
fast adoptions.
In our next steps, we intend to implement a prototype of
our proposed conceptual architecture as a proof-of-concept.
We aim to provide it to the general public as a open source
software to enable fast testing, deployment and adoption
by the market. This contributes to our vision of facilitating
interoperable data management in Clouds.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the Irish Centre for Cloud
Computing and Commerce (IC4), an Irish National Technology
Centre funded by Enterprise Ireland and the Irish Industrial
Development Authority.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A survey,”
Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 15, 2010, pp. 2787 – 2805.
[2]
B. Rao, P. Saluia, N. Sharma, A. Mittal, and S. Sharma, “Cloud
computing for internet of things and sensing based applications,” in
Sensing Technology (ICST), 2012 Sixth International Conference on,
Dec 2012, pp. 374–380.
[3]
J.-C. Liu, K.-Y. Chuang, and Y.-L. Wen, “An efﬁcient data gathering
system for home medical treatment,” in Genetic and Evolutionary
Computing (ICGEC), 2012 Sixth International Conference on, Aug
2012, pp. 460–463.
[4]
C. Rolim, F. Koch, C. Westphall, J. Werner, A. Fracalossi, and G. Sal-
vador, “A cloud computing solution for patient’s data collection in health
care institutions,” in eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2010.
ETELEMED ’10. Second International Conference on, Feb 2010, pp.
95–99.
[5]
FreshTemp,
“Cloud-based
temperature
monitoring
tool,”
https://
freshtemp.com/ [retrieved: 23-09-2014].
[6]
SensaTrack,
“Online
sensor
monitoring
platform,”
http:
//www.sensatrack.com/index.html [retrieved: 23-09-2014].
[7]
D. Catrein, M. Henze, K. Wehrle, and R. Hummen, “A cloud design for
user-controlled storage and processing of sensor data,” in Proceedings
of the 2012 IEEE 4th International Conference on Cloud Computing
Technology and Science (CloudCom), ser. CLOUDCOM ’12, 2012, pp.
232–240.
[8]
Aoki, H. et al., “Cloud architecture for tight interaction with the
real world and deep sensor-data aggregation mechanism,” in Software,
Telecommunications and Computer Networks (SoftCOM), 2010 Inter-
national Conference on, September 2010, pp. 280–284.
[9]
Piyare, R. et al., “Integrating wireless sensor network into cloud
services for real-time data collection,” in ICT Convergence (ICTC),
2013 International Conference on, Oct 2013, pp. 752–756.
[10]
A. Alamri, W. S. Ansari, M. M. Hassan, M. S. Hossain, A. Alelaiwi, and
M. A. Hossain, “A survey on sensor-cloud: Architecture, applications,
and approaches,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks,
2013, http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/917923, In-press.
[11]
A. Salehi and K. Aberer, “GSN, quick and simple sensor network de-
ployment,” european conference on Wireless Sensor Networks (EWSN),
Netherlands, January 2007.
[12]
Open Geospatial Consortium, “Sensor observation service,” http://www.
ogcnetwork.net/SOS Intro [retrieved: 23-09-2014].
[13]
IBM, “Ibm mote runner for wireless sensor platform,” http://www.
zurich.ibm.com/moterunner/ [retrieved: 23-09-2014].
[14]
Caracas, A. et al., “Energy-efﬁciency through micro-managing com-
munication and optimizing sleep,” in Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc
Communications and Networks (SECON), 2011 8th Annual IEEE
Communications Society Conference on, June 2011, pp. 55–63.
[15]
A. Caracas, T. Kramp, M. Baentsch, M. Oestreicher, T. Eirich, and
I. Romanov, “Mote runner: A multi-language virtual machine for small
embedded devices,” in Sensor Technologies and Applications, 2009.
SENSORCOMM ’09. Third International Conference on, June 2009,
pp. 117–125.
[16]
MicroStrain,
“Microstrain
sensorcloud
platform,”
http://www.
sensorcloud.com/ [retrieved: 23-09-2014].
[17]
V. K. Sehgal, A. Patrick, and L. Rajpoot, “A comparative study of cyber
physical cloud, cloud of sensors and internet of things: Their ideol-
ogy, similarities and differences,” in Advance Computing Conference
(IACC), 2014 IEEE International.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 708–716.
[18]
Ostia,
“Portus
Platform,”
http://www.ostiasolutions.com/index.php/
product/platform-overview [retrieved: 23-09-2014].
[19]
TempoDB, “The Time Series Database Service,” https://tempo-db.com/
[retrieved: 15-08-2014].
[20]
Zhang, Jia et al., “Sensor data as a service–a federated platform
for mobile data-centric service development and sharing,” in Services
Computing (SCC), 2013 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE,
2013, pp. 446–453.
[21]
TempoIQ, “Sensor Analytics for the Measured World,” https://www.
tempoiq.com/?r=1 [retrieved: 23-09-2014].
[22]
Bluwird, “BLUWIRED S-CLOUD Platform,” http://bluwired.com/
Pages/Discover/BluwiredCloud.aspx [retrieved: 23-09-2014].
[23]
J. Hong and M. Baker, “Interaction platforms, energy conservation,
behavior change research, and more,” IEEE Pervasive Computing,
vol. 12, no. 3, 2013, pp. 10–13.
[24]
Yang, Kuo-pao et al., “Park-a-lot: An automated parking management
system,” Computer Science and Information Technology, vol. 1, no. 4,
2013, pp. 276–279.
[25]
C. Doukas and I. Maglogiannis, “Bringing IoT and cloud computing
towards pervasive healthcare,” in 2012 Sixth International Conference
on Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing
(IMIS).
IEEE, 2012, pp. 922–926.
[26]
A. A. Chandra, Y. Lee, B. M. Kim, S. Y. Maeng, S. H. Park, and
S. R. Lee, “Review on sensor cloud and its integration with arduino
based sensor network,” in IT Convergence and Security (ICITCS), 2013
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–4.
[27]
ThingSpeak, “ThingSpeak Platform,” https://thingspeak.com/ [retrieved:
23-09-2014].
[28]
Microsoft, “Microsoft azure intelligent system service,” http://www.
microsoft.com/windowsembedded/en-us/intelligent-systems-service.
aspx [retrieved: 23-09-2014].
[29]
M. Prihodko, “Energy consumption in location sharing protocols for
android applications,” in The Institute of Technology, Linkoeping Uni-
versity, 2012, Master Thesis.
[30]
V. C. Emeakaroha, P. Healy, K. Fatema, and J. P. Morrison, “Anal-
ysis of data interchange formats for interoperable and efﬁcient data
communication in clouds,” in Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/ACM 6th
International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing, ser. UCC
’13, 2013, pp. 393–398.
[31]
N.-L. Tran, S. Skhiri, and E. Zimanyi, “EQS: An elastic and scalable
message queue for the cloud,” in 2011 IEEE Third International
Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom),
2011, pp. 391–398.
[32]
S. Vinoski, “Advanced message queuing protocol,” IEEE Internet Com-
puting, vol. 10, no. 6, 2006, pp. 87–89.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Towards Tactical Military Software Defined Radio 
 
 
Major Tapio Saarelainen, PhD, IARIA Fellow 
Research and Development Division 
Army Academy 
Lappeenranta, Finland 
tapio.saarelainen@mil.fi 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents an idea-phase introduction of a 
tactical level communication system (battalion and below), 
which enables utilizing different waveforms and frequencies 
when communicating by using Software Defined Radio. The 
discussed idea-stage solution relies on using Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles 
as 
hub-stations 
in 
order 
to 
ensure 
secure 
communication and reliable data transmission as regards wide 
bandwidth transmission to base-stations. The need for timely 
and accurate analyzing of the increasing amount of Situational 
Awareness and Common Operational Picture –related data 
collected keeps looming large in the battlespace. Similarly, the 
type and amount of different waveforms and frequencies also 
keep increasing. Software Defined Radio with its Graphic User 
Interface application, as discussed in the Results section, may 
offer one way of freeing the hands of a warrior to handle his or 
her firearm instead of a myriad of communication devices 
while in combat. This paper briefly looks at communication 
enabled by using swarms of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle and Self 
Organizing Networks in a military context and provisionally 
examines what testing and creating such a system would 
require and does so only at an early idea phase of a concept 
development process. 
Keywords- Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, Self-Organizing 
Networks, Software Defined Radio/Graphic User Interface. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents an idea-phase introduction of a 
tactical level (battalion and below) communication system to 
be used by a tactical end-user performing in a battlespace. As 
this paper’s contents represent an early idea stage of concept 
development, the system drafted and its features described 
have neither been operationalized nor field-tested. When 
creating any new functional system, the first step of the 
development process concerns outlining an idea of what a 
functioning system necessarily needs to comprise. This idea 
phase of a concept development process turns into a fully- 
fledged concept with operationalized features to be tested 
once the end-user devices discussed in this paper have first 
been brought into being. Testing the devices described in an 
environment similar to what the paper outlines requires 
resources, i.e., political decisions allowing funding, 
personnel, and time. Any testing in lab conditions becomes 
impossible as no 
combat settings 
can be neither 
operationalized nor modelled in laboratories.  
The key issue in modern warfare continues to be 
communication. Without communication there are neither 
coordinated operations nor success. High Data Rates (HDR) 
are needed for the type of data necessary in Battle 
Management Systems (BMS) and in Command Posts (CP) 
where operations are commanded and controlled and orders 
issued onwards for tasks to be executed by lower echelons. 
Military environment is challenging also from the 
perspective 
of 
communications. 
Hostile 
military 
environment possesses challenges of several types for the 
need to communicate. First of all, the communication 
environment, a battle zone, is hostile. An adversary party 
tries to deny the free use of the frequency spectrum. 
Similarly, 
attempts 
of 
jamming 
the 
adversary’s 
communication devices are typical of military actions 
executed in different frequencies and waveforms in the 
battlespace. Secondly, the soldier operating in a hostile 
territory using Cognitive Radios (CR) needs to establish 
mutual contact by using CR equipment to forming an ad hoc 
network. The challenge to create a functioning network in 
this case is exacerbated by the likely lack of accurate 
knowledge of the usage patterns of a radio spectrum in the 
hostile territory. If we compare this situation with a civilian 
case, where the frequencies and platforms are known in 
advance, the challenge in the military case has to be solved 
somehow in order to create a functioning communication 
network. 
This paper introduces the challenges of the Future Force 
Warrior 
from 
the 
perspective 
of 
a 
consumer 
of 
communication services. This issue is essential for both the 
research community and the relevant industry. Once 
problems are pointed out, the process of finding solutions is 
easier. This paper presents one solution for how to facilitate 
fighters’ need for constant capability to communicate in the 
battlespace. 
This paper examines tactical level military operating 
referring to commanded tasks being executed at the level of 
company and below. Both soldiers and commanders of any 
kind are dependent on radios to execute missions. A single 
soldier relies on radio communication in order to be 
commanded. This asks for a reliable communication tool and 
a robust ubiquitous network system that allows for precision 
and minimized collateral damage. A battlespace can be 
understood as an environment, where operations are being 
executed including land, sea, air, underwater and cyber 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

operational environments. Warriors, sensors and Unmanned 
Vehicles (UVs) of several types operate and communicate in 
the versatile, constantly changing battlespace. As indicated 
in [1], militaries are using sensors as part of their battlefield 
strategy. As mentioned in [1], the integration of data 
collecting capabilities is in an essential role in expanding the 
communication platform capabilities. The key issues involve 
collecting the data, analyzing these data, and forwarding the 
analyzed data reliably and in an intact form to the end-user, a 
Future Force Warrior (FFW). Networks have to be organized 
to cover the needs of the end-user at all levels, as explained 
in [2]. Issues such as Quality of Service (QoS) and Speed of 
Service (SoS) are seminal in tactical communications [2]. 
Militaries concentrate on sustaining and developing their 
capability to communicate in a battlespace. To optimize 
performance, a Future Force Warrior needs only one 
communication device, which can be Software Defined 
Radio (SDR) for the reasons listed. First, one communication 
device covers all the communication needs of an FFW 
instead of him or her needing to use several communication 
devices. The focus of the FFW has to be in fighting. This 
means that an FFW keeps his or hands around the weapon, 
monitors the threats in the battlespace and fights. Secondly, 
mobility- and action-critical matters from the perspective of 
an FFW, such as size, weight, and power and cost (SWAP-
C), are relevant. Thirdly, one power source should cover the 
need of communication devices instead of several sources 
(i.e., power source for radio and Personal Digital Assistant). 
Lastly, 
one 
communication 
device 
will 
ease 
the 
communication burden of an FFW and he or she can focus 
on the main functions: to monitor the environment and fight 
to survive. Present military communications are based on 
combat net radios (CNR), dominated by the enhanced 
position location reporting system and the single channel 
ground and airborne radio systems. This means that the 
varying levels of tactical communication can comprise 
several actuators. The distances between the communicating 
elements can vary from only a few meters to tens of 
kilometers and more. Tactical communication utilizes 
unmanned vehicles, drones and satellites acting as hubs or 
relay stations. The term tactical refers to the operative 
capabilities of a given military force. For example, a 
maneuver, which is tactical for the U.S. Army with its 
special forces, can be an operative maneuvre for an army 
smaller in size and its operative capability. 
The basic problem in communication is that the High 
Data Rate gives shorter range in communication (e.g., 4 x 
rate = ½ range). Therefore we have to solve this problem 
with different means than just increasing the data range with 
increased 
transmission 
power. 
Despite 
the 
system 
characteristics, the communication system for military use in 
lower echelons (i.e., companies and below) has to fulfil the 
requirements of operational security, coverage, connectivity 
and Low Probability of Detection (LPD) and Low 
Probability of Identification (LPI). Military operations are 
dependent on covert high-speed networks, which also 
represent functional requirement of modern infantry and 
special operations warfare [3]. 
This paper introduces a solution utilizing a swarm of 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and SDRs. The swarm 
of UAVs is seen as a platform for a communications system, 
in which the distances between the UAVs must be short to 
ensure the message throughput in a hostile communication 
environment. This aims at ensuring a reliable data exchange 
process and fulfilling the requirements of LPD and LPI. 
SDRs are used by FFWs performing at the tactical level and 
also embedded into each UAV to ensure a reliable data 
exchange process. The swarms of UAVs in this system are in 
a central role to ensure the message throughput in a case 
when one or several UAVs are destroyed. Once a UAV 
becomes incompetent to act as a relay-station, a neighboring 
UAV takes over its functions and, with the assistance of 
Self-Organizing 
Networks 
(SON), 
the 
routing 
of 
communication can be reorganized and ensured.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses 
Military Communication Environment, Section III focuses 
on the Challenges of FFW, Section IV introduces SDR, 
Section V introduces Universal Software Radio Peripheral 
(USRP). Section VI concentrates on explaining the idea of 
Cognitive Radio (CR). Section VII discusses the significance 
of a Graphic User Interface, and Section VIII introduces the 
new system. Section IX examines the strengths and 
weaknesses of the introduced system and Section X 
concludes the paper with Section XI describing the demands 
for future work. 
II. 
MILITARY COMMUNICATION ENVIRONMENT 
Military communication environment differs from its 
civilian 
counterpart. 
Any 
civilian 
communication 
environment tends to be non-hostile and its features 
thoroughly known in that the transmission distances, 
frequencies and waveforms used are common knowledge. In 
contrast, the military communication environments are part 
of a battlespace and abound in uncertainties in connectivity 
and latency may vary uncontrollably due to incessant hostile 
electronic warfare attempts. Communication break-down in a 
battlespace typically results in compromising someone’s life. 
A given battlespace comprehends also the communication 
environment, in which war is waged. Military frequencies 
tend to be mandatory and always commanded from higher 
echelons in order to control the electromagnetic spectrum 
most effectively from the execution perspective of own 
military operations. 
Military troops equipped with varying end-user devices 
transform the battlespace of 21st century into network-
centric warfare with Network Centric Operations in a central 
role. SDRs will provide a flexible tool suited for the 
changing military environments in that they allow versatile 
communication in the battlespace [4]. In a constantly 
changing battlespace the commanded troops can be mobile 
or static. Often the communication tools, end-user devices, 
are handheld and lightweight. A ground level military 
performer, soldier, has to be able to communicate also via 
satellites in order to contact higher echelons, for example, 
when executing special operations in rocky terrain. The size 
of the used system, together with its weight, power and cost 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

(SWAP-C) become vital from the perspective of the system 
user and provider. 
For the end-user, to be able to cover multiple battlespace 
scenarios, the simultaneous requirement of communication 
requirements such as voice, video and data together with the 
capabilities and megabit bandwidths set design challenges. 
Moreover, to sustain secure communication by means of the 
end-user devices, new military waveforms have been 
designed to fulfil the requirements of the end-user, a soldier. 
An example of such waveforms suitable for an SDR-based 
system implementation is WiMAX 802.16e, which has been 
modified to operate in the military frequency range of the 
NATO UHF band of 225 – 400 MHz [5]. 
A future military SDR-platform should support multiple 
radio frequency frontends. Depending on the available and 
sufficient frequency bands, different frontends could be 
installed. The flexible use of different frontends and 
waveforms enable finding a suitable system configuration for 
all the planned operational scenarios. The next generation 
SDR-based platform should enable at least the following 
benefits for tactical networking: First, mobility support for 
mobile ad hoc network (MANET). Second, sufficient 
communication capacity must be guaranteed at the tactical 
level, this is a minimum throughput of 1 Mbps to support 
mobile user. Third, from a perspective of life cycle 
management, a SDR platform must be independent from the 
waveforms and frequencies used. Fourth, communication 
flexibility has to be ensured with radio frequencies in SDR 
frontends and with used waveforms. Fifth, interoperability 
with national and coalition waveforms has to be granted [5]. 
In a civilian communication environment an end-user can 
benefit from reliable and fast communication, high 
throughput of messages, issues of low latency, the constant 
capability to communicate, adequate bandwidth, good 
Quality of Service (QoS), and Speed of Service (SoS). 
Civilian communication systems offer the possibility to 
benefit from constant power supply or the capability to 
recharge the battery of the used communication device when 
necessary. The communication process usually suffers from 
only slight if any hostile interference or jamming. 
Communication 
systems 
utilized 
in 
a 
military 
environment can confront all types of interferences. These 
include jamming and all means electronic warfare with a 
constant threat of becoming annihilated by the adversary if a 
communication tool has been detected, pinpointed, and 
placed in the targeting process to be destroyed. Table I lists 
the differences between civilian and military communication 
environments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CIVILIAN AND 
MILITARY COMMUNICATION ENVIRONMENT 
Characteristic
s of 
Communicati
on 
Military 
communication 
environment 
Civilian 
communicatio
n environment 
Free  use of 
spectrum 
Restricted 
More 
possibilities 
Latency 
Varying, 
sometimes 
high 
Typically low 
Energy 
Limited, hard 
to recharge 
Possibility to 
recharge fast 
Hostility 
High 
Low 
Jamming 
Possible 
Low 
Adequate 
bandwidth 
Limited, 
altering 
Typically high 
Limitations in 
use 
Often restricted 
No limitations 
 
As Table I indicates, in a military communication 
environment the characteristics of communication involve 
restrictions and constant uncertainty due to hostility in the 
battlespace. 
III. 
CHALLENGES OF FFW 
The following overview lists six challenges which have 
been identified within the military community. The writer 
has encountered these challenges while conducting research 
on related issues, such as a nationwide Company Attack 
Study performed during 2004 – 2007 in Finland. The first 
challenge is related to the main task of a fighter: the main 
task of an FFW is to fight in performing the given mission. 
This means he or she has to monitor the environment to stay 
alive and to be able to execute the commanded tasks. He or 
she engages the enemy with all the weaponry available. This 
also means that the FFW relies on connectivity and 
capability to communicate at all times. The constant 
connectivity poses the second challenge. Mission success 
requires the capability to transmit and receive data and 
commands. The constant communicating ability requires that 
a single warrior be capable of acting as an executor of an 
operation, or a military commander at some level. 
Connectivity remains the key. Some sort of a network must 
be available at all times. Location data and commands can be 
forwarded only by means of a functioning network and a 
reliable hand-held or soldier-mounted communication 
device. 
The third challenge is linked to the usage of warrior 
platforms. A warrior platform consists of several subsystems 
and their control units. For example, the systems can be 
controlled via a wrist-worn user-interface presented here. All 
the communication controls can be easily and rapidly found 
from the wrist-held device which is embedded onto the arm 
and acts as a supporting hand when using a personal firearm. 
Contrary to a visor-embedded system, this wrist-held device 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

does not hamper viewing the environment with a constant 
data flow. Figure 1 features a wrist-held device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  A wrist-worn control system into which SDR can be embedded. 
The fourth challenge involves the number of networks 
and data sources on which an FFW relies. If the 
communication network or operating unit malfunctions, 
FFWs get in trouble because they lack the necessary 
resources either because of the different frequency of 
waveform used or the network becoming out of coverage. 
This slows down a single FFW and usually harms the whole 
military operation. 
The fifth challenge equals the access to different types of 
Battle Management Systems (BMSs). BMSs support the 
efficient utilization of military units at all levels. The access 
process into a BMS requires more bandwidth than using 
voice and text messaging when issuing commands. Figure 2 
features BMS. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Soldier Systems linkage into Battle Management Systems. 
This sets more bandwidth demands for SDRs used. The 
data may surface in varying waveforms and frequencies. In 
order to benefit from BMSs, the location and identification 
of friend or foe are relevant. These data are needed from the 
battlespace to ensure the effective use of different weapon 
systems. 
Systems related to location data and identification 
systems keep improving. The command and control 
capabilities necessary for units serving at battalion level and 
below are provided by means of BMS. Present combat net 
radios can only be seen as beneficial tools in supporting 
geographical based situational awareness. When several 
operational BMSs are integrated, it is possible to maximize 
the amount quantitative and qualitative data for analysis 
purposes. This involves applying the concept of System of 
Systems (SOS) and utilizing robotic platforms. The sixth 
challenge is the type of a Graphic User Interface (GUI) of a 
communication device, which can be used for various 
purposes. GUIs can be utilized in creating the Situational 
Awareness and Common Operational Picture as well as for 
location services and for weapon selection process. Although 
one of the challenges is the variety of used waveforms and 
the bandwidths, they fall outside of the scope of this study. 
This paper discusses a possible solution for the listed 
challenges. 
IV. 
SOFTWARE DEFINED RADIO 
SDR is a radio communication system in which 
components that have typically been implemented in 
hardware, 
for 
example, 
mixers, 
filters, 
amplifiers, 
modulators/demodulators, 
and 
detectors, 
are 
instead 
implemented by means of software on a personal computer 
or embedded system. Usually SDR can be programmed to 
support frequencies from 100 MHz to 6 GHz with using 130 
nm Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) 
technology [6]. Depending on the system configuration, 
typically supported signal bandwidths can vary between 700 
kHz and 40 MHz or 200 kHz and 40 MHz, depending on the 
CMOS used [6]. In other words, SDR is a wireless 
communications system where the traditional hardware is 
replaced by software modules [7]. While the concept of SDR 
is not new, the rapidly evolving capabilities of digital 
electronics enable executing many such processes which 
earlier used to be only theoretically possible. 
Currently, most SDR related products and studies focus 
on analog communication and voice transmission. The SDR 
platform consists of Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) 
-based radio hardware and open source SDR software 
module [7]. 
The main features of SDR include: 1) radio spectrum 
sensing; 2) reconfigurable radio modules and 3) link for 
digital data communication. These features form an 
important basis to accomplish Cognitive Radio technologies. 
The mobile devices can afford the high speed and 
complex computation owing to the advance in computing 
ability of the processor, such as Personal Digital Assistant 
(PDA), Smart Phone, or Ultra-Mobile PC (UMPC). 
Most of these mobile devices equipped with Wi-Fi, 
WiMAX or other wireless modules enable end-users to 
access services anywhere. The traditional hardware radio 
system comprises a variety of analogy elements such as 
filters, converters, modulators and demodulators. The 
hardware is expensive and has low compatibility with other 
components. 
The reason why SDR becomes increasingly popular is 
that it allows using SDR technology for realizing many 
applications relatively effortlessly in the integration of 
different components. The most used software architecture 
for SDR is the Software Communications Architecture 
(SCA), which is considered as the standard for military 
domain [4]. The novelty of SCA lies in the availability of 
SCA-based tools to allow designers to create component-
based SDR-applications as assemblies of components and 
logical devices. When these types of systems are being 
created, the communication between the components and 
devices must be carefully orchestrated. In this process it is 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

possible to benefit from the use of Common Object Request 
Broker Architecture (CORBA) [4]. 
When discussing SDRs, security issues must be 
considered. When new Software (SW) is being loaded, the 
consequent threat of having unauthorized and potentially 
malicious SW installed on the platform becomes possible, if 
security precautions have not been taken, by, for example, 
adding a digital and verified signature in the code before the 
new software is being transmitted. 
In order to successfully benefit from the products and 
performance of SDR, we have to focus only the performance 
produced via SDR. The added value from SDR can be seen 
via tactical communication requirements for the FFFW 
operating in Battlespace which are: Situational Awareness 
(SA), Common Operational Picture (COP), Command and 
Control systems, identification friend or foe (cf. Figure 3. 
below), (IFF)/Blue Force Tracking, capability to co-operate 
with UAVs and Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) and 
robots, data from sensor to shooter, Voice, Navigation, 
messaging, Imaging, Video, Security. 
One interesting possibility is to embed Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) system into SDR by using Quadrature 
Amplitude Modulation (QAM). The system has been 
explained in [8]. The identification friend or foe (IFF) 
process can be embedded as part of SDR functions. Figure 
features 3 an IFF process. 
 
Figure 3.  Identification process Friend or Foe (IFF) in progress. 
By simply downloading a new program, a SDR is able to 
interoperate with different wireless protocols, incorporate 
new services, and upgrade to new standards. One solution is 
depicted below above while the process is introduced in 
Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4.  RFID system with SDR [8]. 
As Figure 4 indicate, by combining the Radio Frequency 
Identification tags and IFF –process it is possible to decrease 
the total mass of the gear a FFW carries. Similarly, this 
enables 
simultaneously 
decreasing 
the 
amount 
of 
transmission energy necessary for identification purposes. 
RFIDs can be sensitive to electromagnetic interrogation 
signal by nature and need little energy when responding once 
only a slight transmission signal focuses on them. Thereby 
the amount of response energy transmitted towards of the 
interrogator can be significantly small. This means Low 
Probability of Detection as regards the surveillance tools 
spread in the battlespace. Relevant for operational security 
purposes, the interrogation process remains undetected and 
discreet. 
V. 
UNIVERSAL SOFTWARE PERIPHERAL RADIO 
In Universal Software Peripheral Radio, we examine 
only the functionality of USRP. In doing so, we notice it 
offers more performance than its predecessor SDR. The 
technology used in USRP is located in the hardware 
implemented in frontend for sending and receiving 
waveforms. USRP offers different frequencies, bandwidths 
and frequencies for specific purposes. The USRP can be 
fixed to respond to the end-users’ requirements by selecting 
appropriate motherboards for controlling the frequencies and 
waveforms [7]. 
USRP can be divided into two parts based on the 
transmission path. These are the transmitting signal path and 
receiving signal path. For example, on transmit signal path, 
users can define the setting parameters by software on 
personal computer such as radio protocols, modulation types, 
frequency of spectrum modulation. 
Then the USRP receives the parameters, and FPGA 
executes Intermediate Frequency (IF) processing on Digital 
Up Converter (DUC) and Digital Down Converter (DDC). 
After the Intermediate Frequency process, users adjust the 
baseband to the frequency band selected before. 
The last step on USRP motherboard is that digital to 
analog (DAC) converts the digital signal into analog signal. 
Finally, the analog signal is transmitted to the antenna 
through the interface side on the daughterboard, as illustrated 
in USRP block diagram in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Composition of USRP [7]. 
As Figure 5 demonstrates, the composition of the 
introduced USRP system offers flexibility in using different 
waveforms and frequencies. The flexibility can be offered by 
different daughterboards which can be tailored to meet the 
requirements of different frequencies and waveforms. By 
changing and tuning the performances of daughterboards, the 
FFWs 
have 
improved 
communication 
devices 
as 
communication tools in a constantly altering battlespace and 
varying missions. 
VI. 
COGNITIVE RADIO 
When moving on towards the communication device 
suitable for an FFW, we have to take a quick glance at 
Cognitive Radio (CR). As widely known, Software defined 
Radio is a platform for Cognitive Radio [9]. Without going 
into the details of the technical structure or composition of 
CR, we focus on the listed and wanted end-products and 
functionalities of the CR from an FFW perspective.   
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Cognitive Radio capabilities and functionalities include the 
following features. First, Spectrum Awareness (SAw), which 
means being able to detect quickly and robustly the presence 
of incumbent (preemptive) users to avoid causing 
interference. Second, Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA), 
which means CRs will access the spectrum on an 
opportunistic basis. Third, Dynamic Spectrum Sharing 
(DSS), which means CRs must be aware of other CRs’ 
coexistence. Lastly, CRs are Spectrum Agile (SAg), which 
means that CRs should provide seamless operation over 
multiple channels. Also challenges related to adaptive 
coding, modulation and multi-access have to be solved as 
indicated in [9]. 
There is a long way towards CR, which meets the listed 
requirements. From the perspective of an end-user, a 
consumer, an FFW, it is essential to meet the requirements 
listed. This also applies as regards the scientific community 
and the industrial community. The necessary requirements 
have to be identified prior to being able to produce a wanted 
end-product. 
One solution for designing the suitable architecture and 
configurations for the future force radio communication 
device could be Software Communications architecture. 
SCA has been created to assist in the development process of 
SDR communication systems. SCA allows for waveform 
application software to be more easily ported across radio 
platforms. At the moment publicly available specifications 
can be found for SCA 2.2.2 and 4.0, as well as for SCA 
Appendices and SCA APIs. As a matter of fact, it is possible 
in next generation products to take full advantage of the 
following: First, SCA 4.0, which is to empower more 
freedom 
to 
do 
the 
SDR 
implementation. 
Second, 
Programmable SDR chip sets. Third, offering more efficient 
SDR development tools and use of more efficient higher 
level modelling methods. Fourth, adding a new approach to 
waveform portability and full utilization of SDR work done 
in commercial domain. Lastly, designers are focusing on 
developing of sophisticated RF front-end technologies. 
SOA -technology involves assisting processes performed 
in military operations. As indicated in [10], the SOA has 
been used to design and construct the CR systems. When an 
FFW can benefit from the possibilities offered by a 
successful adoption SOA, also in communication services, 
the result can be improved overall performance in military 
operations. 
Figure 6 features how the data are gathered, processed, 
analyzed and then transmitted as commands to an FFW. If 
the data are correctly collected, analyzed and successfully 
transmitted to the performer, an FFW, the process of waging 
war can be improved and collateral damage minimized. 
Various battlespace sensors transmit data to a context-aware 
reasoning layer. In this layer, data are converted to context 
and an inference engine transmits the data to a ubiquitous 
main layer for analyzing purposes. The data are verified, 
analyzed and transmitted as information for the execution of 
the operation [11]. This process is depicted in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Increased FFW performance can be gained via successful data 
utilization and analyzing process [11]. 
Once the collected data have been analyzed, they can be 
forwarded to the military performers who need these data 
most. The transmission process has to be automated to 
ensure sustaining soverall performance. 
VII. GRAPHIC USER INTERFACE 
A new type of communication device for an FFW has to 
fulfil the specific communication needs of an FFW. The 
communication system and the GUIs have to be defined to 
fulfil the needs. Figure 7 features the actuators affecting the 
system definition process. 
 
Figure 7.  The idea of configuration of the future communication device 
from a perspective of a consumer, an FFW. 
According to results presented in [12], the visualization 
of events can improve the human capability to accelerate the 
Military Decision Making Process (MDMP) by offering 
necessary information in required time and understandable 
form.  From the perspective of a consumer, an important role 
is set for the type of a GUI. A functional GUI is a means to 
present collected data, a control panel to access networks and 
guide UVs, a tool for a weapon selection process, and, of 
course, a communication tool for the entities of higher and 
lower echelons. Figure 8 features one possible figure caption 
of a functional GUI. 
 
Figure 8.  A wiev of a Graphic User Interface. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Apart from the mentioned facts, an FFW has to be able to 
access BMSs of various types and different databases with a 
new type of communication tool. Figure 9 features one type 
of BMS where an FFW can be constantly connected to 
optimize the performance while executing tasks. 
 
Figure 9.  A wiev of a BMS. 
Lastly, an FFW has to be able to control the systems 
embedded on his Battle Dress Uniform (BDU). Figure 10 
below features the FFW’s electronic skeleton and its 
functions [13]. 
 
Figure 10.  A composition of a FFW’s electronic skeleton [13]. 
An FFW uses the control unit embedded into his BDU as 
an essential tool to control and monitor the functions of own 
gear. In Figure 11 below, the controlling system is wrist-
worn. 
 
Figure 11.  An example of an FFW as a platform with selected gear [14]. 
By embedding all the control units of the FFW’s 
electronic gear into one wrist-worn controller, the number of 
controlling units can be decreased. This may increase the 
overall performance of the FFW as the FFW can find all the 
control units in one location instead of needing to separately 
control each different embedded system listed in Figure 11. 
VIII. A NEW COMMUNICATION SYSTEM FOR THE FFW 
As noted in [3], mobile ad-hoc networking of dismounted 
combatants is necessary as regards the future involving net-
centric operations. The amount and variety of data 
transmitted in the battlespace keep increasing. Issues such as 
bandwidth, type of waveform, frequency and security are 
only a few of the issues that have to be accounted for. Low 
Probability 
of 
Detection 
and 
Low 
probability 
of 
Identification remain critical in covert operations, as 
mentioned in [3]. Single UAVs are utilized as tools tailored 
for Special Forces and a system relying on Advanced 
Encryption System (AES) encrypted network with a range of 
3 kilometers [12]. 
A new communication system is possible to create if we 
utilize the capabilities of SDR, swarms of UAVs, SDR and 
Self-Organizing Networks (SON) implemented in 4G 
networks. It has to be highlighted that in this system, SDRs 
are implemented in FFW gear and inside an UAV. As noted, 
SON aims to configure and optimize the network 
automatically, in a manner that the interaction of human can 
be reduced and the capacity of the network can be increased. 
The main functionality of SON includes the following: 
self-configuration, self-optimization and self-healing. SON is 
described as a part of 3GPP LTE and it is a key feature for 
effective and automatic operation and maintenance (O&M) 
of 4G networks. Besides that, SON maximizes overall 
performance of network and reduces the cost of installation 
and need of management by simplifying operation and 
maintenance through self-configuration, self-optimization 
and self-healing. SON also reduces the power consumption 
and results in reduced operational expenses and produces an 
environmentally friendly approach. Figure 12 features the 
SON as seen in [16]. 
 
Figure 12.  A composition of a SON implementation in 4G as seen in  [16]. 
When a swarm of UAVs is utilized, the distances needed 
to communicate with an FFW-worn SDR must be minimal in 
order to ensure the message throughput in this system. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Different types of data can be transmitted from a soldier to a 
higher echelon via an UAV. Security issues remain essential 
when dealing with UAVs utilized in Network Centric 
Warfare at a tactical level. This means opting for low 
transmission power and thus minimizing the chances of the 
UAV becoming detected, targeted, and destroyed. 
When transmission distances remain short between the 
ground (FFW) and aerial stations (UAV), the accrued and 
transmitted data can be better secured and requirements of 
LPD and LPI can achieved. When SON utilizes all the 
SDRs, those embedded into the UAVs and those embedded 
into soldier worn systems, this data exchange can be 
executed successfully and thus ensure that the data remain 
intact and coherent. Figure 13 features the data-exchange 
process via a command post and UAVs with the assistance 
of embedded SDRs into the mentioned entities. 
 
Figure 13.  A data exchange process with the swarm of UAVs. 
The swarms of UAVs will forward the data automatically 
via the network system created by UAVs. Demands of LPD 
and LPI can be fulfilled, because the transmitting energy 
used via the transmission protocols by means of UAVs 
remains low. 
IX. 
DISCUSSION 
A military environment, battlespace, differs from a 
civilian environment. In battlespace both constant stress and 
uncertainty continue to dominate. The fear of losing one’s 
life prevails. An FFW has to monitor his or her environment 
when fulfilling the commanded mission and stay alive. The 
mental capacity of an FFW must be focused on the matters at 
hand. The lower the number of gadgets an FFW has to 
monitor, the longer his or her life with an increased 
possibility to continue performing. 
Militaries aim at developing SDR into a communication 
tool for all the troops at the tactical level. The process of 
embedding a functional SDR as part of military troops’ 
communication devices is still globally ongoing in militaries, 
with no existing, operationally fully functional end-user 
devices anywhere in combat use able to transmit large 
amounts of data in various waveforms and frequencies. 
Meeting the requirements of mobile users in a battlespace 
remains challenging. Issues related to SWAP-C have to be 
solved. One critical challenge related to military SDR use 
involves achieving sufficient computational capacity. This is 
a problem when processing wide-band high-bit rate 
waveforms consisting large amounts of data. In terms of 
SWAP-C, an FFW needs the selected communication end-
user device to be reasonably tailored with optimally minimal 
total mass of a device, its batteries and recharging units. This 
means that Data Processing Units (DPUs) and Event Driven 
Administrative and Control Components (EDACCs) have to 
be carefully selected and orchestrated to meet the operational 
requirements of the end-user [7]. 
The issues related to energy cannot be over emphasized. 
The energy requirement of a typical handheld device can be 
between a few hundred milliwatts [15] to few Watts [8]. The 
system specifications of the SDR are significant in defining 
the energy needed as well as the amount of data transmitted. 
Challenges related to operational security are essential in 
reconfiguring the SDR-systems, especially as regards 
software. While loading a new program, new waveform or 
new hopping sequence, issues of transmission security 
during the different uploading processes have to be 
guaranteed. If this part becomes neglected, the SDR will not 
act as a useful tool in own hands in net-centric operations but 
rather becomes a novel tool to be exploited by the adversary. 
A communication system that serves fighters’ needs is 
creatable if we utilize the capabilities of SDR, swarms of 
UAVs, SDR and SON implemented in 4G networks and 
combine them as depicted in Figure 13. This means that an 
FFW’s end-user device, SDR, is connected with a swarm of 
UAVs via SON. The swarms of UAVs form an own data 
communication system in which the data transmission 
distances between UAVs are short and operationally secure. 
This in turn will fulfill the requirements of LPD and LPI. 
The described delicate system introduced is a new one and 
based on ideas that can be executed by utilizing existing 
Commercially Off-the-Shelf (COTS) technology.  The 
system is not yet bullet-proof and can malfunction for a 
number of reasons. Challenges related to creating the 
described system have to be solved to enable the function of 
different processes. The orchestration of the system can also 
fail because of intentional enemy action (jamming, a virus, a 
worm). The system needs to be equipped with an analyzing 
program, which indicates when the system functions 
properly before using the system. This asks for an easily 
replaceable and fault-tolerant system with inbuilt check-in 
routines. Otherwise, traditional methods in orchestrating 
services need to be adopted. 
The 
introduced 
system 
offers 
an 
access 
to 
communication processes, which are created to support 
command and control systems. An FFW relies on 
communication services. To enhance SA and COP, it is 
essential to have user-friendly GUIs of some kind for 
presenting data. As noted, time remains a critical factor in 
tactical-level operations and the main function of an FFW is 
to fight, not to spend time browsing different databases in 
search for vital data. 
Creating a new communication tool requires resources, 
such as personnel, time, money, troops and space to execute 
the use of the tailored device in pre-defined drills. The 
vendors and the end-users have to co-operate to create a 
functioning communication and control tool for the use of an 
FFW. In the development process, the use-cases and usage 
methods of SDRs have to be defined. This includes defining 
use-cases of operations, training-scenarios, types and timing 
of operations, training practices, data gathering during the 
exercises, and After Action Reviews (AARs) together with 
debriefing-sessions for system designers and troops after 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

implementing the training-scenarios. The system-creation 
process requires strict timing in a well-orchestrated series of 
field testing in which the system users and system developers 
have to attend the tests at the same time. The time required 
for field testing equals approximately a decade, the number 
of training drills necessary a hundred, and the number of 
military personnel committed to executing the drills a 
hundred. The complexity of the SDR system requires that a 
handsome number of designers and engineers from the 
vendor’s attend the drills, ideally one on one. The estimated 
funding requirements equal at least a 100 M€. However, only 
average ballpark figures can be estimated as the actual 
realized costs and their approximations would by default 
value be labelled classified. The number of personnel and 
funding required described in this paper rely on the 
experience accumulated over twenty years on active duty as 
a field-test participant.  The military personnel, designers and 
engineers have to be fully committed to this work in order to 
achieve results. Table II below lists the identified resources 
needed for the described study. In order to create a feasible 
testing system, an amount of work equal to producing a 
dissertation is required. 
TABLE II.  
ESTIMATED RESOURCES TEQUIRED FOR FIELD-TESTING 
Types of 
resources 
required 
Vendor 
side 
Military 
side 
Money 
30 M€ 
70 M€ 
Personnel 
100 
100 
Time for 
planning 
2 years 
2 year 
Time for testing 
the system 
5 years 
5 years 
Time for 
evaluating the 
results and the 
system 
2 years 
2 years 
Reserve time 
1 year 
1 year 
Total resources 
10 years 
and 
30 M€ 
10 years 
and 
70 M€ 
 
Table II features only a rough estimate. More precise 
data requires pre-planning for a period of twelve months. 
Different sources of funding, such as industrial and / or 
academic contributions of personnel and / or equipment, 
need to be estimated before any final estimation is doable. 
X. 
RESULTS 
The main result is an idea-phase introduction of a tactical 
level (battalion and below) communication system to be used 
by a tactical end-user performing in a battlespace. As this 
paper’s contents represent an early idea stage of concept 
development, the system drafted and its features described 
can neither be operationalized nor field-tested. 
An FFW performs in a battlespace filled with ubiquitous 
networks and communication systems. He or she has to cope 
with actions involving humans and machines, such as 
databases and UVs. Equipped with a reliable communication 
tool, an FFW can perform tasks with improved speed and 
efficiency. Bespoke SDR can enhance the performance of an 
FFW by answering the defined challenges listed in Section 
III. 
To sustain optimal performance, an FFW has to be able 
to use only one single device for command and control. This 
device can be an SDR with a GUI. This way there is only 
one single device, Software Defined Radio/Graphic User 
Interface (SDR/GUI), for an FFW to communicate and use 
controls with instead of being exposed to several 
communication tools. Compared to a stable civilian 
environment, a military environment equals a constantly 
altering battlespace. An FFW has to be able to monitor the 
events in the prevailing environment instead of needing to 
update the status and monitor his or her command and 
communication tool.  An FFW has to have hands on a 
weapon and be ready to act when necessary. If unable to do 
so, the FFW will become incapacitated by a splinter or a 
bullet. It is essential to enable an FFW to receive and 
transmit data with the assistance of SDR/GUI, into which 
SDR can be embedded. 
First, an improved SDR/GUI can act as a control-station 
for all of the digital systems. This allows an FFW to focus on 
his or her main task, to fight. He or she can monitor the 
prevailing environment and use his or her weaponry in a 
time-critical environment. Second, an FFW can concentrate 
on one device, SDR/GUI, instead of monitoring several 
screens and displays. He or she saves time and can focus on 
the task commanded. Third, the control units of his or her 
own warrior skeleton and communication controls can be 
found from one communication device, SDR/GUI. The 
fourth challenge can also be solved by adopting SDR/GUI 
which will take care of the various networks and waveforms 
and switch automatically to the free and appropriate channel 
to transmit or receive data. 
The fifth challenge was a problem concerning the access 
to BMS via different communication tools. The problem is 
linked to the issues of bandwidth, frequency and waveform. 
The accessing process into BMS involves utilizing the 
performance provided by the SDR and SON. This means 
offering the frequencies, bandwidths and waveforms 
required from the fighters’ perspective. The swarm of UAVs 
serves as a secure and replaceable communication gateway 
for the data exchange process. This allows for keeping the 
transmission power low and transmission ranges relatively 
short. The Sixth challenge was linked to the GUIs. To 
comprehend the prevailing operational situation and a 
holistic list of events at a tactical level, an informative 
presentation of SA and COP is in an essential role. The 
presented system together with improved SDR/GUI can be 
seen as a feasible solution to solve all the listed challenges. 
Figure 14 features a possible view of a functional SDR/GUI 
for the FFW operating at low level (company and below) 
tactical operations. 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 14.  An example of tactical SDR/GUI. 
Tactical SDR/GUIs can serve as command and control 
tools offered for the FFWs. SDR/GUIs can be utilized as 
tools for possibly enhancing the overall performance of the 
soldier. An FFW needs only a short period of time to take a 
look at the SDR/GUI and notice if something significant has 
changed in the overview. An FFW can concentrate on his or 
her main mission, which is to fight instead of constantly 
monitoring all the controlling units of his or her gear. 
XI. 
FURTHER WORK 
When moving towards tactical military SDR/GUI, the 
system presented requires funding and field testing to be able 
to create a functional end-product. The rough estimate of the 
resources required is evaluated above in Section IX and in 
Table II based on the experience gained in twenty years 
spent as a participant in different military tests. Automated 
systems and allocation of diminishing resources force 
militaries to consider the facilitated performance offered by 
means of exploiting SDR/GUI. The result could be an agile 
and modular military performer with ever-improved 
capabilities and SA completed with the capability to utilize 
the diminishing resources more optimally with decreased 
instances of collateral damage. 
Further work related to creating a functional system 
based on the idea-phase description outlined in this paper 
needs to pay attention to operational security issues of using 
software and hardware in a digitized battlespace. Issues such 
as adequate level of constant energy flow and protection 
against violations caused by electronic warfare must be 
studied, tested and solved before the adoption of the system 
in any type of operational use. 
The 
introduced 
idea-phase 
description 
of 
a 
communication system aims at being battle-proof from the 
perspective of using a swarms of UAVs in particular in that 
it guarantees the usability of the system functionality as the 
swarms of UAVs can automatically recreate a functional 
communication network and maintain an adequate distance 
between each UAV in all the circumstances and situations: 
once a UAV is destroyed or shot down, it has been 
programmed 
to 
destroy 
itself 
mechanically 
and 
electronically. The remaining fleets of UAVs corrects the 
formation of flying UAVs automated, to maintain a 
functioning and reliable communication system to ensure the 
communication system remains intact. SON supports the 
communication system formed by the swarms of UAVs 
together with SDRs. Unfortunately, when resources have 
been invested in further researching, developing, and, finally, 
implementing the system introduced here, the follow-up 
papers cannot any longer be accessed in any public domain 
data sources. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. A. Hempenius, A. R. Wilson, M. J. Kumar, N. Hosseini, 
M. E. Cordovez, and M. S. Sherriff, “A More Cost-Effective 
Unattended Ground Sensor Using Commercial Off-the-Shelf 
Products”, Proc. of 2012 IEEE Systems and Information 
Engineering Design Symposium, pp. 62 – 67, ISBN: 978-1-
4673-1286-8/12. 
[2] R. A. Syed and R.S. Wexler, “Army Warfighter Information 
Network-Tactical (WIN-T) Theory of Operation”, Military 
Communications Conference, MILCOM2013, 18–20 Nov. 
2013, 
San 
Diego 
CA, 
pp. 
1453 
– 
1461, 
doi: 
10.1109/MILCOM.2013.246.  
[3] S. L. Cotton and W.G. Scanlon, “Millimeter-Wave Soldier-to-
Soldier Communications for Covert Battlefield Operations”, 
IEEE 
Communications 
Magazine, 
pp.72 
– 
81, 
doi:10.1109/MCOM.2009.5273811, ISSN 0163-6804/09. 
[4] T. Ulversøy, Software Defined Radio: “Challenges and 
Opportunities”, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
Vol. 12, Issue: 4, Fourth Quarter 2010, pp. 531 – 550, 
doi:10.1109/SURV.2010.032910.00019. 
[5] J. Mölsä, J. Karsikas, A. Kärkkäinen, R. Kettunen, and P. 
Huttunen, ” Field test results and use scenarios for a WiMAX 
based Finnish broadband tactical backbone network” The 
2010 Military Communications Conference, San Jose, CA, 
Oct. 
31–Nov. 
3, 
2010, 
pp. 
2014 
– 
2019. 
doi:10.1109/MILCOM.2010.5680446, ISSN 2155-7578. 
[6] Scaldio, 
Reconfigurable 
Radio 
Transceiver 
IP, 
www2.imec.be/content/user/File/Brochures/GR2010_Leaflet 
Scaldio.pdf, accessed on 10th September 2014. 
[7] C-Y. Chen, F-H. Tseng, K-D. Chang, H-C. Chao, and J-L. 
Chen, “Reconfigurable Software Defined Radio and Its 
Applications”, Tamkang Journal of Science and Engineering, 
Vol. 13, No. 1, 2010, pp. 29 – 38.  
[8] M. Islam, M.A. Hannan, S.A Samad, and A. Hussain, 
“Software Defined Radio for RFID Application”, Proc. of the 
World Congress on Engineering and Computer Science 2009 
Vol I WCECS 2009, October 20–22, 2009, San Francisco, 
USA, pp. 415 – 418, ISBN:978-988-17012-6-8. 
[9] G. Thomas, “Situation Awareness Issues in Tactical 
Cognitive Radio”, Proc. of 2012 IEEE International Multi-
Diciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situational 
Awareness and Decision Support, 6–8 March 2012, pp. 287 – 
293, ISBN 978-1-4673-0345-3/12. 
[10] X. Dong, S. Wei, Y. Li, L. Wang, and L. Bai, “Service-
Oriented Radio Architecture: A Novel M2M Network 
Architecture for Cognitive Radio Systems”, Hindawi 
Publishing Corporation International Journal of Distributed 
Sensor Networks Volume 2012, Article ID 762953, 8 pages,  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2012/762953. 
[11] T. Saarelainen, “Modeling War as a Business Process with the 
Assistance of Service Oriented Architecture”, ICDT 2014 The 
Ninth International Conference on Digital Communications, 
Feb. 23–27, 2014 Nice, France, pp. 1 – 7, ISSN: 2308-3964, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-316-2. 
[12] R. Adams, “Special Operations Forces Skills”, Military 
Technology, Vol. XXXVIII, Issue 5/2014, p. 38 – 42, ISSN 
0722-3226. 
[13] T. Saarelainen and J. Jormakka, “Computer-Aided Warriors 
for Future Battlefields”, The 9th European Conference on 
Information Warfare and Security ECIW2009, Lisbon, 6–7 
July, 2009, Portugal, pp. 224 – 233, ISBN: 9781906638337. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[14] T. Saarelainen, “Improving the Performance of a Dismounted 
Future Force Warrior by Means of C4I2SR”, Doctoral 
Dissertation, 212 pages, ISSN: 1796-4059, ISBN 978-951-25-
2457-0, 2013. 
[15] Y. Lin, H. Lee, M. Who, Y. Harel, S. Mahlke, and T. Mudge, 
“SODA: A Low-Power Architecture for Software Radio”, 
Proc. of 33rd annual international Symposium on Computer 
Architecture, pp. 89 – 101, doi: 10.1109/ISCA.2006.37, 0-
7695-2608-X,ISBN: 0-7695-2608-X. 
[16] P. Pancholy, J. Kushwaha, and R. Chitranshi, “Smart 4G 
network:-Implementation of SDR & SON with Automatic 
EM Radiation control”, International Journal of Engineering 
Science and Innovative Technology (IJESIT) Volume 1, Issue 
2, November 2012, pp.14 – 18, ISSN:2319-5967. 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Small and Low Side Lobe Beam-forming Antenna Composed of Narrow Spaced Patch 
Antennas for Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Yosuke Sato, Shuzo Kato 
Research Institute of Electrical Communications, Tohoku University  
Sendai, Japan 
y-sato@riec.tohoku.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—In order to reduce sensor node power consumption 
and interference, high gain antennas are required for the base 
station (BS) but this means multiple BS antennas are required 
for 360° area coverage. A high gain beam-forming antenna is the 
key to base stations covering “spotty service areas” more 
effectively and reducing interference, especially in the ISM bands. 
To solve the size and side lobe issues of conventional beam-
forming antennas, this paper proposes the “narrowly spaced” 
patch antenna array. The measured performance of a prototype 
confirms that while being 2/3rds smaller than conventional 
antennas, it has lower side lobe levels (-20dBc) and high antenna 
gain (10dBi). 
Keywords— Antennas, Linear antenna arrays, Planar arrays, 
Patch antennas, Wireless sensor networks 
I. INTRODUCTION  
In order to realize wide area sensor networks, low energy 
critical infrastructure monitoring (LECIM) has been attracting 
attention resulting in the 802.15.4k standard of the IEEE802 
Standards committee. Since sensor nodes in wide area sensor 
networks are expected to offer long lifetimes with battery 
power, high gain base station antennas are required for 
reducing sensor node power consumption. High gain base 
station antennas are also a good solution to mitigating 
interference, a major problem in Industry-Science-Medical 
(ISM) band wireless communications systems [1-3]. Base 
station antennas that offer beam steering capability are also 
suitable for some wide area sensor networks, such as those for 
agriculture applications, where sensor nodes are closely 
located in multiple spots. Furthermore, 2-dimensonal (2-D) 
beam-forming is more suitable for multiple spot 
communications. The beam forming antenna composed of 
phased array antennas is a good candidate due to its high gain 
and electrical 2-dimensional beam steering. However, the 
traditional phased array antenna with more than λ/2 element 
separation is not suitable for wide area sensor network base 
station antennas since it is physically large and the antenna 
pattern side lobes are significantly high. The sheer size 
increases installation difficulties and decreases wind 
tolerances. Since conventional uniform distribution phased 
array antennas [4-6] have larger side lobe level than fixed 
directive antennas, such as sector antennas [7-9], the 
traditional phased array antenna increases interference to/from  
 
Fig.1. Antenna combination for 360 degree coverage 
 
 
other systems. Resently, narrow beam phased array antenna 
were proposed [10-11] for radar applications. Since the 
narrow beam antenna required more than 10-elements with 
more than l/2 element separation, these antennas are not 
suitable for base satiation antennas due to antenna size issue. 
In order to realize small, low side lobe, and high gain beam-
forming antennas for wireless sensor networks base stations, 
we have proposed a beam-forming antenna composed of 
narrowly-spaced patch antennas. Due to electromagnetic 
simulator advancement, the phased array antenna with less 
than l/2 element separation can be designed and simulated 
well. By using an unconventionally small element separation 
and balancing antenna gain against side lobe levels, we can 
realize small, low side lobe and high gain antennas. 
Since the proposed antenna offers a half power beam width 
(HPBW) of 60 – 80 degrees, 6 elements of the proposed 
antenna will be combined for 360 degree coverage as shown 
in Figure 1.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II proposes a 1-
D low side lobe beam forming antenna to separate the service 
areas by horizontal degrees, such as 60 degrees per beam and 
Section III describes the corresponding 2-D beam forming 
antenna design which will be used to radiate the sensors by 
spots with horizontal and vertical beam-steering. Section IV 
summarizes our work on the proposed small, low side lobe and 
high gain beam-forming antennas 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

II. 1-DIMENSIONAL BEAM-FORMING ANTENNA 
A high gain base station antenna is preferable to separate 
the service areas by horizontal degrees such as 60 degrees per 
beam. This creates following advantage against Omni base 
station antenna in star topology networks: (i) each sensor node 
needs to transmit less power by assuming up-link and down 
link budgets are balanced under maximum transmit EIRP is 
limited by radio regulation, (ii) the system will receive much 
less interference such as 1/6 when 6 element antenna is used, 
(iii) the system can achieve much higher spectrum efficiency 
such as 3 times when 6 element antenna is used.  
For practical applications, base station antenna beam 
forming capability is preferable to adjust the direction of each 
beam to radiate the power efficiently for where sensor nodes 
are located. For this beam-forming antenna, we propose a 
methodology to give mutual couplings between antenna 
elements intentionally contrast to the traditional antenna 
design. A small, high gain and planer antenna element is 
desired for the narrow-element-separation phased array. Patch 
type antennas are easy to connect to micro strip lines (MSL) 
and antenna size is reduced by using high relative permittivity 
substrates. The designed single patch element is shown in 
Figure 2. The patch antenna is fed by a MSL and radiates on 
the Z-axis. The antenna has 10mm wide notches for 
impedance matching. The substrate material is FR-4 whose 
permittivity is 4.12 and tan δ is 0.019 at around 900MHz. 
Patch antenna element width and height are set at 81.2mm to 
suit the working frequency of 920-928MHz that is allocated  
 
 
Fig.2. Single patch antenna 
 
-90
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
-10
-5
0
5
10
Gain [dBi]
Azimuthφ[deg]
 
Fig.3. Single patch antenna gain 
for sensor networks in Japan; MSL width is 6.95mm with 
input impedance of 50 ohm. The element size, 81.2mm 
(0.25λ) is suitable for small element separation arrangements. 
Gain and input reflection of the patch element were simulated 
by an electromagnetic simulator (HFSS v12.1). As shown in 
Figure 3, its peak gain is 6.28dBi and HPBW is 98degrees. 
Reflection is less than -10dB from 920MHz to 928MHz as 
shown in Figure 4. These characteristics confirm that the 
proposed single patch antenna is suitable for a beam-forming 
antenna element. 
A four-element beam-forming antenna composed of narrowly-
spaced linear array antennas was simulated and measured. The 
results confirm that the proposal offers small, low side lobe 
and high gain beam-forming antennas. The key design 
procedure is to determine the best element separation for more 
than 10 dBi gain, and -20dBc side lobe. This trade off was 
balanced by using an electromagnetic simulator. As shown in 
Figure 5, in order to achieve better than -20dBc side lobes, the 
element separation should be 113mm or smaller. For more 
than 10dBi gain, element separation should be 113mm or 
larger as shown in Figure 6. From these results, the separation 
of 113mm can realize small, high gain and low side lobe 
beam-forming antennas. 
The beam-forming antenna composed of the resulting 
antenna is shown in Figure 7. When compared to traditional 
λ/2 separation designs, this structure reduces antenna size by 
35 percent. The simulated reflections of each element 
 
Fig.4. Single patch antenna reflection 
 
Fig.5. Element separation optimization for side lobe 
(4-element 1-D beam-forming antenna) 
Substrate 
Material: FR-4 
Relative permittivity: 4.12 
Tan δ:0.019 
Top view 
 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

is  shown in Figure 8. Element reflection is less than -10dB 
from 920MHz to 928MHz. The proposed antenna has more 
than 10dBi gain and -20dBc side lobe as shown in Figure 9. 
Based on electromagnetic simulation results, a prototype was 
designed, fabricated and measured. Measured reflection results 
are shown in Figure 10. The measurement results show the 
resonance point shift by 1MHz from the simulation and this is 
caused by fabrication error. The designed antenna gain / 
directivity have been measured in an anechoic chamber by 
comparing with an Omni antenna as shown in Figure 11. The 
prototype antenna is connected with the phase shifter (PS) 
board and signals are fed from a signal generator (SG) (The 
measured frequency is 923MHz). Receiver antenna, which is a 
sleeve antenna with 2dBi gain, is set at 4.8m from the  
 
 
Fig.6. Element separation optimization for side lobe 
(4-element 1-D beam-forming antenna) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.7. Beam-forming antenna composed of  
4-element patch phased array antenna 
 
920
922
924
926
928
930
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Reflection[dB]
Frequency[MHz]
 Element 1
 Element 2
 Element 3
 Element 4
 
Fig.8. Simulated reflection  
(4-element 1-D beam-forming antenna) 
transmitter antenna and received signals are fed to a spectrum 
analyzer (SA). The difference from the Omni transmission 
antenna shows the performance of the prototype antenna. A 
comparison of simulated and measured directivity is shown in 
Figure 12. Measured reflection is less than -10dB. The 
measured peak gain is 8.1 dBi, smaller than simulated value, 
and the measured side lobe level is -15.3dBc. Since the 
difference between measured and simulation results is small, 
 
Fig.9. Simulated directivity 
(4-element 1-D beam-forming antenna) 
920
922
924
926
928
930
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Reflection[dB]
Frequency[MHz]
 Element 1
 Element 2
 Element 3
 Element 4
 
Fig.10. Measured reflection 
(4-element 1-D beam-forming antenna) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.11 Measurement setting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anechoic chamber 
Sleeve antenna 
=2dBi 
Prototype antenna 
SG 
SA 
P
S  
 
 
4.8m 
Element separation 
Conventional: λ/2 X 3 
Proposed: λ/3.05 X 3 
500mm 
200mm 
113mm 
Element 1                  2                   3                 4 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

the results show that proposed concept is suitable for creating 
1-dimensional beam-forming antennas 
III. 2-DIMENSIONAL BEAM-FORMING ANTENNA 
For wide area sensor networks, 2-D beam-forming antennas  
are more useful and size reduction is more important than is 
true for 1-D ones. In order to design 2-D beam forming 
antennas composed of 16-element narrowly-spaced patch 
antenna arrays, the element separation was optimized by using 
an electromagnetic simulator. As shown in Figure 13, in order 
to achieve better than -20dBc side lobes, the element 
separation is 98mm or smaller. Since the 2-D phased array 
antenna can emit narrow beams in E-plane and H-plane, the 
gain at the element separation of around 98mm exceeds 10dBi 
as shown in Figure 14. From these optimization results, the 
element separation is set at 98mm. The resulting beam-forming 
antenna is shown in Figure 15. The substrate permittivity is 
4.12 which is same in Figure 2 and 7. The antenna elements are 
separated by 98mm (λ/3.38). When compared to the traditional 
λ/2 separation, this structure reduces the antenna size by 41  
 
-90
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Gain [dBi]
Azimuthφ[deg]
 Simulation
 Measurement
 
Fig.12. Measured directivity 
(4-element 1-D beam-forming antenna) 
 
 
Fig.13. Element separation optimization for side lobe 
(16-element 2-D beam-forming antenna) 
 
Fig.14. Element separation optimization for peak gain 
(16-element 2-D beam-forming antenna) 
percent. The simulated reflections of elements 1, 2, 5, and 6 are 
shown in Figure 16. Since the antenna is symmetrical, these 
four plots are enough to show overall reflection performance. 
All reflection values are less than -10dB from 920MHz to 
928MHz. The antenna gain exceeds 13dBi and side lobes are at 
most -20dBc as shown in Figure 17. A matching prototype was 
designed, fabricated and measured. Measured reflection results 
are shown in Figure 18, and a comparison of simulated 
 
 
 
Fig.15 2-D beam-forming antenna 
920
922
924
926
928
930
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Reflection[dB]
Frequency[MHz]
 Element 1
 Element 2
 Element 5
 Element 6
 
Fig.16. Simulated reflection  
(16-element 2-D beam-forming antenna) 
-90
-45
0
45
90
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Gain [dBi]
Angle[deg]
 E-plane 
 H-plane
 
Fig.17. Simulated directivity 
(16-element 2-D beam-forming antenna) 
920
922
924
926
928
930
-30
-20
-10
0
Frequency[MHz]
Reflection [dB]
 Element 1
 Element 2
 Element 5
 Element 6
 
Fig.18. Measured reflections 
(16-element 2-D beam-forming antenna) 
Element   1          2       3         4 
  5          6       7         8 
9         10      11       12 
13        14      15       16 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Fig.19. Measured directivity 
(16-element 2-D beam-forming antenna) 
 
and measured directivity is shown in Figure 19. Measured 
reflection values are better than -10dB from 920MHz to 
928MHz. In the measurement reflection, the resonance point 
is out of measurement range. Since this difference is comes 
from substrate permittivity error, the difference can be 
canceled. The measured peak gain is 8.59 dBi, smaller than 
the simulation value, and the measured side lobe level is -
22.3dBc 
IV. CONCLUSION 
This paper has proposed the low side lobe beam-forming 
antenna composed of narrowly-spaced patch antenna arrays. 
To validate the proposed antenna, 1-D and 2-D beam-forming 
antennas composed of patch antenna arrays were simulated and 
designed, and prototypes were measured The simulation results 
show that both antennas have, small (65 percent size reduction) 
and low side lobe level (better than -20dBc), and high gain 
(more than 10dBi).  Measured results show close agreement 
with the simulation results and the 2-D beam-forming antenna 
achieved side lobe levels better than -20dBc. Thus, the 
proposed beam-forming antenna is a good candidate for base 
station antennas of wide area sensor networks. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This project is partially supported by Ministry of Internal 
Affairs and Communications, SCOPE and also partially 
supported by Japan Science and Technology Agency, A-STEP 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Park, S. Park, D. Kim, P. Cho, and K. Cho, “Experiments on Radio 
Interference Between Wireless LAN and Other Radio Devices on a 2.4 
GHz ISM Band”, Vehicular Technology Conference 2003,  vol. 3, April 
2003, pp.1798-1801. 
[2] 
S. Unawong, S. Miyamoto, and N. Morinaga,  “Techniques to improve 
the performance of wireless LAN under ISM interference environments”, 
APCC/OECC '99,  vol.1, Oct. 1999,   pp. 802 – 805. 
[3] 
M. R. Souryal1, D. R. Novotny, D. G. Kuester, J. R. Guerrieri, and K. A. 
Remley, “Impact of RF interference between a passive RFID system and 
a frequency hopping communications system in the 900 MHz ISM 
band” Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC),, July 2010, pp 495 – 500. 
[4] 
C. L. Dolph, “A Current Distribution for Broadside Arrays Which 
Optimizes the Relationship between Beam Width and Side-Lobe Level”, 
Proceedings of the IRE, Volume:34,  Issue: 6, June 1946, pp.335 – 348. 
[5] 
T.T. Taylor, “Design of line-source antennas for narrow beamwidth and 
low side lobes”, Antennas and Propagation, Transactions of the IRE 
Professional Group on, Volume:3, Issue: 1, Jan. 1955, pp.16-28. 
[6] 
R. C. Hansen, “Fundamental Limitations in Antennas”, Proceedings of 
the IEEE,  Volume:69, Issue:2, Feb. 1981, pp170 – 182. 
[7] 
T. Seki, H. Yamamoto, and T. Hori, “Low-loss and compact sector 
antenna that adopts omni-directional characteristics”, Antennas and 
Propagation Society International Symposium, Vol 3, July 2000, pp. 
1306-1309. 
[8] 
A. Edalati, and T. A. Denidni, “Beam-switching Antenna Based on 
Active Frequency Selective Surfaces”, APSURSI, , July 2011, pp. 2254-
2257. 
[9] 
T. D. Dimousios, S. A. Mitilineos, S. C. Panagiotou, and C. N. Capsalis, 
“Design of a Corner-Reflector Reactively Controlled Antenna for 
Maximum Directivity and Multiple Beam Forming at 2.4 GHz”, IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Apr. 2011, pp. 1132 – 1139. 
[10] D. G. Kurup, M. Himdi and A. Rydberg, “Synthesis of Uniform 
Amplitude Unequally Spaced Antenna Arrays Using the Differential 
Evolution Algorithm”, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagation, Vol. 51, No. 
9, Sep. 2003, pp. 2210-2217. 
[11] B. Pompeo, L. Pralon, M. Pralon, and R. Mendes, “Phase-only 
pattern synthesis using a modified least squares method for phased 
arrays”, Radar Conference (EuRAD), Oct. 2013, pp. 443-446. 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Accuracy Enhancements in Indoor Localization with the Weighted Average Technique
Grigorios G. Anagnostopoulos, Michel Deriaz
Institute of Services Science
University of Geneva
Geneva, Switzerland
Email: {grigorios.anagnostopoulos, michel.deriaz}@unige.ch
Abstract—Indoor localization is a topic that has drawn great
attention over the last decade. One of the main goals of the
research in the ﬁeld is to improve the achieved accuracy. Along
with the accuracy, factors like the easiness of deployment and
reconﬁguration, the cost, the computational complexity, and the
ability to tune the desired accuracy in speciﬁc areas are also
important. In this study, we used Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)
technology, that offers a low cost and is easily deployed and
reconﬁgured. The weighed average method, combined with the
selection of the closest beacons and the averaging of the received
signal strength indication (RSSI) at the distance domain proposed
in this paper, offers an accuracy down to 0.97 meters, depending
on the deployment conﬁguration. This method was tested in our
lab and was following installed at the hospital in Perugia, Italy,
in the context of the Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) Virgilius
project, where users can navigate with a smartphone.
Keywords—Indoor Localization; Received Signal Strength;
Positioning; Bluetooth
I. INTRODUCTION
During the last years, the ﬁeld of indoor positioning has
drawn an increasing attention of researchers. Outdoor posi-
tioning has been ahead, having reached many users through
commercial applications. Nowadays, almost all new mobile
devices are equipped with global positioning system (GPS)
technology, which has familiarized most users with the concept
of positioning. On the other hand, no indoor positioning
method has been broadly recognized as a standard one, and the
research in this domain has led to having multiple alternatives.
A technology commonly used for positioning in indoor en-
vironments is the Wi-Fi signal [1][2]. One advantage of using
Wi-Fi is that most buildings have several Wi-Fi access points,
in order to provide internet access, so the hardware required
is already installed. On the other hand, usually the access
point network is not dense enough to facilitate a satisfactory
precision of localization. Moreover, the transmission of the
Wi-Fi access points is unstable, as well as the reception in
big distances due to multipath effects, and therefore using the
RSSI of them can be problematic.
In this study, we work with BLE technology. BLE is a wire-
less technology used for transmitting data over short distances.
It has a low energy consumption and cost, while maintaining a
communication range similar to that of its predecessor, Classic
Bluetooth. As transmitters, we used iBeacons, an Apple tech-
nology standard, and more precisely the Tod iBeacons [3].
The iBeacon technology allows mobile applications (running
on both iOS and Android devices) to listen periodically for
signals from beacons and react accordingly. Each beacon
broadcasts a self-contained packet of data periodically. The
packets contain the mac address of each beacon, so that the
receiver can distinguish among them. The RSSI can be used
to estimate the distance between the mobile device and the
transmitting beacon [1][4][5][6]. Due to their low cost and
low consumption, a dense network can be deployed. Having
a dense deployment can lead to a reliable distance estimation,
at least from the closest beacons.
This distance estimation is used to derive the actual position,
usually by using lateration methods [7][8]. These methods can
have some drawbacks, as for example, when the estimated
distances are wrong, or when the beacons used are aligned,
an estimated position that is far from the real one may be
returned. Furthermore, using different mobile devices with
different receiving capabilities can add a systematic error
to each distance estimation that will dramatically affect the
lateration outcome.
In our method, we proceeded with another approach. We
propose a placement of beacons such that the beacons surround
all the area that we want to cover. The position prediction
is limited to the area that is deﬁned by the polygon that
the beacons’ positions deﬁne. We get a distance estimation
from each beacon, by averaging the estimated distances that
correspond to the latest RSSI measurements from this beacon.
In this way, we cope with the instability of the RSSI.
Having this ﬁltered distance estimation, we focus only on
the B closest beacons. In this work, we propose B = 4, as
will be discussed later. We use the inverse value of the distance
estimation as weight, in order to perform a weighted average of
the positions of the 4 closest beacons. This weighted method,
is also met in [9]. That work, to our knowledge, does not
have RSSI ﬁltering, nor does it focus on the closest beacons.
The weighted method in [9] is used with radio frequency
identiﬁcation (RFID) technology, as an area/room selection
ﬁrst step, before performing a server side supervised machine
learning positioning method.
The lateration approach uses the assumption that distance
estimations are close to accurate, which is unlikely. Our
proposed method anticipates the uncertainty of this estimation
as an absolute value. It ﬁrstly utilizes that the expected error is
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

smaller in small distances, and secondly, the main conceptual
idea of RSSI methods, that a stronger RSSI reception from
beacon a as compared to beacon b is interpreted as being closer
to beacon a, especially after averaging distance estimations.
The advantages of the proposed technique are numerous.
The Bluetooth beacons are easily deployed and rearranged in
order to cover new areas of a building or to improve accuracy
with a more dense placement. For example, the deployment
could be more dense in a corridor with many doors, where
accuracy is critical, compared to a long corridor with few
doors, that may simply link two buildings. Another advantage
is that this method does not require the creation of a radio
map [10], where measurements of RSSI from all access points
should be stored for many points of the area where it will
be used. One can reconﬁgure the deployment, by adding for
example one beacon, with no need to retake any measurements
for a radio map, but simply by storing the position of the
new beacon. Our method also offers low computational and
implementation complexity. Finally, as all RSSI techniques, it
has the advantage that most modern mobile phones can offer
the RSSI of a Bluetooth reception, and thus no extra hardware
or modiﬁcation of the devices is required.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we present the propagation model and how it is used to
derive distance estimations form the RSSI values. In Section
3, we present the idea of performing a weighted average of the
known beacon positions. Measurements and both theoretical
and experimental results are reported and discussed in Section
4. Finally, future work directions along with conclusions drawn
are presented in Section 5.
II. PROPAGATION MODEL AND RSSI METHODS
In RSSI methods used in localization, the received signal
strength is used as a measure from which the distance between
the transmitter and the receiver can be inferred. Nevertheless,
the RSSI received at a given time and space depends on many
other factors other than the relative distance of the two devices.
Even the slightest changes in position and orientation can
provoke dramatic variations to the RSSI values [11]. Moreover,
the movement of people and objects in the environment often
has great effect on the signal. In general, RSSI is vulnerable to
strong multipath effects, especially indoors [11]. Furthermore,
factors like temperature and humid conditions can affect the
propagation of the signal [11]. Using a set of RSSI mea-
surements instead of a single instantaneous measurement can
improve the accuracy of the distance estimation [5].
The RSSI, apart from the propagation channel, depends on
the transmitter and the receiver. For a given installed system
the transmitters are the same, but it would be desirable that
each user could use the system by using her personal mobile
device (smart phone, tablet, etc.). Taking under consideration
all these factors, we propose the propagation model and its
parameters that will be used in our system.
The propagation model commonly used for the RSSI to dis-
tance correspondence, where the expected RSSI ri in distance
di is calculated, is the following:
ri = r0 − 10 n log10(di/d0)
(1)
In this formula, r0 is the received RSSI at a reference
distance d0, and n is the path loss exponent which depends
on the transmission channel, the transmitter and the receiver.
Using 1 meter as reference distance, and solving for di, the
formula is simpliﬁed to:
di = 10
r0−ri
10 n
(2)
A Tod Bluetooth iBeacon was placed at the center of the
corridor of Figure 3, and RSSI measurements were performed
at several points at a known distance from the iBeacon.
We performed these measurements using a Samsung Galaxy
S4, and then ran a regression to ﬁnd the parameters of the
best ﬁtting curve described by (2). In Figure 1, we see the
measured RSSI values (black dots) in several distances (at
0.25,0.5,1,2,3,4,5 and 6 meters), and with blue color the
resulted propagation model as the best ﬁtting curve. The
estimated values of these parameters are r0 = −62.72 and
n = 2.2853. Substituting in (2), we get:
di = 10
−62.72−ri
2.2853
(3)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
−90
−80
−70
−60
−50
−40
−30
Distance (m)
RSSI
Fig. 1. RSSI measurments at several disances (in black) and the resulting
propagetion model (in blue) as the best ﬁtting curve described by (2).
In order to have a more reliable distance estimation we
do not use just the latest RSSI reception but a set of the
latest ones. Due to the non linear relation of distance with
RSSI, it is important to decide if we will average the RSSI
values and then get the distance estimation as their average,
or if we should calculate the corresponding distance of each
RSSI reception and then use the average of these distances.
In Figure 1, we see that for distances from 0 to 5 meters,
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

the RSSI differs signiﬁcantly. On the other hand, for distances
greater than 15 meters, RSSI differences are minor. Since we
target to utilise the reliability and distinguishability of the
small distance measurements, we direct our method to this
part of the propagation model. Given that the derivative of
the RSSI curve changes with the distance, averaging the RSSI
values inserts an intrinsic error to the estimation.
To state this argument we explain a simple example. Assume
that users are moving and the RSSI measurements they receive
from each beacon correspond exactly to the real distance from
it at each moment. Averaging in the distance domain, provides
the users’ average distance. On the other hand, due to the non
linear relation of distance and RSSI, averaging RSSI values
ﬁrst, will give a distance estimation different than the average
distance.
Furthermore, in case where the measurements of the RSSI
values are biased, in short distances, small RSSI errors have
small consequences to the distance estimations. On the other
hand, for big distances, a small ﬂuctuation of the RSSI values
can have a dramatic consequence to the estimated distance.
In the proposed method, only the RSSI values of the closest
beacons are used, so averaging in the RSSI domain would
introduce a bias. For these reason, averaging in the distance
domain was selected.
III. WEIGHTED AVERAGE OF BEACON POSITION
Initially, it is worth noting that the method proposed can
give estimations of positions only inside the polygon area that
is deﬁned by the positions where the beacons are placed. For
an indoor localization system and its applications, it may be
desirable to constrain the prediction inside a speciﬁc area, i.e.,
inside the building. In case where map matching is used to
provide navigation, a jump of the estimation outside a building
could lead to problematic navigation. Thus, in practice, to
provide coverage in a rectangular room or a corridor with the
proposed method, B = 4 is the minimum number of beacons
to cover this area. Later in this work, we discuss proposed
conﬁgurations.
Having obtained an estimation about the distance of the
mobile device from each beacon, we proceed to the position
estimation. Due to the phenomenon of multipath effects, it
is unrealistic to claim that at every moment the distance
estimation will be precise. Especially in big distances, just a
small difference in the RSSI values is translated to big distance
differences. On the other hand in small distances the RSSI
values are quite distinguishable. We utilize this fact, in the
following way. From the list of beacons that are detected, we
keep the 4 closest beacons. Assuming that the mobile device
is inside the coverage area (beacon deﬁned polygon), the
estimated position will also be inside the quadrilateral deﬁned
by these four beacons. Let [e1, e2, e3, e4] be the estimated dis-
tances from the 4 closest beacons, while [lat1, lat2, lat3, lat4]
and [lon1, lon2, lon3, lon4], the corresponding latitude and
longitude of their positions. We calculate the latitude Latest
and longitude Logest of the estimated position as follows:
Latest =
4P
i=1
lati
ei
4P
i=1
1
ei
, Lonest =
4P
i=1
loni
ei
4P
i=1
1
ei
(4)
In (4), we calculate the weighted average of the four
closest beacons’ positions, using as weight 1/ei, that is the
inverse of the estimated distance from beacon i. By using
this weighted average the prediction is limited inside the
quadrilateral of the closest beacons, and with the speciﬁc
weight that is proposed, the prediction is pulled towards the
closest beacon, although allowing the rest of the beacons to
contribute inversely proportionately to their distance.
The minimum number of closest beacons that could be used
is 3, since 3 points deﬁne a plane. In the case where the
3 closest beacons were used, the deﬁned area would be a
triangle. In the middle area of this triangle, the estimation
is slightly better comparing to the case where 4 beacons are
used. The drawback with the usage of only 3 closest beacons
is that when the user is moving and passes from one triangle
to the other, the accuracy of estimation near the common edge
of the two triangles is signiﬁcantly degraded. Using the 4
closest beacons offers a smooth transition from one triangle
to another. In the following section, along with the system’s
accuracy measurements, an error analysis of these two cases
is presented.
IV. MEASUREMENTS, RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The weighted average method proposed may have an error
in the location estimation even when the distance estimations
are precise. We model this error in Figure 2, for the cases
where 4 and 3 closest beacons are used. We simulate the
deployment at the corridor where our system was tested. The
beacons are placed at a hight of 2.40 meters, following a
zigzag pattern (alternatively at the left and right wall of the
corridor), every four meters along the direction of the corridor.
The orientation of the beacons is towards their opposite wall.
We observe that, for the ﬁrst scenario (4 closest beacons),
the error is lower at the center of the corridor, and changes
smoothly as we move along the length of the corridor. On
the other hand, using just 3 beacons degrades signiﬁcantly
the accuracy estimation at a broader area. The error increases
rapidly when approaching at the edges of the triangles that the
3 closest beacons deﬁne.
Our method was tested in the corridors of the Centre Uni-
versitaire d’Informatique (CUI), of the University of Geneva.
Measurements were taken with two ways. First, by letting the
mobile device at a speciﬁc place and receiving the estimated
positions it calculated. A second approach was to test the
localization while having the mobile device moving, which
better corresponds to real life scenarios.
In order to get a broad estimation of the positioning accu-
racy, we took 1000 measurements at three points in the cor-
ridor. Two mobile devices were used for these measurements,
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
5
10
15
20
 
X(dm)
 
Y(dm)
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
5
10
15
20
 
X(dm)
 
Y(dm)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Fig. 2. Error in decimeters (color scale) of position estimation in a corridor
at the position x,y, when using 4 (upper plot) and 3 (lower plot) closest
beacons method.
a Samsung Galaxy S4, which was used for the creation of
the propagation model (3), and a Samsung Galaxy Note 3.
The goal was to test the adaptability of the system to different
devices, with different reception characteristics.
The results are represented in the following table. In Fig-
ure 3, the beacon positions are highlighted with black color,
and the places that the measurements were taken with red. We
placed point A to be at the center of the corridor, that better
represents the usual usage area. In order to test the accuracy
of the system at its limits, we place point B exactly at the
wall on the side of the corridor, and point C at the end of the
corridor. Both points B and C lay exactly at the limit of the
beacon’s polygon.
TABLE I. ACCURACY
Mean error (m)
σ of error (m)
Point A
S4
1.22
0.82
Note 3
0.97
0.48
Point B
S4
3.08
0.76
Note 3
3.18
1.09
Point C
S4
3.82
2.20
Note 3
3.50
1.78
Fig. 3. Test environment. Beacon positions are highlighted with black color,
and the places that the measurements were made with red color.
The position estimation is very reliable throughout the
corridor, with an average accuracy of 1.22 and 0.97 meters
for the two devices. The accuracy drops at the limits of the
polygon, but remains reliable, with an average error of 3.08
(and 3.18) meters next to the wall. It is worth mentioning
that the accuracy with the Note 3 is really similar to the one
with the S4, that is the device used for the propagation model
calculation.
Apart from the static measurements, we performed also
a dynamic test in the same environment. The corridor is
2.5 meters wide and the trajectory of the mobile phone’s
movement was 25 meters, at a straight line, and in a constant
pace of 1 m/s. In Figure 4, the real trajectory is represented
by the grey straight line segments, and the corresponding
trajectory of the position estimations by the red crooked line
segments. The mean value and standard deviation of the
distances between the estimated and the true positions are
measured to be µ = 2 and s = 1.28 respectively.
The error in the dynamic version is higher than the static
one, as expected. Nevertheless, a precision of 2 meters for a
moving device that drops to 0.97 when the device is static,
can be satisfactory for most indoor position applications. The
distance measure used for calculating the error was the two
dimensional euclidean distance. Of course, in cases where map
matching is used, all position estimations would be projected
on the axis of the corridor, reducing the error only at its length-
wise component, removing the width-wise component.
Fig. 4. Real trajectory (grey straight ling segments) and path from postition
estimations (red crooked line segments).
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
An innovative indoor positioning system is presented in
this paper. The wireless technology used is BLE, which has
low cost, and offers ease of deployment. It does not require
the creation of a radio map, neither a calibration stage, but
simply the awareness of the positions where the beacons were
deployed. The scenarios that the technology was tested with
were directed towards localization in the corridor area of
buildings. Localization in corridors can assist a navigation
system to guide a user to a room in a building. The achieved
accuracy of localization is 0.97 meters (depending on the
device).
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Our goal is to further improve this method by testing other
beacon conﬁgurations [12] (apart from the zigzag pattern) that
might optimize the accuracy of estimation by also keeping
a low density of beacon deployment. In the context of the
the AAL Virgilius Project, beacons were deployed following
the zigzag pattern in the corridors of the hospital of Perugia,
Italy. The goal was to navigate a user from the entrance of the
hospital to the door of the room that the user would choose.
Regarding a corridor deployment, the zig-zag pattern is very
efﬁcient, but it remains to design a general pattern that works
for all room shapes and sizes.
Moreover, the weight used (inverse distance) has been
selected after comparison with other possible weights, but
remains to be further studied. Lastly, after obtaining a series of
position estimations, we intend to apply an extra ﬁltering step,
in order to smooth the transition among position estimations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported by the AAL Virgilius project (aal-
2011-4-046).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Mazuelas et al., “Robust indoor positioning provided by real-time rssi
values in unmodiﬁed wlan networks.” J. Sel. Topics Signal Processing,
vol. 3, pp. 821–831, 2009.
[2] M. Lee and D. Han, “Voronoi tessellation based interpolation method for
wi-ﬁ radio map construction.” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16,
no. 3, pp. 404–407, 2012.
[3] “Tod iBeacons,” 2014, URL: https://www.todhq.com/ [accessed: 2014-
09-09].
[4] F. Vanheel, J. Verhaevert, E. Laermans, I. Moerman, and P. Demeester,
“Automated linear regression tools improve rssi wsn localization in
multipath indoor environment.” EURASIP J. Wireless Comm. and Net-
working, vol. 2011, p. 38.
[5] C. Papamanthou, F. P. Preparata, and R. Tamassia, “Algorithms for
location estimation based on rssi sampling,” in ALGOSENSORS, 2008,
pp. 72–86.
[6] M. Saxena, P. Gupta, and B. N. Jain, “Experimental analysis of rssi-
based location estimation in wireless sensor networks,” in In Proc. Int.
Conf. Communication System Software and Middleware, 2008, pp. 503–
510.
[7] Z. Yang, Y. Liu, and X.-Y. Li, “Beyond trilateration: On the localizability
of wireless ad hoc networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 18, no. 6,
December 2010, pp. 1806–1814.
[8] K. Lu, X. Xiang, D. Zhang, R. Mao, and Y. Feng, “Localization
algorithm based on maximum a posteriori in wireless sensor networks,”
IJDSN, vol. 2012, pp. 1–7.
[9] H. Zou, L. Xie, Q.-S. Jia, and H. Wang, “An integrative weighted
path loss and extreme learning machine approach to rﬁd based indoor
positioning,” in Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN), 2013
International Conference on, Oct 2013, pp. 1–5.
[10] S. Sorour, Y. Lostanlen, S. Valaee, and K. Majeed, “Joint indoor
localization and radio map construction with limited deployment load,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 99, 2014, no. PrePrints,
p. 1.
[11] G. Zanca, F. Zorzi, A. Zanella, and M. Zorzi, “Experimental comparison
of rssi-based localization algorithms for indoor wireless sensor net-
works,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on Real-world Wireless Sensor
Networks, ser. REALWSN ’08.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp.
1–5.
[12] N. Bulusu, D. Estrin, and J. S. Heidemann, “Adaptive beacon place-
ment.” in ICDCS.
IEEE Computer Society, 2001, pp. 489–498.
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

60GHz Radio Hose for Wireless Harness Communication Systems 
 
Yosuke Sato, Vannsith Ith, Shuzo Kato 
Research Institute of Electrical Communications, Tohoku University  
Sendai, Japan 
y-sato@riec.tohoku.ac.jp  
 
 
Abstract— In order to lower car fuel consumption and increase 
communication capacity, a wireless harness communications 
system that uses metal coated plastic/rubber hose (radio hose) 
as the communications channel is proposed. Measurements 
results show that the proposed system reduces conventional 
harness weight to 1/10, and increase reliability even if the hose 
is cut and/or pinched.  This indicates a possibility for wireless 
communications systems to be adopted not as a soft safety 
system but a hard safety system for the first time. 
Keywordst— Sesor; millimeter wave communications; 
wireless communications; automobiles, harness 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Since the weight of wire harnesses in cars has been 
increasing due to increase of number of Electronic Control 
Unit (ECUs), there is strong need for “harness weight 
saving”. A typical wire harness weighs around 30 to 50 Kg 
and various weight saving approaches have been proposed 
[1]. Conventional wire harness communication systems use 
copper wires, to interconnect the many ECUs. Since the 
number of such units continues to increase with the rapid 
adoption of hybrid and electrical systems, conventional wire 
harness systems are becoming excessively complex and 
heavy. Another trend is the increase use of intra-car 
multimedia systems that demand high data rates. In “intra-
car communication systems”, there is not only front display 
for car navigation systems but also are many multimedia 
monitors for TV and movies.  In order to realize these 
applications, a high data rate communication channel is also 
required in vehicles [2-3]. Currently, USA automobile 
regulation requires tire pressure monitor. This has been done 
by using Bluetooth technology and it is so called “soft safety” 
application where some erroneous transmissions are allowed. 
Meanwhile, engine and brake control systems cannot allow 
erroneous transmission at all and use wired connections. 
They are called hard safety and not even short term 
disruption is permitted. This is naturally the only choice 
given by current technology. To meet these requirements, the 
“wireless harness communication system with radio hose” 
has been proposed. The proposed radio hose is a hybrid of 
wire and wireless communications. This system uses a “radio 
hose” which is lighter than conventional wire harnesses 
while offering the wide bandwidth needed for multimedia 
services, the robustness demanded by the control systems, 
and multiplexing transmissions by a single radio hose. The 
radio hose is made by thin metal coated low dielectric 
material, such as polyolefin whose weight is much lighter 
than wire harness. Since the proposed radio hose aims to 
replace the current wired harness, we name the radio hose 
system as “wireless harness”. The proposed system has high 
reliability since communication remains possible even if the 
hose is cut or pinched. Metal coated hose offers high 
immunity from electromagnetic interference as well. The 
proposed system offers light weight, wide bandwidth, and 
highly reliable wireless harness systems. Since conventional 
wired connects fail once a wire or connector fails, the 
proposed system offers higher communication reliability and 
well suits “hard safety” applications. The proposed system is 
assumed to use 5 and 60GHz unlicensed bands. Although all 
wireless transmissions are contained within the hose, there is 
no need to use unlicensed bands. We have selected these 
bands since relatively cheap transceivers are available for 5 
and 60GHz band applications. When transceiver physical 
size is considered, the 60GHz band is promising, while the 
5GHz band offers long range communications. In our 
previous work [1], the large radius hoses (25-40mm) were 
found to be suitable with low loss for wireless harness 
communication systems. In order to replace the current wired 
harness (with about 6.5 mm in diameter), however, this 
paper focuses on small radius hoses, such as 6.5 mm in 
diameter.  
This paper shows that the transmission loss of a 4m 
length hose is estimated 39.4dB, which is 40.6 dB lower than 
the loss of over-the –air transmission (80dB) [4] and a delay 
spread is as small as 0.2ns, which is small enough for 
effective communications without equalizers and no 
equalizers will contribute to realize low latency systems. 
Although this paper describes 3 Gbps transmission systems 
mostly, a variety of transmission rates, such as 1 Gbps or 
lower are possible supported by IEEE802.15.3c standard. 
We used the measured results to design the channel model 
and BER simulations of both control and entertainment 
signal transmission channels. The simulation results show 
BER penalty is less than 1dB with Forward Error Correction 
(FEC). Since these results show that there is no need to use 
Orthogonal 
frequency-division 
multiplexing 
(OFDM), 
essential if the delay spread is significant, the proposal offers 
high speed communication systems with single carrier links 
and simple equalizers. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
the structure and basic performance of the proposed wireless 
harness communications system. Section III describes its 
reliability. 
Section 
IV 
describes 
multi 
channel 
communication performance. Section V summarizes our 
work on wireless harness communication systems. 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
II. 
WIRELESS HARNESS COMMNICATION SYSTEMS 
As shown in Figure 1, the model considered here consists 
of control systems to send control signals from sensors, and 
entertainment signal transmission systems. The central hub is 
assumed to be the car navigation system. For general 
vehicles, the maximum communication length is estimated to 
be 4m. Because 5GHz communication systems are suitable 
for big vehicles like trucks, this paper targets the 4m wireless 
harness performance since this will be the most common 
application.  
The wireless harness is a plastic hose with conductive 
coating. Our previous research examined a wireless harness 
with large radius (φ=40mm) and proved a possibility of low 
loss and highly reliable transmission over wireless harness. 
Given the severe space constraints of modern vehicles, 
40mm radius hose is not so practical and this paper examines 
radio hoses with smaller  radius.  
Figure 2 shows trial small radius wireless hose 
appearance and its cross section view. Its outside diameter is 
6.5mm and inside diameter is 6mm. The hose made of 
polyolefin has a relative permittivity of 2.3-2.4. As shown in 
Figure 3, its transmission loss is 16.5dB smaller than non-
coated hose. This shows that wireless harness is suitable for 
establishing practical communication channels. Table I 
compares the performance of this small radius hose with the 
performance of the large radius hose measured in previous 
work [1]. In table I, the delay spread is also improved by 
metal coating. As for the latency, we do expect much shorter 
than the current wired harness since the transmission rates of 
the proposed systems are 104 times faster than the current 
one, however, we need to wait for further detailed analysis. 
In order to clarify wireless harness communication 
capacity, we measured transmission losses and delay spreads 
of 1, 0.5, and 0.25m hoses. The measurement system is 
shown in Figure 4 and results are shown in Figure 5. The 
transmission loss is calculated by (1) 
 
Total transmission loss =  
Transmission loss constant x Hose length 
                      + Antenna conversion loss  x 2    (1) 
 
From (1) and Table II, the transmission constant is 8.2dB/m, 
antenna conversion loss is 3.3dB, and the estimated 
transmission loss is 39.4dB. By assuming the sensitivity of a 
3Gbps receiver is - 55dBm at 60GHz (typical sensitivity 
defined by IEEE802.11ad standard), and maximum 
transmission power is 10dBm (typical transmission power of 
Transmitter modules in unlicensed bands), the margin of the 
small radius wireless harness for 3Gbps communication is 
around 35dB. In IEEE 11ad standards, multiple 
communication speed is supported. The assumed systems are 
based on IEEE 802.11.ad standard which supports High 
(more than 3Gbps) and low (1Mbps) speed communication. 
In these standards, the communication is possible if the 
received signal level is higher than the receiver's sensitivity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1 Wireless harness for vehicles 
 
 
  
           
     
Fig.2. Metal coated hose 
 
Fig.3 Transmission peformance of wireless harness 
TABLE I.  
RADIUS COMPARISON OF WIRELESS HARNESS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.4 Measurement setting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
Arrival time [ns]
Received power [dB]
Radio hose (Metal-coated)
Non-coated hose
Transmission Loss@1m
Delay spread@1m
Small radius(φ=6.5mm)
wireless harness
14.8
0.08
Large radius(φ=40.0mm)
wireless harness
31.3
0.16
 
 
d 
φ: 40 / 6.5 mm 
d: 2/ 0.25 mm 
Material：polyvinyl chloride / 
Polyolefin 
φ 
Hose 
Outside metal 
coated hose 
 
 
 
Wireless 
harness 
Conical 
horn antenna 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Since 
communications
standard
high speed communications.
A.
the small diameter hose
radio hose has been 
chloride
each other
F
penetration 
in 
with the
higher 
microwave
30dB penetration 
ha
communications 
B.
less than 4dB
communications. 
loss for 
shown in
15dB 
measured for pinch depths of 0, 2, 4, and 6mm
Figure
20dB
wireless 
harness 
has 
30dB 
margin 
for 
3Gbps 
communication
wireless harness
and separated by 5 cm 
Since IEEE11.ad standard supports high and low speed 
communications
standards, the 
high speed communications.
III. 
A. Immunity to engin noise 
In order to clarify 
the small diameter hose
radio hose has been 
chloride for this test and
each other and the w
For comparison, metal coated and non
penetration loss was
in Figure 5. N
with the free space 
higher penetration loss. Since intra
microwave band and millimeter wave band is small, the 
30dB penetration 
has good noise immunity and 
communications 
B. Communications 
pinching   
Our previous 
less than 4dB
communications. 
The definition of cut length is show
loss for lengths of 0, 1, 2, 4, and 5cm 
shown in Figure
15dB for 5cm cut 
Pinch depth is
measured for pinch depths of 0, 2, 4, and 6mm
Figure 9. The loss increas
20dB for depth of 6 mm
wireless 
harness 
has 
30dB 
margin 
for 
3Gbps 
communication
wireless harness
and separated by 5 cm 
 
TABLE II. 
Hose  
length [m]   
1 
0.5 
0.25 
 
IEEE11.ad standard supports high and low speed 
communications and our proposed systems work in th
, the proposed systems cover from low speed to 
high speed communications.  
 
RELIABILITY OF WIRELE
Immunity to engin noise  
In order to clarify interference
the small diameter hose to engine
radio hose has been measured. 
for this test and 2 horn antennas 
and the wireless hose 
or comparison, metal coated and non
loss was measured. 
Non-coated hose penetration loss
ree space loss, while the coated hose had 
penetration loss. Since intra
band and millimeter wave band is small, the 
30dB penetration loss shows the proposed wireless harness 
good noise immunity and 
communications  
Communications continuity against radio hose cut and 
 
previous study found that
less than 4dB loss increase
communications. This paper examines
he definition of cut length is show
lengths of 0, 1, 2, 4, and 5cm 
Figure 7. The loss increas
5cm cut length.  
Pinch depth is defined in Figure
measured for pinch depths of 0, 2, 4, and 6mm
loss increases with pinch
for depth of 6 mm –
wireless 
harness 
has 
30dB 
margin 
for 
3Gbps 
communications as shown in 
wireless harness remains operational even if 
and separated by 5 cm or radio hose 
TABLE II.  
LOSS AND DELAY SPREAD
 
Transmission 
loss [dB]
14.8 
10.7 
9.4 
IEEE11.ad standard supports high and low speed 
our proposed systems work in th
systems cover from low speed to 
 
ELIABILITY OF WIRELESS HARNESS
 
interference mitigation 
engine noise, penetration loss 
measured. Hose material is 
2 horn antennas 
ireless hose was set on between 
or comparison, metal coated and non
measured. Measured results are shown 
coated hose penetration loss
while the coated hose had 
penetration loss. Since intra-car noise in 
band and millimeter wave band is small, the 
shows the proposed wireless harness 
good noise immunity and can realize
continuity against radio hose cut and 
study found that the hose bend effect 
loss increase, i.e., negligible
examines hose cut and 
he definition of cut length is shown in Figure
lengths of 0, 1, 2, 4, and 5cm were
loss increases with
Figure 8. Transmission
measured for pinch depths of 0, 2, 4, and 6mm
es with pinch depth and is
– 100 % pinched case
wireless 
harness 
has 
30dB 
margin 
for 
3Gbps 
as shown in the previous
remains operational even if 
radio hose is pinched
OSS AND DELAY SPREAD VS. HOSE LENGTH
Transmission  
loss [dB] 
Delay 
spread 
[ns]
0.08
0.1
0.2
IEEE11.ad standard supports high and low speed 
our proposed systems work in these
systems cover from low speed to 
SS HARNESS 
mitigation performance 
, penetration loss 
ose material is Polyvinyl 
2 horn antennas were set facing
set on between them
or comparison, metal coated and non-coated hose
easured results are shown 
coated hose penetration loss is matched
while the coated hose had 30dB 
car noise in the 
band and millimeter wave band is small, the 
shows the proposed wireless harness 
realize highly reliab
continuity against radio hose cut and 
the hose bend effect was
negligible for 3Gbps 
hose cut and pinching
Figure 6. The cut 
were measured 
es with cut length; it is
Transmission loss w
measured for pinch depths of 0, 2, 4, and 6mm as shown in
depth and is less than 
100 % pinched case. Since 
wireless 
harness 
has 
30dB 
margin 
for 
3Gbps 
previous section, the
remains operational even if radio hose is cut 
is pinched virtually flat
HOSE LENGTH 
Delay 
spread 
[ns] 
0.08 
0.1 
0.2 
IEEE11.ad standard supports high and low speed 
ese 
systems cover from low speed to 
 of 
, penetration loss of 
Polyvinyl 
facing 
them. 
coated hose 
easured results are shown 
matched 
dB 
the 
band and millimeter wave band is small, the 
shows the proposed wireless harness 
reliable 
continuity against radio hose cut and 
was 
for 3Gbps 
pinching.  
cut 
 as 
it is 
loss was 
as shown in, 
less than 
ince 
wireless 
harness 
has 
30dB 
margin 
for 
3Gbps 
the 
radio hose is cut 
virtually flat. 
 
 
 
Penetration loss [dB]
Fig.5 Penetration loss peformance of radio hose
Fig.6 
Fig.7 
Fig.8 
61
20
40
60
80
100
120
Penetration loss [dB]
30dB
Fig.5 Penetration loss peformance of radio hose
 
Fig.6 Cut length definition
Fig.7 Measured cut loss results
Fig.8 Pinch depth definition
 
62
Frequency [GHz]
 Free space
 Non-coated rubber hose
 Radio hose
30dB
Fig.5 Penetration loss peformance of radio hose
th definition 
ut loss results 
depth definition 
63
64
Frequency [GHz]
 Free space
 Non-coated rubber hose
 Radio hose
 
Fig.5 Penetration loss peformance of radio hose 
 
 
 
64
 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

multi point communication
is shown in 
antenna
is 
T
Rx1 
polarization
Communication 
to
(
measurement results are shown in 
transmission loss at 4m is 54.5dB by
power 
44.5dBm which is higher than re
communication
are shown in 
loss due to
Thus
in 
of m
harness
proposed system can realize low loss, small delay spread, 
and high reliability intra
proposed system 
loss of 
free space 
communication,
delay spread under the condition of 
than 0.3ns and loss is smaller than the margin. 
channel transmission, 
which again is
margin. 
wireless harness 
efficiency,
[1]
[2]
[3]
 
IV. 
Wireless harness communication 
multi point communication
is shown in Figure
antennas with 13dBi gain with 45HPBW 
is a monopole 
The monopole antenna 
Rx1 use circular
polarization. T
Communication 
to the inserted 
(WLC) where 
measurement results are shown in 
transmission loss at 4m is 54.5dB by
power is 10dBm, 
44.5dBm which is higher than re
communication
are shown in T
loss due to by SLC antenna insert
Thus, WLC still has 30dB margin 
in the 60GHz band.
This paper proposed 
of metal-coated 
harness in automobiles
proposed system can realize low loss, small delay spread, 
and high reliability intra
proposed system 
loss of a 4m wireless harness is 39dB
free space loss.
communication,
delay spread under the condition of 
than 0.3ns and loss is smaller than the margin. 
channel transmission, 
which again is 
margin.  
These measurement results
wireless harness 
efficiency, intra
 
[1] 
K. Fujita, H.
System Using Radio Hose”, 
[2] 
H. Sawada, T.
H. Harada, “A Sixty GHz Intra
System,” Proceedings of IEEE 69th Vehicular Technology 
Conference, Apr. 2009
[3] 
H.Sawada, H.Nakase, K.Sato, and H.Harada, “A Sixty GHz Vehicle 
Area Network for Multimedia Communications,” IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications,
pp.1500-1506
 
 
MULTI CHANNEL COMMUNICATIONS
Wireless harness communication 
multi point communications. 
Figure 10. Tx and Rx1 antenna
13dBi gain with 45HPBW 
 antenna with a 
e antenna consists of
circular polarization
The possible situations are Sub Length 
Communication (SLC) which
 antennas, and 
 hose ends 
measurement results are shown in 
transmission loss at 4m is 54.5dB by
is 10dBm, received 
44.5dBm which is higher than re
communication in 60GHz band. WLC measurement results 
Table IV. The increase in 
by SLC antenna insert
, WLC still has 30dB margin 
60GHz band. 
V. 
CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a wireless 
coated plastic hose 
in automobiles. Measurement
proposed system can realize low loss, small delay spread, 
and high reliability intra-car communication systems. 
proposed system has the follow
4m wireless harness is 39dB
. For the typical
communication, the system 
delay spread under the condition of 
than 0.3ns and loss is smaller than the margin. 
channel transmission, the loss incre
 smaller than wireless harness communication 
hese measurement results
wireless harness is a good candidate for future
intra-car communication systems.
REFERENCES
Fujita, H. Sawada, and S.
System Using Radio Hose”, APMC2010, Dec. 2010
Sawada, T. Tomatsu, G. Ozaki, H.
“A Sixty GHz Intra
Proceedings of IEEE 69th Vehicular Technology 
Conference, Apr. 2009, pp. 1-5
H.Sawada, H.Nakase, K.Sato, and H.Harada, “A Sixty GHz Vehicle 
Area Network for Multimedia Communications,” IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications,
1506. 
NEL COMMUNICATIONS
Wireless harness communication systems
. A typical system 
10. Tx and Rx1 antennas are
13dBi gain with 45HPBW while 
a 1.6dBi Omnidirectional
sists of semirigid
polarization while Rx2 
he possible situations are Sub Length 
which connects the 
 Whole Length 
 are directly connected
measurement results are shown in T
transmission loss at 4m is 54.5dB by (1). W
 power at SLC antenna is 
44.5dBm which is higher than receiver sensitivity for 3Gbps 
in 60GHz band. WLC measurement results 
The increase in W
by SLC antenna insertion is less than 0.3dB
, WLC still has 30dB margin for 3Gbps
ONCLUSION 
wireless harness system consist
 (6.5 mm OD)
easurements show
proposed system can realize low loss, small delay spread, 
car communication systems. 
following features
4m wireless harness is 39dB, 41dB smaller than 
For the typical receiver sensitivity of 3Gbps 
 margin is around 25dB. 
delay spread under the condition of hose cut 
than 0.3ns and loss is smaller than the margin. 
loss increase is less than 19dB
smaller than wireless harness communication 
hese measurement results confirm that 
good candidate for future
car communication systems.
EFERENCES 
Sawada, and S. Kato, “Intra-car Communications 
APMC2010, Dec. 2010
Ozaki, H. Nakase, S.
“A Sixty GHz Intra-car Multi-media Communications 
Proceedings of IEEE 69th Vehicular Technology 
5.  
H.Sawada, H.Nakase, K.Sato, and H.Harada, “A Sixty GHz Vehicle 
Area Network for Multimedia Communications,” IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 27, No. 8,
NEL COMMUNICATIONS 
systems can realize 
system configuration
s are conical horn 
while Rx2 antenna 
Omnidirectional gain. 
semirigid cable. Tx and 
Rx2 uses vertical 
he possible situations are Sub Length 
the inserted antenna 
Whole Length Communication
are directly connected. SLC 
Table III. SLC 
When transmission
power at SLC antenna is 
ver sensitivity for 3Gbps 
in 60GHz band. WLC measurement results 
WLC transmission 
less than 0.3dB
3Gbps communication
system consisting 
(6.5 mm OD) to replace wire 
showed that the 
proposed system can realize low loss, small delay spread, 
car communication systems. T
features. Transmission 
1dB smaller than 
sensitivity of 3Gbps 
is around 25dB. T
hose cut or pinch is less 
than 0.3ns and loss is smaller than the margin. In multi 
ase is less than 19dB
smaller than wireless harness communication 
confirm that the proposed 
good candidate for future, high 
car communication systems. 
car Communications 
APMC2010, Dec. 2010, pp. 57-60. 
Nakase, S. Kato, K. Sato, and 
media Communications 
Proceedings of IEEE 69th Vehicular Technology 
H.Sawada, H.Nakase, K.Sato, and H.Harada, “A Sixty GHz Vehicle 
Area Network for Multimedia Communications,” IEEE Journal on 
Vol. 27, No. 8, Oct. 2009
can realize 
configuration 
conical horn 
Rx2 antenna 
gain. 
. Tx and 
vertical 
he possible situations are Sub Length 
inserted antenna 
Communication 
. SLC 
SLC 
transmission 
power at SLC antenna is -
ver sensitivity for 3Gbps 
in 60GHz band. WLC measurement results 
LC transmission 
less than 0.3dBc. 
communication 
ing 
wire 
that the 
proposed system can realize low loss, small delay spread, 
The 
ransmission 
1dB smaller than 
sensitivity of 3Gbps 
The 
is less 
n multi 
ase is less than 19dB, 
smaller than wireless harness communication 
the proposed 
, high 
car Communications 
Kato, K. Sato, and 
media Communications 
Proceedings of IEEE 69th Vehicular Technology 
H.Sawada, H.Nakase, K.Sato, and H.Harada, “A Sixty GHz Vehicle 
Area Network for Multimedia Communications,” IEEE Journal on 
. 2009, 
[4] 
S. Kato et al.
WPAN 
Systems,” 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communications,
[5] 
M. 
frequency communication characteristics
Transport Syst.
[6] 
IEEE 
802.11 
Task 
Group,
http://www.ieee802.org/11/Reports/tgp_update.htm 
 
 
Central
control unit
S. Kato et al., “Single Carrier Transmssion for Multi Gigabit 60 GHz 
WPAN 
Systems,” 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communications, Vol. 27, No. 8,
M. Heddebaut, V. Deniau, and K. Adouane, 
requency communication characteristics
Transport Syst., Vol.5
IEEE 
802.11 
Task 
Group,
http://www.ieee802.org/11/Reports/tgp_update.htm 
Fig.9 Measured pinch
Fig.10 Multi 
TABLE III.  
TABLE IV.  
Break control system
Central
control unit
Hose
length[m]
0.25
0.5
0.75
Hose length[m]
0.75
(no-SLC antenna)
0.25
0.5
0.75
, “Single Carrier Transmssion for Multi Gigabit 60 GHz 
WPAN 
Systems,” 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Vol. 27, No. 8, Oct. 2009
eddebaut, V. Deniau, and K. Adouane, 
requency communication characteristics
Vol.5, no.2, June 2004, pp. 114
IEEE 
802.11 
Task 
Group,
http://www.ieee802.org/11/Reports/tgp_update.htm 
Fig.9 Measured pinch depth results.
Fig.10 Multi channel communications
 
 
SLC TRANSMISSION 
 
WLC TRANSMISSION
 
 
Break control system
Antenna
length[m]
Transmission
 lossd [m]
22.6
25.4
30
Hose length[m]
Transmission
loss [dB]
(no-SLC antenna)
, “Single Carrier Transmssion for Multi Gigabit 60 GHz 
WPAN 
Systems,” 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Oct. 2009, pp 1466-1478.
eddebaut, V. Deniau, and K. Adouane, “In-vehi
requency communication characteristics”, IEEE trans. Intell. 
June 2004, pp. 114-121. 
IEEE 
802.11 
Task 
Group, 
Nov
http://www.ieee802.org/11/Reports/tgp_update.htm  
depth results. 
channel communications 
TRANSMISSION PERFORMANCE
TRANSMISSION PERFORMANCE
Radio hose
Antenna
Transmission
 lossd [m]
Delay
spread
[ns]
22.6
0.32
25.4
0.27
0.28 
Transmission
loss [dB]
Delay
spｒead[ns]
13.8
14.2
14
14.1
, “Single Carrier Transmssion for Multi Gigabit 60 GHz 
WPAN 
Systems,” 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
1478. 
vehicle WLAN 
, IEEE trans. Intell. 
Nov. 
2014, 
 
PERFORMANCE 
 
PERFORMANCE 
 
Back seat
monitor
Delay
spread
[ns]
0.32
0.27
0.28 
Delay
spｒead[ns]
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.13 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

An Analysis of the Need for Dedicated Recovery Methods and Their Applicability in 
Wireless Sensor Networks Running the Routing Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy 
Networks  
 
Anne-Lena Kampen 
Bergen University College, Bergen  
ITEM NTNU, Trondheim 
Norway 
Anne-Lena.Kampen@hib.no 
anneleka@stud.ntnu.no 
 
Knut Øvsthus 
Bergen University College, Bergen  
Norway 
knut.ovsthus@hib.no 
 
 
Øivind Kure  
 NTNU, Trondheim  
Norway 
okure@item.ntnu.no
 
 
Abstract—Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks 
Running 
(WSN) 
functionality depends critically on the network connectivity. 
The connectivity is generally determined by the node density 
and the nodes’ transmission range. However, the applied 
routing protocol decides the routing path topology. A failing 
node may disrupt the current path topology such that 
dedicated recovery methods are needed to ensure a loop-free 
reconnection of the disconnected nodes. In this article, we 
estimate the probability that disconnected nodes need 
dedicated recovery methods in networks where the nodes are 
randomly located and which use RPL as routing protocol.  We 
further calculate the success rate and overhead cost for 
different RPL fitted recovery protocols to better judge where 
the different methods should be used. 
Keywords-WSN; Recovery; Disconnection; Energy; Looping. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A common requirement for Wireless Sensor Networks 
(WSN) is marginal need for human support during operation. 
Hence, the networks should be able to autonomously handle 
common error conditions, such as loss of connectivity due to 
failing nodes [1]. Connectivity loss negatively affects the 
data throughput and may lead to network partitioning. Thus, 
nodes should be reconnected without any unnecessary delay. 
The reconnection process should further expend limited 
amount of energy to minimize its influence on network 
longevity.   
Reconnection of nodes located such that several 
neighboring nodes are at the same routing distance from the 
sink as a failing next-hop node (parent) introduces 
insignificant delay and energy consumption. However, nodes 
located such that all neighbors are at a routing distance 
further away from the sink than a failing parent node cannot 
make an immediate reconnection. The reason is that the 
reconnection process may create routing loops if not 
controlled. Routing loops are created if the disconnected 
nodes choose their own directly, or indirectly, connected 
successors as new parent nodes. Dedicated global or local 
recovery methods are means to ensure against the formation 
of routing loops during the reconnection process.  
Global 
recovery 
processes 
generally 
postpone 
reconnection of nodes in loop-prone topologies until the next 
global network update. Local recovery processes make nodes 
in the vicinity of a disconnection communicate routing 
information to enable fast, loop-free reconnections. The most 
suitable recovery method is decided by the network 
characteristics and the requirements of the running 
application.  
Our contribution is twofold and relates to recovery in 
randomly deployed network running Routing Protocol for 
Low-Power and Lossy Networks (RPL) [2], which is one of 
the recommended protocols for WSNs. First, we present 
calculations and simulations to assess the need for dedicated 
recovery methods to reconnect disconnected nodes. The 
result can be used as a base to decide whether to introduce 
dedicated recovery management in applied networks. We 
further suggest one on-demand recovery method that 
combines the global and local approaches. The suggested 
method, along with two additional local recovery methods, is 
analyzed to better judge where the different recovery 
methods should be used. 
The rest of the article is organized as follows: the related 
work is introduced in Section 2. The probability that 
dedicated 
recovery 
methods 
are 
needed 
to 
mend 
disconnection is presented in Section 3. An analysis of two 
local recovery methods are presented in Sections 4 and 5. 
The on-demand method is presented in Section 6. The 
methods are compared in Section 7. Section 8 comprises the 
conclusion.    
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Network connectivity calculations are presented in 
several papers, such as [3][4][5]. Zhu et al. [6] conclude that 
a network with satisfying coverage is connected if the 
communication range is twice the coverage range. Topology 
controls methods to maintain k-connected networks are 
investigated and suggested in [7][8] and [9]. Kleinroch [10] 
discusses network connectivity based on cited works and 
presents the node degree needed to achieve network 
connectivity. However, the analysis performed in these 
papers focuses on connectivity without considering the 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

applied routing protocol or reconnection of disconnected 
nodes. Our analysis is based on the functionality of the 
applied routing protocol. 
Many of the presented recovery protocols suggest 
movable nodes to reconnect disconnected nodes [11][12]. 
Nodes are proactive moved to prohibit disconnections, or 
reactive moved to mend disconnections. However, we 
assume that the nodes location is static and the goal is to 
discover all alternative possible recovery paths.  
All recovered paths are required to match the routing 
protocol’s path construction method and avoid formation of 
routing loops. Global methods fulfil this requirement by 
making disconnected nodes in loop-prone positions postpone 
reconnection until the next global update. This approach is 
used in RPL [2]. 
The disconnected node initiates the recovery process in 
local recovery methods. The affected node signals its state to 
adjacent nodes. Depending on the recovery method used, the 
signaling may be relayed further on to reach nodes eligible to 
offer new loop-free paths to the disconnected node. 
Sequence numbers, as used in [13][14], is a common mean 
applied in such local recovery methods to discover new 
paths. Other local recovery processes include avoiding any 
duplicates in the address field during source routing [15] and 
caching alternative feasible successors paths in case the 
current route is broken [16]. The feasible successor paths are 
guaranteed loop free as they report a distance to the 
destination that is shorter than the current path from the 
source to the destination. 
III. 
PROBABILITY OF DEDICATED RECOVERY 
This section presents an analysis of the need for 
dedicated recovery methods to mend routing path 
disconnections. The routing protocol that is used as the basis 
for our analysis is RPL.  
A. Short presentation of RPL 
RPL is a soft state routing protocol that creates routes 
that are directed toward the sink. The overall topology of the 
routing entries creates Destination Oriented Directed Acyclic 
Graph (DODAG). A node’s logical location in the routing 
graph is defined by the nodes rank and selected parent, 
which are two strongly interrelated properties of a node. A 
node calculates its own rank based on its selected parent rank 
and the metric-based cost-of-path between itself and its 
parent.  
To prevent against routing loops are nodes running RPL 
prohibited from increasing their rank in between global 
DODAG updates. Performing a rank increase means that 
nodes make a logically move away from the sink in the 
routing graph, an action which may results in routing loops. 
Global DODAG updates are initiated by the sink by 
distributing 
updated 
Destination 
Information 
Option 
messages (DIO) that flow like a wave throughout the whole 
network.  
B. Presentation of extreme popints for probability 
calculations 
To estimate the probability that a dedicated recovery 
method is needed is complex and depends on the relative 
location of all possible parents’ next-hop node (grandparent). 
However, the highest and lowest probability limits may be 
calculated by studying the difference between dedicated 
recovery need for nodes located at the extreme points. The 
extreme location for the nodes is at the border of the routing 
graph.  One of the extreme points is represented by the nodes 
located at a two-hop distance from the sink.  The nodes next-
to-the-leaf nodes are the highest rank nodes that may require 
dedicated recovery, and represent the second extreme point. 
All other nodes that may require dedicated recovery lie 
between these two borderline cases, so do their average 
probability. 
1) Extreme location one : Two-hop distance node 
Figure 1 illustrates a general node arrangement for nodes 
at two-hop distance from the sink. The blue dot labeled N 
and the blue circle is the node under consideration and its 
transmission distance, respectively.  The red dot is the 
grandparent node, and its transmission range is defined by 
the red circle. The grandparent node is the sink as the node 
under consideration, N, is a node at two-hop distance from 
the sink. The parent node is represented by the green dot 
labeled P. All nodes choose parents that minimize their own 
rank. Thus, the node and its grandparent cannot 
communicate directly. Further, if the parent node dies, the 
node N needs to find a new parent node to maintain the path 
toward the sink. 
According to the loop-avoiding rules of the RPL 
method, a node is never allowed to increase its rank unless a 
global update is performed. Hence, node N needs to 
maintain or improve its rank if the parent node in Figure 1 
dies. The only way node N can improve its rank is to 
achieve a direct connection to the sink, which it cannot. 
Hence, node N needs to maintain its rank. It follows that it 
needs to get connected to a node that is directly connected to 
the sink, i.e., it must keep the sink as its grandparent node 
after recovery. Thus, the alternative new parent node must 
reside in the overlapping area of the transmission circle of 
the grandparent and the transmission circle of the node N 
(area A in the figure). 
2) Extreme location two: Node next-to-the-leaf node 
Figure 2 is used as a reference to calculate the permitted-
area A for a node next-to-the-leaf node. The multiple circles 
centered at the sink represent the location for nodes at a 
specific hop distance from the sink. The area between the 
red dot representing the sink, and the inner red circle, 
represents the location for the one-hop nodes. The area 
 
Figure 1. Node arrangement for a node at two-hop distance 
from the sink. 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

between the inner red circle and the second inner red circle 
represent the permitted-area for the two-hop nodes and so 
forth. As we are considering a node next-to-the-leaf node, 
we assume that the distance between the sink and the node 
under consideration is so far apart that the curvature of the 
sink’s h-hop circle line cutting through the node N’s circle 
approaches a straight line. 
Figure 3 is a segment of Figure 2. The orange vertical 
lines in Figure 3 illustrate the sink’s outer h-hop circle lines 
as straight lines based on the explanation above. The red 
shaded area named ‘A’ illustrate the permitted-area for a 
parent node of node N.  
To find the probability that dedicated recovery is needed 
we derive the expression for the expected value of the 
probability that there exists more than one node inside the 
area A. If there is more than one node in are A, it means that 
there exists a recovery node after the current parent node 
dies. To find the wanted expectation we need an expression 
for the probability that there is another node in A, as well as 
an expression of the probability density function for location 
of node N. 
C. Probability that there is a recovery node in area A 
We assume a uniform node distribution, thus, the 
number of nodes in an area is given by the Poisson 
distribution. λ is defined to be the node density, which 
corresponds to the expected number of nodes in a circular 
shaped area with radius equal to the transmission range. All 
nodes have equal transmission range, r.  
The probability that there is another node in A in Figures 
1 and 2 is given as Prob( more than 1 node in area A | given 
that there is at least 1 node in area A). Prob(1 or more ∩ at 
least 1)/ prob(at least 1) = Prob (2 or more)/Prob (at least 1): 
 (                   |              )  

   (                )   (                 )
   (                 )
  

  
  ( )
   ( )  

We assume that node N is at a distance y from a 
grandparent node, as shown in Figure 1 for the two-hop 
node. y is in the range r, 2r. The area of A1 is symmetric 
around y/2=x. Then the area A1 as a function of x is: 

  ( )     (     (
 
 )  √  (
 
 )
 
 
 
 )

According to the node next-to-the-leaf node, the 
permitted-area is one half of the area A1 in (2), using y=x.  
Notice that the area A2 in Figure 3 is bigger than are A1 
in Figure 1 when the node N is in its closest position to the 
sink (left hand side of the figures). Hence, with node N in 
this position, the permitted-area for the recovering node 
next-to-the-leaf node is bigger than the permitted-area for 
the two-hop recovering node. 
D. Node next-to-the-leaf-node calculations 
We use Figure 2 as reference to calculate the probability 
density function for the node N location. The sector θ in 
Figure 2 defines the sector where a recovery parent node N 
may be located. The cumulative distribution function for the 
node N’s location and the probability density function of 
node N’s location are respectively given by: 

  ( )  
 ((   )  ) 
 
 -  (   )
 
 
 (     ) 
 
 -  (   ) 
 
 
 (     )
(    )  


  ( )  
 (    )
(    )  

Using the presented equations, we can derive the 
expression for the expected value of the probability that 
there exists a recovery node in area A2 for the node next-to-
the-leaf node. The expression is found by combining (1) 
with (4) and (2).  The expected value of P(there exist a 
recovery node inside area A2) is: 

  [ ( )]  

∫ {( (                ( )|            ( )) ( )}  
  
 
 

 ∫
{(  
   ( )
    ( )  )  
 (    )
(    )   }   
  
 


 
                  Figure 2. Disconnected node next-to-the-leaf node. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Node arrangement for a node far from the sink.   
 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

E. Two-hop node calculations 
We will now derive the expectation of the probability 
that there exists a recovery node in area A1 for the two-hop 
node, ref. Figure 1. First we need the expression for the 
probability density function for the location of node N. This 
is found using Figure 4. According to Figure 4 are the 
expression for the cumulative distribution and probability 
density function of the node N given by:  

  ( )  
 ( ) 
 
 -   
 
 
 (  ) 
 
 -    
 
 
  -  
   


  ( )  
  
   
 
Combining (1), (2) and (7), gives the following expected 
value of the probability for the two-hop node: 

 [ ( )]  ∫
{(  
   ( )
    ( )  ) (
  
   )}   
  
 


To summarize; the expression for the expected value of 
the probability that there exist recovery nodes for a node 
next-to-the-leaf node given by (5), and the corresponding 
expression for a two-hop node given by (8). In other words, 
this is the probability that dedicated recovery methods are 
not needed to mend routing path disconnections. The 
calculations 
performed 
are 
based 
on 
numerically 
calculations of the equations. 
F. Simulations - dedicated recovery 
Simulations are conducted in Java to validate the 
calculated results for the expected value of the probability 
that dedicated recovery methods are not needed to mend 
routing path disconnections.  
The simulation for the two-hop node is initialized by 
placing a node N in a fixed position. The next node is 
randomly paced in the donut shaped area between r and 2*r 
form the fixed node. The second node becomes the fixed 
node’s grandparent (the sink). A varying number of nodes 
are subsequently randomly distributed with average density 
λ inside the simulation area.  
The sought probability for the two-hop node is estimated 
based on the percentage of the simulation runs resulting in 
two or more nodes located inside the overlapping area 
defined by the node’s transmission range and the 
grandparent’s transmission range. Dedicated recovery is 
needed if the number of nodes in the overlapping area is less 
than two. The reason is that if there is only one node in the 
overlapping area, it is definitely the parent node and there 
are no nodes left in the area when it dies.  Simulation runs 
resulting in zero nodes inside the area is discarded. The 
simulated result is averaged over 1000 runs for each node 
density.  
According to the node next-to-the-leaf node the 
simulations is performed by placing two nodes at a distance 
h*r + x apart, in the same manner as for the two-hop node. 
0<x<r. The two nodes represent the node under 
consideration, N, and the sink. The number of nodes located 
both inside node N’s transmission range and inside a radius 
of h*r from the sink are counted. The investigated 
probability is further performed following the same 
procedure as when calculating the two-hop node probability. 
G. Results – dedicated recovery 
In this section, we present and discuss the simulated and 
calculated results of the expected value of the probability 
that dedicated recovery methods are not needed to mend 
routing paths.  The curves in Figure 5 show the expected 
value of the probability for the extreme points, i.e., the 
lowest and highest average probability values. The dashed 
red curve represents the simulated probability of the nodes 
at two-hop distance from the sink, and the blue curve shows 
the calculated probability for the two-hop node. The red and 
the dashed green curve show respectively the calculated and 
simulated results for the node next-to-the-leaf node. The 
curvature of the simulation results conform to the curvature 
of the calculated results validating each other.  
The curves in Figure 5 show that the disconnected nodes 
next-to-the-leaf nodes have lower need for dedicated 
recovery than the two-hop nodes.  
The difference between the curves in Figure 5 is caused 
by the unequal characteristics of the two extreme points in 
the routing graph topology. Both the probability density 
function for the node N’s location and the permitted-area are 
different in the two extreme points. The probability density 
function for the location of a leaf node N approaches a 
uniform distribution as the number of hop gets high. This is 
illustrated in Figure 6. The reason for the uniform 
distribution is the straightening of the h*r curvature and the 
related small difference between the circumference of the 
h*r and h*r+r circle when h is high. This is easily seen 
looking at Figure 3. On the contrary, the probability density 
for the location of the two-hop node N is increasing toward 
the outer circumference. The reason is the increased 
circumference which increases available deployment area 
for the node N. This can be observed in Figure 4.  Figure 7 
shows how the permitted-area varies with distance between 
the node N and the sink node. The figure shows that the area 
decreases with increased distance, and also illustrates the 
slightly bigger permitted-area of the node next-to-the-leaf 
nodes. Combining the information given in Figures 6 and 7, 
Figure 4. The sector where a possible node N may be 
located. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

shows that the location probability of the two-hop node 
favors the smallest permitted-area size, while the node next-
to-the-leaf node gives equal priority to all permitted-area 
sizes. A smaller area means that the probability that it 
contain more than one node is lower. Thus, the probability 
that it contains a candidate recovery parent node is lower.  
As expected, and illustrated by the graphs in Figure 5, is 
the need for a dedicated recovery method decreasing with 
increased node density.  The reason is simply that the 
probability that more than one node is located inside a 
defined area increases with node density. However, the 
probability never reaches 1 although the node density gets 
high. The reason is due to the explanation given related to 
Figures 6 and 7: the permitted-area for the recovery nodes is 
very small for some of the locations of node N. Hence, there 
is always a probability that some nodes do not have 
available recovery nodes. 
The graphs in Figure 5 show that if all the nodes in a 
network are required to stay connected some kind of special 
repair method is needed. According to Takagi and Kleinrock 
[10], eight is the magic number of neighbors regarding 
network throughput, and four neighbors are needed to 
maintain a connected network. Hence, we may assume that 
an average well design network has a node density between 
8 and 20. We define the node density as the number of 
nodes inside a circular area with radius equal to the 
transmission range, thus is equals the number of neighbors 
plus one. The graphs show that the probability that 
dedicated recovery is not needed is between 40% and 75% 
at node densities between 8 and 20. Hence, between 25% 
and 60% of the disconnected nodes needs a dedicated 
recovery method to get properly reconnected.  
 
 
 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF GUO ET AL.'S METHOD  
This section presents an analysis of a local recovery 
method suggested by Guo et al. [17]. The method forces 
intermediate nodes on potential recovery paths to adjust 
their rank to make the path feasible for a disconnected node.  
Their method [17] is activated and runs as follows. A 
poisoned node, which is a node that needs dedicated 
recovery to reconnect, initiates the recovery process by 
broadcasting a request. The request is further relayed to the 
receivers’ parent nodes. The process lasts until the requests 
reach a node with better rank than the requesting node. 
Receivers with better rank than the requesting node generate 
a reply and forward it toward the requesting node using the 
same path as the associated request. The nodes along the 
path adjust their rank such that a new, valid path for the 
requesting node is made.  
However, the method is not able to find a new valid path 
for all kind of topologies. The reason is twofold. Requests 
received form a parent node are silently discarded. Hence, 
paths pointing through child nodes are never found. In 
addition, a race condition occurs when siblings of a dying 
parent node simultaneous enter poisoning state. Nodes with 
pending requests silently discard received requests. The 
result may be that paths pointing toward sibling nodes 
remain undiscovered.  
 
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
E(P) 
Node density 
Outermost Node, 10 hop
Java simulation 10 hop
2-hop node
Java simulation 2 hop
Figure 5.  The expected value of the probability that dedicated  
recovery methods are not needed to mend routing path disconnections. 
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
Probability density 
Node N- location 
Two hop node
Next ot the leaf node
2R 
R 
h*R 
h*R+R 
Figure 6.  Probability density function of node N’s location. 
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
Area 
Node N location 
Inner A
Outer A
hR 
R 
2R 
hR+R 
Figure 7.  Permitted-area for recovery node. 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
A. Simulation of Guo et al.'s method 
Based on the layout in Figures 8 and 9, we simulate the 
probability that a poisoned node running Guo et al.'s method 
discovers a new valid path. The red dot is the sink node. The 
area between the sink and the inner red circle represents the 
localization of one-hop (rank one) nodes, the two-hop (rank 
two) nodes are located between the red circles, and so forth. 
The blue node N represents a node that is poisoned and need 
dedicated recovery to get reconnected to the DODAG. The 
blue circle represent node N’s transmission range. The 
figures illustrate the two scenarios that make the [17] 
method local recovery succeed. 
Figure 9 illustrates the scenario that a reachable node 
with equal rank as the poisoned node, has a parent node 
outside the poisoned node’s transmission range. Expressed 
according to the figure, it means that there exists an equal-
rank green node in the overlapping area made of the blue 
circle and the donut shaped area made of the red circles. 
Further, this equal-rank-node has a parent inside the green 
shaded area.   
The other scenario that makes [17] succeed is if a lower-
level node of N (node lying outside the outer red circle) 
have a path toward the sink that does not include N, or N’s 
parent. According to Figure 8, it means that the node N has 
a neighbor in the leftmost green shaded area. This neighbor 
has a parent in the upper green shaded area, which further 
has a parent in the rightmost green shaded are.  
The simulation is implemented in Java. A varying 
number of nodes are randomly deployed inside a circle 
shaped area with radius that is three times the transmission 
range.  All the nodes are supposed to have equal 
transmission range. 5000 runs with different node densities, 
and node N locations, are performed. The numbers of runs 
which satisfy one or both of the scenarios discussed above, 
and indicated in Figures 8 and 9, are counted. This number 
is normalized by the number of runs where recovery is 
needed to reconnect N, i.e., the number of runs where only 
one node reside inside the blue shaded area. 
B. Results on Guo et al.'s method 
Figure 10 shows the simulated probability that a 
poisoned node gets reconnected after performing Guo et 
al.'s local recovery procedure. The x-axis shows the node 
density, λ. As expected is the success probability increasing 
rapidly with node density. When the node density is 4 the 
probability is about 40%. When the node density approaches 
20, the probability approaches 100%. Thus, the  approach of 
[17] works best in high density networks. The probability 
that a dedicated recovery method is needed to reconnect 
disconnected nodes is highest at low node densities; Figure 
5. Hence, the lowest probability of solving the problem is in 
the scenarios where the problem is most likely to occur. 
V. 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACK LOCAL RECOVERY METHOD 
This section presents a local recovery method that is 
based on reliable poisoning of successors (sub-DAG) nodes. 
We call this method the ACK-method. Reliability is 
achieved by letting nodes be aware of their children, and 
make all children acknowledge reception of poisoned 
information transmitted by the poisoned node. Information 
about children is achieved by making all nodes inform about 
their parents in regular transmitted DIO messages.  
Receiving ACK form all children enables the poisoned 
node to increase rank to reconnect to the DODAG. No loop 
is created because sub-DAG nodes with no alternative 
recovery parent inform about their poisoned state in the 
transmitted ACK messages. 
The ACK method will mend disconnections as long as 
the poisoned node receives ACK messages from all its 
children. Hence, the probability of success using this method 
depends on probability of successful reception of transmitted 
packets. We name the probability of successful transmission          
Prec. A poisoned message is retransmitted once if the 
 
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
0
10
20
30
40
Recovery probability 
Node density 
Figure 10.  Probability that Guo et al.'s method succeed 
Figure 8. Recovery path goes through higher level node. 
Figure 9. Recovery path goes through sibling node. 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

poisoned node does not receive ACK from all children. 
Thus, recovery will not succeed if the two poisoned 
messages are lost, or if the ACK message is lost.  
Thus, assuming one child gives the following success 
probability of the ACK method: P(ACK succeed one 
child)=p(First 
Poisoning 
messages 
succeed)*P(ACK 
succeed)+p(First Poisoning messages do not succeed) 
*p(Second Poisoning messages succeed)*P(ACK succeed): 

 (                     )  


          [      ]        

Assuming that either all or none of the child nodes 
receive the poisoning message, the expression for the ACK 
success probability for c child becomes: 
P(ACK succeed for c child)= p(First Poisoning messages 
succeed)*P(ACK succeed)c+p(First Poisoning messages do 
not 
succeed) 
*p(Second 
Poisoning 
messages 
succeed)*P(ACK succeed)c:  

 (                   )   


         
  [      ]        
 

A. Results ACK method 
The probability that the ACK method succeeds is shown 
in Figure 11. The x-axis represents the probability that a 
transmitted packet is received. The blue graph illustrates the 
success probability for a disconnected node with one child, 
and the red graph shows the success probability for a 
disconnected node with five child nodes. As expected is the 
success probability increasing with increased probability of 
receiving transmitted messages and with reduced number of 
child nodes. 
VI. 
ON-DEMAND METHOD 
In this section, we present our proposed combination of 
local and global recovery that may be used to guarantee 
recovery for all node densities while keeping the network 
energy consumption as low as possible. We call this method 
the on-demand method.  
 
 
The method functions as follows. A node entering the 
poisoning state broadcasts an increase-sequence-number 
request. The request is broadcasted throughout the whole 
network, which means that it will eventually reach the sink if 
there exists a path between the poisoned node and the sink. 
When the sink receives the request it initiates the global 
recovery algorithm.  
The message overhead, hence the energy cost, of running 
one iteration of the on-demand method is about twice the 
cost of running one iteration of periodic global update. The 
reason is that the request is broadcasted throughout the 
whole network in a manner similar to DIO message during 
global network update.  
Running the update only when nodes are poisoned 
means that the network wide broadcast is run only when 
needed, and no periodic global network update is in fact 
ever needed.  
The recovery time using the on-demand method 
decrease compared to the periodic approach, as the global 
update is run immediately after the request reach the sink. 
VII. 
ANALYSIS OF RECOVERY OVERHEAD COST 
We perform calculations to estimate the overhead cost 
difference between Guo et al.'s, ACK, on-demand, and 
periodic recovery methods. The overhead is calculated as 
the total number of transmitted and received management 
messages during the recovery process. The overhead cost is 
proportional to the network energy consumed, which should 
be as small as possible to limit the recovery process’ impact 
on the network lifetime.  
The Guo et al.'s method overhead relates to the 
transmission of requests and replies. We assume a uniformly 
distributed network where the average number of neighbors 
is n. The fraction of neighbors forwarding the request is α, 
and the fraction of neighbors that replies the request is β. 
Thus, the number of nodes transmitting the request is (1+ 
αn). The digit 1 in the expression refers to the poisoning 
node initiating the request transmission. Each transmitted 
request is, on the average, received by n neighboring nodes. 
Hence, the total request cost is (1+ αn)*n. Further, we 
assume that the request and replies are relayed once. The 
reply is answered by βn nodes and relayed once by βn 
nodes. Each transmission is received by n nodes. Hence, the 
reply cost is (2βn)*n, and the total overhead cost becomes: 
                           (    )   

The ACK overhead cost relates to the poisoning 
message and ACK message transmission. The poisoned 
node transmits a poisoning message, which is received by 
all neighboring node giving a total cost of 1+n. Further, we 
assume that the fraction of neighbors that are child of the 
poisoning node is Δ. Hence, the ACK messages is 
transmitted by Δn nodes and all messages are received by n 
nodes, giving a cost of Δn*n. In addition, all nodes in the 
neighborhood transmit a DIO concluding the recovery 
process. The DIO is received by all neighbors giving a cost 
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
P(ACK succees) 
Prec 
1 child
5 children
Figure 11.  Probability that ACK succeed vs. Prec. 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

of n*n. Hence, the total cost of the ACK recovery process 
is: 

            (   )        

The on-demand overhead relates to the total number of 
nodes in the network, N, transmitting requests and DIO 
messages. All transmitted messages are received by the 
average number of neighbors. 

(         )             

The overhead according to one run of global recovery 
relates to all nodes N transmitting DIO messages, which are 
received by the average number of neighbors. 

                                

A. Results comparing methods 
Figure 12 shows the overhead for the different methods 
using Δ=0.4 (share of neighbors being child of poisoned 
node), α=0.6 (share of neighbors relaying request) and 
β=0.2 (share of neighbors replying request). The value of Δ 
is chosen looking at the right-hand side of Figure 1: We 
assume that approximately all nodes located inside an area 
about the same size as the red shaded area are children of a 
node N. The rest of the neighboring nodes relay the requests 
received, hence the value of α = 1 - Δ. β is chosen assuming 
that only a small fraction of nodes receiving the relayed 
request are able to answer. These values clearly changes 
according to the network topology. However, the mutual 
relation between the parameters will generally remain 
unchanged. Hence, the information given by the figure is 
valuable.  The total number of nodes in the network is 100. 
There is a big difference between the local recovery 
approach methods’ overhead and the periodic update, as 
shown in Figure 12. However, as the local recovery methods 
cannot guarantee reconnection they require periodic global 
update to coexist to guarantee full network connectivity. 
The figure shows a substantial overhead cost difference 
between on-demand method and periodic update. However, 
the great advantage of using the on-demand method is that 
the method is only trigged by a disconnection. Thus, the 
overhead cost will be lower than the periodic update method 
in network with low disconnection probability.  
The significance of our findings is the statistical analysis 
of the need for dedicated recovery presented in Section 3, in 
addition to the overhead cost for the recovery methods 
presented in this Section. The statistical analysis showed 
that dedicated recovery is needed especially in low density 
networks. In addition, nodes in the vicinity of the sink are 
most vulnerable and require dedicated recovery. These 
nodes are critical for sustaining network connectivity. Our 
overhead cost findings show that cost analysis should be 
performed 
as 
part 
of 
real 
networks’ 
deployment 
methodology to select an appropriate recovery method. The 
selected method should either be the on-demand method, or 
adapting of the periodic global update frequency, as these 
methods are reliable.  
Our results can be used to perform overhead cost 
calculations for network design. The overhead associated 
with the on-demand method is calculated combining (13) 
with the expected number of nodes that need dedicated 
recovery during a time span. The expected number of nodes 
is found combining information about the total number of 
nodes, the nodes failure probabilities, and the probability for 
disconnected nodes’ recovery need, presented in Figure 5.  
The overhead cost of adapting the global update 
frequency is calculated combining (14) with the recovery 
delay requirement. The delay requirement decides the 
network update frequency.    
VIII. CONCLUSION 
Disconnections in WSNs need to be resolved to sustain 
total network availability and avoid destructive data loss. 
Whether disconnections needs dedicated methods to regain 
connectivity depends on the topology in the vicinity of the 
disconnection.  
In this article, we calculated and simulated the 
probability that dedicated recovery methods are needed to 
reconnect disconnected nodes in randomly deployed 
networks. The findings are that dedicated methods are 
needed in 25% to 60% of the cases when a node is 
disconnected. These findings demonstrate the significance 
of including dedicated recovery methods as a part of the 
network management in real scenarios where the network’s 
availability is crucial. If dedicated recovery is not included, 
the periodic global update frequency should be adjusted 
according to the networks’ recovery delay requirements. In 
addition, the findings demonstrate that increased node 
density may be used as deployment methodology to 
improve connectivity stability in critical areas of a network. 
 The findings further show that disconnected nodes close 
to the sink most often need dedicated recovery. These nodes 
are critical to sustain network connectivity. Hence, it may be 
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
5
10
15
20
25
Total number of tx+rx message overhead 
Number of neighbors 
ACK
JGuo
On-demand
Global recovery
Figure 12.  TX+RX message overhead. Number of nodes is 100. 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

wise to adapt the recovery method according to routing 
graph location.      
The failure frequency increases with network size 
assuming equal failure probability for the nodes. Hence, the 
periodic update frequency has to increase with network size 
in network without any dedicated recovery method. 
However, increased update frequency increases the nodes’ 
energy consumption causing reduced network lifetime.   
Introducing a dedicated recovery method may reduce the 
load caused by periodically updates. In this article, we 
calculate the overhead and success rate for two local 
recovery methods, and one suggested global on-demand 
recovery method. The two local recovery methods have 
lowest overhead, but they cannot guarantee reconnection 
success. The global on-demand method is reliable as 
reconnections are established if possible. But, it has high 
overhead. However, using an unreliable recovery method 
that cannot guarantee connectivity requires a simultaneous 
periodic global update mechanism to assure the total 
network connectivity, while a reliable recovery method 
makes periodic global updates superfluous.  
Thus, networks requiring reliable network connectivity 
should either include an on-demand recovery method, or 
adjust the global network update frequency. The on-demand 
method may greatly reduce the long-term network energy 
consumption. Overhead cost analysis presented in this 
article may be used for real scenarios to choose between the 
two methods.   
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] V. C. Gungor and G. P. Hancke, "Industrial Wireless Sensor 
Networks: Challenges,," IEEE Transactions On Industrial 
Electronics, Oct. 2009, pp. 4258-4265.  
[2] T. Winter, et. al., "RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low-
Power and Lossy Networks," RFC 6550, Mar. 2012.  
[3] W. Jia, Y. Fu, and J. Wang, "Analysis of Connectivity for 
Sensor Networks Using Geometrical Probability," Springer, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Aug. 2004, pp. 601-611.  
[4] Y. Wang, B. M. Kelly, and X. Li, "On the Network 
Connectivity of Wireless Sensor Networks following a 
Random and Non-uniform Distribution," IEEE, Sixth 
International Workshop on Selected Topics in Mobile and 
Wireless Computing, Oct. 2013, pp. 69-74.  
[5] X. Xingt, G. Wangt, J. Wu, and J. Li, "Square Region-Based 
Coverage and Connectivity Probability Model in Wireless 
Sensor Networks," IEEE, International Conference on 
Collaborate Computing, Nov. 2009, pp. 1-8.  
[6] C. Zhu, C. Zheng, L. Shu, and G. Han, "A Survey on Coverage and 
Connectivity Issues in Wireless Sensor Networks," ELSEVIER, 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, Mar. 2012, pp. 
619-632. 
[7] I. Saha, et al., "Distributed Fault-Tolerant Topology Control 
in Static and Mobile Wireless Sensor Networks", IEEE, 2nd 
International Conference on Communication System Software 
and Middelware, Jan. 2007, pp. 1-8. 
[8] N. Li and J. Hou, "FLSS: A Fault Tolerant Topology Control 
Algorithm for Wireless Networks", ACM, Proceedings of the 
10th annual international conference on Mobile computing and 
networking,MobiCom, 2004, pp. 275-286. 
[9] R. Ramanathan and R. Rosales-Hain, "Topology Control of Multihop 
Wireless Networks using Transmit Power Adjustment," IEEE, 
Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and 
Communications Societies, vol. 2, Mar. 2000, pp. 404-413. 
[10] H. Takagi and L. Kleinrock, "Optimal Transmission Ranges for 
Randomly Distributed Packet Radio Terminals," IEEE Transactions 
on communications, vol. 32, no. 3, Mar. 1984, pp. 246-257.  
[11] K. Vaidya and M. Younis, "Efficient Failure Recovery in Wireless 
Sensor Networks through Active Spare Designation," IEEE, 
International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor 
Systems Workshops, June. 2010, pp. 1-6.  
[12] M. F. Younis, S. Lee, and A. A. Abbasi, "A Localized 
Algorithm for Restoring Internode Connectivity in Networks 
of Moveable Sensors," IEEE, Transactions On Computers, 
Dec. 2010, pp. 1669-1682.  
[13] C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-
Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing," RFC 3561, July. 
2003.  
[14] J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves and H. Rangarajan, "A New 
Framework for Loop-Free On-Demand Routing Using 
Destination 
Sequence 
Numbers," 
IEEE, 
International 
Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Systems, Oct. 
2004, pp. 426 - 435. 
[15] D. Jhonson, U. Hu, and D. Maltz, "The Dynamic Source 
Routing Protocol (DSR) for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks for 
IPv4," RFC 4728, Feb. 2007.  
[16] J. Raju and J. J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, "A New Approach to 
On-demand Loop-Free Multipath Routing,", IEEE Eight 
International Conference on Computer Communication and 
Networks, Oct. 1999, pp. 522-527. 
[17] J. Guo, C. Han, P. Orlik, and J. Zhang, "Loop-Free Routing in 
Low-Power and Lossy Networks," IARIA, International 
Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications, Aug. 
2012, pp. 59-66. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Domain Speciﬁc Modeling Language for Object Localization in Marine Observatories
Charbel Geryes Aoun∗‡, Iyas Alloush∗,
Yvon kermarrec∗, Oussama Kassem Zein∗
∗Universit´e europ´eenne de Bretagne
∗Telecom Bretagne, Institut Mines-Telecom
∗UMR CNRS 6285 Lab-STICC
Bretagne, France
Email: charbel.aoun@telecom-bretagne.eu
iyas.alloush@telecom-bretagne.eu
yvon.kermarrec@telecom-bretagne.eu
oussama.zein@telecom-bretagne.eu
Joel Champeau‡
‡Ecole Nationale Sup´erieure de Techniques
‡Avanc´ees Bretagne
Bretagne, France
Email: joel.champeau@ensta-bretagne.fr
charbel.aoun@ensta-bretagne.fr
Abstract—Marine observatories (MO) based on sensor net-
works provide a continuous observation of the ocean. The logical
and physical components that are used in these observatories
provide data exchanged environment between different devices
(Smart Sensor, Data Fusion). These components provide new
functionalities or services due to the stable running of this
network. In this paper, we present our approach in extending
the modeling languages to include new domain-speciﬁc concepts
and constraints. Thus, we propose a meta-model that is used
to generate a new design tool (ArchiMO). We illustrate our
proposal with an example from the MO domain. Additionally,
we generate the corresponding simulation code using our self-
developed domain-speciﬁc model compiler. Our approach helps to
reduce the complexity and time of the design activity. It provides
a way to share the different viewpoints of the designers in the
domain of MO.
Keywords-Underwater Object Localization; Marine Observato-
ries.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sensor network is a group of specialized sensors with a
communications infrastructure designed to monitor and record
terms at various locations. MO (Based on Sensor Networks)
provide new opportunities to sea surveys, such as a continuous
observation of the sea [1]. Our research scope is in the ﬁrst
phase of a MO project: Marine e-Data Observatory Network
(MeDON) [2]. MeDON contains different elements (Hy-
drophones, Fusion Servers, Object Localization Algorithms),
and different communication protocols (e.g., REST, SOAP)
[2][3]. The implementation of this information system is
considered as a complex distributed system [3]. We distinguish
two sources of complexity: the complexity of the system, and
the design. The complexity of the system under study [2][3]
is related to: (1) the architecture of the system (Distributed)
which contains different elements from different sub systems
(Underwater Sensor Network and the rest of the information
system); (2) the interactions between the different elements
of the information system and the core network that relies on
standard protocols and transactions; (3) the large number of
sensors (Hydrophones) and servers existing on the networks.
Our scope in MeDON project is in the design of the Smart
Sensor Network and the system to localize the underwater
objects. Designing complex distributed systems consumes
considerable time. According to [2][3], the complexity of the
design is a result of: (1) the different domains of experience
(Business Process Modeling, Information System Modeling,
and the Underlying Infrastructure Modeling) that are required
from the designer(s) to be able to model and describe such
system; (2) distributed Software Structure of MeDON Infor-
mation System (see Figure. 1) since each component (e.g.,
Data Fusion Server, Smart Sensor, etc.) is responsible to
perform set of speciﬁc tasks.
Our global objective is to help the designers of MO to
reduce: the complexity of the design and the time of the design
activity. The deployment of set of sensors (Sensor Network)
is an costly operation due to: the necessary equipments such
as speciﬁc boats, marine cables, Sensors (Hydrophones), Data
Fusion Servers, and experts in diving, etc. Additionally, we
cannot ignore that the deployment operation is risky and the
placement of sensors and servers should be in the right position
where an error in meters may cause larger bit-error rates
in the communication channel (Cables). Thus, an integration
between the information system (Sensors, Servers) and the
communication system (e.g., IMS) [4] is needed.
The large number of sensors that are communicating with
set of fusion servers results in more complex design [5]. We
consider that the time to obtain useful results from the MeDON
system is the resultant of: the time of the operations of
deployment and the design time. Thus, our research question
is: how to improve the time of the design phase and reduce
the complexity of the deployment and maintenance phase?
Our objective is to provide a design tool to the designers
of MO that helps them to model their design taking into
consideration reducing the time of development process, and
managing the complexity.
In this paper, we propose a modeling design tool (ArchiMO)
that helps to manage the complexity and prevents design
modeling errors during the design time. This tool provides
the designer a set of reusable graphical elements and con-
cepts that respect ArchiMate [6] and the MO concepts. Our
approach is based on the concept of domain speciﬁc modeling
languages (DSMLs), which relies on Model Driven Engineers
(MDE) fundamentals [7]. In order to model MO systems, we
choose ArchiMate modeling language as it relies on Enterprise
Architecture (EA) framework [8][9] that allows describing a
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 1. Structure of MeDON- An Example: N=6, Y=3
wide range of domains [10]. We use meta-models to generate
the tools that belong to different development activities using
Eclipse Modeling Framework (EMF) [11].
ArchiMate is proper to model systems from the IT domain
[6]. Our proposal extends the ArchiMate meta-model (Abstract
and Concrete Syntax) to add new concepts and constraints of
MO to ArchiMate. We add speciﬁc constraints to the grammar
of the design tool according to the meta-model proposal. On
one hand, a main feature of (EA) frameworks is sharing the
multiple viewpoints [10]. This reduces complexity of one view
to a manageable size. EA frameworks introduces interoperabil-
ity issues between views and their dedicated software [10]. On
the other hand, our proposed DSML is extensible, where the
developers may extend it and add new concepts and standards
according to the progress and needs in MO domain.
Linking our MO meta-model to the IP Multimedia Subsys-
tem (IMS) one (proposed previously in [12] helps to integrate
the different smart sensors of the sensor network to the rest of
the information system through the core network [4]. We apply
our design model to a model compiler to generate simulation
code that runs directly in NS-3 network simulator [13].
The paper content is organized as follow: in Section II, we
present the related work that is connected to the design tools.
Section III presents MO project. In section IV, we present
MDE fundamentals, DSMLs, ArchiMate, and our proposal
meta-model for the MO/MeDON. Section V explains the
abstract syntax, concrete syntax and semantics of the proposed
DSML. In Section VI, we present the generated design tool
and the simulation approach. In section VII, we conclude and
discuss our future work.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we present the related work in connection
with the design tools.
In relation with the concept of Architectural Description
Languages (ADLs) [14] and their design tools; we are in-
terested in the following concerns that we shall specify and
analyze in this section: (C1) preventing errors during design
by invoking grammar or syntax of language; (C2) multiple
viewpoints that are represented in the architectural description
[15] since a viewpoint is a work product establishing the
conventions for the construction, interpretation and use of
architecture views to frame speciﬁc system concerns; (C3)
extensibility of design tool; (C4) heterogeneity of components
and communications; (C5) testing/execution platform.
According to the preventing errors concern, the design tool
prevents errors during design activity that may be made by
the designer, rather than correct them after the fact. This error
prevention is available in [16][17][18]. Like in our approach,
it’s avoided by invoking the abstract syntax (Our Proposed
Meta-Model) where we have deﬁned and added our speciﬁc
constraints and relations.
Concerning the multiple viewpoints concern, the design tool
provides different viewpoints for the designers according to
their specialties and domains of experience. In [16][17][18],
the design tool provides only one viewpoint in order to ﬁt
software development tasks. This design tool does not provide
the ability to share the design between different designers. Our
approach considers this issue thanks to the different layers of
EA standard that separates between perspectives.
Regarding the extensibility concern, the extension of a meta-
model allows the extension of a design tool by adding new
concepts and constraints to it [16][17]. It’s realized in our
approach by extending the ArchiMate meta-model by new
elements and constraints, then generating a new design tool
that contains the concrete syntax inside the palettes. These
palettes contains the new added components like in [4][10].
Concerning the heterogeneity concern, the existence of
different components and communications that are related to
different contexts and activities. We are facing this heterogene-
ity in the software components and models in [16][17][18]. In
our approach, we are facing this heterogeneity (e.g., Smart
Sensor different than Data Fusion).
According to the execution test platform concern, the de-
signer in [16][17][18] is not able to test and verify his models
or instances on an executable platform (e.g., IMS). Relying on
[4] in our approach, we are able to test our proposed model
(see section VI). For example, IMS can be used to exchange
messages between terminals (e.g. Smart Sensors, and Fusion
Servers).
III. MARINE OBSERVATORIES
Underwater Sensor Networks that aims to environmental
data acquisition will play an essential role in the development
of future large data acquisition systems [19]. They allow the
data to be exchanged and treated between the different devices
(Servers, Sensors). On all these devices, we can have software
components to treat and store the data. An example about MO
is the project Marine e-Data Observatory Network (MeDON).
In this context, the designer should be able to include N
acoustic sensors that are connected to the Y fusion servers as
shown in (see Figure. 1). These servers treats the acoustic data
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

acquired by the hydrophones then diffuse them on the network.
Servers store their data on the same database. The Database
server provides the treated data to the web server where the
conﬁguration of a web application is done. Thus, the web
server diffuses the information detected by the hydrophones
such the voice of the dolphin to the web clients through a
graphical interface.
IV. MODEL DRIVEN ENGINEERING (MDE) AND DOMAIN
SPECIFIC MODELING LANGUAGES (DSML)
MDE [15] is ”a software development method which fo-
cuses on creating and exploiting domain models. It allows the
exploitation of models to simulate, estimate, understand, com-
municate, and produce code”. MDE helps to manage complex-
ity thanks to the modeling concept and model transformations.
Modeling helps to describe the design in a high abstract way
and model transformation helps to have a generated design
tool.
A meta model deﬁnes by itself a language for describing
a Speciﬁc Domain of interest [7]. In our approach, modeling
tools follow the constraints and represent the concepts that
are deﬁned in the meta-model. It permits to instantiate large
number of models that conform to it like in programming
languages [20]; numerous of programs can be implemented
relying on a speciﬁc programming language (e.g., C, C++,
Java, etc.).
Eclipse IDE provides a powerful environment that relies on
EMF which facilitates the modeling/meta-modeling activities,
it supports many model transformation languages as well.
Model transformations help us to generate design tools and
simulation programs directly and automatically considering
meta-models and model instances. Every model transformation
depends on a set of rules that describe and control the
transformation process. The transformation rules may map
models that conform to different meta-models (on the same
abstraction level), such as ATL [21], or map between differ-
ent domains using one meta-model for the source model to
generate texts/codes (e.g., XPAND [22]).
In our case (see Figure. 2), the input model represents the
design of highly abstract level, and the meta-model is the
extended ArchiMate meta-model which represents the abstract
syntax [15][12]. Our code generation is an automated process
that links directly the design model to the simulation scripts
[13]. Thus, it helps to reduce the time of the implementations
for large simulation programs, and it minimizes the implemen-
tation errors.
A. Domain-Speciﬁc Modeling Languages
Domain-Speciﬁc Modeling Languages (DSMLs) [23] en-
able designers from different domains and backgrounds to
participate in software development tasks and to specify their
own needs using domain concepts. A DSML [24] is comprised
of three components: abstract syntax, concrete syntax, and
semantics. The abstract syntax deﬁnes modeling concepts
and their relationships. There are several kinds of concrete
syntaxes: visual, XML-based, textual, etc [25]. The concrete
BusinessActor
SmartSensor
DataFusion
BusinessFunction
Data Acquisition
AlgorithmSelection
ObjectLocalization
DataTransmission
assigned to
ApplicationComponent
ApplicationFunction
FusionSystem
SmartSensorSystem
Inform Server
ManageResources
ComputeCoordinates
Coordinates Storage Handling
TransmitLocData
Can't communicate with
assigned to
assigned to
assigned to
assigned to
assigned to
assigned to
Video Streaming
Voice Streaming
Business Layer
Application Layer
Legend
Structural concepts
Behavioral concepts
Fig. 2. Extending business and application layers of ArchiMate: proposal of
MO Meta-Model
syntax is associated with a set of rules which deﬁnes the
representation of the abstract syntax. Semantics describe the
meaning of a model and are related to the abstract syntax. They
are well-formed rules for the model and are used to constrain
the concrete syntax [24].
Historically, data fusion methods were developed primarily
for military applications (e.g., radars tracking a variable object)
since fused data from multiple sensors provide several advan-
tages over data from a single sensor [5]. We resume, such
methodology as combining set of observations would result
in an improved estimate of the target position. Concepts such
information fusion and sensors networks have perforated the
research and specially the military research. We distinguish
different architecture for data fusion as follows [5][26]: (1)
centralized fusion; (2) hierarchical fusion without feedback;
(3) hierarchical fusion with feedback; (4) distributed fusion.
According to our context, we have selected the most complex
architecture (distributed) to model it, then simulate it in
section VI. During the design activity, set of constraints and
restrictions should be respected by the designer in order to
model such architecture [5]. We will present them in the
contribution section.
In general, errors caught during the design cycle are much
less time consuming to identify and correct than those found
during testing. In order to avoid errors in the design activity,
we have implemented constraints that are deﬁned in the
abstract syntax of the language (Meta-Model) (see Figure.
2). The concrete syntax that is associated with these added
constraints can be implemented in the design tool such as
’ArchiMO’ tool in our context. This tool is generated relying
on Eclipse-EMF (Tool Generation Concept thanks to Model
Transformations).
Modeling languages are used to describe a system with high
level of abstraction (e.g., UML 2.0) [25]. For MeDON/MO,
and in relation with our objectives, we describe distributed sys-
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 3. Business and Application Layers (Palettes)
tems. UML is not enough to cover our needs, as it has only one
layer that contains all of the concepts of the design, and these
concepts are too general [27]. Thus, we selected ArchiMate
modeling language that meets UML in some concepts, but it
can describe the systems from IT domain and share multiple
viewpoints during the design as it relies on TOGAF framework
[15].
ArchiMate relies on Enterprise Architecture (EA) frame-
work [9][15]. It decomposes the system design into three
layers: business, application, and technology. In our approach,
we present these layers in the following way:
1) Business layer: speciﬁes the end-user functions and
actors. It describes the service activities as perceived by
the end-user, and the ﬂow between them;
2) Application layer: speciﬁes the functions and software
components of the service. It describes the capability of
the system under study, and the way of performing its
tasks;
3) Technology layer: speciﬁes the functions, topology,
hardware elements, and signaling protocols of the un-
derlying platform. It describes the execution platform
that offers functions to be used by the functions of the
application layer.
V. CONTRIBUTION
In general, a meta-model of DSL represents the con-
cepts/operations and constraints that belong to the domain
speciﬁcities (MO in our case). In this section, we present our
contribution of a new meta-model (Abstract Syntax), concrete
syntax, and design tool. We extend the concepts of ArchiMate
meta-model to represent the domain speciﬁcations of MO. The
new meta-model enables us to generate and develop design
tools that are coherent with Archi [28]. They contain additional
concepts, elements, constraints and relations that are speciﬁc
to the MO domain and for data fusion concepts [5].
Relying on the distributed fusion architecture (DFA) in
[5], our meta-model (see Figure. 2), and according to [2],
we distinguish the following constraints: for SmartSensor:(1)
Fig. 4. ArchiMate RelationShips
communication between two Smart Sensor elements is not
allowed; (2) communication between Smart Sensor and Data
Fusion element is allowed; (3) Smart Sensor is only allowed
to be related to the Data Acquisition function. For DataFusion:
(1) communication between two Data Fusion elements is
allowed; (2) Data Fusion is only allowed to be related to Al-
gorithm Selection, Data Transmission and Object Localization
functions.
Like in ArchiMate [9][15] our proposed meta-model is
composed of two views: one for the business layer, and another
for the application layer. Regarding the technology layer, we
rely on a meta-model for IMS that provides an underlying
platform in [4] to integrate the information system with the
core network.
For each extended concept or element, a graphical view
(belonging to the concrete syntax) should be deﬁned [10].
Our proposed concrete syntax are shown in the palettes of
the business (the red circles on the right of Figure. 3) and
application (the red circles on the left of Figure. 3) layers.
These palettes are coherent with MO speciﬁc concepts and
relations from which the designer can select, drag and drop
the desired ones.
ArchiMate contains different types of relationships such
association, assignment, etc (see Figure. 4). We have spe-
cialized the deﬁnition of the relationships regarding the new
added concepts. In our context, we have deﬁned the association
relationship for the smart sensor according to the constraints
of DFA (e.g. smart sensor could be only associated to the
data fusion). Furthermore, we have deﬁned the assignment
relationship for the smart sensor according to the constraint
of MO [2] (e.g., Smart Sensor could be only assigned to the
Data Acquisition).
For each ArchiMate element, we can deﬁne the relationship
type that are allowed with this related element. The encoding
ArchiMate relationship is based on an enumeration for all
the possible types. The key values are for example ’o’ for
association and ’i’ for the assignment relationship. For the
business and application layers, we have implemented the
keys relative to the selected relationships and mainly the
associated constraints in java code regarding to our proposed
extended meta-model (see Figure. 2). This implementation is
the grammar of the new proposed DSML.
In order to have a graphical view for the added constraints
and elements, we have generated the design tool ArchiMO
relying on eclipse EMF.
This design tool helps the designer to model the system
in a highly abstract way by drag and drop the elements and
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 5. Association and assignment relationships
relations from the palette. During the model edition, all the
constraints speciﬁed for the MO extension are checked: (1)
forbid the designer to associate two Smart Sensor elements
together; (2) the designer is able to associate a Smart Sensor
element to Data Fusion, Business Actor or other actors (see
Figure. 5); (3) the assignment is only allowed from SmartSen-
sor to the DataAcquisition function (see Figure. 5). Concerning
the Data Fusion element: (1) the association between two Data
Fusion elements is allowed; (2) the designer is able to associate
Data Fusion element to Smart Sensor element (see Figure.
5); (3) the designer is able only to assign the Data Fusion
to the Algorithm Selection, Data Transmission and Object
Localization functions (see Figure. 5).
ArchiMO tool considers different domains of experience,
each domain expert works in a speciﬁc layer (Business,
Application or Technology) as the model created in section
VI. Our contribution replies to the concerns that we have
mentioned in II as it: (C1) prevent syntax and relation errors
that can be made during the design activity; (C2) provides
three layers according to each domain speciﬁcity; (C3) ex-
tends an open, standard, and classical design tool to have a
speciﬁc one like ArchiMO; (C4) deploys different physical
components (Sensors and Servers), and logical components
such acquisition/localization algorithms.
VI. OBJECT LOCALIZATION CASE STUDY
In order to validate our proposed tool, we use it to model
the application of Object Localization using the different new
elements that are proposed in the meta-model (see Figure.
2). Then we apply the design model to a model compiler
(see Figure. 6) that we have developed to perform some error
checks and generate automatically simulation code for NS-3.
This simulation code runs in NS-3 tool that is a standard and
classical simulator in the networking domain.
A. Design Model
We have modeled a system that localizes an underwater
object using our generated design tool ArchiMO. In order to
localize this object, sensors should be connected to data fusion
servers. We have applied the distributed fusion architecture
(DFA) [5] for this design.
Fig. 6. The code generator workﬂow in XPAND language
Fig. 7. Object Localization Underwater
The design model is composed of three views regarding
to the layers of ArchiMate (see Figure. VI-A): Business,
Application, and Technology. In Figure. VI-A, we present parts
of the large model that is designed by ArchiMO. The model
contains behavioral elements, in the business layer (see Figure.
VI-A) shows the ﬁrst activity of the smart sensor which is the
dolphin detection1, etc. These activities are assigned to their
proper smart sensors and these smart sensors are associated
with the different data fusion servers and smart sensors that are
required in the DFA [5]. Concerning the application layer, the
behavioral elements are such the compute coordinates function
that is triggered by the resources reservation function, and so
on. Since ArchiMate allows the association between the layers,
(see Figure. VI-A) shows this association. For example, the
InformA Application Function aims to inform the fusion server
A by the detection of an object through the smart sensor1A.
Regarding the technology layer, a large series of functions
are associated in it (e.g., sendto) to execute this application
function. The sendto function forwards/sends a message of
type SIP or Diameter from one node to another.
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Fig. 8.
Snapshot from the animation through NetAnim tool after running
NS-3 simulation
B. Compilation and Simulation
The design tool ArchiMO generates an XMI ﬁle to represent
the graphical design. This helps to conduct the design model
to other tools. We use the XMI ﬁle as an input to our
self-developed domain-speciﬁc model compiler to generate
the simulation code (see Figure. 6). This hides complexity
of constructing simulation programs from the designer and
saves considerable time of the development process. The code
generator needs both the meta-model including the abstract
syntax of DSML for MO, and the input model that is generated
from the design tool.
The XPAND template in (Figure. 6) contains the mapping
rules between the model elements and their representations in
NS-3 [13].
We have run the generated code in NS-3 (version 3.13),
and the results of compilation and running shows no errors.
Traces and logs (e.g., PCAP ﬁles) were generated to analyze
the simulation outputs.
(Figure. 8) shows the architecture of the system design that
is generated by NS-3 for the mentioned design model. NS-
3 generated a hardware representations (Nodes, Interfaces,
Wires) for the elements of the design model and the blue
colored stream represents a message that is exchanged between
two nodes in a ﬁxed moment. This conﬁrms that the behavioral
elements were mapped as well.
We have used our approach in different application domains
and network simulators (Video Conferencing System [12][13],
and MO context). The common design concept between all
cases is the underlying platform (IMS) that represents the
Platform Speciﬁc Model (PSM) [25].
In other words, considering using one tool (e.g., NS-3), we
could change the application domain relying on ArchiMate and
our extensions (DSMLs) by ﬁxing the underlying platform that
is represented in the technology layer. This conﬁrms that our
proposed design tool (ArchiMO) creates models that follow the
same meta-model and domain-speciﬁc concepts/constraints.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented a Domain Speciﬁc Model-
ing Language (DSML) for MO context. Our approach is based
on extending the ArchiMate meta-model relying on MDE
fundamentals. We have proposed a new design tool (ArchiMO)
that is generated from the extended MO meta-model and
respects the domain-speciﬁc concepts and constraints.
ArchiMO protects the designer from making design errors
earlier than the other design activities and the code generation
step. We are relying on a standard and open tool (Archi) and
developing it by extending the modeling language and Java
implementations. Another advantage is the extensibility of our
proposed meta-model/tool. The developers may extend it and
add new concepts and standards according to the progress in
MO domain. ArchiMO provides the reusability of the added
MO and Data Fusion concepts (e.g., Smart Sensor, Data
Fusion, etc.) in different applications, activities, models or
instances. ArchiMO reduces the time of the design activity
as well, by having the speciﬁc elements and constraints in
the palette of this tool. Additionally, we conserve the standard
constraints in the abstract syntax (Meta-Model) of ArchiMate
since the new added elements inherits concepts from standard
ArchiMate elements.
On the other side, representing and meta-modeling the do-
main knowledge is itself a hard job that needs experience and
high level of accuracy, especially when setting the grammar
of the DSML according to the meta-model constraints.
As perspectives, we will extend our meta-model in order
to satisfy and cover the most possible required operations,
concepts and activities in the context of MO.
REFERENCES
[1] O. Zein, J. Champeau, D. Kerjean, and Y. Auffret, “Smart sensor
metamodel for deep sea observatory,” in OCEANS 2009 - EUROPE,
May 2009, pp. 1–6.
[2] MeDON - Acoustic Data. URL: http://www.medon.info/., Last visited
03-November-2014.
[3] J.-P. Schneider, J. Champeau, and D. Kerjean, “Domain-speciﬁc mod-
elling applied to integration of smart sensors into an information
system,” in International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems
(ICEIS 2011), Lille, France, Jun. 2011.
[4] V. Chiprianov, I. Alloush, Y. Kermarrec, and S. Rouvrais, “Telecommu-
nications service creation: Towards extensions for enterprise architecture
modeling languages,” in 6th Intl. Conf. on Software and Data Technolo-
gies (ICSOFT), vol. 1, Seville, Spain, 2011, pp. 23–29.
[5] M. E. Liggins, D. L.Hall, and J. Llinas, Multisensor Data Fusion, Theory
and Practice, S. edition, Ed.
Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, 2009.
[6] The
Open
Group,
ArchiMate
1.0
Speciﬁcation.
http://www.opengroup.org/subjectareas/enterprise/archimate,
Last
visited 03-November-2014.
[7] J.-L. P´erez-Medina, S. Dupuy-Chessa, and A. Front, “A survey of model
driven engineering tools for user interface design,” in Proceedings of the
6th International Conference on Task Models and Diagrams for User
Interface Design, ser. TAMODIA’07.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, 2007, pp. 84–97.
[8] O. Noran, “An analysis of the zachman framework for enterprise archi-
tecture from the {GERAM} perspective,” Annual Reviews in Control,
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 163 – 183, 2003.
[9] D. Quartel, W. Engelsmanb, H. Jonkersb, and M. van Sinderenc, “A goal-
oriented requirements modelling language for enterprise architecture,” in
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference, 2009. EDOC ’09.
IEEE International, University of Twente.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 3 – 13.
[10] V. Chiprianov, Y. Kermarrec, and S. Rouvrais, “Extending enterprise
architecture modeling languages: Application to telecommunications
service creation,” in The 27th Symposium On Applied Computing.
Trento: ACM, 2012, pp. 21–24.
[11] Eclipse Modeling FrameWork. http://www.eclipse.org/modeling/emf/,
Last visited 03-November-2014.
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

[12] I. Alloush, V. Chiprianov, Y. Kermarrec, and S. Rouvrais, “Linking
telecom service high-level abstract models to simulators based on model
transformations: The IMS case study,” in Information and Communi-
cation Technologies (EUNICE 2012), ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, R. Szab´o and A. Vid´ocs, Eds., vol. 7479.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, August 2012, pp. 100–111.
[13] I. Alloush, Y. Kermarrec, and S. Rouvrais, “A generalized model trans-
formation approach to link design models to network simulators: Ns-3
case study,” in International Conference on Simulation and Modeling
Methodologies, Technologies and Applications (SIMULTECH 2013).
SciTePress Digital Library, July 2013, pp. 337–344.
[14] N. Medvidovic and R. Taylor, “A classiﬁcation and comparison frame-
work for software architecture description languages,” 1, vol. 26, pp.
70–93, Jan 2000.
[15] V. Chiprianov, “Collaborative construction of telecommunications ser-
vices. an enterprise architecture and model driven engineering method,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Telecom Bretagne, France, 2012.
[16] L. Touraille, M. K. Traor´e, and D. R. C. Hill, “A model-driven software
environment for modeling, simulation and analysis of complex systems,”
in Proceedings of the 2011 Symposium on Theory of Modeling &
Simulation: DEVS Integrative M&S Symposium, ser. TMS-DEVS ’11,
San Diego, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 229–237.
[17] K. Y. A. Achilleos and N. Georgalas, “Context modelling and a
context-aware framework for pervasive service creation: A model-driven
approach,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 6, no. 2, p. 281–296,
2010.
[18] J.-L. Bakker and R. Jain, “Next generation service creation using xml
scripting languages,” vol. 4, pp. 2001–2007, 2002.
[19] J. Sorribas, A. Barba, E. Trullols, J. Del Rio, A. Manuel, and M. de la
Muela, “Marine sensor networks and ocean observatories. a policy
based management approach,” in Computing in the Global Information
Technology, 2008. ICCGI ’08. The Third International Multi-Conference
on, July 2008, pp. 143–147.
[20] J. Bezivin, “In search of a basic principle for model driven engineering,,”
Novatica Journal, vol. vol. 2, p. pp. 21–24, 2004.
[21] Atlas transformation language. http://www.eclipse.org/atl/, Last visited
03-November-2014.
[22] Eclispe Modeling. http://www.eclipse.org/modeling/, Last visited 03-
November-2014.
[23] M. M. T. Zekai Demirezen, Barrett R. Bryant, “Dsml design space
analysis,” in UAB, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA, 2011.
[24] H. Cho, J. Gray, and E. Syriani, “Creating visual domain-speciﬁc
modeling languages from end-user demonstration,” in Modeling in
Software Engineering (MISE), 2012 ICSE Workshop on, June 2012, pp.
22–28.
[25] I. Kurtev, J. B´ezivin, F. Jouault, and P. Valduriez, “Model-based DSL
frameworks,” in Companion to the 21st ACM SIGPLAN symposium on
Object-oriented programming systems, languages, and applications, ser.
OOPSLA ’06.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, pp. 602–616.
[26] I. Liggins, M.E., C.-Y. Chong, I. Kadar, M. Alford, V. Vannicola, and
S. Thomopoulos, “Distributed fusion architectures and algorithms for
target tracking,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 95–107,
Jan 1997.
[27] I. Sommerville, Sofware Engineering, Ninth Edition, M. Horton, Ed.
Pearson, 2011.
[28] Archi
tool.
http://archi.cetis.ac.uk/developer/model-new-element.html,
Last visited 03-November-2014.
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A Formal Graph-Based Model Applied to Cluster Communication in Wireless 
Sensor Networks  
Laura M. Rodríguez Peralta, Eduardo Ismael 
Hernández 
Engineering Department,  
UPAEP University 
Puebla, México 
lauramargarita.rodriguez01@upaep.mx, 
eduardo.ismael@upaep.mx 
Lina M. P. L. Brito 
M-ITI (Madeira Interactive Technologies Institute) 
Exact Sciences and Engineering Competence Center, 
University of Madeira (UMa),  
Madeira, Portugal  
lina@uma.pt 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— In several application scenarios, like the case of 
structural monitoring, it is important to model and represent 
the Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) to be deployed. To model 
the components and properties of an entire WSN types of 
collaboration in WSNs, we have created the Collaborative 
Wireless Sensor Networks (CWSN) model. This model also 
models the different types of collaboration that occur in a 
WSN. Our main goal is to provide a theoretical mathematical 
foundation that can model and analyze WSNs. Our approach is 
based on graph theory and propositional logic. The main 
contribution of this paper is applying the CWSN model to 
describe and represent a WSN. The use of the CWSN model 
brings several advantages, such as enabling the graphical 
representation of the state of the network and of several 
important properties: i) the network topology; ii) the 
transmission 
between 
nodes 
considering 
a 
multi-hop 
communication; iii) the transmission hierarchy; iv) the 
evolution of the networks through a succession of graphs; and 
so on. 
Keywords: wireless sensor networks; cluster; graphs; 
comunication; classical proposition logic, network modeling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
WSNs are a special case of wireless ad hoc networks, but 
characterized by specific constraints. Besides energy 
restrictions, sensor nodes suffer from other resource 
limitations: they have reduced memory and processing 
capabilities; and, due to short transmission range, nodes can 
only communicate locally, with a certain number of local 
neighbors [1] [2] [3] [4]. In many cases, these networks are 
subject to highly dynamic conditions, caused by nodes’ 
mobility, hardware failures, lack of battery, or other factors. 
To overcome these limitations, nodes have to collaborate in 
order to accomplish their tasks: sensing, signal processing, 
computing, routing, localization, security, etc. Therefore, 
WSNs are, by nature, collaborative networks [5].  
There are quite a few works in the literature concerning 
collaboration in WSNs; however, they only focus a specific 
type of collaboration, which is associated with the 
accomplishment of a specific task. In [6], we proposed a 
formal and hierarchical model of cooperative work, the 
Collaborative Wireless Sensor Networks (CWSN) model, 
which is designed specifically for WSNs. It allows not only 
the modeling of collaborative work (based in CSCW - 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work [7] - concepts), but 
also the modeling and visual representation of all the entities 
that can compose a WSN, as well as its properties. 
Moreover, CWSN is a generic model since it can be applied 
to heterogeneous networks. We have used first-order logic to 
formalize and describe the proposed model. We further 
employ graph-theory to describe how communication occurs 
within a cluster. This formal description of clusters’ 
communication is based on directed graphs; nodes are 
labeled with the signal +/-, respectively indicating if a node 
is active or not [6] .  
In this paper, we focus on using the graphical 
representation of the CSWN model to represent the state of 
the network and its properties. This graphical representation 
allows the user to comprehend what is occurring in a certain 
moment of the WSN lifetime, by easily visualizing the 
communication interactions, the state of the nodes (active or 
not), the state of the links, etc. This will allow enriching the 
proposed model and giving the user a better understanding of 
the components and the state of the WSN as well, through a 
more complete visual representation of the WSN. This is the 
main contribution of this paper. 
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
briefly describe the related work. In Section 3, the CWSN 
model and its entities are briefly presented. Then, a 
comparison between CWSN and other models is presented. 
The advantages of the model are, also, outlined. Section 4 
presents the SAVER project, an application example of our 
model. Section 5 provides some conclusions and future work 
perspectives.  
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
There are several works that try to model some aspects of 
WSNs. We have observed that the great majority of works 
focus on modeling of connectivity or mobility problems, or 
even on both problems. Moreover, we have identified other 
modeling concerns, such as: communication models, 
interference models, data aggregation models, coverage 
models, and signal processing models. On the contrary, the 
CWSN model intends to model a whole WSN, i.e., it tries to 
consider the most complete set possible of entities that can 
exist in a WSN, and their respective attributes. 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Regarding the works focusing collaboration in WSNs, 
the great majority of them covers a specific type of 
collaboration, which is associated with the accomplishment 
of a certain task, such as: signal processing [8], sensing [9], 
computing [10], routing [11], localization [12], security [13], 
task scheduling [14], heuristics [15], calibration [16], 
resource 
allocation 
[17], 
time 
synchronization 
[18], 
transmission [19], etc., and also works concerning 
collaboration between wireless sensor nodes and other kind 
of devices (heterogeneous groupware collaboration) [20], 
[21] to support some specific applications (for example, 
collaboration between sensor nodes and PDAs, in a fire 
fighting scenario).  
According to the literature, the only work that presents a 
model for collaborative work, in sensor networks, was 
proposed by Liu et al. [22]. It is the Sensor Networks 
Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
(SNSCW) 
model, 
a 
hierarchical model that essentially divides cooperation in 
sensor networks in two layers; the first one relates to 
cooperation between humans and sensor nodes; the second 
one relates to cooperation between the sensor nodes. This 
model was designed for sensor networks.  
However, the SNSCW model only allows the modeling 
of collaboration itself. On the contrary, the CWSN model, 
which has been presented in [6], is a formal model that was 
created specifically to describe WSNs. However, the CWSN 
model allows not only the modeling of collaborative work 
(based in CSCW concepts), but also the modeling, 
formalization and visual representation of the entities that 
can constitute a WSN (different types of nodes, clusters, 
relationships, sessions, obstacles, etc.), as well as its 
attributes. Moreover, it allows the representation of the 
WSN’s hierarchy and of the network evolution. 
The CWSN model formalizes the most significant 
properties of each entity through first-order logic. Even 
though the CWSN model is a graph-based model, it includes 
other objects [6] in order to make the modeling of the 
various entities of a WSN possible. This is of paramount 
importance to completely represent a WSN. 
WSNs are extremely dynamic systems, both in the sense 
that their characteristics change over their lifetime and for 
the fact that sensor networks’ technology (hardware and 
software) is subject to fast changes. To overcome this issue, 
the CWSN model can be updated or extended, through the 
introduction of new entities and/or new attributes. Therefore, 
another key point of this model is its scalability, since it can 
easily evolve. 
III. 
THE CWSN MODEL  
The CWSN model is a formal model of collaborative 
work that was specifically created to describe WSNs. This 
model allows the representation of the entities (different 
types of nodes, clusters, relationships, sessions, obstacles, 
etc.) and properties of a WSN, of its hierarchy, and of the 
network evolution; therefore, it allows not only the 
modeling of collaborative work (based in CSCW concepts), 
but 
also 
the 
modeling, 
formalization 
and 
visual 
representation of a whole WSN.  
The CWSN model formalizes all the properties of each 
entity through first-order logic. Also, CWSN is a graph-
based model; however, it includes other objects in order to 
make possible the modeling and visual representation of all 
the entities that can compose a WSN. This is of paramount 
importance to completely represent a WSN. 
A. CWSN Model Definitions  
We define entities as all the components that might exist 
in a WSN. The symbol, the concept and the description of 
all the entities included in the proposed model are illustrated 
in Table I.  
A WSN can have different types of nodes: ordinary 
wireless sensor nodes, anchor nodes, one or more sink 
nodes (also known as base stations) and a gateway. The sink 
node and the anchor node are wireless sensor nodes with 
special functions. 
A cluster is a group of nodes, created according to: 
geographical area, type of sensor nodes, type of 
phenomenon, task to be performed, etc., providing the WSN 
with a hierarchical structure. If nodes are grouped in 
clusters, one of the members of each cluster becomes the 
cluster head (there is only one cluster head per cluster). In 
this case, all nodes in the cluster have to send collected data 
to the cluster head (for instance, the more powerful node or 
the router, in case of a ZigBee-based WSN), which, in turn, 
is responsible for sending data to a sink node. 
If two nodes collaborate, there is a relationship between 
them. Associated with a relationship there is always an 
exchange of data, which corresponds to the data flow entity. 
Collected data (temperature, humidity, light, etc.) can be 
sent to other nodes using one or more types of signals 
(radio, ultrasound, acoustical, etc.).  
Obstacles are objects (for, e.g., building, tree, rock, etc.) 
that may obstruct the line-of-sight between two or more 
nodes, not allowing for direct communication between 
them. So, they can influence the relationships created. 
The user is the entity who interacts with the WSN, 
defining the application, querying the network, visualizing 
data, customizing the work of the sensor nodes, etc. 
Several collaborative sessions can be established when 
monitoring a WSN, and they can exist simultaneously or 
not. Basically, new sessions may be established based on 
new queries a user makes on the WSN. 
And, last but not least, as the battery is the most critical 
resource of a sensor node, it is really important that the user 
knows the state of the battery of each sensor. That is why 
the battery is also an entity of our model.  
3.1 CWSN Model Formalization 
In this section, we formalize the model’s entities and 
their main properties, using both first-order logic and graph 
theory.  
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

1) Definitions: We can formulate the sensor network as a 
graph G(V,E). V (vertices) represents the set of sensor 
nodes, and E (edges) describes the adjacency relation 
between nodes. That is, for two nodes u, v ∈ V:  
(u, v)∈ E, if, and only if, v is adjacent to u. If a node u is 
within a node v’s transmission range, we say that u is 
adjacent to v, or equivalently, that u is a neighbor of v. In 
the absence of interference, this relation is typically 
symmetric (or bidirectional), i.e., if a node u can hear a node 
v, also v can hear u. 
An arrow between two nodes represents a relationship 
between them. A relationship can be established based on: 
localization, phenomenon, type of sensor node, etc. The 
arrow represents a producer-consumer relationship. Let us 
consider two nodes A and B; the arrow 
 means 
that node A transmits data to node B. So, node B consumes 
information from node A. The transmission of data between 
both nodes follows the format TypeOfSignal.Data (
), verifying the consumer-producer property.  
So, according to the specifications of the CWSN model, a 
WSN can be represented using labeled and directed graphs; 
the labels are associated to the edges and are designated by 
data flow. TypeOfSignal.Data identifies these labels. The 
labels inform the user about the type of signal that is being 
used by the sensor nodes for transmitting data (for, e.g., radio 
frequency, ultrasounds, acoustical, etc.), and about the type 
of data that is being collected and sent to the sink node (for, 
e.g., temperature, humidity, light, acceleration, etc.). These 
labels are important because they allow the user to become 
more aware of the state and the behavior of the WSN, since 
the labels add information that goes beyond the mere 
representation of the communication interactions between 
nodes.  
Let’s represent the total number of sensor nodes that 
constitute the WSN by Nr, with N = {1, 2, …, Nr} and a 
wireless sensor node by Ni, with i ∈ N. The WSN has a 
limited lifetime, which can vary from some hours to several 
months or years. Let us denote the lifetime of the network 
(in seconds) by LT, with T = {1, 2, …, LT}, and the jth 
second of life of the network by tj, with j ∈ T . 
2) Sensor Node (Ni): A sensor node (Ni) is defined by:  
Ni = {ID, TS, CM, CT, R, PS, L, TM, S, PD, 
CN} 
Table II defines and formalizes the properties that are 
important to identify a sensor node (Ni). This Table serves as 
an example for the type of formalization that has been 
proposed for the remaining entities, presenting a formal 
description of their most important properties [6].  
3) Sink Node (SK): The sink node is the node to which data 
collected by ordinary sensor nodes is sent. It is responsible 
for sending data to the gateway being the only node that can 
do it, what verifies the flow control property. Regarding 
mobility, two cases must be distinguished: the Stationary 
Sink Node (StSK), with the localization of the sink being 
well-known and independent of time; and the Mobile Sink 
Node (MbSK), where the localization of the sink node varies 
as it moves along the WSN.  . 
4) Anchor Node (A): If the localization (L) of wireless 
sensor nodes is unknown (usually, due to an ad hoc 
deployment), it may be necessary to have some anchor 
nodes to help these sensor nodes to determine their own 
localization. So, an anchor node differs from a sensor node 
because its localization is always well known. This can be 
achieved either by equipping the anchor node with a GPS 
receiver or by manually configuring its position prior to 
deployment. Regarding mobility, an anchor node (A) can 
be: 
§ 
Stationary (StA): In this case: TM (StA) = St 
§ 
Mobile (MbA). In this case: TM (MbA) = {ContMb, Des} or 
TM (MbA) = {OcMb, Des} 
5) Network (WSN): So, a WSN can be defined by the 
following properties:  
WSN = {To, M, H, Nr, A, C, D, Hi, NSK, NA, 
NC, NO, LT}.  
6) Session (Sei): A session is the essential unit of a 
collaborative activity, which can be created based on 
different queries posed by the user. Depending on the WSN 
specific application, sessions can take place in parallel or in 
sequence; or they can be synchronous or asynchronous. 
Thus, in a certain moment, there may be several 
collaborative sessions in a WSN. A session (Sei) can also be 
formulated as a subgraph, g, of the WSN, with g(V,E) ⊆ 
G(V, E). Accordingly, some properties of the entities 
network and the sensor node are inherited.. Similarly to a 
sensor node (Ni), a session (Sei) can be in one of two states: 
Active (Ac), or Inactive (In) when its objective is fulfilled. 
So: 
S(Sei) = Ac  or  S(Sei) = In. 
Besides, similarly to the entity network, each session can 
have a group of active sensor nodes, a group of inactive 
sensor nodes and a group of relationships and data flows. So, 
a session (Sei) is defined by the following properties:  
Sei = {SeiID, SeObj, S, DTx, SeTLife, To, M, H, 
A, C, D, Hi, Nr, NSK, NA, NC, NO}. 
Note that the topology (To) has the same definition as in 
Table II; however, considering a specific instant of time, the 
topology of the session (Sei) may be different from the 
topology of the WSN.  
Also, considering the number of nodes, number of anchor 
nodes, number of sink nodes, number of clusters and number 
of obstacles, note that:  
Nr (Sei) ≤ Nr (WSN), NA (Sei) ≤ NA (WSN), NSK 
(Sei) ≤ NSK (WSN), NC (Sei) ≤ NC (WSN), NO 
(Sei) ≤ NO (WSN), and SeTLife (WSN) ≤ SeTLife 
(Sei)
A
B
 
{TypeOfSignal.Data}
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.  
DEFINITION OF THE ENTITIES CAN CONSTITUTE A WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORK. 
Symbol 
Concept 
Description 
 
Sensor node 
Nodes can be either stationary or mobile. Also, they can be in one of three possible states: active, sleep mode (in 
order to save energy), or inactive. 
 
Sink node/ 
Base Station 
Node to which data collected by ordinary nodes is sent; being responsible to send data to the gateway. If there is only 
one sink node, all data collected by sensor nodes has to be sent to it. Otherwise, data may be sent to any sink node 
and, in this case, sink nodes must be able to communicate to each other 
 
Anchor node 
Node with known localization, which support the other sensor nodes in the localization process 
 
Cluster 
Group of nodes, created according to: geographical area, type of sensor, type of phenomenon, task, etc. 
 
Cluster Head 
Sensor node to whom all sensor nodes in the cluster send the collected data; it is responsible for sending the received 
data to the Sink node.  
 
Relationship 
The arrow represents a relationship between nodes A and B. It also represents and adjacency relation between nodes 
A and B; nodes A and B are neighbors. 
A relationship can be established based on: localization, phenomenon, type of sensor node, etc. 
 
Data flow 
This label identifies both the type of signal being used (radio frequency, ultrasound, acoustical or light) and the type 
of data being transmitted between nodes (temperature, humidity, light, sound, video, internal voltage, etc.).  
 
Gateway 
Device responsible to send the data to the user, through the Internet or satellite. 
 
Obstacle 
An object (building, tree, rock, etc.) which may obstruct the line-of-sight between two or more nodes; depending on 
the type of signal that is being used by nodes (radio frequency, optical, acoustical, etc.), the obstacles may even not 
allow for communication between nodes. 
 
Session 
In a certain moment, there may be several collaborative sessions in a WSN. A session can be established based on 
the objective (type of phenomenon to monitor, geographical area to monitor, etc.) of the WSN. 
 
Battery 
It represents the percentage of the sensor node’s remaining battery. 
 
User 
Person that interacts with the WSN, querying the network, visualizing data, etc. The user customizes the work of the 
sensor nodes; the data collected by sensor nodes is used by the users’ application. 
 
 
 
7) Cluster (C): If a clustering algorithm is applied [23], 
clusters will be formed. Sensor nodes are grouped into 
clusters, mainly to support scalability (for managing a high 
number of nodes). But, besides supporting scalability, 
clustering can have several different objectives, such as: 
load balancing, fault tolerance, network connectivity, 
maximal network longevity, etc. Each cluster has a leader, 
the cluster head (CH). So, a cluster (C) is defined by:  
C = {CID, CH, Stb, NrC, IaC-To, IeCH-Con, 
CMet}. 
Even though clustering is influenced by the network and 
link layer protocols, some attributes can be identified.  
8) Cluster Head (CH): The cluster head (CH) can be elected 
by the sensors in a cluster or pre-assigned by the network 
designer. Also, CHs may be the richest nodes in resources 
of the whole network. So, a cluster head (CH) is defined by 
[23]: 
CH = {CHID, TM, TN, Ro}. 
B. Main Properties Represented by the CWSN Model 
The CWSN enables the graphical representation of 
several 
important 
properties, 
like 
nodes’ 
mobility, 
connectivity and communication, network heterogeneity and 
stability, network coverage, consumer-producer and flow 
control, as well as the graphical representation of other 
important aspects, like, the occurrence of failures, the 
network topology, the established routing paths, or the 
communication modality used by nodes and the type of 
sensed data. However, some aspects like signal interference 
was not considered in the CWSN model. The representation 
of some of these network properties, like mobility of nodes 
or topology changes, is possible through the representation 
of the network evolution. In other words, the model 
represents a screenshot of a WSN in a specific moment of 
time. As time goes by, several aspects of a particular WSN 
can change: (i) the state of the nodes can change; (ii) new 
nodes can be deployed; (iii) the topology can suffer 
modifications; (iv) new clusters can be created; (v) new 
obstacles can appear; etc. In the CWSN model, these 
network changes are naturally represented through a 
succession of figures as exemplified in Figure 1,  
Figure 1 represents a modification in the topology of the 
network caused by the elimination of an obstacle. The 
obstacle was located between nodes N4 and N1, impeding 
direct communication between these two nodes. For some 
reason (the obstacle may be static, like a tree or building, or 
it may move, like an animal or a car), the obstacle 
A
CH
{TypeOfSignal.Data}
A
B
SK
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

disappeared. Consequently, connectivity and, therefore, 
communication was established between the referred nodes. 
Thus, the CWSN model also addresses the analysis of 
temporal information. This can be used as an input for 
creating a real-time tool that allows visualization and 
representation of a WSN, as we have demonstrated in [25], 
where the CWSN model was translated into XML language, 
which was used as an input for the tool. 
Figure 1.  Modelling a change in the network topology, applying the CWSN Model. 
C. Comparing the CWSN  Model With Other Models For 
WSNs  
Table III allows a quick overview of the main differences 
between the CWSN model and other models that have been 
applied to model these networks.  
The remaining state-of-the-art models mostly address the 
modelling of a single issue of WSNs, addressing up to two 
issues (like mobility and connectivity) in the most complete 
modelling cases. Contrarily to these models, instead of 
focusing on modelling some specific problem of WSNs, the 
CWSN model is used to systematically describe and 
represent the features and properties of all the components 
that might constitute a WSN. So far, no other model has 
covered so many aspects of a WSN as the CWSN model 
does. 
For example, unlike the SNSCW model [22], our model 
does not only model the cooperation within the network, but 
also the entire WSN. The CWSN model also allows the 
representation of the network hierarchy, from the collected 
data to the user (passing through the clusters, the session 
and the WSN). Moreover, the CWSN model is generic, in 
the sense that it can model heterogeneous networks and that 
it can be applied to any type of wireless sensors, (regardless 
its size, its hardware characteristics, the types of signals it 
can measure, etc.). It can also be applied to any WSN 
despite its specific application. So, it is possible to use all 
the entities defined in the model to represent a specific 
scenario of any application (monitoring a forest, a vineyard, 
a volcano, a museum, a natural catastrophe, etc.).  
Besides, any changes that might occur on a certain 
application scenario (new collaborative sessions, new 
clusters, nodes moving, etc.) can be represented by a 
sequence of figures; hence, the CWSN model allows the 
representation of each state of the network and its evolution. 
Regarding collaboration, the model includes some 
fundamental CSCW [7] concepts (for, e.g., session, 
relationship, data flow and groups) and properties (for, e.g., 
consumer-producer and flow control). Thus, analyzing 
Table III, it is possible to conclude that the CWSN model 
presents important advantages over the state-of-the-art 
models presented in section II. 
D. Contributions of the CWSN model 
WSNs are extremely dynamic systems, both in the sense 
that their characteristics change over their lifetime and for 
the fact that sensor networks’ technology (hardware and 
software) is subject to fast changes. To overcome this issue, 
the CWSN model can be updated or extended, through the 
introduction of new entities and/or new properties. 
Therefore, another key point of this model is scalability, 
since it can easily evolve. 
The CWSN model itself models the most important 
components of the WSN. As such, their advantages are: 
§ 
The CWSN model provides a grammar for formally 
modeling an entire WSN, i.e., all the entities that can 
exist in a WSN, and their respective attributes.  
§ 
It also allows to visually and graphically representing a 
whole WSN, including not only its entities, but a very 
important aspect to users and network managers, the 
network topology. Basically, the CWSN model 
provides a common framework for describing and 
representing any WSN.  
§ 
Moreover, the CWSN model allows representing the 
network hierarchy, from the collected data to the user, 
SK
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
N1
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
N3
N2
N4
C1
N6
N5
SK
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
N1
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
{RF.(Te, Hu, Li, Iv)}
N3
N2
N4
N6
N5
C1
T1
T2
time
(…)
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

passing through the sensor nodes, the clusters, the 
sessions and, finally, the whole WSN. 
§ 
Besides, any changes that might occur on a certain 
application scenario (mobility of nodes, failure of 
nodes, topology changes, new collaborative sessions, 
new clusters, etc.) can be represented by a sequence of 
sub-graphs; hence, the CWSN model allows the 
representation of each state of the network and its 
evolution. 
§ 
Furthermore, the CWSN model is generic, since it can 
model heterogeneous networks; it can be applied to any 
type of wireless sensor nodes (regardless their size, 
their hardware characteristics, the types of signals they 
can measure, etc.), and to describe and represent any 
WSN, despite of its specific application. So, it is 
possible to use all the entities defined in the model to 
represent a specific network scenario of any application 
(monitoring a forest, a vineyard, a volcano, a museum, 
a natural catastrophe, etc.).  
IV. 
THE CWSN MODEL APPLIED TO STRUCTURAL 
HEALTH MONITORING 
The use of WSNs have brought several advantages in 
structural monitoring and the establishment of structural 
health compared to conventional methods where computers 
connected to accelerometers are used. In conventional 
methods, it is necessary to install cables through the 
structure, disturbing its normal operation and generating 
maintenance cost. Compared with conventional methods, 
WSNs provide the same functionality at a much lower price 
and a more flexible monitoring. Another problem is the high 
equipment and wiring installation and maintenance cost.  
The cost of a conventional system with a computer and a 
piezoelectric accelerometer is about USD 40000 per 
sampling point. The estimated cost of the proposed system, 
in this work is less than USD 200 per point. In WSNs no 
wiring is required, making installation and maintenance 
much easier and inexpensive. Moreover, the use of WSNs 
allows Structural Analysis of VulnerabilitiEs of buildings 
through wiReless sensor networks (SAVER) platform to be 
deployed and operate even if the building is in operation. It 
does not cause further visual impact due to its small size, 
low power consumption and installation flexibility. The 
advantage of structural health monitoring based on WSNs 
can be extended if the MEMS acceleration sensor type is 
used. The MEMS accelerometer is a silicon chip, which is 
very compact in size, low power consumption and cheap. 
Without MEMS, a small WSN, even low-power and low-
cost accelerometer, would be degraded. 
Thus, the SAVER platform will aim at gathering 
information to establish the vulnerability level of structural 
health of buildings. Such information will be used in 
decision making for both schemes and prevention programs, 
and for post-seismic evaluation. 
The SAVER platform will be able to monitor and 
display information in real-time. It will determine from the 
implementation of several methods for estimating seismic 
response and damage detection, the level of structural 
vulnerability of buildings. In addition, our platform will 
offer several services that will notify users about potential 
risks of the structure through alarms, email and SMS. 
Besides, it will have a Web based monitoring platform and a 
mobile app for Android and I-Phone. Also, this platform 
will 
generate 
graphs, 
reports 
and 
statistics. 
Some 
preliminary results of the SAVER project was publish in 
[26]. 
The expected results, in SAVER project, intend to give 
the basis for the analysis of buildings and gather instrumental 
data that can be useful for decision-making of institutions 
and users that are responsible for infrastructure and 
buildings. Furthermore, in this project, we pretend to provide 
the necessary information to implement methods of 
vulnerability analysis and therefore, to estimate the seismic 
risk of buildings, such as hospitals or schools.  
SAVER project will be validated in the building B 
(Figure 2) of UPAEP University, located in Puebla city in 
México. This building is structured based on reinforced 
concrete rigid frames. Furthermore, it is regular in plan and 
consists of four levels with a height of 3.15 m each one, so 
it has a total height of 12.60 m. In the transversal direction, 
it has a bay of 10.50 m. In the longitudinal direction, the 
building has eight bays of 6 m each one, so that it has a total 
length of 48 m. The structural elements are composed of 
beams and columns. The beams, in transversal direction, 
have square cross section at all levels. 
In the longitudinal direction at level 1 and 4, they have 
variable prismatic section, while in level 2 and 3 are 
rectangular. All columns in each level have variable 
hexagonal section. Floor system has 0.25 m thickness and is 
prefabricated. The building has masonry walls with 0.15 m 
thickness. This building was built in 1984. In recent studies, 
we have determined a high level of structural vulnerability. 
But, these studies were made using only three wired sensors. 
In order to obtain a better vulnerability estimation, we intend 
to instrument this building using the SAVER platform. The 
proposed topology for this building is shown in Figure 3.  
We are planning to install 12 sensor nodes. Each node 
has two sensors, a temperature sensor and an acceleration 
sensor. Using CWSN model, we can visualize the interaction 
among the sensors and their relationship. Figure 4 shows the 
WSN of the Building B. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE II.  
DEFINITION OF THE PROPERTIES OF THE ENTITY A SENSOR NODE (NI). 
 
Properties 
Description / Formalization 
Sensor Node (Ni) 
Identifier (ID) 
Each sensor node has a unique identifier (ID) 
ID (Ni) = i , i ∈ ℕ 
Types of sensors 
(TS) 
A sensor node (Ni) can have several types of sensors, each one measuring a different phenomenon: light (Li), temperature (Te), humidity (Hu), 
sound (Sd), internal voltage (Iv), acceleration (Ac), pressure (Pr), vibration (Vb), received signal strength indicator (RSSI), etc. 
So, TS (Ni) ⊆ {Li, Te, Hu, Sd, Iv, Ac, Pr, Vb, RSSI, ...} 
Communication 
modality (CM) 
A number of communication modalities can be used, such as: radio (RF), light (Li), ultrasound (US), acoustical (Ac), optical (Opt), hybrid 
(Hy). 
So, CM (Ni) ⊆ {RF, Li, US, Ac, Opt, Hy} 
Communication 
Technology (CT) 
A sensor node (Ni) can use different communication technologies. So far, three technologies have been proposed: ZigBee (ZB), which 
corresponds to IEEE 802.15.4; Bluetooth (BT); IEEE 802.11 (Wi-Fi). 
So, CT (Ni) ⊆ {ZB, BT, Wi-Fi} 
Transmission 
Range (R) 
Let Pt be the nominal transmission power of a node. PR;j  i is the received power of a signal propagated from node i to node j. A received 
power PR;j  i above a given threshold Pth will provide sufficient SNR (Signal to Noise Ratio) in the receiver to decode the transmission.  
The nominal transmission range for successful communication can be defined as [19]: R = Pt/Pth 
Note that due to the instability in the transmission range, the area a wireless sensor node can reach is not necessarily a circle and the range can 
vary between r=(1-ε).R and R, ε>0 [19]. 
Power Supply (PS) 
Energy can be supplied by batteries (that are, usually, of very limited capacity), solar cells or an external and unlimited power supply (only 
possible if nodes are stationary and in indoor applications).  
§ 
Battery (B); 
§ 
Solar cells (SC); 
§ 
External and unlimited power supply (VDC); 
§ 
Hybrid (Hy) – for, e.g., battery and solar cells; 
§ 
Etc. 
PS (StSK) ⊆ {B, SC, VDC, Hy, etc.} 
However, the great majority of sensor nodes are equipped with batteries. The lifetime of a sensor node (Ni) is limited by its battery, depending 
on its capacity and type. The battery can be defined by: 
§ 
Type of battery: TB, with TB (Ni) ∈ {lithium, alkaline, li-ion, AA, external power supply, solar cells, electromagnetic and piezoelectric 
transducers, etc.} 
§ 
Capacity (voltage): CB (Ni) [V] 
§ 
Remaining capacity at time tj: PBNi (tj) [%] 
BNi (tj) = {TB (Ni), CB (Ni), PBNi (tj)}  
Localization (L) 
Let LNi (tj), with i ∈ N and j ∈ T , denote the location of node Ni at time tj.  
The type of deployment affects important properties of the network (node density, node locations, etc.). The deployment of sensor nodes may 
be: 
§ 
Random (ad hoc deployment, for, e.g. dropped by an aircraft). In this case, the localization of a node is unknown:  
LNi (tj) = (x, y, z), where x, y, z ∈ ℝ are unknown. 
§ 
Manual: sensor nodes are deployed in pre-determined positions. In this case, the localization of a node is well-known:  
LNi (tj) = (a, b, c), where a, b, c ∈ ℝ are known. 
Product 
Description (PD) 
Alphanumeric that identifies the brand and the model of the sensor node. 
PD (Ni) = {Brand (Ni), Model (Ni)} 
Consumer 
Node 
(CN) 
Often referred to as parent node, is the node to which the sensor node Ni is sending data at time tj. Considering for example a relationship 
between nodes A and B; if node A is transmitting to node B, then B is the consumer node since it is receiving the data.  
Type of Mobility 
(TM) 
A sensor node (Ni) can be: 
§ 
Stationary (St): LNi (t1) = LNi (t2) = … = LNi (tLT) 
§ 
Mobile (Mb): The period of mobility can be occasional or continuous: 
Occasional (Oc), when long periods of immobility occur: 
∃ j, l ∈ T : LNi (tj)  ≠ LNi (tl), and j ≠ l   ∧  ∃ r, s ∈ T : LNi (r)  = LNi (r+1) = … = LNi (s), and s >> r 
Continuous (Cont): ∀ j∈ T  \ {LT} LNi (tj+1)  ≠ LNi (tj) 
Mobility can still be classified in: 
§ 
Incidental (Inc), for, e.g., due to environmental influences ≈ Occasional 
§ 
Desired (Des), whether active or passive, which can be applied to any period of mobility (occasional or continuous). 
So, TM (Ni) ∈ {St, {OcMb, Inc}, {OcMb, Des}, {ContMb, Inc}, {ContMb, Des}} 
State (S) 
Depending on its power mode, the node Ni can be in one of two states (S): 
 Active (Ac): Node that is in the active state. Its color will depend on the cluster it belongs to, since each cluster will be represented by a 
different color. By default, the green color will be used. 
 
 Sleep Mode (Sm): Node that is in the sleep mode, in order to save energy. Colored in grey color. 
 
 Inactive (In): Node that is damaged, or has some failure or has run out of energy. Colored in black color. 
So, S (Ni) ∈ {Ac, Sm, In} 
 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE III.  
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE MODELS CREATED FOR WSNS.
Model 
Modelling issues 
Graph-
based 
CSCW 
concepts 
Collabor
ation 
levels 
Graphical 
representation 
of the WSN 
Formal 
model 
Kenniche and 
Ravelomananana 
(2010) 
Topology 
YES 
NO 
NO 
YES 
(topology) 
NO 
SNSCW  
(Liu et al., 2006b) 
Cooperation 
NO 
YES 
YES 
(two) 
NO 
YES 
Wang (2011) 
Coverage 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Deployment 
and topology 
control 
Bonaci et al. 
(2010) 
Behaviour of the 
WSN under attack 
yes 
no 
no 
no 
Network 
security 
Wu and Chung 
(2009) 
Sensing and 
Coverage 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Deployment 
and topology 
control 
Ni et al. (2009) 
Sensor faults 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Fault detection 
Wüchner et al. 
(2010) 
Performance 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Evaluation of 
performance 
and energy 
efficiency 
CWSN  
The whole WSN 
and 
collaboration 
hierarchy 
YES 
YES 
YES 
(five) 
YES 
(whole WSN) 
YES 
 
The spatial distribution of the sensors is established from 
the geometry of each building. But it is necessary to deploy 
each sensor at least one in the geometric center of each level, 
and one sensor on the corner of the roof. If the longitudinal 
dimension of the building is large, it is suggested deploy 
some sensors in one border of the building. It is important to 
monitor also the ground response using a free field sensor. 
 
Figure 2.  Building B of the UPAEP University 
Figure 5 shows the WSN deployed in Building B, but 
represented using the entities proposed by the CWSN model. 
Basically, this representation clearly shows that only one 
session is established, but more importantly, it shows the 
structure of the WSN and the interactions that will take place 
between the different types of nodes that compose it. For 
instance, it shows that nodes are grouped in two clusters. 
Using the CWSN model, it becomes evident the type of 
data collected by each node. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Topology of the WSN installed in the Building B 
The problem to establish the structural health on 
buildings will be reduced if we use the CWSN model. The 
model can provide a tool for getting instrumental 
information about the structural properties, like acceleration 
on each storey as well as some structural dynamic 
parameters. If we use a sensor that can measure the 
acceleration (Ac) at each storey and considering that each 
sensor can provide the record of (Ac), in three orthogonal 
directions, respect to the building (longitudinal, transversal 
and vertical), the CWSN model can be implemented in order 
to estimate the structural vulnerability level. For this reason, 
we need to compute first the lateral displacement and then 
the structural damage parameter ψ, which is defined as the 
inter-storey drift. Lateral displacement can be estimated if 
we use a procedure that involves two integration steps of 
each acceleration record for longitudinal and transversal 
directions. In this implementation we can define the specific 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

properties for each Sensor Node (Ni), for example, we can 
use three Types of sensors (TS): Ac, Te and lv; 
Communication modality (CM) can be defined as radio; for 
the Communication Technology (CT) we can be use ZigBee 
(ZB); the Power Supply (PS) can be a Hybrid type (Hy); the 
Localization (L) can be defined as Manual.  
In order to show the advantages of the SAVER platform, 
we present a structural vulnerability function for building B 
(Figure 4). The vulnerability function describes the damage 
level d(ψ) in terms of inter-storey drift (ψ). The values of 
damage are from 0 to 1. A damage equals to 0 indicates fully 
health condition and damage equals to 1.0 indicates collapse 
of the building. The vulnerability function was estimated 
using only one accelerometer located in three different points 
on the building. We recorded three acceleration records 
(ambient vibration), but these records were in three different 
intervals of time. This is a big limitation that can be covered 
by the SAVER platform, because the acceleration records 
must be at the same interval of time. The CWSN model can 
represent this easely, since it defines the evolution of the 
network, which can be represented through a succession of 
graphs.  
 
Figure 4.  Typical vulnerability function to establish the strructural health 
condition on Building B 
The modelling and representation of the deployed WSN 
using the CWSN model can bring several advantages from 
the user and network manager’s points of view. The main 
contribution of the CWSN model is to standardize ways to 
model a WSN and provide a unified view of such a network 
regardless of what aspects are considered. Moreover, it 
allows the user and the network manager to become more 
aware of the composition and state of the whole network. 
That is, the CWSN model allows for visually representing 
several details about the WSN that has been deployed, what 
provides them with a more intuitive and prompt 
understanding of the WSN.  
 
Figure 5.  Modeling Building B’s WSN 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The CWSN model also defines the evolution of the 
network, which can be represented through a succession of 
graphs.  
In this paper, we presented the CWSN model, which is 
based on the CSCW methodology and specifically designed 
for WSNs. The great advantage of using this model to 
represent WSNs is that, besides modeling collaboration, it 
can also model the entire WSN. Also, this model allows for 
the representation of each state of the network and its 
evolution. Moreover, the CWSN model is generic, in the 
sense that it can be applied to heterogeneous WSNs, and 
scalable, as it can be updated if any modifications need to be 
introduced. The CWSN model was formalized in first-order 
logic. This attribution allows knowing which edges are 
active and which are not. In other words, we are able to 
identify which nodes are transmitting information. If some 
failure occurs on the process of transmission, our approach 
allows identifying this situation. 
We consider that some advantages of the CWSN model 
arise from the fact of being formal and based on graphs.  
The attributes defined for each entity of the CWSN model 
cover several dimensions. Thus, this model can be used as a 
framework for developing more generic software solutions 
for WSNs. Given the fact of being a broad and generic 
model, also confers the CWSN model with the ability of 
being applied to describe any WSN regardless of its 
application scenario. 
We also believe that this model can assist network designers 
in making better decisions regarding the organization and 
management of the network. This contribution becomes 
more significant given that the CWSN model was used as a 
basis to implement an awareness tool and a sessions’ 
managing tool for WSNs, which will be described in the 
next chapter.  
Internet
Online 
monitoring
C1
C2
	  
SK
{Ac.Te, Iv}
N2
N10
N9
N3
N7
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac, Te, Iv}
N4
N5
{Ac.Te, Iv}
{Ac.Te, Iv}
N11
{Ac.Te, Iv}
CH2
CH1
N1
{Ac.Te, Iv}
N6
{Ac.Te, Iv}
N8
{Ac.Te, Iv}
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Moreover, the CWSN model can be used to automatically 
generate some graphs of the WSN that will allow for 
identifying routing paths, detecting damaged/failed nodes or 
links, etc. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] I., Su, W. Akyildiz, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, 
“Wireless sensors networks: a survey”, Computer Networks,, 
38, 2002, pp. 393-422,.  
[2] L. Brito  and L. M. Rodríguez Peralta, "Wireless Sensor 
Networks: Basic Concepts", in Encyclopedia of Networked 
and Virtual Organizations, Idea Groups, vol. I, 2008, pp. 57-
64, ISBN: 978-1-59904-885-7,.  
[3] S. Tilak, N. Abu-Ghazaleh, and W. Heinzelman, “A 
taxonomy of wireless micro-sensors network models”, Mobile 
Computing and Communication Review, vol. 6, no. 2, April 
2002, pp. 28-36. 
[4] M. Tubaishat and S. Madria, “Sensor Networks: an 
Overview”, IEEE Potentials, May 2003, vol. 22, n. 2, pp. 20-
23. 
[5] K. Römer and F. Mattern, “The Design Space of Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, IEEE Wireless Communications. 11, 6, 
December 2004 , pp. 54-61. 
[6] L. Brito and L. M. Rodríguez Peralta, “A Collaborative 
Model for Wireless Sensor Networks Applied to Museums’ 
Environmental Monitoring”, Proc. of the 5th International 
Conference on Cooperative Design, Visualization and 
Engineering (CDVE’2008), 5220/2008, Mallorca, Spain,, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer Verlag, 
September 2008, pp. 107-116. 
[7] K. 
Mills, 
“Computer-Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
Challenges”, Encyclopedia of Library and Information 
Science, 2003. 
[8] P. Ramanathan, K. Saluja and Y. Hu, “Collaborative Sensor 
Signal Processing for Target Detection, Localization and 
Tracking”, 23rd Army Science Conference. Orlando, USA 
2002. 
[9] K. C. Wang and P. Ramanathan, “Collaborative Sensing 
Using Sensors of Uncoordinated Mobility”, Int. Conference 
on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems, LNCS, vol. 
3560, Springer, Marina del Rey, USA (2005), pp. 293—306. 
[10] L. Iftode, C. Borcea and P. Kang, “Cooperative Computing in 
Sensor Networks”, Handbook of Sensor Networks: Compact 
Wireless and Wired Sensing Systems. Mohammad Ilyas (ed.), 
CRC Press, 2004. 
[11] G. Chen, T. D. Guo, W. G. Yang and T. Zhao, “An improved 
ant-based routing protocol in Wireless Sensor Networks”,  Int. 
Conference on 
Collaborative 
Computing: 
Networking, 
Applications and Worksharing (CollaborateCom 2006), 
Atlanta, USA, 2006, pp. 1—7. 
[12] D. Dardari, and A. Conti, “A Sub-Optimal Hierarchical 
Maximum 
Likelihood 
Algorithm 
for 
Collaborative 
Localization in Ad-Hoc Networks”,  IEEE Communications 
Society Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications 
and Networks (SECON 2004), Santa Clara, USA 2004, pp. 
425—429.. 
[13] A. Chadha, Y. Liu, and S. Das, “Group Key Distribution via 
Local Collaboration in Wireless Sensor Networks”, IEEE 
Communications Society Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc 
Communications and Networks (SECON 2005), Santa Clara, 
USA, 2005, pp. 46—54. 
[14] H. Sanli, R. Poornachandran and H. Cam, “Collaborative 
Two-Level Task Scheduling for Wireless Sensor Nodes with 
Multiple Sensing Units”, IEEE Communications Society 
Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and 
Networks (SECON 2005), Santa Clara, USA, 2005, pp. 350- 
361. 
[15] R. Reghelin, and A. Fröhlich, “A Decentralized Location 
System for Sensor Networks Using Cooperative Calibration 
and Heuristics”, 9th ACM Int. Symposium on Modeling 
Analysis and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems 
(MSWiM’06), Torremolinos, Spain, 2006, pp. 139-146. 
[16] V. Bychkovskiy, S. Megerian, D. Estrin and M. Potkonjak, 
“A Collaborative Approach to In-Place Sensor Calibration”, 
2nd Int. Workshop on Information Processing in Sensor 
Networks (IPSN’03), Palo Alto, USA, 2003, pp. 301—316. 
[17] S. Giannecchini, M. Caccamo, and  C. S. Shih, “Collaborative 
resource allocation in wireless sensor networks”, 16th 
Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems (ECRTS’04), 
Catania, Italy, 2004,  pp. 35—44. 
[18] A. Hu and S. Servetto, “Algorithmic Aspects of the Time 
Synchronization Problem in Large-Scale Sensor Networks”, 
Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 10, Springer Science 
+ Business Media Inc., 2005, pp. 491--503. 
[19] A. Krohn, M. Beigl, C. Decker, T. Riedel, T. Zimmer and D. 
Varona, “Increasing Connectivity in Wireless Sensor Network 
using Cooperative Transmission”, 3rd Int. Conference on 
Networked Sensing Systems (INSS). Chicago, USA, 2006. 
[20] L. Cheng, T. Lian, Y. Zhang and  Q. Ye, “Monitoring 
Wireless Sensor Networks by Heterogeneous Collaborative 
Groupware”. Sensors for Industry Conference (Sicon/04). 
New Orleans, USA, 2004. 
[21] Z. Chaczko, F. Ahmad, and V. Mahadevan, “Wireless Sensors 
in Network Based Collaborative Environments”,  6th Int. 
Conference on Information Technology Based Higher 
Education and Training (ITHET 2005), 2005, pp. F3A-7- 
F3A-13. 
[22] L. Liu, H. Ma, D. Tao and D. Zhang, “A Hierarchical 
Cooperation 
Model 
for 
Sensor 
Networks 
Supported 
Cooperative Work”, 10th Int. Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD’06), 2006, 
pp. 1-6.  
[23] B. Krishnamachari, D. Estrin, and S. Wicker, “The impact of 
Data Aggregation in Wireless Sensor Networks”, Proceedings 
of IEEE 22nd Int. Conf. on Distributed Computing Systems 
Workshops, 2002, pp. 575-578. 
[24] S. Hussain, U. Farooq, K. Zia, and M. Akhlaq, “An Extended 
Topology for Zone-Based Location Aware Dynamic Sensor 
Networks”, 
Proc. 
National 
Conference 
on 
Emerging 
Technologies (NCET), Szabist Karachi, Pakistan, Dec. 2004. 
[25] L. M. Rodríguez Peralta, L. M. P. Leão Brito, Teixeira Gouveia B.A., 
Sousa D.J.G., and Alves C.S., “Automatic monitoring and control of 
museums’ environment based on Wireless Sensor Networks”, 
Electronic Journal of Structural Engineering (EJSE), Special Issue: 
Wireless Sensor Networks and Practical Applications, 2010, pp. 12 – 
34, ISSN 1443-9255. 
[26] L. M. Rodríguez Peralta E. Ismael Hernández, S. A. Cardeña 
Moreno, D. Martínez Jiménez, and A. E. Muñoz Guarneros, 
“Towards to a platform of monitoring based in WSN to 
estimate the structural health of buildings”, Second European 
Conference on Earthquake Engineering and Seismology 
(2ECEES), Istanbul, Turkey, August, 2014, pp. 24-29. 
 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

High Deployability of IEEE 802.15.4k DSSS Systems in Interference Dominated Bands 
 
Yasutaka Tada     Yosuke Sato      Shuzo Kato 
   Research Institute of Electrical Communications, Tohoku University 
 Sendai, Japan 
 yasutaka.tada@riec.tohoku.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— This paper clarifies that 802.15.4k direct sequence 
spread spectrum (DSSS) systems are suitable for wide sensor 
networks with star topology. According to our evaluation, the 
robustness of 802.15.4k DSSS systems under the co-channel 
interference (CCI) is 60 dB stronger than that of 802.15.4g due to 
its DSSS (1023 spreading factor) and FEC. In addition, this paper 
clarifies the area where 802.15.4g cannot survive under 802.15.4k 
CCI and vice versa. The latter area is 50 times larger the former. 
Furthermore, we show that directive base station antennas can 
reduce the interference impacted area by 80% compared to 
omnidirectional base station antennas.   
Keywords—LECIM, IEEE802.15.4k, IEEE802.15.4g 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the latest standardization projects of 802.15 Working 
Group is P802.15.4k Low Energy Critical Infrastructure 
Monitoring (LECIM) Networks [1]. The standard is an 
amendment to the 802.15.4 standard to enable wide area sensor 
networks. Communication systems based the standard combine 
very low power consumption with long communication ranges 
with order of kilometers. There are two PHY layer options in 
the standard, the first one is based on direct sequence spread 
spectrum (DSSS PHY), the second one is based on frequency 
shift keying (FSK PHY). The focus of this paper is the DSSS 
PHY of 802.15.4k with following three reasons: (i) DSSS PHY 
deploys direct sequence spreading and this process gain is 
mandatory for longer transmission range – if 1023 spreading 
code length is used, the system can enjoy 30 dB processing gain. 
(ii) DSSS PHY standard mandates the use of strong FEC (rate 
1/2 convolutional encoding with a constraint length of 7) while 
FSK PHY regulates it as an option and there has been none of 
FSK PHYs deploying FEC in market as of today. This may 
generate about 5 dB advantage of DSSS PHY against FSK PHY 
in AWGN channels and more than 8 dB difference in 
interference dominated environments, (iii) DSSS PHY regulate 
the use of PSK modulation which can be demodulated 
coherently while FSK PHY can’t be demodulated coherently. 
This creates another 3 dB advantage to DSSS PHY. Thus, the 
total advantage of DSSS PHY against FSK PHY is more than 
40 dB practically (with a spreading code length of 1023) and 
this is why this paper selected DSSS PHY as a targeted system 
Although there will be a lot of different sources of 
interferences in 900 MHz bands, this paper focuses on how 
802.15.4.k DSSS systems can survive against interference from 
another standard of the 802.15 family, namely 802.15.4g Smart 
Utility Networks (SUN). This is important assumption since we 
need to identify the interferer to analyze and in Japan, 802.15.4g 
is supposed to be a major interferer to IEEE802.15.4k systems. 
Both systems operate in unlicensed bands, between 920 and 928 
MHz in Japan [2]. Our analyses assume 802.15.4k systems 
operating in the presence of IEEE 802.15.4g co-channel 
interference (CCI) as well as 802.15.4g systems experiencing 
802.15.4k CCI.   
For the interference analysis, we consider two parameters 
that affect the performance of both systems under CCI. The first 
is a relative location of an 802.15.4g sub-channel with respect 
to an 802.15.4k channels. The second one is minimum desired 
signal to undesired signal ratios (D/U) of each system in 
AWGN environments. By using these two parameters, we will 
deduct “Installation inhibited area” in which the interferer 
destroys communications channels in each system. Further, the 
“installation inhibited area” is re-evaluated with a directive base 
station antenna for 802.15.4k DSSS systems showing how the 
“inhibited area” will be reduced by adopting high gain base 
station antennas instead of Omni antennas.  
The outline of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we 
introduce 802.15.4k and 802.15.4g systems and illustrate their 
mutual interference. Section III provides the permissible D/U 
ratios of both systems under CCI. In Section IV, we show the 
Installation inhibited areas of 802.15.4k and 802.15.4g systems. 
Section V elucidates “installation inhibited areas” reduction by 
adoption of directional BS antennas. Conclusions are drawn in 
Section VI.  
II. 
 SYSTEM MODELS AND CO-CHANNEL INTERFERENCE  
As mentioned in the introduction, we focus on the DSSS 
PHY of the 802.15.4k standard. It can operate in many 
unlicensed bands throughout the world including 920-928 MHz 
band in Japan with up to 1 MHz bandwidth as shown in Table 
I. Here, one sub-channel is defined as a channel with a 
bandwidth of 200 kHz and the maximum bandwidth is 1 MHz 
by bonding 5 sub-channels. The other system examined here, 
the 802.15.4g system, has a smaller bandwidth of 200 KHz or 
400 KHz. Its details are shown in Table I as well. 
The channelization of these standards enables 802.15.4g 
with a bandwidth of 200 KHz to interfere with 802.15.4k 
systems in one of its 5 sub-channels. In Figure 1, we illustrate 
the spectra of 802.15.4g operating at 50 kbps (in 200 kHz) and 
802.15.4k systems operating in 1 MHz bandwidth, where a D/U 
ratio is 0 dB. Here, D/U ratio is defined by (1), as a ratio of 
transmission powers of desired and undesired signals.  

DUR =
Transmit Powerdesired signal
Transmit Powerundesired signal

Sub-channel 3 of 802.15.4g is located at the exact center of 
the 802.15.4k signals with a bandwidth of 1 MHz.  
In Figure 2, there are three channels of 802.15.4g systems 
with a bandwidth of 400 kHz, each interfering with 802.15.4k 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

systems operating with 1MHz bandwidth. In this case, sub-
channel 2 of 802.15.4g systems is located at the exact center of 
the 802.15.4k signals.  
Fig. 3 shows a block diagram of the interference simulation. 
“Gain” enables us to set the transmit power of 802.15.4k and 
set expected D/U ratios. “Freq. offset” is used to set the location 
of 802.15.4g channels relative to the 802.15.4k bandwidth. 
Using this system, we evaluate BER performance of each 
system, and derive the minimum D/U ratios to meet the target 
PER (Packet error rate). 
 Fig. 4 compares simulated and theoretical BER 
performance of 802.15.4k and 802.15.4g systems. The 
theoretical performance is evaluated by (2) and (3) as follows 
[7].  
Equation (2) provides bit error probability of BPSK 
modulation with FEC (R=1/2, k=7, Soft decision), and equation 
(3) yields that of Gaussian filtered FSK (GFSK) modulation. As 
indicated by the simulated and theoretical performance, the 
802.15.4k and 802.15.4g simulation systems work correctly. In 
next section, we use the simulation system to evaluate the 
interference of both systems. 

Pb =
1
2 erfc (√R ∙ k ∙
Eb
N0)


=
1
2 erfc (√
7
2 ∙
Eb
N0)


Pb =
1
2 exp (−
Eb
2N0)


TABLE I.  
MAJOR SYSTEM PARAMETERS FOR 802.15.4K 
 AND 802.15.4G 
Parameter 
802.15.4k 
802.15.4g 
Bandwidth 
200 kHz to 1 MHz 
200 / 400 kHz 
Chip / Bit Rate 
Up to 800 kcps 
50/100 kbps 
Modulation 
BPSK, OQPSK 
GFSK 
Filter 
Roll off factor = 0.2 
Gaussian filter 
BT=0.5 
FEC 
Convolutional 
coding 
Rate=1/2, K=7 
No * 
Spreading factor 
16-32,768 
No 
Information bits per 
packet 
32 octets 
32 octets 
Target PER 
0.01 
0.01 
*  Optional ( Convolutional coding Rate=1/2, K=4 )    
 
Fig. 1 Interference example of 802.15.4g signals with a bandwidth of 200 kHz 
and 802.15.4k signals with a bandwidth of 1 MHz 
 
 
Fig. 2. Interference example of 802.15.4g signals with a bandwidth of 400 
kHz  and 802.15.4k signals with a bandwidth of 1 MHz 
 
Data 
Gen.
Encode
Spread
BPSK 
mod.
RRC
Filter
Decode
Despread
BPSK 
demod.
RRC
Filter
15.4k 
BER
15.4g 
BER
Data 
Gen.
Gauss 
Filter
FSK 
mod.
Freq. 
Offset
FSK 
demod.
IEEE 802.15.4k Transmitter
IEEE 802.15.4g Transmitter
AWGN 
channel
   Gain
 
Fig. 3 A block diagram of the performance evaluation under CCI 
 
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
x 10
6
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Frequency (MHz)
 dBm
 
 
TG4k
TG4g Subchannel[1]
TG4g Subchannel[2]
TG4g Subchannel[3]
TG4g Subchannel[4]
TG4g Subchannel[5]
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
x 10
6
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Frequency (MHz)
 dBm
 
 
TG4k
TG4g Subchannel[1]
TG4g Subchannel[2]
TG4g Subchannel[3]
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Fig. 4 BER performance comparison of 802.15.4k(BPSKwFEC) and 
802.15.4g(GFSK) systems (theory and simulation) 
 
III. 
THE MINIMUM D/U RATIOS OF BOTH SYSTEMS  
A. 802.15.4k DSSS system performance 
We evaluate first the minimum D/U ratios of 802.15.4k 
systems with a spreading factor of 1023 to meet the target PER 
under CCI of 802.15.4g operating at different data rates 
(bandwidths). Fig. 5 plots the minimum D/U ratios versus 
Eb/N0 to meet the target PER with parameters of bandwidth 
and relative channel locations of 802.15.4g signals against 
802.15.4k signals. For 802.15.4k systems, the target bit error 
rate (BER) is calculated as 3.9x10-5 to transmit 32-byte packets 
with less than 1 % packet error rate.  
The minimum D/U ratio of 802.15.4k (with 1023 spreading 
factor) under CCI from 802.15.4g tends to be less than -60 dB 
for Eb/N0 values higher than 15 dB, regardless of 802.15.4g 
bandwidths and sub-channels. In the case of narrower 
bandwidth interference, 200 kHz bandwidth 802.15.4g 
interference, the inteference on the center of the 802.15.4k 
channel generates the largest degradation in the low Eb/N0 
region. In the case of 400 kHz bandwidth interference, both 
non-centered 802.15.4g signals (sub-channels 1  and 3) give 
less degradation due to the drop in interference power created 
by passage through a  802.15.4k receiver filter. 
B. 802.15.4g GFSK system performance 
 Fig. 6 plots Eb/N0 versus minimum D/U ratio of 802.15.4g 
under CCI from 802.15.4k with spreading factor of 1023. The 
target BER is the same value as the previous one. The minimum 
D/U ratios of 802.15.4g show up to 4 dB difference depending 
on the bandwidths and relative interfering channels (sub-
channels) in the high Eb/N0 region. 
From these two figures, 802.15.4k DSSS systems show 
much 
stronger 
interference-resistant 
performance 
than 
802.15.4g FSK systems such as a -60 dB D/U ratio requirement 
for DSSS systems and 2-4 dB D/U ratio requirement for 
802.15.4g FSK systems to realize a PER of 1%. This huge 
difference is due to the DSSS processing gain & de-spreading 
of the interference and FEC coding gain. 
 Using the performance results obtained above, the next 
section we will estimate the range / area in which 802.15.4g 
systems can disturb 802.15.4k communications and vice versa. 
 
Fig. 5 Minimum D/U ratio vs. Eb/N0 of  802.15.4g under CCI from 802.15.4k 
with a 1023 spreading factor 
 
Fig. 6 Minimum D/U ratio vs. Eb/N0 of 802.15.4k ( with spreading factor of 
1023) under CCI from 802.15.4g operating with different bandwidths and sub-
channels 
 
IV. 
INSTALALTION INHIBITED AREAS OF 802.15.4K 
AND 802.15.4G SYSTEMS 
In this section, we evaluate “installation inhibited area” of 
802.15.4g and 802.15.4k systems. We assume two things. First 
is that both systems operate as one-to-one communications. 
Second is that the 802.15.4k system uses a spreading factor of 
1023. Simulation parameters are shown in Table II. Fig. 7 
shows the “installation inhibited area” from the Sensor Node of 
802.15.4g to the BS or Sensor Node (SN) of 802.15.4k as an 
interferer. Fig. 8 shows the “installation inhibited area” from 
the SN of 802.15.4k to the BS or SN of 802.15.4g as an 
interferer.  
In this simulation environment, the receiver location is 
shown by (x, y) = (0, 0) meters. The transmitter is located at (x, 
y) = (0, d) meters. “d” means the communication range in Table 
II. We assume that if the D/U ratio is less than the permissible 
D/U ratios (defined in section III), communication is successful. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
Eb/N0 (dB)
BER
 
 
simulated BPSKwFEC
theoritical BPSKwFEC
simulated GFSK
theoritical GFSK
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-64
-62
-60
-58
-56
-54
-52
-50
-48
Eb/No [dB]
The limit of DUR to meet the target PER [dB]
 
 
Bit Rate=50kbps, Subchannel[1]&[5]
Bit Rate=50kbps, Subchannel[2]&[4]
Bit Rate=50kbps, Subchannel[3]
Bit Rate=100kbps, Subchannel[1]&[3]
Bit Rate=100kbps, Subchannel[2]
10
15
20
25
30
35
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Eb/No [dB]
The limit of DUR to meet the target PER [dB]
 
 
Bit Rate=50kbps, Subchannel[1]&[5]
Bit Rate=50kbps, Subchannel[2]&[4]
Bit Rate=50kbps, Subchannel[3]
Bit Rate=100kbps, Subchannel[1]&[3]
Bit Rate=100kbps, Subchannel[2]
802.15.4k parameters 
Target PER≦1% 
Packet length 32 
octets 
 
802.15.4g parameters 
Target PER≦1% 
Packet length 32 octets 
 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Areas inside the contours in each figure indicate locations 
where the interferer transmitter can disturb communication, 
namely, “installation inhibited area”. 
Figures 7 and 8 show that the 802.15.4g system is weaker 
against the interference. The “installation inhibited area” is 210 
meters range, 105 percent of the communication distance. Fig. 
8 indicates that spreading can greatly suppress 802.15.4g 
interference on 802.15.4k systems. As a result, “installation 
inhibited area” is a maximum of 100 meters, 2 percent of the 
communication distance. Finally, we conclude 802.15.4k 
systems have high tolerance to the interference due to spreading 
and FEC. The next section clarifies how the directive antenna 
reduces the interference compared with the omnidirectional one. 
TABLE II.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
802.15.4k 
802.15.4g 
Center frequency 
922.4 MHz 
922.4 MHz 
802.15.4k 
Bandwidth 
1 MHz 
200 kHz 
EIRP 
16dBm 
16dBm 
Transmit power 
13dBm 
13dBm 
Base station 
antenna gain 
3dBi 
3dBi 
Base station 
antenna height 
Urban 
30m 
Urban 
30m 
Suburban 
10m 
Suburban 
10m 
Rural 
10m 
Rural 
10m 
Sensor node 
antenna gain 
3dBi 
3dBi 
Sensor node 
antenna height 
1m 
1m 
Spreading factor 
1023 
No 
Communication 
range 
5000m 
200m 
Path loss model 
Extended-Hata 
model[4] 
Extended-Hata 
model[4] 
 
 
Fig. 7 “installation inhibited area” of 802.15.4g SN with interference from 
802.15.4k SN or BS  to victim 802.15.4g SN  
Fig. 8  “installation inhibited area” of 802.15.4k SN with interference from 
802.15.4g BS or SN 
 
V. 
INSTALALTION INHIBITED AREA REDUCTION 
BY DIRECTIONAL BS ANTENNA 
In this section, we investigate the reduction of the 
interference from 802.15.4k to 802.15.4g and the one from 
802.15.4g to 802.15.4k when 802.15.4k BS employs a 
directional antenna. The BS antenna gain pattern of the 
802.15.4k system is based on a 4-element linear beam forming 
antenna as shown in Figure 9. We use this antenna with a gain 
of 10dBi and an omnidirectional antenna with a gain of 3dBi. 
Simulation parameters are the same as in Table II, except the 
transmit power for directive BS antenna is set the total transmit 
eirp does not exceed 16 dBm as regulated in Japan. Fig. 10 
shows the “installation inhibited area” of 802.15.4k under 
802.15.4g interference for the two types of antennas. The 
“installation inhibited area” is evaluated by formulas (4) and (5) 
as follows. Formula (4) yields a continuous value, while the 
formula (5) yields a discrete value. 

S =
1
2 ∫
r2d
2π
0
θ


=
π
N ∑
rk
2
N−1
k=0


 
With the omnidirectional antenna, the area is 0.04 km2 but 
with the directive antenna it is 0.01 km2. The directional 
antenna reduces the area by 75 percent relative to the 
omnidirectional antenna. Fig. 11 shows the “installation 
inhibited area” of 802.15.4g under 802.15.4k interference. The 
omnidirectional antenna offers an area of 0.15 km2 while the 
directional antenna reduces this to 0.03 km2. The directional 
antenna reduces the area by 80 percent relative to the 
omnidirectional antenna. Therefore, BS directional antenna can 
well suppress the interference and increase spectrum efficiency. 
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
distance[m]
distance[m]
 
 
Urban
Suburban
Rural
15.4g BS
15.4g SN
-150
-120
-90
-60
-30
0
30
60
90
120
150
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
distance[m]
distance[m]
 
 
Urban
Suburban
Rural
15.4k SN
105% (
210m
200m) 
2% (
100m
5000m) 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

 
Fig. 9 802.15.4k BS antenna directivity pattern and  
omnidirectional antenna pattern 
 
Fig. 10 The reduction of “installation inhibited area” by using directional 
antenna: interference from 802.15.4g  
 
Fig. 11 802.15 4g “installation inhibited area” reduction by using directional 
BS antenna: interference from 802.15.4k BS 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this work, we have investigated the performance of 
802.15.4k and 802.15.4g systems under CCI. We confirmed 
that 802.15.4k DSSS Systems under CCI is 60 dB more robust 
than 802.15.4g. We have clarified “installation inhibited area” 
in which 802.15.4g or 802.15.4k cannot survive under CCI of 
the other system. The “installation inhibited area” of 802.15.4k 
turned out to be 50 times smaller than that of 802.15.4g. 
Furthermore, we have showed deployment of directional 
antennas can reduce the “installation inhibited area” (from other 
system) by 80 percent and by 75 percent (to other system). 
Therefore, 802.15.4k DSSS PHY and directional 802.15.4k BS 
antennas can reduce the interference much smaller and increase 
the spectrum efficiency a lot. 802.15.4k DSSS systems are 
suitable for wide area sensor networks with star topology and 
are much more widely deployable in interference dominated 
ISM bands than 802.15.4g systems with higher spectrum 
efficiency. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This project is partially supported by Ministry of Internal 
Affairs and Communications, SCOPE and also partially 
supported by Japan Science and Technology Agency, A-STEP. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] “IEEE Draft  Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks 
– 
Part15.4: 
Low-Rate 
Wireless 
Personal 
Area 
Networks(WPANs) Amendment – Physical Layer Specifications 
for 
Low 
Energy, 
Critical 
Infrastructure 
Monitoring 
Networks(LECIM),” IEEE P802.15.4k/D3, November 2013, 
pp.1-133, Jan,  2013. 
[2] "IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks--Part 
15.4: Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs) 
Amendment 3: Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications for Low-
Data-Rate, Wireless, Smart Metering Utility Networks," IEEE 
Std 802.15.4g-2012 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.15.4-2011) , 
vol., no., pp.1-252, April 27 2012, pp.1-252 
[3] Rec. ITU-R F.1245-1, “Mathematical model of generalized 
radiation patterns of point-to-point fixed-service antennas for use 
in statistical interference assessment.” [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.itu.int/dms_pubrec/itu-r/rec/f/R-REC-F.1245-1-
200005-S!!PDF-E.pdf 
[4] Rep.  ITU-R SM.2028-1 , “Monte Carlo simulation methodology 
for the use in sharing and compatibility studies between different 
radio 
services 
or 
systems.” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-r/opb/rep/R-REP-SM.2028-1-
2002-PDF-E.pdf 
[5] Q. Li and S. Jillings, “TG4k Coexistence Document,” IEEE  
802.15-12-0314-01-004k,  August 2012, pp.1-69 
[6] Y. Tada, T. Baykas and S. Kato, “Performance Evaluation of 
802.15.4k DSSS System in the Presence of 802.15.4g Co-
Channel Interference,” Global Symposium on Millimeter Wave 
2013, April 2013. 
[7] Proakis, J. G., Digital Communications, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, 
2001. 
 
 
 
 
 
-20
-20
-10
-10
0
0
10 dBi
10 dBi
90o
60o
30o
0o
-30o
-60o
-90o
-120o
-150o
180o
150o
120o
 
 
Directive Antenna
Omni Antenna
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
distance[m]
distance[m]
 
 
DirectiveAntenna
OmniAntenna
15.4k BS
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
distance[m]
distance[m]
 
 
Directive Antenna
Omni Antenna
15.4g BS
15.4g SN
20% (
0.03km2
0.15km2) 
25% (
0.01km2
0.04km2) 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

A Real-Time Bridge Pier Scouring Monitoring System Based on Hall-Effect Sensors   
 
Chen-Chia Chen, Ssu-Ying Chen, Wen-Ching Chen, Gang-Neng Sung, Jin-Ju Chue, Chih-Ting Kuo,  
Yi-Jie Hsieh, Chih-Chyau Yang, Chien-Ming Wu, and Chun-Ming Huang 
Applied Research Laboratories, National Chip Implementation Center,  
7F, No. 26, Prosperity Rd. I, Science Park,  
Hsinchu City, Taiwan. 
Email: ccchen@cic.narl.org.tw 
 
Abstract—Scour around bridge pier is the major cause of 
bridge failure such as collapse resulted in loss of life and 
property. Most of available bridge pier scour sensors and 
approaches are very expensive, which is a challenge for mass 
deployment of numerous bridges. Our proposed scour monitor 
system utilized low-cost commercial sensors, hall-effect sensors 
(unit price < $1) that are capable of real-time measuring 
bridge pier scour with resolution of ca. 2.5 cm, and overall cost 
for single sensor node of my proposed work is at least 40% less 
expensive than existing work. After scour event, the typical 
output voltage difference of ~ 10 mV and the signal-to-noise 
ratio of ~ 10 were observed. After simple modified setup, the 
output voltage difference could be reached to ~300 mV. 
Moreover, the master-slave architecture of bridge pier scour 
monitoring system has scalability and flexibility for mass 
deployment. This technique has the potential for further 
widespread implementation in the field. 
Keywords-bridge; piers; scour; senso; hall-effect  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the past few decades, global warming has increased 
dramatically in rainfall intensity, duration, and frequency, 
which resulted in harsh floods in Taiwan. Nevertheless, most 
mountains in Taiwan are very steep with slope gradients, so 
rivers in Taiwan are usually short and steep. When typhoons 
come and bring intensive rainfall, resulted in serious floods, 
even disaster flow [1]. It usually causes tremendous damages 
and loss of life and property. According to 2012 annual 
report by directorate general of highways, MOTC, there are 
~ 9699 bridges of highway in Taiwan area, total length ~ 
502021.8 m. Some of the crossing river bridges face serious 
challenges of bridge foundation scouring problem during 
harsh floods and disaster flow. Bridges lose their piers due to 
excessive pier scour and high flow velocities, which is one of 
the major causes for partial bridge collapse [2]. 
For more than a hundred years, bridge pier scour has 
been extensively studied in the world. Many methodologies 
and instruments have employed to measure and monitor the 
local pier scour depth, such as sonar, radar, ad Time-Domain 
Reflecotometry (TDR), Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG) sensor 
[3]. The sonar and radar sensor provide contactless 
measurement of streambed scouring near bridge pier and 
abutments, and usually used to show the final status of 
streambed after a flood. One of disadvantages of the sonar 
and radar is that they have limit for measuring status of 
streambed in real time as rush water contained sands, even 
rocks during a flood. A method of TDR measures the 
reflections that results from a fast-rising step pulse travelling 
thorough a measurement cable. The depth of soil-water 
interface is determined by counting the round trip travel time 
of the pulse. However, the major drawback of TDR is that 
accuracy of TDR is strongly depended on environment 
temperature and humidity. Moreover, monitoring scour 
depth by FBG is depended on number of FBG elements. 
However, the cost of monitoring of the scour depth by FBG 
technique is higher than that of existing methods [4]. The 
costs of Radar and TDR are expensive due to high-speed 
hardware requirement. For example, a commercial TDR 
(Campbell Scientific Inc., TDR100) was used to real-time 
monitor scour evolution [5], and its price is about $250.  
For FBG, optical devices such as laser, photo detectors and 
the optical fibers are very expensive. In addition, most of the 
existing methods used for scour detection are expensive and 
complicated, which is a major challenge for mass 
deployment to a lot of bridge piers. 
In this study, we develop and verify proposed real-time 
bridge pier scouring monitoring system which has a gateway 
and sensor nodes as master-slave configuration. Each sensor 
node has a hall-effect sensor module; overall cost for single 
sensor node is about ~$100, the cost includes components 
and Printed Circuit Boards (PCB) manufacturing and 
assembly. Our proposed solution is 40% less expensive than 
existing work (TDR). Furthermore, we also developed a 
Bridge Surveillance program for remotely accessing raw 
sensor data. The experimental results show that our proposed 
monitoring system can monitor pier scour process in 
real-time.  
We start with an overview of our proposed architecture 
and experimental setups in related work in Section II. 
Section III presents the results provided from our 
experiments. Finally, we conclude this paper in Section IV. 
II. 
DEVELOPMENT OF REAL-TIME BRIDGE PIER SCOUR 
MONITORING SYSTEM 
Architecture of bridge pier scouring monitoring system 
The architecture of real-time bridge pier scour 
monitoring system is shown in Figure 1. The architecture is 
based on master-slave configuration. A master sends 
commands to slave for controlling sensor node and 
accessing sensor data. The host controller communicates 
with gateway through Power Over Ethernet (POE) and 
Ethernet switch. The host controller sends a command to the 
getaway. When the gateway receives command, the gateway 
converted Ethernet command to RS485 command. After 
converting command, the gateway broadcasts to sensor 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

nodes. Since the command packet contains unique sensor ID, 
only specific sensor node returned sensor data to the host 
controller. We adopt both accelerometer and hall-effect 
sensor modules in our sensor node. In order to reduce 
number of wires in this study, POE is utilized. Simply 
connected 48V battery (3 packs in series for 48V with 
individual 16V lithium iron phosphate battery) to the POE 
adaptor (Cerio, POE-PE03), and used an Ethernet cable to 
connect the POE adaptor to the gateway and sensor node in 
series.  
 
Figure 1: The architecture of real-time bridge pier scouring monitoring 
system 
Gateway and Sensor nodes 
The gateway is comprised of two stacked PCBs – a power 
module and a core module (see Figure 2). The top board is 
the power module, which operates as a DC-DC converter 
for creating 1.2~5V outputs from the 48V input. An 
Ethernet PHY (TI, DP83640) is used to receive and send 
Ethernet data, and also to send signals and power to sensor 
nodes through RS485 interface (ADI, ADM2682E). The 
core module is composed of a Cortex-R4 MCU (TI, 
RM48L952) and a FPGA (Xlilinx, Spartan-6). Ethernet data 
and RS485 data are processed by the Cortex-R4 MCU and 
the FPGA, respectively. The FPGA mainly translates the 
sensor data from serial format to parallel format, between 
the FPGA and the Cortex-R4 MCU have three control 
signals (Int, Rdy, En) and 8-bit data signals. The FPGA 
receives the sensor data in 8-bit as a unit, after the FPGA 
collected 8-bit data, the FPGA will deposit to register, then 
send Int signal = 1 to the Cortex-R4 MCU, notify the 
Cortex-R4 MCU can receive sensor data. After the 
Cortex-R4 MCU receives 8-bit data, the Cortex-R4 MCU 
will set the Rdy signal to send a plus for the FPGA, 
followed by cycle until the FPGA En Signal = 0, on behalf 
of the sensor data has been transferred.  
 
Figure 2: The photos of printed circuit boards of gateway (left) and sensor 
node (right). 
The configuration of sensor node was similar to the 
gateway. The Cortex-R4 MCU is used to access sensor data 
through SPI (Serial Peripheral Interface) interface, and the 
FPGA is used to process RS485 data. The block diagram of 
the FPGA in sensor node is shown in figure 3.  
 
Figure 3:  Block diagram of FPGA in sensor node 
 
The FPGA parses receives commands, executes part of 
commands, and responses to the host. The Cortex-R4 MCU 
takes charge of collecting sensor data. Figure 4 describes 
processing sequence of the FPGA and the Cortex-R4 MCU. 
In Figure 4, the steps in blue are tasks of the FPGA, those in 
purple are memory related tasks, and those in red are tasks 
of the Cortex-R4 MCU.  In the case that the host requests 
sensor data, the FPGA will receive a Read command. The 
FPGA then parses and decodes the command and is aware 
that cooperation with the Cortex-R4 MCU is necessary. The 
FPGA puts this command in memory and notifies the 
Cortex-R4 MCU with an interrupt. The Cortex-R4 MCU 
reads command from memory via I2C, collects sensor data 
and stores them in memory. After collection is done, the 
Cortex-R4 MCU notifies the FPGA with a General-Purpose 
Input/Output (GPIO) signal. Then the FPGA reads data from 
memory and generates response to the host. 
 
Figure 4:  Processing sequence of FPGA and MCU 
Accelerometer and hall-effect sensor modules 
 The core module of the sensor node which is connected 
to an accelerometer (ADI, ADXL345) and a hall-effect 
sensor (Allegromicro, A1301) which is used in this study are 
widely available online. But in this study, we only focus on 
the monitoring scour event by using the hall-effect sensors. 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The output voltage of the hall-effect sensor is returned to an 
ADC (TI, ADS 1258) to digitize its analog signals, as shown 
in Figure 5. Digitizing output voltage of the hell-effect 
sensor sends back to the Cortex-R4 MCU via the SPI 
interface.   
 
Figure 5: Top-view and bottom-view photos of the hall-effect sensor 
 
Setup of the experimental tests 
A Neodymium magnet with a diameter of 8 mm and 
thickness of 3 mm is fixed on thin metal strip with 
thickness of 0.3 mm, as shown in Figure 6. The hall-effect 
sensor and Neodymium magnet are aligned well, and are 
separated by a distance of 10 mm. Both types of sensor 
modules are installed alone the pier model, as shown in 
Figure 7. 
module. 
 
Figure 6: The drawing of house for accelerometer and hall-effect sensor 
module. 
 
 
Figure 7: The photos of setup of real-time bridge pier scouring 
monitoring system. 
 
The monitoring bridge scour erosion detection is carried 
out in a recirculating laboratory flume (length = 36m, width 
= 1 m, depth = 1.1 m) at Hydrotech Research Institute of 
National Taiwan University, Taiwan [6]. The layout of the 
flume and experimental setup are shown in Figure 8. A false 
test bed has a sediment recess (length = 2.8 m, width = 1 m, 
depth = 0.3 m) which is filled by nearly uniform sediment. A 
15-cm-diameter hollow cylindrical pier made of plexiglass is 
located at the middle of the recess. An inlet valve and a 
tailgate are used to regulate depths of flow and flow speed. 
Inlet valve
Flow 
regulator
pier
Tailgate
Sediment in recess
Sediment 
corrector
Head tank
flow
Figure 8: Partial layout of recirculating laboratory flume. 
 
Gateway Initialization 
The procedure including gateway initialization and 
sensor data access are shown in Figure 9. A Bridge 
Surveillance program is ran in the host controller, and it 
sends command (Request Packet) to specific gateway for 
making TCP connection through Ethernet. When the 
gateway receives ACK from the host controller and returned 
SYN/ACK, the TCP connection is made successes. The host 
controller sends a command to disconnect an active 
connection when the busy gateway doses not return 
SYN/ACK. After making TCP connection, the gateway 
firstly initializes GPIO of the FPGA. Secondly, it converts 
Request Packet to serial data, and then it broadcasts serial 
data to sensor nodes. Until FPGA signal = 1, the FPGA 
receives sensor data from sensor node, and then the gateway 
sends the Response Packet to the host controller.  
Host
Converted Request 
Packet to serial data
Sends serial data
Receive Sensor data 
from FPGA
GPIO Initialization
Yes
NO
Request 
Packet
Gateway received 
Request Packet
Gateway sends 
Response Packet
Response 
Packet
Gateway
FPGA 
Int signal = 1
Sensor Node
 
Figure 9: The flow chart of Gateway initialization 
 
Figure 10 shows the Bridge Surveillance program with 
friendly graphical user interface, which automatically 
collects data from accelerometer and hall-effect sensor 
modules.  
 
Figure 10: A Bridge Surveillance program with friendly graphical user 
interface (simulation data). 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

The host controller sends command every 20 ms, and the 
host controller will receive the Response Packet. The 
proposed software extracts the sensor data from payload of 
the Response Packet and then it displays them in real-time 
on charts (left: accelerometer, right: hall-effect sensor) of 
GUI as shown in Figure 10. Therefore, remote users can 
access raw data of each sensor nodes by WiFi 
communication, and they can analyze them in-situ. If pier 
scour status reaches critical condition of bridge collapse, the 
next version of the Bridge Surveillance program will alarm 
people away from the bridge. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
A simple method for calibrating the measuring gap 
between the hall-effect sensor and the magnet will be shown. 
A permanent magnet is moved away from the hall-effect 
sensor, and the dependence between corresponding output 
voltage of the hall-effect sensor and the distance between the 
magnet and the hall-effect sensor is shown in Figure 11. The 
output voltage of the hall-effect sensor as a function of the 
distance is nonlinear, but can be expressed by the following 
equation, 
 
y = 7.513 − 1.055x
+ 0.079𝑥2 − 0.002𝑥3    (1) 
 
where x is the distance between the magnet and the 
hall-effect sensor output voltage in millimeter and y is the 
corresponding output voltage of hall-effect sensor distance in 
volt. We can use look-up table or transfer function to quickly 
find out the gap between the magnet and the hall-effect 
sensor. Besides, performance of a hall-effect sensor was 
guaranteed over an extended temperature range from its 
datasheets. We did not make temperature calibration for the 
hall-effect sensor prior to starting experiments.  
 
Figure 11: The data and fitting curve of the output voltage of the hall-effect 
sensor versus distance between hall-effect sensor and magnet. 
 
When the maximum number (1024) of sensor data is 
reached, the host controller creates a new file to a disk. In 
order to save disk space, a gzip utility is used for 
compression of the sensor data. After uncompressed file, the 
sensor data were shown in Figure 12, each line represents a 
data and time stamp, sensor ID, output voltage of a 
hall-effect sensor and ends with a newline character.  
 
Figure 12: Hall-effect sensor record file. 
 
Figure 13 shows the evolution of signals of the hall-effect 
sensors during the monitoring scour experiment. A cylinder 
pier model is used for these tests. Some of the hall-effect 
sensor modules (sensor module 4-10) are completely 
submerged under sand; the others (sensor module 1-3) are 
left in the air.  
 
Figure 13: Real-time monitor output voltages of all of hall-effect sensor 
modules during scour experiment. Plots from to bottom were corresponded 
from hall-effect module 1 to 10. 
 
At ca. 10000 s, the inlet valve is ON. At 11733s, water 
flow starts striking the thin metal strips of the hall-effect 
sensor module 2 and 3, and their output voltage abruptly 
grows up due to bending of the thin metal strips caused by 
the water flow. It is worth knowing that quiver of voltage of 
the hall-effect sensors were strongly depended on the rate of 
flow water (data was not shown in here). The output voltages 
of the hall-effect sensor module 4, 5, and 6 are suddenly 
dropped down at 11787, 11834, and 11868, respectively. The 
out voltage of the hell-effect sensor drops so quickly 
meaning that the sand around the sensor node is totally 
removed by scour process. However, the rate of change of 
the output voltage of the hall-effect sensor module 7 and 8 
are slower than that of module 4, 5, and 6. It reflects that the 
scour processes are slow and sand around the hall-effect 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

sensor module is just partially removed during scour process. 
The output voltages of the hall-sensor module 9 and 10 
almost have no clear drop, so the sand still covers them well. 
Moreover, the hall-sensor module 1 and 4 are broken due the 
leaking water from imperfect silicon package sites. Figure 14 
shows the pier model before, under, after scour experiment. 
 
Figure 14: Photos of pier model (a) before, (b) under, and (c) after scour 
experiment. 
 
In order to sense the scour event more sensitivity by the 
hall-effect sensor, we try to amplify the change of output 
voltage of the hall-sensor module after scour event, as shown 
in Figure 15.. 
 
Figure 15: Real-time monitor output voltages of the hall-effect sensor 
modules with and without amplified signals during scour experiment. 
 
 We know that the output voltage of the hell-effect sensor 
strongly depends on the distance of the magnet and the 
hall-effect sensor. Therefore, we make the distance between 
the magnet and the hall-effect sensor get closer during install 
sensor node. The change of voltage of the hall-effect sensor 
is enhanced ca. thirty fold that of before original setup, as 
shown in Figure 15.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
  Comparison of existing system for monitoring bridge 
scour is shown in Table I. In this study, we have proposed 
the architecture of real-time bridge pier scouring monitoring 
system featuring hall-effect sensors. Our proposed real-time 
monitoring system offers the advantage of low-cost and 
easy mass deployment. The overall cost for single sensor 
node of our proposed work is at least 40% less expensive 
than existing solutions (TDR).  
 
 
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF EXISTING SYSTEM FOR MONITORING BRIDGE 
SCOUR 
 
TDR 
Radar 
FBG 
This 
work 
Cost ($) 
>250 
>3500 
240a 
~100 
Resolution (cm) 
2.5 
10 
10 
2.5 
Temperature 
effect  
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NO 
work environment 
Water; 
Sand 
Air 
Water; 
Sand 
Water; 
Sand 
Real-time 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
a. 
This price is only for sensor. 
 
Our bridge pier scour monitoring system with a solution 
of 2.5 cm is demonstrated. Furthermore, we also have 
developed the Bridge Surveillance program with friendly 
GUI, which automatically collects data of each sensor node. 
Therefore, it is practical to use our proposed real-time scour 
monitoring system for diagnosis bridge pier scour events. 
Next step, we will further widespread implementation in the 
field. 
 
REFERENCE 
[1] J. C. Chen, C. D. Jan, and W. S. Huang, "Characteristics of 
Rainfall Triggering of Debris Flows in the Chenyulan 
Watershed, Taiwan," Natural Hazards and Earth System 
Sciences, vol. 13, 2013, pp. 1015-1023. 
[2] H. Wang, S. C. Hsieh, C. Lin, and C. Y. Wang, "Forensic 
Diagnosis on Flood-Induced Bridge Failure. I: Determination 
of the Possible Causes of Failure," Journal of Performance of 
Constructed Facilities, vol. 28, Feb. 2014, pp. 76-84. 
[3] L. J. Prendergast, "A Review of Bridge Scour Monitoring 
Techniques," Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical 
Engineering vol. 6, 2014, pp. 138-149. 
[4] J. Y. Lu, J. H. Hong, C. C. Su, C. Y. Wang, and J. S. Lai, 
"Field Measurements and Simulation of Bridge Scour Depth 
Variations 
During 
Floods," 
Journal 
of 
Hydraulic 
Engineering-Asce, vol. 134, Jun. 2008, pp. 810-821. 
[5] 
  X. B. Yu, and X. Yu, “Laboratory Evaluation of Time-Domain 
Reflectometry for Bridge Scour Measurement: Comparison 
with the Ultrasonic Method,” Advances in Civil Engineering, 
vol. 2010, 2010, pp. 1-12. 
[6] Y.-B. Lin, J.-S. Lai, K.-C. Chang, W.-Y. Chang, F.-Z. Lee, 
and Y.-C. Tan, "Using MEMS Sensor in  the Bridge Scour 
Monitoring System," Journal of the Chinese Institute of 
Engineers, vol. 33, Jan, 2010, pp. 25-35. 
 
 
 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Building Automation: Experience with Dynamic Reconﬁguration of a Room
Maxime Louvel, Franc¸ois Pacull, Saﬁetou Raby Thior, Maria Isabel Vergara-Gallego, Oussama Yaakoubi
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, F-38000 Grenoble, France
CEA, LETI, MINATEC Campus, F-38054 Grenoble, France
ﬁrstname.lastname@cea.fr
Abstract—This paper details a case study in the domain of build-
ing automation systems. This case study is the reconﬁguration of
a room that can be split in two or merged in one according to the
current needs. The building is equipped with the LON system,
a standard in building automation. Such a reconﬁguration is
normally done manually by a skilled technician. Thanks to our
approach, it can now be autonomous and triggered by various
external events such as sensor readings, a remote controller or
information from an agenda. To achieve dynamic reconﬁguration
in this context we rely on LINC, a coordination middleware
providing an abstraction layer allowing the encapsulation of
hardware and software components. Thus, we can not only
integrate sensors and actuators but also legacy systems such as
the LON conﬁguration tool. The coordination is provided by
coordination rules which can be statically deﬁned at application
deployment or dynamically added or removed to reconﬁgure the
system.
Keywords–Coordination; middleware; building automation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Advances in consumer electronics and embedded systems
have leveraged the emergence of connected smart devices for
a huge number of applications. These devices communicate
using different protocols and physical medium. Such explosion
of heterogeneous devices and services, and the necessity of
interaction between them, have yielded architectural concepts
based on a common software layer called middleware. A
middleware provides an abstraction view of heterogeneous
hardware, services, and protocols. It hides heterogeneity to the
application and facilitates software re-utilisation, application
deployment, and coordination between different devices to
achieve a common goal.
Building Automation Systems (BAS) are a typical example
of systems requiring a middleware. Indeed, a BAS contains
a huge number of devices and services that use different
protocols and that need to interact between them. A BAS
typically has the following requirements: i. The necessity of
a common software layer to access heterogeneous devices,
ii. The compatibility with legacy systems and protocols to
communicate with existing infrastructures and extend BAS
capabilities and iii. The possibility to dynamically reconﬁgure
the system to allow special operating modes, adaptation to
changing devices and space redistribution. Existing middle-
wares [1] [2] [3] only partially fulﬁl these needs. They are
either too complex to allow dynamic reconﬁguration or they
focus on a speciﬁc part of the BAS needs.
In this paper, we use LINC [4] to answer these challenges.
LINC is a resource-based middleware that provides inter-
actions between connected devices or software components
through coordination rules. Several technologies have already
been encapsulated for building automation. For instance, in [5]
LINC was used to control interactions between different de-
vices. In the present paper, we describe another angle of LINC
where it is used as an administration layer where devices can
be dynamically reconﬁgured and interactions between entities
belonging to the same technology may be changed according
to a given context. In this case, LINC is required only for the
reconﬁguration phase.
This paper presents an example where a BAS, that uses the
Local Operating Network (LON) [6] platform, is dynamically
reconﬁgured to allow space reconﬁguration. In the case study
we consider a room that is split in two (or merged in one) when
a removable wall is closed (or opened). Then, all the devices
present in the room are automatically reconﬁgured according to
the position of the wall. The rules describing all the actions to
perform for reconﬁguration are automatically generated, com-
piled and executed. These actions include removing the current
conﬁguration and putting in place the new one. Additionally,
LINC provides the possibility to extend the capabilities of the
BAS thanks to the encapsulation of new components.
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section II presents
some related work; then, Section III describes the LINC
middleware and Section IV describes the architecture put in
place for dynamic reconﬁguration. The case study is described
in Section V along with some discussions and results. Finally,
Section VI concludes the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
A BAS concerns the control of building services. Extending
or modifying the behaviour of an existing building automation
infrastructure requires dealing with heterogeneity of commu-
nication protocols and legacy systems [7]. There are lots of
communication protocols and many of them coexist on the
same building.
Therefore, a middleware or abstraction layer [8] is needed
in such scenario. Some characteristics as scalability, fault
tolerance and ﬂexibility are desired when choosing the proper
middleware. For instance, scalability allows extending the ca-
pabilities of the BAS by introducing new communication tech-
nologies. Wireless technologies are becoming very attractive
given its ﬂexibility and easiness to install and deploy [9] [10].
Some efforts trying to integrate legacy BAS technologies
and wireless sensor networks technologies can be found in
the literature [11] [12]. Besides, some middleware solutions
for BAS have been proposed [2] [3]. However, since they
target a speciﬁc technology or application, these solutions
lack of ﬂexibility. Scalability may also be an issue given the
complexity of such approaches.
Regarding reconﬁguration, it can be performed at different
levels: i. the nodes or devices level, where the behaviour of
the node is modiﬁed, i.e., sampling period, routing mechanism,
sensing precision, transmission power and ii. the system level
where relationships and coordination of devices are modiﬁed
according to a new deﬁned scenario. In a Wireless Sensor
Network scenario, much effort has been put at the node
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

level; in this case, reconﬁguration is mostly related to reliable
communication between nodes and energy efﬁciency. Some
examples of reconﬁguration in Wireless Sensor Networks
are presented in [13] [14]; furthermore, a middleware may
facilitate this task [15]. In this paper, we focus on the system
level reconﬁguration which allows to adapt an existing system
to a new deﬁned scenario so that new coordination rules are
generated and executed. Such reconﬁguration may be triggered
by an external event. Similarly, a context-aware middleware,
allows adapting the application, based on information retrieved
from sensors or events. Several context-aware middlewares can
be found in the literature [16] [1] each of them focusing on a
given set of applications. For the speciﬁc case of building au-
tomation Istoan et al. [17] propose a mechanism to reconﬁgure
dynamically the relationships between devices and services in
a building. This proposition remains as a conceptual approach
and no real implementation is presented.
III.
OVERVIEW OF LINC
Full description of the LINC middleware may be found
in [4]. This section describes the very basic information to
make the paper self-contained.
LINC provides a uniform abstraction layer to encapsulate
the different software and hardware components. This layer
simpliﬁes the integration of legacy components and their
coordination. This abstraction layer relies on the associative
memory paradigm implemented as a distributed set of bags
containing resources (tuples). Following the Linda [18] ap-
proach, bags are accessed only through three operations:
•
rd(): takes a partially instantiated tuple as input
parameter and returns a stream of fully instantiated
tuples from the bag, where the ﬁelds match the given
input pattern;
•
put(): takes a fully instantiated tuple as input pa-
rameter and inserts it in the bag;
•
get(): takes a fully instantiated tuple as input pa-
rameter, veriﬁes if a matching resource exists in the
bag and consumes it in an atomic way.
A. Examples of components encapsulated as bags
A typical sensor, measuring a physical quantity, can be
modelled through a Sensor bag containing tuples, that are
formed as (sensorid, value). The measured quantity is
then retrieved by accessing this bag. To differentiate sensors
capabilities (temperature, humidity, and so on), a Type bag is
added, containing tuples formed as (sensorid, type).
Actuators may be modelled with a bag command de-
signed as (actuatorid, function, parameter1,
parameter2). Then, when a resource is inserted with a
put() operation, the bag triggers the awaited action over the
targeted actuator adapted with the appropriate parameters. In a
similar manner, any other component or service which provides
a given protocol or API, such as SOAP, RPC, CORBA, or
REST can be encapsulated in a bag or set of bags.
B. Object
Bags are grouped within objects according to application
logic. For instance, all the bags used to control a network with
a given technology are grouped in the same object.
C. Coordination rules
The three operations described above, i.e., rd(), get()
and put(), are used within production rules [19] A pro-
duction rule is composed of a precondition phase and a
performance phase.
1) Precondition phase: The precondition phase is a se-
quence of rd() operations which detect or wait for the
presence of resources in several given bags. The resources are
for instance values from sensors, external events or results of
service calls. In the precondition phase:
•
the output ﬁelds of a rd() operation can be used to
deﬁne input ﬁelds of subsequent rd() operations;
•
a rd() is blocked until at least one resource corre-
sponding to the input pattern is available.
2) Performance phase: The performance phase of a pro-
duction rule combines the three rd(), get() and put()
operations to respectively verify that some resources (e.g., the
one(s) found in the precondition phase) are present, consume
some resources and insert new resources.
In this phase, the operations are embedded in one or
multiple distributed transactions [20], executed in sequence.
Each transaction contains a set of operations that are performed
in an atomic manner. Hence, we can guarantee that actions that
belong to the same transaction, are either all executed or none.
This ensures properties such as:
•
Some conditions responsible for ﬁring the rule (pre-
condition) are still valid at the time of the performance
phase completion;
•
All the involved bags are effectively accessible. For
instance, for a bag encapsulating a remote service we
can determine if such service can be actually accessed.
These properties are very important as they ensure that the set
of required objects, bags and resources, are actually available
“at the same time”. More properties offered by LINC in the
BAS context are detailed in [5].
IV.
APPLICATION ARCHITECTURE FOR DYNAMIC
RECONFIGURATION
Figure 1 presents the architecture of an application based
on LINC. The top layer is the application layer and it deﬁnes
how devices and services interact with each other through the
use of bags and coordination rules.
Application
LINC Middleware
object_6LowPAN
object_Bluetooth
driver_1
driver_2
driver_3
driver_n
driver_n-1
WSAN_1
WSAN_2
WSAN_3
REST_
DEVICE_1
REST_
DEVICE_2
...
object_modbus
driver_5
MODBUS
_DEVICE
object_rest
driver_4
MODBUS
_GATEWAY
6LowPAN
Bluetooth
ZigBee
BASont
remote
server
modbus
slave
modbus
master
object_ZigBee
object_WSAN
Figure 1: Example of application
The bottom layer corresponds to the hardware or service
speciﬁc layer. The API and actions provided by each device are
encapsulated so that they can be accessed through bags deﬁned
in LINC. To facilitate software re-use and evolution, and
to reduce complexity, we have deﬁned frameworks deﬁning
common features. For instance, all wireless sensor networks
share a common set of bags for controlling the sensors and
the actuators. Only the communication part which is dependent
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

on the technology is different. We have thus deﬁned a WSAN
(from Wireless Sensors and Actuator Network) object which is
inherited by all the object responsible for a technology. Adding
a new protocol is basically integrating the driver for the new
technology. Hence, when the driver part has been written the
object can be coordinated with the rest of the system. More
details on this software architecture may be found in [5] [21].
In several applications, reconﬁguration of devices at run
time may be needed. For instance, we may need to change
device parameters and the relationships between devices, or
we may need to perform a software update.
Usually with such architecture, the coordination of devices
of different technologies is done through coordination rules.
These rules deﬁne the different conﬁgurations and interactions
between devices. For instance, what action has to be done on
the light when the button is pressed twice. Thus, reconﬁguring
is removing some coordination rules and replacing them by
new ones, taking into account the new behaviour.
Alternatively, when all the concerned devices use a tech-
nology that integrates one controller, i.e., LON or KNX, we
can use LINC to reconﬁgure these controllers. To do so, we
extended the application described above with the encapsula-
tion of the legacy system used to reconﬁgure the controllers
of the devices. In the case of LON it is the LNS22O tool [22].
Then, the reconﬁguration is done by dynamically inserting new
coordination to reconﬁgure the different controllers.
The reconﬁguration procedure will be started by the appli-
cation as a response to a given event, i.e., a request from the
user, the presence of a resource, or the value of a given sensor.
We now detail how it is possible to dynamically generate rules
and how the activated rules can controlled.
A. Dynamic rules generation
When performing reconﬁguration, coordination rules must
be consistent with the new conﬁguration or scenario. To
ensure this consistency, rules can be automatically generated
corresponding to contextual information. In LINC, rules are
seen as resources in bags. Hence, they can be added, enabled
or disabled at run-time. To add a new rule, a resource is
added in a dedicated bag of the object called AddRules. This
bag receives resources of the form (package,source)
where package is the logical name of the group of rules
and source is the actual code of the rules.
When the reconﬁguration is triggered, the device is recon-
ﬁgured and new coordination rules are generated and added in
the AddRules bag. When a resource is added in this bag, the
rule is dynamically compiled. This compilation includes syntax
veriﬁcations, and various checks to prevent potential issues at
execution time. If the rule contains no detectable error, the
object starts to execute it right away. At this point, the new
scenario is set-up.
B. Control of rules execution
In a rule-based system it might be difﬁcult to know which
rule is executed at any time. Ensuring that a rule is really not
active may be even more difﬁcult. To overcome such issues,
LINC uses a speciﬁc bag, called RulesId, containing the
rules enabled. When a rule is compiled (when the system
is started, or dynamically added as explained previously),
an operation rd(ruleId, "ENABLED") is added in the
beginning of the precondition and in every transaction of the
rule. Hence, removing a rule only requires to remove the
corresponding resource in the bag RulesId. Indeed, no new
instance of the rule may be started. If an instance reaches the
performance phase, it will be aborted because the resource
rd(ruleId, "ENABLED") is not in the bag.
Obviously, the same pattern may be applied to a group of
rules by using a speciﬁc bag mapping the rules id to some other
information that is meaningful for the application. A typical ex-
ample in a BAS is to have two set of rules. The ﬁrst set are the
rules for daily life (e.g., managing lights, heating and comfort).
The second set of rules are dedicated to emergency situation
(e.g., to coordinate the lights with the evacuation procedure).
In case of an emergency, the comfort rules must be disabled
to prevent unexpected situation. This can be done with a bag
containing the current mode i.e., comfort or emergency.
A rd("comfort") (respectively a rd("emergency"))
on the this bag is added in every precondition and every
transactions ensuring that only one mode is used at a time.
Another important aspect of rules execution is that they can
be run on a distributed way. This characteristic provides scala-
bility and the possibility to integrate a considerable number of
technologies. For the particular case of building automation,
several BAS can be easily integrated. Moreover, rules can
be replicated on several machines so that we guarantee its
execution even if there is a faulty machine.
V.
CASE STUDY: RECONFIGURATION OF A BUILDING
AUTOMATION SYSTEM
The context of this case study is the SCUBA (Self-
organising, Co-operative and robUst Building Automation)
project [23]. It aims to provide novel architectures, services,
and engineering methodologies for robust, adaptive, self-
organising, and cooperating monitoring and control systems.
The case study presented in this paper consists in reconﬁguring
a LON system when a room is split in two (or merged in one).
This implies to change the binding between devices to adapt
the system to the current situation: Which button trigger what
and which sensor control what.
This case study illustrates a requirement more and more
important in BAS where people want to optimise the room
usages. To better explain the scenario, we ﬁrst introduce some
basic concepts and deﬁnitions regarding building automation
and the LON technology, which is the imposed legacy tech-
nology. Then, we describe the reconﬁguration procedure and
we discuss the obtained results.
A. Building Automation
A BAS is a network of software and hardware components
that sense, control, and act on the environment and commu-
nicate between them. It ensures the operational performance
of the facility as well as the comfort and safety of building
occupants.
Nowadays, it is possible to monitor and control several
systems of a building. Typically, these systems work inde-
pendently and can communicate between them thanks to a
given interconnection technology which can be a standard
or a proprietary solution. In general, several communication
technologies are present in a building.
At deployment time, the interconnections between devices
are deﬁned according to the disposition of the building. Conﬁg-
uring such interconnections is complex, time demanding, and
requires the intervention of qualiﬁed personal. Reconﬁguration
of the BAS may be required in order to respond to the needs
of occupants, or to replace or upgrade some equipments.
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Typically, these modiﬁcations are planned in advance and they
are done on purpose by a technician.
Changes in the space conﬁguration is something more
dynamic, unplanned and that can be triggered by any occupant.
Physical reconﬁguration of a room needs to be synchronised
with the involved equipments, i.e., sensors, actuators, con-
trollers. For example, consider a button to switch on or off
the lights in a room. If this room is combined with another
room by removing a wall, the lights of the second room must
also be connected to the button of the ﬁrst room.
B. LON
LON [6] is a control network system designed by Ech-
elon Corporation. LON is widely used in existing building
automation systems and it allows communication between
devices coming from different manufacturers using a common
protocol called LONtalk. LON devices are physically linked
together and they embed a special controller called the Neuron
Chip. The latter is associated with a transceiver that allows
its reconﬁguration and communication with other devices. A
unique identiﬁer permits to identify inputs and outputs of
each device on the network. Although devices are physically
connected, they are not able to exchange messages unless a
logical connection, called a Binding, is created between
them. Figure 2 shows an example of two bindings between
three devices. In the example, on of the Network Variable
Outputs (NVO) of the Device_1 is associated to the Network
Variable Inputs (NVI) of two devices: the Device_2 and
Device_3.
Figure 2: Binding between devices
LON networks are designed, monitored, and managed
through a dedicated MS-Windows software stack. This stack is
based on the LON Network Services (LNS) tool [22]. The tool
gives access to a database storing LON designs and provides
a complex API to interact with the network. An LNS Server
is provided on top of the LON Networks as an ActiveX
component. Usually, these tools allow reconﬁguring the net-
work connections by manually creating or removing bindings
between network variables. However, the user can only act on
one binding at a time. A classical room conﬁguration typically
contains dozens of bindings and reconﬁguration needs to be
done by a skilled technician. Hence, space reconﬁguration with
the LON technical tool rapidly becomes too costly and time
demanding.
C. Reconﬁguration of a Room
The platform used for the case study is illustrated in
Figure 3. It is called T1 and is located in the Schneider
premises in Grenoble, France and is one of the use case sites of
the SCUBA project. It consists of two separate rooms (Room
A and Room B) with a removable wall. The wall may be open
to combine both ofﬁces to form a single ofﬁce, or it may be
closed to obtain two different ofﬁces.
Figure 3: T1 Platform
Each ofﬁce is equipped with sensors (temperature, luminos-
ity, and presence), a Heating, Ventilation and Air Condition-
ing (HVAC) system, dimmable spotlights, motorised venetian
blinds, and push buttons. All these devices use the LON
technology.
To manage the space reconﬁguration of the platform, we
consider two conﬁgurations:
•
conﬁguration 1: The wall is open, i.e., the platform
consists of a single room. In this conﬁguration, LON
bindings are created between push buttons (Room A
and Room B) and actuators (lights, blinds) of both
rooms. In addition, a single temperature sensor is used
to control both HVACs. The two presence sensors are
used with an ”OR” logical and any of them can signal
the room occupancy.
•
conﬁguration 2: The wall is closed i.e., the platform
consists of two separated rooms. Both rooms have an
individual control; then, push buttons of Room A only
manage actuators of Room A, and the same applies
for Room B. HVACs are controlled separately by
their respective temperature sensor. The two presence
sensors are independent.
Detecting the presence of the wall, in order to trigger
reconﬁguration, is done thanks to an external device that
may use an arbitrary communication protocol encapsulated
by LINC. In our case study, we have used a simple wireless
magnetic sensor, that operates in the 433Mhz frequency band.
Changing the room conﬁguration requires reconﬁguring
LON bindings. We now detail how the LON tools have been
encapsulated in LINC, and how automatic reconﬁguration is
made possible. The approach signiﬁcantly decreases the time
and cost, compared to a manual reconﬁguration.
1) Encapsulation of LON in LINC: For encapsulation, a
software layer (driver) has been built on top of the LNS Server.
This driver permits to access LON administrative services (for
reconﬁguration). The LONobject has been placed just on top
of the driver layer and it contains bags associated to a speciﬁc
LON network service. Then, requesting a given service is
reduced to a simple standard operation on a bag (rd(),get()
or put()).
The most important bags in our scenario are:
•
CreateBinding A put() operation on this bag, with
the binding information, creates the binding;
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

•
RemoveBinding: A put() operation on this bag, with
the binding identiﬁcation, removes the binding.
Internally, when a put() operation is done on one of these
bags, the corresponding APIs in the LON ActiveX layer are
called, implementing the new binding conﬁguration.
2) Automatic Reconﬁguration of LON: Listing 1 gives an
example of a generated rule to switch between two conﬁgura-
tions. The rule starts with the removal of bindings and then, it
creates bindings for the new conﬁguration. The precondition
and performance of a rule are separated by the symbol “::”.
Hence, this rule has no precondition1 and it is always triggered
once.
This rule is automatically generated from predeﬁned con-
ﬁguration stored in a dedicated component called BASont [21]
provided by one of the SCUBA project partners. Alternatively,
this information could be stored in a database.
1
: :
{
3
# remove bindings
[ ” LonObject” , ” removeBinding” ] . put( ” Locations. Room 2
, R2
Push Button. Switch[ 1 ]
,
nvoSWsetting[ 1 ] @@@Locations. Room 2
, R2 Room
Box. ConstLightCtrl[ 0 ]
, nviCLsetting” )
;
5
#. . .
7
# create the new bindings
[ ” LonObject” , ” createBinding” ] . put( ” Locations. Room 1
, R1
Push Button L e f t . Switch[ 0 ]
,
nvoSWsetting[ 0 ] @@@Locations. Room 1
, R1 L i g h t
C o n t r o l l e r ( LRC 5141). L i g h t C o t r o l l e r [ 0 ]
,
nviChannel 1” )
;
9
#. . .
} .
Listing 1: Generated Rule
Once generated, the rule is inserted in the AddRules bag
of the LONObject upon a condition concerning the presence
of the wall. To do so, we use three rules detailed in Listing 2
and 3.
[ ” LonObject” , ” Sensors” ] . rd( ” magnetic 1” , ” opened” )
&
12
: :
{
14
[ ” LonObject” , ” Sensors” ] . rd( ” magnetic 1” , ” opened” )
&
[ ” LonObject” , ” TriggerConfig” ] . put( ” wall opened” )
&
16
} .
18
[ ” LonObject” , ” Sensors” ] . rd( ” magnetic 1” , ” closed” )
&
: :
20
{
[ ” LonObject” , ” Sensors” ] . rd( ” magnetic 1” , ” closed” )
&
22
[ ” LonObject” , ” TriggerConfig” ] . put( ” wall
closed” )
&
} .
Listing 2: LINC rules that trigger reconﬁguration
The ﬁrst set of rules (Listing 2) takes the value of the
magnetic sensor, that detects the position of the removable
wall. The wall is typically moved by the user of the room.
When a new value is sensed, the rule inserts the required con-
ﬁguration in the bag TriggerConfig of the LONObject.
As observed in the rule, the information obtained from the
magnetic sensor is used to trigger the reconﬁguration process.
Thus, we can also trigger very easily the change with an event
coming from a remote controller or a time-based order from
an agenda. We only need to add a rule for each case.
The second rule (Listing 3) generates the rules presented
in Listing 1 when the wall position changes. For each con-
ﬁguration, there is a list of corresponding bindings which
1
are stored in the bag Bindings. This bag belongs to the
object BindingDB and associates the list of bindings to
the conﬁguration: "wall_closed" or "wall_open". This
bag also contains the list of all bindings to erase, associated to
"clear_bindings", in order to have a clean conﬁguration.
[ ” LonObject” , ” TriggerConfig” ] . rd( ” T1” , w a l l P o s i t i o n )
&
26
[ ” BindingDB” , ” Bindings” ] . rd( ” clear
bindings” ,
a l l B i n d i n g s )
&
[ ” BindingDB” , ” Bindings” ] . rd( wallPosition ,
w a l l P o s i t i o n b i n d i n g ) &
28
COMPUTE:
generatedRule ,
Rulesname =
lonFunctions. generateConfigRule( allBindings ,
wallPositionbinding ,
w a l l P o s i t i o n ) &
: :
30
{
[ ” LonObject” , ” AddRules” ] . put( Rulesname,
generatedRule) ;
;
32
} .
Listing 3: LINC rule that generates reconﬁguration rules
The rule executes as follows:
1)
A rd() operation on the bag TriggerConfig
retrieves the conﬁguration (wall position) when it
changes (line 25);
2)
the next rd() operation on the bag Bindings with
the variant name "clear_bindings" retrieves
the list of all possible bindings on the T1 platform
independently of the actual conﬁguration (line 26).
3)
the next rd() operation is performed on the bag
Bindings with the wall’s position read from the
bag TriggerConfig to get the list of bindings to
be created (line 27).
4)
the generateConfigRule method generates the
LINC rule for the new room conﬁguration follow-
ing the format of the rule presented in (Listing 1).
The COMPUTE operation permits calling an external
method, in this case generateConfigRule.
5)
the generated rule is put in the bag AddRules of
LonObject in order to be executed to switch to the
new conﬁguration (line 31).
Note that, once the rule has been generated and executed,
the middleware is not used anymore; the BAS continues to
work autonomously thanks to the LON controller.
After the encapsulation of LON, the reconﬁguration mecha-
nism can be applied to any number of conﬁgurations involving
any number of rooms. Thanks to LINC, the approach is not
restricted to a given technology and it allows extending the
BAS functionalities using new devices and services. Con-
sidering another standard would only require to develop the
appropriate driver following the same architecture than for the
LON system. Even if these types of systems are based on a
quite heavy API, using several software levels, the process
is repeatable. Once the driver is done, the mechanism for
reconﬁguration presented is this case study can be applied.
The possibility to add and remove rules dynamically, along
with encapsulation of multiple technologies, provides a way
to integrate an existing infrastructure with new sensors and
actuators on a dynamic way. For instance, as soon as a new
sensor is detected, we can execute new rules to allow its
interaction with existing devices. In addition, we can also
bridge two or more existing infrastructures that use different
BAS technologies, i.e, LON, BacNet, KNX, Modbus. This
bridging provides communication between different buildings
or different rooms on a building for example.
Besides, LINC provides several characteristics that are
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

desirable for applications such as building automation. Firstly,
it allows scalability thanks to its distributed nature. LINC also
provides graceful degradation so that alternative actions are
executed when there is a system fault. In addition, LINC
uses transactions guaranteeing the execution of all the actions
deﬁned in a rule, more details can be found in [5]. When
reconﬁguration is performed, the latter characteristic is funda-
mental, since it guarantees that the system is on a consistent
state after reconﬁguration.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented our approach for dynamic
reconﬁguration in the context of building automation. We have
relied on the coordination middleware LINC to provide a non
intrusive reconﬁguration of a legacy system. Once the BAS
have been encapsulated in LINC, it is possible to reconﬁgure
connected devices. Reconﬁguration allows changing relation-
ships between devices or software changes as a response to an
event.
Given that LINC allows adding and generating new rules
on a dynamic way, reconﬁguration and adaptation to new
environmental conditions can be performed easily. As soon
as encapsulation is done, reconﬁguration requires putting a
resource on a bag (send the reconﬁguration command) and
generating the rules according to the new scenario.
This paper has described a case study presenting the recon-
ﬁguration of a building automation system based on the LON
technology. The case study is a room that can be split in two or
merged in one with a removable wall. This reconﬁguration con-
cerns a signiﬁcant set of equipments: temperature, luminosity
and presence sensors, an HVAC system, dimmable spotlights,
motorised Venetian blinds, and push buttons. In LON, such
reconﬁguration is normally done manually by a skilled tech-
nician. With our approach, a dynamic reconﬁguration can be
triggered by an external device that determines the position of
the removable wall. This mechanism provides a fully automatic
system, where the only action required from the user is to
remove/put in place the wall. Here, the middleware is only
used to reconﬁgure the LON controller. After reconﬁguration,
the system continues to run autonomously.
The approach presented in this paper opens the way to new
trends in building automation at a larger scale. Indeed, based
on a middleware such as LINC, it will be possible to provide
such automatic reconﬁguration across several buildings. Future
work will focus on automatic reconﬁguration through several
buildings, using different BAS.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has been partially funded by the FP7 SCUBA
project under grant nb 288079 and Artemis ARROWHEAD
project under grant agreement number 332987.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Saeed and T. Waheed, “An extensive survey of context-aware
middleware architectures,” in Electro/Information Technology (EIT),
2010 IEEE International Conference on, May 2010, pp. 1–6.
[2]
M. Sarnovsk`y, P. Kosteln´ık, P. Butka, J. Hreˇno, and D. Lackov´a, “First
demonstrator of hydra middleware architecture for building automa-
tion,” in Proceedings of the scientiﬁc conference Znalosti 2008, 2008.
[3]
C. Aghemo et al., “Management and monitoring of public buildings
through ICT based systems: Control rules for energy saving with
lighting and HVAC services,” Frontiers of Architectural Research, 2013,
pp. 147 – 161.
[4]
M. Louvel and F. Pacull, “Linc: A compact yet powerful coordination
environment,” in Coordination Models and Languages, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 2014, pp. 83–98.
[5]
L.-F. Ducreux, C. Guyon-Gardeux, S. Lesecq, F. Pacull, and S. R. Thior,
“Resource-based middleware in the context of heterogeneous building
automation systems,” in IECON 2012-38th Annual Conference on IEEE
Industrial Electronics Society.
Montreal, Canada: IEEE, 2012, pp.
4847–4852.
[6]
U. Ryssel, H. Dibowski, H. Frank, and K. Kabitzsch, IEHandbook
LONWorks.
Berlin: Vde-Verlag, 2010.
[7]
W. Kastner, G. Neugschwandtner, S. Soucek, and H. Newmann, “Com-
munication Systems for Building Automation and Control,” Proceedings
of the IEEE, June 2005, pp. 1178–1203.
[8]
S. Krakowiak, “Middleware architecture with patterns and frameworks,”
2007.
[9]
W. Guo and M. Zhou, “An emerging technology for improved building
automation control,” in Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2009. SMC
2009. IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, June 2009, pp. 337–
342.
[10]
V. C. Gungor and G. P. Hancke, “Industrial Wireless Sensor Networks:
Challenges, Design Principles, and Technical Approaches.” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Electronics, 2009, pp. 4258–4265.
[11]
O. F. et al., “Integrating building automation systems and wireless
sensor networks,” in Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation,
2007. ETFA. IEEE Conference on, Sept 2007, pp. 1376–1379.
[12]
M. Jung, C. Reinisch, and W. Kastner, “Integrating building automation
systems and ipv6 in the internet of things,” in 2012 Sixth International
Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous
Computing (IMIS), July 2012, pp. 683–688.
[13]
S. Marcel et al., “Proactive reconﬁguration of wireless sensor networks,”
in Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Modeling,
Analysis and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems, ser. MSWiM
’11, 2011, pp. 31–40.
[14]
M. Szczodrak, O. Gnawali, and L. P. Carloni, “Dynamic reconﬁguration
of wireless sensor networks to support heterogeneous applications,” in
Proc. of IEEE DCOSS Conf., may 2013, pp. 51–61.
[15]
P. Grace, G. Coulson, G. S. Blair, B. Porter, and D. Hughes, “Dynamic
reconﬁguration in sensor middleware.” in MidSens, ser. ACM Interna-
tional Conference Proceeding Series.
ACM, 2006, pp. 1–6.
[16]
K. E. Kjær, “A survey of context-aware middleware,” in Proceedings
of the 25th Conference on IASTED International Multi-Conference:
Software Engineering, 2007, pp. 148–155.
[17]
P. Istoan, G. Nain, G. Perrouin, and J.-M. Jezequel, “Dynamic software
product lines for service-based systems,” in Proceedings of the 2009
Ninth IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information
Technology - Volume 02, ser. CIT ’09, 2009, pp. 193–198.
[18]
N. Carriero and D. Gelernter, “Linda in context,” Commun. ACM,
vol. 32, 1989, pp. 444–458.
[19]
T. Cooper and N. Wogrin, Rule-based Programming with OPS5.
San
Fransisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988, vol. 988.
[20]
P. A. Bernstein, V. Hadzilacos, and N. Goodman, Concurrency control
and recovery in database systems.
New York: Addison-wesley, 1987,
vol. 370.
[21]
P. Franc¸ois et al., “Self-organisation for building automation systems:
Middleware linc as an integration tool,” in IECON 2013-39th Annual
Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society.
Vienna, Austria:
IEEE, 2013, pp. 7726–7732.
[22]
E. Corporation, LNS TM for Windows R⃝ Programmer’s Guide.
USA:
Echelon Corporation, 1996-2000.
[23]
S. F. Project, 2011-2014, http://www.aws.cit.ie/scuba/.
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

An Integrated Ambient Intelligence System in the Monitoring and Rehabilitation of 
the Disorder of Consciousness. 
 
Francesco Riganello, Luigi 
Flotta, Giuliano Dolce 
Institute S. Anna - RAN (Research 
in Advanced Neuro-rehabilitation),  
Crotone, Italy;   
f.riganello@istitutosantanna.it; 
giulianodolce@libero.it 
 
 
Luigi Piscitelli, Calogero Pace 
Department of Informatics and 
Modeling Electronics and 
Systemistics, University of 
Calabria,   
Cosenza, Italy  
lui.piscitelli@gmail.com; 
calogero.pace@unical.it 
 
 
Walter G. Sannita 
Department of Neuroscience, 
ophthalmology and genetics, 
University of Genova, Genova, 
Italy/Department of Psychiatry, 
State University of New York, 
Stony Brook,  NY, USA.  
wgs@dism.unige.it
Abstract—Ambient Intelligence (AmI) collectively refers to a 
family of sensitive electronic systems responsive to humans and 
mediating in the human interaction with devices and 
environment. This novel paradigm of information technology 
complies with the international standards for the functional 
integration of biomedical domotics and informatics in hospital 
and homecare. We have designed and implemented an AmI 
system with sensor networks for the continuous automatic 
monitoring of subjects with severe brain damage and disorder 
of consciousness hospitalized in the S. Anna-RAN Institute for 
medical care and rehabilitation. The system was designed to 
allow real-time analyses of relevant environmental parameters 
and the subjects’ vital signs. Main purposes are to identify: 1- 
partially preserved or recovered circadian/ultradian rhythms; 
2) functional changes potentially associated to prognostic 
indicators; 3) momentary subject/environment interactions or 
functional changes possibly indicative of residual/recovered 
responsiveness; 4) predictive models of responsiveness. The 
system also supports the clinician in decision making. In this 
respect, AmI should be regarded as equivalent to a traditional 
laboratory 
for 
data 
collection 
and 
processing, 
with 
substantially reduced dedicated equipment and staff and 
limited costs. Moreover, the AmI should provide an accurate 
system of observation of the patient-ambient interaction, 
offering a better support to the clinical decision in the 
rehabilitation phase. 
Keywords-Monitoring Systems; Decision Making; Disorders 
of Consciousness; Ambient Intelligence; Sensory Device . 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The label Ambient Intelligence (AmI) collectively 
indicates a family of electronic systems that are sensitive and 
responsive to humans and mediate in the human interaction 
with devices and environment. It provides pervasive but 
unobtrusive sensing and computing devices and ubiquitous 
networking for human/environment interaction [1]. This  
novel paradigm of information technology complies with the 
international Integrating Healthcare Enterprise board (IHE) 
[2] and eHealth HL7 technological standards [3][4] for the 
functional 
integration 
of 
biomedical 
domotics 
and 
informatics in hospital and home care. The European 
Commission charted a path for research on AmI in 2001 [5]. 
The use of biomedical robotics and informatics in hospitals 
is also involved in the processes for medical decision making 
- a complex aspect of the patient’s care whereby a high level 
of cognitive processing is required to manipulate large 
datasets of disparate kind, origin and significance [6]–[8]. 
Subjects with disorder of consciousness  due to severe brain 
injury who are in the vegetative (VS/UWS) or minimally 
conscious (MCS) states [9]–[12] need constant monitoring; a 
continuous stream of clinical/neurobiological/ behavioral 
information is required for appropriate care by the medical 
and nursing staff and to optimize the rehabilitation therapy 
[13]. A dedicated AmI system has been designed and 
developed for this purposes, to provide an accurate system of 
observation of the patient-ambient interaction and to have a 
better support to the clinical decision in the rehabilitation 
phase.  In section II of the paper is described the method of 
data acquisition; the section III is dedicated to the biometric 
and environmental nodes, while the section IV is dedicated 
to the data analysis; the section V contains a brief description 
of the Heart Rate Variability and the importance of its 
analysis in the rehabilitation therapy; finally the section VI 
reports the conclusions. 
II. 
DATA ACQUISITION  
Daily medical and nursing care and the rehabilitative 
protocols in hospital require multi- and cross-disciplinary 
activities. Data acquisition and analyses are core facilities in 
the rehabilitation process, with both scientific and applicative 
implications; 
computational 
environments 
capable 
of 
integrating heterogeneous representations from different 
fields are also mandatory in this context. Such environments 
should integrate heterogeneous formalisms in the same 
model and assist the modeller in designing and implementing 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

new models based  on new knowledge acquired in the 
rehabilitation environment.  
We have designed and implemented an AmI system with ad 
hoc sensor networks for the continuous monitoring of 
subjects in VS/UWS or MCS hospitalized in the S. Anna -
RAN Institute for medical care and rehabilitation. The 
system can be implemented to allow exporting the facility to 
homecare with control in remote. The acquisition and 
integration procedures are implemented to record, store and 
process both biometric and environmental data from 
dedicated nodes. The monitoring system is designed to allow 
real time analyses of the subject’s vital signs and of the 
environmental parameters in which he/she lives (Figures 1 
and 2). Samples of recorded data are shown in figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 1: Block diagram of the monitoring system 
 
 
Figure 2: System overall architecture. 
                              
 
Figure 3: Sample plot of data from the patient and ambient parameters. 
From top to bottom: humidity,  luminosity, noise, room temperature, HR, 
HRV and Patient temperature. 
III. 
BIOMETRIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL NODES 
Data transmission from the subject to the biometric node 
is realized via Bluetooth by mean of Zephyr Bioharness 3 
devices [14]–[16] positioned on a chest strap. Electrodes are 
built to monitor heart rate, heart rate variability, respiration 
rate, temperature, movement and oxigen saturation. 
Specifically: 
 
Two electrodes for  heart rate and heart rate variability; 
 
A sensor on the strap right side for respiration; 
 
A triaxial accelerometer incorporated in the device to 
detect the posture angle and activity indexes; 
 
An infrared temperature sensor to measure skin 
temperature. 
 
A photoplethysmographic sensor to measure PO2. 
Four sensors detect environmental parameters: 
 
Temperature (Texas Instruments LM 35); 
 
Relative Humidity (Honeywell HIH 3605); 
 
Noise (Omnidirectional condenser electret microphone); 
 
Light intensity (Light Dependent Resistor). 
 
The Texas Instrument LM35 is a high-precision 
integrated sensor for detecting ambient temperature. It has a 
linearly 
proportional 
output 
voltage-temperature 
characteristic, with scale factor: +10 mV/°C and a range of 
measurements from -55°C to 150 °C, with ± 0,5°C accuracy 
at 25 °C in addition to the low current draw. The system core 
is based on a microcontroller. The Honeywell HIH 3605 
Environmental Relative Humidity sensor is an integrated 
sensor with linear voltage-relative output, low current draw, 
fast response in time and high accuracy. It works, with a 5 V 
voltage supply in the 0-100 % range; accuracy is ± 2%. The 
datasheet provides formulas to calculate the relative 
humidity and compensate for temperature in respect to the 
relative humidity. The device has three terminals. Light 
intensity is detected by mean of a light sensor using a light 
dependency resistor (LDR) that through its conditioning 
circuit returns a voltage signal that is converted into light 
intensity. It is a passive sensor relay for the variation in a 
semiconductor electric resistance due to the incidence of 
electromagnetic radiation with wavelength from 1mm to 10 
nm. The LDR used in the prototype has a range of operating 
temperature between -30°C and 70°C.  At dark, it offers a 
resistance of 2 MΩ and response time of 30 ms. The 
characteristic of the spectrum response is similar at human 
eye, with peak value at 560 nm. The Condenser Electret 
Microphone is an omnidirectional microphone to detect 
environmental noise. Its operative sensitivity of -38 dB ± 3 
dB at f = 1 kHz, with operating 2-10V range offers a signal- 
to-noise ratio of 58 dB and a frequency spectrum similar to 
that of the human ear (20 ÷ 20000 Hz). The MSP430 family 
[17][18] is a series of mixed-signal processors for ultra-low 
power signals, with 16-bit Von Neumann architecture, RISC-
based. In our project, the Texas Instruments MSP430F2274 
was used to handle, compute and make a first filtering of the 
signals; low power microcontrollers will allow implement a 
battery-powered device. Each sensor requires a conditioning 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

circuit making the output signals from each sensor suitable 
for transmission, display or recording meeting the 
requirements of the device following in the line. A 
conditioning circuit comprises electronic circuits performing 
each of the following functions: amplification, level shifting, 
filtering, impedance matching, modulation, demodulation. 
The accuracy and reliability of environmental sensors and 
measures have been tested in the Nexus Laboratories of the 
Department of electronic engineering, University of 
Calabria, Italy. 
Msp430 used in this prototype module starts through its 
UART (Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter)[19] 
a serial communication at 9600 baud/sec in configuration 
8N1 (8 data bit, no parity bit, 1 stop bit). The microcontroller 
pins for signal transmission and reception are linked to those 
of the Bluetooth module, which serves as the master 
interacting 
with 
the 
slave 
sensor 
node 
networks 
(environmental and biometric). The bit sent contains digital 
information of parameters monitored from sensors. An 
analogic/digital converter is integrated in microcontroller for 
data transmission; it is a SAR [17], 10 bit resolution, with 
internal reference, set at 1,5 V for greater signal accuracy. 
A. Architecture of the system 
The structure of the system (server) (Figures 2 and 3) has 
been designed to collect data from smaller structures (nodes 
and hosts) distributed in the hospital ambient suitable of, and 
requiring, monitoring. Specifically, each ambient will be 
equipped by a host (personal computer) collecting data to be 
sent to the server and a series of biometric sensors worn by 
the patients, that will send the biometric data to the host. 
Host collects data information from sensor nodes of network 
by Bluetooth communication. Servers will collect all data 
from the network by TCP/IP protocol communication.  
B. Application Software 
A Labview National Instruments environment [20] is 
installed in the host to communicate with biometric and 
environmental devices and to acquire physiological and 
environmental information useful for monitoring. The 
Labview application front panel (Figure 4) serves as a 
graphic user interface for the user to display (in graphs, 
waves or numbers) any measured physical quantity.  
 
 
Figure 4: Front panel Labview application 
The block Visual Instrument Software Architecture (VISA) 
[21], that allow the control of data stream of serial port 
necessary to control in a specific time, is used for handling 
serial communication by means of the G language of  
Labview. The application communicates with the two sensor 
nodes of networks by two similar Bluetooth protocols for the 
procedures of communication and data transfer to share the 
same core characteristics. The information collected by 
Labview is stored in real time in a .txt file.  The weight of 
.txt files of the environmental parameters is 2160 bytes/min, 
while the biometric parameters .txt file weight is composed 
by a linear coefficient characterized by mean weight of one 
parameter (4 bytes) multiplied for the number of parameters 
chosen and the time of recording calculated in seconds. The 
reliability of acquired information (status info) and battery 
status are shown in Table I. In a chosen example of example 
4 biometric parameters, the weight of the .txt file would be 
11.84 Mb/day. 
 
TABLE I: DAILY WEIGHT STORAGE 
 
 
 
C. Information about the rehabilitation process 
     These data are obtained through clinical observations 
ranked according to established rating scales filled in by the 
attending physician and nursing staff. The scales in use are: 
 
The Coma Recovery Scale Revisited – CRS [22]; 
 
The Wessex Head Injury Matrix – WHIM [23]; 
 
The Levels of Cognitive Functions – LCF [24]; 
 
The Nociception Coma Scale – NCF [25]. 
Dedicated web applications have been developed to 
enable medical and nursing staff to fill in each scale item 
with the appropriate values. Data are stored in the central 
database and integrated with the information for further 
processing and correlative studies. 
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
 
The traditional biomedical model treats disease as a 
binary variable, whereby a subject is or is not ill. However, 
most chronic disorders are gradual processes and cannot be 
classified as binary, while the threshold determining severity 
can be ambiguously set (the evolution from VS/UWS to 
MCS is an example in this regard) [11][26]. Many biological 
variables, such as cholesterol, blood pressure, and blood 
glucose are normally distributed in the population and a 
convenient and reliable cutoff can be determined to separate 
disease from health. In the definition of the disease and its 
severity and prognosis, judgment needs to be based on 
knowledge and experience for a correct interpretation of 
clinical and laboratory information [27]. In our project, 
measurements and analyses of datasets with information 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

from environmental and biometric sensors follow a 
straightforward strategy, with major focus on variability, 
either spontaneous or in response to environmental changes 
[28]. Sources of variation are manifold and can reflect 
changes in the functional status or in responsiveness as well 
as the existence of residual endogenous mechanisms of self-
regulation or circadian/ultradian cycles. Functional changes 
in VW/UWS or MCS subjects can also depend on interaction 
with the staff or relatives, result from the nursing or 
rehabilitation procedures, or reflect endogenous mechanisms 
[29]. 
The main lines of research are: 1) identification of 
correlations 
between 
sets 
of 
stimulus-conditions 
administered to subjects with disorder of consciousness and 
changes in the recorded variables [30]–[32], and 2) analysis 
of the two-way interaction between the cardiovascular 
system, the central nervous system and the central autonomic 
network model [33]–[36]. The goals in these lines of 
investigation are: 1) to verify whether circadian/ultradian 
rhythms are partially preserved or have recovered to a 
significant extent in individual VS/UWS or MCS subjects; 2) 
to identify functional processes potentially associated to 
prognostic indicators; 3) to detect momentary interactions 
between the subject and the environment or other functional 
changes 
possibly 
indicative 
of 
residual/recovered 
responsiveness; 4) to develop predictive models of 
responsiveness in patients with disorder of consciousness; 5) 
support the clinician in decision making. 
The Decision Support System implemented to help the 
attending physician is based on R, an Open Source statistical 
package expanded with custom modules [37]; traditional and 
advanced techniques of statistical analysis are also used. 
Among these are: the regression analysis (to identify 
relationships among variables), the Neural network (a 
sophisticated pattern detection algorithm using machine 
learning 
techniques 
to 
generate 
predictions), 
the 
Clustering/Segmentation processes (to create groups for 
applications), the Association Rules techniques (to detect 
related items in a dataset), Bayesian statistics, Data mining, 
Neural network, etc.) [38][39].  
 
V. 
HEART RATE VARIABILITY 
Systematic investigation on the heart rate variability 
(HRV) (i.e. the heart rate fluctuations around the mean value 
over the time sample) is a major scientific and applicative 
approach to the functional understanding of VS/UWS and 
MCS at the Institute S. Anna - RAN [30][35][40][41]. HRV 
reflects in time the momentary function of the cardio-
respiratory control system and is regarded as a reliable index 
of the sympathetic/parasympathetic functional interplay [34] 
and intrinsic influence on heart rate. HRV is also thought to 
provide independent information on the autonomic nervous 
system and its two-way functional integration with the 
central nervous system, to express physiological factors 
modulating the heart rhythm and homeostatic adaptation to 
the changing conditions. It is anatomically and functionally 
described by the central autonomic (nervous) network 
(CAN) model [42][43]. The autonomic system influences 
heart rate adaptation through multiple connections (inputs 
from sensory and baroreceptors within the heart and great 
vessels, 
respiratory 
changes, 
vasomotor 
regulation, 
thermoregulatory system and changes in endocrine function 
and neuroendocrine interaction) [34][44]. HRV indirectly 
reflects the organization of affective, physiological, 
cognitive, and behavioural elements and is emerging as a 
possible descriptor of the brain functional organizations 
contributing to homeostasis and homeostatic responses 
[35][45][46]. Research on the possible patterns of correlation 
between HRV measures and the functional models available 
today is crucial in the diagnosis and prognosis of disorder of 
consciousness and in the online monitoring of patients with 
severe brain injury.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
    The medical care, daily management and rehabilitation of 
subjects with severe brain damage and disorder of 
consciousness require inter- and cross-disciplinary activities. 
This is the basic approach in research on consciousness and 
rehabilitation. The extensive monitoring of all aspects of the 
subject’s functional condition and reactivity in his/her daily 
activity is a prerequisite to understand the real efficacy of 
ambient conditions/changes potentially contributing to the 
recovery of the consciousness in the rehabilitative mileu. In 
this context, we need a reliable computational environment 
capable of integrating the heterogeneous representations 
from different rehabilitative and scientific approaches into 
heterogeneous formalisms in a useful model. To this end, our 
AmI system has been contrived to contribute in the efficient 
representation of the rehabilitative environment, by studying 
and correlating biometric parameters with environmental 
variables. The current development in electronic systems and 
pervasive intelligent devices and computing in the 
surrounding environment is the new trend and a new frontier 
of research in the rehabilitative science. New scenarios of 
application are supported by the ongoing miniaturization of 
electronic circuits and increasing computational power. New 
devices can be implemented at low cost to help researchers 
and clinicians. 
    A major advantage of our AmI system is the integration of 
artificial intelligence technology [6][28][47]–[49] with 
traditional or advanced data acquisition systems such as 
those in use in the monitoring of clinical or functional 
parameters of inpatients or of subjects under remote medical 
control. In this respect, our AmI platform complies with the 
standards of the international IHE board and the eHealth 
HL7 format as  hedge technological approach in the eHealth 
functional integration of biomedical and traditional domotic 
equipments and informatics in hospital and home care. Our 
AmI system has been designed and implemented to monitor 
and help treat and rehabilitate subjects with disorder of 
consciousness. It is a multipurpose hw/sw tool suitable of 
extensive application in patients’ monitoring as well as in 
medicine and neuroscience when large biomedical datasets 
are acquired and measures of spontaneous or condition-
dependent variability are needed. In this respect, AmI should 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

be regarded as equivalent to a traditional laboratory for data 
collection and processing, with substantially reduced 
dedicated equipment and staff, and limited costs, providing 
an accurate system of observation of the patient-ambient 
interaction and a better support to the clinical decision in the 
rehabilitation phase. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
E. Aarts, H. hawig, and S. Schuurmans, ―Ambient 
Intelligence,‖ in The Invisible Future, Denning J., McGraw Hill, 
2001. 
[2] 
K. Anyanwu, A. P. Sheth, J. Cardoso, J. A. Miller, and 
K. J. Kochut, ―Healthcare enterprise process development and 
integration,‖ 2003. 
[3] 
R. Gajanayake, R. Iannella, and T. Sahama, ―Sharing 
with Care: An Information Accountability Perspective,‖ IEEE 
Internet Comput., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 31–38, Jul. 2011. 
[4] 
D. M. López and B. Blobel, ―Architectural Approaches 
for HL7-based Health Information Systems Implementation:,‖ 
Methods Inf. Med., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 196–204, Mar. 2010. 
[5] 
K. Ducatel, M. Bogdanowicz, F. Scapolo, J. Leijten, and 
J.-C. Burgelman, Scenarios for ambient intelligence in 2010. 
Office for official publications of the European Communities, 
2001. 
[6] 
B. W. Pickering, J. M. Litell, and O. Gajic, ―Ambient 
Intelligence in the Intensive Care Unit: Designing the Electronic 
Medical Record of the Future,‖ in Annual Update in Intensive Care 
and Emergency Medicine 2011, P. J.-L. Vincent, Ed. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 793–802. 
[7] 
B. W. Pickering, O. Gajic, A. Ahmed, V. Herasevich, 
and M. T. Keegan, ―Data Utilization for Medical Decision Making 
at the Time of Patient Admission to ICU*:,‖ Crit. Care Med., vol. 
41, no. 6, pp. 1502–1510, Jun. 2013. 
[8] 
W. W. Stead, J. R. Searle, H. E. Fessler, J. W. Smith, and 
E. H. Shortliffe, ―Biomedical Informatics: Changing What 
Physicians Need to Know and How They Learn:,‖ Acad. Med., 
vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 429–434, Apr. 2011. 
[9] 
G. G. Celesia and W. G. Sannita, ―Can patients in 
vegetative state experience pain and have conscious awareness?,‖ 
Neurology, vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 328–329, Jan. 2013. 
[10] 
G. Dolce, W. G. Sannita, and for the European Task 
Force on the, ―The vegetative state: A syndrome seeking 
revision?,‖ Brain Inj., vol. 24, no. 13–14, pp. 1628–1629, Dec. 
2010. 
[11] 
S. Laureys, G. G. Celesia, F. Cohadon, J. Lavrijsen, J. 
León-Carrión, W. G. Sannita, L. Sazbon, E. Schmutzhard, K. R. 
von Wild, A. Zeman, G. Dolce, and $author firstName 
$author.lastName, ―Unresponsive wakefulness syndrome: a new 
name for the vegetative state or apallic syndrome,‖ BMC Med., 
vol. 8, no. 1, p. 68, Nov. 2010. 
[12] 
The Multi-Society Task Force on PVS., ―Medical 
aspects of the persistent vegetative state.,‖ N Engl J Med, vol. 330, 
pp. 1499–508, 1572, 1994. 
[13] 
L. Flotta, F. Riganello, and W. G. Sannita, ―Intelligent 
Monitoring of Subjects with Severe Disorder of Consciousness,‖ in 
SENSORDEVICES 2013, The Fourth International Conference on 
Sensor Device Technologies and Applications, 2013, pp. 135–138. 
[14] 
J. A. Johnstone, P. A. Ford, G. Hughes, T. Watson, and 
A. T. Garrett, ―BioharnessTM Multivariable Monitoring Device: 
Part. I: Validity,‖ J. Sports Sci. Med., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 400–408, 
Sep. 2012. 
[15] 
J. A. Johnstone, P. A. Ford, G. Hughes, T. Watson, and 
A. T. Garrett, ―BioharnessTM Multivariable Monitoring Device: 
Part. II: Reliability,‖ J. Sports Sci. Med., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 409–
417, Sep. 2012. 
[16] 
E. Jovanov, D. Raskovic, A. O. Lords, P. Cox, R. 
Adhami, and F. Andrasik, ―Synchronized physiological monitoring 
using a distributed wireless intelligent sensor system,‖ in 
Proceedings of the 25th Annual International Conference of the 
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2003, 2003, 
vol. 2, pp. 1368–1371 Vol.2. 
[17] 
J. H. Davies, MSP430 Microcontroller Basics. Elsevier, 
2008. 
[18] 
J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, and D. Culler, ―Telos: enabling 
ultra-low power wireless research,‖ in Information Processing in 
Sensor Networks, 2005. IPSN 2005. Fourth International 
Symposium on, 2005, pp. 364–369. 
[19] 
Thakare, ―A Review on Implementation of Serial 
Communication 
by 
Universal 
Asynchronous 
Receiver 
Transmitter,‖ Int. J. Res. Comput. Eng. Electron., vol. 2, no. 1, 
2013. 
[20] 
R. Bitter, T. Mohiuddin, and M. Nawrocki, LabView: 
Advanced Programming Techniques, Second Edition. CRC Press, 
2006. 
[21] 
H. Zhao and Z. Y. Dong, ―Design and Implementation of 
USB-based Microwave Power Sensor,‖ Appl. Mech. Mater., vol. 
347, pp. 1039–1042, 2013. 
[22] 
J. T. Giacino, K. Kalmar, and J. Whyte, ―The JFK Coma 
Recovery 
Scale-Revised: 
Measurement 
characteristics 
and 
diagnostic utility,‖ Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 85, no. 12, pp. 
2020–2029, Dec. 2004. 
[23] 
A. Shiel, S. A. Horn, B. A. Wilson, M. J. Watson, M. J. 
Campbell, and D. L. Mclellan, ―The Wessex Head Injury Matrix 
(WHIM) main scale: a preliminary report on a scale to assess and 
monitor patient recovery after severe head injury,‖ Clin. Rehabil., 
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 408–416, Jan. 2000. 
[24] 
C. Hagen, D. Malkmus, and P. Durham, ―Rancho Los 
Amigos levels of cognitive functioning scale,‖ Downey CA Prof. 
Staff Assoc., 1972. 
[25] 
C. Schnakers, C. Chatelle, A. Vanhaudenhuyse, S. 
Majerus, D. Ledoux, M. Boly, M.-A. Bruno, P. Boveroux, A. 
Demertzi, G. Moonen, and S. Laureys, ―The Nociception Coma 
Scale: a new tool to assess nociception in disorders of 
consciousness,‖ Pain, vol. 148, no. 2, pp. 215–219, Feb. 2010. 
[26] 
A. Bosco, G. E. Lancioni, M. O. Belardinelli, N. N. 
Singh, M. F. O’Reilly, and J. Sigafoos, ―Vegetative state: efforts to 
curb misdiagnosis,‖ Cogn. Process., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 87–90, Feb. 
2010. 
[27] 
R. M. Kaplan and D. L. Frosch, ―Decision Making in 
Medicine and Health Care,‖ Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol., vol. 1, no. 
1, pp. 525–556, Apr. 2005. 
[28] 
L. Pignolo, F. Riganello, G. Dolce, and W. G. Sannita, 
―Ambient intelligence for monitoring and research in clinical 
neurophysiology and medicine: the MIMERICA* project and 
prototype,‖ Clin. EEG Neurosci., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 144–149, Apr. 
2013. 
[29] 
F. Riganello, G. Dolce, M. D. Cortese, and W. G. 
Sannita, ―Responsiveness and prognosis in the severe disorder of 
consciousness,‖ Brain Damage Causes Manag. Progn. Schäffer AJ 
Müller J Eds Pp, pp. 117–135, 2010. 
[30] 
A. Candelieri, M. D. Cortese, G. Dolce, F. Riganello, 
and W. G. Sannita, ―Visual Pursuit: Within-Day Variability in the 
Severe Disorder of Consciousness,‖ J. Neurotrauma, vol. 28, no. 
10, pp. 2013–2017, 2011. 
[31] 
F. Riganello, M. D. Cortese, G. Dolce, and W. G. 
Sannita, ―Visual pursuit response in the severe disorder of 
consciousness: modulation by the central autonomic system and a 
predictive model,‖ BMC Neurol., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 164, 2013. 
[32] 
P. Urbenjaphol, C. Jitpanya, and S. Khaoropthum, 
―Effects of the sensory stimulation program on recovery in 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

unconscious patients with traumatic brain injury,‖ J. Neurosci. 
Nurs., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. E10–E16, 2009. 
[33] 
V. Napadow, R. Dhond, G. Conti, N. Makris, E. N. 
Brown, and R. Barbieri, ―Brain correlates of autonomic 
modulation: Combining heart rate variability with fMRI,‖ 
NeuroImage, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 169–177, 2008. 
[34] 
F. Riganello, G. Dolce, and W. Sannita, ―Heart rate 
variability and the central autonomic network in the severe 
disorder of consciousness,‖ J. Rehabil. Med., vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 
495–501, 2012. 
[35] 
F. Riganello, S. Garbarino, and W. G. Sannita, ―Heart 
Rate Variability, Homeostasis, and Brain Function: A Tutorial and 
Review of Application,‖ J. Psychophysiol., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 178–
203, 2012. 
[36] 
R. Lane, K. Mcrae, E. Reiman, K. Chen, G. Ahern, and 
J. Thayer, ―Neural correlates of heart rate variability during 
emotion,‖ NeuroImage, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 213–222, Jan. 2009. 
[37] 
J. Marques de Sá, ―Directional Data,‖ Appl. Stat. Using 
SPSS Stat. MATLAB R, pp. 375–401, 2007. 
[38] 
A. Candelieri, G. Dolce, F. Riganello, and W. G, ―Data 
Mining in Neurology,‖ in Knowledge-Oriented Applications in 
Data Mining, K. Funatsu, Ed. InTech, 2011. 
[39] 
I. H. Witten, E. Frank, and M. A. Hall, Data Mining: 
Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, Third Edition, 
3 edition. Burlington, MA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2011. 
[40] 
G. Dolce, F. Riganello, M. Quintieri, A. Candelieri, and 
D. Conforti, ―Personal interaction in the vegetative state: A data-
mining study,‖ J. Psychophysiol., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 150–156, 
2008. 
[41] 
F. Riganello, A. Candelieri, M. Quintieri, D. Conforti, 
and G. Dolce, ―Heart rate variability: An index of brain processing 
in vegetative state? An artificial intelligence, data mining study,‖ 
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 121, no. 12, pp. 2024–2034, Dec. 2010. 
[42] 
E. E. Benarroch, ―The central autonomic network: 
functional organization, dysfunction, and perspective,‖ Mayo Clin. 
Proc., vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 988–1001, 1993. 
[43] 
E. Benarroch, W. Singer, and M. Mauermann, 
Autonomic Neurology. Oxford University Press, 2014. 
[44] 
E. E. Benarroch, ―The Autonomic Nervous System: 
Basic Anatomy And Physiology‖ Contin. Lifelong Learn. Neurol., 
vol. 13, pp. 13–32, 2007. 
[45] 
E. E. Benarroch, ―Pain-autonomic interactions,‖ Neurol. 
Sci., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. s130–s133, May 2006. 
[46] 
B. H. Friedman and J. F. Thayer, ―Autonomic balance 
revisited: panic anxiety and heart rate variability,‖ J. Psychosom. 
Res., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 133–151, 1998. 
[47] 
C. Ramos, J. C. Augusto, and D. Shapiro, ―Ambient 
intelligence—the next step for artificial intelligence,‖ Intell. Syst. 
IEEE, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 15–18, 2008. 
[48] 
G. Riva, ―Ambient intelligence in health care,‖ 
Cyberpsychol. Behav., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 295–300, 2003. 
[49] 
W. Weber, C. Braun, R. Glaser, Y. Gsottberger, M. 
Halik, S. Jung, H. Klauk, C. Lauterbach, G. Schmid, X. Shi, T. F. 
Sturm, G. Stromberg, and U. Zschieschang, ―Ambient intelligence 
- key technologies in the information age,‖ in Electron Devices 
Meeting, 2003. IEDM ’03 Technical Digest. IEEE International, 
2003, pp. 1.1.1–1.1.8. 
 
 
 
 
 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Accurate Sled Velocity on a Short-Inclined Track Using Accelerometer Data 
Part of an Automated Bob-Skeleton Push-Start Performance Monitoring System
Mark Gaffney, Dr. Michael Walsh, Brendan O’Flynn and Dr. Cian Ó Mathúna 
Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork, 
Cork, Ireland. 
e-mail: mark.gaffney@tyndall.ie 
 
 
Abstract—Wireless Inertial Measurement Units (WIMUs) are 
increasingly used to gather data and improve understanding of 
various human performance and complex motion scenarios. 
The Bob-Skeleton Push-Start features a stooped sprint from a 
crouch while pushing a heavy sled. Maximizing velocity during 
this brief period is considered crucial to performance, however 
it is poorly understood. An adjustable sled Push-Start training 
tool was instrumented with custom WIMUs, and a test subject 
performed 36 runs, with 12 combinations of 3 Incline and 4 
Weight 
settings. 
A developed algorithm 
automatically 
identified, 
extracted, 
and 
integrated 
Pushing-Phase 
Acceleration data to Velocity and Displacement at hundreds of 
samples per second. Drift correction methods improved 
accuracy; while additional checks rejected problematic data-
files. WIMU derived Average Velocities were within -
0.005±0.074 meters per second (0.319±4.214%) of an existing 
Light-Gate system. Such an accurate, automatic, WIMU-based 
system could supplement or replace Light-Gate or other 
performance monitoring methods, while being more portable 
and readily usable by coaches or athletes. This would enable 
consistent, low-cost and high-fidelity, performance monitoring 
from the gym to the ice-track for improved candidate selection, 
comparison and training in Bob-Skeleton and other ice-track 
sled sports. 
Keywords; WIMU, Accelerometer, Bob-Skeleton, Sled, Error 
Correction, Performance Monitoring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Bob-Skeleton is an ice-track sledding sport – similar to 
Bob-sleigh, Luge and Toboggan – with a single athlete 
riding an open sled in a face-forward, prone manner. Each 
run begins with the Push-Start (PS), which requires the 
athlete to sprint from stationary, in a crouched position, 
accelerating to maximum velocity, over a short distance 
(~30-45m), while pushing a heavy sled (~30-40kg), before 
transitioning to riding the sled through a series of turns for 
the remainder of the up to 1.5km long track. 
The sport is highly competitive, with the top times over 
the roughly 90 second run duration often within a fraction of 
a second of each other. While low PS time is generally 
believed to be the most crucial aspect of final race time [1], 
[2], this motion is poorly understood. A combination of the 
sport’s small size and difficulty in accessing ice-tracks, as 
well as the lack of available data are likely responsible for 
the lack of detailed PS studies. Relevant publications often 
rely on problematic data sources, such as: official timing 
(which ignores the first 15 meters) [1], [3-5]; alternative 
single interval timing (which hampers direct comparison, or 
understanding of subtle changes) [6], [7]; or use complex and 
costly data gathering systems (preventing more widespread 
use) [8-10]. 
As such, we set out to develop an easy-to-use, portable 
system that can provide high-quality sled velocity data. 
Ideally “On-Ice” performance would be investigated, 
however “Dry-Land” methods are more likely to be used for 
selection, comparison and training of Bob-Skeleton athletes 
[11-13] – especially for new athletes or in countries without 
a well-established amateur Bob-Skeleton system or easy 
access to ice-tracks – so initial system development and data 
gathering used such facilities at the University of Bath. 
The “Assassin – Horizontal Power Trainer” is a PS 
training tool. It consists of a sled which runs along a pair of 
parallel straight rails, allowing a 3 meter free travel length 
before impacting attached buffers, with a Light-Gate pair 
covering the majority of this; additional weights and 
adjustable track incline can be used to change pushing 
resistance (See Fig. 1 and 2). 
Wireless Inertial Measurement Units (WIMUs) are small 
electronic devices containing sensing elements, similar to 
those in smart-phones (e.g., Accelerometers, Gyroscopes, 
 
Figure 1.  Labelled Diagram of Assassin. 
 
Figure 2.  Attached WIMU (inset) and Assassin during Pushing-Phase. 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

and Magnetometers), along with supporting components, 
which can act as un-tethered motion sensors. A custom 
WIMU system was built on the Tyndall 25mm Mote Micro-
System platform as part of on-going work on human motion 
capture for health and sports applications [14-19]; laboratory 
calibration was performed during assembly [20]. These were 
attached to the Assassin Sled for PS data gathering. 
An automatic process allowing for performance to be 
accurately quantified using WIMU data recorded from an 
Assassin run was developed. High sampling rates provided 
detailed information on how velocity develops from 
standstill, which could be crucial in determining the subtle 
effect of changes to training, warm-up and pushing technique 
and giving a competitive edge. 
WIMU derived results were validated by comparing sled 
Average Velocities to an existing Light-Gate system. An 
initial target of accuracy within 0.1 meters per second was 
set as this was considered the threshold for indicating notable 
differences in performance levels and effectiveness of 
coaching interventions. 
In Section 2, “Data Sources and Method”, the equipment, 
setup, subject and procedure are described. Section 3, 
“Analysis”, contains the acceleration features of a run, 
segmentation and processing of WIMU data, estimating the 
full run duration, rejecting runs and the adaptive integration 
process. Section 4, “Results”, explains and provides, 
individual and combined contour graphs as well as the 
quantification method used to compare and assess the 
accuracy of final integrated WIMU data against the Light-
Gate and a brief estimation of Light-Gate accuracy. Sections 
5 and 6 contain a brief “Discussion” and “Conclusion”. 
II. 
DATA SOURCES AND METHOD 
A. WIMUs, Location and Orientation  
Several identical WIMUs were configured to provide 
wireless Accelerometer data at the maximum sample rate 
and sensor range, of up to 256 Hertz and ±16g respectively, 
reducing the likelihood of saturation and under-sampling of 
large-magnitude or high-frequency acceleration features. The 
effective sampling rate varied, being dependant on 
unpredictable events such as wireless packet loss. Data was 
streamed via 802.15.4 compatible radio at 2.45GHz to a 
Base-station connected to a notebook computer. APIs and 
scripts – written in Python – enabled WIMU configuration as 
well as sensor data gathering, processing and storage. All 
sensor data were converted to real world units – using 
previously gathered on-board laboratory calibration values – 
and written to file. 
Two WIMUs (Front and Top) were placed into 3D-
printed holders before being secured to the metal spars of the 
moveable sled, with similar orientation, using Velcro-elastic 
straps and tape as shown in Fig. 2. This provided some 
measure of redundancy and allowed for investigation of the 
effect of WIMU placement. 
B. Other Equipment and Data Sources  
A Brower “Timing Centre” Light-Gate system [21] – 
consisting of 2 emitter and receiver beam sets – positioned to 
cover the central 2.5 meter portion of each run (See Fig. 1 
and 2). Light-Gate ground separation and rail heights were 
measured using a surveyor’s tape to the nearest centimeter. 
Nominal inclination angles and free travel length were taken 
from technical drawings of the Assassin. 
C. Subject  
A fit male was used as the test subject, representing a 
potential Bob-skeleton athlete undergoing selection. He was 
familiar-with and trained-in the use-of the Assassin, and was 
part of on-going sports science and performance research 
programs at the University Of Bath and UK Sports which 
these tests were a part of. The purpose, procedures and 
equipment were explained to him and he had opportunity to 
ask questions or suggest changes to the procedure. He was 
also allowed to warm-up, take breaks, perform practice runs 
or stop the testing at his discretion. 
D. Procedure  
36 test runs were planned, with 3 runs at each 
combination of 3 nominal rail angles (0, 4 and 7°), and 4 
weight settings (0, 20, 40 and 60 Kg). This allowed for 
adjustment of the effort required of the test subject. The 
centrally located padded shoulder pushing attachment was 
used and the buffers were positioned for the maximum sled 
free travel length of 3m to provide WIMU datasets with the 
largest number of samples possible. The test procedure was 
as follows: 
1. 
Sled is at rest at starting point 
2. 
Change Weight and Inclination Settings if needed 
3. 
Reset WIMUs and Light-Gates 
4. 
Test subject proceeds when ready 
5. 
Stop WIMU recording after the end of the run 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
Initial manual review of data established appropriate 
processing strategies and identified consistent events or 
features of interest as described below and in Fig. 3. 
A. Overview of an Assassin Run 
 
Pre-Push-Off (PPO): Region with sled at rest at the start 
of the track, mostly quiescent with occasional motion 
artifacts due to the athlete addressing the sled. Quiescent 
 
Figure 3.  Labelled Main Features of Assassin Run. 
0 
-1 
0
1
2
3
4
 
Acceleration [m/s
2] 
2 
Time Elapsed Since Push-Off [sec] 
1 
Run 29, Front WIMU, Z-Accelerometer Data 
Acceleration 
Push-Off 
Impact 
Pre-Push-Off 
Post Impact 
Pushing 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

sensor level is affected by track inclination. 
 
Push-off (PO): The start of Pushing-Phase, located at the 
beginning of a sudden rise in acceleration from PPO 
quiescent levels. 
 
Pushing-Phase (PP): Region lasting roughly 2 seconds, 
with large, cyclical, acceleration features likely due to 
individual steps. 
 
Impact Point (IP): A sudden large acceleration feature 
when the sled contacts the buffers, sensor saturation is 
common. 
 
Post Impact (PIP): The remaining data, often beginning 
with saturated severe oscillations which damp down as 
the sled comes to a stop, possibly followed by quiescent 
data and motion artifacts. 
B. Real-World Data Processing Considerations 
Using the equations of motion, it should be possible to 
integrate all the recorded Accelerometer samples over time 
to yield sled Velocity and Displacement. However, the 
recorded WIMU data is not perfect, due to limited sampling 
rates and sensor range, with additional errors due to sensor 
noise and quantization further contributing to this. When 
such data is integrated it tends to drift further from the actual 
values as these errors compound, increasing greatly over 
time. These issues are often encountered with WIMU sensors 
and 
mitigation 
strategies 
have 
been 
developed 
to 
compensate. A new methodology applicable in Bob-Skeleton 
and in the more general case is proposed here involving 
application specific adjustments and integration limits during 
processing which leads to significantly improved results. 
By performing integration only within regions of interest 
where sensor data is not saturated – in this case the PP 
between PO and IP – the potential for drift caused by 
orientation changes, motion artifacts and saturation is 
reduced. Knowledge of the track inclination angle or the 
average value of quiescent sections of the Pre-Push-Off 
region can be used as a Sensor Offset to improve results.  
Using known physical limits as integration constraints 
can further increase the accuracy of the results. In the case of 
the system described: Initial Velocity and Displacement 
values are 0, negative Velocity or Displacement values are 
not possible and Displacement at impact should equal the 
sled’s free travel length (3 meters). 
Re-estimation of the integration period to account for 
data loss etc. causing differences between requested and 
effective sampling rates can also be used – essentially acting 
as Time Warping – although this requires an estimate of the 
duration over which a known number of samples were 
recorded. 
While segmentation and identification of the previously 
described run features and adjustments to improve the 
accuracy of results could be performed “by-eye” or 
manually, an automated method is desirable to reduce 
subjective human variability and enable development of a 
self-contained 
high-accuracy 
performance 
monitoring 
system suitable for use by athletes and trainers.  
C. Automated Data AnalysisMethodology 
An automated analysis system was implemented in the 
Python programming language. It consists of several stages: 
Pre-Processing; Impact Detection; Run Segmentation; Start 
Detection; Integration and an additional stage of Evaluation 
versus the Light-Gate, as described below and illustrated in 
the flowchart in Fig. 4. 
 
Figure 4.  Simplified Flowchart of Assassin Data Analysis Algorithm. 
1) 
Pre-Processing 
Data are prepared for subsequent analysis. WIMU sensor 
data are converted to more convenient units, filtered to 
remove outliers and smoothed to reduce noise, simplifying 
subsequent integration, segmentation, and feature detection 
stages. Data from other sources such as Light-Gate timing, 
Assassin settings and physical measurements; are used to 
estimate useful values.  
2) 
Impact Detection 
The largest magnitude Acceleration 
features are 
identified as Impact Candidates. A threshold is used to check 
if these are suitably large. 
3) 
Segmentation 
Contiguous Active and Passive regions of sensor data are 
identified using detection thresholds estimated from the most 
quiescent region of the filtered sensor data. From these, the 
Active region that contains sufficient data between its start 
and an Impact Candidate is identified as the PP. If 
segmentation is unsuccessful, an iterative process attempts to 
determine a new threshold. 
4) 
Push-Off Detection 
The region around the PPO-PP transition is searched for 
a characteristic peak in the smoothed Acceleration data, the 
beginning of this feature being the Push-Off. 
5) 
Integration 
Initial conditions are set, the offset is applied and 
integration is performed using the previously decided 
integration period and standard equations of motion to yield 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

Sled Velocity and Displacement at each PP Accelerometer 
sample. Comparing the estimated and known Displacement 
at IP allows iterative refinement of the Sensor Offset to yield 
improved integration results. 
6) 
Evaluation 
The integrated data corresponding to the region between 
the Light-Gates can be extracted from the WIMU Sled 
Displacement data and the known Light-Gate positions. The 
WIMU derived Sled Average Velocity values within this 
region can then be calculated and compared to Light-Gate 
derived values. 
D. Estimation of Full Run Duration 
Ideally, the integration period would be the inverse of 
requested sample rate. However, variable on-device 
sampling rate and wireless data loss can make this a poor 
estimate of the system’s effective sample period. Improved 
estimates can be made using per-sample times, or known 
sample counts and durations; however the system used 
lacked accurate time-stamping, preventing such direct 
estimations of effective integration period. 
Light-Gate durations and preliminary WIMU integration 
data were instead used. From the 52 valid WIMU data-files, 
the average sample count in the Light-Gate region was 
estimated at approximately 67.7% (standard deviation of 
1.9%) of the full run sample count (Table 1). An initial 
estimate of the expected Full Run Duration for each Assassin 
setting could then be provided by dividing the Light-Gate 
timing value by 0.677, dividing PP sample count by this 
gave an estimate of the Integration Period. Using the final 
integrated data, the validity of the timed region fractional 
duration estimate was checked (See Fig. 5), with a best-fit 
line showing similar results to the initial estimate as can be 
seen in Table 1. An improved WIMU system with improved 
time-stamping would allow direct determination of sample 
period, removing the current implementation’s reliance on 
the Light-Gates for estimating these. 
TABLE I.  
TIMING REGION DURATION ESTIMATES 
Run Dur. [%] 
Pre-LG 1 
Post-LG 2 
Un-Timed 
Timed 
Initial Est. 
27.3 
5.1 
32.3 
67.7 
Std. Dev. 
2.24 
0.50 
1.90 
1.90 
Final Check 
25.72 
5.32 
31.05 
68.95 
a. 
Estimates of Region Average Durations as Percentage of Pushing-Phase Duration 
 
Figure 5.  Timed Region Duration Estimates Based on WIMU Results. 
E. Identification of Valid Data 
Not all recorded data-sets were of sufficient quality to 
yield reliable integration results. A fully automated system 
should be able to distinguish good and bad data to ensure 
valid results are generated. Several poor data rejection 
conditions were identified, with suitable tests performed 
during analysis and warnings provided as follows: 
1) 
Missing Events in WIMU Data 
Recording started too late or finished too early, cutting 
off PO or IP, causing failure during event detection stages. 
2) 
Missing Data from Other Sources 
Other essential data was un-available (i.e. Light-Gate). 
3) 
Excess Data Loss 
PP had less than 50% of the data samples expected. 
F. Integration Process 
An initial estimate of sensor offset is made based on the 
average value of passive sensor samples in the PPO region 
(1). The initial offset is applied to each PP sensor sample but 
will be iteratively refined later.  

]
/
[
2
0
s
m
N
acc
acc
N
k
k
offset





For N Quiescent raw sample values, acck, in PPO Region 
An integration period that accounts for wireless data loss, 
removal of bad sensor samples or WIMU internal issues that 
change the effective sample rate is needed. From the PP 
sample count and full run duration we can estimate an 
effective sample rate for each data-file and hence integration 
period (2). However, without accurate sensor data time-
stamping we must use Light-Gate timing data estimations of 
the full run duration. 

PO
IP
LG
PO
IP
PO
IP
PP
i
i
T
i
i
T
T
T
t






0.677
/
i PP


For Integration Period t, Time T and Sensor Sample i 
Then integration of PP WIMU data can begin, converting 
offset adjusted Acceleration a, to Velocity v (3) and 
Displacement s (4) for the nth sensor sample since PO.  

t
a
v
v
n
n
n


 1



2
1
1
½
a t
t
v
s
s
n
n
n
n







Known and WIMU estimated Displacement at Impact are 
compared to each other and used to refine the Offset value in 
an iterative binary search manner. This process is explained 
in the C-style pseudo-code in Fig. 6. 
WHILE( !complete && i<max_iteration ){ 
 IF( ABS(displ_error) >= target_accuracy ){ 
  IF(displ_error > 0){ 
   test_offset = offset – offset_step;} 
  }ELSE{ // displ_error < 0 
   test_offset = offset + offset_step;} 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

  z_vel = itegrate(z_acc, test_offset, period); 
  z_displ=itegrate(z_vel, test_offset, period); 
  impact_displ = z_displ[-1]; 
  new_error = impact_displ – target_displ; 
  IF( ABS(new_error) < ABS(displ_error) ){ 
   offset = test_offset;     // update offset 
   displ_error = new_error;} // update error 
  offset_step /= 2; 
  i++; 
 }ELSE{ // ABS(displ_error) < target_accuracy 
  complete=True ;} } 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Of the 70 data-files processed, 52 were determined to 
contain valid PP data, all of which were segmented 
successfully on the first attempt, with 12.17 (Standard 
Deviation 0.98) sensor offset refinement iterations required. 
Samples of output shows the WIMU and Light-Gate derived 
average velocity over the timed region (indicated by height 
of cyan shaded region and horizontal cyan dashed line 
respectively) are very similar, having a difference of 
0.06m/s2 (see Fig. 7). 
Contour graphs of mean Light-Gate and WIMU derived 
Sled Average Velocity for each Weight and Inclination 
setting (See Fig. 8 and 9) show similar magnitudes and a 
trend for reduced velocity with increasing resistance (i.e. 
additional Weight and steeper Inclination) with average 
difference of -0.005±0.074 meters per second. The Root 
Mean Squared Error (RMSE) between the two (See Fig. 10) 
better illustrates this high similarity, with a maximum error 
of 0.105 m/s, most results are well within the target accuracy 
level of 0.1 m/s across a wide range of speeds and equipment 
settings used. 
A. Light-Gate Un-Certainty 
The Light-Gate derived Sled Average Velocity is not 
exact, as both the timing and distance measurements required 
have an associated uncertainty. The time is given in seconds 
to two places of decimals so estimated un-certainty is 0.01 
seconds. The un-certainty in the distance travelled by the 
sled, due to errors in positioning the Light-Gates on 1m tall 
tripods, was estimated at 0.02 meters. Additionally, 
inclination affecting the rail length between the Light-Gates 
was trigonometrically estimated as approximately 0.02 
meters (2.5 meters at 0° versus 2.519 meters at 7°). Adding 
these gives an overall maximum distance error estimate of 
0.04 meters. By combining the lower time with upper 
distance estimates and vice-versa, the un-certainty in Light-
Gate Derived Sled Average Velocity was estimated as 
ranging from 0.066 to 0.115 meters per second (±2.3% on 
average) (See Table II). 
 
 
Figure 6.  Iterative Sensor Offset Refinement 
 
Figure 7.  Processed Run showing Good Average Velocity Agreement. 
 
Figure 8.  Timed region Light-Gate derived Average Sled Velocity. 
 
Figure 9.  Timed region WIMU derived Average Sled Velocity 
 
Figure 10.  RMSE of Sled Average Velocity for the 2 Methods. White 
regions indicates no data available, gray numbers denote number of 
samples used to produce value. 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications

TABLE II.  
LIGHT-GATE UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATES 
For 2.5±0.04 m 
Duration [sec] 
Velocity [m/s] 
Un-Certainty 
Slowest 
1.67±0.01 
1.497±0.066 
±2.199% 
Fastest 
1.09±0.01 
2.294±0.115 
±2.518% 
Average 
1.43±0.01 
1.748±0.080 
±2.300% 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
WIMU and Light-Gate differences are low, generally 
within the target and often within the Light-Gate uncertainty 
levels. Additionally WIMU data provides a more complete 
picture of the Pushing-Phase, yielding velocity and 
displacement at each sensor sample. This enables the 
creation of arbitrary virtual timing intervals; analysis of the 
development of velocity; the detection of individual step 
features, etc. Future WIMU based systems could be even 
more low-cost, small and self-contained than that developed 
here; allowing use across gym, test-track and on-ice sleds, 
without requiring trained users, extensive sled modifications 
or costly installation of trackside equipment. Such a system 
holds great potential for: improving the understanding of the 
Push-Start; identifying good athletes and determining the 
effectiveness of coaching and training interventions. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Although the Bob-Skeleton Push-Start is considered 
crucial to performance, it is poorly understood due to a lack 
of detailed data or accessible methods for gathering such 
data. Using WIMUs to instrument Assassin a method for 
automatic segmentation, drift correction and integration of 
Accelerometer data to Velocity and Displacement was 
developed. Sled Average Velocity results were similar to 
Light-Gate with Root Mean Squared Error within or similar 
to the target accuracy and un-certainty levels. The system’s 
accuracy, low-cost, ease-of-use and portability, could 
provide greater access to such quantitative performance 
data, with its highly detailed data enabling improved 
understanding of the Push-Start. These could lead to 
improved methods for Selection, comparison and training, 
potentially providing a valuable competitive edge. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to acknowledge the support of Science 
Foundation Ireland (SFI) in funding the CLARITY Centre 
for Sensor Web Technologies under grant 07/CE/I1147, and 
the technical and financial assistance of the University Of 
Bath and UK Sports in this deployment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Zanoetti, A. La Torre, G. Merati, E. Rampinini, and F. M. 
Impellizzeri, "Relationship between push phase and final race time in 
skeleton performance," The Journal of Strength & Conditioning 
Research, vol. 20, Aug. 2006, pp. 579-583. 
[2] 
W. A. Sands, et al., "Skeleton: Anthropometric and physical abilities 
profiles: US national skeleton team," Sports Biomechanics, vol. 4, 
Jul. 2005, pp. 197-214. 
[3] 
FIBT 
Bob-Skeleton 
Results. 
Available: 
www.fibt.com/races-
results/results.html, Retrieved: Sep. 2014. 
[4] 
FIBT International Skeleton Rule 16.9 - Starting Area: Bobsleigh and 
Skeleton, 
FIBT, 
2009. 
Available: 
http://www.fibt.com/fileadmin/Rules/Reg SKELETON-2009 - E.pdf, 
Retrieved: Sep. 2014. 
[5] 
N. Bullock, W. G. Hopkins, D. T. Martin, and F. E. Marino, 
"Characteristics of performance in skeleton World Cup races," 
Journal of Sports Sciences, vol. 27, Feb. 2009, pp. 367-372. 
[6] 
C. Cook, D. Holdcroft, S. Drawer, and L. P. Kilduff, "Designing a 
warm-up protocol for elite bob-skeleton athletes," International 
Journal of Sports Physiology & Performance, vol. 8, Mar. 2013, pp. 
213-215. 
[7] 
S. Colyer, "Consecutive Days of Push Start Testing May Mask the 
Effect of Starting Style In Skeleton - a Pilot Study," presented at the 
BASES Biomechanics Interest Group, University of Ulster, Belfast, 
Northern Ireland, Apr. 2012. 
[8] 
N. Bullock, et al., "Characteristics of the start in women's World Cup 
skeleton," Sports Biomech, vol. 7, Sep. 2008, pp. 351-360. 
[9] 
S. Lembert, O. Schachner, and C. Raschner, "Development of a 
measurement and feedback training tool for the arm strokes of high-
performance luge athletes," Journal of Sports Sciences, vol. 29, Nov. 
2011, pp. 1593-1601. 
[10] F. Braghin, F. Cheli, M. Donzelli, S. Melzi, and E. Sabbioni, "Multi-
body model of a bobsleigh: comparison with experimental data," 
Multibody System Dynamics, vol. 25, Aug. 2010, pp. 185-201. 
[11] USA-Bobsled-Skeleton-Federation. 
Combine 
Test 
Protocol. 
Available: 
www.teamusa.org/USA-Bobsled-Skeleton-Federation/, 
Retrieved: Sep. 2014. 
[12] N. Bullock, et al., "Talent identification and deliberate programming 
in skeleton: Ice novice to Winter Olympian in 14 months," Journal of 
Sports Sciences, vol. 27, 2009, pp. 397-404. 
[13] C. Valle, "Think you want to be a bobsledder?" Available: 
http://www.freelapusa.com/think-you-want-to-be-a-bobsledder/, 
Retrieved: Sep. 2014. 
[14] B. O'Flynn, et al., "The development of a novel minaturized modular 
platform for wireless sensor networks," Proceedings 4th International 
Symposium on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN), 
Apr. 2005, pp. 370-375. 
[15] J. Barton, et al., "Miniaturised inertial measurement units for wireless 
sensor networks & novel display interfaces," Proceedings 55th 
Electronic Components & Technology Conference (ECTC), Jun. 
2005, pp. 1402-1406. 
[16] J. Barton, A. Gonzalez, J. Buckley, B. O'Flynn, and S. C. O'Mathuna, 
"Design, Fabrication and Testing of Miniaturised Wireless Inertial 
Measurement Units (IMU)," Proceedings 57th Electronic Components 
& Technology Conference (ECTC), May 2007, pp. 1143-1148. 
[17] C. Rodde, "A Wireless Inertial Measurement System for Tennis 
Swing Dynamics," MEngSc (Microelectronic design) Taught 
Masters, Department of Microelectronic Engineering, University 
College Cork (UCC) and Tyndall National Institute, Cork, 2009. 
[18] M. Gaffney, et al., "Wearable wireless inertial measurement for sports 
applications," Proceedings 33rd IMAPS-CPMT, Gliwice–Pszczyna, 
Poland, Sep. 2009, pp. 138-141. 
[19] M. Gaffney, et al., "A Smart Wireless Inertial Measurement Unit 
System," Presented at Pervasive Health Conference, UCD, Dublin, 
Ireland, May 2011. 
[20] M. Gaffney, M. Walsh, B. O'Flynn, and C. O Mathuna, "An 
automated calibration tool for high performance Wireless Inertial 
Measurement in professional sports," Proceedings IEEE Sensors 
Conference,  Limerick, Ireland, Oct. 2011, pp. 262-265. 
[21] Brower Timing Systems, Test Centre (TC) Timing System. 
Available: www.browertiming.com, Retrieved: Sep. 2014.  
 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-374-2
SENSORCOMM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

