HEALTHINFO 2016
The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for
Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing
ISBN: 978-1-61208-527-2
August 21 - 25, 2016
Rome, Italy
HEALTHINFO 2016 Editors
Pascal Lorenz, University of Haute Alsace, France
Petre Dini, IARIA, USA

HEALTHINFO 2016
Forward
The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care,
Medical Support and Wellbeing (HEALTHINFO 2016), held on August 21 - 25, 2016 in Rome, Italy, tackles
with particular aspects belonging to health informatics systems, health information, health informatics
data, health informatics technologies, clinical practice and training, and wellbeing informatics in terms
of existing and needed solutions.
The progress in society and technology regarding the application of systems approaches
information and data processing principles, modeling and information technology, computation and
communications solutions led to a substantial improvement of problems in assistive healthcare, public
health, and the everyday wellbeing. While achievements are tangible, open issues related to global
acceptance, costs models, personalized services, record privacy, and real-time medical actions for
citizens’ wellbeing are still under scrutiny.
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the HEALTHINFO 2016 technical
program committee as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a broad and high quality
conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also kindly thank all
the authors that dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to the HEALTHINFO 2016. We
truly believe that thanks to all these efforts, the final conference program consists of top quality
contributions.
This event could also not have been a reality without the support of many individuals, organizations
and sponsors. We also gratefully thank the members of the HEALTHINFO 2016 organizing committee for
their help in handling the logistics and for their work that is making this professional meeting a success.
We hope the HEALTHINFO 2016 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas and
results between academia and industry and to promote further progress in health informatics research.
We also hope Rome provided a pleasant environment during the conference and everyone saved some
time for exploring this beautiful historic city.
HEALTHINFO 2016 Advisory Committee
Hans C. Ossebaard, National Health Care Institute, the Netherlands
Adrian S. Barb, Penn State University - Great Valley Campus - Malvern, USA
Tingshao Zhu, Institute of Psychology | Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
Chun-Hsi Huang, University of Connecticut, USA
Ramesh Krishnamurthy, Health Systems and Innovation Cluster, World Health Organization - Geneva,
Switzerland
Eleanor Horton, School of Nursing, Midwifery and Paramedicine | University of the Sunshine Coast,
Australia
Sam Ansari, Philip Morris Products SA - Research & Development / Systems Toxicology, Neuchatel,
Switzerland

HEALTHINFO 2016
Committee
HEALTHINFO 2016 Advisory Committee
Hans C. Ossebaard, National Health Care Institute, the Netherlands
Adrian S. Barb, Penn State University - Great Valley Campus - Malvern, USA
Tingshao Zhu, Institute of Psychology | Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
Chun-Hsi Huang, University of Connecticut, USA
Ramesh Krishnamurthy, Health Systems and Innovation Cluster, World Health Organization - Geneva,
Switzerland
Eleanor Horton, School of Nursing, Midwifery and Paramedicine | University of the Sunshine Coast,
Australia
Sam Ansari, Philip Morris Products SA - Research & Development / Systems Toxicology, Neuchatel,
Switzerland
HEALTHINFO 2016 Technical Program Committee
Hashim Ali, HITEC University Taxila, Pakistan
François-André Allaert, CEN Biotech / CEN Nutriment, France
Jesús B Alonso Hernández, Institute for Technological Development and Innovation in Communications
(IDeTIC) | University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (ULPGC), Spain
Francois Andry, Philips Healthcare, USA
Sam Ansari, Philip Morris Products SA - Research & Development / Systems Toxicology, Neuchatel,
Switzerland
Philip Azariadis, University of the Aegean, Greece
Adrian Barb, Penn State University, USA
Søren Brunak, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
Eric Campo, LAAS-CNRS | Université of Toulouse, France
Vassilis Cutsuridis, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology | Foundation for Research and
Technology - Hellas (FORTH), Greece
Anatoli Djanatliev, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany
Martin Dugas, Institute of Medical Informatics | University of Münster, Germany
Robert R. Freimuth, Mayo Clinic, USA
S. B. Gogia, Society for Administration of Telemedicine and Health Care Informatics (SATHI), India
David Greenhalgh, University of Strathclyde, UK
Mona Haghighi, University of South Florida, USA
Susan Hamer, National Institute for Health Research, UK
Dieter Hayn, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Austria
Hermie J. Hermens, University of Twente, Netherlands
Eleanor Horton, School of Nursing, Midwifery and Paramedicine | University of the Sunshine Coast,
Australia
Chun-Hsi Huang, University of Connecticut, USA
Clara Ionescu, Ghent University, Belgium

Ellen Jaatun, Norwegian University of Technology and Science (NTNU) / St. Olav Hospital, University
Hospital, Norway
Bozena Kaminska, Simon Fraser University, Canada
Bridget Kane, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
Eizen Kimura, Medical School of Ehime University, Japan
Gabriel Kiss, Norwegian University of Technology and Science (NTNU) / St. Olav Hospital, University
Hospital, Norway
Petra Knaup-Gregori, University of Heidelberg | Institute of Medical Biometry and Informatics, Germany
Waldemar W. Koczkodaj, Laurentian University, Canada
Leena Korpinen, Tampere University of Technology, Finland
Georgios Kouroupetroglou, University of Athens, Greece
Ramesh Krishnamurthy, Health Systems and Innovation Cluster, World Health Organization - Geneva,
Switzerland
Elyes Lamine, University of Toulouse / Ecole des Mines d’Albi-Carmaux, France
Valderi Leithardt, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Brazil
Rory Lewis, UC Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, USA
Choubeila Maaoui, LCOMS - Université de Lorraine, France
Wendy MacCaull, St. Francis Xavier University, Canada
Mufti Mahmud, University of Padova, Italy
Flora Malamateniou, University of Piraeus, Greece
Alda Marques, School of Health Sciences | Institute for Research in Biomedicine (iBiMED) | University of
Aveiro, Portugal
Fernando J. Martin-Sanchez, Weill Cornell Medicine, USA
Mário Martins Oliveira, Santa Marta Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal
Ken Masamune, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Japan
José Manuel Matos Ribeiro da Fonseca, NOVA University of Lisbon, Portugal
Martin J. McKeown, University of British Columbia | University Hospital, Vancouver, Canada
Kunal Mitra, Florida Institute of Technology, USA
Nicky Mostert-Phipps, Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, South Africa
Hans C. Ossebaard, National Health Care Institute, the Netherlands
Louise B. Pape-Haugaard, Aalborg University, Denmark
Paolo Paradisi, Institute of Information Science and Technologies - National Research Council (ISTI-CNR),
Italy / Basque Center for Applied Mathematics (BCAM), Spain
Jennifer Percival, University of Ontario | Institute of Technology Oshawa, Canada, Canada
Alain Pruski, Université de Lorraine, Francea
Alexandra Queirós, School of Health Sciences / Institute of Electronics and Telematics Engineering of
Aveiro (IEETA) | University of Aveiro, Portugal
Roos Rajae-Joordens, Philips Research, Netherlands
Deborah Ribeiro Carvalho, Pontifical Catholic University of Paraná, Brazil
Marcos A. Rodrigues, Sheffield Hallam University, UK
Nelson P. Rocha, University of Aveiro, Portugal
Sandra Rua Ventura, School of Allied Health Technologies | Porto Polytechnic Institute, Portugal
Tapio Salakoski, University of Turku, Finland
Stefan Sauermann, University of Applied Sciences Technikum Wien, Austria
Toshiyo Tamura, Osaka Electro-Communication University, Japan
Joseph Tan, McMaster University, Canada
Adel Taweel, King’s College London, UK / Birzeit University, Palestine
Vicente Traver, Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain

Carlos Travieso-González, University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain
Manolis Tsiknakis, Institute of Computer Science (ICS) | Foundation for Research and Technology - Hellas
(FORTH), Greece
Masatsugu Tsuji, Graduate School of Applied Informatics - University of Hyogo, Japan
Gary Ushaw, Newcastle University, UK
Aristides Vagelatos, CTIE Athens, Greece
Gaetano Valenza, University of Pisa, Italy
Bert-Jan van Beijnum, University of Twente, Netherlands
Ricardo Vardasca, Universidade do Porto, Portugal
Eloisa Vargiu, Eurecat, Barcelona, Spain
Enrico Vicario, University of Florence, Italy
Miriam Vollenbroek, Roessingh Research and Development | University of Twente, Netherlands
Sue Whetton, University of Tasmania, Australia
Szymon Wilk, Poznan University of Technology, Poland
Ping Yu, University of Wollongong, Australia
Tingshao Zhu, Institute of Psychology | Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
A Cuffless Blood Pressure Monitor for Home Healthcare Systems Monitored by Health Professionals
Toshiyo Tamura, Masaki Sekine, and Zunyi Tang
1
Architecture for Monitoring Security State of ISO/IEEE 11073 Healthcare User Domain
Gaeil An, Doyoung Chung, and Byungho Chung
6
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

A Cuffless Blood Pressure Monitor for Home Healthcare Systems Monitored
by Health Professionals
A cuffless blood pressure monitor
Toshiyo Tamura
Future Robotics Organization
Waseda University
Tokyo Japan
e-mail: tamurat@aoni.waseda.jp
Masaki Sekine
Department of Medical care Technology
Tsukuba International University
Tsuchiura Ibaragi Japan
e-mail: m.sekine@tius.ac.jp
Zunyi Tang
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nihon University,
Koriyama ,Fukushima, Japan
e-mail: tangzun-yi@gmail.com
Hiroshi Kobayashi
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Nara Medical University
Kashihara, Nara, Japan
e-mail: hirokoba@naramed-u.ac.jp
Abstract—We tested a new model of healthcare that involves
monitoring physiological parameters to improve team-based
healthcare. The system consisted of unobtrusive monitoring, a
database, and interventions by health professionals. This
report discusses the core technologies used, focusing on those
involved in monitoring. An unobtrusive blood pressure (BP)
estimation system, and web-based care system, including its
database, were designed and tested. BP was estimated with a
cuffless BP monitor combined with electrocardiography and
photoplethysmography.
The
mean
difference
(MD)
of
estimated SBP and reference SBP was 0.2 ± 5.8 mmHg and the
limits of agreement ranged from -11.2 mmHg to 11.6 mmHg.
The MD of estimated DBP and reference DBP was 0.4 ± 5.7
mmHg and the limits of agreement ranged from -10.8 mmHg
to 11.6 mmHg. The estimated BP was enough accurate
compared with the cuff-based BP. The core technologies
operated well. The proposed system may prove effective for
home-based healthcare. Further studies are needed to evaluate
the entire care system.
Keywords-home
healthcare;
cuffless
blood
pressure
;
decision making system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is crucial that the healthcare system becomes more
effective so that it can meet the needs of the future ultra-
aged society. Hospitals can play an important role in the
prevention of diseases, but issues related to the increased
demand on medical insurance and the decrease in medical
personnel are critical challenges for an aged society. Indeed,
physicians
and
their
associates
working
in
small
communities must not only provide primary care but also
keep up with new medical technology. Long-term care
facilities have been established and home-based healthcare
services have been recommended to reduce the medical
costs associated with caring for the elderly.
In Japan, cardiovascular disease and stroke are the second
and third leading causes of mortality, respectively; these
conditions have high rates of recurrence [1]. Blood pressure
(BP) plays an important role in these conditions. Key
lifestyle changes and at-home BP monitoring may help
patients to avoid another stroke. Indeed, an occasional BP
reading at a health checkup may not be a sufficient basis for
effective treatment decisions because BP varies. The use of
home BP monitors may help those with high BP to better
understand their control over this condition; thus, this
population should be encouraged to measure and record
their BP and share their BP logs with their doctors [1][2].
Results from randomized trials have suggested home BP
telemonitoring (HBPT) as a promising tool for improving
BP control of hypertensive patients. Most studies have
found significant BP reductions in those using HBPT and
HBPT interventions. These approaches have also garnered a
high rate of acceptance, helped to improve users’ quality of
life, and reduced the costs of medical insurance. Although
HBPT can be advantageous, older patients tend to be less
technologically skilled and may require more user-friendly
home healthcare technology. Cuff-based BP monitors are
commonly used; however, it can be difficult to properly
apply these devices in terms of appropriate fitting and
identification of the correct measuring site.
Low-cost wireless monitoring has probably led to more
data-sharing between patients and clinics. In addition,
HBPT may enhance the quality of data reporting and the
ease with which the results are interpreted by doctors. A key
contributor to the successful management of BP by HBPT is
networking among healthcare providers and consultation
between doctors and pharmacists or nurses. This process
constitutes a new model of care designed to control BP
based on telephone/web services. The effectiveness of this
model has been demonstrated in several trials [3].
As
feedback
from
doctors
is
not
immediate
and
evaluation may be time-consuming and inaccurate, a new
model of care called e-BP has been proposed [4][5]. There
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

is strong evidence that BP can be controlled using a team-
based approach involving health professionals, such as
pharmacists and nurses. Indeed, the use of team-based care
has increased the proportion of individuals whose BP is
under control and has reduced both the systolic and diastolic
BP, especially when the team included pharmacists and
nurses. Implementation of this multidisciplinary approach
will require system-level organizational changes and may be
an important element of home-based medical care [6][7].
This study examined a new intervention system based on
unobtrusive monitoring. First, we developed a healthcare
scenario and core technology, mainly unobtrusive monitors,
to create a new model of care. The results of this
preliminary study will provide information for reconfiguring
the system for further research.
II.
METHOD
In this section, the propose system is desribed.
A. Proposed system
Fig. 1 shows an overview of the proposed system. The
central concept is the use of a team-based care system
consisting of three main parts: unobtrusive monitors, a rule-
based expert health management system, and interventions
by health professionals. Specifically, BP is monitored
unobtrusively by cuffless blood pressure which described
more detailed at (B); the BP data are automatically
transmitted to a server, and health status is ascertained using
a ruled-based expert system, which considers data on the
estimated BP in the morning and evening, steps walked,
weight, and other factors. The expert system automatically
generates alerts based on comparisons with predetermined
threshold
values.
When
alerts
are
issued,
a
health
professional
calls
the
client
and
conducts
a
clinical
evaluation. Based on the findings, the health professional
judges the client’s health status and decides whether a visit
from a clinician is warranted or if a caregiver should be
called. Health professionals manage both chronic conditions
and emergency situations. Clients can also monitor their
health via a browser.
Figure 1. Overview of the system. SBP: systolic blood pressure; DBP:
diastolic blood pressure; HR: heart rate; PPG: photoplethysmograph; ECG:
electrocardiograph.
B． Design of unobtrusive monitoring
The BP was measured with a cuffless BP monitor, a
system that was developed in the 2000s [8] and approved as
a standard by the Institute of Electronics and Electrical
Engineers (IEEE) in 2014 [9]. BP is related to the stiffness
of blood vessels: if the blood vessel is rigid, the velocity of
the blood is rapid, while if the blood vessel is soft, the
velocity is slow. The pulse transit velocity based on the R
wave of the electrocardiograph (ECG) and the associated
peak of the pulse wave are related to the BP. If we know the
calibrated BP, calibrated systolic blood pressure (SBPCAL),
and calibrated pulse transit time (PTTCAL) at SBPCAL, the
estimated systolic (SBPEST) and diastolic (DBPEST) blood
pressures are defined as
(1)
(2)
where γ is the peripheral resistance, and △PTT is the
difference between the obtained PTTMEAS and PTTCAL
[8][10].
The chair-based system consists of an ECG and a
photoplethysmograph (PPG). ECG electrodes are placed on
both arms of an armchair and a PPG sensor is placed on one
arm of the armchair, as shown in Fig. 2. The client gently
touches the electrodes and inserts the index finder in the
sensor box. Beat-by-beat signals are then collected to
estimate SBP and DBP using the above equations. The
algorithm for data collection is shown in Fig. 3.
The device was compared with a simultaneous recording
with a beat-by-beat BP monitor (Finometer, Finapres
Medical Systems, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) based on
the unloading method. The distribution of BP readings and
long-term data were also compared with readings using a
cuff-based BP monitor (HEM 7510C, Omron Healthcare,
Inc., Kyoto, Japan).
Figure 2. Cuffless blood pressure monitor and chair.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Figure 3. A flow chart of decision making program
The accuracy and validity of the setup were tested in ten
normal young males (age, 24.1 ± 5.4 years) who sat in the
chair while the BP was measured.
C. Database
A database was created from information obtained from
clients, including the estimated BP and heart rate. All data
were uploaded to the server, and a health professional
checked the continuity of data collection. The database
software included an expert system and verified client
participation. A health professional was encouraged to
monitor the status of clients who did not participate in this
system. At the same time, the clients checked their own
health status via the Internet.
D.Expert system
A problem-solving expert system is useful for managing
the healthcare of individuals. Home monitoring depends on
patients measuring their BP regularly, recognizing when
readings
consistently
exceeded
the
target
values,
understanding the need for the intensification of treatment,
and visiting their physician for review and appropriate
management. Therefore, we developed criteria to enable the
expert system to generate alerts when values exceeded the
predetermined values listed in Table 1. The criteria have
been made by guidance of physicians. If the client’s health
is relatively good, then a
message
saying
“fine”
is
automatically transmitted to him or her. When alerts are
generated, the alerts are sent to a health professional and not
to the client, who instead receives a message saying, “Your
data are being checked by a health professional who will
reply shortly.”
TABLE 1 ALERT CONDITIONS OF THE EXPERT SYSTEM.
.
Items
Conditions
SBP
>160 mmHg
DBP
>95 mmHg
Pulse pressure (SBP – DBP)
>50 mmHg
SBP (morning – night)
>±30 mmHg
Spontaneous SBP
>160 mmHg
Continuous SBP at successive three
days
>150 mmHg
Changes in the average SBP over 1
month
>30 mmHg
Heart rate
<40 or >120
SBP: systolic blood pressure; DBP: diastolic blood pressure
E. Intervention by health professionals
After receiving an alert, the health professional calls the
client
to
make
relevant
clinical
inquiries.
Initially,
information
is
obtained
regarding
life-threatening
conditions, such as stroke and heart failure. After collecting
physiological data and completing the medical inquiries, the
health professional decides whether to arrange for a
clinician to visit the patient or to contact the patient’s
caregivers. For our trial runs, we recruited and trained
retired register nurses to serve as the health professionals,
and the system was tested on healthy subjects.
F. Experimental set-up
Total system was operated for a healthy young male. The
subjects sat down the chair and touched the electrode on the
chair arm. The experiments were performed two months to
check the reliability of expert system as well as the
operation of intervention.
III.
RESULTS
Results show the accuracy of developed cuffless blood
pressure monitor and a preliminary result of a long term
recording for daily life.
A. Unobtrusive monitoring of BP
Fig. 4 shows the distribution of the BP values obtained
from ten subjects in different environments. The mean
difference (MD) of estimated SBP and reference SBP was
0.2 ± 5.8 mmHg and the limits of agreement ranged from -
11.2 mmHg to 11.6 mmHg. The MD of estimated DBP and
reference DBP was 0.4 ± 5.7 mmHg and the limits of
Figure 4. Bland–Altman plots of systolic blood pressure (SBP,
left) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP, right).
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

agreement ranged from -10.8 mmHg to 11.6 mmHg.
B.Database and intervention system
The database stored information on the estimated BP.
Figure 5 shows the screen display that a health professional
would see. Red indicates outside the normal BP range.
When red values were seen on the screen, the health
professional contacted the client and asked about various
medical conditions before making a decision.
Figure 5. Screen display for the health professional.
Figure 6. Example of long-term BP recordings.
The success of this intervention was tested using long-term
BP monitoring, as shown in Fig. 6.
IV.
DISCUSSION
We developed and tested a model to be used as a new
healthcare system. The novel elements of this approach are
that it involves unobtrusive monitoring and a team-based
healthcare system, which operates efficiently due to its
simplicity.
Based on our preliminary trial, the following problems
remain to be solved. In terms of unobtrusive monitoring,
further studies are required to determine how to eliminate
unreliable signals caused by motion artifacts or other
factors. Cuffless monitoring was performed according to the
IEEE standards, and measurements obtained while the client
sits in a chair are relatively reliable because they are taken at
rest. Although the error was within the standard deviation,
the interval of calibration and measurement site warrant
additional consideration to increase the accuracy of the
measurements.
Furthermore a monitoring device was battery- operated
and client safety is satisfied
The effectiveness of an expert system rests on the
development of a set of rules that produce clinically relevant
alerts that ensure client safety. The existing team-based care
depends on physiological data, such as the BP and ECG, but
the monitoring depends on the clients. Our system measures
physiological parameters without interrupting the daily lives
of the clients, and beat-by-beat information is more accurate
than spot monitoring.
The innovative aspect of this system is related to the
interventions and consultations provided by professional
nurses and medical staff. Although physicians may be too
busy to review all records, health professionals such as
registered nurses can help to diagnose patients and interpret
the BP data obtained in the morning and evening. It is also
important
to
provide
relevant
education
for
health
professionals,
including
registered
nurses,
registered
dieticians,
and
pharmacologists,
and
to
identify
the
experience
and
skills
that
should
be
required
of
professionals involved in this system.
The final goal should be cost-effective eHealth imitative
in daily home healthcare and practice [11] and we collect
data of many clients to prove the system.
V.
CONCULUSION
We proposed a team-based healthcare system. The core
technologies operated without any trouble. We obtained
long-term BP records smoothly and automated decision
making
system
worked
to
classify
either
normal
or
abnormal values. The next step will involve testing the
entire system in a home-based healthcare setting. In addition,
other
cardiovascular
parameters
such
as
ECG
and
respiratory rate should add for better description of medical
service.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Mr. Hashimoto, of Proassist, Osaka, Japan, and
Dr. Watsuji and Mr. Enomoto, of Sharp for designing and
constructing the interface and database.
This work was supported partly by Grants-in-Aid from
the Regional Innovation Strategy Support Program in 2011–
2015 of the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology; the Strategic Information and
Communications R&D Promotion Programme (SCOPE) in
2014–2016 of the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and
Communication, and Health and Labour Sciences Research
Grants for Comprehensive Research on Persons with
Disabilities, Japan Agency for Medical Research and
Development (AMED), 2015-2017
REFERENCES
[1] S. Ovaisi,et al. , Stroke patients’ perceptions of home BP monitoring: a
qualitative study. Br J Gen Pract vol. 61, no.. 590, pp e604-10, 2011
[2] S. Ovaisi et al., Home BP monitoring in hypertensive stroke patients: a
prospective cohort study following a randomized controlled trail. Fam
Pract vol. 30, pp398–403, 2013
[3]
G. Pare, K.Moqadem, G. Pineau, and C. St-Hilaire, Clinical effects of
home telemonitoring in the context of diabetes, asthma, heart failure
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

and stroke: A systematic review. J Med Internet Res vol. 12, no.2, p
e21, 2010
[4]
B.B. Green, et al., Effectiveness of home BP monitoring, Web
communication, and pharmacist care on hypertension control: The e-
BP randomized controlled trail. JAMA vol. 299, no.24, pp:2857–
2867, 2008
[5]
B.B. Green, et al., Online first BP 1 year after completion of Web-
based pharmacist care. JAMA Intern Med vol. 173, no. 13, pp1250–
1252, 2013
[6]
K.K. Proia, et al., Team-based care and improved BP control: A
community guide systematic review. Am J Prevent Med vol. 47, no. 1,
pp 86–99, 2014
[7]
Community Preventive Services Task Force,Team-Based Care to
Improve BP Control, Recommendation of the Community Preventive
Services Task Force. Am J Prevent Med vol. 47, no.1, pp100–
102, 2014
[8]
C.C.Y.
Poon
and
Y.T.
Zhang,
Cuff-less
and
noninvasive
measurements of arterial BP by pulse transit time Proc. 27th Intern
Conf. IEEE-Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Aug
(EMBC 2005) pp5877–5880, 2005
[9]
IEEE standard for Wearable, Cuffless Blood Pressure Measuring
Devices: IEEE std 1708, 2014
[10] W. Chen, T. Kobayashi, S. Ichikawa, Y. Takeuchi, and T. Togawa,
Continuous estimation of systolic BP using the pulse arrival time and
intermittent calibration. Med Biol Eng Comput vol.38, no.5, pp569–
574, 2000
[11] NJ Elbert, et al., Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of eHealth
Interventions in Somatic Diseases: A Systematic Review of
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses. J Med Internet Res 2014;
vol.. 16, no.4, pThe deivcee110.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Architecture for Monitoring Security State of ISO/IEEE 11073 Healthcare User 
Domain 
 
 
Gaeil An, Doyoung Chung, and Byungho Chung 
Information Security Research Division 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI) 
Dajeon, Korea 
e-mail: {fogone, thisisdoyoung, cbh}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— With an increase in concern about one’s health, 
Ubiquitous healthcare (U-health) service industries are getting 
more and more developed. Because the health data is very 
important one, security should be essentially applied to 
healthcare area. This paper proposes a healthcare security 
architecture, which can monitor the security state of a 
healthcare user domain and evaluate its security level. 
Through the proposed architecture, healthcare providers can 
determine trust or distrust of health data received from 
healthcare user domain by checking its security level.  
Keywords-Heahthcare; security state; monitoring; trust; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With an increase in concern about one’s health, U-health 
service industries are getting more and more developed. 
Through U-health service, users can conveniently measure 
their own health status at home or fitness center without need 
to go to the hospitals and receive medical services in remote 
diagnostics.  
Continua Health Alliance (CHA), an international 
healthcare organization, has proposed an end-to-end 
healthcare architecture for enabling end-to-end connectivity 
of devices and services for personal health management and 
healthcare delivery and for providing interoperability among 
various kinds of healthcare devices [1]. The Continua 
healthcare architecture consists of a healthcare user domain 
where the health data (i.e., bio-data) of users is measured 
through personal healthcare devices and a healthcare 
provider domain where the health status of users is 
diagnosed by analyzing the health data. 
Because health data is very important and sensitive one, 
security should be essentially applied to healthcare area. 
Accordingly, the CHA uses security standards such as TLS 
to protect health data in the healthcare provider domain. To 
protect health data in the healthcare user domain, the CHA 
employs link layer security standards. Because the link layer 
security standards do not sufficiently support security 
requirements of healthcare service, there has been research 
for applying security function to the ISO/IEEE 11073 
protocol which is a health data transport protocol [2]-[4].  
Even if the healthcare architecture considers security 
function, there is a problem that healthcare providers cannot 
determine trust or distrust of the health data received from a 
healthcare user domain because they have no information 
about how the health data has been handled in the user 
domain. 
To address the health data trustworthiness issue, this 
paper proposes a healthcare security architecture, which can 
monitor the security state of a healthcare user domain and 
evaluate its security level. Through the proposed architecture, 
healthcare providers can determine trust or distrust of health 
data received from a healthcare user domain by checking its 
security level. 
II. 
HEALTHCARE END-TO-END ARCHITECTURE 
Fig. 1 shows the healthcare end-to-end architecture 
which has been proposed by CHA. The architecture defines a 
Personal Healthcare Device (PHD), Aggregation Manager 
(AM), Tele-health Service Center (TSC), and Health 
Records Network (HRN). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Continua architecture: healthcare end-to-end architecture. 
The PHD is a personal device which measures the health 
status of users. An example of PHDs includes a thermometer, 
a pulse oximeter, a weight scale, a glucose meter, and so on. 
The AM is a communication gateway which collects health 
data from PHDs and transmits them to a TSC or a HRN. An 
example of AMs includes smart-phone, PC, and so on. The 
TSC is a healthcare server which provides healthcare service 
such as a chronic disease management and an old people 
health care. Finally, the HRN indicates a hospital medical 
information system such as hospital Enterprise Health 
Record (HER), physician Electronic Medical Record (EMR), 
or Personal Health Record (PHR). 
In the Continua architecture, there are three kinds of 
interface: User Domain Network (UDN), WAN and HRN. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

The UDN interface is one between PHD and AM. It uses the 
ISO/IEEE 11073 protocol [5] as data transport protocol. As 
link layer protocol it employs Bluetooth, BLE, USB, ZigBee, 
and NFC. The WAN interface is one between AM and TSC 
or between AM and HRN. It uses the IHE HL7 protocol as 
data transport protocol. The HRN interface is one between 
the TSC and the HRN and uses the IHE HL7 protocol [6]. 
Because health data is very important and sensitive one, 
security should be essentially applied to healthcare area. 
Accordingly, the CHA uses security standards such as TLS 
and IHE (Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise) XDM 
(Cross-Enterprise Document Media Interchange) to protect 
health data in the healthcare provider domain. To protect 
health data in the healthcare user domain, the CHA employs 
link layer security standards such as Bluetooth health device 
profile and ZigBee healthcare application profile. The link 
layer security standards do not sufficiently support security 
requirements of healthcare service. For example, the link 
layer security does not support user authentication. To 
directly protect health data in the healthcare user domain, 
there has been research for providing security function to the 
ISO/IEEE 11073 protocol which is a health data transport 
protocol [2]-[4]. But currently any of those research results 
has not been accepted as international standard. 
Even if the healthcare architecture can protect the health 
data from cyber-attack by using security function such as 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability, there is still a 
health data trustworthiness issue. Namely there is a problem 
that the healthcare providers cannot determine trust or 
distrust of the health data received from a healthcare user 
domain because they have no information about how the 
health data has been handled in the user domain. 
III. 
SECURITY STATE MONITORING ABOUT HEALTHCARE 
USER DOMAIN 
This section proposes the architecture for security state 
monitoring and explains in detail about security state data 
collection and security level evaluation. 
A. Architecture for security state monitoring 
In this paper, we propose five steps in order to determine 
trust or distrust of the health data received from a healthcare 
user domain as shown in Fig. 2. The five steps are as 
follows:  
 Raw security state information collection step: collect raw 
security state information by monitoring PHD and AM, 
such as communication security state, healthcare protocol 
state, healthcare environment, and AM security state. 
 Abnormal behavior detection step: detect abnormal 
behavior by analyzing the raw security state information 
which was collected in the previous step and by using 
security software installed in the AM. 
 Security state information normalization step: normalize 
the collected security state information by removing 
duplicated or useless data. As a result, it is generated 
security state information about communication security, 
cyber-attack detection, healthcare environment, and AM 
security. 
 Security level evaluation step: evaluate the security level 
of a healthcare user domain by using the security state 
information acquired through the previous steps.  
 Security response step: determine trust or distrust of the 
health data received from the healthcare user domain. If it 
is regarded as unreliable data, it is ignored and the 
communication from its sender is refused. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Five steps for determining trust or distrust of health data 
received from healthcare user domain 
 
Figure 3.  Architecture for security state monitoring about healthcare user 
domain 
Fig. 3 shows architecture for security state monitoring 
about the healthcare user domain. In the architecture, we 
propose two core components for security state monitoring: a 
healthcare security monitoring (HSM) agent and a HSM 
manager. The HSM agent operates as a component of the 
AM and the HSM manager resides at a separated system 
such as security management server. 
The HSM agent operates as follows. Firstly, it collects 
security state information. And then it detects cyber-attacks 
(e.g., Denial service of attack) by analyzing the collected 
security state information or by using security software 
installed in the AM. Finally, it summarizes the collected or 
analyzed security state information (i.e., communication 
security state, cyber-attack state, health data collection 
environment, and AM security state) and reports them to the 
HSM manager. 
The HSM manager operates as follows. First of all, it 
determines the security level of the healthcare user domain 
by analyzing the security state information received form the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

HSM agent. Lastly, it provides the security level of the 
healthcare user domain to TRC or HRN so as to help them 
determine trust or distrust of the health data received from a 
PHD. 
B. Collection of raw security state data 
The raw security state data which is collected by the 
HSM agent is as follow. 
- Communication security state: indicates whether or not the 
communication 
security 
mechanisms 
such 
as 
authentication, confidentiality, and integrity are applied to 
the UDN interface (e.g., ISO/IEEE 11073 over Bluetooth) 
- Healthcare protocol state: indicates information about 
protocol warning/error messages and protocol connection 
on the UDN interface  
- Health data collection environment: indicates information 
on PHD and AM (e.g. product name and model), whether 
or not a PHD is shared by people, whether a PHD is 
installed in open or private area, and so on  
- Gateway security state: indicates whether or not security 
software or chipsets are being performed on the AM, such 
as a firewall, an anti-virus, a Trust Platform Module 
(TPM), and so on. 
 
A HSM agent can detect abnormal behavior by analyzing 
healthcare protocol state information. An example of 
abnormal behavior includes a denial of service attack which 
requests communication connections so excessively as to 
exhaust the computing resources of an AM. 
C. Evaluation of security level 
If a HSM manager receives security state information 
about a healthcare user domain, it evaluates the security level 
of the domain by analyzing the received information based 
on its own local policy. The following is a simple example of 
such policy-based security level evaluation algorithm.  
 Extract security state attributes from the security state 
information which is received from the HSM agent 
 Convert the value of security state attribute to numeric 
one. (e.g., if authentication function is supported at the 
UDN interface, its value is 1. Otherwise its value is 0) 
 Normalize the value of security state attributes by 
applying different weight to them. The weight value by 
security state attribute is determined by a user-defined 
policy 
 Calculate a total security state score of the healthcare user 
domain by adding all the values of security state attributes 
 Finally determine the security level of the healthcare user 
domain by using the security state score. The relation 
between security state score and security level is set by a 
user-defined policy. 
 
In this paper, we define four kinds of security level: 
Safety, Watch, Warning, and Risk. The security level is 
determined by a user-defined policy. An example of such 
policy is described in Table. 1. According to Table 1, if all 
the security state of a healthcare user domain is perfect, then 
its security level becomes ‘Safety’. If the security state is 
good in the communication security but bad in the gateway 
security or the cyber-attack, then its security level becomes 
‘Watch’. If the security state is bad in the communication 
security, then its security level becomes ‘Warning’. Finally if 
all the security state is bad, then its security level is ‘Risk’.  
TABLE I.  
 AN EXAMPLE OF USER-DEFINED POLICY FOR 
DETERMINING SECURITY LEVEL 
 
IV. 
CONCULSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have proposed a healthcare security 
architecture which can monitor the security state of a 
healthcare user domain and evaluate its security level. Our 
architecture can help healthcare providers determine trust or 
distrust of health data received from the healthcare user 
domain by checking its security level. Our future work is to 
implement and verify the proposed architecture. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded 
by the Korea government (MSIP) (No.B0713-15-0007, 
Development of International Standards Smart Medical 
Security Platform focused on the Field Considering Life 
Cycle of Medical Information) 
REFERENCES 
[1] ITU-T, “Interoperability design guidelines for personal health 
systems,” ITU-T Recommendation H.810, Dec. 2013. 
[2] Rubio ÓJ, Trigo JD, Alesanco Á, Serrano L, and García J, “Analysis 
of ISO/IEEE 11073 built-in security and its potential IHE-based 
extensibility,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, pp 270-285, April 
2016 
[3] A. Egner, Florica moldoveanu, N. Goga, A. Moldoveanu, V. Asavei, 
and A. Morar, “enhanced communication protocol for iso/ieee 11073-
20601,” U.P.B. Sci. Bull., Series C, Vol. 75, Iss. 2, pp. 3-16, 2013 
[4] A. Egner, A. Soceanu, and F. Moldoveanu, “Managing secure 
authentication for standard mobile medical networks,” IEEE 
Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC),  pp. 390-
393, 2012 
[5] The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, “ISO/IEEE 
11073-20601 Standard for Health Informatics - Personal health 
device communication - Application profile-Optimized exchange 
protocol,” ISO/IEEE 11073-20601, 2014 
[6] Health 
Level 
7 
Inc., 
“HL7 
Resource 
Library,” 
2005, 
http://www.hl7.org. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

