PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023
International Conference on Pandemics Analytics
ISBN: 978-1-68558-085-8
November 13th – 17th, 2023
Valencia, Spain
PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023 Editors
Petre Dini, IARIA, USA/EU

PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023
Forward
The International Conference on Pandemics Analytics (PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023) continues
a series of events targeting lessons learned from past and current pandemics and building a basis for
pandemic science analytics. The focus is on models for preparedness, awareness, use of medical
achievements (such as short-time vaccine development), promptly developed logistics (vaccine
production, supply coordination, vaccinations, quarantines), as well as on handling hospital capacity and
personnel. The conference was held in Valencia, Spain, November 13 - 17, 2023.
A pandemic is defined as a widespread occurrence of a disease, at a global level, and affecting a
large number of people. Pandemics are rare, but their effects are deeply damaging to society.
Continuous actions on prevention and control of infectious diseases exist, coordinated by national and
international bodies, such as the World Health Organization (WHO). In pre-pandemic times, citizen
preparedness has mainly focused on the early warning and early monitoring of infectious diseases.
Local/global health research uses data gathering and visualization, usually via dashboards. Research
cooperation between countries is generally on an 'as needed' basis.
Limiting the impact of pandemics on citizens' lives (including social, economic, and educational
aspects) requires the adoption of the best tools by all parties involved. These tools include Big Data for
real-time accurate reports, AI-based decisions for supplies delivery scheduling, high speed and secure
communications, as well as means for combating fake news on social networks and countering the
offenders.
We take this opportunity to thank all the members of the PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023
Technical Program Committee as well as the numerous reviewers. We also kindly thank all the authors
who dedicated much of their time and efforts to contribute to the PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023.
This event could also not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations, and sponsors. We are grateful to the members of the PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023
organizing committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work to make this professional
meeting a success.
We hope the PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023 was a successful international forum for the
exchange of ideas and results between academia and industry and to promote further progress with
respect to pandemic science analytics. We also hope that Valencia provided a pleasant environment
during the conference and everyone saved some time for exploring this beautiful city
PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023 Chairs
PANDEMICS ANALYTICS Steering Committee
Les Sztandera, Thomas Jefferson University, USA
Shada Alsalamah, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia
PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023 Liaison for Certification on Systems
Lorena Parra Boronat, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

Sandra Viciano Tudela, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Jose Miguel Jimenez, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain

PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023
Committee
PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023 Steering Committee
Les Sztandera, Thomas Jefferson University, USA
Shada Alsalamah, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia
PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023 Publicity Chair
Lorena Parra Boronat, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Sandra Viciano Tudela, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
Jose Miguel Jimenez, Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Spain
PANDEMICS ANALYTICS 2023 Technical Program Committee
Vassiliki Balla, University of Patras, Greece
Rosario Catelli, Institute for High Performance Computing and Networking (ICAR) - National Research
Council (CNR), Italy
Jacques Demongeot, Université Grenoble Alpes, France
Marcio Eisencraft, University of São Paulo, Brazil
Marco Furini, Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Italy
Soufiane Gasmi, University of Tunis, Tunisia
Fazel Keshtkar, ST JOHN’S University, USA
Samaneh Madanian, Auckland University of Technology, New Zealand
Samira Maghool, Università degli Studi di Milano, Italy
Veenu Mangat, UIET | Panjab University, India
Sadandaula Rose Muheriwa, University of Rochester - School of Nursing, USA
P. Muthu, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, India
Sina Namaki Araghi, IMT Mines Albi, France
Amal Necibi, Education Ministry, Tunisia
Mehmet Akif Ozdemir, Izmir Katip Celebi University, Turkey
Douangprachanh Sathathone, Mittaphab Hospital / Ministry of Public Health, Vientiane, Laos
Les Sztandera, Thomas Jefferson University, USA
Mesut Toğaçar, Fırat University, Turkey
Andreas Triantafyllidis, Centre for Research and Technology - Hellas (CERTH), Greece
Jun Xu, Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research - Chinese Academy of Sciences,
China
Dongwen Wang, Arizona State University, USA

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

