BIONATURE 2015
The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and
Renewable Energies
ISBN: 978-1-61208-410-7
May 24 - 29, 2015
Rome, Italy
BIONATURE 2015 Editors
Vladimir Strezov, Macquarie University - Sydney Australia
Victor Zaichenko, Biocenter, Russia

BIONATURE 2015
Forward
The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable
Energies (BIONATURE 2015), held between May 24-29, 2015 in Rome, Italy, continued a series
of events covering topics on environment, biodiversity and invasion, and renewable and
sustainable energies.
Environmental change awareness is a key state of spirit and legislation for preventing,
protecting, and ultimately saving the planet biodiversity. Technical and practical methods for
applying bio-agriculture for the public’s health and safety are primary targets. The goal is the
use of ecological economic stimuli in tandem with social and governmental actions preventing
deforestation, pollution, and global warming. To cope with the climate and landscape changes
advanced technical inventory of tools and statistics on lessons learned are needed to derive
appropriate measure and plan accordingly.
Replacing the classical energy with alternative renewable energy (green energy), such as
bioenergy, eolian energy, or solar energy is an ecological and economic trend that suggests
important socio-economic advantages: using native renewable resources, increasing of
selfsufficiency rate of energy and promoting use of clean energy, and that way, polluting
emissions to the air will be reduced. Bioenergy is renewable energy derived from biological
sources, to be used for heat, electricity, or vehicle fuel. Biofuel derived from plant materials is
among the most rapidly growing renewable energy technologies. In several countries corn-
based ethanol is currently the largest source of biofuel as a gasoline substitute or additive.
Recent energy legislation mandates further growth of both corn-based and advanced biofuels
from other sources. Growing biofuel demand has implications for U.S. and world agriculture.
Eolian energy is currently used throughout the world on a large scale. In the past decade, its
evolution shows its acceptance as a source of generation, with expressive growth trends in the
energy matrices in the countries where this source is used Eolian energy is renewable and has
very low environmental impact. To generate it, there are no gas emissions, no effluent refuse,
and no other natural resources, such as water, are consumed. Photovoltaic technology makes
use of the energy in the sun, and it has little impact on the environment. Photovoltaics can be
used in a wide range of products, from small consumer items to large commercial solar electric
systems. The event brought together the challenging technical and regulation aspects for
supporting and producing renewable energy with less or no impact on the ecosystems. There
are several technical integration barriers and steps for social adoption and governmental
legislation to favor and encourage this kind of energy.
The conference had the following tracks:

Green energy, plant diversity, environmental responsibility

Forest landscape

The conference also featured the following symposium:
•
ENVIROSENS 2015, The International Symposium on Remote Sensing for Climate and Earth
Monitoring
We take here the opportunity to warmly thank all the members of the BIONATURE 2015
technical program committee, as well as the numerous reviewers. The creation of such a high
quality conference program would not have been possible without their involvement. We also
kindly thank all the authors that dedicated much of their time and effort to contribute to
BIONATURE 2015. We truly believe that, thanks to all these efforts, the final conference
program consisted of top quality contributions.
Also, this event could not have been a reality without the support of many individuals,
organizations and sponsors. We also gratefully thank the members of the BIONATURE 2015
organizing committee for their help in handling the logistics and for their work that made this
professional meeting a success.
We hope BIONATURE 2015 was a successful international forum for the exchange of ideas
and results between academia and industry and to promote further progress in the areas of
environment, biodiversity and invasion, and renewable and sustainable energies. We also hope
that Rome, Italy provided a pleasant environment during the conference and everyone saved
some time to enjoy the historic beauty of the city.
BIONATURE 2015 Chairs
BIONATURE Advisory Chairs
Lena Strömbäck, SMHI, Sweden
Suhkneung Pyo, Sungkyunkwan University - Suwon City, South Korea
Vladimir Strezov, Macquarie University - Sydney Australia
Victor Zaichenko, Biocenter, Russia

BIONATURE 2015
Committee
BIONATURE 2015 Advisory Chairs
Lena Strömbäck, SMHI, Sweden
Suhkneung Pyo, Sungkyunkwan University - Suwon City, South Korea
Vladimir Strezov, Macquarie University - Sydney Australia
Victor Zaichenko, Biocenter, Russia
BIONATURE 2015 Technical Program Committee
Yoseph Bar-Cohen, Jet Propulsion Lab (JPL) - NASA, USA
Dhrubes Biswas, Indian Institute of Technology, India
Rupp Carriveau, University of Windsor, Canada
Longjian Chen, China Agricultural University, China
Gianfranco Chicco, Politecnico di Torino, Italy
Pedro Corrêa, University of São Paulo, Brazil
Hany A. El-Shemy, Cairo University - Giza, Egypt
Jerekias Gandure, University of Botswana, Botswana
Josean Garrués Irurzun, University of Granada, Spain
Giuseppe Genon, Politecnico di Torino, Italy
Bassim H. Hameed, University of Science Malaysia - Penang, Malaysia
Kathleen Hefferon, Cornell University, USA
Ana Jesús López, University of Oviedo, Spain
Man Kee Lam, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS - Perak, Malaysia
Yu-Te Liao, National Chiao-Tung University, Taiwan
Valentinas Klevas, Kaunas University of Technology / Lithuanian Energy Institute, Lithuania
Ali Mostafaeipour, Yazd University, Iran
Abdeen Mustafa Omer, Energy Research Institute (ERI) - Khartoum, Sudan
Son V. Nghiem, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology - Pasadena, USA
Patrícia Pereira da Silva, University of Coimbra & INESC-Coimbra, Portugal
Suhkneung Pyo, Sungkyunkwan University - South Korea
Bale V. Reddy, University of Ontario Institute of Technology - Oshawa, Canada
Francisca Segura Manzano, University of Huelva, Spain
Elena Serrano, University of Alicante, Spain
Atul Sharma, Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroluem Technology - Rae Bareli, India
Vladimir Strezov, Macquarie University - Sydney Australia
Lena Strömbäck, SMHI, Sweden
Lee Keat Teong, Universiti Sains Malaysia - Penang, Malaysia

Talal Yusaf, University of Southern Queensland - Toowoomba, Australia
Victor Zaichenko, Biocenter, Russia
ENVIROSENS 2015 Program Committee Members
Beata Csatho, University at Buffalo, USA
Gabriel de Oliveira, Brazilian National Institute for Space Research (INPE), Brazil
Lúcio André de Castro Jorge, Embrapa Instrumentação, Brazil
Fabio Del Frate, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Italy
Oleg Dubovik, Universite Lille-1, France
Guido D'Urso, Universita' degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Italy
Garik Gutman, NASA Land-Cover / Land-Use Change Program, USA
Shahid Habib, NASA - Goddard Space Flight Center, USA
Irena Hajnsek, ETH Zurich, Switzerland / German Aerospace Center, Germany
Shuanggen Jin, Shanghai Astronomical Observatory / Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Martin Kappas, Institute of Geography - Georg-August University Goettingen, Germany
Alexander Kokhanovsky, EUMETSAT, Germany
Kati Laakso, SPECIM Ltd., Finland, University of Alberta, Canada
Jonathan Li, University of Waterloo, Canada
Andrea Masini, Flyby S.r.l., Italy
Alberto Moreira, German Aerospace Center (DLR) / Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Germany
Kamel M. Sheikho, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST), Saudi Arabia
Haruhisa Shimoda, Tokai University Research & Information Center, Japan
Todd Shipman, Alberta Energy Regulator (AER) / Alberta Geological Survey, Canada
Cyril Voyant, Université de Corse, France
Francesco Vuolo, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna (BOKU), Austria

Copyright Information
For your reference, this is the text governing the copyright release for material published by IARIA.
The copyright release is a transfer of publication rights, which allows IARIA and its partners to drive the
dissemination of the published material. This allows IARIA to give articles increased visibility via
distribution, inclusion in libraries, and arrangements for submission to indexes.
I, the undersigned, declare that the article is original, and that I represent the authors of this article in
the copyright release matters. If this work has been done as work-for-hire, I have obtained all necessary
clearances to execute a copyright release. I hereby irrevocably transfer exclusive copyright for this
material to IARIA. I give IARIA permission or reproduce the work in any media format such as, but not
limited to, print, digital, or electronic. I give IARIA permission to distribute the materials without
restriction to any institutions or individuals. I give IARIA permission to submit the work for inclusion in
article repositories as IARIA sees fit.
I, the undersigned, declare that to the best of my knowledge, the article is does not contain libelous or
otherwise unlawful contents or invading the right of privacy or infringing on a proprietary right.
Following the copyright release, any circulated version of the article must bear the copyright notice and
any header and footer information that IARIA applies to the published article.
IARIA grants royalty-free permission to the authors to disseminate the work, under the above
provisions, for any academic, commercial, or industrial use. IARIA grants royalty-free permission to any
individuals or institutions to make the article available electronically, online, or in print.
IARIA acknowledges that rights to any algorithm, process, procedure, apparatus, or articles of
manufacture remain with the authors and their employers.
I, the undersigned, understand that IARIA will not be liable, in contract, tort (including, without
limitation, negligence), pre-contract or other representations (other than fraudulent
misrepresentations) or otherwise in connection with the publication of my work.
Exception to the above is made for work-for-hire performed while employed by the government. In that
case, copyright to the material remains with the said government. The rightful owners (authors and
government entity) grant unlimited and unrestricted permission to IARIA, IARIA's contractors, and
IARIA's partners to further distribute the work.

Table of Contents
The Potential for Energy Diversification to Optimise Buildings’ Energy Performance beyond Green Ratings
Xiaofeng Li and Vladimir Strezov
1
Comparative Studies of the Combustion of Raw and Heat-treated Straw and Combined Coal and Straw Pellets
Rafail Isemin, Aleksander Mikhalev, Valentin Konyakhin, Sergey Kuzmin, Oleg Milovanov, and Dmitry Klimov
7
Plant Diversity in the Area of Water Bodies near Krakow. Focus on Invasive Plants
Aleksandra Wagner and Dario Hrusevar
13
Developing Environmental Responsibility Through Place-based Education
Kevin O'Connor and Robert Sharp
20
A Naturalistic Indicator of the Forest Quality and its Relationship with the Land Use Anthropentropy Factor
Silvia Assini and Maria Grazia Albanesi
27
Assessment of Human Pressure on Forest Ecosystems in the Czech Republic
Helena Kankova
34
Use of Proba-V Images in Southern Africa for Dynamic of Desertification Indicators
Rogers Hansine, Alzira Ramos, Maria Joao Pereira, and Amilcar Soares
36
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

The Potential for Energy Diversification to Optimise Buildings’ Energy 
Performance beyond Green Ratings 
Xiaofeng Li and Vladimir Strezov 
Department of Environmental Sciences 
Macquarie University 
Sydney, Australia 
e-mail: xiaofeng.lea@gmail.com; vladimir.strezov@mq.edu.au  
 
Abstract—In the broader context of increasing demands for 
energy associated with expanding population and urbanisation, 
green building measures are an effective approach to relief the 
conflict between lowering ecological footprints of buildings and 
their rapidly growing energy demand. This paper assesses the 
green building rating tools and the fraction of Energy criterion 
as contributor to green star rating. The options that can be 
applied to improve building’s energy consumption profile and, 
with that, contribute to greater green star rating of the 
building are further reviewed. Outdoor energy sources such as 
solar energy, as well as indoor energy sources, e.g. piezoelectric 
energy, are presented. The conclusion of this study is that it 
may be possible to achieve low carbon building footprint 
through the application of renewable energy sources, although 
some of the technologies remain as components of a concept 
that is yet to be fully and successfully demonstrated in practice. 
Keywords-sustainable building; renewable energy; BIPV; 
piezoelectric; bioenergy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Green building measures are defined as a sustainable, 
integrated approach, balancing environmental, economic, 
and social considerations with large scale of implemented 
innovative renewable technologies. However, the level of 
sustainability a building achieves is hard to be benchmarked.  
A range of building rating tools have been developed to 
complement the knowledge about the level of sustainability 
and these rating systems are still in the process of 
improvement [1]. The most widely used building rating 
methods 
are 
Building 
Research 
Establishment 
Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM), Leadership 
in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED), and Green 
Star [2, 3]; as summarised in Table 1.  
There are similarities between these three schemes. They 
assess the building against multiple criteria in different 
categories including Land Use & Ecology, Water, Energy, 
Materials, Health & Wellbeing, Waste & Pollution, 
Management and Innovation [4-6]. Secondly, all these 
schemes are based on credit collecting systems that 
determine the level of sustainability and hence the building’s 
rating classification [7]. Thirdly, all three rating tools have 
been developed into a series aimed at rating of a wide range 
of building types, both newly constructed and existing 
buildings [8]. All three rating methods are compared in Table 
1. It demonstrates that the building rating methods have 
differences in their methodologies, evaluation scopes, 
weighting in credits and certification processes.  
Among these worldwide building rating tools, a common 
acceptance should be noted that the weight of the Energy 
category has the most significant importance, accounting for 
nearly 25% of the total weightings. However, this may not 
be sufficient for buildings aiming for ultimate energy neutral 
or fully self-sustained. Under these circumstances, a recast of 
the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (EPBD) will 
take force on 31 December 2018 by the European Parliament 
and the Council of the European Union in order to strengthen 
the energy performance requirements. The EPBD states that 
the nearly zero or very low amount of energy required 
should to a very significant level be covered by energy from 
renewable source, including renewable energy produced on-
site or nearby [9].  
According to the agreements among the building ratings, 
energy savings in the operating stage are believed to be the 
most substantial benefits of green buildings. A detailed 
review of 60 LEED rated buildings demonstrates that green 
buildings are on an average 25-30% more energy efficient 
compared to conventional buildings [10]. Energy savings in 
green building are achieved primarily by reducing electricity 
purchases from the power grid and secondly by reducing the 
peak energy demand. The reduced energy demand from 
power grids contributes to simultaneous reduction in 
greenhouse gas emissions. Li et al. [11] confirmed the 
energy saving potential by studying one of the most common 
green technologies, the photovoltaics panels in ofﬁce 
buildings. They found that when semi-transparent PV panels 
are used together with dimming controls, a peak cooling load 
reduction of 450 kW was achieved. This was equivalent to 
annual building electricity saving of 1203 MWh, which 
contributed a reduction of 12% of the annual building 
electricity expenditure.  
This evidence has indicated that the level of sustainability 
a building achieves is strongly coupled with the degree that 
renewable energy is integrated and utilised. The application 
of on-site renewable energy production provides possibility 
to reduce dependence on fossil fuel and mitigates emissions.  
II. 
OUTDOOR ENERGY SOURCES FOR BUILDINGS 
Renewable energy resources and their utilisation in 
buildings are key components of sustainable development  
[12]. In this context, the renewable energy resources and 
technologies applicable for integration into the green 
buildings are divided here into those that can generate energy 
from outdoor sources and indoor energy sources. One of the 
most important outdoor energy sources is solar radiation.  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

A. Solar-Electrical and Building Integrated Photovoltaic 
Solar energy is the most abundant and inexhaustible of 
all the renewable energy resources [13]. The amount of solar 
energy incident on the overall land area far exceeds the total 
world energy demand. Aside from the access and abundance 
of the solar resource, there are other positive features that 
make solar energy the ideal source of alternative energy. 
First, solar energy has the potential to provide electricity 
during peak demand times, due to the correlation between 
solar radiation and daytime peak electricity demand. Second, 
solar energy technologies have high compatibility and can be 
easily operated within other hybrid systems [14]. Third, solar 
technologies can offer distribution utilities ancillary services, 
such as grid support [15]. 
Photovoltaic (PV) is a technology used for generating 
electrical power by converting sunlight into direct current 
electricity using semiconductor materials. The PV system 
converts solar radiation into electricity that can be directly 
applied to power electronic appliances. Moreover, PV panels 
have no mechanically moving parts, hence are very easy to 
install and require very little maintenance. The overall cost-
benefits analysis of applying PV in buildings were studied 
through Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and the results were 
encouraging [16]. The carbon footprint of PV electricity is 
found to be favourable compared to the carbon footprint of 
electricity from fossil fuel based electricity and the energy 
payback time is significantly shorter than the expected 
lifetime of 30 years.  
The traditional way of installing PV panels on to 
buildings is named Building Adopted Photovoltaic (BAPV), 
by mounting PV modules to a separate metal support 
structure on the roof. In contrast to the BAPV, Building 
Integrated 
Photovoltaic 
(BIPV) 
is 
defined 
as 
an 
architecturally integrated building component: the electricity 
producing modules are both a functional unit of the building 
and also part of the exterior building envelope, since these 
modules replace conventional building materials [17]. The 
fields of BIPV application are the roof areas of the building 
as well as facades, such as vertical walls, skylights, windows 
and external shading devices depending to the particular 
features of the photovoltaic materials.  
With the development of Thin-Film (TF) technology, 
several types of TF modules with varied photovoltaic 
materials, such as amorphous (a-Si), micromorph (µm-Si), 
copper 
indium 
gallium 
selenide 
(CIGS), 
organic 
photovoltaics (OPV) and dye-sensitized cells (DSC) are 
accepted by the market due to their advanced features. For 
instance, by adding an encapsulating polymer of any colour 
or interferential coating, the TF modules can be tailor-made 
into any size and shape to satisfy the specific architectural 
requirements [18]. The coating and printing techniques 
which are known as the roll-to-roll printing technology, 
employed for the manufacture of the TF PV products, the 
manufacturing costs are expected to be much lower than the 
crystalline silicon solar cells in the next few years [19]. 
Furthermore, a prototype transparent photovoltaic cell with 
an ultrahigh visible transmission has been produced in the 
laboratory [20, 21]. By absorbing only infrared and 
ultraviolet light, letting visible light pass through the cells, 
the cell is able to reach a transmission of >55%±2%, which 
is sufﬁciently transparent for incorporation on architectural 
glass [20].  
BIPV systems significantly extend the solar collecting 
area from roof only to the whole building skin, converting 
the largest vertical areas such as exterior walls and windows 
into electricity generators. They provide a vast vertical area 
directly exposed to the bright morning and early evening 
sunlight and hence the total electricity yield will be 
significantly increased [22]. 
B. Building Suitable Small-Scale Wind Turbines 
Wind energy is an established and mature renewable 
energy alternative as it is clean, safe and available. However, 
the adaptability of mid-scale wind turbines in urban 
environment faces severe challenges because of the 
turbulence of the wind profile, noise pollution, limited size 
and space. In the past few years, many efforts have been 
made to harness wind energy and optimise the small-scale 
wind turbine performance. Until now, two main classified 
types of wind turbines, horizontal axis wind turbines 
(HAWT) and vertical axis wind turbines (VAWT) are 
developed for the turbulent urban wind profile [23].  
HAWTs dominate the majority of the wind industry in 
urban environment [24], due to its extreme high efficiency in 
constant wind conditions. But because their axis of rotation 
of the blades is in a horizontal position, which needs to be 
pointed into the wind, the turbines are very sensitive for the 
wind direction changes. Moreover, the maximum size of 
HAWTs is strictly limited to 1.5-5 m in diameter, regarding 
the safety of wildlife and aircraft, esthetics and maintenance 
[25]. On the other hand, their counterparts VAWTs do not 
necessarily need to point in any particular wind direction. 
Since the main rotor shaft is arranged vertically, the vertical 
wind turbines can handle much higher turbulence and varied 
wind speeds and thus makes them much suitable in building 
mounting to overcome the turbulent nature of the wind in the 
urban environment. According to the size of building 
mounted wind turbines, the energy generating potential is 
reported from 100 W to 30 kW in the wind speed range from 
10-20 m/s [25]. 
III. 
INDOOR RENEWABLE ENERGY ALTERNATIVES 
A number of indoor renewable energies, such as waste 
heat, 
flowing 
water 
in 
internal 
drainage 
systems, 
electromagnetic waves and vibration, may also become 
important energy sources for buildings. 
A. Water flow energy harvesting 
Water flow is known as a useful source of mechanical 
energy which is essentially constant over extended period of 
time [26]. Water ﬂow energy sources in the outdoor 
environment are widespread and used on the macro scale for 
electrical power generation as in hydroelectric plants. The 
streams of water found in the indoor environments also offer 
a great potential for energy harvesting. For instance, the grey 
and black water in the water pipes of a building drain system, 
as well as the rain water collected by the rain harvesting 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

system which is installed on the building roof, have also 
been considered for smaller scale harvesting application. The 
hydro turbines that suit for small scale energy harvesting are 
designed and constructed according to the widely used large 
scale hydro turbines, Pelton (Figure 1a) and propeller (Figure 
1b) turbines respectively [27]. The Pelton turbine is rotated 
by a jet of water discharged from a nozzle and is connected 
to a shaft. The water stream from an upper tank or high 
gravitational potential area sluiced out through the nozzle 
pushing the shaft and hence the energy is harvested in the 
form of electricity. It has been confirmed that the required 
power from a sensor node, 160 mW was obtained for 
HQ=0.14 ml/s with an efficiency of 11.3%. The energy 
harvest system using propeller turbine has a simple 
configuration. The turbine directly installed in the middle of 
the water pipeline could be pushed rotating by the down 
flowing water. Based on the test result, the turbine produced 
900 mW of average power in a home irrigation system. In 
[28], a radial-flux energy harvester incorporating a three-
phase generation principle is proposed for converting energy 
from water flow in domestic water pipelines. The energy 
harvester is able to generate from 15 mW at a flow rate of 5 
l/min to 720 mW at 20 l/min. Therefore, it is possible to 
generate enough energy using very low water stream, 
without the need for energy storage.  
 
Figure 1. Hydro turbines: a) Pelton system; b) Propeller system. 
B. Kinetic Energy Harvesting  
The vibration-based energy harvesting, termed as 
piezoelectric energy generation, has received the most 
attention due to its ability to capture the surrounding ambient 
energy and then directly convert the applied strain energy 
into usable electrical energy and the ease at which they can 
be integrated into a system [29]. By connecting the energy 
harvester with a remote sensor, the harvest can be seen as an 
eternal energy source to replace the conventional battery, 
therefore eliminating the need for long term maintenance.  
At present, a cantilever type vibration energy harvester is 
the most commonly used design due to its simple structure 
and the feature that can produce a large deformation under 
vibration [30]. For this type of design, the majority of the 
cantilever beam piezoelectric harvesters are used in micro-
electro-mechanical system (MEMS) applications [31], 
aiming for vibration resources with high frequency and small 
mechanical stress. In order to extend receiving range of 
vibration frequency and to improve power conversion 
efficiency, a two-stage energy harvester design was 
suggested for the very low frequency vibration environment 
in the 0.2–0.5 Hz range [22], as shown in Figure 2a. This 
design contains two main components, a mechanical energy 
transfer unit linked with a vibration platform and secondary 
vibrating units composed of additional piezoelectric elements 
and vibrating beams fixed on one side. Ideally, when the 
initial impact effects on the platform, the mass attached on 
the mechanical energy transfer unit starts to vibrate in low 
frequency. The low vibration energy is then transferred to a 
much higher natural frequency vibration in the piezoelectric 
elements as the mass passes over and excites the 
piezoelectric beams. 
 
Figure 2. Two designs of the piezoelectric system: a) a two-stage energy 
harvesting approach based on the cantilever system [32]; b) a stack type 
piezoelectric harvester [33]. 
 
A stack type piezoelectric harvester is produced by 
stacking multiple layers of piezoelectric materials, as shown 
in Figure 2b. This results in a high mechanical stiffness in 
the stack configuration. Compared to the cantilever 
configuration, the stack type possesses a large capacitance 
and a higher capability of energy harvesting. It is suitable for 
a high force environment, such as a heavy manufacturing 
facility or in areas of large operating machinery [34]. With 
these features, the stack type piezoelectric harvester breaks 
the limitation from micro-scale energy harvesting in MEMS 
to macro-scale energy generation. In Israel, Innowattech has 
tested this type of energy harvester on highway to collect 
kinetic energy from passing cars as well as railways [35]. In 
the ideal conditions, the system is able to generate up to 200 
kWh in every kilometre, which is enough to satisfy the 
energy demands from more than 800 families.  
To date, several piezoelectric power generating products 
have been released to the market by different companies 
[32], such as Pavegen, Waynergy and Powerleap. The 
Pavegen 
piezoelectric 
harvester, 
Pavegen 
Tile, 
was 
demonstrated at the London 2012 Olympic Games. Twelve 
tiles were installed on a temporary walkway connecting the 
Station to the Greenway walking route at the Olympic Park. 
It was estimated that these tiles would receive more than 12 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

million impressions from footfalls, generating 72 million 
joules of energy, which equals to 21 kWh of electricity. This 
amount of electricity was enough to illuminate the walkway 
for eight hours at full power during the night, and 16 daylight 
hours at half power [36]. A similar test was conducted at the 
University of Beira Interior. The Waynergy People prototype 
was deployed in the pavement at the main entrance of the 
Engineering Faculty. It was confirmed that 525 Joules or 
0.15 Watt-hours of electric energy was harvested from 675 
human steps by the Waynergy system during a peak hour, 
between 9 am and 10 am [37]. 
IV. 
ENERGY PRODUCTION FROM WASTES 
Activities within the buildings contribute to considerable 
generation of organic waste that can be considered as a 
biomass and used for conversion into useful forms of energy. 
The main technologies for biomass processing can be 
classified into three categories: thermo-chemical, bio-
chemical and mechanical extraction. There are three optional 
processes included in the method of thermochemical 
conversion: combustion, gasification and pyrolysis; while 
under the biochemical conversion category, there are two 
technologies available, which are digestion and fermentation. 
In the following, thermochemical pyrolysis and biochemical 
anaerobic digestion are introduced as two promising indoor 
renewable energy generating technologies. 
A. Pyrolysis - A Thermo-Chemical Conversion 
Pyrolysis is a method that converts biomass to more 
useful fuel products [38]. Under pyrolytic conditions 
biomass is heated to maximum temperatures of 450–500
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Sev, “A comparative analysis of building environmental 
assessment tools and suggestions for regional adaptations,” 
Civil Engineering and Environmental Systems, 28(3), 2011, 
pp. 231-245. 
[2] W. L. Lee and J. Burnett, “Benchmarking energy use 
assessment of HK-BEAM, BREEAM and LEED,” Building 
and Environment, 43(11), 2008, pp. 1882-1891. 
[3] Y. Roderick, D. McEwan, C. Wheatley, and C. Alonso, 
“Comparison of energy performance assessment between 
LEED, BREEAM and Green Star” Eleventh International 
IBPSA Conference, Integrated Environmental Solutions 
Limited. Glasgow, Scotland, 27-30 July 2009. 
[4] BREEAM. BREEAM “International New Construction (NC)” 
2013  Available from: http://www.breeam.org/ (accessed 
22/01/2014). 
[5] LEED. “Projects earn points to satisfy green building 
requirements” 
2013 
 
Available 
from: 
http://www.usgbc.org/leed/rating-systems/credit-categories 
(accessed 22/01/2014). 
[6] GBCA, The dollars and sense of green buildings: building the 
business case for green commercial buildings in Australia 
Green Building Council of Australia, 2008, pp. 143. 
[7] R. Reed, A. Bilos, S. Wilkinson, and K.-W. Schulte, 
“International comparison of sustainable rating tools,” The 
Journal of Sustainable Real Estate, 1(1), 2009, pp. 1-22. 
[8] L. Perez-Lombard, J. Ortiz, R. Gonzalez, and I. R. Maestre, 
“A review of benchmarking, rating and labelling concepts 
within the framework of building energy certification 
schemes,” Energy and Buildings, 41(3), 2009, pp. 272-278. 
[9] EPU. EU Directive on the Energy Performance of Buildings. 
2010  Available from: http://www.dfpni.gov.uk/content_-
_energy_performance_of_buildings-pubs-directive (accessed 
14/08/2014). 
[10] S. W. Tsang, and C. Y. Jim, “Game-theory approach for 
resident 
coalitions 
to 
allocate 
green-roof 
benefits,” 
Environment and Planning A, 43(2), 2011, pp. 363-377. 
[11] D. H. W. Li, T. N. T. Lam, W. W. H. Chan, and A. H. L. 
Mak, “Energy and cost analysis of semi-transparent 
photovoltaic in office buildings,” Applied Energy, 86(5), 
2009, pp. 722-729. 
[12] I. Dincer, “Renewable energy and sustainable development: a 
crucial review,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, 
4(2), 2000, pp. 157-175. 
[13] F. Dincer, “The analysis on photovoltaic electricity generation 
status, potential and policies of the leading countries in solar 
energy,” Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15(1), 
2011, pp. 713-720. 
[14] T. T. Chow, “A review on photovoltaic/thermal hybrid solar 
technology,” Applied Energy, 87(2), 2010, pp. 365-379. 
[15] J. Urbanetz, C. D. Zomer, and R. Ruther, “Compromises 
between form and function in grid-connected, building-
integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) at low-latitude sites,” 
Building and Environment, 46(10), 2011, pp. 2107-2113. 
[16] M.J. de Wild-Scholten, "Energy payback time and carbon 
footprint of commercial photovoltaic systems," Solar Energy 
Materials and Solar Cells, 119, 2013, pp. 296-305. 
[17] D. K. Prasad, and M. Snow, Designing with solar power: a 
source book for building integrated photovoltaics (BiPV), 
2005, pp. 252. 
[18] K. L. Chopra, P. D. Paulson, and V. Dutta, “Thin-film solar 
cells: An overview,” Progress in Photovoltaics, 12(2-3), 2004, 
pp. 69-92. 
[19] F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo, and M. Jorgensen, “Product 
integration of compact roll-to-roll processed polymer solar 
cell modules: methods and manufacture using flexographic 
printing, slot-die coating and rotary screen printing,” Journal 
of Materials Chemistry, 20(41), 2010, pp. 8994-9001. 
[20] R. R. Lunt and V. Bulovic, “Transparent, near-infrared 
organic photovoltaic solar cells for window and energy-
scavenging applications,” Applied Physics Letters, 98(11), 
2011. 
[21] R. R. Lunt, T. P. Osedach, P. R. Brown, J. A. Rowehl, and V. 
Bulovic, “Practical Roadmap and Limits to Nanostructured 
Photovoltaics,” Advanced Materials, 23(48), 2011, pp. 5712-
5727. 
[22] C. H. Peng, Y. Huang, and Z. S. Wu, “Building-integrated 
photovoltaics (BIPV) in architectural design in China,” 
Energy and Buildings, 43(12), 2011, pp. 3592-3598. 
[23] S. Eriksson, H. Bernhoff, M. Leijon, "Evaluation of different 
turbine concepts for wind power," Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 12(5), 2008, pp. 1419-1434. 
[24] T.F. Ishugah, Y. Li, R.Z. Wang, and J.K. Kiplagat, "Advances 
in wind energy resource exploitation in urban environment: A 
review," Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 37, 
2014, pp. 613-626. 
[25] A. Dutton, J. Halliday, and M. Blanch, "The feasibility of 
building-mounted/integrated 
wind 
turbines 
(BUWTs): 
Achieving their potential for carbon emission reductions," 
Energy Research Unit, CCLRC, 2005, pp. 77-83. 
[26] J. M. Gilbert, and F. Balouchi, “Comparison of energy 
harvesting 
systems 
for 
wireless 
sensor 
networks,” 
International Journal of Automation and Computing, 5(4), 
2008, pp. 334-347. 
[27] J. A. R. Azevedo and F. E. S. Santos, “Energy harvesting 
from wind and water for autonomous wireless sensor nodes,” 
Circuits, Devices & Systems, IET, 6(6), 2012, pp. 413-420. 
[28] D. Hoffmann, A. Willmann, R. Göpfert, P. Becker, B. 
Folkmer and Y. Manoli, “Energy Harvesting from Fluid Flow 
in Water Pipelines for Smart Metering Applications,” Journal 
of Physics: Conference Series. IOP Publishing, 2013. 
[29] A. Erturk and D. J. Inman, Introduction to Piezoelectric 
Energy Harvesting. Piezoelectric Energy Harvesting. John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2011, pp. 1-18. 
[30] H. S. Kim, J. H. Kim, and J. Kim, “A Review of Piezoelectric 
Energy Harvesting Based on Vibration,” International Journal 
of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing, 12(6), 2011, pp. 
1129-1141. 
[31] G. Tang, J. Q. Liu, H. S. Liu, Y. G. Li, C. S. Yang, D. N. He, 
V. Dzung Dao, K. Tanaka, and S. Sugiyama, “Piezoelectric 
MEMS generator based on the bulk PZT/silicon wafer 
bonding technique,” Physica Status Solidi a-Applications and 
Materials Science, 208(12), 2011, pp. 2913-2919. 
[32] X. Li and V. Strezov, “Modelling piezoelectric energy 
harvesting potential in an educational building,” Energy 
Conversion and Management, 85, 2014, pp. 435-442. 
[33] Piezo-University. Basic Designs of Piezoelectric Positioning 
Drives/Systems. 
2013 
 
Available 
from: 
http://www.physikinstrumente.com/en/products/primages.php
?sortnr=400800.00&picview=2 (accessed 24/02/2014) 
[34] R. A. Steven and A. S. Henry, “A review of power harvesting 
using piezoelectric materials (2003–2006),” Smart Materials 
and Structures, 16, 2007. 
[35] Innowattech. Innowattech IPEG PAD Harvests Energy From 
Passing 
Trains. 
2010 
 
Available 
from: 
http://www.innowattech.co.il/technology.aspx 
(accessed 
03/01/2014). 
[36] O.D Authority, Pedestrians to power walkway to London 
2012 
Olympic 
park. 
2012 
 
Available 
from: 
http://www.energyharvestingjournal.com/articles/pedestrians-
to-power-walkway-to-london-2012-olympic-park-
00004578.asp?sessionid=1 (accessed 05/01/2014). 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

[37] F. Duarte, F. Casimiro, D. Correia, R. Mendes, and A. 
Ferreira, “Waynergy people: a new pavement energy harvest 
system,” Proceedings of the ICE - Municipal Engineer, Vol. 
166(4), June 2013. 
[38] X. Li, V. Strezov, and T. Kan, “Energy Recovery Potential 
Analysis of Spent Coffee Grounds Pyrolysis Products,” 
Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis, 110, 2014, pp. 
79-87. 
[39] V. Strezov, T. J. Evans, and C. Hayman, “Thermal conversion 
of elephant grass (Pennisetum Purpureum Schum) to bio-gas, 
bio-oil and charcoal,” Bioresource Technology, 99(17), 2008, 
pp. 8394-8399. 
[40] Y. J. Lin and H. T. Lin, “Thermal performance of different 
planting substrates and irrigation frequencies in extensive 
tropical rooftop greeneries,” Building and Environment, 
46(2), 2011, pp. 345-355. 
[41] A. Demirbas, “Competitive liquid biofuels from biomass,” 
Applied Energy, 88(1), 2011, pp. 17-28. 
[42] K. Raveendran and A. Ganesh, “Heating value of biomass and 
biomass pyrolysis products,” Fuel, 75(15), 1996, pp.1715-
1720. 
[43] S. Yilmaz and H. Selim, “A review on the methods for 
biomass to energy conversion systems design,” Renewable & 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 25, 2013, pp. 420-430. 
[44] P. McKendry, “Energy production from biomass (part 2): 
conversion technologies,” Bioresource Technology, 83(1), , 
2002, pp. 47-54. 
[45] S. De Meester, J. Demeyer, F. Velghe, A. Peene, H. Van 
Langenhove and J. Dewulf, “The environmental sustainability 
of anaerobic digestion as a biomass valorization technology,” 
Bioresource Technology, 121, 2012, pp. 396-403. 
[46] K. Komatsu, H. Yasui, R. Goel, Y. Y. Li and T. Noike, 
“Feasible Power Production from Municipal Sludge Using an 
Improved Anaerobic Digestion System,” Ozone-Science & 
Engineering, 33(2), 2011, pp. 164-170. 
[47] M. Esen and T. Yuksel, “Experimental evaluation of using 
various renewable energy sources for heating a greenhouse,” 
Energy and Buildings, 65, 2013, pp. 340-351. 
[48] C. Ratanatamskul, G. Onnum, and K. Yamamoto, "A 
prototype single-stage anaerobic digester for co-digestion of 
food waste and sewage sludge from high-rise building for on-
site biogas production," International Biodeterioration & 
Biodegradation, 95, 2014, pp. 176-180. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF THE BUILDING RATING METHODS 
Feature	  
Rating	  Method	  Name	  
BREEAM	  
	  
LEED	  
	  
Green	  Star	  
Launch	  Date	  
1990	  
1998	  
2003	  
Ratings	  
Pass/Good/Very	  Good/Excellent/	  
Outstanding	  
Certified/Silver/Gold/Platinum	  
One	  –Six	  Star	  
Weightings	  
Applied	  to	  each	  criterion	  (consensus	  
based	  on	  scientific/open	  
consultation)	  
All	  credits	  equally	  weighted,	  although	  
the	  number	  of	  credits	  related	  to	  each	  
criterion	  is	  a	  de	  facto	  weighting	  
Applied	  to	  each	  criteria	  
category	  (industry	  
survey	  based)	  
Information	  Gathering	  
Design/management	  team	  or	  
assessor	  
Design/management	  team	  or	  
Accredited	  Professional	  
Design	  team	  
Third	  Party	  Valuation	  
BRE	  
N/A	  
	  GBCA	  
Update	  Process	  
Annual	  
As	  required	  
Annual	  
Assessment	  Collation	  Fee	  
$4000-­‐20000	  
$75,000	  
$4002-­‐8004	  
Cost	  of	  credit	  appeals	  
Free	  
$500	  
$800	  
Building	  Covered	  
	  
	  
	  
	  New	  
+	  
+	  
+	  
	  Interiors	  
-­‐	  
+	  
+	  
	  Core	  &	  shell	  
-­‐	  
+	  
+	  
	  Existing	  
+	  
+	  
+	  
	  Renovated	  
+	  
+	  
+	  
	  Mixed-­‐use	  
+	  
+	  
-­‐	  
Category	  Weightings	  
	  
	  
	  
	  Management	  
15%	  
8%	  
12%	  
	  Energy	  
25%	  
25%	  
24%	  
	  Transport	  
N/A	  
N/A	  
12%	  
	  Health	  
15%	  
N/A	  
12%	  
	  Well-­‐being	  
N/A	  
12%	  
N/A	  
	  Water	  
5%	  
5%	  
14%	  
	  Materials	  
10%	  
18%	  
12%	  
	  Land	  use	  
15%	  
N/A	  
8%	  
	  Ecology	  
N/A	  
5%	  
N/A	  
	  Pollution	  
15%	  
11%	  
6%	  
	  Sustainable	  Site	  
N/A	  
16%	  
N/A	  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

Comparative Studies of the Combustion of Raw and Heat-treated Straw and 
Combined Coal and Straw Pellets 
 
Rafail Isemin, Aleksander Mikhalev, Valentin Konyakhin, Sergey Kuzmin, Oleg Milovanov, Dmitry Klimov 
 Ministry of Education and Science 
Tambov State Technical University 
Tambov, Russia 
e-mails: {penergy@list.ru, risemin@gmail.com, milowanov.o@yandex.ru, marcelldm@mail.ru} 
 
 
Abstract—The main combustion process should be carried out 
in the regime of a fixed, forced ventilated bed for the efficient 
combustion of biofuel with low-melting ash in boilers with 
furnaces with a small height. After a certain period of time, a 
bed must be transferred into a state of turbulent fluidization, 
and then returned to its original state. So, the objective of the 
present work is to study the process of pellets combustion in 
such a bed (let’s call it a pulsating bed). The suggested 
technology 
of 
combusting 
ensures 
prolonged 
steady 
combustion of fuel with moderate carbon monoxide emissions. 
Combined coal waste and straw pellets combust more stable 
with less carbon monoxide emissions than straw pellets. 
Preliminary torrefaction does not influence the stability of 
combustion, but allows reducing carbon monoxide emissions 
from the combustion of combined coal waste and straw pellets. 
Production of coal-straw pellets can apparently be considered 
as a new variant of the organization of coal and biomass co-
combustion; and in the case of pellets torrefaction, it allows 
producing water-resistant fuel suitable for use not only in 
electric power stations, but also in small boiler-houses. 
Keywords-fluidized bed; fixed bed; straw pellets; coal’s waste 
pellets. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Analyzing the sources of raw materials for biofuel 
production, we came to the conclusion that the most 
accessible and annually renewable resource here is straw of 
different crops. Up to 120 million tons of straw of wheat, 
rye, oats and other cereal crops is annually gathered in 
Russia. As for winter wheat straw, we gather up to 60 
million tons of it. Wheat straw is not used to feed cattle, but 
it is used in small quantities as bedding for the animals. 
Straw is often burned in the fields, as the value of its use as a 
fertilizer is questioned by many experts. According to our 
estimations, Russia can use up to 24 million tons of straw as 
fuel every year without harming either crop farming or 
agriculture. Straw as biofuel can be used for co-combustion 
with coal, including low-grade coal and coal waste (slurry). 
At the same time, we must bear in mind that straw is CO2 – 
neutral fuel, i.e., the same amount of carbon dioxide is 
released during the combustion as the plant absorbs during 
its growth. Taking into account the low bulk density of straw 
and granulometric composition of slurry (the particles are of 
size up to 0.2 mm), it makes sense to process this fuel into 
pellets, which are easy to transport and store. The feeding of 
pellets into a boiler furnace can be easily mechanized and 
automated. Such coal-straw pellets can be used in low-power 
boilers (up to 1 MW). 
However, straw differs from wood and wood wastes, 
which are now most frequently used as fuel, by a high 
content of chlorine, silicon, phosphorus, and potassium. The 
presence of these compounds in straw contributes to the 
formation of slag agglomerates in the furnace, coherent 
deposits on the boiler heating surface and corrosion under 
these deposits. Thus, about 80% of the ash, produced during 
combustion of straw, can form slag in the boiler furnace. At 
the same time, only 10% of the ash, produced from the 
combustion of wood bark, can form slag; and the ash from 
stem wood does not form slag at all [1]. 
Some problems with the formation of slag agglomerates 
arise both during the combustion of agropellets in a fixed bed 
[2][3], or during the combustion of agropellets in a fluidized 
bed of inert material [4][5][6][7].  
The process of straw combustion in a fixed bed is largely 
influenced by the mass flow rate of blasting air, and the 
dependence of straw combustion rate in a fixed bed on the 
flow rate of blasting air has an extreme character [8]. This 
severely limits the range of power control of the furnace. 
It is possible to increase the efficiency of biofuel 
combustion, including the increase of the flow rate of 
blasting air, by the organization of the combustion process in 
a fluidized bed.  
Bhattacharya et al. [9] shows that the efficiency of 
combustion in a fluidized bed of such high-ash biofuel as 
rice husks (ash content of 14% or more) can reach more than 
85%. Moreover, in contrast to the combustion of biofuel in a 
fixed bed, the efficiency of a process increases with the 
increase of the flow rate of primary air during the 
combustion in a fluidized bed.  
However, as mentioned above, during the combustion of 
biogranules with low-melting ash in a fluidized bed, we 
observe gradual agglomeration around a burning granule of 
the particles of inert material, which ultimately leads to 
defluidization and cessation of a combustion process.  
It is possible to prevent defluidization by increasing the 
gas velocity in the furnace and by transferring a bed into the 
turbulent fluidization regime. 
The use of turbulent fluidization technology can provide 
significant advantages. So, the combustion of carbon spheres 
in the turbulent fluidization regime passes at the rate of 1.5-3 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
Figure 1. Functional scheme 
times higher than in a bubbling fluidized bed [10], and it can 
be explained by significantly higher rates of mass transfer. 
However, as applied to the technology of biofuel 
combustion in low- and medium-power boilers, i.e., in 
boilers with a small height of the furnace, the technology of 
combustion in the turbulent fluidization regime may be of 
limited use due to high fuel entrainment losses. 
This implies the following proposition: the main 
combustion process should be carried out in the regime of a 
fixed, forced ventilated bed for the efficient combustion of 
biofuel with low-melting ash in boilers with furnaces with a 
small height. After a certain period of time, a bed must be 
transferred into a state of turbulent fluidization, and then 
returned to its original state. The transfer of a bed from one 
state to another can be implemented by changing the current 
frequency, energizing the drive of a blow fan. In this 
connection, the regulators of frequency can be programmed 
in a certain way, and the boiler operates automatically in 
both regimes, without operator’s intervention. 
So, the objective of the present work is to study the 
process of pellets combustion in such a bed (let us call it a 
pulsating bed). 
II. 
THE EXPERIMENTAL UNIT 
Figure 1 shows an outline of the experimental unit for 
studying the combustion of different types of solid fuel. The 
studies are conducted in the remote cylindrical furnace with 
inner diameter of 300 mm and height of 1000 mm above the 
air distribution grill. The furnace is water-cooled, and the 
cooling circuit of the furnace is inserted in the cooling circuit 
of the heat exchanger of flue gases. 
The design of the furnace provides the tangential inlet of 
flue gases into the combustion can of the exchanger. This 
provides the post-combustion of volatile matters and the 
fallout of fuel and ash particles from gas flow.  
The furnace is equipped with a hopper for solid fuel and 
with the device for fuel feeding in the furnace. Fuel inlet in 
the furnace is carried out at height of 350 mm above the air 
distribution grill. 
The furnace is rested upon the air distribution grill; 
blasting primary air from the high-pressure fan is forced 
under this grill. The frequency of the electrical current, 
energizing the drive of the blow fan, is controlled, and it 
allows us to alter both the pressure of blasting air and 
blasting air flow rate by using a special program. 
III. 
METHODS AND MATERIALSE 
In the course of the experiment, we combust pellets 
produced from straw, straw tor-pellets, combined coal slurry 
(70% by weight) and straw (30% by weight) pellets, and 
identical tor-pellets. Such a composition of pellets is 
conditioned by the fact that we want to get pellets with a 
maximum content of coal slurry. On the other hand, when 
the content of straw in the mixture is less than 30%, the 
obtained pellets are insufficiently strong. The cost of 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
Figure 2. Mean square deviation of pressure drop in a bed vs. 
increase of flow rate of blasting air. 
production of pellets from a mixture of coal slurry and straw 
is 60 euros/ton, and it is approximately equal to the cost of 
straw pellets production. 
Torrefaction of pellets is carried out at temperature of 
270°C during 30 minutes. In such a case, the weight loss of 
samples is the following: 85% for straw, 50% for coal slurry, 
and 60% for combined coal slurry and straw pellets. 
The combined straw and coal slurry pellets have the 
following composition before torrefaction: sulfur – 1.2%, 
oxygen – 17.77%, hydrogen – 3.57%, nitrogen – 1.12%, 
carbon – 42.74%. After torrefaction these pellets have the 
following composition: sulfur – 1.27%, oxygen – 10.47%, 
hydrogen – 3.26%, nitrogen – 1.14%, carbon – 44.26%. The 
net calorific value of pellets increases by 17% and runs up to 
19 MJ/kg by reducing the oxygen content and by increasing 
the carbon content. The hygroscopicity of pellets after 
torrefaction decreases from 11% to 7.1%. 
As for straw pellets, the hygroscopicity of pellets 
decreases from 22% to 12% after torrefaction, and the 
calorific value increases by 18% and runs up to 18.3 MJ/kg. 
Previously the authors of the following paper [11] 
determined the values of air flow rate, fed for the combustion 
in the same furnace as Figure 1 shows, where a bed, 
consisting of a mixture of straw pellets and solid combustion 
products, transits into a state of turbulent fluidization. The 
fractional composition of the bed is as follows: the fraction 
of particles smaller than 1 mm is 25%, the fraction of 
particles with the size from 1 mm to 2 is 27%, the fraction of 
particles with the size from 2 mm to 5 is 10% and the 
fraction of particles having a size from 5 to 6 mm is 38%. 
We study the pressure drop pulsations in a bed during the 
combustion of pellets at different flow rates of blasting air. 
The measurement of the pressure drop in a bed is performed 
by means of the differential micromanometer “Testo – 525”. 
The digital signal from the micromanometer “Testo – 525” is 
transmitted every 50 mcs to a personal computer, which 
allows storing the measured values and subjecting them to a 
statistical analysis The micromanometer “Testo – 525” has a 
measuring range from 0 to 3 kPa, the maximum duration of 
continuous measurements is 60 seconds, the measurement 
error is 0.0015 kPa. 
Figure 2 shows the alteration of the mean square 
deviation of pressure drop in a bed with increasing the flow 
rate of blasting air.  
As is well known [12][13][14][15], a sharp drop in the 
values of mean square deviation of pressure drop pulsation in 
a bed is typical to the transition of a bed into the turbulent 
fluidization regime. Hence, for our case (combustion of 
pellets in a bed of solid combustion products) a bed transits 
into a state of turbulent fluidization at air flow rate, divided 
by the cross sectional area of the empty furnace, of 2.0 – 2.5 
m/s. 
In the experiments, a bed is in a fixed state most of the 
time (flow rate of inlet blasting air in the furnace is 1.0 – 1.2 
m/s), and then, as a result of increasing the current 
frequency, energizing the drive of a blow fan, a bed is 
abruptly transferred into turbulent fluidization (flow rate of 
blasting air is 2.0 – 2.5 m/s), and then a bed is again 
transferred into a fixed state. In the course of the 
experiments, we continuously measure the content of carbon 
monoxide, nitrogen oxide, carbon dioxide in flue gases, 
using the gas-analyzer VarioPlus; and we measure the 
content of sulfur oxides during the combustion of combined 
coal waste and straw pellets. The gas-analyzer VarioPlus 
provides the following accuracy: 0.2% for oxygen 
concentration, 0.02% for CO concentration measure, 
± 5 ppm NO concentration measure. 
The analysis of changes in the concentrations of the 
above mentioned substances in flue gases during the 
experiment allows us to evaluate whether the conditions for 
efficient combustion in furnace remain, and whether the 
formation of a significant degree of ash and slag 
agglomerates, preventing the normal combustion, does not 
occur. It is known, that the concentration of oxygen and 
carbon monoxide dramatically increases in flue gases and the 
concentration of carbon dioxide decreases during the 
formation of slag agglomerates and the cessation of normal 
combustion [4].  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
a) straw pellets 
 
 
 
 
 
b) straw tor-pellets 
 
c) coal waste and straw pellets  
 
 
d) coal waste and straw tor-pellets 
Figure 3. Changes in concentration of oxygen in flue gases from combustion of different pellets. 
 
a) straw pellets 
 
 
 
 
 
b) straw tor-pellets 
 
c) coal waste and straw pellets  
 
 
d) coal waste and straw tor-pellets 
Figure 4. Changes in concentration of carbon monoxide in flue gases from combustion of different pellets. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 3 shows the curves of changes in the 
concentration of oxygen in flue gases during the combustion 
of straw pellets (a) and straw tor-pellets (b), combined coal 
waste and straw pellets (c) and combined coal waste and 
straw tor-pellets (d). 
As Figure 3 shows, the combustion of all types of fuel at 
a periodic transfer of a bed from a fixed state into a turbulent 
fluidized state is stable, and the combustion process does not 
cease. The peaks of oxygen concentration are observed only 
after increasing the flow of air (after increasing the current 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
a) straw pellets 
 
 
 
 
 
b) straw tor-pellets 
 
c) coal waste and straw pellets  
 
 
d) coal waste and straw tor-pellets 
Figure 5. Changes in concentration of nitrogen oxides in flue gases from combustion of different pellets (symbols are identical with the previous figures). 
frequency, energizing the drive of a blow fan). Therefore, 
ash and slag agglomerates are not formed in the furnace or 
their formation does not prevent the normal combustion (this 
may be in case of formation of brittle porous agglomerates, 
through which air can freely flow to the fuel). 
The lowest oxygen concentration fluctuations occur in 
flue gases from the combustion of combined coal waste and 
straw tor-pellets. Such pellets have a minimum yield of 
volatile matters, and may be combusted in a bed in an 
arranged way. 
We observe the lowest concentration of carbon monoxide 
in flue gases from the combustion of combined coal waste 
and straw pellets and especially from the combustion of coal-
straw tor-pellets (Figure 4 c, d). This can be explained by a 
low content of volatile matters in these pellets. During the 
combustion of these pellets, sharp carbon monoxide 
emissions are observed only with increasing the flow rate of 
blasting air at the moment when the bed is transferred into 
the turbulent fluidization regime. 
As for straw pellets, torrefaction of pellets practically 
does not influence the emissions of carbon monoxide; it 
evidently can be explained by the slight reduction in the 
yield of volatile matters (about 13%) as a result of such 
processing.  
As a result of torrefaction the nitrogen content of pellets 
does not practically change and remains equal to 0.14 – 
0.15% for straw pellets and 1.12 – 1.14% for combined coal 
waste and straw pellets. Therefore, the emission of nitrogen 
oxides from the combustion of all the types of pellets (Figure 
5) is approximately the same (the emission of nitrogen 
oxides during the combustion of coal-straw pellets is higher). 
So, the following question is obvious: why the emission 
of nitrogen oxides is about the same during the combustion 
of coal-straw pellets, which contain about 8 times more 
nitrogen than straw pellets, as during the combustion of 
straw pellets? In our opinion, there is a partial reduction of 
nitrogen oxides to molecular nitrogen by carbon of fuel when 
the flue gases flow passes through it. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
1) 
The suggested technology of combusting fuel with 
low melting temperature of ash (combustion in a fixed bed 
with a periodic transfer of a bed into the turbulent 
fluidization regime) ensures prolonged steady combustion of 
fuel with moderate carbon monoxide emissions. 
2) 
Combined coal waste and straw pellets combust 
more stable with less carbon monoxide emissions than straw 
pellets. 
3) 
Preliminary torrefaction does not influence the 
stability of combustion, but allows reducing carbon 
monoxide emissions from the combustion of combined coal 
waste and straw pellets. 
4) 
Production of coal-straw pellets can apparently be 
considered as a new variant of the organization of coal and 
biomass co-combustion, which in the case of pellets 
torrefaction allows producing water-resistant fuel suitable for 
use not only in electric power stations, but also in small 
boiler-houses. 
5) 
The results of the study can be used for the boilers 
with any power, equipped with furnaces with a fluidized bed. 
In this case, the furnace of a real boiler can be considered as 
consisting of several furnaces with the inner diameter of 300 
mm (the furnace with such a diameter is used in this study). 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is financially supported by the Ministry of 
Education 
and 
Science 
of 
the 
Russian 
Federation 
(Agreement № 14.577.21.0116).  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Gilbe, M. Othman, E. Lindstrom, D. Bostrom, R. Backman, R. 
Samuelsson, and J. Burvail, “Slagging characteristics during 
residential combustion of biomass pellets,” Energy and Fuel, 2008, 
vol. 22, pp. 3536-3543. 
[2] M. Rőnnbäck, M. Johansson, and F. Claesson, “Combustion test in 
residential burners of pellets from new ash rich biomass,” Proceeding 
on European Pellets Conferences, Wels, Austria 2009. 
[3] S. Kiesewalter and C. Rőhricht “Pelleting of straw and hay,”  
Proceeding on European Pellets Conferences, Wels, Austria, 2004, 
pp. 283-296. 
[4] F. Scala and R. Chirone, “Characterization and early detection of bed 
agglomeration during the fluidized bed combustion of olive husk,” 
Energy & Fuel, 2006, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 120-132. 
[5] W. Lin, K. Dam-Johansen, and F. Frandsen, “Agglomeration in bio-
fuel fired fluidized combustors,” Chemical Engineering Journal, 
2003, vol. 96, pp. 171-185. 
[6] B. Vesna, C. Z. Edgardo, and S. Juha, “Prediction of agglomeration, 
fouling, and corrosion tendency of fuels in CFB co-combustion,” 20th 
International conference on fluidized bed combustion., 2009, pp. 416-
421. 
[7] B. D. Grubor, S. N. Oka, M. S. Ili, D. V. Daki, and B. T. Arsi, 
“Biomass FBC combustion – bed agglomeration problems,” K. J. 
Heinschel (Ed.), Proceeding of the 13th International Conference on 
FBC, vol. 1, 1995, pp. 515-522. 
[8] A. Khor, C. Ryu, Y.-B. Yang, V. N. Sharifi, and J. Swithenbank, 
“Straw combustion in a fixed bed combustor,” Fuel, 2007, vol. 86, 
152-160. 
[9] S. C. Bhattacharya, N. Shah, and Z. Alikhani, “Some aspects of 
fluidized bed combustion of paddy husk,” Applied Energy, 1984, 16, 
pp. 307-316. 
[10] P. Basu and D. Subbarao, “An experimental investigation of burning 
rate and mass transfer in a turbulent fluidized bed,” Combustion and 
Flame, 1986, 66, pp. 261-269. 
[11] D. Virysov, R. Isemin, S. Kuzmin, N. Kondukov, and A. Mikhalev, 
“Determination of the fluidization regimes of bicomponent beds of 
solid particles and the characteristic velocities of a gas in these beds 
by the pulsations of the differential pressure in them,” Journal of 
Engineering Physics and Thermophysics, 2013, vol. 80,  2, pp. 308-
315. 
[12] H. T. Bi,  N. Ellis, I. A. Abba, and J. R. Grace, “A state-of-the-art 
review of gas-solid turbulent fluidization,” Chemical Engineering 
Science, 2000, 55, pp. 4789-4825. 
[13] J. Yerushalmi and N. T. Cankurt, “Further studies of the regimes of 
fluidization,” Powder Technology, 1979, 24, pp. 187-205. 
[14] G. Lee and S. D. Kim, “Pressure fluctuations in turbulent fluidized 
beds,” Journal of Chemical Engineering of Japan, 1988, 21, pp. 515-
521. 
[15] M. Rhodes, “What is Turbulent Fluidization,” Powder Technology, 
1996, 88, pp. 3-14. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

Plant Diversity in the Area of Water Bodies near Kraków  
Focus on Invasive Plants 
 
Aleksandra Wagner 
Dept. Geoinf., Photogrammetry & Remote Sensing of Env. 
AGH University of Science and Technology 
Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: awagner@agh.edu.pl 
Dario Hruševar 
Department of Botany and the Botanical Garden 
University of Zagreb 
Zagreb, Croatia 
e-mail: dario.hrusevar@biol.pmf.hr
 
Abstract— Thirteen locations were examined referring to the 
vegetation and alien species in particular. The locations were 
the areas surrounding anthropogenic water bodies in Kraków 
and vicinity. Most of them were borrow pits left to the process 
of natural succession. In all the locations alien species, 
including neophytes were found. There were 22 neophyte 
species found in total, six of them invasive transformers. The 
most 
common 
was 
the 
Canada 
golden-rod 
(Solidago 
canadensis) found in eight locations. Erigeron annuus was 
found in 7 locations. Bidens frondosa and Conyza canadensis 
were found in 6 locations. Most neophytes were of North 
American origin. 16 archaeophytes were found. Four species 
had uncertain status. In urban areas, the presence of alien 
species does not make much problem, however in rural areas 
the monitoring is recommended.   
Keywords - alien species; invasive species; suburban areas. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Water bodies (natural or artificial) and their vicinity 
make good environment for different plant and animal 
species. They attract both native and non-native species. In 
this paper, water bodies situated in Kraków and vicinity 
were studied. The region is not very rich in natural lakes, 
but includes a lot of artificial water bodies of various origin 
[1]: borrow pits of different size, made after the exploitation 
of limestone, gravel, sand or clay, fishing ponds, former 
decantation ponds, etc. In the process of natural ecological 
succession and sometimes due to human-made reclamation 
measures, these ponds get covered with vegetation and 
become inhabited by animal species [2]. Finally, they form 
semi-natural environment and can contribute to biodiversity 
of the region. The objective of the study is to examine the 
vegetation of selected water bodies in terms of the presence 
of non-native species. Non-native species can be divided 
into 
two 
groups: 
archaeophytes 
and 
neophytes. 
Archaeophytes are plants which arrived in the area in pre-
historic or early historic times and neophytes were 
introduced in modern times and the usual border date is 
accepted as ca. 1500 – the discovery of the Americas [3]. 
Most archaeophytes in Europe arrived with the agriculture, 
as weeds growing in the fields and nowadays they make an 
integral part of the flora, although can also be invasive. 
Neophytes, however, are usually regarded more dangerous 
to biodiversity.  
 
Crossbreeds between native and non-native plants are 
regarded non-native and if one of the parental species is 
neophyte, they are regarded neophytes [3].  Apart from the 
origin, the degree of naturalization in the environment is 
important; Pyšek et al. [3] distinguish casual species - alien 
species that do not form self-sustaining populations and 
naturalized species (synonym: established species) that form 
self-sustaining populations for several life cycles, as well as 
invasive species - a subset of naturalized species forming 
self-replacing populations, having the potential to spread 
over long distances. Tokarska-Guzik et al., after Richardson 
et al. [5] also differentiated the category of transformers (a 
subset of invasive plants) for the species which change the 
character of the ecosystems.  
 
Section II gives the list of locations with a short 
description of every place and studying methods. The 
localities are also shown in the map – Figure 1. In section III 
the results are given, putting particular stress on alien 
species, presented in Table 1. The vegetation of each site 
was described in a separate sub-chapter. Chapter IV 
provides the conclusions and recommendations for further 
studies.  
II. 
STUDY AREA AND METHODS 
 
The study includes the vegetation in the areas of the 
water bodies in Kraków and vicinity in summer 2009 (in the 
case of Bagry and Zakrzówek also 2008). The studied areas 
are named below. More detail characteristics of the water 
bodies and their surrounding can be found in [2] [6] [7] [8]. 
The geographic distribution of the sites is presented in 
Figure 1. The area included: 
1. Two borrow pits bodies situated south-east from the 
centre of Kraków in the area called Płaszów. The area 
of the bigger pond, called Bagry is 30.1 ha and the 
smaller one – called Staw Płaszowski (the Płaszów 
Pond) - is 9.0 ha. The ponds were formed after the 
exploitation of sand and gravel in 1930s. In Table 1., 
they are marked as BG and SP, respectively. The 
surrounding of SP is shown in figure 2. 
2. Staw Dąbski (the Dąbie Pond, marked as D), 2.1 ha, 
situated in Kraków, east from the centre, was formed in 
1930s after the exploitation of clay. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

3. Zakrzówek (marked ZK) - a borrow pit south-west from 
the centre of Kraków of 17.0 ha surface, was made in 
1990s, after quarrying limestone.  
4. The Pond of the Kaczeńcowa Street (KA) was, by the 
Resolution no. XXXI/405/07 of the City Council of 
Kraków, established Ecologically Useful Area – the 
area is 0.82 ha [9]. The pond is situated in the quarter of 
Nowa Huta in Kraków. The pond was formed as a 
result of clay exploitation. 
5. Former decantation pond of the Steelworks in Nowa 
Huta in the region called Kujawy (marked KU) has the 
area of 2.9 ha. 
6. Przylasek Rusiecki (PR) – a group of 11 gravel borrow 
pits of the total area of 82.19 ha, situated in the Eastern 
part of Kraków, quarter Nowa Huta. 
7. Borrow pits in Wola Batorska (WB) – the gravel 
quarrying is still going on, so the area is changing. 
8. Two borrow pits (exploitation of gravel) of Zabierzów 
Bocheński (ZB), commune of Niepołomice area of 
13.03 ha and 3.43 ha, respectively. 
9. The fish pond in Zakrzowiec (ZC) - area c.a. 2.5 ha, 
used for commercial angling. 
10. Two ponds in the town of Niepołomice - Mokra street 
(0.7 ha) and Akacjowa street (0.3 ha), marked as MK 
and A, respectively. 
11. Two borrow pits in the Commune of Liszki called 
Zalew na Piaskach and Budzyń, formerly known as 
‘Kryspinów’ - area 24.5 ha and 20.3 ha, respectively, 
marked as ZP. 
In each location, plots of the area of 16 m2 were randomly 
chosen and the plants were identified to the species or – if 
not possible – to the genus. The plants were listed and 
identified as native, archaeophytes or neophytes, invasive or 
not invasive, harmful or not harmful. To identify the species 
and define their status literature data from Poland [4] [10] 
[11] and other countries of Central Europe [3] [12] [13] [14] 
were used. 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
The original data listing each species are available from 
the authors. In this paper, the results focus on alien species. 
Native species were mentioned, if predominant. Table 1. 
presents only non-native species or species of uncertain 
status. The list includes 22 neophyte species; six of them 
regarded invasive transformers. The most common of them 
were: Solidago canadensis L., found in 8 locations, and 
another invasive (although not harmful) plant – Erigeron 
annuus (L.) Pers. - found in 7 locations. Bidens frondosa L. 
and Conyza canadensis (L.) Cronquist were found on 6 
locations. 
Most 
neophyte 
species, 
however, 
were 
represented only in one location. This particularly refers to 
casual species. These were mainly tree species, mostly 
located in the area of the Mokra Street. This was a 
residential area and some ‘exotic’ trees were planted there. 
Nevertheless, casual species were also found in less human-
influenced place, such as Zakrzówek. Archaeophytes were 
represented by 17 species. Four species have uncertain 
status: one can be archaeophyte or neophyte depending on 
subspecies, which was not determined and the origin of 
three species is still debatable. The most widespread 
archaeophyte species occurred in 3 locations, which 
suggests that their ecological niches were narrower than in 
case of neophytes. On the other hand (data available from 
the authors), non-native species rarely covered more than 
25% of the surface, while native species (like Phragmites 
australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud. or Typha spp.) could cover 
up to 95%. 
 
The number of alien species in each location ranged 
from 1 or 2 in Zalew na Piaskach to 11 in the Mokra street 
in Niepołomice. Nevertheless in the Mokra Street planted 
trees distort the real picture. Considering this, the highest 
number of non-native species would be in Zakrzowiec (10). 
The detail characteristic of the studied sites looks as 
follows: 
A. Bagry 
 
The studies in Bagry were carried out on 2/07/2008 by 
Samalzhan Tleubayeva and Aleksandra Wagner in two 
locations: (1) – north-western shore of the water body and 
(2) – northern shore of the water body. Every location 
included coastal plant like Juncus effuses L., Phragmites 
australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud and Schoenoplectus lacustris 
(L.) Palla. In place (1) there was one alien species noticed - 
Phalaris canariensis L., a neophyte coming from southern 
Europe. This was the only alien species among 7 species 
scored in that place. The 2008 survey in place (2) did not 
show any alien species, however more detail survey of  
3/08/2009 by Dario Hruševar, Aleksandra Wagner, Uroš 
Ljubobratović, and Barbara Patuła showed 7 out of 31 alien 
species, among which 3 (9.7%) were archaeophytes: 
Melilotus albus Med., Melilotus officinalis (L.) Lam and 
Pastinaca sativa L. The latter was considered native for a 
long time, but recent studies shown it was alien. Neophytes 
were represented by two (6.5%) species: Acer negundo L. 
and Robinia pseudoacacia L., both of them classified as 
invasive transformers. The encountered individuals (one of 
each species) were young and belonged to the undergrowth. 
The dominant plant was native: Calamagrostis epigeios (L.) 
Roth. 
B. Staw Płaszowski (the Płaszów Pond) 
 
In the western part the studies were carried out on 
2/07/2008 by S. Tleubayeva and A. Wagner. Eleven species 
were found, among them two neophytes, none of them 
invasive: Oenothera biennis L. and one of North American 
ash trees, probably Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall, rarely 
encountered in natural environment in Poland. The study of 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

20/08/2009 by D. Hruševar and A. Wagner in the eastern 
side of the pond showed 22 species, among which the 
dominant was Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steud. 
There were four (18.2%) neophytes: Solidago gigantea 
Aiton, Solidago canadensis L., Bidens frondosa L., Acer 
negundo L. – all of them invasive transformers. There was 
also a feral cultivar - Humulus lupulus L. Apart from the 
plot, yet another neophyte was found: Conyza canadensis 
(L.) Cronquist, according to [11] the most common alien 
species in Poland. The site is shown in figure 2.  
C. Staw Dąbski (the Dąbie Pond) 
 
The survey of 07/08/2009 by D. Hruševar, U. 
Ljubobratović and A. Wagner showed 12 species in the plot 
in the eastern part of the pond. Significantly dominant was 
Typha angustifolia L. There was only one alien species: 
Bidens frondosa L. In other parts around the pond 32 more 
species were observed, including Nuphar lutea L. – a native 
species protected by the Polish law – the only place in the 
city of Kraków where it occurs naturally. There were also 
three invasive neophyte plants:  Acer negundo L., Solidago 
canadensis L. and Erigeron annuus (L). Pers. The first two 
are regarded transformer species and the latter is regarded 
harmless. 
D. Zakrzówek 
 
Two surveys were carried out in Zakrzówek – on 
18/06/2008 by Samalzhan Tleubayeva, Aleksandra Wagner 
and Robert Mazur – on the hill in the eastern part of the area 
and on 13/08/2009, by D. Hruševar, U. Ljubobratović and 
A. Wagner – in the place slightly further from the previous 
one. In the first place 17 species were observed, including 
one archeophyte Echium vulgare L. and one neophyte 
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Marshall,  usually occurring only as 
a cultivated plant. In the second place 23 species were 
present. Among them three alien species: Lathyrus 
tuberosus L. – an invasive, but not harmful archaeotype and 
Juglans regia L. – a cultivated tree (originating from 
Caucasus and Central Asia) and now expanding into natural 
and semi-natural habitats. Another invasive neophyte found 
there was Solidago canadensis L., classified as a 
transformer, although it was not numerous in that place. 
E. The Pond of the Kaczeńcowa Street 
 
Around the water body, 24 species were found, three of 
them neophyte invasive transformers - North American: Bidens 
frondosa L. and Solidago canadensis L. and Asian - Impatiens 
parviflora DC. The study was carried out on 19/08/2009 by D. 
Hruševar and A. Wagner 
F. Former decantation pond of Kujawy 
 
The survey, carried out on 19/08/2009 by D. Hruševar and 
A. Wagner, showed 15 species, where Calamagrostis epigejos 
(L.) Roth. was dominating. One of them was archaeophyte: 
Melilotus albus Medik and two invasive neophytes: Conyza 
canadensis (L.) Cronquist and Solidago canadensis L. Outside 
the plot, one more neophyte species - Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers. 
was observed as well as 8 native species, including Centaurium 
erythraea Rafn, protected by the Polish law.  
G. Przylasek Rusiecki 
 
The survey carried out on 25/07/2009 by D. Hruševar, 
U. Ljubobratović and A. Wagner in two places near the only 
pond available for bathing: in the eastern part of the shore, 
near the beach and in the northern part – a popular place for 
angling. In the first place 39 species were found and the 
ones occurring in the biggest quantities were Achilea 
millefolium L. and Melilotus albus Medik. The latter is 
archaeophyte and both are characteristic for pastures. In 
fact, the habitats in Przylasek Rusiecki are typically rural 
despite the fact of being situated in the administrative 
borders of the city of Kraków. Another archaeotype was 
Humulus lupulus L. Neophytes were represented by 3 
species: Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers., Bidens frondosa  L. and 
Solidago canadensis L. In the second place the most 
common species was Euphorbia virgata Waldst. et Kit. This 
plant has an uncertain status in the Polish flora. There were 
an archaeopophyte species - Melilotus albus Medik.  Apart 
from the neophyte plants known from the previous place: 
Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers. and Solidago canadensis L., four 
more species: Medicago sativa L., Conyza canadensis (L.) 
Cronquist, Oenothera biennis L. and a tree species: Populus 
× euramericana (Dode) Guinier ex Piccarolo were found.  
H. Wola Batorska 
 
The survey was carried out on 19/08/2009 by D. 
Hruševar and A. Wagner near the ponds in the eastern part 
of the complex of the water bodies. Place (1) was near the 
bigger pond and place (2) near the smaller pond. In place 1 
36 species were found, among them 7 of alien origin: 
archaeophytes: Matricaria perforata Merat., Capsella 
bursa-pastoris (L.) Medik. and Lactuca serriola L., all of 
them invasive, but usually not harmful. Panicum miliaceum 
L. was also found. The subspecies was not defined, which in 
this case, does not allow stating in the plant was 
archaeophyte or neophyte, but it is invasive. Other alien 
species included Phalaris canariensis L., Acer negundo L. 
and Bidens frondosa L. In place (2) twelve species were 
found, including one archaeophyte: Echinochloa crus-galli 
(L.) P.Beauv. and one neophyte: Conyza canadensis (L.) 
Cronquist. In the area outside the plots one more neophyte 
was found: Picea pungens Engelm. The specimen found 
was in a very poor shape. Probably it was deliberately 
planted. 
I. Zabierzów Bocheński 
 
On 10/08/2009 D. Hruševar, U. Ljubobratović and A. 
Wagner surveyed two plots in the area: (1) in the central 
part of the complex – near the beach and (2) in the southern 
part of the area.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
In place (1) 34 species were found, where Bolboschoenus 
maritimus (L.) in the part near water and Trifolium repens L. – 
further from the shore were predominant. There was only one 
neophyte: Bidens frondosa L. and one of uncertain status Cirsium 
vulgare (Savi) Ten.  In site (2) there were 39 species recorded 
and only one - Solidago canadensis L. was neophyte. There were 
also Rumex crispus L. – a plant of an uncertain status and Prunus 
cerasus L. – a cultivated species, in that site occurring as feral. In 
the water a protected by the Polish law species was found - 
Salvinia natans (L.) All. 
J.  Zakrzowiec 
 
The survey was carried out on 17.08.2009 by D. Hruševar 
and A. Wagner in two sites. Site (1) was close to the pond and 
site (2) was in the place of the pond that was dried out a few 
years before the survey. In the site (1) 37 plant species were 
found. The dominant species was Phragmites australis (Cav.) 
Trin. ex Steud, covering more than 75% of surface. There were 
only two neophytes: Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers. and Conyza 
canadiensis (L.) Cronquist and one archaeophyte: Lactuca 
serriola L. In place (2) 24 species were found. The dominant one 
was an archaeophyte Echinochloa crus-galli (L) P.Beauv. Other 
archaeophytes included Setaria pumila (Poir.) Schult. and 
Matricaria perforata Merat. There was also Cirsium vulgare 
(Savi) Ten., an invasive plant of uncertain status. Neophytes 
included Bidens frondosa L., Conyza canadiensis (L.) Cronquist 
and Erigeron annnus (L.) Pers. 
K. The Mokra Street – Niepołomice 
 
The survey was carried out by D. Hruševar and A. 
Wagner on 17/08/2009. There were 31 plants found in the 
plot near the pond. Archaeophytes included: Pastinaca 
sativa L. and Setaria pumila (Poir.) Schult. Neophytes were: 
Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers., Conyza canadensis (L.) 
Cronquist and Veronica persica Poir. The presence of privet 
Ligustrum vulgare L. could be of anthropogenic or natural 
origin, but anthropogenic origin was more likely. The water 
body was in the residential area and many non-native 
species were planted: Picea pungens Engelm., Liriodendron 
tulipifera L., Catalpa bignonioides Walter, Pinus nigra 
Arnold, Abies concolor (Gordon) Lindl. ex Hildebr. and 
Thuja spp. 
L. The Akacjowa Street – Niepołomice 
 
Around the water body 40 plant species were recorded 
on 17/08/2009 by D. Hruševar and A. Wagner. There were 
two archaeophytes: Lactuca serriola L. and Echinochloa 
crus-galli (L.) P. Beauv., as well as three neophytes in the 
area: the bur marigold Bidens frondosa L., black locust 
Robinia pseudoacacia L. and horseradish Armoracia 
rusticana G. Gaertn., B. Mey. & Scherb. The latter is a 
cultivated plant, invasive, but not harmful.  
 
 
M. Zalew na Piaskach 
 
The place selected for the survey on 31/07/2009 (by D. 
Hruševar, U. Ljubobratović and A. Wagner) was in the area 
where the pond was shallower and overgrown by 
macrophytes such as Typha latifolia L. There were 40 
vascular species and a moss – Sphagnum. There was one 
neophyte there: Erigeron annuus (L.) Pers. 
 
The study showed the presence of alien plants, 
including neophytes in each location. Many of them are 
invasive, although only in few localities they were dominant 
or even made a significant proportion in the land cover. The 
most commonly found species (in terms of the number of 
locations) - Solidago canadensis - never covered more than 
25% and often less than 5%. This can confirm an interesting 
study done by Orczewska [15] suggesting that some native 
species (such as Urtica dioica L. and Galium aparine L.) 
can be more dangerous for the habitat than neophytes (such 
as Solidago gigantean Aiton). 
 
The study also confirms the data suggesting higher 
presence of non-native plants in human-influenced areas [4] 
[14]. The lowest number was scored in Zabierzów 
Bocheński and Zalew na Piskach, places relatively distant 
from residential areas. On the other hand the presence of 
non-native species in the areas with already strong human 
influence is not so harmful. The real danger for biodiversity 
is the presence of invasive plants in protected areas. The 
eastern part of the study area is situated near the 
Niepołomice Forest, a place with some amount of strictly 
protected areas. Fortunately in a nearby place like 
Zabierzów Bocheński the influence of invasive species is 
small (two species of Solidago), nevertheless cannot be 
neglected. 
 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
Although alien species occurred in every location in the 
study area, they never dominated. Among the alien species 
particular attention should be paid on invasive transformer 
species: the ash-leaved maple (Acer negundo), black locust 
(Robinia pseudoacacia), Canadian golden rod (Solidago 
canadensis), giant goldenrod (Solidago gigantea), bur 
marigold (Bidens frondosa) and small-flowered touch-me-
not (Impatiens parviflora). The Canadian golden rod was 
the most common of them. 
In the residential areas many alien tree species are 
grown. Apart from two species (the ash-leaved maple and 
black locust) they are not invasive and most of them can 
only sporadically found in the wild. 
 Further monitoring of invasive plant species is 
necessary, also because of the perspective of climatic 
changes. Warming the climate will provide better conditions 
for the reproduction of southern species so that they could 
become invasive. The example can be the common walnut 
(Juglans regia), which was found in one location, but, 
according to literature [11] this species is in the initial phase 
of invasion, so it is likely to extend its range. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

Tab. 1. NON-NATIVE (OR SUSPECTED TO BE NON-
NATIVE) PLANTS OF IN THE AREA OF WATER BODIES 
NEAR KRAKÓW 
N – neophyte, A – archaeophyte 
 
BG 
SP 
D 
ZK 
KA 
KU 
PR 
WB 
ZB 
ZC 
MK 
A 
ZP 
 
Acer negundo 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Robinia 
pseudoacacia 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Juglans regia 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, cultivated, in the first 
phase of invasion 
Populus x 
euroamericana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, not invasive 
Pinus nigra 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, not invasive 
Picea pungens 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Abies concolor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Thuja sp. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Liriodendron 
tulipifera 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Catalpa 
bignonioides 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, casual 
Fraxinus 
pennsylvanica 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, casual 
Solidago 
canadensis 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Solidago gigantea 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Bidens frondosa 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
+ 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Impatiens 
parviflora 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, transformer 
Conyza canadensis 
 
+ 
 
 
 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
+ 
+ 
 
 
N, invasive, weed 
Veronica persica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
N, invasive, weed 
Phalaris 
canariensis 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
N  
Armoracia 
rusticana 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
N, invasive, not harmful 
Medicago sativa 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N, invasive, not harmful 
Erigeron annuus 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
+ 
+ 
 
 
+ 
+ 
 
+ 
N, invasive, not harmful 
Oenothera biennis 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
N, not invasive 
Panicum 
miliaceum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
A or N, depending on 
subspecies 
Echinochloa crus-
galli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
A, invasive, weed 
Setaria viridis 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
A, invasive, weed 
Setaria pumila 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
+ 
 
 
A, invasive, weed 
Cichorium intybus 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A, invasive, not harmful 
Marticaria 
perforata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
 
 
A, invasive, weed 
Lactuca serriola 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
A, invasive, not harmful 
Capsella bursa-
pastoris 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
A, invasive, not harmful 
Papaver rhoeas 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A, invasive, not harmful 
Senecio vulgaris 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
Melilotus albus 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Melilotus 
officinalis 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Pastinaca sativa 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Humulus lupulus 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Echium vulgare 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  
Lathyrus tuberosus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
Odontites verna 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
Cirsium vulgare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
+ 
+ 
 
 
 
Uncertain status, 
invasive, not harmful 
Euphorbia virgata 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uncertain status, not 
invasive 
Rumex crispus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ 
Uncertain status 
 
BG 
SP 
D 
ZK 
KA 
KU 
PR 
WB 
ZB 
ZC 
MK 
A 
ZP 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The paper was financed by the grant of the 
AGH–UST (Badania Statutowe) 11.11.150.949/15. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Król-Korczak [Management of borrow pits for the 
purpose of water recreation in the Kraków 
agglomeration] “Zagospodarowanie odkrywkowych 
wyrobisk poeksploatacyjnych na cele rekreacji 
wodnej w aglomeracji krakowskiej.” Górnictwo 
Odkrywkowe  [Open cast minining] 46, 7/8, 2004, 
pp. 88 – 93. 
[2] A. Wagner, D. Hruševar and U. Ljubobratović: [An 
attempt to evaluate the water bodies in selected rural 
regions in the vicinity of Kraków (Poland)] “Próba 
waloryzacji zbiorników wodnych w wybranych 
rejonach 
wiejskich 
w 
sąsiedztwie 
Krakowa” 
Współczesne 
problemy 
gospodarki 
wodnej 
i 
kształtowania 
środowiska 
obszarów 
wiejskich 
[Current problems of water management and rural 
environment 
development] 
PAN. 
WNBiR, 
Uniwersytet Rolniczy im. H. Kołłątaja w Krakowie. 
WIŚG. KMiKŚ. Warszawa: PAN WNBiR. Zeszyty 
Problemowe Postępów Nauk Rolniczych; z. 561,  
2011, pp. 195–205. 
[3] P. Pyšek et al. “Catalogue of alien plants of the 
Czech Republic (2nd edition): checklist update, 
taxonomic diversity and invasion patterns.” Preslia 
84, 2012, pp. 155–255. 
[4] B. Tokarska-Guzik, B. Węgrzynek, A. Urbisz, A. 
Urbisz, T. Nowak and K. Bzdęga “Alien vascular 
plants in the Silesian Upland of Poland: distribution, 
patterns, impacts and threats” Biodiv. Res. Conserv. 
19, 2010, pp. 33-54. 
[5] D. M. Richardson, P. Pyšek, M. Rejmánek,  M. G. 
Barbour, 
F. 
D. 
Panetta 
and 
C. 
J. 
West 
“Naturalization and invasion of alien plants: 
concepts and definitions.” Diversity Distrib. 6, 2000, 
pp. 93-107.  
[6] A. Wagner [Possibilities of using selected small and 
medium size water ponds in the Cracow region for 
environmentally friendly recreation and ecotourism] 
“Możliwości wykorzystania wybranych małych 
zbiorników wodnych w okolicach Krakowa dla 
celów zrównoważonej ekologicznie rekreacji i 
ekoturystyki” Zeszyty Naukowe Akademii Rolniczej 
im. H. Kołłątaja w Krakowie. No. 393. Inżynieria 
Środowiska [Environental Engineering] vol. 23, 
2002, pp. 233–244.  
[7] A. Wagner and M. Orlewicz-Musiał [Recreational 
water bodies in Kraków over the history] “Zbiorniki 
rekreacyjne na terenie Krakowa na przestrzeni 
dziejów” In: [Cities come back towards water] 
Miasta wracają nad wodę  (ed. Marek Kosmala. 
Toruń : Polskie Zrzeszenie Inżynierów i Techników 
Sanitarnych [Polish Association of Engineers and 
Technicians], 2011, pp. 197–206. 
[8] A. Wagner and D. Hasanagić “Comparative analysis 
of selected water bodies in Cracow and vicinity in 
terms 
of 
their 
revitalization” 
Innowacyjne 
rozwiązania rewitalizacji terenów zdegradowanych 
[Innovative solutions of the revitalization of 
degraded areas] (ed. Jan Skowronek) Instytut 
Ekologii Terenów Uprzemysłowionych; Centrum 
Badań i Dozoru Górnictwa Podziemnego Sp. z o. o., 
2014, pp. 139–152. 
[9] [Resolution no. XXXI/405/07 of the City Council of 
Kraków of 19th December 2007 on Establishing the 
Ecologically Useful Area ‘The Pond of the 
Kaczeńcowa Street’] - Uchwała nr XXXI/405/07 
Rady Miasta Krakowa z dnia 19 grudnia 2007 r. w 
sprawie ustanowienia użytku ekologicznego „Staw 
przy Kaczeńcowej”. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.bip.krakow.pl/?dok_id=167&sub_dok_
id=167&sub=uchwala&query=id%3D17225%26am
p%3Btyp%3Du   2015.01.09. 
[10] B. Pawłowski (ed.): [Polish flora. Vascular plants of 
Poland and neighbouring countries] “Flora polska. 
Rośliny naczyniowe Polski i ziem ościennych.”. 
Vol. XI. Warszawa, Kraków: Polska Akademia 
Nauk, Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 371 pp., 
1967.  
[11] B. Tokarska-Guzik, Z. Dajdok, M. Zając, A. Zając, 
A. Urbisz and W. Danielewicz: [The Plants of the 
alien origin in Poland, focus on invasive species] 
“Rośliny 
obcego 
pochodzenia 
w 
Polsce 
ze 
szczególnym 
uwzględnieniem 
gatunków 
inwazyjnych.” 
Warszawa: 
Generalna 
Dyrekcja 
Ochrony Środowiska, 2012. 
[12] J. Medvecká et al. “Inventory of the alien flora of 
Slovakia.” Preslia 84, 2012, pp. 257–309. 
[13] T. Nikolica,  B. Mitić, B. Milašinovic and  S. D.  
Jelaska, “Invasive alien plants in Croatia as a threat 
to 
biodiversity 
of 
South-Eastern 
Europe: 
Distributional patterns and range size.” C. R. 
Biologies 336, 2013, pp. 109–121.  
[14] A. Alegro, S. Bogdanović, I. Rešetnik, I. Boršić, P. 
Cigić, T. Nikolić, “Flora of the seminatural 
marshland Savica, part of the (sub)urban flora of the 
city of Zagreb (Croatia)” Nat. Croat., Vol. 22, No. 1, 
2013, pp. 111–134. 
[15] A. Orczewska, “Kto groźniejszy: obcy czy swój? 
Negatywne oddziaływanie nawłoci późnej Solidago 
gigantea, pokrzywy zwyczajnej Urtica dioica i 
przytuli czepnej Galium aparine na gatunki runa 
leśnego 
we 
wtórnych 
lasach 
olszowych 
posadzonych na gruntach porolnych” [Who is more 
dangerous: the alien or the native? The negative 
impact of Solidago gigantea, Urtica dioica and 
Galium aparine on the herbaceous woodland species 
in recent post-agricultural alder woods]. Studia i 
Materiały CEPL w Rogowie. R. 14. Zeszyt 33, 4, 
2012,  pp.217-225.  
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
10 km 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The study area. 
 
 
 
  
Figure 2.  The example of vegetation – the area near the Płaszów Pond. On the right-hand side – Solidago sp. Photo by A. Wagner. 
 
Zalew na 
Piaskach 
Zakrzówek 
Staw 
Płaszowski 
Bagry 
Staw Dąbski 
Przylasek 
Rusiecki 
Wola Batorska 
Zabierzów 
Bocheński 
Zakrzowiec Mokra 
Akacjowa 
Kaczeńcowa 
Kujawy 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

Developing Environmental Responsibility Through Place-based Education 
Kevin O’Connor 
Department of Education 
Mount Royal University 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
e-mail: koconnor@mtroyal.ca 
Robert Sharp 
Yukon Department of Education 
Yukon Territorial Government 
Whitehorse, Yukon, Canada 
e-mail: bobsharp5@hotmail.com
 
 
Abstract— In response to the release of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Synthesis 
Report, Dr. John P. Holdren, Director of the U.S. White House 
Office of Science & Technology Policy stated “The IPCC’s new 
Synthesis Report is yet another wake-up call to the global 
community that we must act together swiftly and aggressively 
in order to stem climate change and avoid its worst impacts". 
Realizing this call to action will require the active participation 
of 
governments, 
industries 
and 
global 
populations. 
Unfortunately governments and industries often let short-term 
economic considerations govern their behaviors contrary to the 
efforts required to address long-term environmental and social 
issues associated with climate change. Communities, NGOs, 
families and schools often lead the way in the development of 
informed populations whose citizens are supported in their 
personal responsibility for social actions towards climate 
change.  Schools that follow place-based educational principles 
actively involve students in a range of community concerns 
with goals of informing and encouraging action in a wide 
variety 
of 
environmental 
and 
social 
issues. 
Research 
identifying long-term development of responsible citizenship is 
linked to place-based education.  This paper describes long-
term analysis of a program utilizing place-based science 
education and how these practices have effected the students’ 
perceptions of their social and environmental responsibilities 
as citizens. It then explores how these approaches have led to 
responsible citizenship in northern Canada. 
Keywords- Place-based Education; Social Responsibility; 
Environmental 
Stewardship; 
Critical 
Pedagogy; 
Active 
Citizenship. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, 
Biodiversity and Renewable Energies provides opportunities 
to address a wide range of topics relating humans and their 
interactions with the natural world. Most recently, the United 
Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC 
released the first of four chapters of its Fifth Assessment 
Report AR5 in November [1]. The report calls for a strong, 
concerted global effort to combat climate change.  This is 
seen as necessary to protect the health of our economies, 
communities, children and future [2]. Such a concerted 
global effort will require that populations are informed, 
critical and actively involved in a wide range of climate 
related issues. In North America, various governmental, 
industrial and economic forces have strenuously opposed 
such action out of concern that these efforts may negatively 
impact their own economic wellbeing. Canadian Prime 
Minister, Stephen Harper characterizes this ideology as he 
recently stated, “No matter what they say, no country is 
going to take actions that are going to deliberately destroy 
jobs and growth in their country. We (Canada) are just a little 
more frank about that”  [3]. Some governments and industry 
groups 
have 
undertaken 
aggressive, 
pervasive, 
and 
persuasive advertising programs in an attempt to assuage 
environmental concerns. A pro-development campaign 
within Canada has not gone unnoticed: “Responsible 
resource development, Canadians now accept, is something 
we cannot afford. The mantra of economic growth at any 
cost has made us willing participants in the rape that Harper 
and his corporate masters have enabled” [4]. Many resource 
development groups, along with political representatives, 
often distort and manipulate conditions so as make critical 
analysis undesirable and label those dissenters as ‘radical’ 
and ‘unpatriotic’.  A common narrative that has emerged in 
Canada is that citizens who express concerns about 
environmental conditions are often labeled ‘extremists’ [5]. 
Currently, numerous social media platforms consistently 
include rhetoric attempting to persuade Canadian citizens 
that pipelines, fracking and the Alberta tar sands bitumen 
development benefit the whole Canadian population through 
‘job creation’ and ‘national prosperity’, with little to no 
reference to the cost to environments, health and to the social 
fabric of communities. 
In the face of such public campaigns, it has become 
increasingly important to have an informed and critical 
citizenship prepared to embrace responsible environmental 
and social behaviors. Barr’s research on environmental and 
social responsibility shows that public relations campaigns 
and advertisements are not sufficient to develop this type of 
citizenship [6]. This type of critical citizenship finds its 
origins rooted in active involvement at the level of 
community.  Active citizens dynamically embrace the social 
responsibilities associated with environmental citizenship 
and see, as part of their civic roles, the necessity of becoming 
informed, maintaining critical perspectives and becoming 
actively involved in social, political and environmental 
issues [7].   The genesis’ of such citizenship rests in family, 
community and schooling that promotes responsible 
environmental behaviors. Hines et al. in their study on the 
analysis and synthesis of research on environmental behavior 
determined the following variables were found to be 
associated 
with 
responsible 
environmental 
behaviors: 
knowledge of issues; knowledge of action strategies; locus of 
control, attitudes; verbal commitments, and; an individuals 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

sense of responsibility [8].  A follow-up meta-analysis 
conducted by Bamberg and Möser twenty years later had 
similar findings. They found results that support “the 
conception of pro-environmental behavior as a mixture of 
self-interest and pro-social motives. … There is also progress 
in the understanding of factors/processes contributing to the 
development as well as activation of pro- environmental 
moral norms” [9, p. 22]. 
We posit that the conditions that give rise to responsible 
environmental and social behaviors are a major focus of 
place-based educational initiatives [10][11][12].  This paper 
explores the ways in which place-based initiatives may be 
incorporated in school instructional strategies.  These place-
based educational initiatives focus on the development of 
citizenship focusing on a critical knowledge of social, 
environmental and political issues and associated action 
strategies, locus of control, attitudes, verbal commitments 
and an individuals sense of responsibility within a 
community. 
This paper is structured as follows: in Section II, we 
define citizenship and posit that critical thinking is a central 
foundation. In Section III, we introduce the field of place-
based education. We proceed to describe two related 
longitudinal research projects (Section IV), and their 
methodologies (Section V), that examine the extent to which 
an experiential education initiative has fostered responsible 
citizenship through place-based activities. In Section VI, we 
discuss our findings, and finally, Section VII gives a 
summary of the main findings and highlights compelling 
evidence indicating that educational processes involving 
place-based activities that encourage data collection, 
refection and action are important antecedents to responsible 
citizenship. 
II. 
CRITICAL PEDAGOGY AND CITIZENSHIP 
Here, we use Glaser’s definition of citizenship: “Good 
citizenship calls for the ability to think critically about issues 
concerning which there may be a difference of opinion and 
apply democratic values to the issues. Critical thinking has 
three components: an attitude of carefully considering 
problems, knowledge of logical inquiry methods, and skill in 
applying those methods”. [13] 
 In the examination of the educational processes and 
social actions that lead to good citizenship, we posit that 
critical thinking is the central foundation [7][14][15].   
Learning to think critically is conceptualized as the 
acquisition of the competence to participate critically 
in the communities and social practices of which a 
person is a member. If education is to further the 
critical competence of students, it must provide them 
with the opportunity at the level of the classroom and 
the school to observe, imitate and practice critical 
agency and to reflect upon it. Learning contexts must 
be chosen which students can make sense of and in 
which they can develop a feeling of responsibility for 
the quality of the practice in question. [16, p. 359] 
A crucial condition to critical pedagogy is it needs a 
context to be relevant and therefore be sustainable [15][17].  
Community issues in which frame place-based learning 
provide the context for critical thinking, situational 
conditions, and for attributes such as locus of control.  Place-
based educational activities focus on environmental and 
social values, situational characteristics and psychological 
variables; as community action is open to a range of varying 
and competing interests [6]. 
III. 
PLACE-BASED EDUCATION 
Place-based education (PBE) provides the learning 
context.  PBE is an approach to teaching that is grounded in 
the context of community, both natural and social. It 
connects place with self and community. The field has 
emerged from the strong roots laid by thirty years of 
environmental education in North America [18][19]. PBE 
provides a purpose to the knowledge and reasoning taught in 
schools. It provides a contextual framework for much of the 
curriculum (i.e., gives meaning to the studies) and engages 
the student in the conditions of her/his own reality. Tyler 
examines an educator’s ability to influence the environment 
to promote learning: “It is desirable that the problems be set 
up in the kind of environment in which such problems 
usually arise in life. This is more likely to result in his 
viewing this as a real problem worth of his effort to solve” 
[20, p. 69]. 
A survey of the literature on PBE reveals characteristic 
patterns to this still-evolving approach that make it 
distinctive: 
• 
It emerges from the particular attributes of a place. 
The content is specific to the geography, ecology, 
sociology, politics, and other dynamics of that 
place. This fundamental characteristic establishes 
the foundation of the concept.  
• 
It is inherently multidisciplinary.  
• 
It is inherently experiential. In many programs this 
includes a participatory action or service-learning 
component; in fact, some advocates insist that 
action must be a component if ecological and 
cultural sustainability are to result.  
• 
It is reflective of an educational philosophy that is 
broader than ‘learn to earn’. Economics of place 
can be an area of study as a curriculum explores 
local industry and sustainability; however, all 
curricula and programs are designed for broader 
objectives.  
• 
It connects place with self and community. Because 
of the ecological lens through which place-based 
curricula are envisioned, these connections are 
pervasive. 
These 
curricula 
include 
multigenerational and multicultural dimensions as 
they interface with community resources.  [11] 
IV. 
RESEARCH  
We describe two related longitudinal research projects 
[21] that examine the extent to which an experiential 
education initiative has fostered responsible citizenship 
through place-based activities.  The research project follows 
students from ten to twenty years following their 
participation in an integrated secondary science program 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

focusing on place-based activities in which science data 
collection and peer-driven social, political and environmental 
actions are promoted. The Experiential Science Grade 11 
(ES11) program was created as a pilot in 1994 and is now in 
existence as a territorial education model. The ES11 program 
is a Yukon Territory public-school program of studies open 
to all Grade 11 students.  Students from a wide range of 
schools choose to take part in the program.  Students spend 
35-45 days of a 93-day semester conducting field studies 
related to community issues and strategically connected to 
integrated curriculum science-related studies. During a ten-
year study period, 357 students have participated in the 
program and three different educators have taught the ES11 
program. About two hundred place-based activities covering 
a wide variety of issues have been the focus of student 
learning over the decade of research. 
The ES11 program integrates Biology 11 (a survey 
course including studies related to population ecology), 
Geography 
12 
(studies 
of 
Atmospheric 
dynamics, 
geomorphology and resource utilization), Chemistry 11 
(introduction to quantitative chemistry), Art 11 (focused on 
scientific illustration and landscape), Field Methods 11 
(applied studies in environmental monitoring protocols) and 
Physical Education 11 (focused on physical well-being and 
outdoor education).  Students are engaged in two full-day 
labs a week (Chemistry and Biology), housed in the local 
post-secondary institution Yukon College.  Field studies 
expose students to a wide variety of ‘experts’ associated with 
a range of resource management issues. Rigorous field 
methods, reliable well-kept data and valid scientific 
methodology are the foundation of the program. The 
GLOBE program (Global Learning and Observations to 
Benefit the Environment) is an instrumental educational 
platform utilized to assist in engaging ES11 students in the 
field of experiential science. GLOBE is a worldwide hands-
on, school-based education program that was crafted to 
develop an awareness of one’s "Place" in the natural world. 
Through the use of environmental science related activities 
and an integration of traditional ecological knowledge, 
students develop an enlightened recognition of the proper 
relationship of self, community and global world. Students 
collect field data and analyze various aspects of 
environmental study issues before developing strategies to 
address and take action related to community concerns. 
During an ES11 semester, students take part in a wide 
variety of place-based activities, often in the company of 
scientists who have been working in a related field.  They 
take part in an intensive month-long trip that involves field 
studies and community activities conducted in a range of 
settings.  Most of the activities involve environmental 
monitoring and most are longitudinal in nature as they span 
over a period of years.  The community issues students 
address during their time in the ES11 program are typically 
characterized as PBE initiatives.  The ability to infuse an 
outdoor activity with related environmental field studies 
benefits the whole educational enterprise. The linking of 
environmental field studies with an outdoor pursuit gives 
both the study and the activity additional educational value 
and meaning. In addition, field studies reinforce both labs 
and lectures in specific subjects, addressing a traditional 
education problem: integrating theory and practice [22]. 
Courses such as geography, survey biology, quantitative 
chemistry, ecology and environmental studies are often 
integrated and lend themselves to field studies that link to a 
range of outdoor activities.  The field studies approach often 
takes on the mantel of PBE since many of the field studies 
are centered on responding to community concerns, studying 
and collecting data and proposing possible responses to the 
community-defined problem. Addressing ‘real’ topics and 
finding ways to apply the prescribed learning outcomes to 
these studies have proven to engage students in ways that 
secure knowledge and strengthen positive community 
attitudes. In this respect, including field studies with outdoor 
pursuits has been proven to be a successful educational 
approach [19][23][24]. 
V. 
METHODOLOGY  
This longitudinal mixed-methods research [25] examines 
the extent to which various educational strategies foster long-
term commitments to responsible citizenship.  The research 
followed two distinct yet related paths.  The first was a 
tracking of the post-secondary educational activities of the 
students who took part in the ES11 program. We were able 
to compile information related to students’ choices of post-
secondary institutions, program of studies, course results and 
employment. The preliminary results of an initial survey, 
combined with interviews and anecdotal discussions with 
many of the former students pointed to the value of early 
student involvement in place-based activities leading to 
social and environmental action and responsibility.  We 
conducted “a spiral of cycles” [26] in our research, thus the 
preliminary results allowed us to refine not only the 
questions, but also the research techniques for following 
surveys and interviews. This gave rise to the second stream 
of research designed to collect more detailed information 
about the choices and actions of this cohort of students and 
how their ES11 experience may have influenced their 
subsequent values and actions.  To this end, an intensive 
survey addressing many topics including questions related to 
their values and actions associated to active citizenship were 
distributed to students of this cohort.  At present both of 
these research projects are ongoing.  This paper reports on 
our preliminary findings. 
Many features of this research are possible because of the 
size and nature of the community.  The city of Whitehorse, 
in the Yukon Territory, Canada, is a relatively small isolated 
northern city.  Many students opt to carry on their post-
secondary education in different ‘southern’ universities and 
technology institutions. The Yukon Government offers 
students, who complete their secondary school (Grade 7-12) 
in the Yukon Territory, a Yukon Student Grant.  This grant 
provides each student $5500 each year over five years 
towards post-secondary education.  Students are required to 
maintain and report their academic standing to qualify for the 
ongoing grants.  Our research has been able to use these 
features to track and keep in touch with former ES11 
students. Based on the relatively small size of the Whitehorse 
community 
(approx. 
population 
20,000), 
personal, 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

community and educational relationships that develop during 
the program’s field studies and place-based activities give 
rise to frequent encounters with former students and /or their 
family in various environments.  These conditions result in 
opportunities to engage with students and collect valuable 
data.  Research information related to the students’ post-
secondary education gained during the formal and in-formal 
student interactions are recorded in a database of student 
post-secondary records. Records of students receiving the 
Yukon Student Grant are also used to contribute to this 
database.  To date, 150 of the 357 students have been added 
to the post-secondary database.  Of these, 37 out of 45 have 
submitted completed surveys.  The detailed survey takes 
more than an hour to complete. Some students have chosen 
to complete the survey through a personal face-to-face 
interview process. 
VI. 
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS 
A. Post-Secondary Educational Pathways 
The initial stage of research followed 150 former 
students. In a number of cases, the students followed more 
than one path.  Since the Yukon Student Grant program is 
provided within the registered five years, information 
following the five years has been obtained through 
interviews of students within the cohort.   
The previous tables tell only part of a ‘story’ related to 
the activities undertaken by this student cohort. In depth 
review of results show that 90% of the ES11 students 
tracked, to date, went to university.  Of these, the greatest 
number followed a science program. More than half of these 
pursued fields related to environmental studies.   
B. Citizenship Survey Results 
The second ongoing research project, that includes the 
intensive 
survey, 
paints 
a 
more 
comprehensive 
understanding of the impact the program had on long-term 
student engagement and citizenship. To date, 37 of 45 
surveys have been returned.  The detailed survey includes a 
bank of open-ended questions that address seven broad 
topics: education and training following high school; 
employment history; service to community or society; 
friendships 
persisting 
from 
high 
school; 
personal 
background; travel and recreational interests; impacts of high 
school on subsequent choices, and; a concluding open ended 
section that invites further comments.  The first four banks of 
questions provide quantitative information while the last 
three banks of questions provides qualitative information.   
Overall, the intensive survey provides a blend of quantitative 
and qualitative information that yields insights into the 
individuals’ citizenship and the extent to which the ES11 
program may have influenced subsequent life choices.  Each 
of these topics is summarized below. 
 
1) Interim Quantitative Findings 
a) Post-Secondary Education 
• 
All 37 respondents took part in post-secondary 
education and training.   
• 
All completed more than one program of studies and 
completed more than one degree. 
• 
25% attended their first course at the local post-
secondary institution-Yukon College and then went 
to southern Canadian post-secondary institutions. 
• 
20% 
have 
attended 
university 
and 
training 
institutions in other countries (UK, US, NZ and 
Australia). 
• 
45% of respondents have completed graduate 
studies-Masters, PhD or professional degrees.   
b) Employment 
• 
Employment histories indicate that 85% of the 
students worked part-time in the Yukon during their 
time at studies and then took jobs in many different 
Canadian and international locations.   
• 
All respondents had jobs when they responded, and 
20% indicated they were looking for other positions.   
• 
The most interesting result as it relates to this paper 
is 45% held employment in fields related to 
environment or environmental monitoring.  
c) Travel and Recreational Interests 
• 
All respondents have traveled to 2 or more 
continents and all indicate an interest in more travel.   
 
Figure 1.  Post-Secondary Choices 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  University Program Selections 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

They have collectively visited and/or worked in 
every continent.   
• 
All respondents have remained active in outdoor 
activities and attribute many of their secondary 
school activities as the origins of these pursuits.   
• 
40% of the respondents indicate they coach in areas 
related to their outdoor interests.   
• 
Some respondents listed a wide variety of outdoor 
activities while others describe their interests as 
outdoor activities and healthy lifestyles. 
d) Personal Background  
• 
70% of the respondents indicated they were married 
or in long-term relationships, 55% have children and 
only 25% indicated they were single.  Only one 
respondent had been divorced after six years of 
marriage.   
• 
60% considered themselves to be settled in their 
lifestyle, but of these, half indicated they were 
settled in their personal lives but not yet settled in 
their employment and also on where they live 
geographically.   
• 
25% of respondents live in the Yukon, and 60% of 
the respondents living outside the Yukon indicated 
they would like to live in the Yukon or in the 
province of British Columbia (just south of the 
Yukon).   
 
2) Interim Qualitative Findings 
To best represent the qualitative findings, we have 
chosen in this section of the analysis to provide 
representative quotes from the student responses that 
demonstrate key themes.  Their voice, expressing common 
themes over a period of years, time and again provides 
compelling evidence regarding the values and subsequent 
actions of the former students.  
a) Impacts of Experiential Science on Subsequent 
Choices 
 Three quarters, 75% of the respondents indicated that the 
ES11 program impacted their subsequent career and 
educational choices.  The following quotes represent the 
scope of these views.  
The extended trip in ES was an invaluable learning 
experience for me regarding my ability to interact and 
communicate with others. As we (students) were tangled 
in socially intense learning environments (due to 
traveling with many adolescents), we were forced to 
learn and adapt to other peoples behavior. My ability to 
communicate has continued to grow and is an integral 
part of my job. I started learning about tolerance, 
empathy, charity, and patience when I was in ES, and it 
has allowed me to grow into the medical provider that I 
am today.  (Male, 1998) 
Motivated, engaged and challenging teachers with an 
awareness of current events reinforced my interest in 
global politics encouraged my interest in development 
studies and sustainable communities…it had a lasting 
impact on my decision to pursue an education that 
included an environmental component. (Female, 1996) 
From the ES experience, I value opportunities to 
learn through practical experience and trying –and 
possibly 
failing. 
I 
value 
innovation. 
I 
value 
environmental sustainability and policy decisions that 
have been informed by science.  (Male 1997) 
Collecting salt from the side of the Alaska Hwy and 
taking it into the chemistry lab at Yukon College and 
actually figuring out how much salt was present in the 
gravel to link to caribou occurrences there, integrating 
chemistry, biology, and ecology. This experience as 
holistic learning changed how I viewed education and 
the world around me. I also learned that education could 
be fun and if I found something I enjoyed learning about, 
like how humans encounter their environment, it was up 
to me to figure it out for myself. (Female, 2003) 
My high school experience cemented my interest in 
natural sciences.  I sought out programs that could offer 
field-based studies. (Male, 1996) 
My educational experience shaped my long-term 
employment goal to be part of an organization that 
promotes global sustainability, environmental awareness 
and social conscience while building networks between 
governments and civil society.   Ultimately, it reinforced 
my interest in development studies with a focus on 
environmental issues.  (Female, 1999) 
b) Relationships 
It is important to reiterate that students who took part in 
ES came from different schools and different communities.  
Even though they were only together as a cohort for a four-
month semester and many now live in different parts of the 
word, 60% of respondents indicated they remain in contact 
with friends they formed during the time they spent in ES11.   
I have maintained friendships with some people that I 
only met through this program and would have otherwise 
not know. Although not all people I kept in contact with, 
there are a select few that our relationship has grown 
over the years and I talk to on a regular basis (despite 
our geographical differences). (Male, 1997) 
I am very close to a few of the people from my ES 
class, and continue significant relationships with them to 
this day. It is always a pleasure to see people from my ES 
class. (Male, 2001) 
c) Service to Community or Society 
95% of the respondents indicated they participate in 
service for their community and/or humanity.  The following 
two quotes give a sense of his commitment to service and 
how service is related to citizenship.   
Volunteer service is an essential aspect of being part 
of a community. It is an important consideration in how 
someone chooses to live because to be a volunteer 
encourages people to pursue activities they are 
passionate about; it also encourages people to be 
increasingly aware of issues outside their own social 
circles; and provides the opportunity to foster attributes 
like commitment and dedication. With such attributes, 
volunteers ensure sustainable programs that address 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

local issues and needs. I helped the Conservation Society 
of Sierra Leone facilitate community outreach workshops 
to encourage increased awareness of environmental and 
conservation of natural resource issues. I organize and 
conduct rapid assessment surveys of coastal sea-turtle 
habitat and local fishing practices. (Female, 1999) 
 One of the things I learned from ES is that everyone 
has a voice; it’s all about how you say what you want to 
say. One of the most important things is to learn about 
the matter yourself and not rely on what others (e.g., 
pamphlets, protestors, etc.) are trying to convince you of. 
Do your own research, learn about it and you will have a 
stronger voice for it. People are more likely to listen to a 
knowledgeable person than a passionate, one-sided rant. 
And you might learn something yourself that changes 
your view of what others are saying. Being open to other 
people’s opinions is as much a part of having a voice as 
knowing what to say. (Male, 1998) 
Only 2 of the respondents indicated their voices were not 
heard and had little opportunity to influence decisions locally 
or nationally. A number of respondents spoke to problems 
with electoral systems but they still felt the capacity to 
influence change. Every participant responded that they vote 
in civic, territorial, provincial and/or national elections. This 
contrasts with the turnout of average Canadians as reported 
in the most recent National May 2011 election; only 39% of 
Canadians aged 18-24 years and 45% aged 25-34 years voted 
[27]. 
d) Open-Ended Section 
The survey invited respondent to make comments in an 
open-ended format. The following are a representative 
sample of their comments. Most of these relate to the 
experiential and PBE process:   
After being in ES and after having gone through a 
moderate amount of post-secondary education I think 
that experiential learning is a more robust way of 
learning and teaching. Being able to see a medial 
moraine, a U-shaped valley, the impacts of clear cutting, 
etc., turned ‘learning objectives’ into concrete lessons. I 
think 
that 
in 
a 
perfect 
world 
all 
curriculums 
should/would be delivered in the same manner: intensive, 
tactile and above all meaningful. (Male, 2004) 
 Innovative experiential programs like these are an 
excellent model and should be expanded into other 
regions of Canada and other subject areas – perhaps in 
physics (engineering) and political/social studies?   
Decisions on where to move with my family and where to 
enroll my child for school will be heavily influenced by 
the availability of programs such as ES. (Female, 1995) 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The extent and nature of the responses to the detailed 
survey shows a community of practice [28] of young adults 
involved in community and a heightened understanding of 
‘place’ in active ways.  They express the significant role this 
type of educational experience has influenced subsequent life 
choices.  Most participating students felt a sense of social 
and environmental responsibility, we suggest are values and 
attitudes needed to address issues such as climate change. 
Data from the quantitative and qualitative analysis show 
complementary results.  Those participating in the ES11 
program demonstrated an uncommon level of engagement 
and civic and environmental responsibility.  These students 
refer to the challenging and significant place-based field 
studies, the co-operative work relationships that develop 
during their semester and diverse instructional processes 
used throughout the program as features that left lasting 
change. Field studies resonated with those students who 
learn best experientially and in social contexts. Students 
consistently reported the short and long term benefits 
attributed to their participation. A number of students 
indicated they struggled with conventional classes yet found 
success and engagement in the environmental field studies 
approach to courses. In terms of conventional academic 
scores, students in ES11 consistently outscored all other high 
school classes taking similar courses.  
The development of citizens who internalize community 
and global challenges related to social and environmental 
goals appears to be an essential aspect of addressing 
phenomena related to climate change. This research sheds 
light on how public schooling may contribute to such 
development. In summary, the actions and values expressed 
by ES11 participants reflect those qualities of responsible 
citizenship needed to address the challenges identified by the 
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report [1].  This research provides 
compelling quantitative and qualitative evidence indicating 
that educational processes involving place-based activities 
that encourage data collection, refection and action are 
important antecedents to responsible citizenship.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC, “Fifth 
Assessment 
Report, 
2014,” 
URL: 
http://www.ipcc.ch 
[accessed: 2014.12.09]. 
[2] David Suzuki Foundation, “IPCC report is clear: we must 
clean up our act, 2014,” URL: http://www.davidsuzuki.org 
[accessed: 2014.11.20]. 
[3] S. Chase and B. McKenna, “Canada ‘more frank’ about 
climate change, 2014” The Globe and Mail. URL: 
http://www.theglobeandmail.com [accessed: 2015.01.12]. 
[4] C. Hume, “Climate change vs. Rob Ford and Stephen Harper: 
Hume, 
2013,”. 
The 
Toronto 
Star. 
URL: 
http://www.thestar.com [accessed: 2014.12.10]. 
[5] R. Liepert, “Keystone XL pipeline will keep Canada from 
hitting 2020 greenhouse gas emissions targets, say critics, 
2014,” [Radio broadcast episode]. In M. Tremonti (Producer), 
The 
Current, 
Toronto, 
ON: 
CBC. 
URL: 
http://www.cbc.ca/thecurrent/ [accessed: 2015.01.18]. 
[6] S. 
Barr, 
“Strategies 
for 
sustainability: 
Citizens 
and 
responsible environmental behaviour,” AREA, 35(3), 2003, 
pp. 227–240. 
[7] J. Kincheloe, Critical Pedagogy. New York: Peter Lang, 
2005. 
[8] J. M. Hines, H. Hungerford, and A. Tomera, “Analysis and 
synthesis of research on responsible environmental behavior: 
A meta-analysis,” Journal of Environmental Education, 18 
(2), 1986, pp. 1-8. 
[9] S. Bamberg and G. Möser, “Twenty years after Hines, 
Hungerford, and Tomera: A new meta-analysis of psycho-
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

social determinants of pro-environmental behaviour,” Journal 
of Environmental Psychology, 27, 2006, pp.14–25. 
[10] R. Louv, Last Child in the Woods: Saving our Children from 
Nature-Deficit Disorder. Chapel Hill, NC : Algonquin Books 
of Chapel Hill, 2005. 
[11] K. O’Connor, “Puzzles rather than answers: Co-constructing a 
pedagogy of experiential, place-based and critical learning in 
Indigenous educatio,” Unpublished doctoral thesis, McGill 
University, 2009. 
[12] D. Sobel, Place-based Education: Connecting Classrooms and 
Communities. Great Barrington, Massachusetts: The Orion 
Society, 2004. 
[13] M. E. Glaser, “Critical thinking: Educating for responsible 
citizenship in a democracy,” National Forum: Phi Kappa Phi 
Journal, 65(1), 1985, pp. 24-27. 
[14] P. Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Continuum, 
1970. 
[15] D. Gruenewald, “The best of both worlds: A critical pedagogy 
of place,” Educational Researcher, 32(4), 2003, pp. 3-12. 
[16] G. Ten Dam and M. Volman, “Critical thinking as a 
citizenship competence: Teaching strategies,” Learning and 
Instruction, 14, 2004, pp. 359-379. 
[17] W. Penetito, “Place-based education: Catering for curriculum, 
culture and community,” New Zealand Annual Review of 
Education, 18, 2009, pp. 5-29. 
[18] D. W. Orr, Earth in Mind: On Education, Environment, and 
the Human Prospect. Washington, DC: Island Press, 1994. 
[19] J. Raffan, “The experience of place: Exploring land as 
teacher,” Journal of Experiential Education, 16(1), 1993, pp. 
39-45. 
[20] R. W. Tyler, Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949. 
[21] K. O'Connor and R. Sharp, “Planting the science seed: 
Engaging students in place-based civic actions,” European 
Scientific Journal, 4, 2013, pp. 160-167. 
[22] J. Dewey, Experience and Education. London: Collier-
MacMillan, 1938. 
[23] K. O’Connor, “Learning from place: Re-shaping knowledge 
flow in Indigenous education,” TRANS-Internet-Zeitschrift 
für 
Kulturwissenschaften, 
No. 
7/8-2, 
2010, 
URL: 
http://www.inst.at/trans/17Nr/8-2/8-2_oconnor.htm 
[24] J. L. Woodhouse and C. E.  Knapp, Place-based Curriculum 
and Instruction: Outdoor and Environmental Education 
Approaches. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural 
Education and Small Schools, 2000. 
[25] J. W. Creswell and V. L. P. Clark, Eds., Designing and 
Conducting Mixed Methods Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
SAGE, 2011. 
[26] K. Lewin, “Group decision and social change,” In T. 
Newcomb and E. Hartley, (Eds.), Readings in Social 
Psychology. New York: Henry Holt, 1947. 
[27] M. Mayrand, “Declining voter turnout: Can we reverse the 
trend?, 
2012,” 
Elections 
Canada 
Online. 
URL: 
http://www.elections.ca [accessed: 2015.01.05]. 
[28] E. Wenger, Communities of Practice. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

A Naturalistic Indicator of the Forest Quality and its Relationship with the Land 
Use Anthropentropy Factor 
Theory, Tools, and Results for an Italian Case Study
Silvia Assini  
Dept. of Earth and Environment Sciences 
University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
e-mail: silviapaola.assini@unipv.it 
Maria Grazia Albanesi 
Dept. of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering 
 University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
e-mail: mariagrazia.albanesi@unipv.it 
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes a new indicator related to an 
important aspect of the forest landscape: the quality, expressed 
by the forest floristic composition, according to the 
phytosociological approach. Furthermore, the relationship 
with an existing land use indicator, the Anthropentropy 
Factor, is investigated. Another novelty of this research is its 
multidisciplinary 
approach: 
we 
combine 
the 
classical 
algorithms of computer vision systems to process the images 
from GIS (Geographic Information System) databases with the 
necessary expertise provided by the biological knowledge. The 
goal is to build a deep knowledge about some aspects of 
biodiversity preservation, by studying the impact of anthropic 
activities, both inside (urbanization) and outside (forests) the 
areas occupied by human settlements. We define two metrics to 
classify the levels of land use and forest quality status. The 
knowledge coming from the computation of the two indicators 
and the corresponding metrics can be used for policy actions, 
to 
guide 
local 
government 
decisions 
for 
biodiversity 
conservation in the landscape planning. The two indicators and 
the methodological approach are validated by presenting 
experimental results on a case study of a North-West area of 
Italy.  
Keywords- biodiversity; land use; environmental indicator; 
forest status; Anthropentropy Factor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Land use estimation is a key aspect for biodiversity 
preservation; in fact, the European Environment Agency 
considers land use and biodiversity in the same policy target 
and objective for the next decades [1]. The reason is the 
well-known significant loss of the territory, both for vegetal 
and animal species, due to the impact of anthropic activities 
on the environment. There are plenty of examples of human 
activities which lead to soil sealing and loss of wild nature: 
urban and rural expansion, new roads and communication 
lines, settlements for industries, tourism and services, and 
intensive farming.  
If we consider the problem by a quantitative, absolute, 
point of view, the situation may not seem so dramatic: 
according to the most recent Corine Land Cover data [2] 
referring to the period 2000-2006, the artificial areas cover 
only the 4% of the land in Europe, as compared to a 34% of 
forests, a global value of 51% for activities to support the 
economic growth and food (agriculture, crops, pasture and 
semi-natural vegetation) and a 11% of bare soils, water and 
wet lands. However, if we consider the net change in land 
cover, expressed as a percentage of the initial year (2000), 
we observe a worrying value of +2.5% for the artificial areas, 
while other typologies of land cover have important 
decreases or slight increases (less than 0.5%). 
Processes which cause land-use change are different in 
different parts of Europe [3]: the Boreal and Alpine regions 
are dominated by forest management; abandonment and 
intensification are mainly encountered in the Mediterranean; 
urbanization and drainage are more characteristic of the 
Continental and Atlantic regions. In Italy and, particularly, in 
the studied area, urbanization and agricultural intensification 
are the main drivers of biodiversity loss in the planar belt, 
while land abandonment and the consequent forest re-
colonization cause biodiversity loss in the hilly-montane belt 
[4]-[6]. 
For all these reasons, a high challenging goal of the 
scientific community is to provide efficient ways to define, 
measure and correlate indicators which refer to some aspects 
of land use and biodiversity estimation, in order to help in 
defining policies to preserve environment and, in the same 
time, to assure a sustainable growth of our economies and 
societies. This ambitious goal is the main aspect of the 
research described in this paper, which is organized as 
follows. Section II describes the addressed problem and main 
novelties of our approach. Section III describes the state of 
the art, for what concerns the problem of defining efficient 
indicators for land use and forest status. Section IV addresses 
the problem of computing the new proposed Forest Status 
Quality Indicator (FSQ), and its relationship to a land use 
indicator, which has been recently proposed in literature, i.e., 
the Anthropentropy Factor, (AF). Section V describes the 
results of the computations of the new indicator on a real 
case on the Italian territory. Conclusion and considerations 
about future work close the article. 
II. 
OUR MULTIDISCIPINARY APPROACH 
One of the main novelties of the proposed study is its 
multidisciplinary approach, which bridges across two 
important fields of our modern scientific research: computer 
science and botany. Both of them have knowledge, tools and 
paradigms which are able to assess the impact of human 
activities for a sustainable future. In particular, we have 
chosen to address the problem of estimating land use and, 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

among the different categories of land use, to pay attention to 
two main aspects: 
 
The estimation of the areas which are not influenced 
by anthropic activities and, potentially, could be 
occupied entirely by wild nature; 
 
Inside these areas, which parts are occupied by 
forests, and their quality status. 
We have chosen these two aspects because (a) the first is 
essential to estimate, for a given territory, which parts are yet 
available for wild habitats, and (b) the second takes into 
consideration the important presence of the forests which 
provide benefits for the human well-being (the so-called 
ecosystem services), such as flood prevention, erosion 
control, CO2 absorption, climate regulation, refugium 
function for wild plants and animals, recreation, science and 
education. However, a simple counts of square kilometers is 
a too rough method to give hints on the real status of the 
environment for biodiversity preservation. In fact, others 
elements have to be taken into consideration, in order to 
describe the two aspects by indicators which have a real 
meaning, from an ecological point of view. In particular, we 
fixed these goals: 
 
The proposed indicators have to take into account 
not only the areas, but also their shapes, as 
fragmentation of habitats is a great problem for 
biodiversity preservation. 
 
The presence of a forest, inside a territory, has to be 
described not only by its relative area, but also by 
several aspects related to its quality, as the number 
of alien or protected species and the stratification.  
Our multidisciplinary approach combines algorithms of 
computer-assisted image processing and remote sensing data 
analysis with the knowledge about forest typologies based on 
their floristic composition according to the phytosociological 
approach [7-10]. Besides the indicators, we propose two 
metrics to define ranges of increasing worrying status for 
biodiversity preservation. Such metrics may support policies 
for management and restoration of forests and landscape.  
III. 
THE STATE OF THE ART 
A. Forest quality indicators  
Quality means different things to different people. The 
assessment of forest quality differs according to the different 
components that can be evaluated (ecological, social and/or 
economic components associated to forests). In many 
assessment systems, environment has been relegated to a 
relatively unimportant element, if compared with other issues 
such as economic importance, although there are now also 
some specialized indicator sets relating to the environment, 
such as WWF (World Wide Fund For Nature) Living Planet 
Index [11]. Other examples include: the IUCN (International 
Union for the Conservation of Nature) well-being index [12], 
that divides indicators into two classes, the first relating to 
human well-being (socio-economic) and the second to the 
environment (ecological, environmental services etc.) and 
the Montreal Process criteria and indicators [13], for 
temperate and boreal species outside Europe, which uses 
seven criteria (and 67 indicators) including the conservation 
of biological diversity.  
B. Land use indicators 
All data provided by international projects [14] proves 
that our high-energy consumption lifestyles are exerting an 
increasing, destroying pressure on wildlife habitats. We have 
to consider not only the soil sealing phenomenon, i.e., 
thousands of hectares/year are covered by concrete, but also 
the fragmentation of territory and of habitats, a serious threat 
for most of endangered species in Europe. Therefore, 
conventional land use indicators based on the simple 
computation of area percentage are not able to express the 
gravity of the problem. For this reason, we have considered 
recent contributions in literature [15-16], which describe a 
new indicator, called Antropentropy Factor (AF). Here, we 
recall the basic definition and concepts which are essential to 
understand the relationship between this indicator and the 
Forest Status Quality Indicator here proposed (for details on 
the properties of the AF indicator and its application to 
Italian territory, see [15]). 
Anthropentropy is a neologism, from the Greek term 
Anthropos (Άνθρωπος) = man, and entropy; in fact, the AF 
indicator wants to express the “disorder” introduced in 
natural ecosystems, by the presence and disturbance of 
human beings. The AF expresses in an absolute, continuous 
scale (from 0 to 1) the degree of anthropic human activities 
and the consequent land use. We think that this indicator is 
the closest one to a naturalistic evaluation of land use, 
because it does not only computed the percentage of land 
occupied by human activities and urban expansion, but also 
it takes into consideration the shape of the areas subtracted to 
nature, and their relative positions, thus incorporating an 
important aspect of fragmentation and its impact on 
biodiversity. This is possible because the computation is 
performed 
by 
using 
classical 
image 
processing 
morphological operator of dilation [17] on satellite GIS 
images of the territory on satellite maps of the territory. 
In order to compute the AF indicator, we define the 
following entities: (a) the delimited part of a geographic 
territory under consideration, and its area S, in squared 
kilometers; (b) the Death Zone, as the union of all the 
anthropic regions of the territory, and its area DA, in square 
kilometers), and (c) the Neutral region as the part of the 
territory, if any, containing inland waters, (e.g., lakes or 
lagoons) and lands located more than 3,000 m above sea 
level, and its area NA (in square kilometers). The 
Anthropentropy Factor (AF) is defined [15] as the ratio: 
 
AF = DA / (S – NA)  
(1) 
The AF expresses the land use as a fractional number, 
between 0 (completely uninhabited territory, DA = 0) and 1 
(the Death Zone completely occupies the territory, but for the 
Neutral Zone (if any, because in the Neutral Zone human 
settlements are not possible.) In Table I, the corresponding 
metric on the AF indicator is described. For a reasoned 
treatment of the metric and its relationship with a possible 
policy making for a sustainable development, see [15-16].  
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

TABLE I.  
THE METRIC ON THE AF INDICATOR FOR LAND USE. 
Class of 
land use 
and map 
color 
Evaluation of Land Use  
Intervals of AF 
Meaning 
1 
light green 
0 <= AF <= 0.2 
 
Very low level of anthropentropy, 
ideal situation for nature and human 
beings 
2 
green 
0.2 < AF <= 0.4 
 
A 
first 
worrying 
level 
of 
anthropentropy, but the situation is 
still good 
3 
yellow 
0.4 < AF <= 0.6 
 
A serious level of anthropentropy, 
with a beginning negative impact of 
anthopization on the environment. 
4 
red, light 
violet 
0.6 < AF <= 0.8 
 
A 
very 
serious 
level 
of 
anthropentropy, 
with 
a 
great 
negative impact of anthopization on 
the environment. 
5 
violet, 
black 
0.8 < AF <= 1 
 
The 
worst 
situation, 
with 
an 
irreversible 
environmental 
degradation. 
 
In Figure 1, the map of the area of our case study (the 
territory of Pavia province) is shown: for each municipality, 
its territory is depicted in a color related to the class of land 
use, as specified in Table I (from green, yellow, red and 
black). Even if the AF indicator is able to take into 
considerations quantitative extensions, shapes and relative 
positions of the anthrophized areas of a territory, it expresses 
only the land use pressure on the environment (according to 
the DPSIR (Driving Forces, Pressures, States, Impacts, 
Responses) model [18] of the European Environment 
Agency); it does not give any hints on the state of the green 
areas outside the urbanized areas, which is the goal of the 
second and new indicator here described. 
IV. 
THE FOREST STATUS QUALITY INDICATOR  
For our purposes, we define the forest quality status as 
the value of its ecological components, with particularly 
reference to the biodiversity conservation. We have chosen 
the following components: the number of forest layers (more 
layers correspond to higher biodiversity), the presence of 
protected species according to the regional law (more 
protected species mean higher and better biodiversity) [L.R. 
10/2008] and the presence of alien species (lesser alien 
species mean higher and better biodiversity). We considered 
only natural forests (plantations were not taken into 
consideration). Furthermore, we considered only forests 
occurring on areas greater than 10.000 square meters. In 
forest patches smaller than 1 ha, floristic richness is 
generally very low [19]. For a given territory of area S, we 
define a set of sub-regions occupied by natural forest Fi (i = 
1, 2, n). Each of Fi may have one or more occurrences, 
denoted by the index k, in the territory (k = 1, 2, max(i)). 
Each k-th occurrence is characterizes by: (a) an area Ak
i, 
expressed in square meters, for i= 1,2,,…n and k = 1, 2,… 
max(i) and (b) a type of Ti, derived from the GIS Database 
“Map of the Forest Types of Lombardy” [20], which 
classifies forests on the basis of their physiognomy 
(dominant woody species) and the ecological characteristics 
of the site where they occur (geological substrate, type of 
soil, etc.) [21]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  
The visual map for the AF land use indicator for the 
municipalities of the target area of our case study (Pavia Province, 
Lombardia, North Western Italy).  
In our target territory, we have 66 different forest types, 
but only 32 of them have occurrences whose areas are 
greater than 10.000 square meters. Therefore, in our case 
study, n= 32. 
For each forest Ti, we found the correspondence with one 
or 
more 
phytosociological 
tables 
[22]. 
When 
this 
correspondence was not reported by the above mentioned 
authors, we used other bibliographic references or 
phytosociological relevés collected in the area where the 
forest type occurs. In Table II, a list of the types Ti and the 
relative 
reference 
syntaxa, 
for 
the 
territory 
under 
investigation, is provided. The Type Lab field in the Table is 
a label which refers to the database [20] used as input data 
source. 
For each forest type Ti, which is described by one or 
more phytosociological tables, we defined a set of the three 
indicator components (si, ai, pi) above described:  
 
Stratification (number of layers) of a forest type i 
(si): this component analyzes the quality of the forest 
structure. The tree and the herb layers are always 
present in a forest. The shrub layers (high-shrub 
and/or low-shrub layers) were considered valuable if 
their total cover were > of 10% of the sampled forest 
area (indicated in the phytosociological tables) or at 
least one species presented an abundance value equal 
to 2.  
 
 Percentage frequency of alien species (ai) in the 
corresponding phytosociological table/s. When more 
phytosociological tables described a forest type Ti, a 
mean value between the percentages of each table 
was calculated. 
 
Percentage frequency of protected species (pi) in the 
corresponding phytosociological table/s. When more 
phytosociological tables described a forest type Ti, a 
mean value between the percentages of each table 
was calculated. 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

TABLE II.  
FOREST TYPES FOR THE PROVINCE OF PAVIA (ITALY) 
Type 
Laba 
Description of forest types Ti 
and relative reference syntaxa  
 
1 
T1: Oak-Hornbeam wood of the lowlands  
Syntaxa: Polygonato multiflori-Quercetum roboris subass. 
carpinetosum and anemonetosum Sartori 1984; Quercus robur, 
Carpinus betulus and Physospermum cornubiense community; 
Quercus robur, Carpinus betulus and Holcus mollis community 
12 
T2: Oak wood of inland sand dunes (“dossi”) 
Syntaxa: Quercus robur community 
13 
T3: Oak wood of stony river beds  
Syntaxa: Quercus robur and Brachypodium rupestre community 
14-
15 
T4, T5: Oak-Elm wood (also including the Black Alder variant) 
Syntaxa: Polygonato multiflori-Quercetum roboris subass. 
ulmetosum Sartori 1984 
20, 
23 
T6, T7: Quercus pubescens wood of the carbonatic substrates 
(also including the Chestnut variant) 
Syntaxa: Quercus pubescens, Euphorbia cyparissias and 
Epipactis helleborine community 
26, 
27 
T8, T9: Quercus petraea wood of the carbonatic substrates and 
mesic soils (also including the Chestnut variant) Syntaxa: 
Physospermo cornubiensis-Quercetum petraeae Oberd. et Hofm. 
1967 
28 
T10: Quercus cerris wood 
Syntaxa: Quercus cerris, Cruciata glabra and Anemone trifolia 
community 
45, 
48, 
49, 
50, 
57 
T11, T12, T13, T14, and T15: Chestnut wood on drift; Chestnut 
wood of the carbonatic substrates (mesic soils, meso-xeric soils, 
xeric soils); Chestnut wood of the siliceous substrates and mesic 
soils  
Syntaxa: 
Physospermo 
cornubiensis-Quercetum 
petraeae 
Oberd.et Hofm. 1967; Castanea sativa and Corylus avellana 
community 
63, 
64, 
65 
T16, T17, and T18 Ostrya carpinifolia and Fraxinus ornus wood 
(of layer, of cliff, typical) 
Syntaxa: Knautio drymeiae-Ostryetum Mondino et al. 1993 
84 
T19: Birch wood 
Syntaxa: Betula pendula community 
88 
T20: Primitive Beech wood 
Syntaxa: Trochiscantho-Fagetum Gentile 1974; Fagus sylvatica 
and Acer opulifolium community 
89, 
96, 
97, 
105 
T21, T22, T23, and T24: Beech wood of the carbonatic substrates 
(high-montane, montane, montane of xeric soils, submontane) 
Syntaxa: Trochiscantho-Fagetum Gentile 1974; Fagus sylvatica 
and Acer opulifolium community 
99 
T25: Beech wood of the siliceous substrates 
Syntaxa: Trochiscantho-Fagetum Gentile 1974; Fagus sylvatica 
and Acer opulifolium community 
172 T26: Black Alder wood of gulley 
Syntaxa: Alnus glutinosa, Populus alba and Ulmus minor 
community 
173 T27: Typical Black Alder wood 
Syntaxa: Osmundo regalis-Alnetum glutinosae Vanden Berghen 
1971; Carici elongatae-Alnetum glutinosae W. Koch 1926 et R. 
Tx. 1931; Carici acutiformis-Alnetum glutinosae Scamoni 1935 
177 T28: Willow wood of bank 
Syntaxa: Salix alba community; Salicetum albae Issler 1926 
180 T29: Salix cinerea wood 
Syntaxa: Salicetum cinereae Zolyomi 1931 
183 T30: White Poplar formation 
Syntaxa: Populus alba community  
188 T31: Pure Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
Syntaxa: Robinia pseudoacacia community 
189 T32: Mixed Robinia pseudoacacia wood 
Syntaxa:Robinia pseudoacacia, Quercus robur and Ulmus minor 
community 
a. According to ERSAF database [20] 
 
The three components can assume only discrete values, 
from 0 to 3. While the definition of quality of stratification is 
independent on the altitude of the forest, the definition of 
values related to the percentages of alien and protected 
species is different, according to the altitude. Thus, 
naturalness is higher in the montane belt than in planar belt. 
We differentiate between forest types belonging to the class 
“high hilly and montane” (altitude > = 500 m) and forest 
types belonging to the class “planar and low hilly” (altitude < 
500 m). The three components (si, ai, pi) are defined 
according to an empirical if – then- else algorithm, reported 
in Figure 2. 
 
If the number of layers = 2 , then si = 1 
 Else if number of layers = 3 , then si = 2 
 Else if number of layers = 4 , then si = 3 
 
For altitude <500 m: 
If the percentage of alien species is > 40 then ai = 0 
Else if alien species range is (15- 40] then ai = 1 
Else if alien species range is (5- 15] then ai = 2 
Else if alien species range is [0- 5] then ai = 3 
If percentage of protected species range is (0.5-3] then pi = 1 
  
Else if protected species range is (3- 6.5] then pi = 2 
  
Else if protected species range is > 6.5 then pi = 3 
 
For altitude > = 500 m: 
If the percentage of alien species is > 10 then ai = 0 
Else if alien species range is (5-10] then ai = 1 
Else if alien species range is (2-5] then ai = 2 
Else if alien species range is [0- 2] then ai = 3 
If percentage of protected species range is (0.5-5] then pi = 1 
Else if protected species range is (5- 10] then pi = 2 
Else if protected species range is > 10 then pi = 3 
Figure 2.  The computation algorithm of the three indicator components. 
For each of the forest type i of Table II, we computed the 
relative value set of (si, ai, pi), according to the algorithm of 
Figure 2 and  the phytosociological tables and/or relevés: the 
complete value set is reported in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
THE VALUE SET OF COMPONENTS FOR STRATIFICATION, 
ALIEN AND PROTECTED SPECIES, FOR EACH FOREST TYPE. 
Type Lab 
Components (si, ai, pi) 
 
1 
3,2,3 
12 
2,2,1 
13 
3,3,3 
14-15 
3,2,2 
20, 23 
3,3,1 
26, 27 
2,3,3 
28 
3,3,2 
45, 48, 49, 50, 57 
2,3,3 
63, 64, 65 
3,3,2 
84 
1,3,0 
88 
3,3,3 
89, 96, 97, 105 
3,3,3 
99 
3,3,3 
172 
3,3,1 
173 
2,3,2 
177 
1,1,0 
180 
2,2,0 
183 
3,1,0 
188 
2,1,0 
189 
3,2,0 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

After determining the values of the set of components for 
stratification, alien and protected species, it is now possible 
to define the Forest Status Quality Indicator (FSQ) of a given 
territory as: 
  
FSQ = iksi + ai + pi)*Ak
i/S  
(2) 
for i= 1, 2,.., n, k = 1,2,… max(i) where i is one of the n 
the significant forest type (at least one occurrence of the 
forest has Ak
i >= 10.000 square meters) which is present in 
the territory under investigation, Ak
i is the area of the k-th 
occurrence of forest type i, and S is the area of the territory. 
The number of occurrences may vary, from a minimum of 1 
to a maximum, which depends of the forest type (max(i)).  
The FSQ definition is the weighted values of the 
components, where the weights are the ratios between the 
areas of the forests and the area of the territory under 
investigation. The wider is the area occupied by a forest, the 
higher is its contribution to the global quality of the territory. 
Besides, its contribution is related to the values of the 
components (stratification, alien, and protected species) as 
described in the if-then-else algorithm. The summation in (2) 
is for all the forest types of the territory under investigation, 
and for all the occurrences of the forests. 
The FSQ value can range from 0 (no forests are present 
in the territory with at least one occurrence of A1
i> 10.000) 
to a maximum of 9, which is derived by considering the 
“perfect”, quite unrealistic, situation of a forest of very high 
TABLE IV.  
THE METRIC ON THE FSQ INDICATOR FOR FOREST 
QUALITY. 
Class of forest 
quality 
Evaluation of Forest quality and policy  
Intervals of FSQ 
Suggested policy 
1 
Unsatisfactory 
0 <= FSQ <= 0.9 
 
Very low level forest quality. 
A 
high-impact 
policy 
of 
restoration 
and/or 
requalitication of forest is 
mandatory.  
2 
Satisfactory but 
improvable 
0.9 < FSQ <= 1.8 
 
Sufficient forest quality but 
improvable. A policy for 
forest 
biodiversity 
preservation is preferable. 
3 
Good 
1.8 < FSQ <= 3.6 
 
Good forest quality, the first 
level of satisfactory situation. 
A policy for the conservation 
of 
existing 
forests 
is 
suggested. 
4 
Optimum 
3.6 < FSQ <= 4.5 
 
The optimun situation, with a 
high quality of forests. A 
policy for the conservation of 
existing forests is suggested. 
Anyway, if shrublands and 
grasslands 
are 
scarse 
or 
absent, a policy for their 
biodiversity preservation has 
to be considered. 
5 
Overbalanced 
FSQ > 4.5 
 
The overbalanced situation, 
forests have overcome other 
ecosystems. A policy for 
shrubland 
and 
grassland 
biodiversity preservation is 
highly suggested. 
 
quality (set of components (si, ai, pi) =(3,3,3)), and where 
the areas of all the occurrences are equal to the area of the 
entire territory  Ak
i = S). 
By using an approach similar to the AF metric, we have 
defined a set of ranges for the FSQ indicator, starting from 
an unsatisfactory forest quality, a satisfactory but improvable 
situation, a good, an optimum situation and overbalanced 
situation. In Table IV, the metric for the FSQ indicator and 
the suggested policy actions are shown.  
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  
A. Data Sets and computer-based processing 
The case study is the province of Pavia (Figure 1), which 
is located around its chief town, Pavia (latitude, longitude: 
45°11'7"44 N, 09°9'45"00 E), in the North-Western part of 
Italy. The province consists of 190 Municipalities, with the 
altitude (meters above sea level) in the range [53-951]. In 
order to compute the value of FSQ in (2), it is necessary to 
have a description of the territory in terms of administrative 
boundaries and area, the geo referential coordinates of the 
occurrences of the forest, and their relative types and areas. 
We have used two GIS databases in order to derive the 
useful data: (a) the database of the Italian administrative 
boundaries provided by Istat [23], where we can compute the 
exact boundaries of the municipalities of the case study and 
their relative areas (the term S in (1) and (2)), and (b) the 
ERSAF (Ente Regionale Servizi Agricoltura e Foreste, i.e., 
Regional Agency for Agriculture and Forest Services) 
database [20]. By superimposing the two data sets we can 
obtain a visual map of the territory, where, for each 
municipality, we can compute, with a standard primitives of 
GIS software, the areas of each k-th occurrence of each 
forest type i (the value Ak
i. in (2)).  
 
 
Figure 3.  The visual map of the input data [20]: different colors refers to 
the forest types of Table II (a detail of the province of Pavia, Italy). 
In Figure 3, the visual map for a limited zone of the 
studied area is shown in the standard Google Earth interface. 
Different colors refer to different types of forests. 
B. Results on the case study and discussion 
The values of AF and FSQ computed, according to (1) 
and (2), for each municipality are shown in Figure 4. The 
correlation between the two sets of values is very low 
(correlation coefficient: -0,197651). The dispersion plot 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

(FSQ v. AF) of Figure 5 also shows that the two indicators 
are quite independent and this is a positive result, because it 
expresses the fact that the two indicators are related to 
independent and different pressures on the environment: land 
use and forest quality. Figure 5 also shows that all the 
Municipalities with serious levels of AF (> 0.4) have very 
low levels of forest quality (FSQ < 0.9). This underlines a 
worrying trend to neglect the ecological compensations to 
mitigate the impact for increasing urbanization. On the other 
side, some Municipalities of high altitude show very low 
levels of AF (< 0.2), but overbalanced levels of FSQ (> 4.5), 
underling a worrying trend to neglect the forest re-
colonization caused by land abandonment. All the results 
indicate how environment and biodiversity loss are scarcely 
considered in the land use policies of the study area. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, an innovative indicator for forest quality 
has been proposed and its relationship with the land use 
anthropentropy factor has been investigated. The forest 
quality indicator is coherent with literature indications [13] 
which suggest the use of existing database, indigenous 
knowledge and possibly some field research as methods for 
data collection in order to evaluate the biodiversity 
conservation. Furthermore, they also suggest basic biological 
knowledge (in our case, phytosociology) as necessary 
expertise. 
Current and future developments of this work include: a 
wider study area (Lombardy Region) and a shape parameter 
related to forest occurrences. An interesting analysis is to 
investigate how to combine FSQ and AF in a “super-
indicator”. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors greatly appreciate for his collaboration 
Antonio di Gennaro, for importing and pre-processing of 
data from GIS databases. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] European Environment Agency, “Towards a green economy 
in Europe - EU environmental policy targets and objectives 
2010–2050,” 
EEA 
Report 
n. 
8/2013, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/towards-a-green-
economy-in-europe [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[2] Analysis of changes in European land cover from 2000 to 
2006, http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/land-
cover-2006-and-changes-1 [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[3] F. Gerard et al., “Land cover change in Europe between 1950 
and 2000 determined employing aerial photography”, 
Progress in Physical Geography, vol. 34 (2), 2010, pp. 183-
205. 
[4] A. Falcucci, L. Maiorno, and L. Boitani, “Changes in land-
use/land-cover patterns in Italy and their implications for 
biodiversity conservation”, Landscape Ecology, vol. 22, 2007, 
pp. 617-631. 
[5] S. Assini, F. Filipponi, and F. Zucca, “Land cover changes in 
abandoned agricultural land in the Northern Apennine (Italy) 
between 1954 and 2008: spatio-temporal dynamics”, Plant 
Biosystems, in press, doi: 10.1080/11263504.2014.983202. 
[6] S. Assini, F. Filipponi, M. Brusoni, and F. Zucca, “Vegetation 
of abandoned areas in the northern Apennines (Italy): 
phytosociological aspects and biodiversity analysis”, Acta 
Botanica Gallica: Botany Letters, vol. 161 (4), 2014, pp. 379-
393, doi: 10.1080/12538078.2014.948065. 
[7] J. Braun-Blanquet, Plant Sociology. New York: Mac Grew 
Hill Book Company, 1931. 
[8] E. Biondi, “Phytosociology today: Methodological and 
conceptual 
evolution”, 
Plant 
Biosystems, 
vol. 
145 
(Suppement),  2011, pp. 19-29. 
[9] C. Blasi, E. Biondi, and J. Izco, “100 years of plant sociology: 
A celebration”, Plant Biosystems, vol. 145 (Supplement), 
2011, pp. 1-3. 
[10] R. Pott, “Phytosociology: A modern geobotanical method”, 
Plant Biosystems, vol. 145 (suppl. 1), 2011, pp. 9-18. 
[11] J. Loh, Living Planet Index 2003. WWF and the UNEP-
World Conservation Monitoring Centre,Gland, Switzerland 
and Cambridge, UK, 2003. 
[12] R. Prescott-Allen, The Well-Being of Nations: A Country-by-
Country Index of Quality of Life and the Environment. Island 
Press, Covelo, California and Washington DC, 2001. 
[13] N. Dudley, R. Schlaepter, W. Jackson, J.P. Jeanrenaud, and S. 
Stolton, Forest Quality, Assessing Forests at a landscape 
Scale. Eartscan, London, Sterling VA, 2006. 
[14] European 
Environment 
Agency, 
Urban 
Sprawl, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/highlights/urban-sprawl-eating-
into-wildlife [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
[15] M. G. Albanesi and R. Albanesi, “A new approach based on 
computer vision and collaborative social networking for 
environmental preservation: theory, tools and results of Italian 
ACI project,” Proc. of The Eight International Multi-
Conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology ICCGI2013, Nice (France), IARIA ed, 21-26 July 
2013, pp. 16-21, ISBN 978-1-61208-283-7. 
[16] M. G. Albanesi and R. Albanesi: “A Decision-making 
Support System for Land Use Estimation Based on a New 
Anthropentropy 
Predictive 
Model 
for 
Environmental 
Preservation 
– 
Theory, 
Model 
and 
Web–based 
Implementation”, International Journal On Advances in 
Intelligent Systems, IARIA ed, v 7 n 1&2 2014, pp. 85-102. 
[17] R. C. Gonzales and R. E. Woods, Digital image processing, 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008, Chapter 9, “Morphological 
image processing”. 
[18] E. Smeets and R. Weterings, “Environmental indicators: 
typology and overview,” European Environment Agency 
Technical 
Report 
n. 
25/1999 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/TEC25 
[retrieved: 
March, 2015] 
[19] P. Digiovinazzo, G.F. Ficetola, L. Bottoni, C. Andreis, and E. 
Padoa-Schioppa, “Ecological thresholds in herb communities 
for the management of suburban fragmented forests”, Forest 
Ecology and Management, vol. 259, 2010, pp. 343-349. 
[20] Ente Regionale Servizi Agricoltura e Foreste (Regional 
Organization for Services in Agricolture and Forests) 
http://www.cartografia.regione.lombardia.it/ArcGIS10/rest/se
rvices/ERSAF/carta_reali_forestali/MapServer. 
[retrieved: 
March, 2015]. 
[21] R. Del Favero, Forest types of Lombardy (transl. I tipi 
forestali nella Regione Lombardia), CIERRE Ed., 2002. 
[22] C. Andreis and F. Sartori, eds, “Forest Vegetation of 
Lombardy, 
phytosociological 
classification” 
(transl. 
Vegetazione forestale della Lombardia. Inquadramento 
fitosociologico), Archivio Geobotanico, vol. 12-13, 2011, pp. 
1-215. 
[23] Istat 
shapefile 
for 
administrative 
boundaries: 
http://www.istat.it/it/archivio/24580 [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

 
 
 
Figure 4.  The two indicators Anthropentropy Factor (AF) and Forest Status Quality (FSQ), for all the municipalities of the province of Pavia. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  The relationship between the two indicators for land use and forest quality: dispersion plot of FSQ vs. AF, for all the municipalities of the 
province of Pavia. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

Assessment of Human Pressure on Forest Ecosystems in the Czech Republic 
 
Helena Kaňková 
Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Humanities 
Prague, Czech Republic 
e-mail: Helena.Kankova@czp.cuni.cz 
 
 
 
Abstract— 
Forest ecosystems play 
an 
important 
role 
for natural environment as well as for human society. With 
population and economic growth forests are put under 
increasing pressure leading to destruction of habitats and 
irreversible biodiversity loss. Quantification and interpreting 
the degradation of forest ecosystems can help raise public and 
political awareness needed for preserving the remaining 
species. In this study, human pressure on forest ecosystems in 
the Czech Republic and its impact on biodiversity loss were 
assessed. One of the main tools used is Mean Species 
Abundance indicator assessing human-induced changes in 
biodiversity including land-cover change, land-use intensity 
and fragmentation. Results are supplemented by statistical 
outputs of the National Forest Inventory and the Databank of 
natural forests of the Czech Republic. The results show serious 
decrease of mean species abundance in all landscape including 
forests. Most of the forested areas in the Czech Republic are 
affected by long-term human influence resulting in significant 
biodiversity loss and forest degradation. 
Keywords-forest; human pressure; biodiversity; mean species 
abundance. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In European landscape, forest ecosystems present an 
irreplaceable part of natural environment for habitat they 
provide, ability of climate regulation, flood and erosion 
control, water cycle and others including many services and 
products used directly by humans [1]. With growing 
population and demand for natural sources, forests are under 
increasing pressure. In the Czech Republic, an inland 
human-dominated Central European country with an area of 
approximately 79,000 km2, forests currently cover 33 % 
of the area. Although forested areas have continuously 
expanded there since the end of 19th century, they suffer 
from 
pollution, 
fragmentation 
and 
unsustainable 
management [2]. 
In our ongoing research, the anthropogenic pressure on 
ecosystems in the Czech Republic and its impact on 
biodiversity loss are assessed. Forested area assessment is 
one of the key parts of the study as forest ecosystems 
represent most of natural preserved and protected areas in the 
Czech Republic. The aim of the work is to quantify the 
extent of anthropogenic pressures on ecosystems, assess their 
spatial patterns and compare impacts in forested area with 
other landscape.  
Methods of the study are described in Section 2 of this 
paper, including specification of spatial datasets and 
indicator used for assessing biodiversity loss.  In Section 3, 
first results are presented, followed by conclusion in 
Section 4.   
II. 
METHODS 
Main steps of this study were (1) creating datasets of 
spatial distribution of Mean Species Abundance indicator 
(MSA) in the Czech Republic as a measure of anthropogenic 
pressure, (2) comparing impacts in forested area with other 
landscape, (3) supplementing results by statistical outputs of 
the National Forest Inventory in the Czech Republic. 
A. Spatial datasets 
To calculate MSA values based on land use and land 
cover data, the Consolidated Layer of Ecosystems 
of the Czech Republic (CLES) [3] was used as the most 
detailed currently available dataset of ecosystem distribution 
on the national-wide level. CLES distinguish 41 categories 
of habitats on a fine spatial resolution, including information 
on the degree of naturalness for each habitat category. Where 
a clarification was needed, actual land cover was compared 
to original landscape using a map of potential natural 
vegetation in the Czech Republic [4]. Data and results were 
supplemented by statistical outputs of the National Forest 
Inventory in the Czech Republic [5] and the Databank 
of natural forests of the Czech Republic [6]. 
B. Mean Species Abundance 
MSA is an indicator developed for model GLOBIO3 
assessing human-induced changes in biodiversity based on 
simple cause-effect relationships between environmental 
drivers and biodiversity impacts [7]. Drivers considered 
in this study are land-cover change, land-use intensity 
and fragmentation as they are assumed to be the main cause 
for biodiversity loss [8][9]. MSA values indicate relative 
remaining mean species abundance of original species 
compared to primary vegetation scaled between zero 
and one (1 = all original species, 0 = no original species). 
Water surfaces are not evaluated in this version of MSA 
indicator [7]. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

First step was assigning MSA impact values of land-cover 
change and land-use intensity to 41 CLES categories of 
habitats in the Czech Republic. Alkemade et al. [7] define 14 
categories of land cover types and their MSA values based 
on a broad meta-analyses of available literature. Most of the 
CLES categories were assigned by their definition (artificial 
surfaces, natural vegetation) while several CLES categories 
were evaluated as intermediate and given a proportional 
value of two MSA categories following approach used by 
Prydatko et al. [10]. Geographical distribution of MSA 
values was then processed in GIS software. Another step was 
assessing fragmentation impact based on the extent of 
individual patches of forested areas based on approach of 
Alkemade et al. [7]. Neither distance nor shape of patches is 
considered in this version of MSA indicator. 
III. 
RESULTS  
Mean species abundance in the Czech Republic reached 
31% of original biodiversity in intact ecosystems. That 
means that human pressures decreased original biodiversity 
on average by almost 70 %. The biggest impact was located 
in intensively used agricultural areas in the lowlands. 
Forested mountain ranges in the border areas, as well as 
other forested interior parts of the country, achieved the 
highest values indicating they present relatively best 
preserved ecosystems in comparison with other landscape 
(MSAAVERAGE=23,7 %). However, the MSA in forested areas 
(MSAAVERAGE=43,9 %) is still decreased by human pressure 
on average by more than half.  
Although forested areas cover about 33 % of the Czech 
Republic, most of them are fragmented into small patches 
with an area less than 100 km2 as a result of dense road 
network, urban areas and intensively used agriculture land.   
While potential natural vegetation are represented on 
most of the area by mixed or broad-leaved forests with 
dominant proportion of oak and beech, due to economic 
pressure a lot of planted forests are monocultures, with 
coniferous trees occupying almost 82 % of forested area.  
Only 1,2 % area of all forests in the Czech Republic can 
be regarded as natural forests close to its original condition 
defined by [6]. All other areas including protected forests are 
affected by long-term human influence resulting in 
significantly modified species composition, spatial and age 
structure and soil degradation.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Forests present potential natural vegetation on most of 
the Czech Republic’s area and thus provide important habitat 
for big part of original fauna and flora, as well as play 
important role for human society in provision of many 
ecosystem services. This study documents significant human 
pressure on forest ecosystems and their degradation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Special thanks go to David Vačkář from Charles 
University in Prague and anonymous reviewers for useful 
comments. The work was supported by the grant SVV-2015-
260 237.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, “Ecosystems and Human 
Well-being: Synthesis,” Island Press, Washington, DC, 2005.  
[2] Ministry of the Environment of the Czech Republic, “Report 
on the Environment in the Czech Republic in 2013,” [online]. 
Available from:  <http://www.mzp.cz/cz/zpravy_o_stavu_ 
zivotniho_prostredi_publikace> 2015.04.10 
[3] J. Frélichová, D. Vačkář, A. Pártl, B. Loučková, Z. V. 
Harmáčková, and E. Lorencová, “Integrated assessment of 
ecosystem services in the Czech Republic,” Ecosystem 
Services 8: 2014, pp. 110-117. 
[4] R. Mikyška, M. Deyl, J. Holub, M. Husová, J. Moravec, R. 
Neuhäusl, and Z. Neuhäuslová-Novotná, “Geobotanical map 
of Czechoslovakia,” Academia, Praha, 1968. 
[5] Forest Management Institute, “National Forest Inventory in 
the 
Czech 
Republic,” 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
<www.uhul.cz> 2015.04.10 
[6] Silva Tarouca Research Institute for Landscape and 
Ornamental Gardening, “Databank of natural forests of the 
Czech 
Republic,” 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
<http://www.pralesy.cz/> 2015.04.10 
[7] R. Alkemade, M. van Oorschot, L. Miles, C. Nellemann, M. 
Bakkenes, and B. ten Brink, “GLOBIO3: a framework to 
investigate options for reducing global terrestrial biodiversity 
loss,” Ecosystems 12 (3): 2003, pp. 374-390. 
[8] R. J. Scholes and R. Biggs, “A biodiversity intactness index,” 
Nature 434 (7029): 2005, pp. 45-49. 
[9] P. Reidsma, T. Tekelenburg, M. Van Den Berg, and R. 
Alkemade, “Impacts of land-use change on biodiversity: An 
assessment of agricultural biodiversity in the European 
Union,” Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 114: 
2006, pp. 86-102. 
[10] V. Prydatko, G. Kolomytsev, R. Burda, and S. Chumachenko, 
“Landscape ecology: Textbook on application of pressure-
based biodiversity modelling for national and regional 
educational purposes,” NAU, Kyiv, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

Use of Proba-V Images in Southern Africa for Dynamic of Desertification Indicators 
 
Rogers Hansine 
Geography Department 
Eduardo Mondlane University 
Maputo, Mozambique 
rogers.hansine@yahoo.com 
 
Alzira Ramos 
 CERENA/Instituto Superior Técnico 
University of Lisbon 
Lisboa, Portugal 
alzira.ramos@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 
 
Maria João Pereira 
CERENA/Instituto Superior Técnico 
University of Lisbon 
Lisboa, Portugal 
maria.pereira@tecnico.ulisboa.pt 
 
Amílcar Soares 
CERENA/Instituto Superior Técnico 
University of Lisbon 
Lisboa, Portugal 
asoares@ist.utl.pt
 
 
Abstract—In 
southern 
Africa, 
land 
degradation 
and 
desertification affect the territory to a considerable extent. 
Given the lack of economic resources to reverse the problem in 
many countries within the region, prevention mechanisms can 
be key to address further land degradation and desertification. 
The use of Earth Observation Data for analyzing land 
degradation and desertification dynamics, in southern Africa is 
widely and consistently used. Under the Desert watch 
Extension project a consistent methodology to attain an 
Indicator of Susceptibility to Desertification was developed. In 
this paper we aim to implement the Indicator for Susceptibility 
to 
Desertification 
through 
Desert 
Watch 
Extension 
methodology, but employing new Earth Observation Data 
from the satellite mission of the Project On Board Vegetation-
Proba-V. Our preliminary results validated the use of this new 
Earth Observation data set for the analysis of the spatial 
variability as well as temporal dynamics of drought, one of the 
key driving factors of land degradation and desertification in 
the region. 
Keywords- the Southern Africa; desertification indicators; 
Proba-V; drought. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This study aims to analyse the new dynamics of 
desertification and land degradation indicators in Southern 
Africa. The study area comprises Southern Mozambique, 
Southern Zimbabwe and the Northern part of South Africa. 
The research goal is to produce an Indicator for 
Susceptibility of Desertification (ISD) through remote 
sensing data, namely the Proba-V (Project On Board 
Autonomous Vegetation)1. The Proba-V is satellite mission 
from European Spatial Agency (ESA) and Centre National d' 
Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and is providing new Earth 
Observation Data since June 2013. This product has the 
same performance as the Satellite Pour l’ Observation de la 
Terre – Vegetation (SPOT-VGT)2. Hence, it allows us to 
have series of data from 1998 to current days. 
                                                           
1 Proba Vegetation: small satellite for global vegetation http://proba-
v.vgt.vito.be/  
2 Spot-Vegetation programme http://www.spot-vegetation.com/  
The semi-arid areas cover almost 16% of African 
continent´s surface and represent about 5.1 million km2 [1].   
Dryland degradation affects much of Africa, in general, and 
Southern Africa, in particular [2]. There are several studies 
that sought to discriminate between climate and human-
induced dryland degradation in Southern Africa [3][4][5]. 
Among various factors, the cyclical occurrence of droughts 
at local level, as well as deforestation caused by farming and 
alike activities can increase the risk of desertification 
particularly in the semi-arid areas in Southern Africa [1]. 
The indicators about the susceptibility to desertification, 
particularly in the semi-arid areas in Southern Africa region, 
still requires further study. To what extent, through the use 
of the Proba-V-new remote sensing data - a steady and 
effective Indicator for Susceptibility of Desertification –
ISD, can be obtained for Southern Africa? Our research goal 
is to employ the Proba-V satellite imagery and the DW-E 
methodology for obtaining an affective Indicator for 
Susceptibility to Desertification. We consider that using this 
new data could represent a crucial step for consolidating the 
understanding of the dynamics of desertification in Southern 
Africa. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
In Southern Africa region, the driest months are July and 
August, whereas the rainiest months are December and 
January. Fundamentally, in the study area, two main seasons 
can be identified. One is cold and dry and another is hot and 
wet with about the same duration length of 6 months each. 
However, a decrease in precipitation can increase the 
likelihood of severe droughts. 
In the preliminary stages of this study, in order to 
calibrate the ISD using the new Proba-V images, the 
correlation between the Normalized Difference Vegetation 
Index (NDVI), extracted from Landsat (Thematic Mapper3, 
Enhanced Thematic Mapper plus 4  and Operational Land 
                                                           
3 Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) https://lta.cr.usgs.gov/TM    
4 Landsat Enhanced Thematic Mapper plus (TM) 
https://lta.cr.usgs.gov/LETMP  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

Imager–Thermal Infrared Sensor5), SPOT-VGT and Proba-V 
images, was investigated by each land cover class. The 
Landsat images were pre-processed: radiometric and 
atmospheric correction, dark-object subtraction method and 
cloud and shadow mask and upscaling for Proba-V and 
SPOT-VGT spatial resolution. The images used in the 
calibration were taken from the month of September (the end 
of the dry season) for the years 2001, 2008 and 2014. 
The dynamic of desertification indicators include: a) the 
number of days per year with precipitation below 1 
millimeter (RL1) was computed from climate reanalysis of 
the data from The European Centre for Medium-Range 
Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), and it was the input for 
climatic component; and b) biophysical component, which is 
based on NDVI and soil brightness analysis, by land cover 
class. As work in progress, the models of desertification 
indicators 
had 
been 
determined 
using 
geostatistical 
methodologies (kriging, co-kriging, stochastic simulations ) 
with 
the 
biophysical 
and 
the 
climatic 
indicators 
[6][7][8][9][10][11][12]. This methodology coupled with 
field work (direct observation) will be pivotal to validate the 
findings as well as to ensure consistency. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The Proba-V and SPOT-VGT data products had shown a 
significant correlation with Landsat image, allowing us to 
follow through with the next step, which is the ISD.  
Despite the decreasing in spatial resolution from 30m 
(Landsat) to 100m (and 300m) (Proba-V), the temporal 
resolution was increased from 2 images per month to 6 (and 
3) per month. This is one of the major enhancements that 
the Proba-V satellite provided on Open Earth Observation 
Data. 
Our results about climatic component (see Figure 1 and 
Figure 2), suggest that there could be a steady relationship 
between the spatial dynamic of drought and spatial 
variability of semi-arid areas over the region. Figure 1 
represents the Static Component, which is the average of the 
number of days per year with precipitation below 1 
millimeter (RL1). The highest values of the average of RL1 
(red spots), seem to be spatially distributed according to 
desert areas and semi-arid areas over the region. Figure 2 
represents the Dynamic Component, which is the slope of 
the variance of number of days per year with precipitation 
below 1 millimeter (RL1). The areas with high values (in 
red) experience the major variability in rainfall and these 
areas are distributed according to the semi-arid areas over 
the region. Overall, the climatic component analysis seems 
to show high levels of consistency with previous work on 
spatial dynamics of land degradation and desertification in 
Southern Africa [2]. We are working on soil component and 
we expect to obtain desertification indicator results with 
different spatial resolution (100m, 300m) using Proba-V 
images. 
                                                           
5 Landsat 8 OLI (operational Land Imager) and TIRS (Thermal Infrared 
Sensor) https://lta.cr.usgs.gov/L8  
In conclusion, the ISD in semi-arid areas, where the 
range of drought periods differed in magnitude in space and 
time, is 
significant 
for 
resources 
management 
and 
sustainable development strategy at national level. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the European Spatial 
Agency, under the project “Development of Earth 
Observation 
(EO) 
indicator 
for 
the 
Dynamic 
of 
Desertification in Southern Africa”: Alcantara Study 
Reference No.: Ref: 144P12 and Contract Number: 
AO4147864/14/F/MOS. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Kassas, M., “Desertification: a general review”, Journal of 
Arid Environments, Vol. 30(2), 1995, pp. 115–128, 
doi:10.1016/S0140-1963(05)80063-1) 
[2] Tyson, P. D., “Climate and desertification in Southern 
Africa”, 
GeoJournal, 
Vol. 
2(2), 
1981, 
pp. 
3–10, 
doi:10.1007/BF00196320. 
 
Figure 1. Climate Static Component 
 
Figure 2. Climate Dynamic Component 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies

[3] Barbier, E. B., “The economic linkages between rural poverty 
and land degradation: some evidence from Africa”, 
Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, Vol. 82(3), pp. 355–
370, doi:10.1016/S0167-8809(00)00237-1. 
[4] Evans, J., and Geerken, R., “Discrimination between climate 
and human-induced dryland degradation”, Journal of Arid 
Environments, 
Vol. 
57(4), 
2004, 
pp. 
535–554, 
doi:10.1016/S0140-1963(03)00121-6. 
[5] Wessels, K. J., Prince, S. D., Malherbe, J., Small, J., Frost, P. 
E., and VanZyl, D., “Can human-induced land degradation be 
distinguished from the effects of rainfall variability? A case 
study in South Africa”, Journal of Arid Environments, Vol. 
68(2), 
2007, 
pp. 
271–297, 
doi:10.1016/j.jaridenv.2006.05.015.. 
[6] Costa  A.C., Soares A., “Local spatiotemporal dynamics of 
a simple 
aridity 
index in 
a 
region 
susceptible 
to 
desertification”, Journal of Arid Environments, Vol. 87, 2012, 
pp. 8-18, (IF: 1.822). 
[7] Durão  R.M., Pereira M.J., Costa A.C., Delgado J., 
del Barriod G., Soares A., “Spatial-temporal dynamics 
of precipitation extremes 
in 
southern Portugal: 
A 
geostatistical 
assessment study”, International 
Journal 
of Climatology, Vol. 30(10), 2010, pp. 1526-1537, (IF: 
2.479): 
[8] Durão  
R.M., 
Pereira 
M.J., 
Branquinho 
C., 
Soares 
A., “Assessing spatial uncertainty of the Portuguese fire risk 
through direct sequential simulation”, Ecological Modelling, 
Vol. 221(1), 2010, pp. 27-33, (IF: 1.769). 
[9] Costa  A.C., Soares A., “Homogenization of Climate 
Data: Review and New Perspectives Using Geostatistics”. 
Mathematical Geosciences, Vol.  41(3), 2009, pp. 291-
305,  (IF: 0.848) 
[10] Costa  
A.C., 
Soares 
A., 
“Trends 
in 
extreme 
precipitation indices derived from a daily rainfall database for 
the South of Portugal”  International Journal of Climatology, 
Vol. 29(13), 2009, pp. 1956-1975, (IF: 2.347) 
[11] Durão  R., Pereira M.J., Costa A.C., Corte-Real J.M., Soares 
A., “Indices of precipitation extremes in Southern Portugal - a 
geostatistical approach”,  Natural Hazards and Earth System 
Sciences, Vol. 9(1), 2009, pp. 241-250. 
[12] Costa A.C., Durao R., Pereira M.J., Soares A., “Using 
stochastic space-time models to map extreme precipitation in 
southern Portugal”, Natural Hazards and Earth System 
Sciences. Vol 8(4), 2008, pp. 763-773. (IF: 1.345) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-410-7
BIONATURE 2015 : The Sixth International Conference on Bioenvironment, Biodiversity and Renewable Energies
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

