RelaySpot: A Framework for Opportunistic
Cooperative Relaying
Tauseef Jamal1, Paulo Mendes1, André Zúquete2
1SITI, R&D Unit of Informatics Systems and Technologies, Universidade Lusofona de Humanidades e
Tecnologias (ULHT), COFAC, Campo Grande 376, Lisbon, Portugal
{tauseef.jamal,paulo.mendes}@ulusofona.pt
2IEETA / Dep. Electronics, Telecommunications and Informatics University of Aveiro Campus Universitário de
Santiago 3810–193 Aveiro, Portugal
andre.zuquete@ua.pt
Abstract—Advances in wireless technologies, including more
powerful devices and low cost radio technologies, have po-
tential to drive an ubiquitous utilization of Internet services.
Nevertheless wireless technologies face performance limitations
due to unstable wireless conditions and mobility of devices.
In face of multi-path propagation and low data rate stations,
cooperative relaying promises gains in performance and relia-
bility. However, cooperation procedures are unstable (rely on
current channel conditions) and introduce overhead that can
endanger performance especially when nodes are mobile. In this
paper we describe a framework, called RelaySpot, to implement
cooperative wireless solutions in large mobile networks, based
upon the combination of opportunistic and cooperative methods.
RelaySpot based solutions are expected to minimize signaling ex-
change, remove estimation of channel conditions, and improve the
utilization of spatial diversity, minimizing outage and increasing
reliability.
Index Terms—Cooperative relaying; Opportunistic relaying;
Wireless Resource Management; Space-Time Diversity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, Internet access became essentially
wireless, with 802.11 technologies providing a low cost broad-
band support for a ﬂexible and easy deployment. However,
channel conditions in wireless networks are subjected to inter-
ference and multi-path propagation, creating fading channels
and decreasing the overall network performance. While fast
fading can be mitigated by having the source retransmitting
packets, slow fading, caused by obstruction of the main signal
path, makes retransmission useless, since periods of low signal
power lasts the entire duration of the transmission.
Extensive research has been done to mitigate the effect
of shadowing in wireless networks, being mostly focused on
Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) systems. Recently,
cooperative relaying techniques have been investigated to in-
crease the performance of wireless systems by using diversity
created by different single antenna devices, aiming to reach
the same level of performance of MIMO systems.
Cooperation occurs when overhearing relays assist the trans-
mission from source to destination by transmitting different
copies of the same signal from different locations, allowing the
destination to get independently faded versions of the signal
that can be combined to obtain an error-free signal [1].
Figure 1.
Cooperative Relaying
Figure 1 shows a pair of single antenna devices able to
act as relays of each other by forwarding some version
of “overheard” packets along with its own data. Because
the fading channels of two different devices are statistically
independent, this generates spatial diversity. The development
of cooperative relaying systems, of which Figure 1 illustrates
a simple scenario, raises several research issues including the
performance impact on the relay itself, and the interference on
the overall network leading to a potential decrease in network
capacity and transmission fairness.
At the link layer, IEEE 802.11 uses the CSMA/CA algo-
rithm to control medium access, being the Distributed Coor-
dination Function (DCF) the most common operation mode.
In scenarios with fading channels and low data rate stations,
high throughput, reliability, and coverage may be possible with
an efﬁcient cooperative Medium Access Control (MAC) layer
achieved by modifying the DCF signaling scheme.
The deﬁnition of MAC cooperative schemes poses several
challenges, specially in the presence of mobile nodes. A major
challenge is related to relay selection, which aims to identify
the most suitable relay(s) for assisting transmissions between
any pair of nodes. Research is ongoing to devise efﬁcient relay
selection at MAC layer, being the proposed approaches mostly
source or destination based. In the former case, the source
maintains a table with Channel State Information (CSI) of
neighboring devices to support relay selection. In destination-
based approaches, the destination decides whether to use
relaying or not, based on thresholds and CSI kept on the
destination and on potential relays. Both approaches incur in
some overhead (specially source-based) and are not efﬁcient
24
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

reacting to network changes, mainly in the presence of mobile
nodes.
In this paper, we present our arguments in favor of a
new type of cooperative relaying scheme based upon local
decisions that do not rely on unstable information (e.g., CSI)
collected over multiple links. We describe an 802.11 backward
compatible cooperative relaying framework, called RelaySpot,
that aims to ensure accurate and fast relay selection, posing
minimum overhead and reducing the dependency upon CSI
estimations, which is essential to increase the system perfor-
mance in scenarios with mobile nodes. The basic characteristic
of any RelaySpot-based solution is the capability to perform
local relaying decisions at potential relay nodes (can be more
than one), based on a combined utilization of opportunistic
relay selection and cooperative scheduling. Intermediate nodes
take the opportunity to relay in the presence of local favorable
conditions (e.g., no concurrent trafﬁc) and absence of relaying
attempts by any other nodes. Cooperative scheduling is used
to compensate unsuccessful relay transmissions. To the best of
our knowledge RelaySpot is the ﬁrst framework that aims to
create the basic conditions to allow relay selection to be done
without relying on CSI estimation.
II. STATE OF THE ART
Initial work in cooperative networking was mainly focused
on physical layer approaches aiming to achieve higher spatial
diversity. Although previous work shows the beneﬁt of coop-
eration in wireless networks, it does not deﬁne medium access
methods that would support new cooperative schemes. To
take full advantage of physical layer cooperative techniques,
new MAC schemes must change the transmitter-receiver com-
munication model to include a transmitter-relay(s)-receiver
model. Common examples of cooperative MAC source-based
cooperative relaying schemes are that use one relay [2], [3] or
two relays in parallel [4]. Source-based relaying approaches
require the source to maintain a table of CSI that is updated
by potential relays based upon periodic broadcasts. As an ex-
ample, with CoopMAC [2], the source can use an intermediate
node (called helper) that experiences relatively good channel
with the source and the destination. Instead of sending packets
directly to the destination at a low transmission rate, the source
makes use of a two-hop high data rate path to the desti-
nation via a helper. In case of CoopMAC, potential helpers
overhear ongoing RTS/CTS transmissions for measuring the
source-helper and helper-destination CSI. Based on the CSI
broadcasted by potential helpers, sources update a local table
(cooptable) used to select the best relay for each transmission.
Source-based approaches undergo two main problems: channel
estimation and periodic broadcasts, which introduce overhead
that is problematic in mobile scenarios.
While source-based proposals follow a proactive approach,
reactive cooperative methods [5], [6] rely on relays to re-
transmit on behalf of the source when the direct transmission
fails. An example is PRO [5], where relays are selected
among a set of overhearing nodes in two phases: First, a local
qualiﬁcation process takes place at potential relays, during
which the link quality is compared with some predeﬁned
threshold, leading to the identiﬁcation of qualiﬁed relays.
In a second phase qualiﬁcation information is broadcasted,
allowing qualiﬁed relays to set scheduling priorities. Reactive
approaches face the same challenges of source-based methods.
CoRe-MAC [7] is another reactive Cooperative MAC protocol.
In CoRe-MAC, when a NACK is overheard, candidate relays
send an AFR (Apply For Relay) message to the destination
within a ﬁxed number of slots. After receiving non colliding
AFRs, the destination elects best relay in term of highest
received SNR. However the destination does not know which
is the suitable number of AFR messages to wait for, in order
to reach a good decision. Moreover, the extra handshake mes-
sages introduce signiﬁcant overhead in case of relay failure.
N. Marchenko et al. propose a mechanism [8] where all
overhearing nodes estimate the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR)
for both source-relay and relay-destination channels, based on
which they can nominate themselves as potential relays. Po-
tential relays send a nomination message to the destination, by
selecting a slot in the contention window, and the destination
selects a most suitable relay among all the nominated nodes.
This proposal has several drawback: i) geographic position of
nodes is assumed to be known; ii) the size of the contention
window has great inﬂuence in selecting the best relay; iii)
the destination node is not aware of the number of nominated
relays.
In the case of multi-hop networks the performance gain
of cooperative relaying may be exploited by ﬁnding a node
that assists the transmission for every hop. Although the gain
achieved through cooperation diversity increases robustness,
it requires retransmissions reducing network capacity. Such a
hop base cooperation scheme neglects a crucial evidence: not
only the destination of a packet might be in need of help but
also the next hop. An alternative approach may be to use two-
in-one cooperation [6], in which a single retransmission can
improve the success probability of two ordinary transmissions
(source to next-hop and next-hop to destination), leading
to a better usage of the network capacity. In two-in-one
cooperation all potential relays react after detecting a missing
Acknowledgment (ACK) from the destination. Although two-
in-one cooperation can achieve a diversity gain of three, the
most suitable relay selection scheme is not investigated.
In what concerns relay selection mechanisms, the basic
mechanism deﬁnes an opportunistic behavior in which all
overhearing nodes estimate the CSI of sender-node and node-
destination links based on which they set a timer such that
nodes with better channel conditions broadcast ﬁrst their
qualiﬁcation as relays, or even data to be relayed [9]. Such
mechanisms present a high probability of collision, as well as
low efﬁciency in mobile scenarios due to CSI measurements.
Nevertheless, opportunistic relaying has been modiﬁed aiming
to increase its efﬁciency level [10], [11]. For instance, with
relaying on demand [12], the basic relay selection mechanism
[9] was modiﬁed with the introduction of a receiver thresh-
old aiming to improve energy savings. With on-demand ap-
proaches nodes with bad channel conditions do not participate
in relay selection. However, such approaches still rely upon
RTS/CTS for channel estimation, leading to high overheads.
For better understanding of the different type of relay selec-
25
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

tion schemes, Jamal and Mendes [13] devised a comprehensive
analysis and taxonomy.
III. RELAYSPOT
Relay selection is a challenging task, since it greatly affects
the design and performance of a cooperative network. On
the one hand, cooperation is beneﬁcial for the network, but
on the other hand it introduces extra overhead (e.g., CSI
estimation). The major goal of RelaySpot is to minimize
overhead introduced by cooperation, with no performance
degradation.
Unlike previous work, RelaySpot does not require mainte-
nance of CSI tables, avoiding periodic updates and consequent
broadcasts. The reason to avoid CSI metrics is that accurate
CSI is even harder to estimate in dynamic networks, and
periodic broadcasts would need to be very fast to guarantee
accurate reaction to channel conditions. Moreover, relay se-
lection faces several optimization problems that are difﬁcult
to solve, which means that the best relay may be difﬁcult to
ﬁnd. Hence, for dynamic scenarios, the solution may be to
make use of the best possible relaying opportunity even if
not the optimal one (e.g., in terms of CSI). By achieving the
best performance over the faced conditions, RelaySpot aims
to target a fair balance between relay selection and additional
resource blockage.
In summary, RelaySpot aims to select the relay(s) based
only on information local to potential relays, with minimum
computational effort and overhead. The remaining of this
section describes RelaySpot opportunistic relay selection, co-
operative relay scheduling, and chain relaying mechanisms.
A. Opportunistic Relay Selection
The relay selection process only takes into account nodes
that are able to successfully decode packets sent by a source.
This ensures that potential relays are closely bounded with
the source, with which they have good channel conditions.
The qualiﬁcation of a node as a relay depends upon local
information related to node degree, load, mobility and history
of transmissions to the speciﬁed destination, and not to CSI.
Node degree, estimated by overhearing the shared wireless
medium, gives an indication about the probability of having
successful relay transmissions: having information about the
number of neighbors allows the minimization of the collision
risk as well as blockage of resources. However, it is possible
that nodes with low degree are overloaded due to local
processing demands, leading to delay.
Equation 1 estimates the interference level that a potential
relay is subjected to as a function of node degree and load.
Let N be the number of neighbors of a potential relay, Td and
Ti the propagation time of direct and indirect transmissions
involving such potential relay, respectively, and Ni and Nd
the number of nodes involved in such indirect and direct
transmissions (indirect transmissions are the ones overheard
by the potential relay, and direct transmissions are the ones
ending and starting at the potential relay). Adding to this, Tp
is the time required for a potential relay to process the result
of a direct transmission. The interference factor (I) affecting
a potential relay has a minimum value of zero corresponding
to no direct or indirect transmissions.
I =
Nd
X
j=1
(Tdj + Tpj) +
Ni
X
k=1
Tik, I ∈ [0, ∞[
(1)
The goal is to select as relay a node that has low interference
factor, which means few neighbors (ensuring low blockage
probability), short transmissions and few direct transmissions
(ensuring low delays).
Figure 2 shows a scenario where node R is selected as a
potential relay. Node N1 is the direct neighbor of node R,
while there are several other indirect neighbors (N2,N3,N4,
X). Apart from R, node X also seems to be a relay candidate
due to its low interference level. But it may be difﬁcult to select
R or X due to the similar interference levels: while R has a
short transmission from a neighbor and a long transmission
from the source, X is involved in an inverse situation. The
selection of R or X as a relay can be done based on two other
metrics of the RelaySpot framework: history of successful
transmissions towards destination; stability of potential relays.
Figure 2.
Opportunistic relay selection scenario
Although it is ensured that potential relays have good chan-
nel with the source, the quality of the relay-destination channel
is unknown. Without performing measurement of CSI for the
relay-destination channel, channel conditions can be estimated
based on the successful ratio of previous transmissions towards
the destination (history factor) and the current stability of a
potential relay (mobility factor). The history factor (H), is
estimated as a ratio between an exponential moving average
of the duration of successful transmissions and the maximum
duration of any successful transmission (HM), variable that
is initiated to a time unit. The factor H aims to tell whether
the intended relay has probabilistically a good channel with
the required destination, without the need to estimate and
broadcast channel information.
The mobility factor (M) is estimated as a ratio between an
exponential moving average of the pause time of the node and
the maximum detected pause time (MM), which is initiated
to a time unit. The factor M aims to select more stable nodes
as relays.
26
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

Based on the interference factor of a node, as well as its
history and mobility factors, the probability of selecting a node
as relay for a given destination is given by Equation 2, which
shows that the selection factor (S) is proportional to the history
of successful transmissions to the destination and the pause
time, and inversely proportional to the interference level of
the node.
S = H ∗ M
1 + I , S ∈ [0, 1[
(2)
Lets go back to Figure 2 to illustrate the usage of Equation
2. Lets assume that R is a node that moves frequently around
the destination with a good history of successful transmissions.
While X is a node with long pause times but that is new near
the destination. In this case, Equation 2 may gives preference
to node R, although it presents a higher mobility factor than
X.
After overhearing data packets or RTS towards a destination,
a potential relay uses the estimated selection factor (S) to
compute the size of its contention window (CW), between
a predeﬁned minimum and maximum values of CWmin and
CWmax, as given by Equation 3.
CW = CWmin + (1 − S) (CWmax − CWmin)
(3)
From a group of nodes that present good channel conditions
with the source, the opportunistic relay selection mechanism
gives preference to nodes that have low degree, low load, good
history of previous communication with the destination, as
well as low mobility. In scenarios with highly mobile nodes,
we expect opportunistic relay selection to behave better than
source-based relay selection (e.g., CoopMAC), since with the
latter communications can be disrupted with a probability
proportional to the mobility of potential relays, and relays may
not be available anymore after being selected by the source.
As illustrated in Figure 3 the selection mechanism may
leads to the qualiﬁcation of more than one relay each one
with different values of S, depending on current conditions.
Selected relays will forward data towards destination based
on its cooperative relay scheduling mechanism.
Figure 3.
Opportunistic relay selection
B. Cooperative Relay Scheduling
This section describes the functionality proposed to allow
self-elected relays to avoid high interference and to guarantee
high data rates to a destination while preventing waste of
network resources.
The contention window (computed in Eq 3) plays an im-
portant role in scheduling relay opportunities. The goal is
to increase the probability of successful transmissions from
relays to the destination by giving more priority to relays
that are more closely bounded to the destination, while not
neglecting the help that secondary relays may give. Increasing
diversity, by allowing the destination to receive multiple copies
of the same packet, aims to construct error free packets while
avoiding re-transmissions.
Based on the quality of the packets received from all self-
elected relays, the destination estimates which of the involved
relays are more suitable to help in further transmissions (to get
multiple copies the receiver only process received packets after
a predeﬁned time window). By sending a list of priority relays
embedded in ACKs the destination allows potential relays to
improve the accuracy of the back-off time computation in
next transmissions (relay with highest priority sends and the
other back-off but keep overhearing the transmission). This
functionality leads to a space-time diversity, which leverage
the space diversity used by prior art (e.g., CoopMAC). Space-
time diversity is achieved by allowing the usage of different
relays over time, helping the same source-destination commu-
nication.
Cooperation between selected relays, identiﬁed by the pri-
ority list embeded in ACK message, aims to ensure a high
probability of selecting the best set of nodes as relays over
time. Decision to switch relays is done as a consequence
of a transmission. Figure 4 illustrates the cooperative relay
scheduling, in a situation where R1, R2 and R3 are self-
elected as relays, with R3 having smaller CW than R1 and
R2 (as illustrated in Figure 3). Based on the quality of the
received packets, the destination is able to decode the data by
combining the packets received from R1 and R2.
In this situation the destination sends an ACK having R1 and
R2 as primary relays and R3 as secondary one i.e., ACK(R1,
R2; R3). This means that in the next transmission R1 and R2
will transmit (diversity 2) and R3 will back-off and overhear
the transmission. Cooperative scheduling allows to keep a
source-destination transmission in a good shape even when
the primary relay is not useful anymore.
Figure 4.
Cooperation relay scheduling
C. Chain relaying
The proposed opportunistic relay selection and cooperative
relay scheduling mechanisms aim to increase throughput and
reliability, as well as to reduce transmission delay by increas-
ing the diversity adjusting the relaying order. Nevertheless,
the presence of mobile nodes, as well as unstable wireless
27
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

conditions, may require higher levels of diversity achieved
based on nodes that are closed to the destination (higher
probability of successful transmissions). Hence, RelaySpot
includes the possibility of using recursive relay selection and
retransmissions in case of poor performance. This functionality
is called chain relaying (c.f. Figure 5).
In a chain relaying, the relaying process is repeated for
the relay-destination channel (R1-D and R2-D in Figure 5),
by having another relay (R4) or set of relays helping the
transmission from each of the previously selected relays to the
destination. R4 may not receive correct packets from source,
but it is closely bounded to R1 as well as to the destination. R4
can trigger chain relaying when both primary and secondary
relays fail, which can be detected after overhearing of two
recurring NACK messages (or the absence of ACKs/ NACKs)
during a predeﬁned time window. Chain relaying aims to
minimize the outage and to increase the overall throughput
by complementing the cooperative scheduling functionality.
Figure 5.
Chain relaying
IV. RELAYSPOT ALGORITHM IN A NUTSHELL
The RelaySpot process is triggered by potential relays
themselves (the ones with correct copies) if no ACK from the
destination is overheard (c.f. Figure 6). RelaySpot operation,
for a speciﬁc pair source-destination ends when there are no
more packets to be send or when the destination informs the
relays to stop relaying packets, after detecting that the number
of damaged packets received through the direct channel from
the source have decreased below a predeﬁned threshold. This
action aims to increase network capacity by allowing relays
to help other endangered transmissions.
Since the opportunistic relay selection process can lead to
several relays being selected, self-elected relays may adjust
their priority based on the information collected from the ACK
sent by the destination. The goal is to give higher priority to
successful relaying operations in future transmissions.
Figure 6.
RelaySpot start-up ﬂow
Due to the unpredictable conditions of relay-destination
channels, the RelaySpot process can be repeated in a recursive
process having relays as sources (Chain Relaying). Nodes
that are able to successfully decode packets sent by a relay
to a destination may trigger the RelaySpot operation on that
relay-destination channel in case the channel conditions are
so bad that the node will overhear two consecutive NACK
(or the absence of ACKs/ NACKs) during a predeﬁned time
window. This means that relays closer to the destination can
help the transmission when the destination does not get any
(acceptable) packet from any relay in contact with the source.
Figure 7 illustrates the operation of the RelaySpot algorithm
in comparison to CoopMAC. Lets consider that we have three
potential relays (R1, R2, and R3), where R3 is the best (pri-
mary) relay. Figure 7 starts by showing that with CoopMAC
at time T0 potential relays do some CSI computation and then
broadcast it to source, while at that time RelaySpot potential
relays does local computations of I and M factors without any
transmission.
At time T1 CoopMAC relays undergoes three way hand-
shake by introduction of “Helper ready To Send” (HTS) mes-
sage, while RelaySpot potential relays updates local factors I
and M without any transmission.
At time T2, CoopMAC sends data via the selected helper
i.e., R3. RelaySpot potential relays ﬁrst computes the selection
factor S and CW after the reception of data from source,
selecting R3 and R1 as relays, which then transmit data
to the destination, achieve higher diversity than CoopMAC.
The destination notiﬁes the relays (in ACK message), about
priority order for future transmission i.e., ACK(R3; R1). After
receiving the ACK, R1 will back-off since R3 seems to be
suitable to provide reliable transmissions.
At time T3, R3, the primary relay, moves away. In such case
CoopMAC will repeat from start the relay selection procedure
after a maximum number of retries. While in RelaySpot, the
secondary relay R1 (in this example) will try to help the
transmission and will send data to destination on behalf of
source after detecting the missing ACK for R3 transmission
(or detecting NACK). If this is successful, destination will
send ACK(R1).
At time T4 we suppose that R1 is unable to cooperate too.
In this situation R4 overhears two consecutive NACKs during
a predeﬁned time frame. Thus chain relaying will occur as
other nodes (R1, R2, and R3) are not suitable anymore. In
case of CoopMAC when there is no suitable relays, poor direct
transmission will take place leading to outage.
At time T5 the destination move closer to source and the
direct link between source and destination become stronger.
In RelaySpot when the destination starts receiving the correct
packets from source, it notiﬁes the relays to stop cooperation
(i.e., ACK(s) ) and continue receiving the direct data, while
in CoopMAC the data will be still relayed over the selected
relay (R3 in this example).
V. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
Most of the current cooperative relaying approaches use
only one relay, selected based on CSI estimations, without
28
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

Figure 7.
Illustration of the RelaySpot algorithm with chain relaying
exploiting different relays in parallel or in sequence. The
proposed RelaySpot framework provides a set of functional
building blocks aiming to opportunistically exploit the usage
of several relays to ensure accurate and fast relay selection,
posing minimum overhead and reducing the dependency upon
CSI estimations in scenarios with mobile nodes. The proposed
building blocks are related to opportunistic relay selection,
cooperative relay scheduling, and chain relaying. With very
dynamic channel conditions, it is expected that any solution
based on the RelaySpot framework will have better perfor-
mance than previous relaying proposals due to its combination
of opportunistic and cooperation operations.
As future work, we aim to implement an instantiation of
the RelaySpot framework in a test-bed aiming to prove the
efﬁciency of this new type of cooperative relaying schemes.
We expect to prove the potential of the RelaySpot achieve-
ments in terms of outage, delay and throughput, as well as
to investigate the adjustment for the source retransmission,
contention window and chain relaying timers. Finally, the
impact of the hidden and expose node problems needs to
be addressed, because the RelaySpot framework proposes to
avoid RTS/CTS messages since their utilization depends on
packet size and increasing overhead.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Thanks
are
due
to
FCT
for
PhD
grant
number
SFRH/BD/60436/2009. The research leading to these results
has received funding from the European Commission’s Sev-
enth Framework Programme (FP7) under grant agreement n°
257418, project ULOOP (User-centric Wireless Local Loop).
REFERENCES
[1] W. Elmenreich, N. Marchenko, H. Adam, C. Hofbauer, G. Brandner,
C. Bettstetter, and M. Huemer, “Building Blocks of Cooperative Re-
laying in Wireless Systems,” Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Springer, vol. 125, no. 10, pp. 353–359, Oct. 2008.
[2] P. Liu, Z. Tao, S. Narayanan, T. Korakis, and S. Panwar, “CoopMAC: A
Cooperative MAC for Wireless LANs,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 340–354, Feb. 2007.
[3] Z. Hao and C. Guohong, “rDCF: A Relay-Enabled Medium Access
Control Protocol for Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, vol. 5, Mar. 2006.
[4] K. Tan, Z. Wan, H. Zhu, and J. Andrian, “CODE: Cooperative Medium
Access for Multirate Wireless Ad Hoc Network,” in Proc. of IEEE
SECON, California, USA, Jun. 2007.
[5] L. Mei-Hsuan, S. Peter, and C. Tsuhan, “Design, Implementation and
Evaluation of an Efﬁcient Opportunistic Retransmission Protocol,” in
Proc. Of IEEE MobiCom, Beijing, China, Apr. 2009.
[6] H. S. Lichte, S. Valentin, H. Karl, I. Aad, L. Loyola, and J. Widmer,
“Design and Evaluation of a Routing-Informed Cooperative MAC Pro-
tocol for Ad Hoc Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE INFOCOM, Phoenix,
USA, Apr. 2008.
[7] H. Adam, W. Elmenreich, C. Bettstetter, and S. M. Senouci, “CoRe-
MAC: A MAC-Protocol for Cooperative Relaying in Wireless Net-
works,” in Proc. of IEEE GLOBECOM, Honolulu, Hawaii, Dec. 2009.
[8] N. Marchenko, E. Yanmaz, H. Adam, and C. Bettstetter, “Selecting a
Spatially Efﬁcient Cooperative Relay,” in Proc. of IEEE GLOBECOM,
Honolulu, Hawaii, Dec. 2009.
[9] A. Bletsas, A. Khisti, D. Reed, and A. Lippman, “A simple Cooperative
Diversity Method Based on Network Path Selection,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 659–672, Mar.
2006.
[10] K.-S. Hwang and Y.-C. Ko, “An Efﬁcient Relay Selection Algorithm for
Cooperative Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE VTC, Baltimore, USA, Oct.
2007.
[11] Y. Chen, G. Yu, P. Qiu, and Z. Zhang, “Power-Aware Cooperative Relay
Selection Strategies in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE
PIMRC, Helsinki, Finland, Sep. 2006.
[12] H. Adam, C. Bettstetter, and S. M. Senouci, “Adaptive Relay Selection
in Cooperative Wireless Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE PIMRC, Cannes,
France, Sep. 2008.
[13] T. Jamal and P. Mendes, “Relay Selection Approaches for Wireless
Cooperative Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE WiMob, Niagara Falls, Canada,
Oct. 2010.
29
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

