A Service-Based Model for the Internet Value Chain
Erika Pigliapoco and Alessandro Bogliolo
University of Urbino
Urbino, Italy 61029
Email:

access-based and service-based business models, we adopt a
7-stage VC obtained by separating the Internet core from the
access network (both of them included into the Connectivity
segment in A.T. Kearney’s report) and by distinguishing the
services provided over the top (OTT) from those provided
within operators’ managed networks (the latter not explicitly
mentioned in the above report).
Figure 1.
The Internet value chain.
The resulting VC, shown in Figure 1, is composed of the
following stages: contents and applications (stage 1), that
could be either copy righted or generated by end-users; OTT
online services (stage 2), made globally available on the In-
ternet; support technologies (stage 3), which include content
delivery overlay networks and hosting services; Internet core
(stage 4), made of interchange points and core networks
of incumbent operators; online services provided within
managed networks (stage 5), which include IPTV services;
access networks (stage 6), which include both backhauling
and retail access up to the network termination points made
available to end-users; user devices (stage 7), which include
HW/SW user interfaces and customer premises equipment
(CPE) used to connect to network termination points.
It is worth noticing that stage 4 includes both operators’
backbones and interchange points, so that Figure 1 does not
point out the re-distribution of value within the Internet core,
which is governed by peering agreements and managed by
international organizations.
According to historical data of market capitalization [2],
VC segments have followed very different trends in the
recent past: while stages 2, 3, and 7 have known a signiﬁcant
growth from 2004 to 2010 (4x, 2x, and 5x respectively),
stages 1, 4, and 6 have not taken any advantage of the
fast increase in Internet trafﬁc and their capitalization has
slightly decreased in the same period. As for segment 5,
mainly represented by IPTV market, the compound annual
growth rate is expected to be around 25% until 2014 [6].
The
imbalance
of
Internet
market
capitalization
is
schematically represented in Figure 2 in order to provide a
qualitative perception of the bottlenecks which risk to impair
network development.
A. Access-Based Value Chain
The current functioning of the network is dominated by
two main features. The ﬁrst one is vertical integration, which
is the absorption into a single organization (namely, the so-
called operator) of all the aspects required to go from the
Internet core to end-users, often including even the provision
Figure 2.
Schematic representation of the unbalanced capitalization of the
Internet value chain.
of customer equipment (vertical integration is represented as
a dashed macro-stage in Figure 2). The second one is the
all-or-nothing offer of Internet access, which gives to end-
users only the categorical choice between subscribing to full
access to the network, or being completely cut off. Internet
access is typically sold at a monthly ﬂat fee depending only
on the nominal (i.e., maximum) bandwidth at user’s disposal.
From operators’ stand point this business model was orig-
inally motivated by the perspective of: attracting costumers
with a simple offer, avoiding the operating costs of complex
accounting policies, taking advantage from average individ-
ual use well below the nominal bandwidth, and exploiting
statistical sharing to over-book the bandwidth available.
From end-users’ stand point, the model has induced the
misleading perception that: Internet bandwidth is the only
good customers pay for (while they also pay for access
infrastructures and CPE), the nominal bandwidth is the
actual one they are entitled to use all the time (while it
represents only a peak value they are not allowed to pass),
and the more they use the network the more convenient their
contracts become (while the monthly rate was determined
assuming they would not have used the Internet all the time).
From OTT service providers’ stand point, the access-
based business model has created a global market where to
offer their services without caring about transport, allowing
them to deliver most services for free and to get money from
commercial sponsors.
It is a matter of fact that the Internet has become a two-
sided market where the apparent gratuitousness of trafﬁc
has created a short-circuit between the two sides (namely,
service providers and end-users), cutting off from revenues
network operators, which lay in the middle.
The ultimate effect of this phenomenon is the so-called
cloud computing: users feel Internet services to be so close
to them and reachable at no additional costs, that they keep
on the cloud even their personal ﬁles that could ﬁt at no cost
in the storage devices embedded in their smart phones.
Although such a short circuit has signiﬁcantly contributed
to the diffusion of the Internet and to the development
of advanced online services, the model suffers from many
14
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

weaknesses which make it unsuitable to sustain the expo-
nential development.
First, the advent of a huge variety of services with
different bandwidth requirements has created a signiﬁcant
spread of usage patterns with a consequent inequality among
users who pay the same fee in spite of heterogeneous needs
(for instance, 1% of mobile data subscribers generate over
20% of mobile data trafﬁc [7]). If such a monthly fee is
higher than the perceived value of the Internet, individuals
may be not motivated enough to subscribe.
Second, there are stages in the VC of Figure 2 (such as
stage 6) which signiﬁcantly contribute to the costs incurred
by operators without generating any direct value, since
they are hidden to end-users. This misalignment between
costs and revenues impairs innovation because operators
are neither motivated to invest in access infrastructures
nor interested in boosting the development of bandwidth-
intensive services.
Third, as the average individual use gets close to the nom-
inal bandwidth included in the monthly fee, over-booking
causes the congestion of access networks with consequent
loss of quality of service (QoS).
To contrast these effects, operators have tried to ﬁnd scope
economies by adopting the so-called triple-play market strat-
egy, which consists in providing additional services (namely,
IPTV and VoIP) within the walled gardens of their own
networks. Moreover, they have been induced to apply trafﬁc
shaping and access tiering techniques in order to delay the
congestion of their networks and to mitigate its effects on
QoS.
Governments, on the other hand, have come on stage in
many ways in order to bridge digital divide, foster competi-
tion, and defend end-users’ interests. In particular, public
funds have been allocated in many countries to ﬁnance
the development of next generation networks (NGNs) and
the deployment of access infrastructures in market failure
regions, regulations have been enacted to impose incumbent
operators to make their infrastructures available to new
entrants at controlled wholesale/unbundling conditions, and
network neutrality has been enforced by preventing operators
from adopting access tiering policies and from establishing
commercial relationships with OTT service providers.
If state interventions can play a signiﬁcant role in trigger-
ing development, they cannot guarantee sustainability (if not
complemented by private investments and not supported by
suitable business models) and they often produce side effects
that may even end up thwarting their own original purposes.
This is the case of neutrality enforcement and local loop
unbundling, which discourage private investments in NGNs
by reducing business opportunities, by avoiding bandwidth
optimizations, and by making the break-even point unreach-
able in many scenarios. Moreover, state ﬁnancial aids, even
if targeted only to access networks (stage 6 in the VC),
create signiﬁcant distortions in many other markets (stages
4, 5, and 7 in the VC) because of vertical integration and
triple-play market strategies currently adopted by incumbent
operators.
B. Service-Based Value Chain
Figure 3.
Service-based Internet value chain.
The VC proposed in this section is based on two main
features: vertical separation, as opposed to vertical in-
tegration, and service orientation, as opposed to access
orientation typical of the current Internet model discussed
in the previous subsection.
Technically speaking, separation is an inherent property of
the Internet induced by the layered structure of its protocol
stack. Network neutrality, which has been one of the main
driving forces behind Internet development and innovation,
was naturally induced by the layered architecture before
becoming a controversial principle. In this context, vertical
separation is particularly intended as market segmentation,
which enables each segment in the VC to be possibly
managed by different actors who interact with all other
segments by means of transparent and proﬁtable commercial
relationships. Separation also enables each market segment
to make business with other industry sectors and public
organizations, not represented in the VC, or to be targeted by
state ﬁnancial aids and welfare policies. Vertical separation
has been identiﬁed by ITU as one of the four technology
implications on market structure which prompt for new
business models, the other three implications being service
innovation, network innovation, and horizontal integration
(i.e., network convergence) [8].
Service orientation, which is the second distinguishing
feature of the proposed VC, means the opportunity for end-
users to directly focus on the services they need, even if they
have not yet established commercial relationships with any
operator. There are many motivations for focusing on ser-
vices (delivered both OTT and within managed networks):
services/applications are at the top of the TCP/IP stack, they
are much more attractive than their enabling technologies
(i.e., connection and transport), they provide great opportu-
nities of diversiﬁcation and innovation, and they have proved
capable of taking advantage of trafﬁc growth. Although
market capitalization data clearly demonstrate that services
are the main driving force of the Internet, current business
models do not provide adequate instruments to distribute the
revenues along the VC in order to support the development
required at all its stages.
15
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

An ideal representation of a service-based VC is provided
in Figure 3. End-users establish direct relationships with ser-
vice providers (SPs), who operate both at stage 2 (OTT) and
at stage 5 (within managed networks). These interactions,
which may or may not involve payments, are represented by
black arrows with label (a) in Figure 3, where thick arrows
with label (b) represent revenues coming from sponsorships,
advertisements, and any other form of business made with
stakeholders who take advantage of the Internet without
being directly involved in the VC. Both type-a and type-
b incomes are collected at stages 2 and 5, even if all stages
contribute to the VC. Transparent relations among the actors
operating at different stages are then needed to enable a fair
redistribution of revenues along the service-based VC. Inter-
stage redistributions are represented by horizontal arrows in
Figure 3. Finally, dashed arrows with label (c) represent
ﬁnancial aids possibly targeting backbones (stage 4) and
access infrastructures (stage 6).
Stage 7 (i.e., CPE) is shadowed in Figure 3 and it is not
involved in any inter-stage commercial transaction because
it is a thriving market by itself, which is expected to be able
to keep following and supporting Internet growth without the
need for signiﬁcant changes in its business model. In other
terms, end-users’ devices (such as smart phones, net books,
PCs, set-top-boxes, ...) can be considered to be already at
users’ disposal, since customers are highly motivated to pay
for them. Hence, they can be neglected in our analysis since
they are neither a bottleneck to be overcome, nor a source
of revenues suitable to be redistributed along the VC. Notice
however that the lack of interactions between stage 7 and the
rest of the VC does not mean that CPE cannot be provided
by operators (as they usually are in current business models).
Rather, it simply means that this kind of scope economies
are not considered to be relevant for network development.
Internet bandwidth is nothing but a special kind of service
provided at stage 5 by Internet servise providers (ISPs) who
manage gateways placed between access networks (stage
6) and Internet core (stage 4). Access infrastructures are
assumed to be open to end-users, whose CPE associates
for free in order to allow them to gain access to online
services (including Internet bandwidth). SPs and ISPs pay a
fee to the operators managing the access network in order to
be allowed to expose their services to connected end-users.
As long as SPs share their revenues with access network
operators, the latter are motivated to open their networks to
end-users, in that they add to the value of the network by
making it more attractive for SPs. This allows operators to
take advantage of the development of the two-sided market
they enable, and provides the motivation required to invest
in access infrastructures.
OTT SPs may keep exposing their services on the Internet
without establishing direct relationships with network opera-
tors. In this case, they can be reached by end-users who sub-
scribed with some ISP to gain access to the Internet, while
they will not be reached by end-users who have connected
only to the access infrastructure without buying Internet
bandwidth. On the other hand, OTT SPs can decide to enter
into a contract with an operator to make their services also
reachable, within managed access networks, to end-users
who associated for free with the access infrastructure. In
the ﬁrst case the trafﬁc generated within the acces network
is paid by end-users (as a share of the fee they pay to ISPs),
while in the second case it is paid by SPs. Finally, depending
on the nature of the services, OTT SPs may or may not share
their revenues with content providers (stage 1) and enabling
technology providers (stage 3).
Although many different business models can be con-
ceived and adopted, commercial relationships should be
mainly based on IP trafﬁc in order to provide the so-called
price-signal which acts as a positive feedback in triggering
and sustaining development.
In summary, the service-based VC provides a suitable
support for development and growth, in that it lowers access
barriers for end-users, it reduces information asymmetry by
avoiding end-users to be billed unawarely for the trafﬁc
generated by the services they use, and it allows operators
to establish transparent commercial relationships with SPs
without violating network neutrality. In fact, neutrality is
preserved as long as the same conditions are applied at each
stage to all the actors playing the same role in the VC.
III. A SERVICE-BASED MODEL
Figure 4. Interactions between end-users and SPs in a service-based neutral
access network.
Moving from an access-based to a service-based model
implies a paradigm shift in the Internet VC. While at some
stages such change can emerge from the natural evolution
of current business models, at some others it prompts for
innovative architectural and commercial models. The most
challenging issue in this context is the re-design of the
relationships among end-users, operators, and SPs across
access infrastructures. To this purpose, a suitable support can
be provided by the so-called neutral access network (NAN)
model [9].
16
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

NANs are a special category of open access networks
[10] conceived to make the access infrastructures econom-
ically sustainable in market-failure regions by triggering
positive externalities and enhancing penetration [11]. A
NAN exhibits the features of a full-ﬂedged network by
itself, containing a sizeable set of services made available
to the users before they register with any ISP. End-users
are allowed to associate with the NAN for free without
prehemptive registration. Once the users have entered the
NAN, they are exposed to all the services made available
within the network, including Internet surﬁng through the
gateways managed by ISPs. Registration and authentication
are required only to gain access to the Internet or to
those internal services which require user identiﬁcation for
accounting, personalization, privacy, or security needs. The
entry of a new user into the NAN has a beneﬁcial effect
for all other users since it helps reaching the critical mass
of users required to incentivize the provisioning of new
services. Similarly, the entry of a new SP has a spillover
beneﬁt for all other providers since it induces new users to
enter the shared marketplace and it contributes to cover the
costs of the infrastructure. Service orientation is natural in
a NAN. End users have commercial relationships only with
SPs (including ISPs), who pay a share of their revenues to
the NAN organization. The share is then possibly distributed
among multiple stakeholders: real estate owners, investors,
and local operators.
Figure 4 represents the possible relations that can be
established in a NAN. Vertical solid arrows stay for IP
trafﬁc, dotted arrows stay for direct transactions between
end-users and SPs, horizontal solid arrows stay for revenues
coming from markets outside the VC (including sponsorhips
and advertisment), while dashed arrows stay for commer-
cial relationships between SPs and NAN operators. Three
paradigmatic cases are depicted, referring to three end-users
who are assumed to be connected for free to the NAN by
means of their own CPE.
Case 1. End-user u1 wants to gain full access to the Inter-
net. To this purpose, he/she registers with one of the virtual
operators (namely, ISP1) offering Internet bandwidth in the
NAN. The conditions at which Internet bandwidth is sold by
ISP1 include the share he has to pay to the NAN operator
for transporting u1’s trafﬁc across the NAN. Once on the
Internet, u1 takes advantage of the service delivered by an
OTT SP (namely, SP1) without taking care of transport.
This case reproduces the same user experience of current
access-based models, while retaining the beneﬁts of service
orientation. Commercial agreements between ISP1 and NAN
operators can assume the form of a wholesale contract, but
the key novelty is that u1 connected to the NAN before
registering with ISP1 and was allowed to choose the ISP as
a service.
Case 2. End-user u2 associates to the NAN without buy-
ing Internet bandwidth since it is only interested in a speciﬁc
service (like tourist information, e-government, IPTV, ...)
which is supplied by SP2 within the access network. The
only relation he/she has to establish is with SP2, who is
supposed to pay a fee to the NAN operator for web hosting
and transport. Revenues for SP2 can come either from end-
users (if they pay for the service), or from sponsors/subsidies
(if the service is delivered for free), or from both (if a mixed
model is adopted, such as the one of IPTVs providing both
free channels and pay-per-view contents).
Case 3. End-user u3 behaves exactly as u2, even if the
service he/she wants to use is provided by an OTT SP
(namely, SP3). This is made possible by the agreement
between SP3 and the NAN operator, signed to expose the
online service of SP3 within the NAN. From a technical
point of view, this could be done in many different ways,
including mirroring, proximity caching, and white listing.
The trafﬁc generated across the NAN is then paid by
SP3, while the service he/she provides makes the access
infrastructure more attractive.
The trade-off between network neutrality, bandwidth opti-
mization, and capitalization is reached thanks to the nature of
the commercial relations established at all stages, which are
not discriminatory, not exclusive, and inherently regulated
by market law.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In spite of the exponential growth of Internet trafﬁc,
the unequal distribution of revenues along the Internet VC,
together with the imbalance between costs and revenues
caused by the business models currently adopted by network
operators, risk to impair evolution towards broadband next
generation networks.
The VC is like a pipeline the capacity of which is limited
by the thinnest pipe, so that a fair distribution of revenues
along the VC is essential to trigger and sustain network
development.
The Internet VC has been analysed in order to point
out the limitations of current access-based models and to
propose a paradigm shift towards a new service-based ap-
proach. Service orientation, complemented by suitable busi-
ness models, allows all stages of the VC to take advantage
of the attractiveness and diversity of online services and
to beneﬁt from the revenues they can generate in terms of
sponsorships and advertisement.
It has been shown that neutral access networks provide a
suitable support to the adoption of a service-based model,
allowing end-users to connect for free to the access infras-
tructure and then focus only on the services they need,
including Internet bandwidth. The systematic application
of not exclusive agreements among the actors involved
(service providers, content providers, and network operators)
provides the basis for a fair redistribution of revenues along
the VC, driven by market rather than by policy enforcement.
17
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

The urgent need for a paradigm shift in the Internet VC
can be viewed in many recent events and market signs.
Amazon’s Kindle 2 has conquered the market of e-book
readers by freeing end-users from the burden of connectivity.
It integrates a hidden SIM card which allows end-users to be
always connected (seemlessly) to the online store. The cost
of download is included into the price of e-books thanks to
an agreement between Amazon and AT&T, which in its turn
has roaming agreements with mobile operators all around the
world [12]. This is a neat example of a vertical application
built on top of a vertically-separated architecture to provide
a service-oriented user experience.
Groupon (www.groupon.com) is a deal-of-the-day website
which operates in hundreds of localized markets worldwide.
The business model is fairly simple: it offers a deal per
market per day. If users who sign up for the offer reach a
given threshold, then the deal becomes available to all of
them and the retailer shares his/her revenues with Groupon.
For retailers, Groupon works as an assurance contract which
guarantees a critical mass which makes the deal like a
quantity discount [13]. In 2010, Groupon Inc. refused a
6 billion Dollar offer from Google, clearly demonstrating
the value of localized on-line business. It is apparent that
Groupon could provide its services within a NAN, making
it available to local end-users even if they have not signed
with any ISP.
In January 2011, Google Inc. accepted to allow publishers
to quit Google News without affecting the results returned
by its main search engine, and to disclose revenue-sharing
arrangements for its AdSense partners. This agreement ended
an antitrust investigation of the Italian Competition Authority
(AGCM) triggered by the Italian Federation of Newspaper
Publishers (FIEG) because most people were content with
aggregated summaries found on Google News and bothered
to click on the links that led to their newspaper websites,
costing the publishers advertising and page views. This story
shows that services (e.g., online aggregators and search
engines) are much closer to end-users than contents (e.g.,
news), so that it is much easier for SPs than for content right
owners to be paid by end-users and sponsors. The agreement
found in Italy also demonstrates that it is worth for both cat-
egories to ﬁnd a suitable revenue sharing mechanism which
reduces the imbalance and makes the business sustainable.
Google Inc. has provided free Wi-Fi access in Mountain
View (CA) for several years and it has contributed to the
development of many other municipal networks. In February
2011 the City Council approved a 5-year extension of the
Google WiFi deal, with an escape clause for Google. There
are two signs that can be found in this piece of news: the
ﬁrst one is that OTT SPs are interested in widening their
market by lowering access barriers, the second one is that
they do not want to take the place of network operators (the
escape clause was wanted by Google).
In December 2010 some of the major European mobile
operators, including Orange, Telecom Italia, Telefonica and
the Vodafone Group, have demanded that popular OTT
services, such as those from Google, Facebook, Skype and
Apple, contribute to pay for the trafﬁc they generate on
their networks. This request, motivated by the lack of return
for operators from the exponential growth of IP trafﬁc, has
raised network neutrality issues due to the unsuitability of
the business models adopted, which do not allow operators
to establish commercial relationships with SPs without im-
pairing the neutrality of the connection they provide.
In conclusions, service orientation is proposed in this
paper as the key for granting to the Internet the degrees
of freedom required to autonomously ﬁnd the best balance
among the segments in the VC, thus overcoming the bottle-
necks and creating the preconditions for development.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The research leading to these results has received fund-
ing from the EU IST Seventh Framework Programme
([FP7/2007-2013]) under grant agreement n 25741, project
ULOOP (User-centric Wireless Local Loop).
REFERENCES
[1] Cisco. Visual Networking Index Global Mobile Data Trafﬁc
Forecast. Cisco White Paper, 2010.
[2] A. T. Kearney. A Viable Future Model for the Internet. A.T.
Kearney report, 2010.
[3] Akamai. Q3 2010 - The State of the Internet. Akamai report,
2011.
[4] A. T. Kearney.
Internet Value Chain Economics.
The
Economics of the Internet, Vodafone Policy Paper, 2010.
[5] S. Verbrugge et al.
Methodology and input availability
parameters for calculating OpEx and CapEx costs for realistic
network scenarios.
OSA Journal of Optical Networking,
5(6):509–520, 2006.
[6] Multimedia Research Group Inc. IPTV Global Forecast 2010
to 2014 - Semiannual IPTV Global Forecast Report. MRG,
Inc., June 2010.
[7] Cisco. Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Trafﬁc
Forecast Update, 2010-2015. Cisco White Paper, 2011.
[8] International Telecommunication Union.
ICT regulation
toolkit.
http://www.ictregulationtoolkit.org/, last visited on
Feb 2011.
[9] A. Bogliolo. Introducing Neutral Access Networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th Conference on Next Generation Internet
Networks, 2009.
[10] J. Barcel´o, A. Sfairopoulou, and B. Bellalta. Wireless open
metropolitan area networks.
SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput.
Commun. Rev., 12(3):34–44, 2008.
[11] E. Pigliapoco and A. Bogliolo. Enhancing broadband pene-
tration in a competitive market. In Proc. of the International
Conference on Evolving Internet, pages 159–163. IEEE Com-
puter Society, 2010.
[12] C. Loebbecke et al.
Innovating for the mobile end-user
market: Amazon’s kindle 2 strategy as emerging business
model. In Proc. of the International Conference on Mobile
Business, pages 51–57. IEEE Computer Society, 2010.
[13] A. Mason. System and Methods for Discount Retailing. US
Patent 2010/0287103 A1 (assigned to Groupon Inc.), 2010.
18
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

