Digital Complexity in DSL:
An Extrapolated Historical Overview
Michael Timmers, Koen Hooghe, Mamoun Guenach, and Jochen Maes
Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs
Copernicuslaan 50
B-2018 Antwerp, Belgium
Email: {michael.timmers,mamoun.guenach,jochen.maes}@ieee.org,koen.hooghe@alcatel-lucent.com
Abstract—Digital subscriber line (DSL) technology for copper
twisted pair access networks has been evolving to meet the ever-
growing demand for higher data rates. This evolution has gone
hand in hand with the roll out of ﬁber deep in the access network.
The most recent technology is vectored VDSL2, able to offer an
aggregate data rate of 200 Mb/s on a single copper pair. The next
step is to reach 500 to 1000 Mb/s over even shorter copper loops
up to a few hundred meters. Such a DSL deployment is an enabler
for the cost-effective continuation of the ﬁber roll-out closer to
the end-user. In this paper, a reality check is performed on the
digital complexity of a next-generation DSL (ΩDSL) transceiver.
By taking into account Moore’s law, it is shown that the time is
right for this next-generation DSL.
Keywords—Digital Subscriber Line, complexity, analysis
I. INTRODUCTION
After their ﬁrst introduction in the early 1990s, wireline
broadband networks, which includes ﬁber, coaxial cable and
twisted pair, has evolved substantially. Despite the inherent
attenuation of copper which limits the capacity, transmission
over this medium remains attractive as it is abundantly present
throughout the world due to historical telephone deployment.
Hence, broadband over copper offers substantial deployment
cost savings as compared to ﬁber-to-the-home (FTTH). Indeed,
while FTTH has been technologically viable since 1988 [1],
digital subscriber line (DSL) remains the predominant broad-
band access technology for the residential market [2]. How-
ever, as the access network remains the bottleneck in the end-
to-end connection and due to the continuing demand for ever
higher data rates, copper is being replaced by ﬁber step-by-
step. Due to typical branched topologies, the cost per user of
ﬁber deployment increases substantially when moving closer
to the user. This is why different operators have expressed
enthusiasm with recent technologies, such as phantom mode
and vectoring, which hold the promise of delivering more than
300 Mb/s [3]. The success of vectoring and phantom mode
transmission triggered interest in a next-generation broadband
DSL, ΩDSL, beyond vectored VDSL2 to deliver 500 Mb/s
to 1 Gb/s over relatively short loops, i.e., below 400 m [4].
Standardization of such an ΩDSL has been started in the
project G.fast. However, due to the competition from other
access technologies, the DSL capacity increase must remain
cost-effective and, hence, low-complex. Indeed, as a healthy
cost difference between FTTH and Fiber-To-The-Curb (FTTC)
needs to stay in place, ΩDSL designs need to carefully
evaluate the complexity of the used scheme.
In this paper, we focus on the digital complexity of the
underlying scheme. We discuss different generations of DSL
technologies based on discrete multi-tone modulation (DMT),
using the methodology presented in [5]. We compare the com-
plexity of different DSL ﬂavors by introducing a time scaling
based on Moore’s Law [6]. Finally, we extrapolate these results
to evaluate DMT-based proposals for a ΩDSL. We show
that an evolutionary path is in line with previous complexity
increases between generations. A DMT-based ΩDSL, which
can leverage on proven technology, is, hence, recommended.
This paper is structured as follows. First, we give an
overview of discrete multi-tone modulation in Section II.
Afterwards, we present challenges and opportunities for the
next-generation DSL in Section III. Then, in Section IV, we
introduce the reference methodology for complexity analysis.
We analyze the digital complexity of the different DSL ﬂavors
in Section V and draw conclusions in Section VI.
II. OVERVIEW OF DISCRETE MULTI-TONE MODULATION
In this section, we give a short overview of the DMT
modulation scheme and discuss its strengths and weaknesses.
channel
Mapper
Transmit
gain
scaling
IFFT
P/S
Add CE
DAC
ADC
Remove CE
FFT
S/P
FEQ
Demapper
Fig. 1.
Discrete multi-tone modulation splits the frequency-selective channel
into a number of independent narrowband ﬂat channels, which allows to adapt
to the channel in a computationally efﬁcient way.
DSL modems use a particular modulation format referred
to as discrete multi-tone modulation (DMT), which splits
the frequency-selective channel into a number of independent
narrowband ﬂat channels. This allows to cope with severe
channel conditions in a ﬂexible and computationally efﬁcient
19
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

way. For instance, the frequency-selectivity of the twisted pair
channel can be dealt with by means of simple frequency
domain equalization techniques. Moreover, narrowband inter-
ference can be handled by vacating (notching) the transmission
over the corresponding subcarriers, complemented with time-
domain windowing. Echo reﬂection can be tackled by duplex-
ing two-way data transmission in non-overlapping upstream
and downstream bands, which is referred to as frequency-
division duplexing (FDD). DMT furthermore allows for a
spectrally efﬁcient design, as the amount of power and the
number of bits transmitted on each subcarrier can be allocated
in a ﬂexible and optimal way, using so-called power and bit
loading procedures.
In Fig. 1, the general blocks of DMT modulation are
shown [5, 7]. In the transmitter, the input data bits are ﬁrst
mapped onto QAM constellations points for each of the nc
carriers. Each carrier has a complex transmit gain to control
the carrier power. The frequency domain samples Xk are then
converted into a time-domain symbol with an N-point inverse
fast Fourier transform (IFFT), where N is twice the number
of carriers, nc:
xn =
N−1
X
k=0
Xke
−j2πkn
N
(1)
After the IFFT, a cyclic extension (CE) is added with a length
ν that is larger than the time delay spread to combat inter-
block interference. Windowing is further applied to reduce out-
of-band leakage. The resulting signal then passes through a
digital-to-analog converter (DAC) and is sent over the channel.
In the receiver, the received signal is digitized with an
analog-to-digital converter (ADC). An FFT per DMT block of
N samples is applied to switch back to the original frequency-
domain symbols. The single-tap frequency domain equalizer
inverts the channel on a per-carrier basis, followed by the
demapper to recover the transmitted information bits.
III. THE NEXT-GENERATION DSL
In this section, we discuss the objectives for ΩDSL. After-
wards, we present a general overview on where the opportu-
nites lie to achieve these objectives.
A. Objectives
To compete with other access network technologies, such
as wireless, coax or ﬁber, ΩDSL should target a data rate of
1Gb/s aggregated over upstream (US) and downstream (DS).
Although the residential market demand is still far below
this limit, it is expected that the bandwidth consumption will
continue its exponential growth and it is expected that the
top line data rate demands will exceed 1Gb/s by 2030 [8].
Aside from this data rate, ΩDSL should be very ﬂexible,
both in the frequency as in the time domain to adapt to
dynamic channel conditions and applications requirements.
An important aspect is also energy efﬁciency: the energy
consumption of ΩDSL should scale with the applied load, i.e.,
the actual throughput. As the DSL environment will become a
lot more dynamic, it is also important to be robust by avoiding
packet errors, retransmitting and keeping the downtime of the
DSL communication as low as possible.
B. Approach
DMT remains one of the prominent candidates for achieving
the objectives listed in Section III-A. Indeed, DMT is very
ﬂexible in the frequency domain and especially suited for
spectral conﬁnement, which is important when moving to
higher bandwidths, where additional notching is required.
Furthermore, as any other multicarrier based modulation the
frequency selectivity of the channel can easily be addressed by
very basic single tap equalizers. It is also robust to near-end
crosstalk and echo through frequency division duplexing. Far-
end crosstalk can be avoided through precoding, which can be
easily implemented in the generic DMT scheme. However, it
is not so robust against transient noise. Therefore, we should
rely on fast adaptation mechanisms like a fast bit swap and bit
loading or adaptive coding techniques, such as FEC or ARQ.
Luckily, due to the ﬂexibility of DMT such fast adaptation
is possible. However, due to the FFT/IFFT core, DSL is a
complex modulation scheme. Hence, in this paper, we want to
perform a reality-check and look if ΩDSL is feasible. In this
section, we will ﬁrst describe how the DMT scheme needs to
be applied to deliver the high data rates that are required.
We start our analysis from the Shannon-Hartley theorem [9]:
C = W log2

FTTH
ADSL
CO
< 5 km
FTTN / VDSL2 (G.vector)
Cab
< 1 km
FTTC or FTTB / OmegaDSL
RN
< 200 m
Fig. 2.
Fiber is contiuously being deployed closer to the user, starting from
an all-copper deployment from the CO (ADSL). An economically interesting
next step exist in the combination of FTTB or FTTC with ΩDSL
TABLE I
PARAMETERS USED FOR FIGURES IN SECTION III
Fig. 3
Fig. 4
Looplength
200 m
variable
Twisted pair
24 awg
24 awg
Noise power
-135 dBm/Hz
-135 dBm/Hz
Transmit power
-60 dBm/Hz
-60 dBm/Hz (f <= 30 Mhz)
-76dBm/Hz (f > 30 MHz)
Γ
9.45 dB
9.45 dB
bmax
15 bits
15 bits
η
78%
78%
Notches
none
none
However, it is clear that the coding will need to provide
the desired robustness and resiliency to counter the channel
dynamics. Some components of the interference, such as
self-crosstalk, can be cancelled today, e.g., in G.vector [10].
Another typical parameter to increase system capacity is the
analog bandwidth, W. The widest proﬁle of VDSL2 uses
a 30 MHz bandwidth. Today, VDSL2 is limited at lower
frequencies by the bit cap, bmax, which is set to 15 bits per
carrier. Also, here, headroom exist to remove this constraint
in low-bandwidth systems, constrained by ADC technology.
In Fig. 3, we show the headroom for these different options
for a 24 awg twisted pair with a looplength of 200 m for
a transmit power of −60 dBm/Hz and a noise power of
−135 dBm/Hz. Each block in the grid of this ﬁgure, represents
50 Mb/s (10 MHz multiplied by 5 (b/s)/Hz). Hence, we can
immediately see that a 30 MHz bandwidth will not sufﬁce,
as it is only able to deliver 750 Mb/s Shannon capacity
even on a null-loop (15 blocks in Fig. 3, i.e., 25 (b/s)/Hz
over 30MHz). We also see that removing the bit cap, bmax,
only has limited beneﬁt in the lower frequency range. The
efﬁciency does have a large impact, but, as indicated above,
coding overhead is required to deliver the desired robustness
and resiliency. An interesting and valuable parameter is the
SNR gap, Γ. Traditionally, this is used to cover the channel
dynamics. However, when we leverage on the ﬂexibility of the
DMT modulation scheme, we can lower this gap. As indicated
in Fig. 3, this increases the SNR with 6 dB or, equivalently,
about 2 (b/s)/Hz.
In Fig. 4, we show the looplength distribution for three
proposals for a DMT-based ΩDSL, using the parameters listed
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
5
10
15
20
25
Frequency [MHz]
Spectral efficiency [(bits/s)/Hz]
 
 
Shannon
Gamma = 0dB
Efficiency = 100%
bmax = Inf
G.vector
Fig. 3.
The headroom of different options shows the relative contributions
of each parameter optimization. To reach the 1Gb/s objective, increasing the
bandwidth is a must.
in Table I. It shows that a 70 MHz proﬁle cannot reach the
desired 1 Gb/s for any looplength. However, a bandwidth
of 140 MHz is in line with the objectives for ΩDSL. As
a reference, we also included a 280 MHz proﬁle, which is
capable to deliver over 2Gb/s for the shortest looplengths.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Looplength [m]
Net aggregate data rate [Gb/s]
 
 
NG−DSL (70)
NG−DSL (140)
NG−DSL (280)
Fig. 4.
Using parameters listed in Table I, we show that a 140 MHz proﬁle
will reach 1Gb/s for the target looplengths.
IV. METHODOLOGY FOR DMT COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we discuss the methodology for complexity
analysis of DMT modulation schemes. We rely on the work,
presented in [5], which we summarize below. In this paper,
however, we rely on the number of multiply-accumulates per
second (RMAC) and the number of memory locations per
second (RMEM) for comparison of the different DSL tech-
nologies, rather than on the number of multiply-accumulates
per bit as done in [5].
21
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

TABLE II
COMPLEXITY OF A DMT SYSTEM [5].
Operation Block
NMAC
NMEM
Transmit gain scaling
N
N
IFFT
0.75N log2 N
1.5N
Tx-windowing
2ν
2ν
Rx-windowing
2ν
2ν
FFT
0.75N log2 N
N
FEQ
1.5N
2N
Total
2.5N + 1.5N log2 N + 4ν
5.5N + 4ν
In Table II, the number of multiply-accumulates per symbol
(NMAC) and the number of memory locations per symbol
(NMEM) are shown for each block of the DMT modula-
tion scheme. Below, we indicate the number of multiply-
accumulates, NMAC,b, in (4) and memory locations, NMEM,b
in (5) to transmit a single bit. We also deﬁne the precision-
scaled metrics, NBMAC,b in (6) and NBMEM,b in (7), respec-
tively [5].
NMAC,b = NMAC
bsymb
,
(4)
NMEM,b = NMEM
bsymb
,
(5)
NBMAC,b = NMAC,bBMAC,
(6)
NBMEM,b = NMEM,bBMEM,
(7)
where BMAC and BMEM are the precisions of the multiply-
accumulates (MAC) in bits and the number of bits per word
in the memory, respectively. The comparison metrics, RMAC
and RMEM, can readily be found as follows:
RMAC = NMAC,bR,
(8)
RMEM = NMEM,bR,
(9)
where R is the rate (throughput) of the DMT system in b/s.
The total complexity of a DMT scheme can be found in
Table II. Below, we summarize how the precisions, BMAC and
BMEM, can be found. The signal-to-quantization-noise ratio
(SQNR) at the ADC output is given by [11]:
SQNR = 6.02BADC + 4.77 − PAPR[dB],
(10)
where BADC is the ADC precision, PAPR is the peak-to-
average power ratio in dB of the underlying modulation
scheme. The SQNR needs to conﬁgured so that the quantiza-
tion noise only has limited impact on the bit-error-ratio (BER).
Typically, the quantization noise should have an impact below
0.25 dB:
SQNR > max
i
SNRi + 12.27[dB],
(11)
assuming ﬂat noise. The ADC precision can then be derived
as:
BADC =
l 1
6.02

for this future technology [12]. However, the results quali-
tatively hold for other carrier spacing. In Fig. 5, we see the
precision-scaled complexity, NBMAC, relative to ADSL in its
ITU standardization year of 2001. This relative complexity,
RMAC(x, y), metric of DSL technology x in year y is based
on Moore’s law that states that the transistor density on a chip
doubles each 18 months [6]. While studies show a ﬂattening
of this law, we assume that it holds to facilitate our analysis:
RMAC(x, y) =
RMAC(x)
RMAC(ADSL)2
2
3 (y−2001) .
(17)
A few interesting things can be observed. First, ADSL
seems to be a cheap technology. However, the technology
for ADSL was already available in 1995, long before the
ITU standardization, making it a complex technique at market
introduction. The pressure on complexity is mainly related to
an increased competitive market.
The innovation from ADSL2 with respect to ADSL were
mainly targeted at coding, using the same modulation scheme.
This is why they come out equivalently complex in this
comparison. The main reason why ADSL2 did not become
a commercial success is because it was standardized by ITU
almost simultaneously as ADSL2plus and the complexity
(cost) of ADSL2plus was acceptable to allow cost-effective
and dense line cards and customer premise equipment. Fur-
thermore, we see that all standards, when introduced, have a
relative complexity metric in the range [0.6, 1.6]. The most
prominent outlier is VDSL1 at a relative complexity metric
of 4.5. This can indicate why VDSL1 only had moderate
commercial success, because of the high complexity cost
involved. Furthermore, after two years, the 12 MHz proﬁle
of VDSL2 was standardized, which uses the same bandwidth
and number of carriers, rendering VDSL1 obsolete.
The other outlier is the 30 MHz proﬁle of VDSL2, which
has lower deployment volumes than the 17 MHz proﬁle. This
is mainly due to the fact that the 30 MHz proﬁle targets FTTB
deployment, which takes a long time to establish. Counter
examples are Japan and Korea. More interestingly, the relative
complexity metric of the three ΩDSL proposals already fall
in 2012 within this appropriate standardization range. This is
in line with recent start of actvities at standardization bodies.
A similar analysis can be performed for the relative precision-
scaled memory complexity metric, RMEM(x, y) (see Fig. 6).
Given the fact that N is the main contributing factor to both
complexity and memory, we draw similar conclusions for the
memory complexity.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have discussed the digital complexity of
different DSL ﬂavors. We have shown that successful adoption
of DMT-based DSL technologies occurs in a certain complex-
ity range, when corrected with Moore’s Law. Recently, a next-
generation DSL technology is being targeted for very short
looplengths and very high data rates. We have shown that the
opportunity window for standardization of ΩDSL has come,
using an extrapolation of the digital complexity.
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
year
Relative memory complexity
 
 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
A:  ADSL
B:  ADSL2
C:  ADSL2+
D:  VDSL DMT
E:  VDSL2 (8)
F:  VDSL2 (12)
G:  VDSL2 (17)
H:  VDSL2 (30)
I:  G.hn
J:  ΩDSL (70)
K:  ΩDSL (140)
L:  ΩDSL (280)
Fig. 6. Relative memory complexity of the different DSL ﬂavors as a function
of time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the IWT under contract number
100334, Phanter. The authors would like to thank Paul Spruyt
and Adriaan De Lind Van Wijngaarden for their careful review.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Bourne, “Fiber to the home: practically a reality,” in Proc. of the IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC), 1988, pp. 890–894.
[2] T. Mastrangelo, “Annual Market Outlook Report,” Broadband Trends,
July 2009.
[3] M. Peeters and S. Vanhastel, “The Copper Phantom,” OSP Magazine,
Jan. 2011.
[4] L. Humphrey, “Fibre to the DP,” Broadband Forum, Dec. 2010.
[5] B. Shim and N. R. Shanbhag, “Complexity analysis of multicarrier and
single-carrier systems for very high-speed digital subscriber line,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 51, no. 1, Jan. 2003.
[6] G. E. Moore, “Cramming more components onto integrated circuits,”
Electronics, pp. 114–117, Apr. 1965.
[7] J. Bingham, “Multicarrier modulation for data transmission: An idea
whose time has come,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 28, pp.
5–14, 1990.
[8] Zhone, “Choosing the right fttx architecture,” Retrieved on January
20 2010 from http://www.zhone.com/solutions/docs/zti-wp-fttx choices.
pdf.
[9] C. E. Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” vol. 27,
pp. 379–423, July 1948.
[10] V. Oksman, “The ITU-T’s new g.vector standard proliferates 100 mb/s
dsl,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 140–148,
Oct. 2010.
[11] A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer, “Discrete-time signal processing,”
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, pp. 637–641, 1989.
[12] J. Maes, M. Timmers, and M. Guenach, “Optimized modulation param-
eters for a next-generation dsl,” Technical Report, Jan. 2011.
23
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

