Deployment of Femtocells in Pakistan: A Consumer’s Perspective 
 
 
 
           Javed Iqbal 
 
                         Sahibzada Ali Mahmud, Gul M Khan, Fahad Ullah 
 
                Transmission Division 
 
 
 
           Electrical Engineering Department 
                       National Telecom Corporation 
 
 
    University of Engineering and Technology 
                                         Pakistan  
 
 
 
 
         Peshawar, Pakistan 
                             javed.iqbal@ntc.org.pk 
 
                                 sahibzada.mahmud@nwfpuet.edu.pk,          
                                                                                                             gk502@nwfpuet.edu.pk, fahadullah@nwfpuet.edu.pk 
 
Abstract—Femtocell base stations operate in the licensed cellular 
band, and are small and low power devices providing a feasible 
and low cost alternative to microcell deployment in order to 
improve indoor signal coverage at homes and small buildings. 
Despite many benefits that can be offered by wide scale femtocell 
deployment by network operators, there are some mandatory 
factors related to the end user perception in adopting and paying 
for the technology. In this paper, a thorough survey has been 
conducted to get an idea about the end user perspectives in 
regard to the deployment of femtocells. The survey contains a 
number of questions asked from over 150 participants from 
different backgrounds in order to determine the user opinion on 
installing femtocells and opting for data services offered by 
cellular network operators. Different categories have been made 
from the survey questions and results obtained are presented and 
discussed. Although the survey has been conducted in urban and 
rural areas of Pakistan, the survey can prove to be valuable in 
assisting network operators to adopt better marketing strategies 
outside Pakistan as well. Based on the general user response, it is 
evident that the users showed their interest in utilizing femtocells 
if better and low cost packages for using data services are 
provided. Furthermore, in those areas where DSL connectivity 
options are not available, users are willing to pay for femtocell 
base stations that can connect them to the cellular network via 
the microcell base station. 
Keywords—Femtocell; Fixed Mobile Convergence; Cellular 
Networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cellular networks have been providing new and innovative 
services to its users while on the other hand they are also facing 
expansion problems. In cellular networks frequency re-use, 
better signal strength in indoor environments, and capacity 
enhancements in populated areas keeping in mind the cost 
constraints are nontrivial issues. The radio signal carrying 
information degrades as it enters a closed structure for instance, 
a building. Femtocells are small base stations that operate in 
the licensed cellular bands. They are small and inexpensive 
devices similar in size to a Wireless LAN (WLAN) Access 
Point, and transmit at a low power and are to be placed in 
individual homes and backhauled onto the operator’s network 
via conventional Digital Subscriber Lines (DSL).  
Both the concept and the economics of femtocells constitute 
a radical arrival from traditional macro radio access networks, 
where each macro base station typically covers a fairly large 
geographical area and serves a relatively large number of 
users. Their strategic positioning inside the home and ability 
to be customized to the needs of individual consumers promise 
to rapidly make them major future components of the 
operators’ business. Femtocells have gained a lot of attention 
from the research community due to the benefits offered in 
terms of infrastructure cost saving, load balancing, and 
improved user experience indoors [1]. The idea of femtocells 
was presented in 1999; however, it started attracting wide 
spread market attention in 2007 [2]. Cellular operators have 
shown interest in the commercial deployment of femtocells in 
order to increase network capacity and improve coverage.  
Since it is unlikely that the network operators are going to 
deploy additional microcell base stations in order to improve 
signal strength in indoor environments because of the 
substantial cost that is associated, femtocells provide a very 
low cost and feasible alternative. However, the wide scale 
presence of DSL being the prevalent means of access 
connectivity for consumers and providing data services at 
much better data rates than the cellular alternatives, mostly at 
a flat monthly rate, raises the question whether the end 
consumers are ready and willing to pay extra for provision and 
deployment of femtocells. Even though femtocells can offer 
better indoor reception for the consumer, still extra cost is 
associated if data services of the cellular network operator are 
used. Therefore, another important question is whether the 
consumers while having the option of utilizing data services 
using the existing DSL connection at a flat rate (which they 
are already paying) are going to utilize the data services of the 
cellular network operator (for which they have to pay extra) if 
the femtocell base station is deployed.  Most of the new 
mobile phones in the market have a Wireless LAN interface 
and the users can use their mobile phone to connect with a 
wireless router to get access to data services and even make 
free voice calls using applications like Skype. Therefore, the 
end user perception about femtocell deployment can assist in 
answering these questions and help the network operators to 
shape their policies accordingly regarding wide scale 
femtocell deployment with better packages to entice the 
consumer in using their data services.  
In this paper, a survey has been carried out using the most 
pertinent questions regarding femtocell deployment in order to 
gather the relevant statistics that portray the consumer 
perception in a way that can be helpful to the network 
operators to shape their marketing strategy regarding femtocell 
deployment in Pakistan. Section II of the paper gives a brief 
introduction about the generic network architecture that can be 
used for femtocell deployment. Section III gives specifics 
about femtocell deployment in Pakistan. Section IV describes 
the main advantages which femtocell deployment can offer. 
Section V contains the main contribution of the paper and 
gives the details of the survey and its results. Section VI has 
some recommendations based on the result of the survey. 
Section VII concludes the paper.  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

II. 
GENERAL ARCHITECTURE 
For femtocell deployment, initially, a flat network 
architecture was proposed with IP used as a backhaul transport 
protocol to the operator’s network. In the flat architecture a 
Security Gateway (SG) is placed between the cellular operator 
network and the femtocell that acts as the residential Node-B. 
In other proposed architectures, a Radio Access Network 
(RAN) Gateway is placed between the IP Network and the 
operator’s core network [3][4]. When a RAN gateway is 
deployed some of the functions of the Radio Network 
Controller (RNC) are moved to the femtocell base station. 
These RAN gateways can incorporate substantial traffic from 
large number of femtocells on Iu over IP (the interface 
introduced for femtocell access to a UMTS network) [5]. The 
RAN gateway than forwards that traffic to the UMTS network 
on the Iu-PS (Iu- Packet Switched Interface defined for RAN 
gateway and Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN) of a 
UMTS network) and Iu-CS (Iu circuit switched, interface 
between RAN gateway and MSC of the network) interfaces. 
Other interfaces include Iub (between the RNC and the Node 
B) and Iur (between RNCs in the same network). Iu interfaces 
carry user traffic (such as voice or data) as well as control 
information. The Iu interface is specified at the boundary 
between the Core Network (CN) and the RAN. The Iu-CS and 
Iu-PS interfaces are specified in the 25.41x series of UMTS 
technical specifications. The RAN gateway provides a 
simplified means to assist in wide scale femtocell deployment 
for cellular network operators with lower infrastructure 
expenditure. An example architecture can be seen in Fig. 1.  
III. 
FEMTOCELL DEPLOYMENT IN PAKISTAN 
In Pakistan, the Telecom sector is in the process of 
evolution and new standardized technologies are being 
adopted. End users can opt for different broadband packages 
that utilize ADSL with cheaper and more attractive offers and 
bandwidths of up to 50 Mbps. Above 60% of the population 
has access to voice and data services using either the cellular 
network or DSL. However, the issue of poor indoor reception 
usually thwarts the end user to go for data connectivity using 
the cellular network mainly because of lower data rates and 
the associated cost.  
Since many popular internet applications especially 
streaming voice and video applications have high throughput 
requirements, the cellular network operators in Pakistan are 
gradually expanding their coverage and improving their 
capacity to accommodate more users and offer them higher 
data rates. However to fully satiate the requirements of the end 
users and encourage them to utilize the cellular networks for 
data services, the operators have to provide better packages 
and improve the link budget for indoor environments. 
Currently the data services are provided by the network 
operators using GPRS and EDGE in Pakistan.  
In order to provide better throughputs, the planning has 
already started to upgrade their networks to UMTS and make 
use of newer 3GPP [6] specifications like High Speed Data 
Packet Access (HSDPA), High Speed Packet Access 
(HSPA+), Long Term Evolution (LTE) and LTE Advanced. In 
order to improve the indoor coverage and signal quality, 
implementation of femtocell base stations shall prove to be a 
viable and low cost solution from the network operator’s 
perspective. However, to find out the feasibility of mass 
deployment in the urban and rural areas surveys have been 
conducted in 9 major cities of Pakistan as well as the rural 
areas. In the survey, the opinion was inquired from more than 
150 participants. The questions asked in the survey were 
prepared in such a way that the results can be utilized and 
prove to be useful to network operators outside Pakistan. In 
near future Pakistan Telecommunication Authority (PTA) is 
going to auction the IMT2000 frequency band for UMTS 
(WCDMA) services. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 GAN-based Home NodeB architecture 
IV. 
ADVANTAGE OF INSTALLING FEMTOCELLS 
According to the statistics, above 70% calls are originated 
from homes and inside the buildings [7]. To mitigate the issue 
of poor indoor reception microcell installation is a solution 
with substantial cost associated with it. The femtocell base 
station installation in a home or a building does not only ensure 
lower infrastructure expenditure but can also relieve the traffic 
from the microcell base stations [8]. The reason is that the 
femtocell base station is connected to the available DSL 
connection and all the user traffic is backhauled to the cellular 
network directly using that connection. Even users can share 
the cost of femtocell implementation if the femtocell base 
station is provided at a lower cost by the operator or provided 
freely as a part of an attractive package.  
By installing Femtocells, in addition to better voice quality, 
multimedia and other data traffic can be accessed at higher 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

data rates because of improved Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR). 
Femtocells will deliver converged services (voice, video and 
data services) at home and will enable users to have a 
seamless experience across both outdoor and indoor 
environments [9]. Because of a lesser distance between users’ 
mobile device and the femtocell, the user device can connect 
to the femtocell base station using lower transmission power 
hence reduced battery consumption and lower probability of 
health concerns.  
V. 
CONSUMER PERSPECTIVE SURVEY 
The survey was conducted in cities of Karachi, Lahore, 
Islamabad, Rawalpindi, Quata, Bannu, Peshawar, Mardan and 
Nowshera. In this section, questions from the survey are 
categorized in different sections. Each section has the relevant 
questions tabulated, the tables representing the questions and 
the percentage response, and finally the graph giving an 
insight of the received response. 
A. Connection and Reception 
Five questions asked in this category of survey are listed n 
Table I. Most of the questions asked were about the 
connectivity options that a user has and about the cellular 
service signal reception. In Table II, the results of the survey 
are tabulated and based on the results (answers), percentage 
plots are made as shown in Fig. 2.  
Question 4 is particularly worth mentioning because it is 
obvious from the results that people are interested in paying 
more in order to get a better signal strength at their homes i.e. 
for indoor usage of cellular service. 
TABLE I CONNECTION AND RECEPTION RELATED QUESTIONS 
Q.No 
Question 
Answer 
Choices 
Remarks 
1 
Do you have a DSL 
connection at home? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
 
2 
Do you use your cell phone to 
access data services i.e. access 
the internet? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
 
3 
Do you have a good signal 
reception at your home 
(indoors)? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
 
4 
Would you prefer to have 
good/better signal reception at 
your home for a one off 
payment? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
 
5 
Do you intend to receive good 
signal reception at home only 
to receive phone calls or also 
to make phone calls using 
your cell phone? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
Answer if 
“Yes” to 4 
 
TABLE II RESULTS OF THE CONNECTION & RECEPTION RELATED QUESTIONS 
Question 
No. 
Answer Percentage 
Choice (i) 
Choice (ii) 
1 
93% 
7% 
2 
40% 
60% 
3 
58% 
42% 
4 
79% 
21% 
5 
86% 
14% 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Answer Choices Plot for Table II 
 
B. Making Phone Calls 
This section categorizes the questions asked about using 
which service for making phone calls. Table III tabulates the 
questions asked from the users. Based on the questions asked, 
the results are obtained as shown in table IV.  Fig. 3 depicts the 
corresponding bar graphs for each question asked. 
TABLE III MAKING PHONE CALLS RELATED QUESTIONS 
Q.No. 
Question 
Answer Choices 
6 
When at home, do you primarily 
use your landline phone to make 
calls more often or do you use 
your mobile phone to make calls? 
i. Landline 
ii. Mobile Phone 
7 
Does cost of making the phone 
call affect your priority in any 
way? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
8 
Does the reception quality of 
your mobile phone affect your 
priority in any way? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
 
TABLE IV RESULTS OF THE MAKING PHONE CALLS RELATED QUESTIONS 
Question No. 
Answer Percentage 
Choice (i) 
Choice (ii) 
6 
60% 
40% 
7 
73% 
27% 
8 
76% 
24% 
 
Question 8 in this category is important because users are 
interested in changing their means of making a call based on 
the reception quality. Poor reception quality usually leads to 
calling from another source, landline for instance, rather using 
the mobile phone. 
C. Accessing Internet 
Data services and internet related questions are listed in this 
category as Table V shows. Based on the feedback, the results 
of the questionnaire are tabulated in Table VI. Finally, the 
results are plotted in Fig. 4. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

 
 
Figure 3 Answer Choices Plot for Table IV 
 
As the results show, most of the users are interested in using 
mobile phone for internet access. The principle reason behind 
choosing a mobile phone for internet access is the associated 
mobility and convenience. Also, users most of the time use 
both cellular data service and a WLAN for mobile internet in 
phones though there isn’t a particular higher priority for either 
one. Both are used by most of the users, most of the time. For 
better indoor reception and hence accessing data services, 
almost half of the users who were part of the survey are willing 
to pay more. The results obtained and discussed show that the 
deployment of femtocells in an indoor environment is very 
likely in near future.  
TABLE V ACCESSING INTERNET RELATED QUESTIONS 
Q.No. 
Question 
Answer Choices 
9 
When at home, which device 
do you use to access the 
internet more often i.e. your 
mobile phone or the DSL 
connection? 
i. Mobile Phone 
ii. DSL 
Connection 
10 
In case it’s the mobile phone, 
do you connect your cell phone 
to the WLAN router and access 
the internet or do you use the 
services of your cellular 
operator or both? 
i. WLAN Router 
ii. Cellular 
Operator 
iii. Both 
11 
In case you don’t use your 
mobile phone to connect to the 
internet, is any one of the 
following any reason for you to 
do so? 
 
i. Poor indoor 
reception 
ii. Comparatively 
higher cost of 
using data 
services from 
cellular operator 
 
12 
Would you prefer the 
convenience of using mobile 
phones to access the internet 
even at a comparatively higher 
cost when compared to the 
DSL connection? (if the option 
of femtocell is available and as 
a result good reception is 
available) 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
13 
What percentage of time do 
you utilize accessing data 
services each day using your 
cellular operator while at home 
compared with the total time 
utilized throughout the day 
doing the same? 
 
i. 10-20 % 
ii. 20-40 % 
iii. 40-60 % 
iv. 60-80% 
v. 80-100% 
 
 
TABLE VI RESULTS OF ACCESSING INTERNET RELATED QUESTIONS 
Q.No. 
Answer Percentage 
Ch. (i) 
Ch. (ii) 
Ch. (iii) 
Ch. 
(iv) 
Ch. (v) 
9 
79% 
21% 
- 
- 
- 
10 
29% 
27% 
44% 
- 
- 
11 
48.3% 
51.7% 
- 
- 
- 
12 
48.4% 
51.6% 
- 
- 
- 
13 
41.8% 
20.6% 
22% 
12.1% 
3.6% 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Answer Choices Plot for Table VI 
 
D. Femtocell Installation 
Table VII lists the questions asked about the deployment of 
Femtocells. The results of the survey are tabulated in Table 
VIII and the corresponding plots are shown in Fig. 5. Different 
inferences can be made from the results in this category of the 
survey. Users are interested in installing femtocells to get good 
reception for the signal itself as well as to use the data services. 
Half of the users in this case chose for both options. Question 
15 is important because it reflects user opinion on installing 
femtocells at their homes—or any indoor enclosure for that 
matter—in case DSL services are not reachable especially in 
rural areas.  
One major reason not to opt for a Femtocell deployment at 
home is the price of the device itself although the results are 
comparable with another reason for not using a Femtocell 
device at home i.e. the data service charges set by the 
operators. Users will be interested in deploying a Femtocell at 
their homes if the operators can lower the data services charges 
or introduce reasonable data packages. Finally, most of the 
users are ready to share their Femtocell service with other 
external users even though the limited user capacity is 
explicitly mentioned in the question. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

TABLE VII FEMTOCELL INSTALLATION RELATED QUESTIONS 
Q. 
No. 
Question 
Answer 
Choices 
14 
If you would opt to install a femtocell 
base station, would it be because you 
prefer to have good signal reception for 
making/receiving voice calls using your 
cell phone or because you prefer to access 
the data services or both? 
i. Good Signal 
Reception 
ii. Access Data 
Services 
iii. Both 
15 
If you don’t have DSL connectivity 
because it is not available in your area, 
would you consider buying a Femtocell 
Base station to get better reception and 
high speed data services? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
16 
What is the main reason for not opting for 
a femtocell solution? 
 
i. Cost of 
Femtocell base 
station 
ii. Cost of data 
services 
provided by 
the cellular 
operator 
 
17 
Would any of the following make you 
reconsider about getting a femtocell 
solution? 
 
i. Femtocell 
base station 
provided free 
of cost by the 
cellular 
operator 
ii. Lower 
charges for 
data services 
or better 
packages at 
lower cost 
iii. Data 
services 
provided free 
of cost by the 
cellular 
operator 
 
18 
In case your decision to install a femtocell 
is to improve the signal reception for 
making/receiving phone calls, would you 
still sometimes use the facility to access 
data services from your cellular operator? 
i. Never 
ii. Maybe 
iii. If a good 
offer is 
available 
iv. don’t know 
19 
In case DSL connectivity is not available 
in your area for some reason and your 
femtocell has a direct wireless connection 
to the nearby macrocell base station, 
would you be willing to share your 
femtocell coverage with external users 
who might need to connect to the nearby 
macrocell base station by using your 
femtocell as one of the relay devices to 
send their signal across (Considering the 
fact that a femtocell base station might 
not support more than 4 users at a single 
instant)? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
TABLE VIII RESULTS OF FEMTOCELL INSTALLATION RELATED QUESTIONS 
Q. No 
Answer Percentage 
Ch. (i) 
Ch. (ii) 
Ch. (iii) 
Ch. (iv) 
14 
24.8% 
24.8% 
50.4% 
 
15 
84.4% 
15.6% 
 
 
16 
52.8% 
47.2% 
 
 
17 
35.1% 
40.3% 
24.3% 
 
18 
17.9% 
28.5% 
47.0% 
6.6% 
19 
64.2% 
35.8% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Answer Choices Plot for Table VIII 
 
E. Skype Users 
In this category of the survey, questions are asked from 
around 100 users who used Skype in their smartphones and are 
different from the pool of users who were asked Questions 1-
19. Table IX lists the questions that were asked. The results 
obtained are tabulated in Table X and based on those results; 
the corresponding plots are drawn as shown in Fig. 6.  
More than half of the users didn’t use Skype application in 
their phones. Half of the users with Skype installed in their 
smartphones were interested in using the application for 
making free local and international phone calls and most of 
them were interested in paying for deploying a femtocell base 
station at their homes in order to get better reception for faster 
data services. 
TABLE IX SKYPE USER RELATED QUESTIONS 
Q.No. 
Question 
Answer 
Choices 
Remarks 
20 
Do you own a smart phone 
that has Skype installed? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
 
21 
Do you use your Skype 
service to make free calls 
nationwide and 
internationally? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
Answer if 
“Yes” to 
20 
22 
Would you opt to pay for a 
femtocell base station to 
get better indoor coverage 
as well as faster data 
services? 
i. Yes 
ii. No 
Answer if 
“Yes” to 
21 
 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

 
TABLE X RESULTS OF SKYPE USERS RELATED QUESTIONS 
Question No. 
Answer Percentage 
Choice (i) 
Choice (ii) 
20 
44.30% 
55.70% 
21 
50.60% 
49.40% 
22 
65.50% 
34.50% 
 
 
Figure 6 Answer Choices Plot for Table X 
 
VI. 
RECOMMENDATIONS BASED ON SURVEY RESULTS 
Based on the results of conducted survey, it is evident that 
the potential consumers of femtocell based services are 
interested in getting data services from the cellular operators at 
a lower cost. The response to Question 19 suggests the 
willingness of most of the end consumers to share their 
femtocell coverage in case there is no DSL connectivity 
available especially in rural areas, in order to indirectly access 
the macrocell base station or Node b. This option if exercised 
shall have an impact on the overall deployment architecture 
since multihop communication can be considered in order to 
give access to users to indirectly access the macrocell base 
stations or Node b’s via connected femtocells. Furthermore, 
Hybrid Access Points (HAPs) can be considered in the future 
that can give access to WLAN users as well as femtocell users 
and backhaul their traffic to the respective networks via a 
single, high bandwidth DSL connection and has the ability of 
traffic differentiation.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
Femtocell deployment in urban and rural areas in Pakistan is 
expected in the near future. It is clear that a wide scale 
implementation shall benefit the operators in terms of 
substantial infrastructure cost savings. However, the end user 
can also benefit in terms of improved indoor signal reception 
for voice and data access.  The results of the survey carried out 
show that the users are willing to acquire femtocell based 
solutions if cost effective and better packages are offered by 
the network operators.  The results of the survey can prove to 
be a good yardstick for network operators in and out of 
Pakistan to shape their marketing strategies in an effective 
manner in order to increase the utilization of their networks in 
terms of substantial data services and as a result more revenue 
generation.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Kim, R.Y.,  Jin Sam Kwak, and Etemad, K.,“WiMAX Femtocell: 
Requirements, Challenges, and Solutions,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, Vol. 47, Issue: 9, pp. 84-91, Sep. 2009. 
[2] 
Douglas, N. K., Takahito Y., and Favichia F.,“Standardization of 
Femtocells in 3GPP,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 47, Issue: 
9, pp. 68-75 Sep. 2009. 
[3] 
3GPP TS 43.318, Generic Access Network (GAN) Stage 2, Rel-5. 
[4] 
3GPP TS 44.318, Generic Access Network (GAN); Mobile GAN 
Interface Layer 3 Specification, Rel-5. 
[5] 
Zhang J., and de la Roche, G., Femtocells: Technologies and 
Deployment. Sussex, UK: John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 2010 
[6] 
www.3gpp.org 
[7] 
 G. Mansfield, “Femto cells in the US market - business drivers and 
femtocells in the US market - business drivers and consumer 
propositions,” in FemtoCells Europe 2008, AT&T, Oct. 2008. 
[8] 
Claussen, H., and Calin, D.,“Macrocell Offloading Benefits in Joint 
Macro and Femtocell Deployments,” Personal, Indoor and Mobile 
Radio Communications, 2009, IEEE 20th International Symposium on, 
pp. 350 – 354, Sep 2009. 
[9] 
Chandrasekhar, V., Andrews, J., and Gatherer, A.,“Femtocell Networks: 
A Survey,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 46, Issue: 9, pp. 59–
67, Sep 2008. 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

