Towards a Dynamic and Adaptative Prioritization of Wireless Broadband Vehicle-
to-Ground Communications 
Communication Management based on Network Utility Maximization and QoS Requirements 
 
Itziar Salaberria, Asier Perallos, Roberto Carballedo 
Deusto Institute of Technology (DeustoTech) 
University of Deusto 
Bilbao, Spain 
{itziar.salaberria, perallos, roberto.carballedo}@deusto.es 
 
 
Abstract—The growth of the use of wireless and internet 
technologies in transport systems, enables the provision of new 
information 
services 
based 
on 
vehicle-to-ground 
communications. There are many broadband management 
systems, 
but 
most 
of 
them 
come 
from 
non-mobile 
environments. This results in a poor performance when 
deployed to environments where senders and receivers are 
moving. Such problems appear because transportation systems 
environments 
present specific 
requirements 
related 
to 
coverage, bandwidth and also a mix of communications 
networks. In order to tackle these challenges, this paper 
presents the work in progress of a vehicle-to-ground 
communication 
middleware 
that 
aims 
to 
manage 
communication requests using a dynamic schema. The core of 
this new communications manager is an adaptive algorithm 
that selects the most favorable network link taking into 
account several actual and past aspects of the communications 
requests. 
Keywords-Communications 
Management; 
Limited 
Bandwidth; 
Quality 
of 
Service; 
Vehicle-to-Ground 
Communications. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Transportation industry is demanding more bandwidth, 
more immediate response time and more reliability for their 
communication networks in order to perform intra-vehicle, 
vehicle-to-ground or trackside communications. In this way, 
research is being promoted to provide more convenient and 
efficient vehicular systems by using broadband networks to 
link onboard systems with ground systems. 
Nowadays, the use of wireless and Internet technologies 
is increasing in the transportation enabling bidirectional 
vehicle-to-ground communications [1]. However, these kinds 
of communications applied to this environment have to 
respond to several challenges related to aspects like 
coverage, bandwidth, communication disruptions, multiple 
network interfaces for communications and different 
priorities in the information transmission, responding at the 
same time to applications Quality of Service (QoS) [2] 
requirements. 
On the other hand, the existing broadband management 
systems, which are used in other (non-mobile) environments, 
do not satisfy the needs of vehicular applications [3] [4]. In 
addition, there are several applications trying to transmit 
information to/from the vehicles at the same time. This 
implies the existence of a bandwidth monopolization 
problem. 
To tackle these challenges, it is necessary a smart 
intermediate element which manages when the applications 
(both terrestrial and vehicular-side) can communicate with 
each other and makes the most favorable available network 
link selection for communications. This is the aim of the 
work presented here. 
In contrast to existing initiatives, the proposed solution 
enables a continuous broadband communication channel 
between applications in vehicles and ground control centers 
based on an application layer middleware which do not 
require specific considerations in the rest of the protocol 
layers. Existing standards for Intelligent Transportation 
Systems (ITS) communication architectures, such as [5] [6] 
[7], are principally focused on network level issues in order 
to fulfill Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) and Vehicle-to-
Infrastructure (V2I) communication requirements. Unlike the 
proposed ones, these architectures are usually oriented to 
traffic security applications that need immediacy and a low 
volume of data transmission. 
This paper is organized into the following sections: the 
second section includes a brief state of the art. The third 
section details the proposed communication middleware 
requirements and architecture. To close, the fourth section of 
the paper describes the future work indicating the following 
steps in the work in progress. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
The presented research work is focused on vehicle-to-
ground 
broadband 
communications 
prioritization 
management focusing on high level protocols. Thus, in the 
following subsections the state of the art related to the two 
main issues of the work will be discussed: (1) vehicle-to-
ground wireless communications, and (2) broadband 
communications prioritization and QoS. 
A. Vehicle-to-Ground Wireless Communications 
Wireless communication technologies are growing in 
vehicular systems due to transportation companies are 
demanding greater efficiency for their systems while they are 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

also seeking to provide new information services [8]. 
Consequently, vehicular systems are enabling not only 
vehicle-to-ground continuous communications, they also 
tend to install wireless equipment in stations and other 
wayside locations for broadband communications where 
large quantities of maintenance [9] [10] and multimedia [11] 
data can be transmitted between vehicle and ground system 
while vehicle is in coverage area. 
It is important to point out that the emphasis in 
developing wireless network is on network bandwidth and 
coverage. Therefore, the applicability of the communication 
system will largely depends on their ability to provide 
sufficient data rates (QoS requirements), considering 
introduced protocol overhead, packet fragmentation and 
possible retransmissions. A major problem with using 
unlicensed frequency bands like 802.11x is obviously the 
interference on and shared access of the wireless medium. 
These aspects can cause blocking of information services 
communication. In order to solve this kind of questions, one 
option is to enable multiple wireless interfaces making 
possible switching from one interface to other. It is for this 
reason that the vehicular wireless communication systems 
tends to be designed using multiple radio and mobile 
interfaces (GPRS, UMTS, WLAN, etc.) in “always best 
connected” [12] way to enhance communications availability 
and obtain the possible major bandwidth capabilities [13], 
selecting the most favorable link for the communications at 
every moment. This kind of solutions increases system cost, 
but can help to improve system availability greatly. 
Therefore, the use of multiple network interfaces 
simultaneously allows building a better combined wireless 
communication channel. The objective is to achieve the 
highest data rates being able to meet different mobile 
scenarios as well as mobile applications requirements. To 
that end, there are solutions that advocate exploiting network 
diversity from different wireless networks and operators in 
order to be able to aggregate bandwidths that can then be 
offered as a single large, more stable pipe to end users [14]. 
Furthermore, it is important to point out the emergent 
application of Internet protocols, languages and technologies 
(TCP/IP, HTTP, XML, etc.) [15]. 
B. Broadband Communications Prioritization and QoS 
Wireless communications applied to mobile environment 
present several limitations related to coverage and bandwidth 
that can cause service disruptions. Moreover wireless 
stations that need to transmit relevant information must deal 
with wireless stations wishing to transmit less priority traffic. 
With the purpose of achieve QoS requirements 
demanded by services, several communication management 
and prioritization heuristics [16] [17] and mechanisms exist 
[18] [19] [20]. Although existing solutions are mainly 
focused on network aspects and not in final applications and 
services, other approaches are focused in optimizing the use 
of the network technologies according to the type of traffic 
generated by applications (QoS control). Therefore, there is 
an open research field that can be tackled from two 
complementary points of view: (1) QoS requirements 
management which involves technology concepts related to 
the information to transmit, and (2) aspects about network 
conditions that make possible the transmission of that 
information (bandwidth, coverage, latency, etc.).  
In addition, many of these solutions are focused on 
mobile environments and are able to monitor network 
parameters (like bandwidth). The main idea in these 
solutions is to prioritize communications services allowing 
or denying communications, or readjusting its data rates, in 
accordance with QoS requirements demanded by the 
communication requests and available networks bandwidth 
limitations.  
These mentioned solutions applied to transportation 
would 
allow 
prioritizing 
vehicle-to-ground 
wireless 
communications taking into account its QoS restrictions. 
However, they are mostly oriented to regulate wireless 
stations 
communications 
and 
not 
final 
individual 
applications communication requests. Moreover, they do not 
monitor previous performance aspects (variable) not 
allowing to the system to dynamically adjust its performance 
for more efficiency.  
These questions open an interesting line of work to 
develop adaptive algorithms and interactive control methods 
that perform this adjustment dynamically. The basic idea is 
to monitor network conditions in real-time, receive feedback 
measures of the variables of interest, and based on these 
measures and QoS requirements, make a wireless 
communication prioritization assigning them the considered 
bandwidth data rate. 
III. PROPOSED COMMUNICATION MIDDLEWARE 
The proposed solution consists on a communication 
middleware that aims to enable several physical network 
communication links between vehicle and ground system 
(3G, WiFi, etc.), choosing the network link considered as the 
best at every moment according to the bandwidth availability 
(not having final applications to get involved in the network 
management).  
Focusing on an application layer middleware it is a more 
flexible approach allowing the introduction of new 
parameters or factors that can be managed to improve 
communications performance. So, the objective is to develop 
a 
dynamic 
and 
adaptive 
communications 
requests 
mechanism based not only on network conditions and 
applications request priorities. This mechanism will be based 
also on system historical performance parameters (previous 
bandwidth values, time in network coverage areas during the 
transportation routes, previous applications communications 
performance, etc.). 
A. Requirements 
The final system should respond to several requirements:  
1) Dynamic and efficient communication request 
management: this system will prioritize vehicle-to-ground 
communcations requests taking into account communication 
urgency creteria, as well as previous performance logs. 
2) The best bandwidth: the system will always select the 
physical link considered as the best taking into account the 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

 
Figure 1. Dynamic Communication Prioritization Architecture for 
Vehicle-to-Ground Communications based on QoS Requirements and 
Network Conditions 
bandwidh in order to respond to final applications 
communication requirements. 
3) Quality of Service: it is necessary to know the 
bandwidth availability offered by the network link which is 
active at every moment, as well as the bandwidth offered by 
the rest of communications links (although they are not 
being used). At this point, it is essential to establish a set of 
connection procedures which permit to reserve a certain 
bandwidth for a particular communication. 
B.  Architecture 
The architecture of the presented solution (Figure 1) is 
composed by two software elements; one in the terrestrial 
side (Terrestrial Communication Manager, TCM), and the 
other boarded in vehicles (Vehicular Communication 
Manager, VCM). The former manages terrestrial aspects of 
the architecture and the latter vehicular-side issues, and they 
interact to each other in order to control and manage vehicle-
to-ground communications. In addition, this system develops 
a Bandwidth Measurement Service (BMS) that notifies 
available links bandwidth values to the VCM at every 
moment. It is necessary to emphasize that bandwidth 
measurement would be an independent research field that is 
not explored in this work. 
Therefore, the final objective is to demonstrate that this 
communication management system improves vehicle-to-
ground broadband communications efficiency especially in 
these situations where applications communications needs 
are higher than the bandwidth offered by the available 
network links ensuring at the same time applications QoS 
requirements. 
Thus, the proposed solution is composed by several 
functional modules: 
1) Active Link Selection: the communication platform is 
based on different physical communication link existence so 
that the combination of these independent links offers a 
continuous vehicle-to-ground connectivity in order to 
respond to the final applications communications demand. 
So, taking into account the availability of enabled different 
physical links, the system always selects as active link this 
network interface that offers the best bandwidth (based on 
the features and coverage of the physical link).  
Therefore, 
to 
establish 
vehicle-to-ground 
communications, VCM and TCM can communicate through 
different communications network physical links. The VCM 
is who selects the active link considered most favorable for 
communications based on available links bandwidth 
measurements notified by BMS, and then establish active 
link connection with TCM. So, BMS is continuously 
monitoring all enabled network links status, and VCM 
switch from one to other in two cases: (1) when active link 
connectivity is lost and (2) when BMS measurements 
indicate that another link is better than this established as the 
active. In these two cases, the active communication link 
change is transparent for final applications that do not detect 
connection interruptions if these link changes occur while 
they are transmitting. 
At this point it should be emphasized that the basis is that 
the system always defines a single vehicle-to-earth network 
link as active for communications (the most favorable). So, 
all communications will always be generated by the channel 
set as active (WiFi, GSM/GPRS, Tetra, etc.) regardless of 
the availability of other physical channels simultaneously. 
2) Requests Prioritization Management: the objective is 
to prioritize vehicle-to-ground communications based on 
several criteria so that the transmission of critical 
information has more priority over other information that 
need less "immediacy" when being transmitted. Therefore, 
this platform proposes a set of communication requests 
prioritization criteria divided into two categories: (1) static 
criteria and (2) dynamic criteria. Static criteria are related to 
applications QoS requirements like information priority 
level, required minimun data rates, or requests cronological 
order. Dynamic criteria are variable factors that are related 
directly with the communications that have been carried out 
previously (the average duration of vehicles stopping in a 
known wireless network coverage area, the average duration 
that takes the communications of a particular application at 
certain data rates, bandwidth values obtained previously, 
wireless networks coverage values, etc.). Thus, combining 
these two kinds of criterias, the system calculates a numeric 
value that represents the fitness of serving a request. Once 
calculated this value, it is used to discern which 
communication request is served. Hence, in order to 
perform requests prioritization, this system develops several 
queues where requests are sorted by vehicle and this 
calculated value (priority). 
Therefore, the idea is that the system reconfigures how it 
prioritizes the communication requests depending of its 
behavior over time, always seeking the most optimal 
configuration based on system feedback. 
3) Vehicle-to-Ground Control Protocol: TCM and 
VCM on each vehicle communicate each other  and 
exchange commands in order to establish active links and 
manage 
vehicular 
and 
terrestrial 
final 
applications 
communications 
requests 
prioritization. 
The 
control 
protocol is defined using XML messages where information 
is exchanged via TCP/IP sockets.  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

4) Final Application Communication Control and 
Management: the described platform aims to enable vehicle 
and terrestrial vehicular applications to communicate each 
other in a more efficient way. So when an application 
attempts to start a new communication makes a request to 
the platform. Then the system makes a decision about what 
priority requests can be served concurrently taking into 
account 
active 
link 
bandwidth 
limitations, 
priority 
parameters and requests QoS requirements. Thus, once the 
system give way to a communication request, adjust this 
communications data rate taking into account its QoS 
requirements, active link bandwidth availability and active 
priority requests communicating concurrently. In addition, 
system should assign more bandwidth than minimaly 
required to a request depending on bandwidth availability  
and priority active requests requirements. 
C. Developing State 
The proposed middleware is already developed and is 
being debugged in order to improve its performance and fix 
detected errors. Besides, with the purpose of test the platform 
there have been developed applications simulators that 
permit making communication requests to the system under 
different QoS requirements.  
IV. FUTURE WORK 
Once the system is developed, it will be tested 
configuring several testbed scenarios. The idea is to have a 
preconfigured scenarios 
including a 
set of 
known 
communication requests (generated both on terrestrial side 
and on vehicles) and   network conditions.  
Therefore, the testing scenarios will include different 
kind of final applications that generate different kind of data 
traffic (multimedia, text, files, binary, etc.) that are usual in 
transportation systems, as well as predefined network 
conditions (using an external tool that allows to regulate 
network interfaces bandwidth values). The objective is to 
evaluate the systems performance, launching several 
communication requests and causing network active link 
changes (because of more favorable link or link lost 
detections), that allows checking whether obtained results are 
as expected. 
On the other hand, these tests will be useful to evaluate 
communications prioritization algorithm in order to improve 
its efficiency. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Aguado, E. Jacob, P. Saiz, J. Unzilla, M. Higuero and J. 
Matias, “Railway signaling systems and new trends in 
wireless data communications”, Veh. Tech. Conference, pp. 
1333-1336, Sep. 2005 
[2] W.C. Hardy, “QoS measurement and evaluation of 
telecommunications 
Quality 
of 
Service”, 
Review 
R.Chodoreck, IEEE Communications Magazine, 40(2), pp. 
30–32, 2002  
[3] D. Marrero, E.M. Macías, and A. Suárez, “An admission 
control and traffic regulation mechanism for infrastructure 
WiFi networks”, IAENG International Journal of Computer 
Science, Vol. 35, Issue 1, pp. 154-160, ISSN: 1819-656X, 
2008 
[4] T. Okabe, T. Shizuno and T. Kitamura, “Wireless LAN 
Access Network System for Moving Vehicles”, 10th IEEE 
Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC), pp. 
211-216, 2005 
[5] Car to Car Communication Consortium, “Car to Car 
Communication Consortium Manifesto: Overview of the 
C2C-CC System”, C2C-CC, version 1.1, 2007 
[6] ETSI TR 102 638, “Intelligent Transport System (ITS); 
Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; 
Definition, ETSI specification TR 102 638, v.1.1.1, June 2009 
[7] G. Karagiannis, O. Altintas, E. Ekici, G.J., Heijenk, B. 
Jarupan, K. Lin, T. Weil, (2011) “Vehicular networking: A 
survey and tutorial on requirements, architectures, challenges, 
standards and solutions”, IEEE Communications Surveys & 
Tutorials, 13 (4). pp. 584-616 
[8] L. Qi, “Research on Intelligent Transportation System 
Technologies and Applications”, Workshop on Power 
Electronics and Intelligent Transportation System, pp. 529-
531, 2008 
[9] A. Bondavalle, Andrea Ceccarelli, et al., “Design and 
Evaluation of a Safe Driver Machine Interface”, International 
Journal of Performability Engineering, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 153-
166. January 2009 
[10] Min-Song Li, Duan Zhuo-hua, “Wireless Monitoring System 
in The Application of Train”, International Conference on 
Internet Computing and Information Services, pp. 589-590, 
2011 
[11] Y.K. Choong, C. Lin and L. Xiaoyu, “BlueBus: A Scalable 
Solution for Localized Mobile Service in a Public Bus”, 
Mobility Conference, pp- 712-715, 2007 
[12] E. Gustafsson and A. Jonsson, “Always bes connected”, 
Wireless Communications IEEE, 10 (1), pp. 49-55, Feb. 2003 
[13] G.M. Shafiullah, A. Gyasi-Agyei and P. Wolfs, “Survey of 
Wireless Communications Applications in the Railway 
Industry”, The 2nd International Conference on Wireless 
Broadband 
and 
Ultra 
Wideband 
Communications 
(AusWireless), pp. 65, 2007 
[14] P. Rodriguez, et al., “MAR: A Commuter Router 
Infrastructure for the Mobile Internet”, 2nd International 
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications and Services 
(MobiSys), 2004 
[15] A.Gatti, “Trains as Mobile devices: the TrainCom project”, 
Wireless Design Conference, London, 2002 
[16] P. Dharwadkar, H.J. Siegel, and E.K.P. Chiong, “A Heuristic 
for Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation with Preemption and 
Degradation for Prioritized Requests”, 21st International 
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), 
2001 
[17] P. Jayachandran and T. Abdelzaher, “Bandwidth Allocation 
for Elastic Real-Time Flows in Multihop Wireless Networks 
Based on Network Utility Maximization”, 28th International 
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 2008 
[18] D.Marrero, E.M. Macias and A. Suarez, “Dynamic Traffic 
Regulation for WiFi Networks”, Proceedings of the World 
Congress on Engineering (WCE), 2007 
[19] M.F. Horng, Y.H. Kuo, L.C. Huang and Y.T. Chien, “An  
Effective Approach to Adaptive Bandwidth Allocation with 
QoS Enhanced on Ip Networks”, International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Information Management and Communication 
(ICUIMC), 2009 
[20] P. Noh-sam and L. Gil-Haeng, “A framework for policy-
based sla management over wireless  LAN”, Proceedings of 
the Second International Conference on e-Business and 
Telecommunication Networks (ICETE), INSTICC Press, 
ISBN 972-8865-32-5, pp. 173-176, UK, October 2005 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

