Adaptive Resource Allocation Scheme for TETRA Networks with Multi-operators  
 
Salman A.  AlQahtani 
Information and Communication Technology Department 
King Fahd Security College 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
salman@kfsc.edu.sa 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we evaluate various aspects of packet 
data transmission in terrestrial trunked radio (TETRA) 
networks giving particular emphasis on the performance of 
applications transmitting data between a number of radio 
terminals and a fixed server. The utilization of such 
applications is constantly increasing in public safety networks 
and so does the need to dimension and configure TETRA 
networks to meet their reliability, delay and loss requirements. 
Without an efficient radio resource management (RRM), one 
operator can exhaust the capacity of others. This study tackles 
an 
efficient 
scheduling 
to 
provide 
maximum 
system 
throughput and proportional fairness in accordance with 
operator capacity share through adaptive resource allocation 
scheme. We refer to this new scheme as multi-operators time 
division generalized processor sharing scheme (M-TDGPS). It 
employs both adaptive rate allocation to maximize the resource 
utilization and GPS techniques to provide fair services for each 
operator. The performance analysis of this scheme is derived 
using the GPS performance model and compared with the 
normal static rate M-TDGPS scheme. The simulation results 
show that the proposed adaptive rate M-TDGPS scheduling 
scheme improves both system utilization (throughput) and 
average delays. 
Keywords-adaptive rate scheduling; GPS; multi-operator; 
utilization; TETRA 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Several IP-based data services are used today in 
Terrestrial Trunked Radio (TETRA) networks. The traffic of 
these IP-based applications is characterized by small 
messages (e.g., in the order of 80–150 bytes) being sent 
occasionally between a number of TETRA radio terminals 
and a fixed server. These messages are typically transmitted 
on a TETRA packet data channel (PDCH), and consequently 
we term such client-server applications as packet data 
messaging applications [18]. 
For current and next TETRA and beyond time division 
with multiple access (TDMA) networks, sharing the radio 
access network has become an important issue for TETRA 
operators. TETRA and beyond network rollout is a very 
costly and time consuming process. Therefore, sharing of 
network infrastructure among operators offers an alternative 
solution to reducing the investment in the coverage phase of 
TETRA. Another advantage of the deployment of shared 
networks is the increased coverage, since operators can 
cooperate on coverage and sites as a more cost-effective way 
to cover large geographical areas. All together, this will 
result in reduced time to market and earlier user acceptance 
for TETRA and its related services. The sharing methods 
available for similar wireless network operators are proposed 
in many literatures [1-3]. These sharing methods include, site 
sharing, radio access network (RAN) sharing, common 
network sharing, and geographical network. The previous 
proposals and studies of wireless sharing methods present 
the problem from an architectural and technical point of view 
without investigating how the shared radio resources are 
going to be managed and controlled through radio resource 
management (RRM) procedures. The RAN based sharing 
method is of special importance as it reflects the most recent 
and critical sharing option where more than one operator 
shares the same RAN. In RAN sharing method, which is the 
focus in this study, each operator has its own core network 
and only the RAN is shared as depicted in Fig. 1. This 
implies that multiple operators fully share the same RAN. 
Without an efficient RRM, one operator may exhaust the 
capacity of others. Therefore, there is a critical need for radio 
resource control between the multiple operators to prevent 
one operator from exhausting the capacity of others.  
Service level agreements (SLA) specify the usage of the 
radio network capacity for each operator under the RAN 
based sharing agreement [16]. Each operator receives the 
agreed upon Quality of Service (QoS) level by following the 
specified operation rules in the SLA. More about SLA and 
service management can be found in [16]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Tetra RAN Sharing 
1
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

In order to secure the fair access to the network resources 
and to optimize the usage of the allotted capacity, it is very 
important to allow the RRM to separately control each 
operator and guarantee its minimum required capacity. In 
other words, the RRM procedure should guarantee that the 
maximum traffic per operator as defined by SLA is not 
exceeded unless permitted. RRM can allow an operator’s 
traffic to exceed its limit in an adaptive way if there are 
unused resources related to other unbacklogged operator in 
order to increase the overall system utilization. Hence, the 
shared radio resources must be controlled in a fair and 
efficient way between operators. The Scheduling scheme, as 
part of RRM, controls the packets transmissions during the 
connection time. This study proposes the same idea in the 
case of TETRA networks. It focuses on designing an 
efficient and fair scheduling scheme for multi-operator 
TETRA system. 
A. Related Works and Motivation  
An ideal fair scheduling discipline is the well known 
generalized processor sharing (GPS), and also known as 
weighted fair queuing (WFQ) [4][5]. The GPS discipline was 
introduced in [4][5].Several GPS-based fair scheduling 
schemes have been proposed for wireline packet network 
[4]-[6]. Also, these GPS-based scheduling algorithms have 
been adapted to wireless networks. The work in [7]-[9], 
extend fair scheduling schemes developed for wireline 
networks to time division multiple access (TDMA)-based 
and hybrid time-division/code-division multiple access 
(TD/CDMA) based wireless networks. These schemes are 
implemented 
using 
a 
conventional 
time-scheduling 
approach, requiring high complexity due to the intensive 
computation for the virtual time of each packet [10]. 
In order to improve radio resource utilization and achieve 
fairness with low complexity in such TETRA-based wireless 
networks, number of recent algorithms for GPS-based uplink 
scheduling are studied and adapted in [11]-[15]. In [12]-[13], 
an uplink low-complexity code-division GPS (CDGPS) 
scheme for dynamic fair scheduling is proposed. The 
CDGPS scheduler makes use of the adaptability of the 
mobile wireless physical layer to perform fair scheduling on 
a time-slot basis by using a dynamic rate-scheduling 
approach rather than the conventional time scheduling 
approach as in GPS. At the beginning of each time slot, the 
scheduler adjusts only the channel rate of each session traffic 
flow in the system by varying the spreading factor and/or 
using a multiple of orthogonal code channels, rather than 
allocating service time to each packet as in GPS to reduce 
the implementation complexity of GPS [13]. A low-
complexity GPS-based bandwidth scheduling scheme similar 
to the CDGPS is also proposed in [14], where a multi-carrier 
CDMA system is considered. Based on the minimum power 
allocation algorithm, a WCDMA GPS scheduling scheme is 
proposed in [15]. However, all these scheduling schemes are 
designed for single operator systems without considering 
how to control and schedule the resources that are shared 
among more than one operator in an efficient and a unified 
way. 
B.  Research Contribution 
In this study, the CDGPS and GPS discipline idea is 
adapted and extended in order to design a new high 
performance GPS-based scheduling scheme which can 
effectively control the shared resources among TETRA 
multi-operators in an efficient and fair manner. Efficient 
means higher system utilization and fair means that each 
operator guaranteed at least a capacity equals to its capacity 
share specified in the SLA. Therefore, a multi-operator 
TDMA based of GPS  (M-TDGPS) rate scheduling scheme 
for the uplink TETRA network is designed and analyzed. 
The scheme employs both adaptive rate allocation to 
maximize the resource utilization and M-TDGPS to provide 
fair services for each operator. The resource allocated to each 
operator session is proportional to an assigned weight factor 
as per the SLA specification. After the initial allocation of 
the allotted capacity, M-TDGPS scheme uses the GPS 
service discipline to dynamically schedule the assigned 
channel rates of one operator among the traffic classes within 
that operator independently.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the system model and assumptions. Section III 
explains the proposed scheme in details while Section IV 
presents the obtained results, as well as the discussion. 
Finally, the paper is concluded in Section V. 
II. 
SYSTEM MODEL AND ASSUMPTIONS  
The original TETRA standard first envisaged in ETSI 
was known as the TETRA Voice plus Data (V+D) standard 
[17].  Because of the need to further evolve and enhance 
TETRA, the original V+D standard is now known 
as TETRA Release 1.  An overview of the network elements 
covered in the TETRA standard is shown in Fig. 2. 
1) Switching and Management Infrastructure (SwMI): 
The abbreviation SwMI is used to classify all of the 
equipment and sub-systems that comprise a TETRA 
network, including base stations.  
PSTN, ISDN
PDN
 
Figure 2.  TETRA Standard Interfaces 
2
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

Even 
though 
some 
ETSI Technical 
Committee 
(TC) TETRA members felt that a standard base station 
interface would be useful (as provided in GSM) it was 
decided that owing to the way in which different 
manufacturers configure their networks for optimum 
performance and design flexibility, it would be impractical to 
implement. 
It was also agreed, for the same reasons as the base 
station interface, that everything contained inside the SwMI 
would not be standardized, thereby allowing TETRA 
infrastructure manufacturers flexibility in design, and the 
ability to differentiate their portfolio offerings, when in 
competition 
with 
other 
TETRA 
manufacturers.  This 
practical approach also meant that new technologies in the 
areas of transmission and networking could be used without 
having to go through a long standardization process. 
2) Air Interfaces (1 & 2): The most important (and 
complex) interfaces are considered to be the ‘air interfaces’ 
between the base station and radio terminals (1) and the 
Direct Mode Operation (DMO) interface (2). DMO is a 
facility that allows terminals to operate in local radio nets 
independent of the main TETRA network infrastructure. 
3) Peripheral Equipment Interface (PEI) (4): This 
interface standardizes the connection of the radio terminal to 
an external device, and supports data transmission between 
applications resident in the device and the connected 
TETRA radio terminal. The PEI also supports certain 
elements of control within the radio terminal from the 
external device and/or application. 
4) Remote Dispatcher Interface (5): This interface was 
originally intended to allow connection to remote wire line 
dispatcher consoles like those located in major control 
rooms.  Unfortunately, work on this interface was dropped 
in ETSI TC TETRA as the complexity to provide a 
universal interface without degrading performance was 
impractical.  This was because the personal mobile radio 
(PMR) industry had specialist manufacturers of control 
room equipment, the majority of which differed in the way 
they interfaced to PMR networks.  Similarly, the TETRA 
network architecture of manufacturers also differed adding 
to the complexity of providing a universal interface. For 
these reasons only TETRA manufacturer specific interface 
specifications are available to support the many voice and 
data applications requiring access to TETRA infrastructures. 
5) PSTN/ISDN/PABX (6):This standardized interface 
enables TETRA to interface with the PSTN, the ISDN 
and/or a PABX. 
6) Inter-System Interface (7):This standardized Inter-
System Interface (ISI) allows infrastructures supplied by 
different TETRA manufacturers to inter-operate with each 
other allowing interoperability between two or more 
networks.  There are two methods of interconnection in the 
standard, one covering information transfer using circuit 
mode and the other using packet mode. 
7) Network Management Interface (8): Like the local 
dispatcher 
interface, 
it 
was 
recognized 
during 
standardization 
activities 
that 
a 
common 
network 
management interface was impractical. Fortunately, this 
early standardization was not wasted as it was later turned 
into a comprehensive guide to assist users in defining 
network management requirements. 
Besides these network element standards, the many 
services and facilities available on TETRA are also 
standardized.  The most significant of these being: 
• 
Advanced and fast group call services - clear and 
encrypted  
• 
Individual calls - clear and encrypted  
• 
Short Data Services -  clear and encrypted  
• 
Packet Data Services - clear and encrypted  
Each TETRA carrier is spaced at 25 kHz intervals and 
supports 4 calls. In a typical 400 MHz system there is 10 
MHz duplex spacing between the transmit and receive 
frequencies (45 MHz for 800 MHz systems). Each TETRA 
carrier is divided into four time slots as shown in Fig. 3. A 
TETRA call is allocated one of four time slots on a particular 
downlink carrier frequency for mobile station (MS) 
reception, and the corresponding time slot on the 
corresponding uplink carrier frequency for MS transmission. 
Each time slot can be occupied by a burst which contains 
traffic in two fields and a number of bits which aid the 
terminal in synchronizing to the air interface signal.  
At the base station the burst signals for four separate calls 
are assembled into one TDMA frame and these TDMA 
frames are organized into a structure of multi-frames and 
hyper-frames. Radio performance testing is concerned with 
the bursts in the timeslots. Terminals use the timing 
information from the received signal to judge when they 
should transmit to the base station in their allotted time slot.  
We assume that the channel bit rate is 5Mbps and N 
operators can share the cell radio resource (channel rate). 
Each operator has number of MS. The transmission rate of 
each operator’s MS is scheduled on time-slot basis. For each 
slot, the scheduler allocates adequate service rates to the N 
operators, using M-TDGPS scheduling procedures, to 
guarantee the capacity share requirements of all the operators 
in a fair manner. 
 
Hyperframe (61.2s)
Multiframe (1.02s)
TDMA frame (56.67ms)
1
2
3
4
17
18
1
2
3
4
508
509
510
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
60
5
control
frame
 
Time slot (14.167ms)
 
 = 510 modulating bits
  
Figure 3.  TETRA TDMA 
3
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

After assigning each operator j its fair service rate, its 
local scheduler allocates adequate service rates to its flows to 
guarantee the QoS requirements of all the traffic classes 
within operator j in a fair manner. The scheduler within each 
operator can be designed independent of other operator 
scheduler. Each operator implements its own call admission 
control, which attempts to control its own arrival traffic. 
The new RRM system model is shown in Fig. 4. When a 
mobile terminal wants to connect, it needs to send a 
connection requests using the random access channel 
(RACH). When this request is received at the base station 
(BS), the multi-operator call admission control (CAC) 
scheme is first used to check the admission of the connection 
request of an operator. If the result is positive, the connection 
request belonging to this operator is accepted and becomes 
ready for traffic transmission. This is called the admitted 
connections. When packets for an operator are available for 
transmission, they need to be scheduled according to their 
QoS and bit error rate (BER) requirements as a second phase 
using the uplink scheduler. However, how the packets of this 
operator’s connections are transmitted in each frame is 
determined by our proposed M-TDGPS scheduling scheme. 
Therefore, the M-TDGPS scheme employs the dynamic rate 
allocation among operators in order to increase the overall 
system utilization and use the GPS model in order to insure 
the fairness amongst operator when allocating the shared 
resource. After allocating each operator its resource the 
TDGPS is then used within each operator to schedule its 
traffic class. 
Two types of services are considered in this study. These 
two types are: 1) Real-time traffic (RT) such as voice or 
video, 2) non-real-time traffic (NRT) such as data traffic. 
The required QoS in terms of delay and BER are different 
for each of these traffic types. In the next sections, the detail 
descriptions of the proposed scheme are presented. 
 
Figure 4.  RMM Model for RAN sharing 
III. 
PROPOSED M-TDGPS SCHEMES 
The shared resources will be the TETRA channel rate, C, 
assumed here to be equal to 5 Mbps. We have N operators 
sharing the same channel. The queuing model of the 
proposed M-TDGPS scheme is shown in Fig. 5, where the 
link capacity C is shared by N operators. Each operator has 
its own assigned soft capacity defined based on the SLA. 
The assigned weight for operator j is 
j
g , where j = 1, 2,…N. 
Therefore the total cell capacity in terms of channel rate is 
divided into N groups. The jth operator maintains two of 
connections with link rate Cj(k) during the kth medium access 
control (MAC) slot with capacity 
g jC
.  
It is assumed that the traffic characteristic of each input 
traffic input or stream of the M-TDGPS model is shaped by a 
Leaky-Bucket regulator [4] in order to achieve a bounded 
delay and bounded buffer size for traffic queue. Leaky 
Bucket characterization of a traffic stream is based on 
specifying two parameters (
σij
,
ij
ρ ) where
σij
 and 
ij
ρ  are 
token buffer size and token generate rate, respectively of the 
leaky bucket. In M-TDGPS scheduling schemes, the 
allocated resources to an operator Cj(k) during the kth slot can 
be fixed or adaptive as follows.  
A. Fixed rate M-TDGPS 
Let cj is the minimum assigned rate for jth operator such 
that; 
 
 
N
j
C
g
c
j
j
1,..,
,
=
=
 
(1) 
where gj is defined based on SLA such that; 
∑
=
=
N
j
j
g
1
1
and ∑
=
≤
N
j
j
C
c
1
. With this mechanism and at 
each time slot, an operator j is given Cj(k)= cj share if there it 
has a backlogged session. If no packet is ready, then Cj(k)= 0 
and the unutilized capacity of an operator is not allowed to 
be used by other backlogged operators. This scheduling 
called fixed rate (FR) M-TDGPS scheduling and the system 
can be viewed and multi-independent TDGPS systems. 
Therefore, the assigned rate for each operator is based on (1). 
 
 
Figure 5.  Queuing detail mode for M-TDGPS Scheme 
 
4
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

B. Adaptive rate M-TDGPS 
In case of an adaptive rate (AR) M-TDGPS scheduling, 
for each time slot, T, first the jth operator is given its 
minimum cj as in (1). The unutilized resources, if any, are 
then specified by; 
 
∑
=
≥
−
=
N
j
j
r
c
C
C
1
0
 
(2) 
Then the excess resources are divided amongst the 
backlogged operator such that 
 
∑
∀
=
 has  backlog
operator
that
i such
i
i
r
j
e
g
g C
c
   
(3) 
 
e
j
j
c
c
k
C
+
) =
(
 
(4) 
 
The sum of Cj(k) over all the operators should not exceed 
C in case of adaptive rate and should not exceed 
g jC
 in 
case of fixed rate allocation. The assigned capacity share to 
each operator j, Cj(k), is also shared by K traffic classes or 
flows. Each traffic class i within each operator j has its 
arrival rate (Aij), queue (Qij), and maintain a connection with 
link rate Rij(k) during the kth MAC slot. The sum of Rij(k) 
over all classes of one operator j should not exceed Cj(k). 
The procedure used to assign the link rate is explained in the 
next subsection. 
C. The M-TDGPS Procedure 
The M-TDGPS procedure is defined as follows. Consider 
a queuing system of TETRA uplink channel rate with link 
transmission rate of C. Let Wj(τ, t) be the amount of operator 
j traffic served during interval of (τ, t]. Each operator j link is 
associated with a positive real weight, gj, j=1,.., N.  
Let Sij(k) be the amount of session i traffic of operator j 
served during the time slot k out of the Wj(τ, t) that was 
assigned to its operator. Each traffic i of operator j link is 
associated with a positive real weight, wjj, i=1,.., K selected 
based on QoS requirement of this traffic class. Let the 
scheduling period of M-TDGPS scheme, i.e. the slot length, 
be T. The M-TDGPS server will allocate each Cj(k) and 
Rij(k) for each operator j and its individual traffic i, 
respectively using the following steps.  
• 
Let OBj(k) be the total amount of backlogged traffic 
for operator j during the time-slot k, and Bij(k), be 
the total amount of backlogged traffic of class i of 
operator j during the time-slot k, such that 
1
(
)
K
j
i j
i
O B
B
k
=
= ∑
. 
• 
Using OBj(k), the Wj(k) and Sij(k)   are determined 
as follows. If  OBj(k)=0, then Wj(k)=0 and Sij(k)=0 
for all i. If  OBj(k)> 0, then Wj(k)= ciT and Sij(k)= 
rijT for all Bij(k)>0, where ci is the minimum 
capacity share guaranteed to operator j, and rij is the 
minimum rate guaranteed to traffic i form the 
assigned capacity share of its corresponding operator 
j. ci and rij are calculated as follows:    
 
∑
=
=
N
j
j
i
i
g
g C
c
1
 
(5) 
 
∑
=
=
K
i
ij
j
ij
ij
w
k
w C
r
1
( )
 
(6) 
The session i with Bij(k)=0 will have   Sij(k)= 0 and 
wij(k)=0.                                                   
• 
After assigning each operator its Wj(k) then , in case 
of adaptive rate scheduling  if 
CT
k
W
j
j
<
∑
( )
, then 
the remaining unused  resource is distributed to the 
operators  who need more than their guaranteed 
service ciT. The distribution of the remaining unused 
resource should be in proportion to each operator’s 
weight gj, according to the M-TDGPS service 
discipline as shown in (4). When an operator j 
receives part of the unused capacity, it will be 
distributed to its traffic who need more than their 
guaranteed service rijT in proportion to each traffic’s 
(session) weight wij. 
• 
Finally the allocated channel rate to each operator j 
and to each backlogged operator traffic i can be 
determined by Cj(k)= Wj(k)/T and Rij(k)= Sij(k)/T, 
respectively. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In this section, simulation results are presented to 
demonstrate the performance of the proposed M-TDGPS 
scheme in terms of delay and system throughput only due to 
paper limitation. Throughput is calculated as the average 
number of served packets per second. C++ is used to build 
the simulation model. Based on the characteristic of TDMA 
wireless physical layer, the scheduling period T is 14.167 ms 
as shown in Fig. 3. In simulation, the M-TDGPS scheme is 
compared in case of adaptive rate (AR) M-TDGPS and fixed 
rate 
(FR) 
M-TDGPS 
under 
heterogeneous 
traffic 
environments. The total bandwidth is assumed to be a 
constant C=5Mbps assuming we have the new generation of 
TETRA Networks. Three operators are considered (N=3) 
each operator is assigned different weight based on SLA.  
We assumed that each operator is given (gj=1/3) of the 
bandwidth as a minimum. All operator follows are modeled 
by a Poisson process with average arrival rate λ  and packet 
length L shaped by a leaky-bucket regulator for providing 
bounded delay.  In this simulation L=512 bits which is the 
maximum size of data frame, 
σij
=100L, 
ij
ρ =C/6, and λ  
can be varied in order to change the system load. 
In the following experiments, the traffic loads of operator 
2 (OP2) and operator 3 (OP3) is fixed to 512 Kbps and the 
traffic loads of operator 1 (OP1) is varied.  The system 
throughputs and the average packet delay versus offered 
traffic are depicted in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. The offered traffic is 
5
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

calculated as the total of all operators' traffics (Packets per 
second). 
Fig. 6 shows the system throughputs comparison in case 
of fixed rate (FR) and adaptive (AR) rate M-TDGPS. The 
traffic loads are the sum of average arrival rates of the 6 data 
follows (two per operator).  
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Offerd Traffic (Pkts/sec)  
Throughput (Pkts/sec) 
 OP1-FR MCDGPS
 OP1-AR MCDGPS
M-TDGPS
M-TDGPS
Offered traffic (Pkts/sec)
 
Figure 6.  System Throughputs 
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
Offerd Traffic (Pkts/sec  
Average Delay(sec)
 OP1-FR MCDGPS
 OP1-AR MCDGPS
  
Figure 7.  Average packets delay. 
As expected the throughputs of adaptive rate M-TDGPS 
is higher in case of using adaptive rate because of using the 
concept of utilizing the unused resources of other operators. 
Hence the system throughputs increase. Fig. 7 shows the 
average delay with different system loads. In this figure it 
can be seen that the average delay performance of adaptive 
M-TDGPS is better than M-TDGPS with a fixed capacity per 
operator. In adaptive M-TDGPS, the unused resources can 
be distributed amongst the backlogged flows. Therefore, 
more packets can be served. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
An efficient adaptive rate M-TDGPS scheme has been 
proposed for supporting multi-services in the uplink of 
TETRA networks with multi-operators. The simulation 
results show that the proposed scheme can improve both 
system utilization and average delays. The proposed scheme 
allows for a flexible trade-off between the GPS fairness and 
efficiency in resource allocation and is an effective way to 
maximize the radio resource utilization under the fairness 
and QoS constraints. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. AlQahtani and U. Baroudi, “An Uplink Performance 
Evaluation for Roaming-Based Multi-Operator WCDMA 
Cellular Networks,” 4th ACS/IEEE International Conference 
on Computer Systems and Applications, UAE, March 8-11, 
2006, pp. 376-380. 
[2] Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), “Network 
Sharing; Architecture and functional description (Release 6),” 
Technical specification TS 23.251, version 2.0.0, June 2004. 
[3] Siemens AG, “3G Infrastructure Sharing - The Siemens 
Perspective,” available at http://www.siemens.com (accessed 
on 20 Feb. 2011). 
[4] A. Parekh and R. Gallager, “A generalized Processor Sharing 
Approach to Flow Control in Integrated Services Network-
The Single Node Case,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on 
Networking, , vol. 3, No 1,June 1993 ,pp. 344-357. 
[5] A. Parekh and R. Gallager, “A generalized Processor Sharing 
Approach to Flow Control in Integrated Services Network-
The Multiple Node Case,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on 
Networking, vol. 13, No 6, April 1994, pp. 137-150.  
[6] Z. Zhang, D. Towsley, and J. Kurose, “Statistical Analysis of 
the Generalized Processor Sharing Scheduling Discipline,” 
IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 13, No 6, August 1995, 
pp. 1071-1080.  
[7] P. Ramanathan and P. Agrawal, “Adapting Packet Fair 
Queueing 
Algorithms 
to 
Wireless 
Networks,” 
Proc. 
ACM/IEEE MOBICOM’98, Oct. 1998, pp. 1-9. 
[8] M. Arad and A. Leon-Garcia, “A Generalized Processor 
Sharing 
Approach 
to 
Time 
Scheduling 
in 
Hybrid 
CDMA/TDMA,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’98, March 1998, 
pp. 1164-1171. 
[9] T. Nandagopal, S. Lu and V. Bharghavan, “A Unified 
Architecture for the Design and Evaluation of Wireless Fair 
Scheduling Algorithms,” Wireless Networks, vol. 7, Aug. 
2002, pp. 231-247. 
[10] D. Stiliadis and A. Varma, “Efficient Fair Queueing 
Algorithms for Packet-Switched Networks,” IEEE/ACM 
Trans. Networking, vol. 6, April 1998, pp. 175-185. 
[11] A. Varsou and H. Poor, “An Adaptive Rate Processor Sharing 
Technique,” Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf., Oct. 
2001, pp. 2584-2588. 
[12] L. Shen, and J. Mark, “Dynamic Fair Scheduling With QoS 
Constraints in Multimedia Wideband CDMA Cellular 
Networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Comm., vol. 3, No. 1, Jan. 
2004, pp. 60-73. 
[13] L. Shen, and J. Mark, “Fair Resource Allocation with 
Guaranteed Statistical QoS for Multimedia Traffic in 
WCDMA Cellular Network in Wideband CDMA Cellular 
Networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Computing, vol. 4, No. 2, 
April 2005, pp. 166-177. 
[14] A. Stamoulis and G. Giannakis, “Packet Fair Queueing 
Scheduling Based on Multirate Multipath-Transparent CDMA 
for Wireless Networks,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, 26-30 
March 2000, pp. 1067-1076. 
[15] X. Wang, “An FDD Wideband CDMA MAC Protocol for 
Wireless Multimedia Networks,”  Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, 30 
March-3 April 2003, pp. 1067-1076. 
[16] R. State, K. El-Khazen, G. Martinez, and G. Vivier, “Service 
management for multi-operator heterogeneous networks". 
IEEE GLOBECOM,  17-21 Nov. 2002, pp 2069-2073. 
[17] http://www.tetramou.com (last accessed on 20 Feb. 2011) 
[18] D. Axiotis and  A. Salkintzis, “Packet data messaging over 
TETRA: 
network 
performance 
Analysis,” 
Wireless 
networks, vol. 16, No 4, July 2009, pp. 1189-1198.  
6
ACCESS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Access Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-142-7

