Optical Access Network Migration from GPON to XG-PON  
 
Bostjan Batagelj, Vesna Erzen,                           
Jurij Tratnik, Luka Naglic 
University of Ljubljana 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
e-mail: bostjan.batagelj@fe.uni-lj.si 
e-mail: vesna.erzen@fe.uni-lj.si 
e-mail: jurij.tratnik@fe.uni-lj.si 
e-mail: luka.naglic@fe.uni-lj.si 
 
Vitalii Bagan, Yury Ignatov, Maxim Antonenko 
Moscow Institute for Physics and Technology 
Department of Radio-Electronics 
and Applied Informatics 
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: VBagan@gmail.com 
e-mail: yury.ignatov@gmail.com  
e-mail: maxim.antonenko@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—The purpose of this paper is to give an introduction 
into the new standard base of next-generation Passive Optical 
Network (NG-PON). Study and analysis of future trends in the 
development of next-generation fixed broadband optical 
network is performed. The main intention of this paper is to 
describe migration from Gigabit-capable Passive Optical 
Network (GPON) to Ten-Gigabit-Capable Passive Optical 
Networks (XG-PON). Paper answers the question of what 
extent active and passive GPON elements need to be replaced 
and what needs to be added when migrating to XG-PON. 
Special focus is also pointed on the coexistence of GPON and 
XG-PON. 
Keywords-passive optical network; Gigabit PON; XG-PON; 
fiber to the home; optical access network 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With new services like three-dimensional high-definition 
television, cloud computing, more and more internet based 
applications the required bandwidth to the end user is 
increasing constantly (approx. 50% per year by Nielsen’s 
law [1]). This gives the infrastructure providers an 
opportunity to offer new services and consequently increases 
average revenue per user, and thus they need to make smart 
decision about the investment into Fiber to the x (FTTx) 
technology, where x stands for node, cabinet, curb, cell, 
building, premises or even home as an ultimate and final 
solution. 
It is the common fact that running fiber to the end 
customer (to the home) is the best possible option. After 
making the decision for FTTH there are two basic 
architectures possible. One is point-to-point (P2P) [2] and 
another is point-to-multipoint (P2MP) typically seen on the 
market as PON (Passive Optical Network) technology.   
Most of the recent deployment in Europe and America is 
based on GPON system standardized by ITU-T series G.984 
[3]. It offers downstream speed of 2.4 Gbit/s typically for up 
to 64 users and upstream speed of 1.2 Gbit/s. Since fiber as a 
media can transport much more, operators are expecting 
more from FTTH technology.  
Present 
Gigabit-capable 
Passive 
Optical 
Network 
(GPON) as a future safe investment new standard for first 
generation 
of 
Ten-Gigabit-Capable 
Passive 
Optical 
Networks (XG-PON1) has been published in 2010 by ITU-T 
[4]. This standard will offer 10 Gbit/s downstream and 2.5 
Gbit/s upstream speed; but, target distance and split ratio did 
not increase much. Research in this area continues the job to 
bring even better P2MP technology. Most of them are today 
known under the term second generation of next-generation 
Passive Optical Network (NG-PON2). Incorporating the 
Wavelength-Division Multiplexing (WDM) technology is 
mandatory to go beyond XG-PON data rates, splits and 
reach. The main difference between XG-PON1 and NG-
PON2 from operator point of view will be the migration 
strategy. Since the NG-PON2 will use brand new 
technology, coexistence of GPON and NG-PON2 will be 
difficult.   
This paper presents the migration from GPON to XG-
PON. As an enhancement to GPON, XG-PON1 inherits the 
framing and management from GPON. XG-PON1 provides 
full-service operations via 4x higher rate and 2x larger split 
to support a PON network structure. In Section 2 of this 
paper basic technology and up-to-date standards status are 
described. Section 3 contains main points in the XG-PONs 
deployment and development: general description, co-
existence with previous standards, physical layer capability, 
etc. Some information on the RF CATV co-existence inside 
XG-PON is also described. Section 4 contains information 
on the examples of products for WDM filters that are 
planned to use in XG-PON1, possible candidates for OLT 
filters and also information on the tunable lasers, their 
possible applications for NG-PONs systems, advantages and 
disadvantages. 
Section 
5 
summarizes 
the 
overall 
conclusions. 
II. 
BASIC TECHNOLOGY DESCRIPTION 
A. Gigabit PON 
Efforts to standardize PON networks operating at above 
1 Gbit/s were initiated in 2001 as the ITU-T G.984 series of 
recommendations [3]. GPON attempts to preserve as many 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

 
characteristics of the G.983 series [5] of recommendations as 
possible, however, due to technical issues related to 
providing the higher line rates, the BPON and GPON 
systems are not interoperable. 
At 
the 
moment, 
GPON 
standards 
have 
seven 
transmission-speed combinations (line rates): symmetric 1.2 
or 2.4 Gbit/s; or asymmetric 1.2 or 2.4 Gbit/s downstream 
with 155 Mbit/s, 622 Mbit/s, or 1.2 Gbit/s in the upstream. 
But in fact there is the only one useful standard, which is 2.4 
Gbit/s downstream and 1.2 Gbit/s or 2.4 Gbit/s upstream. 
As with BPON, the network may be either a one or two-
fiber system from the Optical Line Terminal (OLT). In the 
downstream direction, GPON is also a broadcast protocol 
with all Optical Network Terminals (ONTs) or Optical 
Network Units (ONUs) receiving all frames and discarding 
those not intended for them (Figure 1). Upstream 
transmission is via the Time Division Multiple Access 
(TDMA) and is controlled by an upstream bandwidth map 
that is sent as part of the downstream frame.  
 
Figure 1.  GPON consists of Optical Line Terminal (OLT), Passive 
Optical Splitter, Optical Network Units (ONU) or Optical Network 
Terminals (ONTs).  
Up-to date GPON OLTs are able to support split ratios of 
16, 32, or 64 users per fiber. ITU-T G.984.2 includes future 
ratios of up to 128 users per fiber and accounts for this in the 
transmission-convergence layer. According to G.983.3 
(Figure 2), for a single-fiber system, the operating 
wavelength is in the 1480 nm to 1500 nm band in the 
downstream and in the 1260 nm to 1360 nm band in the 
upstream. This leaves the 1550 nm to 1560 nm band free for 
RF overlay video services. For a two-fiber system: in the 
1260 nm to 1360 nm band in both the downstream and the 
upstream directions. 
 
Figure 2.  ITU-T definition of telecommunication wavelength bands with 
three operating windows. 1310 nm is used for upstream. 1490 nm and 1550 
nm are used for downstream. 
B. XG-PON1 
General XG-PON1 physical layer specifications were 
finalized in October 2009 and published by ITU-T in March 
2010. XG-PON1 wavelength plan was a problem discussed 
in FSAN/ITU-T by vendors and operators. Driven by the 
optical transceivers market, FSAN/ITU-T selected the 
narrow downstream wavelength range of 1575 nm to 1580 
nm, because it is the only wavelength band that is left in the 
system crowded with RF overlay video services. This choice 
has advantage that it also matches the downstream 
wavelength selection included in 10G-EPON draft standard. 
The overall XG-PON and GPON optical spectrum is 
illustrated in Figure 3. C-, L-, and O- bands were compared 
in the selection of upstream wavelength. The first option of 
C band overlapping with the RF overlay video channel was 
eliminated. The L band was also eliminated due to the 
insufficient guard band between upstream and downstream 
wavelengths. After all, the candidate wavelength was 
narrowed down to O- band and O+ band. Comparing the 
pros and cons (such as complexity and costs), O- band was 
selected because O+ band has higher requirements on filters 
and is more expensive. Wavelength for upstream is 1260 nm 
to 1280 nm. 
The downstream rate of XG-PON1 was defined as 10 
Gbit/s, which was mainly driven by the well-established and 
low-cost 10 Gbit/s continuous transmission technology in the 
industry. The exact rate is 9.95328 Gbit/s that keeps the 
consistency with typical ITU-T rates. This is different from 
the rate of the IEEE 10GE-PON, which is 10.3125 Gbit/s. 
There were 2.5 Gbit/s and 10 Gbit/s proposals for the XG-
PON1 upstream rate. 2.5 Gbit/s upstream rate was selected 
for specification after careful studying of application 
scenarios and component cost. The 10 Gbit/s upstream 
system is still considered as a high cost system with limited 
application scenarios in the near future. 
As an enhancement to GPON, XG-PON1 inherits the 
framing and management from GPON [6]. XG-PON1 
provides full-service operations via higher rate and larger 
split to support a PON network structure. The baseline XG-
PON1 standards have been completed. In June 2010, the 
transmission convergence (TC) layer and optical network 
termination management and control interface (OMCI) 
standards for XGPON1 were consented in the general 
meeting of ITU-T SG15. 
 
Figure 3.  GPON and XG-PON wavelength allocation (video overlay band 
is supposed to be reused for WDM PON in the future). 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

Since the downstream window is only 5 nm wide, it will 
require cooled laser sources and thus should be quite 
expensive [7]. It is conceivable that this downstream band 
could be extended beyond 1580 nm for systems that operate 
on more modern Optical Distribution Network (ODN) 
infrastructures, and this could enable optical line termination 
(OLT) optics suitable for outdoor deployment or uncooled 
operation in an indoor deployment. Such extension must be 
small, otherwise it will complicate ONU filter design. The 
upstream wavelength is 1270 nm and window is 20 nm wide, 
enabling the use of uncooled laser sources under all 
circumstances, saving on ONU optics costs. 
C. XG-PON2 
The FSAN/ITU-T community has still not achieved a 
consensus 
concerning 
the 
direction 
for 
XG-PON2 
development. Some experts see a natural progression from 
G-PON to XG-PON1 and to XG-PON2 with minimal 
changes in the framing, TC, and management protocols. 
Others see the 10 Gbit/s upstream as a point for transition to 
the 10G-EPON standard. This is a subject of ongoing study. 
The obvious solution is to retain the 10 Gbit/s 
downstream paths as implemented in XG-PON1 and to 
extend the framing structures for the TC layer specified in 
the XG-PON1 section to support 10 Gbit/s upstream. This 
would allow for XG-PON1, XG-PON2 and G-PON co-
existence on the same PON and would allow the reuse of all 
of the basic data structures. However, this solution suffers 
from grave shortcomings. Firstly, it is not clear if 
fragmentation should be supported in the upstream at these 
rates and what impacts that would have on the DBA 
algorithm could be proposed for NG-PON1 systems. In 
addition, separate ranging windows may be required for XG-
PON1 and XG-PON2 to allow the dual rate receiver at the 
OLT to prepare for the reception of a specific burst at the 
correct bit rate. 
If XG-PON2 follows the 10G-EPON system in some 
fashion, we then must address the notable gaps in this 
standard. The XG-PON2 work in the ITU would attempt to 
fill them. These uncovered topics include: activation, 
security, 
protection 
switching, 
dynamic 
bandwidth 
allocation, and management. 
D. Ethernet PON 
EPON standards are being developed in the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 802.3ah Task 
Force [8]. The Ethernet in the first mile (EFM) task force of 
the IEEE 802.3 standards committee published standards that 
included a passive optical network (PON) variant in 2004. 
The protocol used in EPON is an extension of IEEE 802.3 
and operates at 1 Gbit/s with a reach of 10 or 20 km between 
the central office and the customer. The architecture is a 
single shared fiber with an optical splitter. The supported 
split ratio is 16 users per PON. The system operates in the 
1480 nm to 1500 nm band in the downstream direction, and 
in the 1260 nm to 1360 nm band in the upstream direction. 
As with 1 Gbit/s EFM Fiber, while not specifically 
mentioning the wavelength for broadcast video service, 
EPON allocates its wavelengths to leave the 1550 nm to 
1560 nm band open and is capable of supporting a broadcast 
video wavelength in that band. 
Since Ethernet does not utilize a P2MP topology, EPON 
required the development of a control protocol to make the 
P2MP topology appear as a P2P topology. This protocol is 
called the multipoint control protocol (MPCP). Like all 
PONs, in the downstream direction EPON is a broadcast 
protocol. Every ONT receives all packets, extracts the 
Ethernet frames intended for that customer, and discards the 
rest. As with APON and GPON, transmission in the 
upstream direction is regulated by TDMA. 
E. 10G-EPON 
The 10 Gbit/s Ethernet Passive Optical Network standard 
(10G-EPON) supports two configurations: symmetric, 
operating at 10 Gbit/s data rate in both directions, and 
asymmetric, operating at 10 Gbit/s in the downstream 
(provider to customer) direction and 1 Gbit/s in the upstream 
direction. It was approved as IEEE 802.3av standard in 2009 
[8]. 
The 
main 
driver 
for 
10/10G-EPON 
symmetric 
configuration was to provide proper downstream and 
upstream bandwidth to support multi-family residential 
building (known in the standard as Multi Dwelling Unit 
(MDU)) 
customers. 
When 
deployed 
in 
the 
MDU 
configuration, one EPON ONU may be connected to up to a 
thousand subscribers. 
The 10/10G-EPON employs a number of functions that 
are common to other P2P Ethernet standards. For example, 
such functions as 64B/66B line coding, self-synchronizing 
scrambler or gearbox are also used in optical fiber types of 
10 Gigabit Ethernet links. 
III. 
OVERVIEW ON TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
PONs seems to be the most attractive solutions for 
optical access technologies. All signals are distributed 
through the optical network from the optical line terminal 
(OLT) to every end user’s optical network termination unit 
(ONT), which are connected on the same PON branch.  
The next-generation (NG) PON should satisfy demands 
for increasing traffic and higher bandwidths. All future 
strategies for NG-PON evolution are expected to deploy 
wavelength division multiplexing (WDM). .  
Generally, NG-PON technologies are used to subdivide 
into two categories [9]:  
• 
Evolutionary growth (the so-called NG-PON1). They 
are supposed to provide improved performance, such as 
higher data rates, with legacy optical distribution 
networks and co-exist with legacy PONs.  
• 
Revolutionary change (NG-PON2). Such as WDM-
PON, optical code division multiplexing (OCDM), etc., 
they are supposed to provide enhanced services on new 
distribution networks.  
Current GPONs systems are intended to migrate to NG-
PON1 applying identical colorless ONTs. The migration 
would occur in the same optical distribution network which 
implies coexistence. The advantage appears in cost saving, 
easier planning, maintaining and expanding of this network. 
Here, 
we 
mainly 
focus 
on 
evolutionary 
NG-PON 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

technologies, XG-PON1 and XG-PON2, that are expected to 
replace current GPON and EPON solutions in the near- to 
midterm. 
A. Deployment Scenarios of XG-PON 
A general requirement of NG-PON1 is to provide higher 
data transmission rates than GPON. On the other hand, it 
should be done with minimized costs.  Thus operators expect 
NG-PON1 to leverage existing optical deployments. Hence, 
FSAN/ITU-T 
specified 
the 
NG-PON1 
backward 
compatibility with legacy GPON deployments to protect the 
initial GPON investments of operators [7][10][11]. The 
specified NG-PON1 system is called XG-PON1. In an XG-
PON1 system, the upstream rate is 2.5 Gbit/s and the 
downstream rate is 10 Gbit/s (asymmetric line-rate upgrade). 
In other words the downstream bandwidth of XG-PON1 is 
four times of that of GPON, while the upstream bandwidth 
of XG-PON1 is only twice as that of GPON. Since we have a 
very important result as the ODN in XG-PON1 entirely 
inherits that of GPON, implying that optical fibers and 
splitters in legacy GPON systems can be reused in XG-
PON1. XG-PON1 also inherits the P2MP architecture of 
GPON. 
As 
indicated 
in 
XG-PON1 
physical 
layer 
specifications, the upstream/downstream wavelength of XG-
PON1 is different from that of GPON. Compatibility 
between XG-PON1 and GPON is achieved by implementing 
WDM splitter in the downstream at the central office (CO) 
and a Wavelength Blocking Filter (WBF) at the user side 
(could be located inside an ONU, between an ONU and an 
optical splitter, or on an optical splitter) to multiplex or 
demultiplex wavelengths on multiple signals in downstream 
and upstream directions. FSAN/ITU-T has proposed two 
evolution XG-PON1 deployment scenarios to greenfield and 
brownfield depending on the network maturity: 
• 
Greenfield scenarios can use XG-PON1 to replace 
legacy copper line systems since they do not have any 
pre-existing optical fiber deployments. Greenfield 
scenarios require the deployment of new PON systems, 
which are straight-forward. 
• 
Brownfield scenarios use coexistence of XG-PON1 with 
the pre-existing GPON deployments. When migrating to 
XG-PON1 operators can upgrade ONUs over the ODN 
batch by batch or all at once. The selection between 
these two types of upgrades is decided by how long 
GPON and XG-PON1 will coexist in the same ODN. To 
achieve a successful GPON-to-XG-PON1 upgrade, the 
OLT and each ONU must support [ITU-T G.984.5 
AMD 1] compliant wavelength plans.  
B. Coexistence of GPON and XG-PON 
FSAN/ITU-T standards are intended to provide the 
coexistence of GPON and XG-PON and define reserved 
wavelength plans. The wavelength allocation meets this 
standard and synergies with IEEE standardization [12].   
The wavelength band allocations for GPON are: 1260 nm 
to 1360 nm for upstream and 1480 nm to 1500 nm for 
downstream. The neighboring bands are referred to as guard 
bands separating basic and enhancement bands and 
preventing interference. G.984.5 standard recommends pre-
installing commercially available low-cost WBFs in GPON 
ONTs to obtain the required isolation outside the guard 
bands and to decrease the migration costs. In Figure 4, we 
propose the coexistence of GPON and XG-PON by 
implementing two super-separating WBFs in the GPON 
ONTs. WBFs of steep spectral characteristics should be able 
to separate the allocated passbands to avoid the interference 
and moreover to narrow the guard bands. An ideal band-pass 
has a completely flat passband and thus completely rejects 
all wavelengths outside the widths of the passband.  
Figure 4.  Coexistence of GPON and XG-PON using original ONTs 
supplemented by WBFs. 
Accordingly, the FSAN/ITU-T requirements for the 
performance of the optical band super-separation filters are: 
• 
at least 32 dB (according to 984.2) insertion loss outside 
the required passband width and maximum 5 dB 
insertion loss within the required pass band width of 
1290 nm to 1330 nm for WBF upstream and 1480 nm to 
1500 nm for WBF downstream, 
• 
guarantee of the filter contrast factor (dB/nm) as high as 
possible (qualitatively) achieved by steep transmission 
curves in the vicinity of cut-on/cut-off wavelengths of 
1290 nm / 1330 nm and 1480 nm / 1500 nm, 
• 
minimizing severity of production by designing both 
band-pass WBFs as combinations of short-pass and a 
long-pass filters in series to achieve the required 
passbands and to minimize production costs. 
IV. 
NEW DEVICES FOR XG-PON DEPLOYMENTS 
The evolutionary growth under NG-PON1 is based on 
the demand of the minimal equipment investments. Thus 
NG-PON1 should operate with the same infrastructure as 
GPON. However, current GPON and NG-PON1 coexistence 
requires wavelength separation of signals to avoid 
interferences between downstream and upstream channels. 
Low-cost WBF seems to be able to provide the wavelength 
band separation to ensure that GPON ONTs can operate 
undisturbed alongside NG-PON1 deployments. Passive 
filters based on thin film filter (TFF) technology seems to be 
the most suitable to use in the NG-PON system configuration 
with wavelength blocking filters [12]. 
When deploying XG-PON systems some devices needed 
to be replaced as shown on Figure 5.  
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

Regarding the comparison of application of WDM filters 
and tunable lasers for NG-PONs deployment one can 
suppose that in relatively short-term period the usage of 
WDM filters seems to be more promising because of smaller 
costs and more developed technological basis. On the other 
hand, tunable lasers for NG-PONs are still developing 
meeting few problems on the temperature control and higher 
costs. With the lack of a cooling requirement and the 
electrical power requirements that accompanied by CWDM 
filters usage, the installation of DFBs-based devices is made 
possible for outdoor pedestal and strand mount as well as 
homes [13]. On the other hand, the usage of DWDM filters 
meets the same problems with high costs on temperature 
control systems as a configuration with tunable lasers [14]. 
 
Figure 5.  GPON, XG-PON1 and XG-PON2 backward compatibility. 
We also consider different technologies and a number of 
solutions for the realization of integrated wavelength 
selective devices for WDM communication systems. Silicon 
nanowire based technology is a good example of this. This is 
an attractive way towards highly integrated systems with the 
capacity for wafer scale mass production compatible with 
microelectronics. The parameters of the fabricated devices 
are in many cases not sufficient for practical applications, but 
the technological improvements are still possible that should 
allow matching the market demands. 
A. WDM multiplexer 
WDM multiplexer is the optical device, which is required 
at the central office (CO) under XG-PON deployment [15]. 
This device combines the GPON, XG-PON, and RF video 
downstream wavelengths for transmission over a common 
fiber between the WDM multiplexer and the splitter at the 
fiber distribution hub. In the upstream direction, the RF 
video, GPON and XG-PON upstream wavelengths are 
combined over a common fiber at the splitter hub and de-
multiplexed at the WDM multiplexer for transmission to the 
RF translator, GPON and XG-PON OLT respectively. 
WDM multiplexers are specified in ITU-T G.984.5. They 
allow signals from different wavelength channels to be 
multiplexed into one optical fiber, transmitted together and 
demultiplexed. 
There 
are 
several 
kinds 
of 
WDM 
multiplexer 
components, which are available nowadays. The first class of 
such elements based on TFF or fiber Bragg gratings consists 
usually of discrete components for each wavelength. The 
second class is Planar Light wave Circuits (PLCs) also called 
Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs) represented mainly by 
arrayed waveguide gratings (AWGs), but including also 
more 
seldom 
used 
etched 
diffraction 
grating-based 
multiplexers (EDGs). This is the class that can manage large 
numbers of channels and treat them in a parallel way and 
could be considered from aspect of the XG-PON2 
deployment long-term prospects. This class can also be 
integrated with other passive and active components on a 
common platform.  
During the last decade, PLC-based components have 
greatly improved core network solutions and capacity and 
are expected to have similar influence on NG access 
networks. Photonic integration based on silicon platform is 
now under a very intensive development and due to its 
compatibility to standard CMOS electronics promises low 
cost mass production allowing for deployment of FTTx 
infrastructures more cost effectively than ever before. 
B. Wavelength Blocking Filter design  
As it was already discussed the TFF are suitable low-
cost, ONT independent and simple operation candidates for 
WBFs [12]. TFF is usually made of a sequence of non-
absorbing thin films of the thickness that is comparable to 
the wavelength of light and of materials of high and low 
refractive index. They should have optical characteristics 
resistant against temperature changes. The interference of 
light entering a multilayer structure of a specific number of 
alternating thin films causes the spectral dependent transfer 
characteristics of the filter (transmittance or reflectance of 
optical signal). The number of layers, layer materials, optical 
properties and thicknesses influence significantly TFF 
transmission 
characteristics. 
Therefore, 
the 
spectral 
transmittance or reflectance of a desired filter can be tailored 
for a specific application by the number and optical 
properties of layer used in the design.  
V. 
SUMMARY 
In addition to the PON and BPON technologies 
developed by the ITU-T in the past, one can define three 
important stages in the technology development for the past 
and the next decades:  
• 
1 Gbit/s PON era. EPON and GPON concepts proposed 
in the beginning of 2000s by the IEEE and FSAN/ITU 
correspondingly were successfully adopted and already 
emerged as market leaders. 
• 
10 Gbit/s PON era. The IEEE and FSAN/ITU-T began 
researching 10G PON technology in 2008 as it was 
considered to be the beginning of the 10 Gbit/s optical 
access era. The IEEE released the 10G EPON standard 
in September 2009. Soon after, the ITU-T launched an 
initiative to set 10G GPON inheriting the Optical 
Distribution Frames (ODF) of current GPON and the 
main standards for XG-PON1 were approved and 
published in mid-2010. Driven by the growing demand 
for bandwidth and increasing market competition and 
given a combination of industry maturity and cost, 10G 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

PON technology is expected to be commercialized on a 
small scale in 2013 at the earliest. 
• 
Post-10G PON era. This area is not covered by the 
leading standards developers and still exists as some 
concepts and prototypes. The IEEE and FSAN/ITU-T 
have explored the topic but has not yet arrived at any 
concrete conclusions, because of large costs and weak 
relevancy to the market demands. WDM and hybrid 
WDM/TDM-based technologies may represent the 
trend, but OFDM, OCDMA and coherent technologies 
are the likely candidates in the future PON area. 
Deployment of new PONs should be optimized by 
choosing of the correct passive splitting arrangement to 
decrease 
the 
costs 
on 
the 
active 
infrastructure 
implementation. Generally, several considerations need to be 
taken into account when designing the network: 
• 
optimal use of active equipment  
• 
coexistence with current technologies and flexibility to 
be able to adapt it easily to a future customer 
distribution 
• 
regulatory needs for unbundling the next-generation 
access (NGA) networks 
• 
optimizing operational cost due to field interventions 
These considerations will result in a number of design 
rules. 
Co-existence of XG-PON1 with current GPON system 
seems to be the most reasonable to provide with WBFs 
filters based on TFF technology (on the ONTs side) 
accompanied by WDM filters to distinguish the signals from 
different OLTs (on the CO side).  WDM systems seem to be 
the most natural way to interconnect RF CATV and the 
migrating networks [16]. Physical layer capability of XG-
PONs is quite well-known [7][10][11] and could be used as a 
real guideline for the new networks deployment. 
A multi-level splitting system can help to solve the 
problem of split ratio demands increase corresponding to 
XG-PON1 deployment. Moreover, XG-PON1 inherits the 
framing and management from GPON. This is a good 
advantage of the technology that helps to decrease the 
deployment costs. Other network elements should be in 
general changed, replaced, introduced or developed with new 
network deployment. 
In the present paper, we also regarded such technologies 
as XG-PON2 and tunable lasers that are not considered as a 
short-term perspective, but also supposed to be an important 
part of the network deployment in the future. Tunable lasers 
seem to be a luxury at the moment because of great costs on 
cooling systems and technological base development. On the 
other hand, XG-PON2 still does not correspond to the 
market demands on the upstream channel speed ratio with its 
also great costs taking into account. Another interesting 
possibility to improve upstream speeds with less costs using 
Non-Return-to-Zero 
(NRZ) 
coding 
is 
still 
under 
consideration. This could deliver 5 Gbit/s for not much more 
cost than the current 2.5Gbit/s optics, and it would of course 
coexist with the 2.5Gbit/s system (and G-PON) [6]. 
  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work reported in this paper was supported by 
bilateral project of Slovenian Research Agency and Russian 
Federation under the title: “NG-PON2 based on WDM 
technology”. Project is Co-financed by Rostelecom and 
Iskratel.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Nielsen, "Nielsen's Law of Internet Bandwidth". 
http://www.useit.com/alertbox/980405.html, Retrieved: April 
2012. 
[2] B. Batagelj, “Implementation concepts of an optical access 
network by point–to–point architecture,” Electrotechnical 
Review, Ljubljana, Slovenija, Phil., pp. 259–266, 2010. 
[3] ITU-T Rec. G.984 series: “Gigabit-capable passive optical 
networks (G-PON)”. 
[4] ITU-T Rec. G.987 series: “10-Gibabit-capable passive optical 
networks (XG-PON)”. 
[5] ITU-T Rec. G.983 series: “Broadband optical access systems 
based on passive optical networks”. 
[6] Frank J. Effenberger, “The XG-PON System: Cost Effective 
10 Gb/S Access”, Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 29, 
Issue 4, pp. 403-409, 2011. 
[7] F. J. Effenberger, H. Mukai, J.-I. Kani, and M. Rasztovits-
Wiech, 
“Next-generation 
PON 
part 
III—System 
specifications for XG-PON,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 47, 
no. 11, pp. 58–64, Nov. 2009. 
[8] K. Tanaka, A. Agata, and Y. Horiuchi, “IEEE 802.3av 10G-
EPON Standardization and Its Research and Development 
Status”, IEEE/OSA Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 
28, no. 4, pp. 651-661, 2010. 
[9] M.D. Andrade, G. Kramer, L. Wosinska, Jiajia Chen, S. 
Sallent, and B. Mukherjee, “Evaluating strategies for 
evolution 
of 
passive 
optical 
networks”, 
IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 49, pp. 176-184, 2011. 
[10] J.-I. Kani, F. Bourgart, A. Cui, A. Rafel, M. Campbell, R. 
Davey, and S. Rodrigues, “Next-generation PON part I—
Technology roadmap and general requirements,” IEEE 
Commun. Mag., vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 43–49, Nov. 2009. 
[11] F. J. Effenberger, H. Mukai, S. Park, and T. Pfeiffer, “Next-
generation PON part II—Candidate systems for next 
generation PON,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 
50–57, Nov. 2009. 
[12] J. Mullerova and D. Korcek, “Super-separation thin film 
filtering 
for 
coexistence-type 
colorless 
WDM-PON 
networks,” 13th International Conference on Transparent 
Optical Networks (ICTON), pp. 1-4, 26-30 June 2011. 
[13] C. Bouchat, C. Dessauvages, F. Fredricx, C. Hardalov, R. 
Schoop, and P. Vetter, “WDM-upgrade PONs for FTTH and 
FTTBusiness” in Proc. Int Workshop Opt. Hybrid Access 
Netw., Florence, Italy, pp. 231-238, Jun. 2002.  
[14] L. G. Kazovsky, N. Cheng, W.-T. Shaw, D. Gutierrez, and S.-
W. Wong, “Broadband optical access networks”, John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2011. 
[15] L. Wosinski, N. Zhu, and Z. Wang, “Wavelength selective 
devices for WDM communication systems”, 2009 IEEE 3rd 
International Symposium on Advanced Networks and 
Telecommunication Systems (ANTS), pp. 1-3, New Delhi, 
14-16 Dec. 2009. 
[16] J. D. Farina, “Coarse Wavelength Division Multiplexing”, 
Chapter 9. “CWDM in CATV/HFC Networks”, pp. 269-283, 
CRC Press 2007. 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-205-9
ACCESS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Access Networks

