Experimental 20 Gbit/s Absolute Polar Duty Cycle Division Multiplexing - 
Polarization Division Multiplexing (AP-DCDM-PolDM) Transmission  
 
Amin Malekmohamadi 
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering  
The University of Nottingham, Malaysia Campus 
Malaysia 
Aminmalek_m@ieee.org 
Mohamad Khazani Abdullah 
Dept. Research and Development 
Significant Technologies, Sdn, Bhd 
Malaysia 
khazani@sigtech.com.my
 
 
Abstract - 20 Gbit/s ( 2 × 2 × 5 Gbit/s) Absolute Polar Duty 
Cycle Division Multiplexing (AP-DCDM)-Polarization Division 
Multiplexing (PolDM) over 180 km standard single-mode fiber 
has been experimentally demonstrated in order to double the 
capacity of PolDM and increase the maximum dispersion 
uncompensated reach. The AP-DCDM-POLDM performance 
is examined utilizing a polarization stabilizer. By increasing the 
length from 0 km (back-to-back) to 180 km the 10 Gbit/s single 
AP-DCDM channel without SOP stabilizer experienced ~1 dB 
penalty as compared to around 2 dB penalty when the SOP 
stabilizer is active. 
Keywords- Optical Communication; Absolute Polar Duty 
Cycle Division Multiplexing (AP-DCDM); PolDM.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Absolute polar duty cycle division multiplexing (AP-
DCDM) appears promising for its spectral width and its 
chromatic dispersion tolerance [1-3]. The small spectrum of 
AP-DCDM system reduces the inter channel coherent 
crosstalk in AP-DCDM-WDM systems. The possibility of 
setting channel spacing as narrow as 62.5 GHz (0.5 nm) for 
40 Gbit/s AP-DCDM signals over WDM was confirmed [3]. 
As reported in [3], a capacity of 1.28 Tbit/s (32 x 40 Gbit/s) 
was packed into ~ 15.5 nm (1550-1565.5 nm) EDFA gain-
band with 0.64 bit/s/Hz spectral efficiency by using 10 
Gbit/s transmitter and receiver. Good dispersion tolerance 
makes AP-DCDM very attractive for uncompensated optical 
links [1-3].  
Transmission capacity enhancement is a key issue for 
network 
for today’s telecommunication. Polarization 
division multiplexing (PolDM) is well known technique for 
doubling the spectral efficiency [4]. 
In PolDM systems, two signals are transmitted at the same 
wavelength with orthogonal states of polarization (SOP).   
At the receiving end, the polarization channels are 
demultiplexed at polarization beam splitter and detected 
independently. In PolDM applications, due to external 
distraction factors an automatic state of polarization 
stabilization is actually desirable. Because of coherent cross 
talk between the two orthogonally polarized channels, SOP 
stabilizers cause impairments in PolDM applications [8, 9]. 
We have already discussed the implementation issues and 
advantages of AP-DCDM over a single wavelength, Wave 
length division multiplexing (WDM) and PolDM based on 
the simulation results [1-3]. 
In this paper, for the first time to the best of our 
knowledge, the AP-DCDM system has been exploited 
experimentally together with PolDM using a SOP in order to 
transmit over 180 km at an aggregated bitrate of 20 Gbit/s (2 
× 2 × 5 Gbit/s), without dispersion compensation. 
The polarization stabilizer which is used in this 
experiment is described in [8]. Bit-Error Rate (BER) versus 
Optical Signal Noise Ratio for various standard single mode 
fiber lengths is measured in a case of AP-DCDM over 
PolDM system utilizing a SOP stabilizer. In a case of single 
AP-DCDM channel, the BER versus OSNR is measured for 
both with and without the SOP stabilizer. 
The experimental study shows the capabilities of AP-
DCDM format to double the capacity of PolDM in 
dispersion uncompensated condition and evaluates the effect 
of the SOP stabilizer on propagation penalties. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
the experimental setup for a 2-channel AP-DCDM system 
over PolDM. Section III shows the performance of AP-
DCDM over PolDM System. Section IV concludes our 
paper. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
Figure 1 illustrates the experimental setup of AP-DCDM 
over PolDM. As shown in Figure 1a, the evaluation starts 
with two AP-DCDM channels (2 x 5 Gbit/s) with PRBS of 
231-1 and followed by 2 PolDM channels (2 x 10 Gbit/s) 
(Figure 1b). In this setup, each PolDM channel contains two 
users that were already multiplexed by using AP-DCDM, 
which means each PolDM channel contains 2 x 5 Gbit/s that 
can offer a possible transmission rate of 20 Gbit/s (2 x 2 x 5 
Gbit/s) for PolDM system. Channel 1 and Channel 2, each at 
5 Gbit/s with PRBS 231 -1 are carved with one electrical RZ 
pulse carvers at 50% of duty cycle and NRZ pulse carver, 
respectively.  The voltages for both users at the multiplexer 
input are identical. Both users’ data are multiplexed via AP-
DCDM multiplexer [1-3]. Subsequently, the rectifier circuit 
(REC) is used to produce an absolute signal [1-3]. The 
signals are used to modulate a distributed feedback laser 
(DFB), which operates at 1548.51 nm wavelengths using a 

Mach-Zehnder-Modulator (MZM). The modulated AP-
DCDM signal is divided into 2 uncorrelated copes using a 
fiber spoil, which has a delay of about 20 μs. Power for 2 
signals is identical, two signals orthogonally polarized using 
a fiber polarization controller (PC) and combined using a 
polarization beam combiner (PBC).  
Using an electro absorption modulator (EAM) one of the 
signals is marked with a pilot tone at one Megahertz. 
   
 
 
 
Figure 1. AP-DCDM-PolDM setup.  (a) 2 x 5 Gbit/s AP-DCDM setup (b) 2 
x 10 Gbit/s AP-DCDM signal over PolDM. The eye-diagram was taken for 
the 180 km link while transmitting both SOPs 
 
A polarization multiplexed signal at an overall bit-rate of 
20 Gbit/s is generated and launched in an uncompensated 
single mode fiber (SMF) link. 
After transmitted over the fiber, by using a fiber 
polarization beam splitter, the 2 AP-DCDM- PolDM 
channels at the same wavelength are de-multiplexed.   
In order to indemnify the random polarization 
fluctuations, we used a SOP stabilizer before the polarization 
beam splitter. 
The SOP of both channels are checked and stabilized. 
The root-mean-square pilot tone is extracted and fed back to 
the electronic controller of the polarization stabilizer [8]. 
A single demultiplexed channel (which contains 2 AP-
DCDM channels) is detected by an avalanche photodiode 
(APD) and passed through the AP-DCDM Clock-and-Data-
Recovery (CDR) unit to extract the AP-DCDM channel 1 
and channel 2 [1, 2]. 
As shown in Figure 1, by using a filtered amplified 
spontaneous emission (ASE) source and variable optical 
attenuator (VOA) a variable amount of ASE noise is added 
to the demultiplexed signal in order to change the optical 
signal to noise ratio (OSNR). For this measurement, we used 
Optical Spectrum Analyzer with resolution of 0.5 nm. 
The performance of 20 Gbit/s AP-DCDM-PolDM is 
examined over fiber lengths from 0 km to 180 km.  
Due to low lunch power the effect of nonlinearities are 
negligibly small. 
 
III. 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
The PolDM-AP-DCDM system at aggregated bit rate of 
20 Gbit/s with the SOP stabilizer is evaluated. We have 
measured the BER as a function of the single demultiplexed 
channel OSNR, which is detected after polarization 
demultiplexing. 
Note that the input power to avalanche photodiode is 
fixed to -19 dBm. The performance of single channel 
transmission system is compared with the PolDM-AP-
DCDM signal in the present and absence of SOP stabilizer. 
Figure 2 reports the bit error rate curves versus optical 
signal noise ratio over back to back, 125 km and 180 km 
SSMF length. The 20 Gbit/s AP-DCDM-PolDM results 
(PolDM-APDCDM_SOP Stabilizer ON) refer to the channel 
tagged using a pilot tone, which has a worse performance 
than another channel. These BER curves are compared with 
10 Gbit/s single user, when stabilizer is on (1CH-
APDCDM_SOP Stabilizer On), off (1CH-APDCDM_SOP 
Stabilizer Off) and the pilot tone. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Bit Error Rate versus Optical Signal Noise Ratio for different 
lengths of standard single mode fiber. Measures are performed for PolDM-
AP-DCDM system at 20 Gbit/s when the SOP stabilizer is on (black 
marker) and for single channel system at 10 Gbit/s (no SOP stabilizer) 
(open markers) and for single channel system at 10Gbit/s with a SOP 
stabilizer (gray market)  
 
To realize a SOP stabilizer effect on the AP-DCDM-
PolDM performance. Figure 3 shows the effect of 
propagation length on OSNR at BER of 10-6 for single-
channel system at 10 Gbit/s in a presence and absence of 
SOP stabilizer and for AP-DCDM-PolDM transmission at 20 
Gbit/s in presence of stabilizer.  

The penalty of ~ 1 dB is experienced by increasing the 
length from 0 km (back-to-back) to 180 km for the 10 Gbit/s 
single channel transmission when the SOP stabilizer is off. 
And a penalty of around 2 dB is experienced when the SOP 
stabilizer is active.   
A penalty increases to around 2.8 dB when both 
orthogonally polarized channels are propagating. The penalty 
increases because of the non ideal performances of optical 
components in SOP stabilizer which cause the inter-channel 
crosstalk because of the limited polarization extinction ratio 
(~ 14 dB) of the SOP stabilizer. 
 
 
Figure 3. Optical Signal Noise Ratio for Bit Error Rate of 10-6 versus 
different standard single mode fiber length. Measures are performed for 
Polarization division multiplexing system at 20 Gbit/s when the SOP 
stabilizer is active, single-user system at 10 Gbit/s when the SOP stabilizer 
is off and single user system at 10 Gbit/s when the SOP stabilizer is on. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Absolute Polar Duty Cycle Division Multiplexing over 
Polarization Division Multiplexing has been shown an 
alternative technique to double the bitrate, while preserving 
the 10 Gbit/s dispersion tolerance of the AP-DCDM format. 
The experimental performance demonstrate the capability of 
AP-DCDM-PolDM to provide transmission over 180 km of 
SSMF uncompensated fiber at an overall capacity of 20 
Gbit/s. We have shown the effectiveness of an SOP 
stabilizer in an APDCDM-PolDM system.  
Despite of coherent crosstalk between channels, a BER of 
less than 10-6 with tolerable penalties is achieved up to 180 
km transmission length of SSMF without using any 
dispersion compensation techniques. 
Based on the experimental results, it can be concluded 
that using AP-DCDM technique, more than one user can be 
carried over the same PolDM channel. Consequently, the 
capacity utilization of the PolDM channels can be increased. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Malekmohammadi, M.K. Abdullah, A.F., Abas and M. Mokhtar, 
“Analysis of RZ-OOK over Absolute Polar Duty Cycle Division 
Multiplexing in Dispersive Transmission Medium”,  IET journal of 
Optoelectronics, vol. 3,  pp. 197–206, 2009 
[2] A. Malekmohammadi, G. A. Mahdiraji , A. F.Abas, M. K. Abdullah, 
M. Mokhtar and M. F. A. Rasid, “ Realization of  High Capacity 
Transmission in Fiber Optic Communication Systems Using Absolute 
Polar Duty Cycle Division Multiplexing (AP-DCDM) Technique”, 
Optical Fiber Technology, vol. 15, pp. 337-343, 2009  
[3] A. Malekmohammadi, “20 Gbit/s Absolute Polar Duty Cycle 
Division Multiplexing-Polarization Division Multiplexing (AP-
DCDM-PolDM) Transmission System” Proc. The Sixth International 
Conference on Systems and Networks Communications (ICED 2011), 
Aug.2011  
[4] P. Boffi, M. Ferrario, P. Martelli, P. Parolari, A. Righetti and R. 
Siano, “20-Gb/s PolDM Duobinary transmission over 350-km ssmf 
supported by a polarization stabilizer and an optical dispersion 
compensator,” IEEE Photon.Technol. Lett., vol. 20, pp. 1118–1120, 
Jul. 2008. 
[5] M. I. Hayee, M. C. Cardakli, A. B. Sahin, and A. E.Willner, 
“Doubling 
of 
bandwidth 
utilization 
using 
two 
orthogonal 
polarizations and power unbalancing in a polarization-division-
multiplexing scheme,” IEEE Photon.Technol. Lett., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 
881–883, Aug. 2001. 
[6] J. Toulouse, “ Optical Nonlinearities in Fibers: Review, Recent 
Examples, and System Applications” Journal of Lightwave 
Technologies, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 3625-3639,  2005. 
[7] H. Kim and R.-J. Essiambre, “Transmission of 8 × 20 Gb/s DQPSK 
signals over 310-km SMF with 0.8-b/s/Hz spectral efficiency,” IEEE 
Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 769–771, May 2003. 
[8] M. I. Hayeei, M. C. Cardakli, “Doubling of Bandwidth Utilization 
Using Two Orthogonal Polarizations and Power Unbalancing in a 
PolDM Scheme,”IEEE Photonic Technology Letter , Vol. 13, No. 8, 
pp/ 881-883, 2001. 
[9] P. Winzer and R. Jean, Advance modulation formats for high-
capacity optical transport networks, J. Lightwave Technol. vol. 24,  
pp. 4711–4728, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

