Collaboration Web - Social Computing Technology for Emergency Data 
Interoperability  
 
Aurel Machalek, Dominic Dunlop 
University of Luxembourg 
Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg 
email: aurel.machalek@uni.lu, dominic.dunlop@uni.lu
 
 
Abstract— This paper discusses the use of social media for data 
interoperability 
and 
sharing 
between 
agencies 
during 
emergency situations, natural disasters, and disruptions of 
critical infrastructure.  The work presented is ongoing in the 
context of the Emergency Responders Data Interoperability 
Network (REDIRNET) research project. The project’s 
purpose is to provide a decentralized framework for 
interoperability between emergency agencies’ systems, based 
on a public meta-data gateway controlled by the agencies 
through a socio-professional web interface. A major problem 
during crisis situations is sharing data from various sources 
between the agencies involved. These data are often 
heterogeneous and distributed between many organisations 
with different access rights, and may have little or no security 
level protection. This paper focuses on the shared platform, 
which collects information from a variety of sensor nodes and 
presents it in a user-friendly manner. This is a new approach 
to using social networks actively in the field of Public 
Protection and Disaster Relief by addressing the technological 
challenge 
through 
an 
open-sourced 
metadata 
gateway 
combined with social computing technology.  
Keywords-Collaboration web; Data interoperability; Social 
computing technologies. 
I. 
CONTEXT AND MOTIVATION 
In recent years, First Responder organizations across 
Europe have considerably improved their communications 
and IT systems through the deployment of new technologies, 
including such innovations as unmanned surveillance and 
sensor systems that assist in preventative actions and 
enhance responses to major crisis events. Nevertheless, a 
number of recent major incidents have highlighted the 
challenges first responders face, most notably concerning 
barriers to interoperability [1], [2]. These challenges must be 
faced despite the current economic and financial situation, 
which places agencies under considerable budgetary 
pressure, leaving them unable to invest significant sums in 
enhancing their interoperability capabilities – particularly 
when such cooperation between agencies is thankfully not 
required frequently. This leads to the conclusion that if we 
are to enhance agency interoperability, this must be achieved 
through cost-effective solutions. Interoperability is especially 
important during major incidents, when many agencies are 
involved. In addition to the core responder agencies, major 
crisis events invariably involve public utilities, technical 
 
 
Figure 1.  Metadata gateway combined with socio-professional 
networking. 
rescue, 
the 
coastguard, 
search 
& 
rescue, 
highway 
management, hazmat and other disaster relief teams. As a 
consequence, several command posts and crisis management 
centres are in operation and need to inter-operate. The need 
for interoperability between different agencies has often led 
to the development of one-to-one interconnection solutions, 
which suffer from maintenance issues as the connected 
systems evolve. Moreover, such ad hoc solutions often fail to 
consider emerging concerns related to security and privacy. 
Two main technologies are combined in our project: a 
common metadata gateway and a socio-professional 
networking system [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], allowing each 
agency to set the visibility and controllability of its data for 
each partner agency and each data field, as shown in Figure 
1. The project introduces a system that provides seamless 
interoperability for participating agencies at virtually zero 
cost, while still offering great flexibility as regards what data 
can be available to partner agencies via the socio-
professional web. This level of interoperability offers 
emergency service agencies a more effective response to 
major crisis incidents that may ultimately lead to enhanced 
safety and security for the public across Europe. 
In the remainder of this paper, we first discuss related 
work in Section II, before moving in Section III to a 
presentation of the REDIRNET components used to 
implement the collaboration web described in Section IV. 
Our conclusion is presented in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The idea of the Collaboration Web took shape in 2012, 
with the launch of the Free Secure Interoperable 
Communication (FREESIC) project [8]. Its goal was to 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-481-7
ACCSE 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

“allow highly secure and cost effective interoperability 
between communication infrastructures over the entire 
Europe”. The approach chosen was to leverage existing 
interoperability solutions such as gateways, simplifying 
FREESICs adoption by agencies, and, in return, opening 
broader possibilities for them. The service operated free of 
charge 
and 
offered 
open 
source 
gateway 
code, 
documentation and operational guidelines for others to use. 
Provision was made to continue the free-of-charge operation 
after the project’s end. The architecture took into account 
ongoing standardization research (e.g., the Network Centric 
Operations 
Industry 
Consortium 
(NCOIC) 
Interoperability Framework [9]) to reduce integration time 
and costs. The integration process was simple: the system 
integrator took the gateway equipment and modified it as 
needed. While the gateway remained the property of the 
integrator, the integrator did not have to worry about 
disclosing any know-how or information. Communication 
between gateways was end-to-end encrypted and each 
gateway was under the full control of the end user, so as to 
avoid security concerns2. The project was successful in 
showing that the initial concept of the Collaboration Web 
was workable. 
III. 
REDIRNET COMPONENTS 
The main focus of the current project [10] is to create 
possibilities for interagency communication and the sharing 
of first responders’ data. Our system allows an agency to 
access a partner’s shared sensor data. Based on the sensor 
and its capability, two kinds of connection can be set up: a 
request/response connection is used for batched data, while a 
stream connection is established for a continuous data flow. 
It is assumed that the partner agency consuming the data is 
capable processing the incoming data. As an example, in 
Figure 2, Agency B is offering data streams from Sensor 4 
and Camera 1 to Agency A. This arrangement has been 
previously agreed between the two agencies and configured 
using the REDIRNET socio-professional network. The 
network’s seamless interoperability means that Agency B’s 
Sensor 4 and Camera 1 can be displayed in agency A’s 
control center beside its own Sensor 6 and Camera 3. The 
same is true for data displayed on Agency A field officers’ 
handheld devices. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  REDIRNET components. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-481-7
ACCSE 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

 
Figure 3.  Class diagram showing REDIRNET components.  
In order to provide agencies with the ability to share their 
data resources, some preliminary steps are required. The 
data-producing resource must be connected to some sort of 
translator, which can encode the data stream into a common 
transport protocol, and provide the correct command 
interface. This translator is then connected to a transport 
network, which can verify permissions for each user and 
route the stream to its destination, where it is translated into a 
protocol native to the data consumer and subsequently 
displayed. 
This workflow, shown in Figure 3, can be achieved by a 
system consisting of five components: 
 Main 
Switch, 
redirecting 
the 
communication, 
checking permissions and providing a logging 
facility, 
 Core Data Storage, supplemented by an ontological 
search engine, providing database services for all data 
requiring storage, 
 Collaboration Web, the user interface for the system, 
allowing resources to be registered and their 
permissions to be managed, 
 Gateways, a client at each agency client, taking the 
role of mediator between the Main Switch and the 
plug-ins, 
 Plug-ins, drivers providing interfaces for the endpoint 
resources. 
IV. 
COLLABORATION WEB 
The socio-professional networking component provides a 
decentralized opportunity for an interoperability network to 
be built and configured by its users. It also allows the 
interoperability network to be run without major operational 
costs, since the collaboration rules are set by the agencies 
themselves by following basic guidelines. Collaboration 
rules are set according mutual agreements between the 
agencies involved and should cover issues that include the 
visibility and controllability of data fields, data streams and 
switches. The algorithms and keys used for end-to-end 
encryption of the data are also set up by the agencies. 
 The Collaboration Web handles the use cases related to 
getting in touch with other agencies and the high-level 
configuration of the inter-connection based on abstract roles. 
Typical use cases are the creation of an agency profile, 
registration of a data resource, and configuration of 
permissions. The agency’s authorized users can perform all  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Collaboration Web system in relation to other components. 
these actions through a web browser. The web interface will 
initially provide all of the essential collaboration capabilities 
mentioned above, but, should the need arise, it can be 
extended to provide additional functionalities of the type 
found today in commercial applications. 
In line with modern approaches to the development of 
web applications, we are using the Model-View-Controller 
programming paradigm for enhanced robustness and 
modularity, as shown in Figure 4. The services of the 
REDIRNET Core, particularly its Core Data Storage 
component, will implement the Model and Controller 
functions of the paradigm, while the Collaboration Web 
itself will provide the View role. 
 Figure 5 shows the operations allowed by the 
collaboration web, an example screen for which appears as 
figure 6. These operations will allow each agency's 
authorized users to: 
 
register users and maintain profiles; 
 
enter name, short-name, description, and contact 
information; 
 
establish partnerships between agencies; 
 
search for a partner agency, propose/approve a 
partnership, display the partners of an agency and 
whether a partnership was mutually approved; 
 
search for the data resources of other registered 
agencies;  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Collaboration Web system operations. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-481-7
ACCSE 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

 
 
Figure 6.  Collaboration Web ontology search (detail). 
 
set up interoperability for resources with the help of 
the ontology subsystem, which allows the user to use 
the terminology native to their region or domain; and 
 
examine log events and set the correct permissions 
on each resource. 
The Collaboration Web should also be able to initiate a 
crisis event, which makes it possible to override some of the 
permissions. (This possibility of overriding existing 
resource permissions will be of course based on agreement 
between the respective agencies.) A major issue in such 
collaborative systems is data privacy, especially where 
international cooperation is involved. To solve such 
concerns, the collaboration system will be available only to 
agencies in the field of Public Public Protection and Disaster 
Relief, and subject to bi- or multilateral agreements based 
on trust relationships estabished before each agency joins 
the system. 
V. 
 CONCLUSION 
The core features of the REDIRNET system have 
already been tested and the system is being prepared for 
integration by the first test users. These core features are 
related to data transfer from the producing plug-in and 
gateway, via the main switch, to the consuming gateway and 
plug-in. The system also supports a limited set of social 
networking features, semantic search and agent-assisted 
resource polling. The system remains under development, 
and we expect to implement other features defined in the 
system requirements in the coming months. The whole 
system will be evaluated in the final demonstration, which 
will include both emergency agencies and end users. The 
usability of the system must satisfy both technical 
(functional) and non–technical requirements, such as 
process/culture, financial & commercial, legal & regulatory, 
and data privacy, which will be developed in cooperation 
with end users at the beginning of  the research project.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by European Union projects 
FP7-607768 REDIRNET: Emergency Responder Data 
Interoperability Network, VEGA No. 2/0054/12 and CLAN 
APVV-0809-11 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. Baldini, “Report of the workshop on ‘Interoperable 
communications for Safety and Security’,” European 
Commission Joint Research Centre Institute for the Protection 
and Security of the Citizen, 2010. [Online]. Available from: 
http://rp7.ffg.at/upload/medialibrary/lbna24540enc.pdf 
[retrieved: April, 2016] 
[2] R. Mitchell, C. Eckel, and J. Mathis, “Implementation Profile 
for Interoperable Bridging Systems Interfaces.” NIST/OLES, 
2009. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.firstresponder.gov/Lists/Safecom/BridgingSystem
sInterfaceCoreProfile11_FINAL.pdf [retrieved: April, 2016] 
[3] N. Huijboom et al., “Public Services 2.0: Social computing 
and its implications for future public services,” Institute for 
Prospective Technological Studies, 2009. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://ftp.jrc.es/EURdoc/JRC54203.pdf 
[retrieved: 
April, 2016] 
[4] C. Pascu, D. Osimo, M. Ulbrich, G. Turlea and J. C. 
Burgelman, “The potential disruptive impact of Internet 2-
based technologies,” First Monday, vol. 12, no. 3, 2007. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://firstmonday.org/article/view/1630/1545 
[retrieved: 
April, 2016] 
[5] M. Slot and V. Frissen, “Users in the ‘golden’ age of the 
information society,” Observatorio Journal, vol.1, no. 3, pp. 
201–224, 2007. 
[6] M. Madden and S. Fox, “Riding the waves of ‘Web  2.0’,” 
Pew Research Center, 2006. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2006/10/05/riding-the-waves-of-
web-2-0/ [retrieved: April, 2016] 
[7] M. B. Kemp, Social computing comes of age, Cambridge, 
MA: Forrester, 2007. 
[8] FREESIC, 
Free 
Secure 
Interoperable 
Communication 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.freesic.eu. [retrieved: 
April, 2016] 
[9] NCOIC Interoperability Framework. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.ncoic.org/technology/technical-
products/frameworks/10-technology/33-tech-prod-
framework-nif [retrieved: April, 2016] 
REDIRNET, Emergency Responder Data Interoperability 
Network. [Online]. Available from: http://www.redirnet.eu. 
[retrieved: April, 2016] 
 
 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-481-7
ACCSE 2016 : The First International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

