Medical Sign Language Dictionary with 3D Animation Viewer
Yuji Nagashima
Kogakuin University
2665–1, Makano–machi, Hachioji–shi,
Tokyo, 192–0015, Japan
Email:nagasima@cc.kogakuin.ac.jp
Keiko Watanabe
Kogakuin University
1–24–2, Shinjiku–ku, Tokyo,
163–8677, Japan
Email:ed13001@ns.kogakuin.ac.jp
Abstract—This paper reports on the medical sign language
dictionary for medical use, which shows the sign language motions
in 3D animation. The dictionary includes a viewer function.
Because the dictionary contains 3D images of sign language
motions that were obtained using motion capture technology, the
viewer function enables users to see the sign language motions
from any viewpoint they choose. Further, the dictionary also
enables words to be searched by hand shape or motion.
Keywords–Sign Language; Medicine-Clinical Terms; Dictio-
nary; 3D Animation
I.
INTRODUCTION
In many cases, sign language native speakers do not seek
medical attention until their condition becomes critical. The
causes of this problem include the absence of sign language
words that are appropriate for expressing their complaints
and the absence of appropriate sign language expressions for
explaining their medical conditions. However, accurate sign
expressions are required in those settings because vital issues
may be discussed. Moreover, existing sign language dictio-
naries have been compiled with the use of pictures, photos
and videos. A problem arises in that medical sign language
varies considerably in style from one region to another and
has not been standardized. In addition, there are currently no
dictionaries that allow users to view sign motions based on 3D
animation from any viewpoint.
To address this, we are collecting medical words and
studying sign language expressions of the words with the aim
of unifying and spreading medical sign language expressions
[1]. The data of the 3D sign language motions were obtained
using optical motion capture technology. The data of the 3D
motions are in BVH (BioVision Hierarchy) format. However,
we have not yet established a dictionary.
This paper reports on an unprecedented medical sign
language dictionary developed by the authors that enables users
to view 3D animated images of sign language motions. This
dictionary prototypes a model experimentally based on the
request of doctors and nurses. In Section II, the dictionary not
only contains medical words, but also provides explanations
in sign language about medical terms that are believed to be
difﬁcult for a sign language native speaker to understand. In
Section III, we developed a 3D viewer that renders animated
images of sign language in actual time by reading the BVH
data. This 3D viewer enables users to check sign language mo-
tions as search results by selecting a viewpoint. In Section IV,
the dictionary comes with a search function that can be used
by entering Japanese words. This function permits free word
searches, searches by category, and other types of searches.
In addition, regarding searches by sign language element, the
dictionary permits searches by hand shape,movement locus of
hands, and relationship between left and right hands, among
others.
II.
WORDS AND EXPLANATIONS
As for the words contained in the dictionary, we selected
those that are necessary and frequently used for medical prac-
tice in a hospital, excluding dental technical terms. The total
number of words in the Japanese index is 1,113. The number
of sign language words corresponding to the 1,113 Japanese
words is 1,272 because synonyms of different movements exist
for some of the Japanese words.
Medical terms include a large number of difﬁcult technical
terms. The meanings of many of these words are not clearly
understood by ordinary people simply by seeing them. As
a result, the dictionary includes explanations of words that
are believed to be hard to understand without explanations
and those whose meanings are likely to be misunderstood.
The explanations are provided using sign language expressions
that allow native speaker of sign language to understand the
meanings of the words. For example, the dictionary includes
explanations of diseases such as toxoplasmosis and Kawasaki
disease, the meanings of words such as remission, and differ-
ences in meaning between virus and bacterium and other pairs
of words that are confusing to the general public. A total of
122 explanations are provided about 141 words, with some of
them explaining multiple relevant words.
III.
3D VIEWER
The data of the 3D sign language motions were obtained
using optical motion capture technology. The data of the 3D
motions are in BVH format. We developed a 3D viewer that
renders animated images of sign language in actual time by
reading the BVH data.
The 3D viewer developed enables users to check the sign
language motions of the avatar in a selected direction or from
a selected viewpoint in the 3D space. The control panel on the
right side of Figure 1 permits the adjustment of the viewpoint
(camera position), to zoom in/out, move the image parallel,
and rotate it.
IV.
SEARCH FUNCTION
The dictionary comes with a search function that permits
two types of searches: search by Japanese keyword and search
by description of sign language. The search results can be
checked by viewing animated images of the sign language
using the 3D viewer mentioned in Section III.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

Figure 1. Example of the 3D viewer’s screen
A. Search by keyword in Japanese
1)
Search of the list of words and explanations: A list of
headings in the dictionary is displayed for the search.
2)
Search of kanji and hiragana: Search by entering
headings consisting of both kanji and hiragana (par-
tial match).
3)
Search by hiragana characters for the word: Search
by entering hiragana characters for the word (partial
match).
4)
Search by category: The words contained in the
dictionary are classiﬁed into 20 categories, including
diagnosis and treatment department, name of disease,
symptom, and body part, with some of them classi-
ﬁed into multiple categories. The dictionary permits
searches of the list of words in each category (Table
I).
5)
Search by keyword used in explanation.
TABLE I. MEDICAL WORD CLASSIFICATION AND EXAMPLE
WORDS
Classiﬁcation
Example words
Parts of body
head, eyelid, foot
Internal organs
neurohypophyis, hormone
Care
full nursing, nursing certiﬁcation
Facilities
germfree room, ICU (Intensive Care Unit),
blood sampling room
Food
grapefruit, natto, alcohol
Hospital departments
internal medicine, pediatric clinic
State
critical condition, remission, climacteric
Medical examination
respiration, heart sound, second opinion
Medicine
tablet, antibiotic, anticancer drug
Name of Diseases
gastritis, Alzheimer’s disease, atopic dermatitis
Occupation
medical doctor, nurse, dietician
tests and Tools
medical check-up, blood test, gastrocamera
Secretion
blood serum, cerumen, cerumen
Sports
rugby, sky, malathon, mountaineering
Operation
laparoscopic surgery, suture, anesthesia
Symptom
vomiting, hyperpnea, compression fracture
Treatment
hemostasis, laser treatment, oxygen inhalation
Therapy and rehabilitation
speech therapy, dietary care, palliative care
Receptions
accounting, medical certiﬁcate, reservation
otheres
survival rate, trafﬁc accident, QOL (Quality Of Life)
B. Search by symbol describing sign language word
The words contained in the dictionary are described using
the NVSG (Nominal Verbal Sightline Grammatical) element
model that was suggested by the authors [2]. This method
describes morphemes in sign language by dividing each
morpheme into hand shape, motion, expression, and gaze.
Accordingly, the dictionary permits searches of sign language
motions with unknown meanings by hand shape using N
element (Figure 2), motion, and other elements.
Figure 2. Search screen by the hand shapes
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
This paper has described the medical sign language dictio-
nary for medical use, which shows the sign language motions
in 3D animation. We developed a 3D viewer that renders
animated images of sign language in actual time by reading
the BVH data. This 3D viewer enables users to check sign
language motions as search results by selecting a viewpoint.
As a result, it is possible to use the dictionary as a reverse
dictionary in which the meanings of sign language are able
to be searched from the shapes and motions of the hands.
Moreover, because 3D motion data and the morpheme time
structure are linked to each other one by one in the database,
it is possible to view sign language based on the morphemes.
There have been no sign language dictionaries available with
these functions before. The usability and practicality of the
dictionary are extremely high. We are getting impression of
expressing sign language which can be understood intuitively
from medical staff.
We are proceeding with a further study on how to synthe-
size new words that are not found in the current dictionary
by taking advantage of this morpheme dictionary described
using NVSG elements. Furthermore, we have to perform a
user evaluation in the medical scene of this dictionary.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Part of this work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for
Scientiﬁc Research Grant Number 26244021.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Terauchi and Y. Nagashima , ”Study of Sign Language Expression
of Medical Sign Language Words,” Proc. of the the Ninth International
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI 2016),
April 2016, pp. 297–298.
[2]
K. Watanabe et al. , ”Study into Methods of Describing Japanese Sign
Language,” Proc. of the Communications in Computer and Information
Science (CCIS) series, June 2014, pp. 270–275: , HCI International 2014,
ISBN: 978-3-319-07853-3.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

