Identifying Significant Parameters of the US Bridges  
 
                         Prasad Chetti 
School of CSIS 
Northwest Missouri State University 
Maryville, MO, USA 
Email: pchetti@unomaha.edu 
  Hesham Ali 
College of Information Science and Technology 
                           UNO, Omaha, NE, USA 
Email: hali@unomaha.edu 
 
Abstract— Various bridge parameters, either alone or in 
combination with other parameters, significantly affect the 
performance of the bridge decks in various regions. Identifying 
such parameters and/or their interaction effects allows the 
bridge authorities to understand and assess the bridge decks’ 
performance in different regions. This paper analyzes 1,732 
same-age US bridges from the national bridge inventory dataset 
with respect to various independent parameters along with 
bridge deck condition rating as the dependent parameter. The 
Kruskal-Wallis test was performed on these bridge decks for 
various 
independent 
parameters. 
Multiple 
pairwise 
comparisons between groups were also performed using the 
Wilcoxon test. Results show that material, design, and region 
affect the deck condition ratings of the bridges both individually 
and while interacting with each other. Further, it is observed 
that bridges made of concrete material with stringer multi-beam 
girder design, and which reside in the Highplains region 
perform the worst, whereas the prestressed concrete bridges 
with the same design and which reside in the same region 
perform the best. 
Keywords— National Bridge Inventory (NBI) Dataset; 
Kruskal-Wallis Test; Bridge Condition Ratings.  
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
     The national bridge inventory database is being 
maintained by the U.S. Federal HighWay Administration 
(FHWA) since 1992. This database has the information of 
more than 600,000 bridges which includes both culverts and 
highway bridges. Information of each bridge is recorded with 
more than 100 parameters. Each bridge in the U.S. is 
inspected once every two years [7][8]. In 2017, U.S. bridges 
received a C+ grade for their overall performance [1]. Bridge 
decks’, superstructures’, and substructures’ condition is 
verified by the bridge engineer based on the inspection 
frequency of the bridge [2]. Bridge decks are assigned a 
rating value between ‘0’ and ‘9’, as shown in Table 1. Rating 
condition ‘9’ is assigned to an excellent condition rating 
bridge and ‘0’ is assigned to a failed bridge. Bridges 
deteriorate for various reasons which include age of the 
bridge, material used to construct it, design used, average 
daily traffic on the bridge, geographical region of the bridge, 
etc. Population analysis models in association with 
correlation networks were applied on the civil infrastructures 
and in financial markets to show that various significantly 
enriched parameters effect the dependent parameters [2]-
[6][11]. Deterioration models were applied to estimate the 
bridge condition ratings [9] and stochastic systems have been 
analyzed using stochastic/probabilistic model checking 
[12][13]. Some research in the recent past showed that 
climatic region also plays an important role in the 
deterioration of bridges [10]. However, the research 
presented in [10] was limited to one parameter, such as 
concrete material. The U.S. is geographically a huge country 
and divided into six climatic regions based on the varying 
environmental conditions, as shown in Fig. 1. All climatic 
regions have their own environmental conditions. For 
example, the Southeast region has dry or hot temperatures, 
and the Northeast region has very cold temperatures.  
     The National Bridge Inspection (NBI) database [7] 
consists of the information of each bridge along with more 
than 100 parameters. These parameters could be divided into 
both input and outcome parameters [2]-[5]. This paper 
attempts to study the effect of the independent parameters on 
a dependent parameter, including the interaction effects of 
the independent parameters on the dependent parameter. The 
three independent parameters considered for this study are: 
material, design, and region. The only dependent parameter 
considered was the deck condition rating. The aim of this 
study is to see how same-age bridges perform when the 
independent parameters are stand alone and when they 
interact with each other. Further, this study estimates the 
mean deck condition ratings while comparing the groups of 
independent parameters when they are alone or in interaction 
with each other. A one-way analysis of variance (one-way) 
ANOVA was required to see if the independent parameter 
groups’ means are the same or not. For this, the Kruskal-
Wallis test (since the data is not normal) was used for 
identifying the effects of the independent parameters on the 
dependent parameter. If the groups’ means are the same, then 
 
 
Figure 1. Six climatic regions encompassing the United States. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

TABLE 1. DESCRIPTION OF CONDITION RATINGS OF BRIDGES 
 
there is no effect of the independent parameter on the 
dependent parameters. Otherwise, there is an effect. If the 
groups’ means are not the same, then we need another test to 
see which group performs better or worse. For this, the 
Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used for comparing the means 
of the groups. 
 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
 
     The dataset used for this study is from the NBI database 
[7]. The bridges across the USA that were built between the 
years 1991 and 1993 with an age of 27 years and were not 
rebuilt (bridges that did not go through any kind of 
maintenance so far) are selected for this study. The resulting 
dataset has a total of 1,732 bridges. Three independent 
parameters and one dependent parameter are considered for 
this study. The three independent parameters are: material, 
design, and region, and the dependent parameter is the deck 
condition rating. The objective is to find whether the 
independent parameter influences the dependent parameter. 
This process is done in two steps. First, the Kruskal-Wallis 
(KW) test is applied individually on each of these 
independent parameters to see if they influence the 
dependent parameter. Second, if there is an influence of the 
independent parameter on the dependent parameter, then the 
Wilcoxon pairwise comparison test is applied on the 
independent parameter groups to see the differences within 
them. The second step is applied only if the independent 
parameter effects the dependent parameter in the first step. 
This two-step process is repeated with the interactions of the 
independent parameters to see their influence on the 
dependent parameter. The purpose of applying the KW test 
and the Wilcoxon test on the interactions is to see if the 
interactions of independent parameters’ groups lead to better 
mean values of the deck condition ratings than the 
independent parameters’ groups mean values alone.  
     The following hypotheses are tested on all independent 
parameters and interactions with the deck condition ratings 
as the independent parameter.  
1. The null and alternate hypotheses on materials is given 
below.   
H0:    The means of deck condition ratings of all material 
types are equal 
            Ha:    The means are not equal 
2. The null and alternate hypotheses on designs is given 
below.  
     H0: The means of deck condition ratings of all design 
types     are equal 
     Ha: The means are not equal 
3. The null and alternate hypotheses on regions is given 
below.  
     H0:  The means of deck condition ratings of all regions 
are    equal 
     Ha: The means are not equal 
 
4. The null and alternate hypotheses on material * design * 
region is given below.  
      H0: The means of deck condition ratings of all              
material*design*region are equal 
      Ha: The means are not equal 
 
 
Figure 2. Pairwise comparison among the groups of materials 
 
Condition Rating 
      Description 
            9 
Excellent condition 
            8 
Very good condition 
            7 
Good condition 
            6 
Satisfactory condition 
            5 
Fair condition 
            4 
Poor condition 
            3 
Serious condition 
            2 
Critical condition 
            1 
Imminent failure condition 
            0 
Failed condition 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

Figure 3. Pairwise comparison among the groups of the designs 
 
 
Figure 4. Pairwise comparison among the groups of the region 
 
At the significance level α = 0.05, p-values are < 0.001 
for all the above hypotheses. Therefore, the null 
hypotheses are rejected in all the cases. This clearly 
indicates that the independent parameters influence the 
dependent parameter. 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
 
     This section demonstrates different experimental results 
for all the given hypotheses.  
     Initially, the KW test was applied on the material types. 
The mean values of all the material types are not equal. 
Hence, the null hypotheses were rejected, and it was 
concluded that the material types influence the deck 
condition rating. The Wilcoxon test was applied on the 
groups of material types to see which material is performing 
better. Fig. 2 shows various material types and their 
corresponding mean deck condition rating values (shown 
inside parentheses) after 27 years. From Fig. 2, we see that 
the prestressed concrete (given as Prestr’Conc) material type 
is performing the best compared to all other material types 
with the average deck condition rating value of 7.02. The 
lowest performing material type is Wood or Timber (given 
as WdOrTmbr). Fig 2 also shows two types of boxes while 
comparing the material type groups. Boxes shown with red 
color (or boxes without ‘x’ mark in them) are the material 
groups whose mean deck condition rating values are 
significantly different. For example, prestressed concrete 
material’s mean deck condition rating value is 7.02, which is 
significantly different from the concrete material’s (given as 
Cncrt) average deck condition rating value, which is 6.78. 
Similarly, the green boxes with ‘x’ symbol in them indicate 
that there is no significant difference between the mean 
values of the two material types. For example, concrete 
continuous (given as CnctrCont’s) and concrete materials do 
not have a significant difference in their mean deck condition 
ratings. Seven material types were compared in this test. Out 
of seven material types, Wood or Timber material is 
significantly different from five other material types, as 
shown in Fig. 2. This indicates that Wood or Timber material 
is behaving differently from almost all other materials in 
terms of performing lower. Further, there is no performance 
difference among steel continuous material and concrete, 
concrete continuous, prestressed concrete, and prestressed 
concrete continuous materials.  
     The second independent parameter tested is the design 
type.  Seven different designs were tested, as shown in Fig. 
3. From Fig. 3, we see that the Frame type is performing the 
best with the mean deck condition ratings value 7.38, and 
Truss-Thru design is performing the worst with the value 
6.08. 
Further, 
Truss-Thru 
design’s 
performance 
is 
significantly different from all other designs.  
     The third independent parameter is the region. The US is 
geographically divided into six different regions, as shown in 
Fig 4. The KW-test was applied first, and the results show 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

that the region effects the deck condition ratings. The 
Wilcoxon test results are shown in Fig 4. The Midwestern  
 
 
Figure 5. Pairwise comparison among the groups of the interactions of 
materials, designs, and regions 
 
region is performing the best with the average deck condition 
rating value of 7.04, and the Northeast region is performing 
the worst with the value of 6.51. Further, the Northeast 
region’s performance is significantly different from all other 
regions, except the Western region. The Wilcoxon test result 
of interactions of all the three independent parameters is 
shown in Fig 5. The results show that the bridges made of 
concrete material with stringer multi-beam girder design and 
that reside in the Highplains region perform the worst with an 
average deck condition rating value of 5.70, whereas the 
prestressed concrete bridges with the same design that reside 
in the same region perform the best with the value of 7.41. 
Similarly, prestressed concrete bridges with stringer 
multibeam-girder design that reside in the Southern region 
are also performing the best after 27 years. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
 
     This paper analyzed the deterioration of 1,732 US bridges 
with 27 years of age for each bridge. Three independent 
parameters, namely, material, design, and region along with 
their interactions have been considered to see their effect on 
the dependent outcome condition rating parameter, namely, 
the deck rating. However, the region parameter was not part 
of the original NBI database. It was added in this study as the 
climatic regions play an important role in the deterioration of 
bridges. As the deck ratings data is not normal, the Kruskal-
Wallis test was applied to see if the independent parameters 
influence the dependent parameter. The Wilcoxon test was 
applied for the multiple pairwise comparisons between the 
groups of the independent parameters to see how the groups 
are performing significantly different. Corrplot package in R 
language was used to visualize the significant differences 
among the groups of the independent parameters.  
     The results show that material, design, and region 
influence the deck condition ratings of the bridges both 
individually and in interaction with each other. Further, it is 
observed that the bridges made of concrete material with 
stringer multi-beam girder design that reside in the 
Highplains region perform the worst, whereas the prestressed 
concrete bridges with the same design that reside in the same 
region perform the best. Similarly, prestressed concrete 
bridges with stringer multibeam-girder design that reside in 
the Southern region are also performing the best after 27 
years. Hence, by using the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by 
the Wilcoxon test, it is concluded that the bridges with 
concrete material and having stringer multibeam-girder 
design are not suitable for the Highplains region. The 
prestressed concrete material is more suitable, as it performs 
the best.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
ASCE report card on the US bridges, 2017, [Online]  
https://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/01/Bridges-Final.pdf  [accessed June 2022]. 
[2] 
P. Chetti and H. Ali, “Estimating the Inspection Frequencies of Civil 
Infrastructures using Correlation Networks and Population 
Analysis”, International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, 
vol.13 1&2, pp. 151-162, 2020.  
[3] 
P. Chetti and H. Ali, “Impact of Daily Traffic on Various Bridge 
Decks in Different Climatic Regions”, EWSHM, 2022. 
[4] 
P. Chetti and H Ali, “Analyzing the Structural Health of Civil 
Infrastructures Using Correlation Networks and Population 
Analysis”, In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference 
on Data Analytics, Porto, Portugal, 2019. 
[5] 
P. Chetti, H. Ali, R. Gandhi, B. Ricks, D. Ghersi, and L. Najjar, “A 
New Approach for Analyzing Safety and Performance Factors in 
Civil Infrastructures Using Correlation Networks and Population 
Analysis”. In the Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on 
Structural Health Monitoring (IWSHM), 2021. 
[6] 
Z. Hatami, P. Chetti, H. Ali, D. Volkman, A Novel Population 
Analysis Approach for Analyzing Financial Markets under Crises – 
2008 Economic crash and Covid-19 pandemic, 2021. 
[7] 
Federal 
Highway 
Administration 
(FHWA), 
[Online] 
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/nbi/ascii.cfm, 
[accessed 
June 
2022]. 
[8] 
Federal 
Highway 
Administration 
(FHWA), 
[Online] 
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/mtguide.pdf, 
[accessed 
June 
2022] 
[9] 
A. Hatami and G. Morcous, “Developing deterioration models for 
Nebraska bridges”, No. M302, 2011.  
[10] 
A. M. Chyad, O. Abudayyeh, F. Zakhil, and O. Hakimi, 
“Deterioration rates of concrete bridge decks in several climatic 
regions”, 
In 
2018 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Electro/Information Technology (EIT), 2018, pp. 0065-0068. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

[11] 
Z. Hatami, H. Ali, D. Volkman, and P. Chetti, “A New Approach 
for Analyzing Financial Markets Using Correlation Networks and 
Population Analysis” In Proceedings of the 24th International 
Conference on Enterprise Information Systems, vol. 1, 2022, pp. 
569-577. 
[12] 
R. Lal, W. Duan, and P. Prabhakar, “Bayesian statistical model 
checking for continuous stochastic logic”, In 2020 18th ACM-IEEE 
International Conference on Formal Methods and Models for 
System Design (MEMOCODE), 2020, pp. 1-11. 
[13] 
R. Lal, “Scalable safety verification of stochastic hybrid 
systems” (Doctoral dissertation, Kansas State University), 2021 
[Online] 
https://krex.k-state.edu/dspace/handle/2097/41399 
[accessed June 2022]. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

