Implementation of a Super-resolution Algorithm to Improve Spatial Resolution of 
Optical Signals
Byung-Jin Lee, Sung-Woo Kim 
Department of Electrical and 
Electronic Engineering, Chungbuk 
National University, Cheongju, 
Chungbuk, Rep. of Korea 
e-mail: Byung2487@naver.com, 
onlyparadise@nate.com
Bong Guk Yu 
GCI INCORPORATED, 307, 218, 
Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon  
e-mail: bgyu2@nate.com
Kyung Seok Kim 
Department of Electrical and 
Electronic Engineering, Chungbuk 
National University, Cheongju, 
Chungbuk, Rep. of Korea  
kseokkim@cbnu.ac.kr
Abstract—An Optical Time Domain Reflectometer (OTDR) is 
the most widely used instrument to monitor problems in 
currently installed optical fiber. It evaluates the physical 
characteristics of optical fiber, such as transmission loss and 
connection loss. It is important to increase the spatial 
resolution to accurately detect optical path problems using an 
OTDR. When the pulse width is greater than twice the distance 
between the two reflectors, the two reflected pulses overlap, 
and it is not possible to distinguish the reflected signal. To 
overcome these limitations, this paper proposes a spatial 
resolution–enhancement 
method 
by 
applying 
a 
super-
resolution algorithm. As a result of digital signal processing 
implementation in TMS320C6455T DSP board, it is possible to 
analyze the event interval more precisely by improving the 
resolution when applying the super-resolution algorithm. 
Keywords—optical 
time 
domain 
reflectometer; 
spatial 
resolution; cross-correlation; super-resolution algorithm. 
I.
INTRODUCTION  
The wired communications market is switching to fiber to 
the home (FTTH). With downsizing of base stations due to 
the competition of fourth-generation (4G) LTE services and 
the spread of optical repeaters, the mobile communications 
market has widely spread to antenna towers within a 25 km 
radius. With the advent of 5G and revitalization of the 
Internet of Things market, the use of optical fiber will 
increase sharply in the future. The OTDR is the most widely 
used instrument for monitoring problems in currently 
installed optical fiber. The OTDR is designed to test FTTx 
networks and evaluate the physical properties of the fiber, 
such as transmission loss and connection loss. The OTDR is 
widely used in the manufacture, construction, and 
maintenance of fiber optic communications systems. It is 
important to increase the spatial resolution to accurately 
detect optical path problems using an OTDR. Spatial 
resolution is the most representative parameter for OTDR 
performance, along with dynamic range. When the pulse 
width is less than twice the distance between two reflectors, 
the signals from them are reflected without overlap, and the 
reflected signal can be distinguished. However, when the 
pulse width is greater than twice the distance between the 
two reflectors, the reflected pulses overlap, and it is not 
possible to distinguish the reflected signal. Spatial 
resolution must be increased to distinguish the signal. To 
increase the spatial resolution, a narrow pulse width of 10 ns 
or less should be used. However, as the width of the pulse 
narrows, the distance of measurable optical fiber is 
shortened, and a receiver having a large reception 
bandwidth is required. As the receiving bandwidth increases, 
the amount of noise in the receiver increases proportionally, 
so the dynamic range of the OTDR decreases. That is, a 
conventional OTDR based on a single pulse has a tradeoff 
relationship between spatial resolution and dynamic range. 
To overcome this problem, a cross-correlation–based OTDR 
method was proposed [1]. Although this method has several 
advantages, such as increasing the dynamic range without 
sacrificing spatial resolution, it is still limited by the 
electron modulation bandwidth [2]. Therefore, a new super-
resolution algorithm is needed to overcome these limitations 
and improve resolution. 
In this paper, we propose a method of improving the 
spatial resolution of an OTDR based on cross-correlation by 
applying a super-resolution algorithm. We evaluate the 
spatial resolution performance of the OTDR by comparing 
the proposed method with a cross-correlation–based OTDR 
via Digital Signal Processing (DSP) implementation.  
This paper is organized into five sections. Section 2 
describes the cross-correlation–based OTDR system, and 
Section 3 analyzes the super-resolution algorithm for 
resolution enhancement. Section 4 describes the algorithm’s 
implementation and offers an analysis of the results. The 
main conclusions are in Section 5. 
II.
CROSS-CORRELATION BASED OTDR SYSTEM
A cross-correlation–based OTDR can be divided into 
three major parts, as shown in Figure 1: the transmitter, 
which mixes the downstream data signal with a pseudo 
noise signal, the part of the optical fiber that experiences 
various losses and reflections, and the receiver, which 
receives and analyzes the signal. The data signal is 
separated into a reference signal for correlation using a tap, 
a signal back-reflected from the optical fiber and received 
through a photodetector, and an OTDR trace that can be 
drawn by cross-correlation with the reference signal. A 
cross-correlation–based OTDR using a Golay signal can 
obtain the OTDR trace through cross correlation of ݒ(t) and 
Golay signals received through a Photo Diode (PD). The 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

cross-correlation result of the two signals, ܥ(γ), can be 
expressed as: 
ܥ(γ) = ∫ݒ(ݐ)ݏ(ݐ−ߛ)݀ݐ
௠∆௧
଴
= ∫ݒ଴(ݐ)ݏ(ݐ−ߛ)݀ݐ
௠∆௧
଴
+
∫
݊ݐℎ݉(ݐ)ݏ(ݐ−ߛ)݀ݐ݉∆ݐ
0+∫݊ݍ(ݐ)ݏ(ݐ−ߛ)݀ݐ݉∆ݐ
0
=ܥ଴(γ) +ܥ௧௛௠(γ) +ܥ௤(γ)                                  (1)                                                                          
Cross correlation between the signal returned from the 
OTDR and the Golay signal has a range of 0 to ݉∆ݐ, where 
m is the length of the Golay signal, given as ݉ = 2୥୭୪ୟ୷ −
1, and ∆t is the interval between one bit in the Golay signal. 
That is, ݉∆ݐ is the time corresponding to one period of the 
Golay signal. ܥ଴(ߛ) denotes the measured reflectivity, 
ܥ௧௛௠(ߛ) denotes the thermal noise generated from the 
TIA(Transimpedance Amplifier), and ܥ௤(ߛ) denotes the 
ADC(Analog to Digital Converter) quantization term. 
ܥ௧௛௠(ߛ) and ܥ௤(ߛ) are terms related to the noise level when 
there is no backscattering signal on the OTDR trace, and 
ܥ଴(ߛ) determines the shape of the OTDR trace. 
III.
ANALYSIS OF THE SUPER-RESOLUTION ALGORITHM TO 
IMPROVE RESOLUTION
When the pulse width is more than twice the distance 
between the two reflections, the signal in which the two 
reflected pulses overlap and are reflected is not 
distinguishable. Therefore, a super-resolution algorithm to 
distinguish it is necessary. Among the signal processing 
methods available, the Multiple Signal Classification 
(MUSIC) algorithm is the most widely used. Although 
computational complexity is high, it is known as a 
technology that can provide highly accurate estimations [3]. 
The MUSIC algorithm is used to estimate the spatial 
spectrum of an incoherent signal. When the signal is 
coherent, the coherent signal will be combined into one 
signal, and the received independent signal is reduced in 
size due to the interference signal. This leads to less 
covariance matrix rank reduction and a larger number of 
eigenvalues than the incoming signal. To solve this problem, 
a method for reconstructing a conjugate matrix of a data 
matrix was proposed [4]. The proposed technique is based 
on the eigenvalue decomposition of the autocorrelation 
matrix of received signal ܥ(ߛ). The procedure for 
implementing the proposed OTDR-based super-resolution 
algorithm is as follows. The energy value of signal ܥ(ߛ), 
cross-correlated to find the reflection point of the raw data 
signal, is calculated, and the peak value extracted. This is a 
result of not applying the algorithm. Second, ܥ(ߛ) is applied 
to the resolution algorithm to derive reflection point results. 
We compare the performance of the second resolution 
algorithm by outputting the first and second results together. 
First, covariance matrix R of the received signal is 
expressed with Equation (2): 
ܴ௫ = E{ܥ(ߛ)ܥு(ߛ)}= APAு +ߪ௡
ଶܫ=ܴ௦ + ܴ௪  (2) 
where H denotes the Hermitian transpose, and A is the 
signal gain value (A = 1). From Equation (1), covariance 
matrix R can be represented by the combination of signal 
covariance matrix ܴ௦  and noise covariance matrix ܴ௪ . 
ܲ = E{ܥ(ߛ)ܥு(ߛ)} is the ݇ × ݇ covariance matrix of the 
signal. Assuming that additive noise is not correlated. The 
mean of noise is 0, and variance is equal to ߪ௡
ଶ, and the 
covariance matrix can be expressed as ܴ௪ =ߪ௡
ଶܫ. ܴ௦ is an 
m-by-m matrix with explicit matrix coefficients (Rank), 
where m is the number of signals reflected in the event 
interval. Therefore, each (m-k) eigenvector corresponds to a 
noise vector m by a k that has eigenvalue 0. As a result, the 
signal vector is orthogonal to the (m-k) noise vector. If there 
is no correlation between k signals, rank(APAH) = k. Using 
this, covariance matrix R of the received signal is divided 
into a signal subspace and a noise subspace, and can be 
expressed by Equation (3): 
ܴ௫ = APAு +ߪ௡
ଶܫ=ܷௌΛௌܷௌ + ܷேΛேܷே       (3) 
where ܷௌ = [ݑଵ,ݑଶ, ⋯ ,ݑ௞] is the signal eigenvector matrix, 
and ܷே = [ݑ௞ାଵ,ݑ௞ାଶ, ⋯ ,ݑ௠] is the noise eigenvector 
matrix, which then make transformation matrix T, where T 
is an m-order inverse unit matrix referred to as a transition 
matrix: 
ܶ = ቎
0
0
0
0
⋯
1
⋯
0
⋯
⋯
1
0
⋯
0
⋯
0
቏                            (4) 
when Y =  ܶܥ଴
∗(ߛ), ܥ଴
∗(ߛ) is a complex conjugate of ܥ଴(ߛ). 
The covariance matrix Y is as follows: 
ܴ௬ = E{ܻܻு} = ܴܻܶ∗(ݎ)ܶ                  (5) 
Figure 1. Cross-correlation-based OTDR system model 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

Here, R is the sum of ܴ௫ and ܴ௬, and the reconstructed 
conjugate matrix can be obtained using the above equation:    
ܴ = ܴ௫ + ܴ௬ = APAு + ܶ[APAு]∗ܶ + 2ߪ௡
ଶܫ     (6) 
According to matrix theory [5], if u is an eigenvector 
corresponding to the zero eigenvalue of matrix APAு, u
must be an eigenvector corresponding to the eigenvalue of 
matrix ܶ[APAு]∗ܶ. Thus, the matrices ܴ௫, ܴ௬, and R has  
same noise subspaces. When eigenvalue decomposition is 
performed on R, eigenvalues and eigenvectors are obtained. 
The noise subspace between the eigenvectors can be 
distinguished according to the number of signals to be 
estimated, as follows: 
R= ܷ෡ௌΛ෡ௌܷ෡ௌ + ܷ෡ேΛ෡ேܷ෡ே                   (7) 
The MUSIC spatial spectrum is composed of the new 
noise subspaces, as follows: 
ܨ௜௠௣௥௢௩௘ௗ =
ଵ
஺ಹ௎෡ಿ௎෡ಿ
ಹ஺                    (8) 
IV.
ALGORITHM IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS 
ANALYSIS
In 
this 
section, 
we 
analyze 
performance 
by 
implementing 
the 
super-resolution 
algorithm 
in 
TMS320C6455T DSP board. First, the measurement 
environment is shown in Figure 2. Three events were 
created, 334 m and 335 m, and 338 m from the starting 
point, followed by the endpoint. The measurement 
parameters were set to a wavelength of SM1310 nm at a 
distance of 500 m. The pulse width was 3 ns, with the 
average amount of data at 214. The refractive index was 
1.46, the total size of the data was 10,000 samples, and the 
data sampling interval, 5 cm. Figure 3 shows the 
TMS320C6455T DSP board that was used. The DSP chip 
used in the emulator implementation is a Texas Instruments 
TMS320C6455; the CPU operates at 1.2 GHz, flash 
Figure 2. OTDR measurement environment                                                          Figure 3. TMS320C6455T DSP board  
Figure 4. High resolution algorithm DSP implementation result 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

memory was 2 MB, and Dynamic Random Access Memory 
(DRAM), 512 MB. However, with flash memory at 2 MB, 
if the program becomes complicated and the amount of 
computation increases, operation of the program becomes 
possible through DRAM. In this case, although the amount 
of DRAM is large, it is possible to expand the program, but 
the operating speed is slower than operation through flash 
memory. To configure the real-time system, consideration 
of memory management is also required [6]. 
The results of the DSP implementation in the above 
measurement environment are shown in Figure 4. Results 
from the DSP were stored and represented in Matlab. The 
black graph represents the raw data, and the graph outlined 
in red is from the super-resolution algorithm. It can be 
confirmed that an event occurs near 330 m in the total 
length of 500 m. If you look at the enlargement, you can see 
that the first event occurred at 334 m, and there is an event 
after another 1 m, and you can see that an event occurs after 
another 3 m. With raw data, you cannot decompose 1 m of 
334 m and 335 m. From applying the resolution algorithm, 
the resolution improves, and the 1 m event interval that the 
raw data cannot decompose is correctly decomposed. The 
size of the signal level is also improved by about 8 dB, so 
the event interval can be more accurately distinguished.  
V.
CONCLUSION
In general, the performance of an OTDR is determined 
by its dynamic range and spatial resolution. In this paper, we 
analyzed the MUSIC algorithm to improve the resolution 
performance of the OTDR, and we implemented an 
improved MUSIC algorithm to compensate for the 
incoherent characteristics of the MUSIC algorithm. As a 
result of analyzing the performance of the algorithm through 
DSP implementation, we correctly decomposed events of 
1 m intervals that could not have been resolved before, and 
the variation of the signals was also reduced. Compared with 
the raw data, the signal level improved by about 8 dB. 
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Furukawa, K. Tanaka, Y. Koyamada, and M. Sumida, “Enhanced 
coherent OTDR for long span optical transmission lines containing 
optical fiber amplifiers,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 7, no. 5, 
pp. 540–542, May 1995 
[2]
X. Ai, R. Nock, J. G. Rarity, N. Dahnoun, “High-resolution random 
modulation cw lidar”, Applied Optics, Vol. 50, No. 22, pp. 4478-
4488 2011. 
[3]
Z. I. Khan, M. MD. Kamal, N. Hamzah, K. Othman, and N. I. Khan, 
“Analysis of Performance for Multiple Signal Classification 
(MUSIC) in Estimating Direction of Arrival,” Preceeding of RFM, 
pp. 524-528, 2008. 
[4]
S. Su, W. Liu, W. Zheng, “Estimation of direction of arrival for 
correlation signals based on modified MUSIC algorithm”, JOURNAL 
OF INFORMATION &COMPUTATIONAL SCIENCE, Vol. 10, No. 
13 , pp. 4027-4035, 2013 
[5]
Nering, Evar D. (1970), Linear Algebra and Matrix Theory (2nd ed.), 
New York: Wiley, LCCN 76091646 
[6]
Y. B. Jang, “DSP theory and practice”, Saeng neung Publisher, 
2004.05 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

