Mathematical Modeling Approach to the Design and Analysis of Measurement and
Control Systems
Thanh Nga Thai
School of Electrical Engineering
HaNoi University of Science and Technology
Ha Noi, Viet Nam
email: thaithanhnga@gmail.com
Abstract—Mathematical modeling represents system behaviors
in mathematical terms. In system analysis, a descriptive model
can be done using different control laws or fitting experimental
measurements or other empirical data. This work presents an
analysis based on mathematical modeling as the behavior
observation representations for measurement and control
systems. Some adaptable control methods based on multi-
function
optimizations
from
the
linear
and
nonlinear
characteristic measurements became a step to ensure stable
system performance. Developing a mathematical model for
changing the regenerative parameters within the limit of the
feasible structure is a synthesis of measurement and control
systems. An application for calculating energy from power
demand associated with the switching delays depending on the
charge controlled capacitor properties is constructed. The
process of developing a suitable mathematical model from
experimental measurements and control gives the key for the
principle practice modeling design system.
Keywords-
mathematical
model;
system
analysis;
measurement; control system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the traditional measurement system engineering, the
role of a model is not only important for advanced system
design, but also to measure the viability and reliability of the
system. Traditional model approaches to system engineering
have
always
relied
on
mathematical
modeling.
Mathematical
models
are
usually
used
in
different
engineering
disciplines
such
as
electrical
engineering,
computer sciences, nature sciences, or social sciences to
explain how a system works and to predict the behavior in
the future.
The energy resources in the world are exploited with the
use of traditional energy, causing an environment problem
as well as global warming. Renewable energy sources are
clean and available in nature, but the problem is, it is
difficult
to
use
energy
economically
and
efficiently.
Reasonable exploitation and use of renewable energy
requires a sustainable optimal synthesis method. The
preferred solution is to select the optimal mathematical
model
for
forecasting
techniques.
According
to
the
classification criteria of mathematical models, nonlinear
systems tend to be studied with strongly nonlinear models.
There are two main approaches: the model free approach
and the model based approach. The model based approach
has a fundamental role in determining time, size and cause
of a characteristic in a dynamic system operation. The
model based approach is done by the structure of the model
and the existing input-output relationships.
The
model
free
approach
is
used
in
real
time
measurements and process history, when the model based
approach is unavailable or not useful. In dynamic systems,
the inner parameters of the system will modify its dynamics.
If a characteristic property or parameter of the system from
the standard condition changes, there are some blocking
situations of disconnects between system components or
structural damage inside. The pre-knowledge of a healthy
system usually uses observer-based methods or parameter
estimation
techniques.
However,
some
nonlinear
characterizations might not be observed and estimated
because of the inaccurate values of the physical variables or
environmental conditions.
The nonlinear characteristic approach in a system is
critical
to
the
quality
of
measuring
the
production
processing capability. This characterization is done by using
a phenomenological or general basis function, which is the
observed behavior of the system. This shows that changes in
the inputs of a model affect the output, but sometimes
produce un-observed states. Because the characteristics of
each part or each component are completely different, from
random fault as variations of supply voltage, temperature
changes or inaccurate instrument reading, improving safety
and reliability for the automatic recovery, a nonlinear
system needs a specific control technique with a low cost
and
high
effectiveness.
Nonlinear
characterization
measurement can be suggested as a method in fault
detection for operating constraints in process system than
the corporation with the potential inaccuracy of the model or
model mismatch. A mathematical model built from this
characterization is to select in design and analysis the
measurement and control system. The rest of the paper is
structured as follows. In Section II, we provide an overview
to
improve
the
analysis
and
design
approach
with
mathematical
modeling.
In
Section
III,
an
adaptive
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-735-1
ACCSE 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

development method based on control theory allows to
develop simulation nonlinear characteristics as a virtual tool
for ensuring stable system performance. The conclusion
presents a collection from the series references for using
mathematical
modeling
for
design
and
analysis
of
measurement and control systems.
II.
MAIN PROBLEM
In each structure system, the classification criteria are
linear or nonlinear mathematical model, static or dynamic
model, explicitly or implicitly calculated, deterministic or
probabilistic model, deductive, inductive or floating model.
This
work
concentrates
on
linear
and
nonlinear
mathematical models. A mathematical model describes the
system
by
establishing
the
relationship
between
the
variables from a set of variables and equations. Some
properties of the system are the set of functions between the
different variables and building the equations of the
described system.
A. Model based and model free
The first group is the model-based method, also known
as knowledge based dynamic model. The behavior of the
system when modeled as a set of differential equations is
usually in state space form. The nonlinear state space model
has the general structure:
ݔ̇= f ൫ݔ,ݑ൯ݔܴ߳௡,ݑܴ߳௠(1)
y = g (x)ݕܴ߳௣
The measurement vector y is provided by the available
sensors, and u is the control input vector, n, m, p are the
dimensions of the vector x, u, y [10]. Under classical
assumptions about control inputs, this general representation
rewrites in an input affine form:
ݔ̇= ൫ݔ൯ +ܩ൫ݔ൯.ݑݔܴ߳௡,ݑܴ߳௠(2)
y = g (x)ݕܴ߳௣
This model retains the nonlinear global behavior of the
system while benefiting from interesting results in nonlinear
control theory. A further step towards simplification is to
linear equation (2) around an operating point or a reference
trajectory. The linear model has the form:
൜ݔ̇=ܣݔ+ܤݑ
ݕ=ܥݔ(3)
Where A, B, C are possibly varying time. We suppose A
and B are controllable for the linear conditions in which the
criterion optimization stands. The computation to solve
around equilibrium uses the matrices between themselves as
takes into account the nonlinearities of function f. g
corresponds to the global behavior of the system.
Developing
an
improved
mathematical
model
is
estimating the accuracy of the estimated parameter and
identification as characterization of the model system. To
obtain the suitable mathematical model for the system with
special characterizations by all techniques in computer
sciences, an example is presented in [8].
A dynamic system model can be categorized by many
factors, such as genetic and non-genetic aging factors.
Genetic factors can not be easily controlled, while non-
genetic can be controlled and include poor maintenance,
high loads and stress in the operation of the system. Some
parameters make the model can't be observed and controlled
in the domain stabilization system. These parameters need
to be identified to ensure an accurate action processing or
make the move to protection mode and automatic mode.
The algorithm for estimate these parameters is based on
aging,
such
as
mechanical,
electrical
and
structural
conditions, which are important for most of existing model
designs. Beside the estimation parameters, processing signal
by image is often used in any fields where the quick
identification of an object is necessary. This work is as
empirical model for the model based software and system
engineering.
The model free approach is also used when no explicit
dynamical model of the control system is available. It
exploits measurements acquired in real time, or available in
a previously constructed database, using the behavior of the
signal model. Some nonlinear characterizations in the
system might not be observed and estimated. The predicted
solution is suitable operating in the control system. For the
vehicle system, the model free approach is preferred for the
trajectory control, represented by differential equations or
difference equations. The model free approach is useful for
a scenario in which the system depends on other random
variables relating inputs to outputs for the role of control.
An example of a model free approach is as follows. A
system presents a model free by general state equation [10]:
ݔ̇= ൫ݔ,ݑ൯ݔܴ߳௡,ݑܴ߳௠(4)
The output of this system y, y ∈R୫ that vector output can
be rewritten in the form:
ݕ=(ݕଵ,ݕଶ,ݕଷ … ,ݕ௠)(5)
ݕ௜= ℎ௜(ݔ,ݑଵ,ݑଶ, … ,ݑ௠) i = 1 to m
(6)
The output components of y are analytically independent,
the state components x and the input components u are the
function of the output components and a known number of
their derivative, written as follows:
ቐ
ݔ௜= Φ௜(ݕଵ,ݕଵ
(ଵ) … ,ݕଵ
(ఓ೔,ଵ) ,ݕଶ, … ,ݕଶ
(ఓ೔,ଶ) … ,ݕ௠,…,ݕଶ
(ఓ೔,ଶ))
ݑ௝= ψ௝(ݕଵ,ݕଵ
(ଵ) … ,ݕଵ
൫జೕ,ଵ൯ ,ݕଶ, … ,ݕଶ
൫జೕ,ଶ൯ … ,ݕ௠,…,ݕଶ
൫జೕ,ଶ൯
(7)
The functions Φ and Ψ are identified by the equation:
  Φ̇ = ݂൫ߔ,ߖ൯
(8)
Consider a nonlinear system whose discrete time dynamics
from an initial state are given by:
ܺ௞ାଵ=ܺ௞+ f (ܺ௞, ܷ௞)
(9)
with k ∈ N where X୩ϵR୬ , U୩ϵR୫ , f is a smooth vector field
of X୩ and U୩ is, respectively, the state and the input vectors
of this system at time k. We suppose here that each input
has an independent effect on the dynamic state:
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-735-1
ACCSE 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

డ௙
డ௨೔≠
డ௙
డ௨ೕ      i ≠ j with i, j = {1,…, m} 
(10)
The discrete dynamic model in a nonlinear system can be
rewritten as:
Model continue → Discretion → Discrete Model 
Ẋ = f(X, U)X୩ାଵ
X୩ + f(X୩ + U୩)
∃Y୩| Y୩ = h൫X୩൯
(11)
With k ∈ N where X୩ϵR୬ , U୩ϵR୫
X୩: is in respect to the state vector of this system at time k.
U୩: is the input vector of this system k to k+1.
f: is a smooth vector field of X୩ and U୩ .
Y: the output vector measurement.
The mathematical model by state equation (11) is
structured from the output function, the state component and
input
component.
It
makes
more
clearly
about
the
characteristic set to function dynamic system, using model
output obtained by simulation and prediction when the
process noise enters the system. Input noise is an important
role defined non-functional properties in a systematic
manner when not well established domain. The simulation
is developed by the non-functional properties tool under the
function properties parameters from the model free method.
An application for building using the model based approach
is shown in references [8][9], in which energy performance
diagnosis is done based on a mathematical model from non
destructive measures, inverse method and artificial neural
networks. Another application for associated model free can
be found in reference [10,] that improves the model based
approach by a dynamic model with characteristic matrix
fault effect to flight trajectory. These works provide an
overview in using a model as the best way for measurement
and control advance methods.
B. Maintaining the measurement and control system
Modern control theory approaches not only the model
based approach but is also based on different methods like
the model free approach in which the output has a
characteristic prediction of the input. Analytical redundancy
means to exploit mathematical relations between measured
or estimated variables to detect possible dysfunction. This
should be understood as knowledge based dynamic model
[10]. Residual generation uses a model of the system in
which the control inputs sent to the actuators and the system
outputs as measured by the sensors injected to predict the
behavior of the system, or part of it, and compare this
prediction to the actual action. The associated algorithms are
located functional and non-functional properties of models
to performance benchmarking and optimization.
Based on the difference between performance level-PL
and safety integrity level SIL, each architecture model is
associated with three parameters: frequency and duration of
exposure
Fr,
probability
of
an
event
occurring
Pr,
probability of avoiding or limiting the harm Av [11]. For the
particular applications, the model choices such as thermal
and ageing models are required by prior experience using
the equipment in process industries where the transformer
thermal loss of life related with changing the regenerative
parameters within the limit of the feasible structure [3]-[6].
Thermo physical parameters are the important parameters in
the transformer thermal for building, vehicle, etc. Building a
model based on [4] by chosen thermal, loss of life model,
the load and ambient temperatures are the factors for long
term planning to realistic conditions. A method and a model
presented in [3] show model parameterization by the
variability of operating conditions to achieve nonlinear
loads. For insulating materials, the degradation model
Arrhenius from the chemical kinetic law of Arrhenius
presented in [5] to obtain some results in [6].
III.
APPLICATIONS
Some approaches to system design and analysis selected
mathematical models, such as the works illustrated in
[1][2][7]. A reconstruction performance of the process
analysis is shown in [1] by computation tomography. An
acoustic emission technique is applied for ceramic material
in [2]. A nondestructive control method to have the
characterization put in for plastic composite is presented in
[7]. The way to ensure stable system performance becomes
a step in the control based mechanism such as the energy
from the associated power demand [8]-[10]. An unmanned
vehicle as drone in a complex system has been applied as a
mathematical
model
approach
and
user
centered
methodology in Samanta method for the designed human
factors based on the analysis and development of a specific
Web based tool [12]. This methodology also involved the
model free approach for different support stages. To achieve
the innovation criticized for expected structure achieved on
dynamic switching, the nonlinear differential equation
expressions based on the form fracture cracks growth
structure and data prediction tendency levels are used [13].
Figure 1 illustrates the idea of building smart models based
on mathematical modeling for design and analysis of
measurement and control system.
Figure 1. Example of the framework for developing a mathematic model.
1
A
2
B
C-A
C-B
3
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-735-1
ACCSE 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

1- The model free approach as the tendency equation with
nonlinear dynamic equation for control system.
2- The model based approach as the database theory with
the foundation database.
C- Connection equations.
C-A – Following the design and control prediction, the
strategy dynamic trajectory path is calculated.
C-B - The approximate equivalent analytical solution based
on foundation database.
3- States transforming equation to the adaptive smart model.
IV.
CONCLUSION
Mathematical models are composed of relationships and
variables,
which
can
be
described
as
operators
and
parameters, or multi-functions, according to their structure.
In a complex dynamic system, experimental measurements
and control with linear and nonlinear characterizations leads
to important advances. Such as the useful theories, are
developed a suitable mathematical model in the process
system to solve the mismatch model problem. Training and
tuning to obtain the model evaluation provides a given
mathematic model that described the system accurately. The
idea of this paper is a new solution for developing a
mathematical model based on smart model adaptive from
regenerative parameters within the limit feasible structure
by renews switch delay connections. The future work
continues present more detail about the floating model in
catastrophe theory to obtain natural dynamic nonlinear
equations.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Marechal, D. Togane, A. Celler and J. M. Borwein''
Assessment of the performance of reconstruction processes
for
computed
tomography'',
p2-4,
Nuclear
Science
Symposium, 1998.
[2]
E.A.C.Ersen
''
Application
de
la
technique
d'emission
acoustique a la caracterisation de materiaux ceramiques
evolutif''', Thesis, p60-80, 2004.
[3]
M. J. Resende, L. Pierrat and J. Santana ''The transformer
thermal loss of life: Part 1 improved deterministic approach
for thermal and ageing models'',
Power Engineering, p2-3,
2007.
[4]
M. J. Resende, L. Pierrat and J. Santana ''The transformer
thermal loss of life: Part 2 influence of functional and
structural parameter's variability. A probabilistic approach'',
Power Engineering, p1-4, 2008.
[5]
L. Pierrat and F. Michel, ''Introduction d'une variation
aleatoire de temperature dans le modele de degradation
thermodynamique d'Arrhenius'', p2-3.
[6]
L. Pierrat, ''Influence d'un profil thermique aleatoire sur le
taux de defaillance d'un composant electronique'', Astelab,
p3-5, 2010
[7]
E. B. Ndiaye, P. Marechal, D. Hugues ''Modelisation et
mesure
d'impedance:
de
la
ligne
de
transmission
au
tranducteur-
Application
au
control
non-destructif
du
vieillissement de plaques composites'', CFA, p2-5, 2014.
[8]
T. N. Thai, Estimate Thermo-physical parameters from
characterization of the building materials by using artificial
intelligence, p329-334, AINA workshop Barcelona, Spain,
2013.
[9]
T. N. Thai, ''Energy perfformances diagnosis of building by
heat loss approach'', Cigos, Lyon, France 2013.
[10] T. N. Thai, Characteristic matrix faults for flight control
system, ICMMS , Paris, France 2014.
[11] The difference between PL and SIL machine safety standards,
Motioncontroltips.com [accessed June 2019]
[12] T.
Villaren,
"Modeles
et
mecanismes
d'adaptation
de
l'interaction homme-machine aux changements de contexte",
Thesis.
[13] Y. Kun, "Brief annotation of the connection equation", Xi'an
Modern Nonlinear Sicience Applying Institute, 18 March
2011.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-735-1
ACCSE 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

