 
Evaluation of IoT Device Management Tools 
 
Biliyaminu Umar1, Hamdan Hejazi1, László Lengyel1, Károly Farkas1,2 
1Budapest University of Technology and Economics, 
2NETvisor Ltd 
email: biliyaminu.umar@edu.bme.hu, hamdan.hejazi1@gmail.com, lengyel@aut.bme.hu, farkask@hit.bme.hu 
Abstract— Industry 4.0 with Internet of Things (IoT) is the 
next wave in technology revolution, which is expected to change 
our everyday life. This digitalization is having great impact on all 
the domains (energy, healthcare, transportation, manufacturing 
etc.) in addition to the Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) sector. In IoT scenarios, numerous sensors 
measure and report several phenomena and diversified IoT 
solutions are deployed to collect huge amount of data. IoT 
platforms, such as Amazon AWS, IBM Watson or Microsoft IoT 
Suite, have been available to aid the development of such 
services/applications. However, one of the major challenges faced 
by IoT solutions providers is the supervision and management of 
the large number of deployed sensors/devices. Presumably, the 
magnitude and heterogeneity of the IoT systems makes it difficult 
to manage them with conventional IT management tools and 
techniques. New techniques and tools have to be explored and 
developed or the traditional management solutions have to be 
adapted to the new challenges. In this paper, we identify and 
formulate the essential challenges of IoT device management and 
supervision, review the actual state-of-the-art IoT device 
management and supervision techniques and tools available on the 
market, and briefly evaluate their features and typical use cases. 
Keywords- Internet of Things; Device Management; Platforms; 
Sensors. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Internet of Things (IoT) enables numerous devices around 
the world to communicate and transfer data collected from 
different environments to the IoT platforms. According to Cisco, 
25 - 50 billion ‘things’ will be connected to the Internet by the 
year 2020 [1]. This aggressive growth of emerging smart 
devices connected to the Internet infrastructure poses one of the 
most challenging tasks in the IoT space. IoT management tools 
need to provide solutions to meet the requirements of 
connectivity, heterogeneity, security, scalability and data 
handling [2]. 
The global relevance of IoT and its application to several 
domains, such as home and industrial automation, intelligent 
energy management, automotive applications, healthcare, works 
of life, brings in another dimension of heterogeneity as these 
diverse applications use a plethora of things (sensors, actuators, 
devices) to communicate via the Internet [3]. However, the lack 
of a unified approach of handling heterogeneous devices from 
several vendors presents a major challenge in IoT device 
management. Several solutions using different techniques, such 
as Lightweight Machine to Machine (LwM2M) [4], which 
manages devices remotely, have been proposed to solve these 
shortcomings. Unfortunately, these approaches are limited only 
to devices that have enough resources to implement the required 
management protocols and to connect directly to the Internet 
[5][6]. SNMP [7] and NETCONF [8] standards have also been 
used in monitoring IoT devices, but the heterogeneous nature 
often leads to waste of resources and inefficiency. 
Finding an appropriate IoT management tool from the 
available options for a given field of application is a challenge a 
customer faces. Although the functionality and the performance 
provided by the tools are similar, their techniques and 
implementations are quite different. Thus, a comprehensive 
analysis of requirements and possible solutions is necessary to 
facilitate the tool selection process. In this paper, we identify and 
formulate the essential challenges of IoT device management 
and supervision, review the actual state-of-the-art IoT device 
management and supervision techniques and tools available on 
the market, and briefly evaluate their features and typical use 
cases. 
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section II 
introduces the basics of IoT system architecture and IoT device 
management challenges. Section III discusses the requirements 
and our evaluation benchmark for comparing the management 
tools. The selected and investigated IoT management tools are 
introduced in Section IV and compared in Section V. Finally, 
Section VI draws the conclusions. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
       To effectively identify and evaluate the existing solutions 
in IoT device management, it is imperative to clearly 
understand the structure and challenges faced in the IoT 
systems. In this section, the generic architecture of IoT systems 
and its common challenges with regards to device management 
are introduced. 
A. IoT System Architecture 
IoT systems consist of numerous devices, such as 
smartphones, temperature sensors, actuators, connected in 
various environments. These sensors, devices, gateways are 
connected via communication networks to cloud services and 
applications. These things could be surrounded or distributed by 
long distances in different environments but controlled and 
managed centrally in the cloud, thus named cloud computing. 
On the other hand, a decentralized solution known as edge/fog 
computing is an alternative to be realized when processing is 
required to be carried out closer to the source of the data to 
improve the quality of service provided [9]. 
To understand the IoT system architecture, identifying and 
investigating its logical layering can help. In this paper, the 
fundamental blocks of the IoT system architecture are presented 
as layers and every layer forms an interesting field of research. 
These layers are: Sensing layer, Communication layer, Cloud 
layer, Management layer, and Services and Applications layer 
in Figure 1. The Sensing layer consists of sensors, actuators and 
smart devices that collect the data from surrounding 
environment. The Communication layer provides a means of 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

 
transferring the collected data to the cloud, or the application 
layer. The Cloud layer aggregates the data for processing and 
storage, and makes it available for use to services and 
applications. Management data are separated from service data 
and collected in the management system from proper operation 
and administration of the entire IoT system. The Services and 
Applications layer presents the output data as services, 
applications and features offered to the end-user depending on 
the use-case. 
The IoT communication protocols in the Communication 
layer and the low latency computing in the Cloud layer in 
addition to the provided Quality of Service (QoS) and 
management tools of the system determine the strengths and 
weaknesses of the IoT platforms and system architectures. 
 
Figure 1. Layers of the IoT System Architecture. 
1) Sensing layer: The main function of the Sensing layer is 
to detect changes in the physical status of the connected things 
in real-time. It includes sensors, which are the main 
components of this layer. The task of the sensor is to measure 
the physical environment, identify and localize the smart 
objects, collect the data and send them to the Cloud layer for 
processing and storage. The actuators in this layer are usually 
mechanical devices, such as switches, that execute the desired 
actions in response to changes [10]. 
2) Communication layer: The Communication layer is 
responsible for interaction between the layers of the IoT 
architecture. It transfers the data collected in the Sensing layer 
to the Cloud or the Services and Applications layer directly. It 
includes routers, switches and gateways, which are connected 
to devices that cannot connect directly to the cloud. Protocols, 
such as Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) [11], 
Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) [12] and 
Lightweight Machine to Machine (LwM2M) connect various 
IoT devices to send data to upper layers [13]. 
3) Cloud layer: It is also known as the processing unit of 
the IoT system. The collected data from sensors and devices are 
ingested in the Cloud layer. Its tasks are storing, processing, and 
analyzing data. In general, the cloud employs a data centre as a 
central server to process data generated by the edge devices. 
There is ongoing research on next generation cloud computing 
to decentralize some of the processing tasks from the cloud to 
edge nodes to improve computation performance [14]. 
4) Management layer: It is responsible for monitoring and 
operating all other layers, providing the features for the 
management tools usually implemented in the cloud. 
5) Services and Applications layer: The Services and 
Applications layer provides the applications and a variety of the 
services, such as data collection, data analytics, data 
visualization and security. They depend on the use cases and 
desired functionalities provided to the end users. 
B. IoT Device Management Challenges 
Consequent to the accelerated evolution in IoT, service 
providers encounter several challenges in satisfying the 
management requirements. These challenges include the 
following ones. 
1) Connectivity of Heterogeneous IoT Devices: The IoT 
paradigm requires widespread connectivity of billions of 
heterogeneous devices. This heterogenity in connectivity is 
considered as a significant challenge to the interoperability of 
protocols and solutions developed by different vendors [15]. 
The accessibility from anywhere can be achieved via the 
Internet, either by gateways or direct connection and opens the 
IoT system to a large environment of products and services. 
Moreover, remote control, which enables the management, 
monitoring and control of devices, is of high significance to the 
solutions. This will further lower operational costs by collecting 
data and implementing maintanance remotely [16]. The IoT 
system architecture is designed for use in different physical 
environments. Thus it requires the capability to handle many 
heterogeneous devices. Wherefore, a considerable concern 
within developing IoT solutions is handling the interaction with 
heterogeneous IoT devices [17]. 
2) Device Management Challenges: Device management is 
one of the most significant features expected from any IoT 
management tool. Retaining the device information, status and 
logs is important. Provision of detailed reports and information 
about the device level statistics is desired for numerous things 
[18]. As IoT devices scale to billions, the current centralized 
network mangement model could present bottlenecks. In an IoT 
system, the device integration support is required because some 
tasks or requirements can be done by implementing one service, 
while other tasks will be executed via the integration of several 
services [19]. 
3) Security Limitations: Security is a critical challenge in 
IoT systems because of the consequences of security breaches, 
such as financial and credibility losses. For instance, hackers 
often target the edge devices of the IoT system, which are 
considered as entry points [20]. Efficient IoT systems with 
billions of devices connected should have protection, detection 
mechanisms and secure procedures in case of unusual events 
and anticipate vulnerabilities [17]. The integration of IoT into 
our life extend the security concerns from information and 
assets to human life and health. With the rate at which 
technology is growing, vendors could focus more on 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

 
functionality rather than security. Therefore, IoT management 
tools need to implement alternative techniques to handle 
different 
issues 
while 
using 
the 
identification 
and 
authentication for multiple types of IoT communication 
protocols used for data communication and transfer. These need 
to be encrypted and secured with a robust encryption algorithm 
to prevent possible risks [21]. 
4) Next Generation of IoT Management Tools: The 
accelerated development of IoT is impacting various scientific 
areas, thus inducing many trends in the next generation of IoT 
systems. Changing infrastructure is one of these trends because 
the centralized computing prototype is impressionable to single 
point of failures and large data centres consume huge amount 
of energy to keep them operating [14]. Alternate technologies 
being developed to reduce failures in the cloud include multi-
cloud, micro cloud and cloudlet, ad hoc cloud and 
heterogeneous cloud [9]. In addition, minimizing the workloads 
for low-latency and resource processing has been a 
considerable challenge for cloud computing [22]. The new 
trend known as edge/fog computing brings processing closer to 
the data source [23], and the management tool is required to suit 
these changes and subsequently scale with the architecture and 
devices. 
III. 
EVALUATION BENCHMARK 
Based on the highlighted challenges, we draw a 
requirements/features table to serve as a benchmark for 
comparing the management tools reviewed in this paper (Table 
II). Therefore, performance and relevance of a tool have been 
evaluated by investigating and comparing the following 
requirements/features. 
• Device Management: This is one of the most important 
features expected from any management tool. The tool 
should maintain a list of connected devices and track their 
operation status; it should be able to handle configuration, 
firmware (or any other software) updates and provide 
device-level error handling and reporting [18]. 
• Protocols 
Supported: 
Things 
require 
a 
direct 
communication path to the platform in both the forward and 
reverse direction for information exchange and sending 
commands. Thus, a management tool should support 
application and management protocols that the device can 
work with to exhibit a ‘device agnostic’ property. Some 
widely used application protocols include MQTT, CoAP, 
REpresentational State Transfer (REST) and eXtensible 
Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP). Other 
Protocols, such as LwM2M and Open Mobile Alliance - 
Device Management (OMA-DM) are classified as 
management protocols [24]. 
• Product Lifecycle Management: This involves the 
management 
of 
a 
device 
from 
installation 
and 
commissioning till its decommissioning. During the 
lifetime of this thing, it is necessary to make some 
software/firmware updates to implement new features, 
remove bugs and fix security vulnerabilities [25]. Thus, it is 
a major challenge in IoT, based on its scale of millions of 
devices, to individually perform these important tasks. 
Over-the-Air (OTA) upgrades, downgrades and option of 
force updates for super critical firmware are expected 
features of the management system. 
• Troubleshooting and Maintenance: Diagnostics features are 
required in the operation of IoT devices [26]. The tool 
should also allow the sending of custom and system level 
commands to a device, such as reboot or factory reset. 
• Security and Access Control: The security measures 
required for IoT systems are higher than those of general 
software and applications [27]. The connection of millions 
of devices to a network increases the vulnerabilities 
proportionally. Since the devices are low cost and low 
power, these security requirements need to be met from the 
platform end of the management system in the form of 
message-level security and data encryption [28]. 
• Localisation and Mapping: Location support is essential 
especially when a device’s location is not static rather 
dynamic. The continuous tracking of the location will thus 
help generate the historic location view. In some 
applications, GPS locations or network triangulation is 
necessary for fleet management and asset tracking solutions 
[24]. 
• Scalability: This is one of the most important non-
functional features [24]. As most of the management 
systems are web applications, it is expected to be highly 
scalable to the order of millions of things. Support auto 
scaling feature could also be included by the application 
developers, so a scalability magnitude could also be defined 
for customers to provide some limit. 
• Device Monitoring: Tools that can provide device 
monitoring and performance data visualizations are also 
very helpful in supervising the network of things. Alarm 
indications to provide alerts in case of faults and critical 
events should be embedded into the tool for easy and 
efficient monitoring of the whole network [26]. 
• Integration: 
Provision 
of 
standard/open 
APIs 
for 
integration has high importance in a management tool. As 
most vendors already have an existing enterprise platform, 
the seamless integration of a management tool via a 
standard API will make the operations and management 
much easier. The importance of the interoperability of IoT 
management tools cannot be over-emphasized as this is the 
source of a platform/device agnostic management system 
[28]. 
IV. 
IOT DEVICE MANAGEMENT TOOLS 
In this study, we have selected a variety of tools on the 
market that have the potential to play an essential role in 
monitoring smart things in the IoT solutions. These tools were 
selected because they are suitable stand-alone IoT device 
management tools with extensive implementation in several 
industrial use cases.  We shortly describe the selected tools in 
this section, while a summary highlighting their key features and 
example use cases is shown in Table I. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

 
A. Xively CPM 
Xively Connected Product Management (CPM) is a tool that 
offers solutions for enterprises building connected products and 
services. Moreover, it enables companies to easily build and 
manage IoT security, connected devices and products including 
home automation, and capturing their IoT data. It provides a 
simple and scalable platform enriched with tools necessary to 
connect, manage and engage things. It has standard APIs for 
integrating data with primary enterprise systems, such as 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) [29][30]. 
B. DevicePilot 
DevicePilot implements locating, monitoring and managing 
connected devices at scale. It is completely agnostic, providing 
platform connectivity to any device, and easily integrates with 
IoT platforms. It is a cloud-based application, which scales with 
the deployed infrastructure, schemaless and provides all 
functionalities via a REST API [31]. 
C. Wind River HDC 
Wind River Helix Device Cloud (HDC) is a tool that helps 
reduce the complexities of building and managing large-scale 
IoT deployments. It enables device health monitoring, bi-
directional file transfer, remote access to help service engineers 
detect and diagnose problems before they impact critical data 
collection. HDC provides tools one needs for deploying, 
monitoring, servicing, updating, and decommissioning IoT 
devices [32]. 
D. QuickLink IoT 
QuickLink is a resource efficient device management 
solution based on LwM2M and OMA-DM standards. It supports 
device provisioning, configuration, diagnostics management 
and over-the-air updates. It has a plug-in API architecture with 
encrypted data collection using CoAP with Transport Layer 
Security (TLS) [33]. 
E. ThingWorx Utilities 
ThingWorx Utilities is a set of tools, rich in features that 
enable and support the rapid deployment and adoption of 
powerful IoT applications. It provides device management 
capabilities for day to day management of the connected devices 
and includes utilities to provision, remotely monitor and update 
the connected devices and assets. With its standard framework, 
it is also possible to integrate new IoT applications into existing 
business systems [34]. 
F. Particle 
Particle is a full-stack IoT device management platform that 
provides all the necessary tools to securely and reliably connect 
IoT devices to the web/cloud. The solution can be used on 
different scales of deployment from large enterprises to 
innovative start-ups and everyone in between. It is secured by 
using encrypted communication protocols, easy to use and 
provides an interface to see devices, push software updates, and 
make changes and improvements on an ongoing basis. It offers 
several development tools, such as Web IDE, Desktop IDE and 
a Command Line Interface (CLI). The device management 
console can manage team permissions from a single 
administrative interface. Support for cross-vendor devices is 
limited and continuously developed [35]. 
G. Losant Helm 
Losant Helm is a fully integrated IoT device management 
and connectivity tool directly embedded in the Losant IoT 
platform, an enterprise-ready cloud platform that enables 
developers to easily make use of real-time data by rapidly 
developing smart, connected solutions for IoT. It serves as a 
control hub for connected production facilities and its hardware-
agnostic platform is easily integrated with a broad variety of 
sensors, controllers, machines, and device gateways. This 
enables many-to-many interoperability across disparate systems 
and technologies. Its open communication standards (REST, 
MQTT) provide simple connectivity to millions of devices [36]. 
H. DataV IoT Device Management 
This tool makes equipment and device management a 
priority as industrial companies connect more business-crucial 
assets together with IoT. It gives the power to manage the full 
lifecycle of all assets from a centralized location, including 
configuration, inventory, and OTA software updates and 
configuration [37]. 
V. 
COMPARISON OF MANAGEMENT TOOLS 
Today, none of the selected and evaluated tools claims to 
support all the features we used in the benchmark. Interestingly, 
all of them support the basic features of device management, 
remote monitoring, product lifecycle, scalability and integration 
to IoT platforms. The protocols supported, localization and 
mapping, troubleshooting and maintenance, security and access 
control features are available in a limited number of these tools. 
DevicePilot stands out as the star performer from this study 
because it supports more features than the other tools we have 
evaluated. Localisation of devices, access control of the 
connected things and support to REST protocols are its added 
features. Its only drawback is the lack of maintenance and 
troubleshooting function. 
QuickLink IoT follows closely with troubleshooting and 
maintenance features with OTA updates added to the basic 
functionalities. It also supports LwM2M and OMA-DM device 
management protocols. It does not support mapping of devices 
and the security features are limited.  
Particle, Losant and Wind River HDC have very good 
maintenance features with remote diagnostics and updates but 
lack localization and access control functionalities. Particle 
supports CoAP, MQTT and its proprietary Particle subscribe 
protocols. Losant integrates remote management with audit and 
log files from devices. HDC manages devices via MQTT 
protocol with security extensions.  
Xively is also a very good management tool with robust 
security features and support to MQTT, REST and HTTP 
protocols. Unavailability of localization, mapping and 
troubleshooting and maintenance of devices are its major 
drawbacks.  
ThingWorx Utilities and DataV both integrate well with IoT 
platforms. While ThingWorx supports protocols such as MQTT, 
CoAP and XMPP, DataV provides limited support to standard 
protocols. Both tools lack localization and access control 
features, but DataV supports troubleshooting and error log 
management. None of the reviewed tools fully supports all IoT-
related protocols. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

 
TABLE I.  
KEY FEATURES AND TYPICAL USE CASES OF THE EVALUATED IOT MANAGEMENT TOOLS 
Tool 
Vendor 
Key Features 
Typical Use Cases 
XIVELY CPM 
[29] 
LogMeIn 
Inc. 
Device agnostic connectivity (MQTT, REST and 
HTTP protocols), scalability, security and IoT 
platform integration 
Agriculture, energy 
management and DNA 
research improvement 
DEVICEPILOT 
[31] 
DevicePilot 
Device management, security, scalability, 
mapping, real-time monitoring and easy 
integration 
Energy management, 
construction, healthcare and 
smart cities 
WIND RIVER 
HDC [32] 
Wind River 
Thing management via MQTT with security, 
device health monitoring, remote diagnostics and 
software upgrade 
Smart homes, healthcare, 
industrial, automotive and 
energy management 
QUICKLINK 
IOT [33] 
SmithMicro 
Software 
LwM2M and OMA-DM supported device 
management, securty, diagnostics and OTA 
updates  
Asset management, smart 
monitoring, connected cars 
and smart cities 
THINGWORX 
UTILITIES [34] 
ThingWorx 
Device management using MQTT, XMPP or 
CoAP, remote control and monitoring, product 
lifecycle and IoT platform integration 
Manufacturing, healthcare, 
transportation and utilities 
PARTICLE [35] 
Particle.io 
Connectivity, OTA updates, security, IoT platform 
integration, remote diagnostics, monitoring, 
reports and alerts. It supports MQTT, CoAP and 
Particle subscribe 
Smart homes, environment 
monitoring, infrastructure and 
supply chain management 
LOSANT HELM 
[36] 
Losant 
Remote provisioning, agnostic management, 
audits and logs, 3rd party IoT platform integration 
Manufacturing, logistics and 
retail management 
DATAV IOT 
DEVICE 
MANAGEMENT 
[37] 
BSquare 
Device health monitoring, device and error logs, 
real-time monitoring, performance issue resolution 
and IoT/enterprise platform integration 
Smart metering, intelligent 
vending, fleet management 
and transportation 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF THE EVALUATED IOT MANAGEMENT TOOLS/PLATFORMS  
 (LEGEND: ● – SUPPORTED; ○ – NOT SUPPORTED; ◐ – PARTIALLY SUPPORTED) 
Tool 
Device 
Management 
Protocols 
Supported 
Product 
Lifecycle 
Management  
Trouble-
shooting and 
Maintenance 
Security  
and Access 
Control 
Localisation 
and Mapping  
Scalability 
(to millions) 
Device 
Monitoring 
Integration 
XIVELY  
● 
◐ 
● 
○ 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
DEVICE PILOT 
● 
◐ 
● 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
● 
● 
WIND RIVER 
HDC 
● 
◐ 
● 
● 
◐ 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
QUICKLINK IOT 
● 
◐ 
● 
● 
◐ 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
THINGWORX 
UTILITIES 
● 
◐ 
● 
○ 
◐ 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
PARTICLE 
● 
◐ 
● 
● 
◐ 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
LOSANT HELM 
● 
◐ 
● 
● 
◐ 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

 
DATAV IOT 
DEVICE 
MANAGEMENT 
● 
◐ 
● 
● 
◐ 
○ 
● 
● 
● 
Table II compares the eight selected and evaluated IoT 
management tools/platforms taking into consideration that due 
to their continuous development some requirements will be met 
by the products in the nearest future. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The current growth trends adumbrate that IoT will gain 
higher and higher importance in several industries in the coming 
years. This expands its influence on the interaction between man 
and technology, and the role of a functional and robust 
management system is getting more importance. 
This paper presents the basic and fundamental requirements 
of an IoT management and supervision solution based on the 
generalized architecture of an IoT implementation. Using these 
requirements as a benchmark, we have selected, evaluated and 
compared eight industrial IoT management tools. Unfortunately, 
the complex structure of IoT implementations due to their 
numerous applications, heterogeneous devices and diverse use 
cases makes it challenging to come up with a generic ‘one for 
all’ management tool. However, our comparison matrix, given 
in Table II, can help IoT solution providers choose the most 
appropriate management tool for their target system assuming a 
good understanding of the requirements. In future, we plan to 
develop/extend IT management tools to meet the needs of the 
IoT ecosystem. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work presented in this paper has been carried out in the 
frame of project no. 2017-1.3.1-VKE-2017-00042, which has 
been implemented with the support provided from the National 
Research, Development and Innovation Fund of Hungary, 
financed under the 2017-1.3. funding scheme.  
This work was performed also in the frame of FIEK_16-1-
2016-0007 project, implemented with the support provided from 
the National Research, Development and Innovation Fund of 
Hungary, financed under the FIEK_16 funding scheme. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Evans, “The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of 
the Internet Is Changing Everything,” CISCO IBSG, 2011. 
[2] C. Pham, Y. Lim, and Y. Tan, “Management architecture for 
heterogeneous IoT devices in home network,” 2016 IEEE 5th 
Glob. Conf. Consum. Electron. GCCE 2016,  2016, pp 1-5.  
[3] Y. Jie, J. Y. Pei, L. Jun, G. Yun, and X. Wei, “Smart Home 
System Based on IoT Technologies,” in 2013 International 
Conference on Computational and Information Sciences, 2013, 
pp. 1789–1791. 
[4] “Lightweight machine to machine technical specification,” 
OMA-TS-LightweightM2M-V1_0-20170208-A, Open Mobile 
Alliance, Feb 2017. 
[5] S. Rao, D. Chendanda, C. Deshpande, and V. Lakkundi, 
“Implementing LWM2M in constrained IoT devices,” in 2015 
IEEE Conference on Wireless Sensors (ICWiSe), 2015, pp. 52–
57. 
[6] M. Ersue, D. Romascanu, and J. Schoenwaelder, “Management 
of Networks with Constrained Devices: Problem Statement and 
Requirements,” RFC 7547, May 2015 
[7] D. Harrington, R. Preshun, and B. Wijnen, “An Architecture for 
Describing Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) 
Management Frameworks,” RFC 3411, December 2002. 
[8] R. Enns, M. Bjorklund, and A. Bierman, “Network Configuration 
Protocol (NETCONF),” RFC 6241, June 2011. 
[9] B. Varghese, N. Wang, S. Barbhuiya, P. Kilpatrick and D. S. 
Nikolopoulos, 
“Challenges 
and 
Opportunities 
in 
Edge 
Computing," 2016 IEEE International Conference on Smart 
Cloud (SmartCloud),” New York, NY, 2016, pp. 20-26. 
[10] A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aledhari, and M. 
Ayyash, “Internet of Things: A Survey on Enabling 
Technologies, Protocols, and Applications,” IEEE Commun. 
Surv. Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2347–2376, 2015. 
[11] J. Guth, U. Breitenbücher, M. Falkenthal, F. Leymann, and L. 
Reinfurt, “Comparison of IoT platform architectures: A field 
study based on a reference architecture,” 2016 Cloudification of 
the Internet of Things (CIoT), 2016, pp. 1-6. 
[12] C. Bormann et al, “CoAP (Constrained Application Protocol) 
over TCP, TLS, and WebSockets,” RFC 8323, 2018. 
[13] OASIS.org, “MQTT version 3.1.1,” OASIS Standard, October 
2014, 
http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/os/mqtt-
v3.1.1-os.html, [retrieved: June 2018]. 
[14] B. Varghese, and R. Buyya, “Next Generation Cloud Computing: 
New Trends and Research Directions,” Future Generation 
Computer Systems, 2017,  pp. 1–22. 
[15] M. Elkhodr, S. Shahrestani, and H. Cheung, “The Internet of 
Things : New Interoperability, Management and Security 
Challenges,” International Journal of Network Security & Its 
Applications, vol. 8, 2016, pp. 82-102. 
[16] “Remote 
Monitoring 
and 
Maintenance: 
Mission-Critical 
Operations at the Competitive Edge,” Oracle, 2016, [Online], 
Available: 
http://www.oracle.com/us/solutions/internetofthings/iot-remote-
monitoring-brief-2881653.pdf, [retrieved: May, 2018]. 
[17] T. Perumal, S. K. Datta, and C. Bonnet, “IoT device management 
framework for smart home scenarios,” 2015 IEEE 4th Glob. 
Conf. Consum. Electron. GCCE 2015, 2016, pp. 54–55. 
[18] V. Gazis et al., “A survey of technologies for the Internet of 
Things, 11th International Wireless Communications and Mobile 
Computing Conference (IWCMC), Dubrovnik, 2015, pp. 1090-
1095.doi: 10.1109/IWCMC.2015.7289234. 
[19] J. Lin et al., “A Survey on Internet of Things: Architecture, 
Enabling Technologies, Security and Privacy, and Applications,” 
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 5, 2017 pp. 1125–
1142. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2683200. 
[20] K. Shea, “Device Management in the Internet of Things – Why It 
Matters and How to Achieve It,” WindRiver, 2017, [Online] 
Available: http://www.new-techeurope.com/2017/06/07/device-
management-internet-things-matters-achieve/, [retrieved: May 
2018]. 
[21] Jasper (2014), “Achieving End-to-End Security in the Internet of 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

 
Things,” [online], Availabe: http://pages.jasper.com/White-
Paper-Cellular-IoT-Security_Cellular-IoT-Security.html, 
[retrieved: May 2018]. 
[22] P. Varshney and Y. Simmhan, “Demystifying Fog Computing: 
Characterizing Architectures, Applications and Abstractions,” 
Proc. - 2017 IEEE 1st Int. Conf. Fog Edge Comput. ICFEC 2017, 
2017, pp. 115–124. 
[23] D. C. Klonoff, “Fog Computing and Edge Computing 
Architectures for Processing Data from Diabetes Devices 
Connected to the Medical Internet of Things,” J. Diabetes Sci. 
Technol., vol. 11, no. 4, 2017, pp. 647–652. 
[24] P. Ganguly, “Selecting the right IoT cloud platform,” 2016 
International Conference on Internet of Things and Applications 
(IOTA), 
Pune, 
2016, 
pp. 
316-320. 
doi: 
10.1109/IOTA.2016.7562744. 
[25] B. Moran, M. Meriac, H. Tschofenig, “IoT Firmware Update 
Architecture,” 
IETF 
Internet-Draft, 
[online], 
Available: 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-moran-suit-architecture-00, 
[retrieved: May 2018]. 
[26] “Internet of Things will require remote monitoring solutions”, 
Opengear, 
[online], 
Available: 
https://opengear.com/articles/internet-things-will-require-
remote-monitoring-solutions-order-succeed, 
[retrieved: 
May 
2018]  
[27] L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A 
survey,” Computer networks, 54(15), 2010, pp.2787-2805. 
[28] “What makes device management a core compatibility of an IoT 
platform,” 
Softweb 
Solutions, 
[online], 
Available: 
https://www.softwebsolutions.com/resources/IoT-device-
management-platform.html, [retrieved: May 2018]. 
[29] “Connected Product Management,” Xively, [online], Available: 
https://www.xively.com/xively-iot-platform/connected-product-
management, [retrieved: May 2018]. 
[30] “Guide to Connected Product Management (CPM),” Xively, 
[online], Available: https://www.xively.com/resources/guide-to-
connected-product-management, [retrieved: May 2018]. 
[31] “Device Pilot Features,” Device Pilot, [online], Available: 
https://www.devicepilot.com/about/features/, [retrieved: May 
2018]. 
[32] “Wind River Helix Device Cloud,” Wind River, [online], 
Available: 
https://www.windriver.com/products/helix/device-
cloud/, [retrieved: May 2018]. 
[33] “Overview of QuickLink IoT Services Platform,” SmithMicro 
Software, [online], Available: https://www.smithmicro.com/iot-
oem/products/quicklink-iot-services-platform/overview, 
[retrieved: May 2018]. 
[34] “Manage Your Industrial IoT with ThingWorx,” ThingWorx 
[online], 
Available: 
https://www.ptc.com/en/products/iot/thingworx-
platform/manage, [retrieved: May 2018]. 
[35] “Device 
Cloud,” 
Particle, 
[online], 
Available: 
https://www.particle.io/products/software/device-cloud, 
[retrieved: May 2018]. 
[36] “Data and Device Management,” Losant, [online], Available: 
https://www.losant.com/iot-platform/data-and-device-
management, [retrieved: May 2018]. 
[37] “DataV IoT Device Management, BSquare, [online]. Available: 
https://www.bsquare.com/iot-device-management/, 
[retrieved: 
May 2018]. 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-658-3
ACCSE 2018 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

