Review of Basic Research on Factors Media and Word Formation Typologies that 
Cause Bursts Between Online Social Networks 
 
Yasuko Kawahata1,2  
1Rikkyo University, 3-34-1 Nishi-Ikebukuro,Toshima-ku,Tokyo, Japan   
2Center for Spatial Information Science, the University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa-shi, Chiba, Japan  
e-mail: kawahata@rikkyo.ac.jp  
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we obtained a study on the interaction 
between Twitter and other media. As basic research on the 
interaction between large-scale media and discourse space in 
Japan, we will examine the characteristics of discourse space 
regarding the interaction of direct and indirect actions of 
information, based on the results of simulations of basic 
mentions and interactions centered on the characteristic 
keyword "human" from around 2011 to 2014. In this research, 
we explored the possibility of analyzing the characteristics of 
the discourse space regarding the direct and indirect actions of 
information. 
Keywords-Social Media; Simulation; Sociophysical; Twitter. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
       As the number of academic approaches to social media 
increases, the number of social media outlets has also 
diversified, and the number of users and their contact time 
continues to grow. However, in recent years, there has been a 
tendency for Twitter to be linked to other social media such 
as images and videos, and the diffusion and perception of 
trends differs depending on the language. In this paper, we 
discuss the interaction between Twitter and other media. In 
this study, as basic research on the interaction between large-
scale media and discourse space in Japan, we will examine 
the characteristics of discourse space regarding the 
interaction of direct and indirect actions of information, 
based on the results of simulations of basic mentions and 
interactions centered on the characteristic keyword "human" 
from around 2011 to 2014. In this research, we explored the 
possibility of analyzing the characteristics of the discourse 
space regarding the direct and indirect actions of 
information. According to [1], the equation of reputation 
dynamics in the mathematical model for hit phenomena has 
the following form:  
 
                         (1) 
 
Here, the first term corresponds to the effect of media as 
an external force; the second term corresponds to attenuation 
of attention and direct communication D; and the third term 
corresponds to indirect communication. In the analysis of 
reputation on social media, the third term, the indirect 
communication term, is very important. However, for Web 
application 
access, 
the 
third 
term, 
the 
indirect 
communication term, has been discussed in previous studies 
as lacking [2][3][4], and we would like it to be re-examined 
in the process of basic research for this analysis, such as 
adjustment of random numbers.  
In previous studies of mathematical models of hit 
phenomena [2][3], analyses were focused on topics that 
received special attention on social media in Japan.   
In reality, however, it is necessary to conduct basic 
research on how one keyword or word is intertwined with or 
affected by other bursts of keywords, and to compare and 
discuss the relationship between the interaction of media 
information around these keywords and the actual results. In 
addition, it is necessary to compare and discuss the 
relationship between the interaction of media information 
around these keywords and the results of actual 
measurements. The task of this research is to find out what 
kind of universal keywords change their behavior on the 
Web due to the increase in their quantity on other media at 
what time, and to consider the difference between the 
phenomena in the real world and on the Web.  
 
Figure 1. The amount of exposure in each media including 
"Keyword:Human" (the number of exposure in online social media and TV 
media in Japan), 2011/01-2015/03 (Tweet data sampling 1/10). 
 
The reason for including the keyword "human" in the 
graph of data examples in Figure 1 is that "human" was the 
most frequently mentioned word in the Japanese language 
from 2011 to 2015, and it is also a frequently appearing word 
in Japanese idiomatic dictionaries. In addition, around 2011, 
Japan was hit by the Great East Japan Earthquake, an 
unprecedented disaster, and Japan received a great deal of 
support not only from within Japan, but also from countries 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-076-6
ACCSE 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

around the world. This is because, at that time, too, the 
keyword "human," which expresses "human life," was most 
frequently used in the center of communication keywords in 
the Social Network Sites (SNS) space within Japan. In other 
words, this keyword was first taken up because "human" was 
the keyword representing the core that was communicated a 
lot on SNS during the period when people were conscious of 
communication between people's hearts and minds. 
II. 
DISCUSSION 
 
Nowadays, we are able to obtain information on social 
trends and excessive movements from social media.   
In the early days of research on mathematical models of 
hit phenomena [2], the number of external forces in the 
media and the actual number of mentions on social media 
such as Twitter were to some extent determined by 
simulation results, and the transition could be inferred from 
the behavior of parameters in the calculation results. 
However, in recent years, due to complex factors such as 
advertising agencies, external forces have been arbitrarily 
applied to certain "keywords", and it has become somewhat 
difficult to analyze them using the mathematical models in 
previous studies [2][5].   
In this study, we examine the number of Twitter, Blog, 
2ch, and TV exposures of registered words in nouns, verbs, 
adverbs, 
coordinating 
verbs, 
conjunctions, 
and 
inspirations/interjections in Wiktionary: Japanese Basic 
Vocabulary 1000 [7] from the dawn of the social media 
space in Japan (2011/01-2015/03).   
We wanted to extract the number of mentions in Twitter, 
Blog, 2ch, and TV exposure (in seconds) of the registered 
words in the basic Japanese vocabulary of 1000 [7] and 
return to the basic research to obtain a consideration of the 
behavior of these direct and indirect media information and 
media interaction. In order to understand the characteristic, 
arbitrary, and excessive behaviors on SNS as one of the 
natural phenomena, we think it is important to compare and 
analyze the behaviors and activities around the accounts 
(sources) that have a strong network structure on social 
media with the real-life events and phenomena on social 
media for the future development of the web science field. 
The number of mentions among online social networks 
(media) starting from keywords and topics is shown in 
Figure 2.  
There are "keywords" and "topics," especially "natural 
phenomena”. For this reason, as mentioned in the 
introduction, we believe it is necessary to consider the 
interaction of information and keywords that spontaneously 
generate interaction outside of the media in the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Amount of media exposure related to” Keyword: human" 
including the results of the two calculations during disasters in Japan, when 
social incident (Tweet data sampling 1/10), Simulation Result1: Effect TV, 
Simulation Result2: TV and News. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Result of simulation 1,2, the second term, the parameter D of 
direct communication and the third term, the parameter P of indirect 
communication, are accounted from the proportion of optimal solutions from 
the proportion and random number calculation (1), 10000 times [2][3]. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-076-6
ACCSE 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

III. 
CONCLUSION 
 
As shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3, when looking at the 
number of mentions among online social networks (media) 
starting from naturally occurring cases such as when a 
disaster occurs, or keywords that appear frequently in daily 
life, the number of mentions in the above Figure 2 and 
Figure 3 are the number of mentions when a disaster occurs.  
In the case of a major incident, the number of press 
mentions of a common word can have a rapid impact one or 
two days after the incident occurs. Therefore, it is difficult to 
predict the number of mentions on Twitter and 2ch, where 
the volume of information exchange is large.  
As for the calculation results, D and P show the optimal 
solutions by assigning parameters using the Monte Carlo 
method to generate random numbers, but in the case of 
sudden incidents, the number of reports increases rapidly by 
a day or two. On the other hand, when the keywords are 
generalized, the calculation results show that the influence of 
the parameter D (especially, TV+News) as the influence of 
extremely direct information is a little strong. Therefore, in 
the case of using a sociophysical approach for this kind of 
analysis, it is important to examine the qualitative 
characteristics of the real numbers and conduct the analysis, 
and to compare the parameters of the simulation results 
separately at the time of the incident and before and after the 
incident. We believe that it is important to further 
accumulate basic research. By accumulating these studies, 
we may be able to propose ideas to compensate for the 
missing parameters in (1) according to [2]. 
                                        ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number JP19K04881. The author is grateful for R1 Leading 
Initiative for Excellent Young Researchers (LEADER) based 
on Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Yoshida, A. Ishii, and H. Aragaki, “The equation for big 
hits: Mathematizing the word-of-mouth effect of social 
media” Discover 21, Inc., 2010.  
[2] A. Ishii, H. Arakaki, N. Matsuda, S. Umemura, T. Urushidani, 
N. Yamagata and N. Yoshida, The ’hit’ phenomenon: a 
mathematical model of human dynamic Interactions as 
stochastic processs. New Journal of Physics 14, 2012.  
[3] S. Suzuki and S. Morimoto, Present status and issues of 
internet television in Japan: Information Processing Society of 
Japan 74th Nationwide Meeting (4-733).   
[4] J. B. Pendry, “Reliability Factors for LEE D Calculations. ” J. 
Phys. C3: 937, 1980. 
[5] N. Yamagata, “Discussion of parameters of mathematical 
model of hit phenomenon using random numbers,” Graduate 
thesis, Department of Applied Mathematics and Physics, 
Faculty of Engineering, Tottori University, 2010.  
[6] A. Ishii, T. Koyabu, K. Uchiyama, and T. Usui, 
"Mathematical theory for social phenomena to analyze 
popularity of social incidents quantitatively using social 
networks", 
Proceeding 
in 
Adaptation, 
Learning 
and 
Optimization, vol. 2, pp 389-402, ISI Proceedings by 
Springer-Verlag, 2015.  
[7] Wiktionary, 
1000 
Basic 
Japanese 
Vocabulary 
(Ref:2015/08/26),   https://ja.wiktionary.org/wiki/Wiktionary
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-076-6
ACCSE 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

