Information Ranking in Real-Time for Summarizing Emergency Calls
Jae Kwan Kim, Myon Woong Park, Laehyun Kim
Center for Bionics
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Seoul, Korea
emails:{kimjk, myon, laehyunk}@kist.re.kr
Keonsoo Lee
Medical ICT
Soonchunhyang University
Asan, Korea
email: keonsoo@sch.ac.kr
Abstract—Summarizing emergency calls needs to be processed
in real-time. Before a conversation is over, the value of a newly
acquired statement should be determined. At the same time,
the objective of the call, which is to obtain the information on
the emergency situation, should be achieved. In this paper, a
method of information ranking in real-time is proposed. This
method summarizes an emergency call by extracting keywords
and calculating the weights of the keywords with their
frequency and relations with other words. The keywords are
sorted with the weights and assigned to properties of a
dialogue
model.
From
the
constructed
dialogue
model,
statements which are not related to the conversation’s topic
can be pruned.
Keywords-information ranking; summarization; emergency
call; real time.
I.
INTRODUCTION
One of the most important contributions of summarizing
documents
is
the
reduced
complexity
for
human
understanding. With the help of technologies in storing and
compressing data, the size of documents especially text
based
documents
is
free
from
the
requirement
for
summarization. However, as the meanings of data are
revealed when recognized by humans, acceptance by human
is one of the most important criteria for evaluating the value
of the data. Most summarizations, which are automatically
executed by machines, are worked on completed documents
such as articles, news, essays, and books. However, in real
world, summarizations are performed for documents in
progress. Students note key sentences in lectures. Reporters
sum up addresses in press conferences. A debater needs to
analyze the opponent’s opinion and respond to it in real-time.
The same restriction exists in responding to emergency calls.
In order to confirm the correct situation of the emergency,
the call receiver needs to control the dialogue to acquire the
required information. When a conversation loses the point, it
should be interrupted and returned to the original objective.
In this paper, we propose a summarization based information
ranking method. As this method summarizes and determines
the topic of an unfinished document, it can be properly
applied to report emergency calls which require prompt
response before the conversation is over.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the types of summarization and the dialogue model
as background. Section III proposes the main idea of this
paper. Section IV concludes this paper.
II.
BACKGROUND
A.
Summarization
The types of summarization can be classified as shown in
Table I [1]. Three criteria are used to identify types of
summarization. One is the level of expressions [2]. The
expressions in a summary can be either reused from the
original document or rewritten. Another is the coverage of
summarization [3]. Determining what is important in the
original document depends on a viewpoint. Reflecting on the
viewpoint makes for a different summary. The other is the
number of documents [4]. A summary of series and a
summary of an event are different.
The proposed method is classified as a query-based
extraction summary for a single document.
TABLE I.
TYPES OF SUMMARIZATION
Category
Types of Summarization
Name
Description
Level of
expressions in
summarization
Extraction Summary
Important words or sentences from the original document are extracted and the set of such
keywords becomes the summary.
Abstraction Summary
Novel expressions are written by analyzing the extracted keywords semantically. Concept
generalization, Part-Whole replacement, Metonymy, and Semantic unification are the examples
of generating abstraction.
Coverage of
summarization
Generic Summary
All the information in the original document are included in the summary.
Query-based Summary
Only the information which is related to the given query is included in the summary.
Amount of
documents
Single Document
Summarization is performed on a single document.
Multiple Documents
Summarization is performed on a set of documents.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

B.
Dialogue Model
Every conversation, even a chitchat, has its objective.
The
objective
is
achieved
by
sharing
information.
Dialogue Model is a structure of information to be shared
in the conversation [5]. It consists of six components such
as Who, What, How, Why, When, and Where. When
dealing with emergency calls, Who, What, and Where are
mandatory. Even though the additional information such
as How, Why, and When is useful to make more reliable
and accurate plans for rescue teams, the Who, What, and
Where information is enough to send rescue teams to the
scene where the emergency situation occurs.
The summarized result is assigned to fill the properties
of the dialogue model. By comparing the relations among
properties, the conversation can be saved from getting off
topic.
III.
METHOD
The proposed method consists of three steps, as shown
in Figure 1. Summarization is performed with the first step
and the second step. In the first step, keywords are
extracted from the newly given statement. The keywords
are composed of nouns, verbs, adjectives which are used
as a complement, and a preposition. In the second step, the
weight of each keyword is calculated. This calculation is
executed with heuristic rules. There are three fundamental
rules. One is that higher frequency corresponds to higher
weight. Another is that the keywords in the same sentence
share the weight. The last is that the query related
keywords have higher weight. As the objective of
responding to emergency calls is to acquire information on
the situation of the emergency, what is not related to such
objective does not have to be summarized. The third step
is constructing a dialogue model with the keywords which
are sorted with their weight. As described in Section II.B,
Who, What, and Where are filled on the preferential basis.
The prepositions, which are collected in the first step, are
used for determining the sluts of the dialogue model. The
constructed dialogue model is evaluated for closing the
conversation. If the conversation is not over, a new
statement is added and the process is repeated.
IV.
CONCLUSION
Every behavior has its objective. Any behavior which
loses its objective or fails to achieve the objective is
removed or replaced by another behavior. The objective of
emergency calls is to notify the situation and ask for help.
In order to achieve this objective, it is important to extract
valuable information and evade the wasteful usage of time
and efforts. Summarizing a conversation is a key for
determining the worth of each sentence. In this paper, a
method of information ranking in real-time is proposed.
This method summarizes an emergency call by extracting
keywords and calculating the weights of the keywords
with their frequency and relations with other words. The
set of keywords are sorted with the weights and they are
assigned to properties of a dialogue model. From the
constructed dialogue model, statements which are not
related to the conversation’s topic can be pruned.
This method assumes that the newly added information
is in a grammatically correct form. However, formal
sentences are not made in a real conversation. In order to
process such broken, ambiguous, and unfinished sentences,
a reliable natural language processing module is needed.
Thus, the way of processing informal statements will be
researched as future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the ICT R&D program of
MSIP/IITP. [2015-0-00197, Development of a solution for
situation-awareness based on the analysis of speech and
environmental sounds]
REFERENCES
[1]
A.
Nenkova
and
K.
McKeown,
“Automatic
Summarization,” INR, vol. 5, no. 2–3, pp. 103–233, Jun.
2011.
[2]
M. R. Amini, N. Usunier, and P. Gallinari, “Automatic
Text Summarization Based on Word-Clusters and Ranking
Algorithms,” in Advances in Information Retrieval, 2005,
pp. 142–156.
[3]
H. Saggion, K. Bontcheva, and H. Cunningham, “Robust
Generic and Query-based Summarisation,” in Proceedings
of the Tenth Conference on European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics - Volume 2,
Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2003, pp. 235–238.
[4]
D. R. Radev, H. Jing, and M. Budzikowska, “Centroid-
based Summarization of Multiple Documents: Sentence
Extraction, Utility-based Evaluation, and User Studies,” in
Proceedings of the 2000 NAACL-ANLP Workshop on
Automatic Summarization, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 2000,
pp. 21–30.
[5]
K. Lee, J. K. Kim, M. W. Park, L. Kim, and K. F. Hsiao “A
Situation‐based 
Dialogue 
Classification 
Model 
for 
Emergency Calls,” in Proceedings of the 2017 International
Conference on Platform Technology and Service, 2017, pp.
196-199.
Figure 1.
Process flow of the proposed method.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

