Application of Bioinspired Algorithms for the Optimization of a Radio Propagation
System Simulator Based on OpenStreetMap
Juan Casado, José Luis González, Abdelhamid Tayebi, Josefa Gómez, Francisco Sáez de Adana
Computer Science Department
University of Alcalá
Alcalá de Henares, Spain
emails: juan.casado@edu.uah.es, josel.gonzalez@edu.uah.es, hamid.tayebi@uah.es, josefa.gomezp@uah.es,
kiko.saez@uah.es
Abstract—This work aims to solve the need for an advanced
radio propagation prediction tool in outdoor environments. A
previous simulator developed by the authors is improved by
adding new algorithms that extend the application to a new,
more advanced and complete version. This extension is
developed in JavaScript, HTML5 and Cascading Style Sheets,
using Bootstrap as a framework to achieve an intuitive and
friendly application that adapts to all screens. The tool is easily
accessible through the Web and includes an intuitive graphical
interface to introduce the simulation parameters and to show
the obtained results.
Keywords- OpenStreetMap; propagation losses; optimization
algorithms; evolutionary algorithms; simulation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This work is conceived as a continuation of the paper
published in [1], whose objective was to develop a simulator
able to obtain the radio propagation losses in external
environments quickly and accurately. The main advantage of
this tool was that the information of the environment was
obtained from OpenStreetMap [2], which provides very
detailed geographic data from any part of the world required
to calculate the propagation losses. This paper aims to
improve
that
computer
tool
incorporating
different
evolutionary algorithms to optimize the position of the
antennas so that the coverage provided is the best possible,
while minimizing the number of antennas. Since each
optimization algorithm has its advantages and disadvantages,
several algorithms will be implemented and the tool will
carry out the same simulation by applying each of them and
will show the output of the one that offers the best results,
that is, the one that better suits the particular conditions of
each environment. Six empirical methods for computing the
radio propagation losses in outdoor environments will be
available (Okumura-Hata [3][4], COST 231 [5], Longley-
Rice [6], Walfish-Bertoni [7], Walfish-Ikegami [8], and
Eibert and Kuhlman [9]). Since the optimizations can take a
long time, the code will be parallelized taking advantage of
the
processors
that
include
several
cores.
With
this
parallelization, we will try to minimize the calculation time
required by the evolutionary algorithms. The tool developed
will be validated with real measurements. Several antennas
will be placed in the optimized locations in order to obtain
the best coverage in a certain area (the surroundings of the
University of Alcalá (Alcalá de Henares, Spain)). The tool
will be available both for wireless devices (smartphones,
tablets, portable PCs, etc.) and for desktop computers. It will
be multiplatform, since it will be developed using Javascript,
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS3) and HTML5. Figure 1 shows
the graphical user interface of the previous tool (before the
improvements) and the tool that is currently being improved.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2,
we present the related work. In Section 3, we present the new
features of the tool. Finally, we conclude in Section 4.
II.
RELATED WORK
Nowadays,
smartphones
have
become
indisputable
accessories and indispensable for all. We depend on them to
check the weather, to plan the holidays, access bank details,
check the mail, etc. That is why having a good radio
propagation coverage that fulfills all our demands at all times
is highly desirable. As a result of this, the study of
propagation losses has become a vital task when developing
any mobile communication system. As an alternative to the
expensive and tedious measure campaigns that must be
carried out to study radio propagation in a specific area,
software tools that carry out this task are generally used. In
recent years, several tools have been developed [10]-[14]
based on both deterministic and empirical methods. These
tools require some knowledge of the environment to extract
the
information
needed
by
the
propagation
model
implemented, which can be obtained from various sources
such as government institutions, satellite images, city
planning maps, etc. In this case, OpenStreetMap allows to
obtain geographic information easily from the Internet.
Another of its many advantages is that OpenStreetMap
provides an application programming interface that allows to
develop applications using the information contained in the
maps.
On the other hand, it is also important to mention that
many optimization problems that arise in the field of
engineering are very complex to solve using traditional
algorithms,
so
evolutionary
algorithms
are
generally
implemented, which are inspired from nature and are based
on the natural evolution of living beings. The application of
this type of algorithms in complex optimization problems
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-735-1
ACCSE 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

originates in 1960, when Holland [15] solved an artificial
intelligence problem through evolutionary strategies based
on the natural evolution of the species. Since in those times
its
practical
application
was
impossible,
it
was
only
described theoretically, explaining the adaptive process of
natural systems and how to design artificial systems that
emulate the essential mechanisms of natural systems.
Evolutionary algorithms have been very successful since
the 60s to the present day because they have proven to be
useful in search and optimization problems in many fields
such as engineering, science, administration and industry. In
addition, they are simple, easy to understand and design,
have no limitations on the objective function, are robust and
reasonably efficient. For this reason, from the work of
Holland, other research channels appeared, such as Genetic
Algorithms [16], Genetic Programming [17], or Evolutionary
Programming [18]. The basic characteristics of all of them
are the following:
-
They use codings of the solutions that are generally
associated with strings of symbols or bits (binary
coding).
-
The parameters to be optimized are modified from a set
of previously established search space points.
-
In each iteration or generation, they only use the value
of the objective function (instead of using derivatives or
other more complex calculations).
-
They use probabilistic transition rules instead of using
deterministic rules.
In addition, all of them adapt to changes in the
environment to find an optimal solution to a problem,
developing a population of candidate solutions during a
generation based on the aptitude values of each candidate
and applying crossover, mutation and selection techniques.
Each type of evolutionary algorithm has its own specificities,
which
makes
them
different
from
each
other.
The
fundamental characteristic common to all of them is that,
being inspired by Darwin's theory of evolution, the fittest
individuals will have a higher probability of reproduction. In
turn, the individuals descended from these individuals will
have a greater possibility of transmitting their genetic codes
to the next generations. In this way, it will be possible to
obtain a final generation that will be the optimal generation,
that is, the optimal solution of the problem to be solved.
Moreover, the tool will also include other bio-inspired
algorithms based on swarm intelligence, such as bees [19],
ant colonies [20] and flocks of birds [21]. These three
algorithms focus on the fact that the environment changes
continuously and organisms must be able to adapt to these
changes and act accordingly. These techniques allow to
implement flexible and robust systems at the same time.
III.
NEW FEATURES
Starting from the work done in the previous simulation
tool, and considering the previous contributions to the scope
of this work, the innovative effect of the proposed tool and
its novelest aspects could be broken down into the following
points:
-
The tool will include several optimization algorithms
that will provide the optimal location of the antennas in
order to obtain the maximum level of signal in each
simulation. In particular, genetic algorithms, evolution
strategies,
evolutionary
programming
and
genetic
programming will be available.
-
The user will be able to specify a particular algorithm or
can execute the full simulation option in which all of
them will be executed and the best results will be
displayed.
-
The code of the optimization algorithms will be
parallelized in order to minimize the calculation time
and thus speed up the simulations.
-
The position of any number of antennas can be
optimized, which must be established as an input
parameter.
-
The
possibility
of
carrying
out
a
multi-objective
optimization will be offered in which, in addition to
optimizing the position of the antennas, it will also be
possible to optimize their radiation power. The default
option will be to display antennas that have the same
characteristics to simplify the calculations, but the user
will have some advanced options in which he/she can
configure,
in
addition,
the
optimization
of
other
parameters.
-
Several propagation models (Okumura-Hata, COST
231, Longley-Rice, Walfish-Bertoni, Walfish-Ikegami,
and Eibert and Kuhlman) will be included to analyze
which is the model that provides the best results for a
certain environment.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Most of the new features mentioned in the previous
section have been already implemented. Therefore, it is
expected that the final version of the tool will be available
soon. Future work includes testing and validation. A
measurement campaign will be carried out and the obtained
results will be compared to the simulations provided by the
tool.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the Vice rectorate for Research
and Knowledge Transfer of the University of Alcala (Spain)
through project CCG2018/EXP-020.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Tayebi, J. Gomez, F. Saez de Adana, O. Gutierrez and M.
Fernandez
de
Sevilla,
"Development
of
a
Web-Based
Simulation Tool to Estimate the Path Loss in Outdoor
Environments using OpenStreetMaps [Wireless Corner]," in
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, vol. 61, no. 1, pp.
123-129, Feb. 2019.
[2]
OpenStreetMap, “https://www.openstreetmap.org”, [retrieved:
March 2019].
[3]
Y. Okumura, E. Ohmori, T. Kawano, and K. Fukuda, "Field
strength and its variability in VHF and UHF land-mobile
service," Rev. Elec. Comm. Lab., vol. 16, no. 9-10, pp. 825-
873, 1968.
[4]
M. Hata, "Empirical formula for propagation loss in land
mobile radio services," IEEE Trans. Veh. Tech., vol. 29, no.
3, pp. 317-325, 1980.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-735-1
ACCSE 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

[5]
G. S. de Brito, "Overview of the activities of the project cost
231 "Evolution of land mobile radio (including personal)
communications"," Proceedings of 2nd IEEE International
Conference on Universal Personal Communications, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada, 1993, pp. 560-564, vol.2.
[6]
P. L.
Rice,
A. G.
Longley,
K. A.
Norton,
and
A. P.
Barsis.
“Transmission
loss
predictions
for
tropospheric
communications
circuits”,
Technical
Note 101, revised
1/1/1967, U.S. Dept. of Commerce NTIA-ITS.
[7]
J.Walfish, H, L. Bertoni, “A Theoretical Model of UHF
Propagation in Urban Environments”, IEEE Trans. Antennas
and Propagation, Ap-38, 1988.
[8]
Ikegami. F, S. Yoshoida, T. Takeuchi, and M. Umehira,
“Propagation
Factors Controlling Mean Field Strength on
Urban Streets,” IEEE Trans. on Antennas and Propagation,
vol. 32, Dec. 1984, pp. 822-829.
[9]
Eibert, T. F., Kuhlman, P., Notes on semiempirical terrestrial
wave propagation modelling for macrocellular environments.
Comparison
with
measurements.
IEEE
Transactions
on
Antennas and Propagation, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 2252-2259,
2003.
[10] W. M. O’Brian, E. M. Kenny and P. J. Cullen, “An efficient
implementation of a three-dimensional microcell propagation
tool for indoor and outdoor urban environments” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 49, no. 2, pp.
622-630, March 2000.
[11] A. Roullier-Callaghan, “A radio coverage and planning tool”.
6th IEEE High-Frequency Postgraduate Student Colloqium,
pp. 35-40, September 2001.
[12] A. P. Garcia, H. Ortega, A. Navarro and A. H. Rodriguez,
"Effect of terrain on electromagnetic propagation in urban
environments on the Andean region, using the COST231-
Walfisch-Ikegami model and GIS planning tools," Twelfth
International Conference on Antennas and Propagation, 2003
(ICAP 2003). (Conf. Publ. No. 491), 2003, pp. 270-275 vol.1.
[13] L. Lozano, M. J. Algar, I. Gonzalez and F. Catedra,
"FASANT:
A
Versatile
tool
to
analyze
antennas
and
propagation in complex environments," 2009 3rd European
Conference on Antennas and Propagation, Berlin, 2009, pp.
2088-2092.
[14] F. S. de Adana, F. Fernandez, J. L. Loranca and R.
Kronberger, "Covermap: Computer tool to calculate the
propagation in open areas importing data from GoogleMaps,"
Antennas & Propagation Conference, 2009. LAPC 2009.
Loughborough, pp.229,232, 16-17 Nov. 2009.
[15] J. H. Holland, "Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems",
University of Michigan Press, 1975, p. 211
[16] D. E. Goldberg, "Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization,
and
Machine
Learning",
Addison-Wesley
Publishing
Company, 1989, p. 412
[17] J. R. Koza, "Genetic Programming. On the Programming of
Computers by Means of Natural Selection", The MIT Press,
1992, p. 819
[18] L. J. Fogel, A. J. Owens and M. J. Walsh, “Artificial
Intelligence through Simulated Evolution”, John Wiley and
Sons, 1966, p. 170
[19] D. Karaboga and B. Basturk, “A powerful and efficient
algorithm for numerical function optimization: artificial bee
colony (abc) algorithm,” J. Global Optimization, vol. 39, no.
3, pp. 459–471, 2017.
[20] E.
Bonabeau,
M.
Dorigo,
and
G.
Theraulaz,
“Swarm
Intelligence: From Natural to Artificial Systems”. Oxford,
1999.
[21] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, "Particle Swarm Optimization".
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Neural
Networks. IV. pp. 1942–1948, 1995.
(a)
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-735-1
ACCSE 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

(b)
Figure 1.
Graphical user interface of both simulation tools: (a) before the improvements, (b) after the improvements (work in progress).
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-735-1
ACCSE 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

