USAMED Learning Object - Usability in Digital Educational Materials for Seniors
Planning, Development and Implementation
Tássia Priscila Fagundes Grande, Leticia Rocha Machado, Ana Luisa Fonseca, Larissa Camargo Justin, Sibele
Pedroso Loss, Patricia Alejandra Behar
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
Avenue Paulo Gama, 110 - Building 12105 - 3rd floor living room 401.
Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil
tpri.fagundes@hotmail.com, leticiarmachado@gmail.com, alcfonseca1@gmail.com, larissacjustin@gmail.com,
sibeleloss@gmail.com, pbehar@terra.com.br
Abstract— The aim of this paper is to present the planning,
development and implementation of USAMED learning object
- Usability in Digital Educational Materials for Seniors. The
object was developed in 2015 and has the purpose of discussing
how to develop materials for mobile devices following usability
guidelines that consider the needs of older people. The
USAMED was planned and developed from the methodology
suggested by Amante and Morgado (2001): a) Project Design;
b) Planning; c) Implementation; d) Evaluation. During the
development process, we observed the lack of information
about the importance of the design of pre-planning to meet the
need for responsiveness of the material and the pedagogical
suitability to entice users to use it in practice. It was observed
that the USAMED object may help different professionals in
the planning and development of Digital Educational Materials
(DEM) for seniors who use mobile devices on a day-to-day
basis.
Keywords—learning object; elderly; mobile devices; usability.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Every year, digital technologies have been increasingly
becoming an integral part of people’s daily lives. In recent
years, the number of mobile devices being marketed and
acquired by the public (such as smartphones and tablets) has
significantly increased. A research by the Getúlio Vargas
Foundation University [1] of São Paulo indicated that, in
2015, there were 306 million devices connected to the
Internet, 154 million of which were smartphones. At the
same time, the number of elderly people has increased.
According to the data of Brazilian’s Institute of Geography
and Statistics (IBGE), life expectancy in 2015 was 75.2
years, highlighting that Brazil’s population life expectancy
has been increasing [1].
Therefore, like younger people, the elderly are also
acquiring
or
receiving
mobile
devices,
especially
smartphones, from their family members. However, older
people have difficulty in handling such devices, both because
of a lack of experience as well as other difficulties that such
technologies present to the elderly, like the need for
sensibility in the fingers to handle the touch screens, the
small size of the screens, and so on. These obstacles can
develop frustration and anguish for the elderly public,
becoming necessary to develop actions that include them and
enable them to use the technologies, in addition to theoretical
discussions on possible strategies that can aid the elderly
with the use of these resources or even the development of
materials by different professionals for these public.
Based on this scenario, many questions arise, specially in
the educational field: how to enable digital inclusion for the
use of mobile devices by the elderly?; Which pedagogical
strategies can be adopted for the use of mobile devices by the
elderly?; Are there adequate materials to enable the elderly
to learn how to use smartphones and/or tablet devices?; How
to develop materials that may suit the older public in the use
of mobile devices?
Starting with these questions, it is necessry to think more
about possible guidelines for the development of digital
educational materials (DEMs) that may be suitable for the
elderly regarding the use of mobile devices. DEMs are
educational materials composed of digital resources in their
elaboration [3]. This type of material is used with the
purpose of approaching with the use of technologies, being
an advance of the analog material. Some examples of DEMs
are
websites,
web
pages
and
learning
objects
(LO).
Therefore, in this article, the term Learning Object (LO) will
be used as a synonym of Digital Educational Material
(DEM). The usability of DEMs plays an important role, as it
can influence its increasing use by students, instigating and
motivating them to become an active participant. Therefore,
the development of LOs may be an option to present
educational content in a more dynamic and interactive way.
Therefore, this article aims to introduce the planning,
development and implementation of the USAMED Learning
Object - Usability in Digital Educational Materials for
Seniors. The acronym for the learning object was chosen
from its full name in Portuguese. The purpose of this object
was to present and discuss, with/for different professionals,
how to appropriately develop educational materials for the
older
public,
proposing
materials,
explanatory
texts,
evaluation forms and activities in the form of challenges.
This object was developed in the first semester of 2015 in
order to help teachers and professionals from different areas
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

plan and implement educational materials for mobile devices
for the elderlypublic.
Next, we will discuss the use of mobile devices by the
elderly, followed by the concepts of digital educational
materials. After that, the methodology adopted for the
development of this material will be presented, culminating
with the presentation and implementation of the USAMED´s
learning object.
II.
EDUCATION, AGING AND MOBILE DEVICES
The constant changes in the world, especially concerning
mobile technologies, impact different sectors of society.
Some portions of the population are being digitally excluded
because of lack of information or lack of training in the use
of mobile devices. Thus, education comes as a way to
support the elderly in their search for staying current in
different areas, such as technology.
According to the survey "TIC Domiciles and Users
2013", 61% of Brazilians with ages 60 or over have a mobile
phone device, referring to a sample of 168.3 million people.
In 2006, this rate was 18.9%. The main reasons for the
increase were the portability, lightness, discretion and size of
mobile devices.
As a consequence, questions arise regarding the needs
that come with age, especially in the use of mobile
technologies: what educational practices to adopt to include
the elderly in the use of digital technologies? How to develop
educational materials for mobile devices that addresses the
needs of the elderly? Therefore, usability issues have been
the subject of new studies that also address the role of
usability in the development of digital educational materials
for mobile devices.
A.
Education and Aging
According to IBGE data [2], the elderly population has
been growing significantly in Brazil. From 2000 to 2016, the
growth went from 2.56%, going to 5.61% and to 8.17%.
IBGE projects [2] that the senior public will be 13.44% of
the country's population by 2030.
The elderly population’s growth can be attributed to
several factors, such as improvement in Brazilians’ quality of
life, development of medicines and diseases treatments, as
well as the reduction in child mortality and fertility rates [4].
Osório [4] affirms that social and cultural aspects are
strongly linked to the process of aging, therefore, this is not
restricted only to psychological and physiological factors.
Aging "is also seen as an event of changes in attitudes and
mentality,
resulting
from
the
relationships
established
between age groups and their living conditions" [4].
A portion of the senior population seeks to adapt to the
changes that are happening in society, especially in what
refers to technological advancements. They seek to stay
autonomous and active within their aging process [4].
However, there are still preconceived ideas that link the
elderly to concepts like dependence, illness and little
capacity, which can result in distancing of this public from
other individuals.
According to gerontology researches, having a social role
is essential for the elderly to achieve a promising aging. The
quality of life of the elderly is strongly related to active
aging, regarding the improvement of their physical, social or
mental potential. According to Both and Portella [5], a
relevant alternative that serves as support to keep the elderly
active are educational interventions that take into account the
interests of the target public, and may be through permanent
education. Thus, it is opportune that these interventions take
place in order to encourage the elderly in the search for
knowledge of the aging process, considering their social
environment,
their
experiences
and
their
uncertainties,
respecting their personal needs.
The importance of a permanent education is referenced
by Doll [6] and Osório [4]. According to the authors, there is
no specific age group for learning. According to Zimerman
[8] and Pasqualotti [9], it is necessary to instigate the
reasoning
of
the
elderly,
fomenting
the
reflection,
communication and interactions, intending to soften the
effects of aging. In this context, digital technologies are
presented as an alternative to assist in the process of self-
knowledge of the elderly. Some elderly have already
discovered digital technologies and seek to explore them.
Therefore,
it
is
important
to
be
aware
of
which
characteristics of this technology and its use, or not, are
significant to the elderly.
This public interest in learning how to use new
technologies can be associated with the fact that the
technology presents itself as an alternative to promote the
interaction with other generations. That is, they can maintain
an active communication with friends and family, staying
socially active [7]. At the same time, Machado [10] mentions
that education, together with digital technologies, can offer
cognitive maintenance’s alternatives to the elderly, good use
of free time and more social contact.
Another factor considered important today, besides the
fast access to the Internet, is portability. These are some of
the attributes of a digital technology called mobile device.
This technology has increasingly influenced the senior public
to take and use these resources in their daily life, as they
simplify communication and the search for information.
Such topics will be discussed next.
B.
The Elderly and Mobile Devices
There are different types of mobile devices, the most
popular ones being tablets and smartphones. The elderly are
increasingly
seeking
to
stay
current
about
digital
technologies and are motivated to learn how to use more
economically accessible mobile technologies. In this sense,
teaching about the use of these technologies by this public is
important. At the same time, accessible materials for mobile
devices are needed, both in interface and in educational
aspects.
The main characteristics of mobile devices are the
mobility and the possibility of connecting to the Internet,
boosting the use of these technologies for different means
and environments. Customization also makes mobile devices
more attractive as it can be organized to meet each
individual's personal needs.
Currently, there is a wide variety of applications for
different areas, such as leisure: games, movies, books, travel;
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

for the job: bank transactions, office tools, information on
professions; for health: information on sports, with diet and
exercise tips; for education and culture: several study
materials, knowledge tests and video lessons, among others.
The use of applications for communication purposes is one
of the most versatile ones, since there are apps with features
that go beyond the voice, it can be for text messages, videos,
image, music, text files as well as video conferences.
Therefore, all these characteristics from mobile devices
end up increasing its use from different people, including the
elderly, especially in regards to communication with family
and friends.
However, older people who are interested in using these
technologies end up having to adjust to the barriers that arise.
After all, technologies are not usually projected considering
motor and cognitive difficulties that come up with age [11].
Consequently, different studies have been done regarding
usability and accessibility in these devices and in the
construction of digital educational materials for them, taking
into account the different needs of users.
III.
DEMS AND THE ELDERLY
As technology advances, society has been through
important
transformations
in
all
areas,
especially
in
education. The main catalyst for those changes is the
insertion of digital technologies into educational institutions.
This makes the development of digital educational materials
(DEMs) increasingly evident as a possibility to meet the new
demands. In this article, the term Learning Object (LO) will
be used as synonym of digital educational material (DEM).
DEM is understood to mean "all educational material that
incorporates
digital
resources
in
its
elaboration"
[3].
Therefore, DEMs can be considered an evolution of the
analogical material, being used with the intention of
approaching technologies.
Some examples of DEMs are learning objects (LO), web
pages and, with the advent of mobile devices, applications.
Applications, also considered digital educational materials,
since they are "[...] programs with few features that run on
the operational systems created for these mobile devices,
they have proprietary license and closed source license and
are only available in repositories known as stores [...]” [12].
Learning objects are materials composed of several
medias, such as texts, animations, presentations and videos
[13][14]. Some of the benefits that justify the use of LOs in
the
educational
context
are
flexibility,
updating
ease,
customization, interoperability, increasing the value of
knowledge, and ultimately indexing and searching [15].
Learning objects developed by institutions and research
groups from different fields are available online through
repositories, allowing anyone to access their contents. There
are also websites and web pages where users can access their
content at any time.
When searching for technologies related information, the
elderly end up having contact with materials developed in
several courses, such as digital inclusion. This public tends
to search for information regarding technological resources,
such as computers, notebooks and, increasingly, mobile
devices. This way, developers of DEMs need to think over
and analyze possible ways of designing these materials to
understand the specifications of new technologies, such as
mobile devices, which is increasing in space among users.
According to Machado [10] the first LOs developed for
the senior public was only done in 2013. Before that, there
were not even LOs aimed to gerontology and education
professionals with adequate contents and considering the
needs of this public.
When designing a DEM for the elderly, it is important to
look
at
this
audience’s
specific
demands,
especially
regarding mobile devices, as they have different properties
than computers. The main differences between them are
screen size, touchscreen, and movements, among others.
Therefore, it is necessary to analyze these elements and their
peculiarities to the development of DEMs [16].
In this perspective, the usability of DEMs aimed at the
elderly is essential for the construction, since it facilitates its
use. Usability is quoted by some authors as a point that
should be considered in the development of digital materials
to mobile devices regarding different needs of the public that
use them [11]. Nielsen and Budiu [16] pointed out that web
usability issues are for mobile devices, but for the latter they
are indispensable.
According to the Brazilian Association of Technical
Standards
ABNT
(NBR
ISO
9241
-
Ergonomic
Requirements for Working with Computer Offices) usability
is "[...] defined as the capacity that an interactive system
offers its user in a given context of operation, for the
accomplishment of tasks, in an effective, efficient and
pleasant way ".
According to Preece, Rogers and Sharp [17], "usability is
usually considered as the factor that ensures that products are
easy to
use, efficient and enjoyable from the user's
perspective." These authors also highlight usability goals for
materials, such as having security, both for fear of use issues
and
for security of technologies; being efficient and
effective. The same authors state that the material should be
easy to learn how to use, easy to remember and have good
utility. They emphasize that it is important to take into
account User Experience issues. Therefore, the evaluation of
a material usability is essential in its planning, development
and improvement.
Therefore, it is important to think which usability
indicators would be significant to the development of mobile
devices, taking into consideration the target audience, the
material purpose and technology type.
The World Wide Web Consortium - W3C [18] highlights
some guidelines for mobile websites, such as simple
navigation; short URLs; different mobile devices must be
taken into account; one must use Web standards in marking,
formatting and making content available; avoid using
mapped images, frames, nested tables, and pop-ups; do not
measure in pixels or absolute units; avoid text entry; label all
form controls appropriately; and avoid the use of pop-up
windows that cause certain insecurity and confusion in the
elderly.
When it comes to mobile devices, these issues need to be
reinforced, as they have some different characteristics, such
as having less space for writing and reading, since the main
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

way of entry are practically the human fingers, which
requires space for action [16]. The authors also reinforce the
importance of avoiding unnecessary information, or, if
needed, place it in the background, otherwise it may
discourage users.
IV.
METHODOLOGY
The development of learning objects requires planning,
communication
and
technical,
pedagogical
and
design
knowledge. Tarouco et al. [14] point out that, for the
construction of objects, it is necessary to consider "both
inherent aspects of learning theories and to combine the
knowledge
of
areas
such
as
ergonomics,
systems
engineering,
besides
taking
into
consideration
the
potentialities and limitations of the technology involved".
Therefore, the complexity required for the development of
learning objects is evident, as well as the need for an
interdisciplinary team to be involved.
For the development of the learning object USAMED -
Usability in Digital Educational Materials for Seniors, a
specific methodology presented by Amante and Morgado
[19] was adopted. These authors point out that "Designing,
planning and developing educational applications requires,
however, the passage through a set of phases that together
determine the quality of the final product" [19].
The steps suggested by Amante and Morgado [19] are: a)
Project Conception: what, for whom and in what way is the
object to be developed; b) Planning: put into practice the first
phase of what was designed, the so-called storyboard-model
of what will be created; c) Implementation: all points
planned during project development and planning will be put
into practice; d) Evaluation: set of evaluated procedures and
validation of the product.
Thus, these steps were the base for developing the
USAMED object, as detailed next:
Step 1 - Project Design: The project objective was
initially outlined, specifying the final user profile, as well as
emerging needs to meet the material objectives. The
variables responsiveness, usability and accessibility were
considered, as well as the user profile diversity.
Step 2 - Planning: After the initial design of the object,
the operating storyboard was made, on which the possible
links, modules and technological resources that could be
used in the object were listed. Also, wireframes of the
screens to adjust the screen layout (location of the elements
that will compose the interface) were developed. The
navigation was readjusted during the process to suit the
needs that arose (for example, use of such object in mobile
devices and usability to meet this need), as well as
accessibility issues.
Step 3 - Implementation: In this step, the planning and
design of the storyboard were put into practice. For that
matter, a survey was made on possible metaphors that could
be adopted for the interface of the object, considering three
areas: mobile devices, seniors and usability. A selection of
the materials and contents was also made.
Step 4 - Evaluation: For the accomplishment of this step,
it was used the evaluation form of usability developed in a
master’s dissertation work [20]. After analyzing the object,
we intend to apply it in an extension course that will be
offered at the University in 2018, where the improvement of
professionals who wish to develop a DEM for mobile
devices for the older public is sought.
It should be noted that the object’s team, composed of
pedagogues, gerontologists and designers, accomplished all
stages. For the planning and development process, bi-weekly
meetings were held where the individual and collective tasks
of the team members were divided.
This methodology was used because it is the recurrent
one for the construction of learning objects in Brazil. The
team developed a new methodology called ConstruMED
[22]. However, this new methodology was developed after
the construction of the object and is based on competencies,
the focus not being adopted on the Object.
V.
RESULTS
The purpose of USAMEDs - Usability in DEMs for
Senior is to discuss and deepen usability issues regarding
Digital
Educational
Materials
(DEM)
for
the
elderly,
focusing primarily on new frameworks to meet the needs of
mobile devices. The object is available in the University's
repository (http://www.lume.ufrgs.br/), as well as through
the website: http://nuted.ufrgs.br/oa/usamed. The USAMED
learning object was developed and published in Portuguese
language
in
Brazil.
This
LO
was
developed
by
an
interdisciplinary team of the Nucleus of Digital Technology
Applied to Education (NUTED), and has as target audience
professionals
from different areas: teachers,
designers,
programmers, gerontologists etc. Therefore, the object can be
used as a subsidy to create educational materials on mobile
devices aimed at the elderly, with four modules available:
1)
DEMs for the elderly: this module deals with the
concepts of DEMs, repositories and developed examples
specifically for the older public;
2)
Usability in DEMs: discussion on what is usability,
its theoretical application in digital educational materials and
analysis tests;
3)
Usability recommendation: here, specific usability
parameters
for
the
elderly
public
are
pointed
out,
responsiveness issues (in order to meet the demand of mobile
technologies) and application examples;
4)
Online tools: possible digital tools for building
DEMs
are
presented
in
order
to
apply
usability
recommendations to the older audience.
Each module has explanatory texts on the presented
subjects, including links to videos, online pages, images, and
so on. Support materials built by the team itself in a dynamic
way that allows a greater understanding of the issues
addressed; Challenges, in the form of activity, that intend to
problematize the questions presented during the modules.
Some of the texts wording that may be difficult to
understand were conceptualized, in order to facilitate the
usability and to enable a better understanding of it.
The object also includes, in addition to the modules, a
user guide page about the object itself for the user-student, as
well as a user guide with possible strategies that the user-
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

teacher can adopt for the use of the objects in their practices.
Credits are also available presenting the developer team
(both the pedagogical and design group).
For a better understanding, in the next section, we will
analyze and point out the results found in the developed
object
and
two
categories:
Design
and
Educational
Gerontology.
A.
Design
The user interaction with the interface can directly
influence the learning process, and may or may not motivate
the user to continue to explore the material [3]. Thus, a
design of easy navigation and exploration was adopted in the
LO, not relying on depth or specific knowledge on the
computer resources for its manipulation.
The object followed the standards of the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) accessibility [18]. For usability
issues we considered the studies of Nilsen and Budiu [16],
mainly the 10 heuristics suggested by the author, which are:
1) Visibility of system status; 2) Link between the system
interface and the real world; 3) User freedom and control; 4)
Consistency
and
standards;
4)
Error
prevention;
5)
Recognition rather than recall; 6) Flexibility and efficiency
of use; 7) Aesthetics and minimalist design; 8) Support for
users to recognize, diagnose and recover from errors; 9) Help
and documentation.
In this sense, the interface was thought from its users,
professionals from different areas who wish to work with the
elderly. In view of the target audience and objectives of the
object, it was possible to delimit the general requirements of
the interface such as the indispensability of working fully on
mobile devices. It was also necessary to exercise caution
with users who did not have technical knowledge about
digital technologies, considering users' needs and mobile
devices’ uses. Thus, it was determined the use of a grid on
the home page and a simple layout of columns on the
internal pages. The grid on the page and the simpler layout
on the inside pages make it easier to transition between LO
on your mobile device and your computer (Figure 1).
Figure 1.
USAMED Responsibility.
After the initial research in which the initial requirements
of the users and the objectives of the object were exposed,
we set out to generate alternatives that could meet these
demands. For such, the brainstorming method was applied
first, where the objective was the definition of the main
problems and the creation of initial concepts at the beginning
of a project. After that, during meetings with the pedagogical
team, a sketch of the initial layout concepts based on the
content already created was designed. From these sketches,
associations of the main layout schemes were created (Figure
2).
Figure 2.
Initial Home Sketches.
Since the object was to aid users who would teach
seniors, it was decided to use a color palette that was
pleasing to this public. Several texts refer to the use of pastel
colors when mentioning the older population, to pass a
tranquility and serenity notion. For this reason, less saturated
colors and pastels were used in the first schemes. In the next
interactions of the color palette, the spectrum has decreased,
tending to more monochromatic or analogous situations to
exalt the concept of set to all the modules. For the
implementation it was decided to use a monochromatic set of
blues, tending to the less saturated ones. According to Heller
[21] in her book Psychology of Color, blue is the favorite
color of 46% of men and 44% of women, being also
acknowledged as the color of sympathy, harmony and trust.
Pink has been defined to serve as an accent on buttons to add
interest and force to the layout.
Because LO is composed mostly of texts, typography
serves as an important tool for user comfort. For this project,
the use of Roboto font in the text body and Raleway for titles
was chosen. Google, developed especially for use on the web
and open source nature, meaning that anyone can download,
modify and use it for personal or commercial projects,
authors both fonts. The fonts are offered in different weights
and are available with Portuguese language accents. Font
size, line spacing, and kerning were taken into account to
ensure readability across devices.
From
the
definition
of
the
elements
previously
mentioned, the wireframes of the LO pages were elaborated.
The goal of this step is to design a page starting from the
structural level. Typically, this method is used at the
beginning of projects to establish the basic structure of a
page before adding visual design and content. Afterwards, a
prototype is produced, where colors and actual content are
added before implementation begins. Then, the prototype
implementation of the learning object was coded using
HTML, CSS and Javascript/Jquery (Figure 3).
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

Figure 3.
USAMED interface.
B.
Educational-Gerontology
The content of the object was developed to attend to the
needs of the elderly who will access educational materials
on mobile devices. To meet this proposal, the pedagogical
team,
composed
of
undergraduates,
graduates
and
postgraduates in education and/or gerontology, developed
contents that can be accessed in the order in which it was
presented or randomly, according to the user's needs.
The object also has, as reference, results of studies based
on
the
needs
of the
elderly in
the
use
of
mobile
technologies,
as
well
as
from experiences
in
digital
inclusion courses [6][7]. In addition to these aspects, the
physiological, psychological and cognitive changes of the
elderly and their influence on the teaching and learning
process were also considered in the construction of the
learning object [5].
Explanatory texts: In order to attend to the needs and
adapt to mobile devices, the texts of the modules were made
in an objective way and with an informal language, in order
to approach the user with the approached thematic. The
texts were divided into small blocks so that reading on
mobile devices is facilitated, and situations and examples
that refer to the elderly public were also quoted. Illustrations
were used as a complement to the text, in order to instigate
the user to read the available material. The references of
authors used in the text were listed below it and not in the
body, so that there would not be a distruption in the reading.
The pedagogical team developed all texts collectively.
Activities: In total, eight challenges were proposed, two
on each module. They are presented as activities on which
the user can perform in the learning object itself. This could
ensure higher autonomy and interactivity in a playful and
contextualizing way in the use of LO or combined with
other digital resources. In order to achieve this, challenges
were proposed that, besides being able to finish out of the
object, can also, in some cases, be finished by combining
them with a virtual learning reality.
Complementary materials: The materials developed for
the object had the purpose of helping the users to deepen
their knowledge about the addressed topics. They were all
developed by the pedagogical team, using different formats,
such
as
explanatory
flowcharts,
animations,
tables,
questionnaires, etc. (Figure 4). These materials may serve
as a complement to the text of the modules and may be used
separately or in conjunction with the proposed challenges in
the object.
Figure 4.
USAMED Tools Module Support Material Interface.
Therefore, from the construction of the modules by the
pedagogical team and the layout by the designer, the
USAMED learning object became available on the Web.
This can be used by anyone who has an interest in it, as well
as by using in training and training courses.
VI.
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
The use of mobile devices by the elderly will increase
even more in the coming years. Education, as well as other
different
fields,
must
be
attentive
to
these
changes,
discussing and developing materials that can help the older
public to handle these technologies. As presented in this
article, there is a lot of research being done on usability and
mobile devices. However, most of it is focused on the
presentation of technologies (screen, layout of applications
etc.), with digital education materials being deprived,
especially the learning objects. Education has not yet begun
a
more
in-depth
reflection
on
issues
concerning
the
importance
and
influence
of
design
(usability
and
accessibility) in DEMS for mobile devices, especially for
the elderly public.
Thus, this article’s objective was to present the stages of
development and implementation of the USAMED learning
object that addresses this theme. It is observed that the
USAMED object can help different professionals from
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

different fields, such as health, education, technology, etc. in
the planning and development of DEMs for seniors who use
smartphones and/or tablets on a daily basis.
During the development process, it was possible to
observe the lack of information on the importance of design
pre-planning
to
attend
to
the
need
for
material
responsiveness,
as
well
as
pedagogical
suitability
to
instigate users to use the object in their practices.
One of the main contributions of the USAMED object is
the updated materials on the subject, as well as examples
and forms that present usability guidelines that users can use
to evaluate their materials constructed or under construction.
In this perspective, more research and more in-depth
discussions on the subject should take place in order to
enable the planning and implementation of new educational
materials on mobile devices for the elderly.
VII.
REFERENCES
[1]
FGV - Fundação Getúlio Vargas University. “Smartphone
number outperforms computers” [26th Annual Information
Technology
Report.
2015].
Available
in:
Http://exame.abril.com.br/tecnologia/noticias/numero-
desmartphones-supera-o-de-computers-in-brasil
[2]
IBGE - Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. “Life
expectancy
of
Brazilians.
2015”.
Available
at:
http://g1.globo.com/ciencia-e-
saude/noticia/2015/12/expectativa-devida-so-brasileiros-sobe-
para-752-anos-diz-ibge.html.
[3]
C.A.W Torrezzan. “Pedagogical Design: a look at the
construction of digital educational materials”. Dissertation,
Postgraduate Master in Education. Federal University of Rio
Grande do Sul, 2009.
[4]
A. R Osório. “The elderly in today's society”. In: A. R Osório,
F.C. Pinto. The elderly: social context and educational
intervention. Lisbon: Instituto Piaget, 2007.
[5]
A. Both, R. Portella. “Gerontology: a socio-educational
proposal for the elderly”. In: A. Both, M.H.S. Barbosa, C.R.,
Benfica. Human aging: multiple looks. Background: UPF,
2003.
[6]
J.
Doll.
“Education
and
Aging:
fundamentals
and
perspectives”. The third Age, vol. 19, pp. 7-26, n.43, 2008.
[7]
J. Doll, L.R. Machado. “The elderly and new technologies”.
In: E. Freitas, L. Py, F.A. Cançado, J. Doll, M. L. Gorzoni.
(Org.). Geriatrics and Gerontology Treaty. Rio de Janeiro:
Guanabara Koogan, 2011.
[8]
G. I. Zimerman. “Old age: biopsychosocial aspects”. Porto
Alegre: Artmed, 2000.
[9]
A. Pasqualotti. “Development of social aspects in old age:
experimentation of computerized environments”. In: A. Both
et al. Human aging: multiple looks. Background: UPF, 2003.
[10] L. R. Machado. “Construction of a pedagogical architecture
for cyberseniors: revealing the inclusive potential of distance
education”. Dissertation, Postgraduate Master in Education.
Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, 2013..
[11] L. G. N. O. Santos, L. Ishitani, C.N. Nobre. “Use of casual
games on mobile phones by the elderly: a usability study”.
Journal of Applied Informatics, vol. 9, n 1, 2013. Available at
<http://www.ria.net.br/index.php/ria/article/view/88>.
[12] B.G.B.Neves, R.S. Melo, A.F. Machado. “Mobile universe: a
free educational application for mobile devices”. Free Text:
Language and Technology, vol.7, 2014.
[13] P.A.Behar et al. “Pedagogical Models in Distance Education”.
Porto Alegre: Artmed, 2009.
[14] L. Tarouco. “CESTA Project - Collection of Entities to
Support the Use of Technologies in Learning”. S / ED: Porto
Alegre, 2003.
[15] M.F.C Souza et al. “LOCPN: Petri nets. Learning Objects
Production”. Revista Brasileira de Informática em Educação,
vol. 15, pp. 39-42, 2007.
[16] J. Nielsen, R. Budiu. “Mobile usability”. Rio de Janeiro:
Elsevier, 2014.
[17] J. Precce, Y. Rogers, H. Sharp. "Interaction design: beyond
human - computer interaction". Porto Alegre: Bookman,
2005.
[18] W3C - World Wide Web Consortium. "Webdesign for
mobile".
2015.
Available
at:
<http://www.w3.org/standards/Webdesign/mobilWeb>.
[19] L. Amante, L. Morgado. “Methodology of design and
development
of
educational
applications:
the
case
of
hypermedia materials”. Discourses, III Series, special issue,
pp.125-138, Open University, 2001.
[20] T.P. Grande. “Digital educational materials for the elderly:
searching
for
usability
indicators
for
mobile
devices”.
Dissertation Project in Education. Federal University of Rio
Grande do Sul, 2015.
[21] V. Heller. “Psychology of color: How colors act on feelings
and reason”. Barcelona: Gustavo Gilli SA. 2008.
[22] ConstruMed.
Available
at:
http://nuted.ufrgs.br/oa/construmed/
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-570-8
ACCSE 2017 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

