IoT Security: A Basic IoT Hardware Security
Framework
Christoph Haar
Hochschule f¨ur Telekommunikation Leipzig
Leipzig, Germany
Email: haar@hft-leipzig.de
Erik Buchmann
Leipzig University
Leipzig, Germany
Email: buchmann@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
Abstract—More and more Internet of Things (IoT) devices
are being used in companies today. The usage harbors great
risks, because numerous observations have shown that many
IoT devices on the market are insecure. For this reason, well-
known security authorities such as the German Federal Office
for Information Security (BSI) or the National Institute for
Standards and Technologies (NIST) have established standards
and guidelines, considering known threats and common security
practices for IoT devices. They focus on software security as
well as the secure planning and usage of IoT devices. Hardware
security on the other hand is less considered. In this paper,
we develop a basic IoT hardware security framework that can
be implemented into existing security concepts. To reach this
goal, we compare three official IoT security standards to identify
important hardware threats. After that, we perform a risk
identification for four different IoT devices to find out if the
mentioned hardware threats really apply to different application
scenarios. Based on the results, we develop a basic IoT hardware
security framework. Our research has shown that the hardware
threats mentioned in the official IoT security standards are of
great importance. Because they apply to a wide range of different
application scenarios for IoT devices, we implemented them in
our basic IoT hardware security framework.
Keywords – IoT Security Standards, IoT Hardware Threats,
Risk Identification, Security Framework.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the last years, the number of connected IoT devices
in enterprises has increased rapidly [1]. They are used to
improve the productivity of business processes or to massively
reduce costs [2] [3]. On the other hand, there are numerous
threats associated with their use [4]–[7]. Observations have
shown that many IoT devices on the market are insecure [8].
Attackers can compromise them, spy out internal data and
interrupt services. The damage caused by such attacks can
be existence-threatening. Official security authorities, such as
the German Federal Office for Information Security (BSI),
the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST)
or the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA)
have already addressed this issue. Numerous free IoT security
standards also have been published during the last years. They
consider known threats and common security practices. A
closer examination reveals that there is no uniform process
for IoT hardware security. The hardware is the basis of any
IoT device [9]. Thus, there should be a structured process for
basic protection. The aim of this paper is to develop a basic IoT
hardware security framework that can be used to protect any
IoT device on a basic level. For this purpose, we compare three
official IoT security standards, published by BSI, NIST and
ENISA to identify important IoT hardware threats mentioned
in the standards. The result of this comparison serves as the
basis for a risk identification. We select four different and
commonly used IoT devices and perform a risk identification
to be able to find out if the mentioned hardware threats
really apply to different application scenarios. Based on the
results, we derive a basic IoT hardware security framework
that includes the identified risks. Our basic IoT hardware
security framework consists of three steps. Following these
steps ensures a basic protection of any IoT device regardless
of its application scenario.
Paper structure: Section II contains the related work. In
Section III, we perform a risk identification and generalize our
findings. In Section IV, we define the IoT hardware security
framework, followed by a discussion in Section V. Section VI
concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we introduce three official IoT security
standards and compare, which hardware threats are mentioned.
In this way, we are able to identify particularly important
threats. At the end of this section, we give a brief introduction
into risk identification.
A. IoT Hardware Security
The security of IoT devices should start with the security
of the hardware because it is the basis of any device [9].
There are already numerous publications, describing hardware
threats and suitable security practices for IoT devices [9]–[13].
Also official security standards have been developed and
published to ensure a secure usage of IoT devices and all their
data, as well as the entire system on which they are operated.
Each standard considers hardware security differently.
a) BSI: The BSI describes 47 product and technology-
neutral elementary threats in the BSI standard 200-3 [14].
They describe general risks for IT systems, regardless of their
application scenario. Not every elementary threat is affecting
each part of an IT system. The BSI lists all elementary threats
that are addressing a certain element of the IT system in the
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

IT Grundschutz Compendium [15]. For example, the module
”‘SYS.4.4 General IoT Devices”’ contains an appendix which
considers 20 of the 47 elementary threats that are affecting
IoT devices as Table I illustrates.
TABLE I
IOT ELEMENTARY THREATS
BSI Elementary Threats For IoT Devices
G 0.2 Bad Environmental Conditions
G 0.4 Pollution, Dust, Corrosion
G 0.8 Disruption of Power Supply
G 0.9 Failure or Disruption of Communication...
G 0.14 Interception of Information / Espionage
G 0.16 Theft of Devices, Storage Media and...
G 0.18 Poor Planning or Lack of Adaptation
G 0.19 Disclosure of Sensitive Information
G 0.20 Information or Products from an...
G 0.21 Manipulation with Hardware
G 0.23 Access to IT Systems
G 0.24 Destruction of Devices or Storage Media
G 0.25 Failure of Devices or Systems
G 0.26 Malfunction of Devices or Systems
G 0.28 Software Vulnerabilities or Errors
G 0.29 Violation of Laws or Regulations
G 0.30 Unauthorised Use or Administration of...
G 0.38 Misuse of Personal Information
G 0.39 Malware
G 0.40 Denial of Service
These threats apply to all IoT devices regardless of their
application scenario or security properties. They consider the
hardware and software, as well as a secure planning and usage.
Because they are completely unsorted, it is up to the user to
identify the hardware related threats.
b) NIST: The National Institute for Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST) published several drafts for IoT security in
2020 [16]–[20]. They consider the acquisition and implemen-
tation of IoT devices in companies and give an overview about
important steps that need to be considered, when planning
to use IoT devices. They also describe how the data of IoT
devices can be protected, as well as the entire system. As
Table II illustrates, the NIST does not use elementary threats
like the BSI but similar hardware threats are mentioned.
TABLE II
NIST IOT HARDWARE THREATS
NIST Hardware Threats For IoT Devices
Physical Damage
Unauthorized Access
Hardware Manipulation
The NIST specifies the mentioned threats. Physical damage
includes vandalism, as well as damage through high or low
temperatures and humidity [16]. This is similar to G 0.2
Bad Environmental Conditions and G 0.24 Destruction of
Devices or Storage Media. It is also mentioned that IoT
devices may have to endure physical damage through extreme
temperatures that could be caused by a fire. Unauthorized
Access is considered by considering the restriction of network
and local interfaces [17]. That means, the IoT device must be
able to deactivate local and network interfaces. In this way,
open communication interfaces could be deactivated to avoid
unauthorized access. This covers the elementary threat G 0.23.
Hardware manipulation is addressed by mentioning the use of
unique physical identifiers [17]. There is no precise definition
of what is meant by unique physical identifier, but there are
approaches, such as PUFs that leads to an unique behavior
of the device. Any physical manipulation would change this
unique behavior and detect the manipulation. This is similar
to G 0.21 Manipulation of Hardware.
The hardware threats are mentioned in different sections
of the drafts but there is no separate section or even a clear
process that defines general steps for protecting the hardware.
c) ENISA: The European Union Agency for Network
and Information Security (ENISA) [21] published the Baseline
Security Recommendations for IoT. This publication contains
a hardware security section. It is addressing IoT security
challenges and provides general security recommendations
when using IoT devices. Many hardware threats are considered
as shown in Table III.
TABLE III
ENISA IOT HARDWARE THREATS
ENISA Hardware Threats For IoT Devices
Elemental Threats
Environmental Threats
Physical Damage
Hardware Manipulation
Power Loss
Data Interception
The mentioned threats are also similar the elementary
threats from the BSI. ENISA separates the threat physical
damage. It is only caused through vandalism. Threats like
water and fire are not considered as physical damage but as
elemental threats. Environmental threats on the other hand are
causing damage through high or low temperatures. Intercep-
tion is not only a physical threat. It is mentioned that all
kinds of data interception has to be considered. That could
be the interception of data traffic or stored data but also
the interception of electromagnetic radiation emitted by the
hardware. Also the usage of hardware that provides security
features like specialised security chips to detect physical
manipulations is recommended. Disruption of power supply is
another mentioned threat. Even though ENISA has introduced
a separate section for hardware security, there is still no clearly
defined process for hardware protection.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

It can be clearly seen that the mentioned hardware threats
are very similar in the three security standards. Sometimes
the threats are just categorized differently. For example the
NIST considers fire as physical damage. For ENISA, on the
other hand, it is an elementary threat. However, both standards
consider fire as a threat.
Since the hardware threats are so similar in the individual
standards, we use the 47 BSI elementary threats as a basis for
our risk identification. The elementary threats are also product
and technology-neutral and compatible with other international
catalogs and standards.
B. Risk Analysis
In 2017, the BSI published the current version of the BSI-
Standard 200-3 [14] that defines the steps of a risk analysis.
The first step is the risk identification. Threats that are realistic
for a certain target object and its application environment are
identified by IT-security experts in a brainstorming session.
IT-security experts means information security officers, re-
sponsible specialists, administrators, users of the target object
and if available external expert. The risk identification is a
very important step, because not identified threats will lead
to a major security gap. It is only possible to classify threats
and define appropriate security practices for identified threats.
ENISA also starts the risk analysis process by considering
security incidents that have become public over the last years.
Also a threat taxonomy is illustrated [21]. Other official secu-
rity authorities like NIST [22] also define a risk management
process that starts with a risk identification.
They all understand risk identification as a fundamental step
for further risk management activities.
III. RISK IDENTIFICATION
In this section, we perform a risk identification for the hard-
ware of four different IoT devices. In the first step, we select
four IoT devices and list all their hardware components. We
use the hardware components to determine, which hardware
threats are affecting the IoT device. After that, we analyze
the 47 elementary threats from the BSI and select those that
potentially address the hardware. This is necessary because
the elementary threats from the BSI are not limited to the
hardware. In the next step, we perform the risk identification.
In particular, we systematically analyze for each IoT device
which hardware components are affected by the potential hard-
ware threats. Finally, we analyze and generalize our findings.
A. IoT Devices
For our investigation, we select four commonly used IoT
devices. The IoT Security Camera [23], the IoT Smoke De-
tector [24], the IoT Soil Temperature Sensor [25] and the IoT
Power Outlet [26]. The application scenarios of the devices are
as different as possible. In this way, we are able to determine if
the mentioned IoT hardware threats from the BSI really apply
to a wide range of different application scenarios.
Table IV gives a brief overview of all hardware components
of each IoT device.
TABLE IV
IOT DEVICE HARDWARE COMPONENTS
Security Camera
Smoke Detector
Cables, Camera,
Case, Infrared
LED’s, Micro SD
socket, Microphone,
Motherboard,
Processor, Sensors
Battery, Case, LED,
Motherboard,
Processor, Reset
Button, Sensors,
Speaker
Soil Temp. Sensor
Power Outlet
Antenna, Battery,
Case, Motherboard,
processor, Sensors
Case, Motherboard,
Processor, Sensors,
Socket Connector
B. Potential IoT Hardware Threats
The elementary threats, defined by the BSI cover a wide
range of potential threats for an entire company. They also
consider many hardware threats. We do not consider all of
them in this paper. Table V summarizes the hardware threats
we consider. We consider damage caused by G 0.1 Fire, G 0.2
Bad Environmental Conditions and G 0.3 Water because these
threats are always conceivable. For example, Water damage
can be caused by simple rain. Fire can be caused by a short
circuit and bad environmental conditions can stem from to high
or low temperatures. We also consider that an IoT device can
be damaged by excessive pollution. Dust and soil can intrude
through leaks and damage hardware components. This threat
is considered in G 0.4 Soiling, Dust, Corrosion.
TABLE V
POTENTIAL IOT HARDWARE THREATS
Potential IoT Hardware Threat
G 0.1 Fire
G 0.2 Bad Environmental Conditions
G 0.3 Water
G 0.4 Soiling, Dust, Corrosion
G 0.8 Disruption of Power Supply
G 0.12 Electromagnetic Interference
G 0.13 Interception of Radiation
G 0.21 Manipulation of Hardware
G 0.23 Unauthorized Entry
G 0.24 Destruction
On the other hand, we do not consider G 0.5 Natural Catas-
trophes, G 0.6 Catastrophes in the Environment and G 0.34
Attack. These threats do affect the entire hardware but they
are extreme events. Normally, IoT devices cannot be protected
against such incidents. G 0.8 Disruption of Power Supply
considers service interruptions or physical damages caused by
a sudden power loss. The reason for this could be a storm that
could occur at any time. Thus, we do also consider this threat.
The BSI also mentions G 0.12 Electromagnetic Interferences
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

as an elementary threat. Although it is not mentioned as an
elementary threat to IoT devices, the BSI points out that all
electronic devices are affected by G 0.12. Furthermore, the
BSI emphasizes that also wireless communication like WI-
FI can be affected by electromagnetic interferences. Because
IoT devices are electronic devices and they do communicate
wireless, we consider this threat. Data can be revealed through
electromagnetic interferences. The BSI is mentioning this
threat in G 0.13 but does not consider it as an elementary
threat for IoT devices. ENISA on the other hand mentions
that all threats that intentionally or unintentionally reveal data
has to be considered. Due to this fact, we also consider G
0.13 Interception of Radiation. This could also be considered
as G 0.14 espionage but this security practice also includes
non hardware aspects like the interception of data traffic. Due
to this fact, we do not consider G 0.14 espionage. We do also
not consider G 0.16 Theft of Devices, because the hardware
is not necessarily affected by a theft. G 0.21 Manipulation
of Hardware means every willful change of the original
hardware that leads to an unnoticed change in behavior. Since
devices are usually purchased from unknown manufacturers,
manipulation of the hardware cannot be ruled out. Thus, we
also consider this threat. With G 0.23 Unauthorized Entry, the
BSI considers physical access via unprotected communication
interfaces like USB ports [11]. Because many IoT devices
have such open communication interfaces, we also consider
this threat. The BSI differentiates between G 0.41 Sabotage
and G 0.24 Destruction. In both cases the aim is to damage
the IT systems. Destruction means willful attacks against the
device by impact. Sabotage describes the manipulation of the
environment that leads to a damage of the IT system. For
example closing the ventilation slots of a server, which leads
to overheating and finally damage or destroy the server. Since
both threats have the same goal, we summarize and consider
them in G 0.24 Destruction.
C. Implementation
In this step, we implement the risk identification. That
means, we analyze which hardware components are affected
by the potential hardware threats. Furthermore, we check for
each of the four IoT devices whether it has the affected
hardware component. G 0.1 Fire A fire cannot be assigned
to a specific hardware component. It could lead to a damage
of all hardware components of any IoT device. Therefore, we
consider all four IoT devices as affected.
G 02. Bad Environmental Conditions All four devices
have a clear defined operating temperature. That makes their
entire hardware affected by G 0.2 Bad Environmental Condi-
tions. The security camera can be operated between -10 and
+55 degrees. The smoke detector and the power outlet on the
other hand can only be operated above 0 degrees up to +40
degrees. The soil temperature sensor has the largest operating
temperature range from -40 to +80 degrees. If the devices
are operated outside the specified operating temperature, all
hardware components could be damaged. Thus, we consider
all four devices as affected.
G 03. Water In case of a water intrusion, non electric com-
ponents would not be affected. For example, all four devices
have a plastic case. This case can be wet but it would not be
damaged by the water. The damage would caused to electronic
components. All four devices have electronic components like
sensors, processors or LEDs. Thus, we consider all as affected.
G 0.4 Soiling, Dust, Corrosion Like G 0.3, this threat
does not affect non electric components like the plastic case
or buttons. Soiling, dust and corrosion would only cause
damage to electronic components. For example the sensors of
all four IoT devices could be disturbed by to much pollution
or the processor could overheat. Furthermore, the electronic
components could rust after moisture has entered the device.
Because all four devices have electronic components, we
consider all as affected.
G 0.2 Bad Environmental Conditions
G 0.1 Fire
G 0.3 Water
G 0.4 Soiling, Dust, Corrosion
G 0.24 Destruction
G 0.8 Disruption of Power Supply
G 0.21 Manipulation of Hardware
G 0.12 Electromagnetic Interference
G 0.13 Interception of Radiation
G 0.23 Unauthorized Entry
IoT Security Camera
IoT Smoke Detector
IoT Soil Temperature Sensor
IoT Power Outlet
IoT Security Camera
IoT Security Camera
IoT Power Outlet
Fig. 1. IoT Device Threats
G 0.8 Disruption of Power Supply The IoT security cam-
era and the IoT power outlet have a power connection. These
devices do not have batteries what makes them dependent
from external power sources. As soon as the power supply is
interrupted, both devices will be turned off immediately. Due
to this fact, we consider them as affected. The IoT smoke
detector and the IoT temperature sensor are battery operated.
That means, they are not connected to power sources and
therefore unaffected by this threat.
G 0.12 Electromagnetic Interference All electronic de-
vices can be disturbed by electromagnetic interferences. That
means, every electronic hardware component is affected. Since
each of the four IoT devices is an electronic device, we
consider them as affected.
G 0.13 Interception of Radiation All electronic devices
emit radiation. That means, every electronic hardware com-
ponent is affected. Since each of the four IoT devices is an
electronic device, we consider them as affected.
G 0.21 Manipulation of Hardware Manipulation of hard-
ware can also not be assigned to a specific hardware com-
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

ponent. For example, the case of all 4 devices could be
manipulated in such a way that water intrudes and cause dam-
age. The sensors could also be manipulated so that incorrect
measurement results are transmitted. Thus, we consider all
hardware components of each device to be affected.
G 0.23 Unauthorized Entry The IoT security camera is
the only device that has an open communication interface. It
is possible to connect SD cards. An attacker could use this SD
card socket to gain unauthorized access to the IoT security
camera or the entire network. Due to this fact, we consider
the IoT security camera as affected. The other three devices
not have any open communication interfaces, thus we consider
them as not affected.
G 0.24 Destruction It is always possible for an attacker to
intentionally destroy any hardware component of each of the
four devices. Thus, we consider all four devices as affected.
Figure 1 summarizes the results of our risk identification.
It can be seen that each of the four devices is addressed by at
least one threat. G 0.23 is only affecting the IoT camera. This
is because it is the only device with an open communication in-
terface. G 0.8 Disruption of Power Supply is affecting the IoT
camera and the IoT power outlet because they are connected
to the buildings electricity. All other threats are affecting each
of the four IoT devices. With our risk identification, we were
able to confirm that the threats mentioned in the official IoT
security standards apply to different application scenarios. In
the next step, we generalize our results to be able to use them
as a basis for our framework.
a) Generalization: As we can see, a hardware threat can
only affect an IoT device, if it has the addressed hardware
component. For example, G 0.23 Unauthorized Entry can only
affect IoT devices that have open communication interfaces
like USB ports. Figure 2 illustrates hardware components that
are affected by the potential IoT hardware threats.
We were able to determine that G 0.1, G 0.2, G 0.21 and
All Components
Open Communication
Interfaces
Electronic Components
Power Connection
G 0.2 Bad Environmental Conditions
G 0.1 Fire
G 0.3 Water
G 0.4 Soiling, Dust, Corrosion
G 0.24 Destruction
G 0.8 Disruption of Power Supply
G 0.21 Manipulation of Hardware
G 0.12 Electromagnetic Interference
G 0.13 Interception of Radiation
G 0.23 Unauthorized Entry
Fig. 2. Affected Hardware Components
G 0.24 are affecting every hardware component. That means,
as soon as a device exists, all components are addressed. G
0.3, G 0.4, G 0.12 and G 0.13 are affecting all
electronic
components in general. Since every IoT device communicates
electronically, it also consists of electronic components. Due
to this fact, all IoT devices are affected. G 0.8 is addressing
power connections to the building’s electricity. That means,
battery operated devices are generally not affected. G 0.23 is
affecting all IoT devices with open communication interfaces.
IV. FRAMEWORK DEFINITION
With our risk identification, we found out, which of the
hardware threats mentioned in the official IoT security stan-
dards apply to different IoT devices. In this way, we were
able to confirm that these threats are of particular importance
for the hardware of IoT devices. These threats must either be
considered for all IoT devices or at least for a large number
of different application scenarios. Due to this fact, we define
a basic IoT hardware security framework that considers these
threats in this section. There is a total of four hardware threats
(G 0.1, G 0.2, G 0.21 and G 0.24) that apply to all hardware
components of each of the four IoT devices. Because they
are also mentioned in the official IoT security standards, they
should definitely be considered when securing IoT devices.
Same holds for the four hardware threats (G 0.3, G 0.4, G
0.12 and G 0.13) that are affecting all electronic hardware
components of each of the four IoT devices. Because every IoT
device has electronic components, they should also definitely
be considered. There are two hardware threats that only apply,
in case the IoT device has a certain hardware component. G
0.8 is only affecting devices that have a power connection. G
0.23 requires open communication interfaces like USB ports
or SD card slots for example. In our framework, it has to
be checked, if the IoT device have these components. If the
device not have the hardware components, G 0.8 and G 0.23
not have to be considered. This process is illustrated by the
following pseudocode.
for EACH IoT-Device x do
SECURE G 0.1, G 0.2, G 0.3, G 0.4,
G 0.12, G 0.13, G 0.21, G 0.24 ON x
if x has power connection then
SECURE G 0.8 ON x
end if
if x has open communication interface then
SECURE G 0.23 ON x
end if
end for
x is representing a certain IoT device which goes through
the framework. SECURE indicates a function. If SECURE
is ON, the hardware threat is affecting the IoT device and
security practices has to be considered for a certain hardware
threat like G 0.8 for example. Otherwise, the hardware threat
is not affecting the device and no security practices has to be
implemented for this threat.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

V. DISCUSSION
The official security authorities consider different aspects
of IoT security e.g., a secure planning, implementation and
usage of IoT devices, data security, as well as software and
hardware security. Our comprehensive review and comparison
of three official IoT security standards, published by the BSI,
NIST and ENISA has shown that the mentioned hardware
threats are very similar within these standards. With our risk
identification, we were also able to confirm that the mentioned
hardware threats indeed affect a wide range of different
application scenarios for IoT devices. Thus, it is meaningful
to define a framework that includes these threats. However,
suggesting appropriate security practices for these threats is
not part of our framework, because they are already described
in the BSI module SYS.4.4. It is also important to mention
that further security measures are necessary. Our framework
serves as a basic hardware protection. It includes IoT hardware
threats that are affecting different IoT devices, regardless of
their application scenarios or security requirements. Additional
threats must be identified for each IoT device. In this way,
our framework can be included into other security activities.
For example, the BSI defines steps for a risk analysis in the
BSI standard 200-3 [14] to identify additional threats and
security practices according to specific application scenarios
and security requirements. Our basic IoT hardware security
framework could be implemented before the risk analysis. In
this way it can be embedded into existing security concepts.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper was motivated by the fact that official IoT
security standards do not consider a uniform procedure for
a basic hardware protection of IoT devices. The aim was
to develop a basic IoT hardware security framework that
can be implemented into existing security concepts. For this
purpose, we analyzed three official IoT security standards,
publishes by the BSI, NIST and ENISA. We compared which
hardware threats are mentioned. These threats seem to be of
great importance for IoT security in general. By performing a
risk identification for four different IoT devices, we checked
whether these threats really apply to different application
scenarios. We were able to confirm the importance of these
threats. In the next step, we used them to develop our basic
IoT hardware security framework. This framework consists
of a total of 10 hardware threats that are affecting different
application scenarios for IoT devices. It can be used as a basic
hardware protection for IoT devices, and it can be included
into existing security concepts.
REFERENCES
[1] Business Wire, “Strategy analytics: Internet of things now numbers 22
billion devices but where is the revenue?” 2021.
[2] I. Lee and K. Lee, “The Internet of Things (IoT): Applications, invest-
ments, and challenges for enterprises,” Business horizons, vol. 58, no. 4,
pp. 431–440, 2015.
[3] R. Gupta and R. Gupta, “ABC of Internet of Things: Advancements,
benefits, challenges, enablers and facilities of IoT,” in 2016 Symposium
on Colossal Data Analysis and Networking (CDAN).
IEEE, 2016, pp.
1–5.
[4] W. Zhao, S. Yang, and X. Luo, “On threat analysis of IoT-based systems:
A survey,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Smart Internet of
Things (SmartIoT).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 205–212.
[5] V. Hassija et al., “A survey on IoT security: application areas, security
threats, and solution architectures,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 82 721–
82 743, 2019.
[6] K. N. Mallikarjunan, K. Muthupriya, and S. M. Shalinie, “A survey
of distributed denial of service attack,” in 2016 10th International
Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control (ISCO).
IEEE, 2016,
pp. 1–6.
[7] M. Hosseinzadeh, B. Sinopoli, and E. Garone, “Feasibility and detection
of replay attack in networked constrained cyber-physical systems,” in
2019 57th annual allerton conference on communication, control, and
computing (Allerton).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 712–717.
[8] J. Kleinhans, “Internet of insecure things,” https://www.stiftung-nv.
de/sites/default/files/internet of insecure things.pdf, Accessed March
2022, 2017.
[9] S. Sidhu, B. J. Mohd, and T. Hayajneh, “Hardware Security in IoT
Devices with Emphasis on Hardware Trojans,” Journal of Sensor and
Actuator Networks, vol. 8, no. 3, p. 42, 2019.
[10] J. Milosevic, N. Sklavos, and K. Koutsikou, “Malware in IoT software
and hardware,” Conference: Workshop on Trustworthy Manufacturing
and Utilization of Secure Devices, 2016.
[11] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, B. Sikdar, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Consumer IoT:
Security Vulnerability Case Studies and Solutions,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 17–25, 2020.
[12] J. Deogirikar and A. Vidhate, “Security attacks in IoT: A survey,” in 2017
International Conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics
and Cloud) (I-SMAC), 2017, pp. 32–37.
[13] L. I. P. Technik, “SONOFF S55 Wi-Fi Smart Waterproof Socket,” 2020.
[14] Federal
Office
for
Information
Security
BSI,
“BSI-Standard
200-3:
Risk
Analysis
based
on
IT-Grundschutz,”
https:
//www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/BSI/Grundschutz/
International/bsi-standard-2003 en pdf.pdf,
Accessed
March
2022,
2017.
[15] ——,
“BSI
IT
Grundschutz
Compendium
Edition
2019,”
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/BSI/
Grundschutz/International/bsi-it-gs-comp-2019.pdf, Accessed March
2022, 2019.
[16] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “IoT Device Cyber-
security Guidance for the Federal Government,” https://nvlpubs.nist.
gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-213-draft.pdf, Accessed
March 2022, 2020.
[17] ——, “IoT Device Cybersecurity Capability Core Baseline,” https://
nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2020/NIST.IR.8259A.pdf, Accessed March
2022, 2020.
[18] ——, “IoT Non-Technical Supporting Capability Core Baseline,” https:
//nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2020/NIST.IR.8259B-draft.pdf, Accessed
March 2022, 2020.
[19] ——, “Creating a Profile Using the IoT Core Baseline and Non-
Technical Baseline,” https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2020/NIST.IR.
8259C-draft.pdf, Accessed March 2022, 2020.
[20] ——, “Profile Using the IoT Core Baseline and Non-Technical Baseline
for the Federal Government,” https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2020/
NIST.IR.8259D-draft.pdf, Accessed March 2022, 2020.
[21] European
Union
Agency
for
Cybersecurity,
“Baseline
Security
Recommendations for IoT,” https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
baseline-security-recommendations-for-iot/,
Accessed
March
2022,
2017.
[22] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Guide for Conduct-
ing Risk Assessments ,” https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/legacy/sp/
nistspecialpublication800-30r1.pdf, Accessed March 2022, 2012.
[23] Reolink, “Most Popular 5MP PoE Security IP Camera,” https://reolink.
com/gb/product/rlc-410/ Accessed March 2022, 2021.
[24] X-Sense
Innovations
Co.,
Ltd.,
“X-Sense
XS01-WT
Wi-
Fi
Smoke
Detector,”
https://www.x-sense.com/products/
x-sense-xs01-wt-wi-fi-smoke-alarm Accessed March 2022, 2021.
[25] Sigfox Foundation, “Remote Signals Soil Temperature Monitor,” https:
//partners.sigfox.com/products/remote-signals-soil-temperature-monitor
Accessed March 2022, 2021.
[26] Allterco Robotics, “Make Your Home Smart,” https://shelly.cloud/
documents/catalogues/catalogue.pdf Accessed March 2022, 2021.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-964-5
ACCSE 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computation, Communications and Services

