Cybersecurity Awareness Training provided by the Competence Developing Game
GHOST
Johannes A. König, Martin R. Wolf
Lab for IT Organization and Management
Aachen University of Applied Sciences
Aachen, Germany
email: koenig@fh-aachen.de, m.wolf@fh-aachen.de
Abstract—This paper introduces a Competence Developing
Game (CDG) for the purpose of a cybersecurity awareness
training for businesses. The target audience will be discussed
in detail to understand their requirements. It will be explained
why and how a mix of business simulation and serious game
meets these stakeholder requirements. It will be shown that a
tablet and touchscreen based approach is the most suitable
solution.
In addition, an empirical study will be briefly
presented. The study was carried out to examine how an
interaction system for a 3D-tablet based CDG has to be
designed,
to
be
manageable
for
non-game
experienced
employees. Furthermore, it will be explained which serious
content is necessary for a Cybersecurity awareness training
CDG and how this content is wrapped in the game.
Keywords-Cybersecurity; Awareness; CDG; Serious Game;
tablet game; business simulation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The
use of digital systems
is
crucial in
modern
companies and one effort of digitization is to use these
digital systems more efficiently. Through these efforts, more
and more analog processes are no longer available. By that,
nowadays almost all relevant records are stored in databases
or on cloud based file servers. Accordingly, the analog data
management will be reduced to minimum, if that has not
already happened.
Of
course,
a
well
functioning
digital
working
environment is required to ensure that the data are always
available. If data are accessible everywhere and always for
employees,
then
assailants
are
able
to
use
these
infrastructure, too. This issue is getting worse because
nowadays, in modern digitalized systems, employees are
owners of the keys necessary for data access. Consequently,
it is no longer necessary for an assailant to attack the IT-
infrastructure (IT = Information technology) or the IT-
department. He can focus his attack directly on the data-
using persons, e.g., with fishing-mails, social attacks,
manipulated flash drives, etc. Despite this issue, this kind of
always available data management is indispensable for
modern companies.
As a result, it is essential to train non-IT personnel how
to avoid cybersecurity risks arising within their daily
digitalized work [1]. Already today, employees are often the
biggest threat in the cybersecurity chain [2]. To offer an
effective cybersecurity awareness training, it is important to
establish a continuous training cycle to establish a long term
behavior change (req. 7 (see Section II)). It should be noted
that too many topics in too short time increase the risk to
overwhelm the exercisers which is also a reason for a long
training
cycle.
Basically,
a
successful
cybersecurity
awareness training has to solve two tasks. On one hand, it
has to attract the attention of the participants for a defined
time period. On the other hand it has to convey the training
content as efficiently as possible. Unfortunately, most of
today’s trainings solutions show weaknesses in dealing with
both aspects. A very suitable solutions to address both
aspects is the use of interactive computer based training
methods (req. 6 (see Section II)) [1]. The use of gaming
concepts in serious situations provides the possibility to
transfer the motivation of a gaming situation into a serious
learning context. In addition, games provide an environment
which allows to choose risky or intentional wrong strategies
just to figure out what will happen. Generally, there are three
major kinds of games with a serious approach: Serious
Games, Business Simulation/Games and the approach of
Gamification. Further, there are different gradations of, e.g.,
serious games, which are not consistently defined [3].
However,
instead
of
questioning
‘What
defines
a
particular game kind?’ König and Wolf suggest to focus on
the question ‘What characteristics of which game kind are
well suited for a specific application’ [4]. For this, they
provide the umbrella term Competence Developing Game
that encompasses all ‘serious’ game types (digital and
analog): ‘A Competence Developing Game (CDG) is a game
that has the primary purpose to teach knowledge, skills and
personal, social and/or methodological abilities, in work or
study
situations
and
in
professional
and
personal
development of the game player, by retaining the motivation
of a gaming situation’ [3].
Accordingly, this paper examines what features a digital
CDG must have in order to enable a cybersecurity awareness
training for (German) business users. Further, it shows how a
specific CDG, in which these features have been realized,
looks like. The game is called GHOST: Gamified Hacking
Offence Simulation-based Training (see [18]).
In Section II, the target audience will be determined in
more
detail,
to
understand
their
preferences
and
requirements. Section III addresses these requirements to
determine a suitable CDG game kind. In Section IV, it will
be explained how a game interaction interface design for a
huge audience group like, ‘business users’, could look like.
In addition, in Section V, a study that examines game
interaction systems will be briefly presented.
Section VI
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

describes the CDG GHOST which results from all previous
considerations. Section VII offers a conclusion and an
overview about future work and use.
II.
FINDING REQUIREMENTS BY UNDERSTANDING THE
AUDIENCE
A study in German enterprises determined that the three
most common reasons for employee related trainings are:
the development of employee skills, increasing employee
motivation and job satisfaction, and strengthening the
employee-company
relation
(req.
1).
The
study
also
determined the obstacles that inhibit employee trainings.
The identified top-two reasons not to train although there is
a need are: no time available to dispense employees (43,8%)
and missing internal capacity to organize a training (42,6%)
[5]. A second study in German companies identified training
costs and also the time issue as main reasons not to train
employees. The three most common training methods are
learning at the place of work (46%), external courses (28%)
and in-house courses (<28%) [6].
In the case of learning at the place of work, the time an
employee needs to be dispensed is limited to the actual
duration of the training, because there is no traveling time
(obstacle: no dispense time available) (req. 2.a.). The
absence of traveling time is linked to the absence of
traveling costs (obstacle: training costs) (req. 2.c.). By that,
the organizational complexity of the training is also reduced,
as employees must be covered shorter, and they are more
easily
accessible
in
crisis
situations,
etc.
(obstacle:
organizational capacity) (req. 2.b.). Accordingly in the case
of a continuous training cycle, as needed for a cybersecurity
awareness training and therefore for GHOST, learning at the
place of work seems particularly advantageous. These
considerations clarify why learning at the place of work is
the most popular training method and therefore it should be
the method of choice for GHOST (req. 2).
In addition to these employer-focused considerations,
the CDG GHOST is after all played by employees. As
explained in Section I, more or less every employee who
uses digital systems for work reasons should participate in a
cybersecurity
awareness
training.
By
that,
the
target
audience is broad (req. 3). Since the GHOST-Research-
Project is granted by a German ministry (Federal Ministry
of Education and Research), the German employee sector
was considered in first place. According to a report by the
Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training, the
average German trainee is 19.7 years old. The report shows
the first grouping called "16-year-olds and younger". The
average age of all employees was 43 years in 2016, with a
relatively balanced distribution between women (~ 47%)
and men (~ 53%) [7]. In summary, it can be stated that the
vast majority of the target group is> = 16 years and <67
years old, the average age is 43, and women and men are
similarly distributed.
As already mentioned, the use of a CDG as a training
instrument has the advantage that the motivation of a game
situation can be transferred in a serious context. In order to
use this advantage a CDG must entertain players in a fun
way while keeping the serious content in focus. This aspect
requires a CDG that matches the tastes and abilities of the
target audience. But because of the diversified target group,
it is nearly impossible to construct a CDG that fulfills the
individual game taste of each subject. On the other hand, the
development of many games that meet the individual taste
of each player would be expensive and it would stand in
opposite to the obstacle: ‘costs’. Following these remarks, a
CDG that addresses a broad audience always represents a
compromise in game design.
To find the major common denominator of each CDG-
Player
the
‘Pyramid
Assessment
Framework
for
‘Competence Developing Games’’ ('PACDG-Framework')
was studied with this objective. The PACDG-Framework
represents a tool that delivers the capability to analyze
different game kinds in a standardized way. To do so, the
framework covers, among other things, the entire player
perspective of a CDG [4], as it was proposed (also) in the
well-known
MDA-framework
for
conventional
entertainment games [8]. However, the PACDG-Framework
covers the CDG-Player perspective in the three steps:
“Experience”, “Aftereffect” and “Impact”. The last two
steps refer to the same idea: A CDG should lead to
competence acquisition, where the competences should help
to solve at least one real life problem (req. 4). The step
“Experience” is all about the player’s claim to participate in
an emphatic and positive gaming experience. In order to
meet this claim, a high, entertainment game equivalent,
quality must be delivered (req. 5).
Therefore, a CDG-based training that is accessible for all
employees who use digital systems for work reasons
should…:
Req. 1.
…develop
skills,
increasing
motivation
/
satisfaction, strengthening the job relation.
Req. 2.
…take place at the place of work to reduce
a. time expense and release time,
b. organizational overhead and by that
c. costs.
Req. 3.
…be accessible for every target group member.
Req. 4.
…help to solve a real life problem.
Req. 5.
…be similar in quality to an entertainment
game.
Additionally a CDG for a cybersecurity awareness training
should…: (see Section I)
Req. 6.
…use
interactive
computer
based
training
methods.
Req. 7.
…occur in a continuous training cycle.
III.
GAME TYPE SELECTION
As discussed in Section I and II, the use of interactive
computer
based
training
methods
is
suitable
for
a
cybersecurity awareness training. By that, a serious game, a
business
simulation
(supported
by
a
computer
based
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

simulation model) or a gamified work environment could be
used (fulfill req. 6). Furthermore it is of course possible to
develop a CDG in one of the named kinds with an
entertainment game comparable quality (fulfill req. 5).
However, every well designed cybersecurity awareness
training will match the requirements 1 and 4 too. It is
because the main CDG purpose would be to lead to
competence acquisition, where these competence acquisition
refers to the ability to perceive possible IT-Security threats
(fulfill req. 1). As IT-Security issues are a real life problem,
of course, such competences would support to solve a real
life problem (fulfill req. 4).
Therefore it can be assumed,
that a capable development team has the ability to develop a
CDG from one of the named game kinds that has the
potential to fulfill the requirements 1, 4, 5 and 6.
So to choose the most suitable CDG game kind it is
necessary to determine whether the requirements 2, 3 and 7
can be fulfilled.
„’Gamification’ is the use of game design elements in
non-game contexts“[9]. As a result, for the gamification
solution a deeply integration of game elements into the
computer environment of the employees would be necessary.
Based on such integration, e.g., correct behavior such as
scanning a flash drive or locking the screen during a longer
period of inactivity could be rewarded with points (fulfill
req. 2a-b). This solution would enable a permanent and time
neutral training without the need of learning to handle the
training instrument (fulfill req. 3 and 7). However, the
necessary development effort would be high (game element
integration in every used program and operating system) and
the privacy protection question would need clarification (not
fulfill req. 2c). In addition, the extensive system intervention
could have unforeseeable consequences on the IT security of
the manipulated operating systems and programs. For these
reasons a gamification solutions does not seem suitable for a
cybersecurity awareness training.
A closed ‘Business Simulation’ is characterized by the
participants being placed into a well-defined and prepared
action situation. A model calculation (the simulation)
assesses the decision effects on the game environment.
Further the model communicates the success of each action
to the players [10]. Since a business simulation is similar to a
board game the majority of the employees should not have
any problem to handle the game (fulfill req. 3). In addition,
many simulation games are turn-based anyway and thus
predestined for a long continuous game cycle (fulfill req. 7).
The problem here is that even if it is possible to organize
multiple business game session at the work (fulfill req. 2a),
fixed dates have to be coordinated between different
employees plus the necessary setup and dismantling of the
business game have to be organized in time (not fulfill req.
2b-c). That means, a business simulation can also not fulfill
all requirements.
The third alternative are ‘Serious Games’. Serious Games
are
video
games
where
the
primary
purpose
is
not
entertainment, enjoyment or fun, which does not mean that
Serious Games are not entertaining. They just have another
primary purpose, in kind of an ulterior motive [11]. A video
game has the advantage of being fully flexible in terms of
time. Further no coordination is required between employees
nor an organization of the game setup and it can also take
place at work (fulfill req. 2a-c) However, it is difficult to
realize a continuous training cycle without a turn-based
design and such a design is not intended for Serious Games
(not fulfill req. 7). But indeed it is the only approach that has
the potential to fulfill requirement 2.
At this point, a CDG reveals its strength. The solution is
to mix up the game kinds. Serious Games are the only game
type that fulfills the requirements 2a-c, but the turn-based
design of business simulations supports a continuous game
cycle. Accordingly the solution is to develop a Serious Game
with Business Simulation (turn-based) game mechanics (see
Section VI). Therefore, only the mix out of a Serious Game
and a Business Simulation has the potential to fulfill
requirements 1 to 7.
Due to this design choice, the biggest problem with
meeting the requirements will be requirement 3 in which a
CDG is demanded that is playable for every target group
member. In requirement 5, the demand for a quality which is
similar to an entertainment game is formulated. It needs to be
kept in mind that not all members of the target group have
experience with video games. It must therefore be ensured
that requirement 3 can be met without losing number 5.
Therefore, it is necessary to find an interaction-interface for a
high quality video game that does not require any video
game experience. Section V will introduce a case study that
was performed to evaluate how a game interface has to be
designed to meet requirement 3 even when the game uses a
3D-Environment to fulfill requirement 5. Section IV explains
the game interface development and the case study design.
IV.
DEALING WITH THE GAME INTERACTION ISSUE
Germany is the largest video game market in Europe with
sales of 2.8 billion euros in 2015. Overall, the video game
players are distributed as follows: PC / laptop 18.4 million
players, smartphone 17.2 million players, console 15.6
million players, tablet 11.5 million players, handheld 8.3
million players. It should be noted that smartphones and
tablets both use gaming apps, which means gaming apps
with 23 million players in total have the largest player
community [12]. Accordingly to that information even in the
aimed target group the amount of people who have
experience with gaming apps should be higher than with
other video game mediums.
In addition, it can be stated that touchscreens as used in
smartphones and tablets have significantly changed the
world of games in a short period of time. Modern
touchscreen devices show a very intuitive interaction design
that allows even children to use such a device successfully.
To explain why touchscreen devices are intuitive to such
strong extend, a look at the three-layered brain model is
helpful. To use a tool (in a computer context a tool means a
device like a keyboard, a mouse, a game controller, etc.)
humans have to make use of their neocortex. The cerebrum
represents the highest layer in the brain model. In contrast,
for ‘touches’, as needed during the use of a touchscreen
device, humans only need to use the reptilian brain, which is
represented in the lowest layer in the three-layered brain
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

model [13]. Both aspects, (a) the widely use of gaming apps
and (b) the intuitive aspect of modern touchscreen devices
lead to the conclusion that a gaming app based CDG is the
right choice for GHOST. Considering the broad target
audience it is further reasonable to use a tablet based gaming
app because of the larger screen size compared to a
smartphone.
According to the last Section, a CDG should be similar in
quality to an entertainment game (req. 5). Modern gaming
apps with the scope to be played over a longer period of time
(as it is planned in GHOST) implement a three-dimensional,
high quality looking game environment regardless of the
genre (see e.g. Lara Croft Go, Lego Star Wars, Jam League,
Modern Combat, Asphalt, Bothers: a tale of two sons, etc.).
By that, GHOST has to be a three-dimensional tablet based
CDG. On the other hand, GHOST has to be accessible for
every target group member (req. 3). Thus, an appropriate
game interaction system has to be found, that allows three-
dimensional tablet based playing even for people who have
never played a video game in their live. However, there are
well established interaction systems for videogames that are
also adapted for touchscreen devices.
The three most common used are 1st-Person, 3rd-Person
and God view. The idea behind the 1st-Person perspective is
that the player sees through the eyes of his player-character
(PC) [14]. In conventional video games, the player controls
the PC with mouse and keyboard [15]. Touchscreen based
1st-Person games are usually implemented in landscape
mode. To control the PC the left and right thumb are used.
The left thumb is used in the lower left area of the screen to
control the movement of the PC. The right thumb is used in
the lower right area of the screen to control the viewing
direction [16].
In games that implement a 3rd-person perspective, a
camera is used, which is aligned to the top of the PC to show
him completely. Sometimes 3rd-person is implemented with
„Trailing” option, then the camera is anchored at head height
behind the PC. In classic video games, the control is similar
to 1st-person games [15] the same applies to the touch screen
control.
A God View perspective, also referred to by the terms
'overhead', 'top down' and 'God Eye', provides a perspective
in which the game map is shown from above. Usually the
control is realized with the mouse [14]. Touchscreen-based
God View games are often implemented by touching directly
on the device. In such case the 'touch' on the device is
equivalent to a mouse click. Additionally manipulations of
the camera perspective are done by the usual multi-touch
gestures (e.g., two-finger zoom). Consequently, any 3D
gaming interaction system known from the Computer/Laptop
can be adapted for touch screen based games.
It has to be noted, that the 1st-person and 3rd-person
solution only replace mouse and keyboard through two
equivalent virtual generated tools. By that, according to
Schell [13], neocortex participation is still needed and
whereby the advantage of a touchscreen solution is not
exploited. Only the 'God View' interaction systems provide a
solution that’s natively transforms touch into interaction. As
a result, this kind of game interaction should be manageable
for inexperienced players and therefore is the right solutions
for a touchscreen based CDG and GHOST.
However, this question cannot be clarified for the
intended target audience based on the state of scientific
research. There
is a lack
of empirical research
that
investigates the suitability of existing touch screen-based
control and camera tracking paradigms for 3D serious
games. However, since a well-functioning interaction system
is elemental for the CDG success, a corresponding study has
been carried out that will be briefly discussed in the next
Section.
V.
INTERACTION SYSTEM FOR A TOUCHSCREEN BASED
CDG
A. Discussion of possible interaction systems
The main objective of the study is to investigate wheatear
it is possible to find an interaction-interface for a high quality
tablet based video games that does not require any video
game
experience.
Such
an
interaction-interface
would
connect requirements 3 and 5 that seem as if they exclude
each other. The presence of such an interface would open the
possibility to develop a cybersecurity awareness training that
fulfills all seven requirements in the first place.
From a theoretical point of view, a game that responds as
intuitive as possible on touch screen input should be
advantageous for the players. As shown in the last Section
even the ‘God View’ interaction system relies on not
intuitive multi-touch gestures for camera control. For that
reason, a new interaction system for the GHOST prototype
was designed.
These ‘optimized’ called interaction system provides the
PC control via finger touch. The PC automatically moves to
the location of the map where the map was touched. Even
the interaction with game objects or non-player characters
(NPC) works this way. If a player, e.g., touches a game
object his PC will automatically move to the point next to the
object. After arriving at this point an interaction dialog opens
automatically. To remove the maybe not intuitive camera
control the whole game map is divided in different camera
zones (partly multiple zones in one room). Each zone
provides its own static camera perspective. If the player
controls his avatar from one camera zone to another, the
camera angle changes automatically. The player is not aware
of where the zone boundaries are, the camera angle change
just happens. To help the CDG-Player’s orientation, there is
also a second ‘optimized+’ called interaction system where
the camera change from one position to the next one appears
in a smooth move.
Additionally to the three mentioned interactions systems
(1st-Person, 3rd-Person, God View) both versions were
examined in a blind study. For this purpose, a small game
was designed where the participant had to find six game
objects or NPCs to interact with. At the beginning of the test
a participant is set in a game environment (a space ship) with
six rooms and two corridors. The participant does not get any
map because the study also refers to the orientation ability.
Finally the time needed to complete the interaction tasks was
measured.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A total of five mini games, called ‘demo versions’,
because they based on the GHOST source code, were
developed:

Demo1: 1st-Person

Demo2: 3rd-Person

Demo3: God View

Demo4: optimized+

Demo5: optimized
Deviating from the previous explanation of 3rd-Person
interaction-systems the 3rd-Person PC control was changed.
Usually the PC is controlled with the left and right thumb as
in a 1st-Person tablet game.
Indeed, the interaction system in Demo2 uses a touch
based PC movement control as in the ‘optimized’ demo
versions. In addition, camera rotation was enabled by
integrating a two-finger-rotate gesture for camera rotation.
The classic two thumb control is still used in Demo1. Figures
1 to 4 are screenshots made of each demo version,
respectively.
Figure 1.
1st-Person interaction system with dynamic appearing
‘activate’-button for object interaction (Demo1).
Figure 2.
3rd-Person interaction system before and after two-finger-rotate
(Demo2).
Figure 3.
Good-View before and after gesture based camera rotation
(Demo3).
Figure 4.
Adjacent camera zones in the optimized (+) interaction system
(Demo4&5).
B. Summary of Study Results
TABLE I.
SUBJECT DISTRIBUTION
subject distribution
Demo1
Demo2
Demo3
Demo4
Demo5
age<=37
7
7
7
7
6
age>37
6
6
6
6
6
ݔ̅ age
39
38
40
41
41
SD age
17
16
16
15
15
n woman
6
6
6
6
6
n men
7
7
7
7
6
n
13
13
13
13
12
Figure 5.
Average play time and 95% confidence interval.
In total 64 participants participated in the study. Table I
provides information about the exact distribution of the test
subjects to the individual demo versions.
An ANOVA was calculated and, by that, proved that the
playtime
differences
are
statistically
significant (ߙ=
.05; ܨ(ସ,ହଽ) = 4,26; p < 0,0011) .
Figure
5
shows
the
average playtime for each demo version. It can be seen, that
the playing time of the demo version 4 and 5 are the shortest
ones. As a result, the assumption that an intuitive interaction
system simplifies the access to the game can be confirmed.
By that, the ‘optimized’ or ‘optimized+’ interaction systems
are the most suitable solutions for the GHOST-Prototype.
Moreover the results show that there are performance
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

differences between the groups <=37 and >37 and that demo
version 4 and 5 minimize these differences.
VI.
GHOST: A CDG BASED CYBERSECURITY AWARENESS
TRAINING
Following the remarks of this paper, GHOST is a turn-
based,
tablet-based,
serious
game
like,
Competence
Developing
Game,
which
provides
a
cybersecurity
awareness training for end users in companies. Furthermore,
in
GHOST
a
new
intuitive
interaction
systems
was
implemented. By that, it has the potential to fulfill the seven
requirements which were derived in chapter two.
Whether GHOST meets these requirements depends on
the game design. First of all the game design tracks two
aspects. It creates the space to experience which personal
actions
are
positive
respectively
negative
for
the
cybersecurity. Second, it demonstrates which and why IT-
department activities are necessary and meaningful. By that,
it allows the end user to notice missing activities in his/her
company and in addition it will increase the employee’s
acceptance for such activities.
In case of a cybersecurity training too many topics in a
short time period increase the risk to overwhelm the
exercisers [1]. Therefore in the beginning each game round
(playtime 30 to 60 min) treats only one serious topic. The IT
risks are hidden between other tasks and rarely occur, as in
reality. In order to evaluate which serious content should find
its way into the GHOST CDG, Annex ‘A’ of ISO 27001 was
analyzed
(ISO/IEC
27001:
Information
technology
–
Security techniques – Information security management
systems – requirements, see [17]). In Table II, the serious
topic of each game round is presented.
The idea behind GHOST’s game design is to minimize
the organizational effort. By a trick, GHOST still provides
player the illusion of playing together. Every GHOST
training is designed for 8 players in two groups at the same
time. The training consists of 16 units (game rounds) in total.
However, each round gets a specific time period in which the
round is active and ready for play. In this period each player
can choose the moment to play the round individually. At the
end of the time period the GHOST-System calculates, based
on each individual result in a group, a common group result
which is the starting point for the next round. If, e.g., a
player misses to participate in one round the whole group
result will be weakened. This kind of game design uses the
business simulation advantages like group motivation and
the enforcing of a specific continuous training cycle without
the disadvantages of complicated appointment organization.
Nevertheless
GHOST
allows
even
real
multiplayer
experience. The Round 7&8 as 15&16 require all 8 players
to participate the training at the same time. Each group has to
be in one physical room, the merging of the groups takes
place via internet. These real multiplayer rounds serve as
highlights of the complete training cycle. However, since
two multiplayer rounds are played at one appointment,
accordingly only two appointments must be arranged. As a
result GHOST provides 16 play rounds and only requires the
coordination of two appointments, which results in a huge
reduction of the organizational effort compared to business
simulations. Table II shows the assignment between serious
content and game rounds.
As already mentioned, the serious content in GHOST is
hidden between other tasks. To assure a simple knowledge
transfer between the game environment and the real world it
seems to be obvious to build an office environment inside
the game. Accordingly, the player would solve everyday
work tasks inside the game world to come across serious
content from time to time. This would result in a game that
simulates an office for a game player whose position is
currently an office, means playing-office in the office.
TABLE II.
GAME ROUNDS
Round
Serious topic
1
Screen lock
2
Handling of foreign flash drives
3
Phishing-Mails
4
Backups
5
Mobile Devices (especially Smartphones)
6
Websites, software installation, own IT infrastructure
7&8
(MP)
Passwords, Information encoding, Emergency response,
Environmental Security, Backups
9
Access rights
10
Environmental Security, safe workplace
11
Virus prevention, Keylogger, Work delegation
12
Network Devices, Audits,
13
Log files, Access Right Management
14
Quiz Round
15&16
(MP)
Flash drive, Information encoding, Phishing-Mails, Malware,
Passwords, Emergency response
MP = Multiplayer
This would most likely ruin the fun aspect of the game,
what would gamble away the main advantage of a CDG, the
transfer of the motivation of a game situation to a serious
context. For this reason, the game was moved 50 years into
the future. The players find themselves in a science fiction
scenario on a space ship named GHOST. They experience a
journey of sixteen laps (one lap one round) and figure out
quickly that someone tries to sabotage the mission by
infiltrating the ship's computer systems.
As a crew member each player has to handle a lot of day-
to-day tasks, which are intentionally similar to 2017 tasks in
a normal office. Nevertheless, a player has to be constantly
on guard while interacting with the computer systems or
other aspects in his environment. The assailant could start the
next cyber-attack in any moment, with any strategy.
VII.
CONCLUSION
GHOST is a novel approach to perform a cybersecurity
awareness training for end users in companies. As shown in
Section II such a training should fulfill at least seven
requirements to match employer and employee expectations.
However, this paper shows that the exploitation of the CDG
concept provides the necessary resources to develop a
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

suitable game design. It turns out, however, that the game
control, due to the large target group, requires a closer
examination. Therefore a study was carried out that solving
this issue (evaluate req. 3). How the serious game content
was systematically developed out of the well-known ISO
27001 is also explained.
Summarized a GHOST training can take place at the
place of work to reduce the time expense. Since an extensive
preparation is not needed the organizational overhead is
reduced. Both aspects also reduce the training costs (req. 2a-
c). Because of its sophisticated empirical evaluated (see
Section V) interaction systems even employees without any
game experience can participate the training (req. 3). In
addition, this interaction system helps GHOST to have an
entertainment game look and feel (req. 5). The turn-based,
business game inspired, game design allows further a
continuous training cycle, that is made possible with a
computer-based training (req. 6 and 7). Moreover, the social
significance of - and the increased attacks on- IT systems
leave no doubt on the real life relevance of the underlying
problem (req. 4).
In
this
discussion,
only
requirement
1
was
left
unmentioned. Requirement 1 demands a CDG to help an
employee to develop skills, to increase his motivation and
satisfaction and to strength the job relation. As already
shown requirement 1 aspects have been taken into account
throughout
the
GHOST
development.
Nevertheless
requirement 1 can only be substantiated by field studies.
However, the GHOST prototype will be ready for use in
short future. Accordingly, for the experimental verification
of the GHOST aftereffect a field study is already planned
and will be performed in April 2018. The study will provide
the possibility to validate the GHOST aftereffect and, by
that, to prove the fulfillment of requirement 1 that is not
addressed in this paper. After the evaluation of the GHOST
aftereffect GHOST will be used for cybersecurity awareness
trainings in real life.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Nagarajan, J. M. Allbeck, A. Sood and T. L. Janssen,
“Exploring game design for cybersecurity training”, Cyber
Technology in Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems
(CYBER), IEEE International Conference, pp. 256-262, 2012.
[2]
S. Culp, “Cyber Risk: People Are Often The Weakest Link In
The
Security
Chain”,
Forbes,
[Online].
Available:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/steveculp/2016/05/10/cyber-
risk-people-are-often-the-weakest-link-in-the-security-chain,
Last access: 27.10.2017, 2016.
[3]
J. A. König and M. R. Wolf, “A New Definition of
Competence Developing Games,” ACHI 2016, pp. 95-97,
2016.
[4]
J. A. König and M. R. Wolf, “The Pyramid Assessment
Framework for ‘Competence Developing Games’”, HCI
International, pp. 232-237, 2016.
[5]
S. Seyda and Werner, „IW Continuous Vocational Training
Survey 2014 - Companies Show In-creased Committed and
Invest more in Enhancing their Employees’ Skills“, Cologne
Institute for Economic Research, 2014.
[6]
Gesellschaft für Innovationsforschung und Beratung mbH.,
„Empirical monitoring to the qualification situation in the
German economy“ (original foreign title:„Empiriegestütztes
Monitoring zur Qualifizierungssituation in der deutschen
Wirtschaft“), Berlin: Federal Ministry for Economics Affairs
and Energy, 2014.
[7]
BIBB, “Data Expose to the Vocational Training Report 2017
– Information and analysis in on the development of
vocational training” (original foreign title: „Datenreport zum
Berufsbildungsbericht 2017 - Informationen und Analysen zur
Entwicklung der beruflichen Bildung“), Federal Institute for
Vocational Education and Training, 2017.
[8]
R. Hunicke, M. Leblanc and R. Zubek, “MDA: a formal
approach to game design and game research” In: Proceedings
of the Challenges in Games AI Workshop, Nineteenth
National Conference of Artificial Intelligence, 2004.
[9]
S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled and L. Nacke, “From game
design elements to gamefulness: defining "gamification"”,
Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek
Conference:
Envisioning
Future
Media
Environments.
Finland: ACM, pp. 9-15, 2011.
[10] U. Blötz, “Business Games and Serious Games in Vocational
Training” (original foreign title: „Planspiele und Serious
Games in der beruflichen Bildung“), Bertelsmann, 2015.
[11] D. Michael and S. Chen, “Serious Games: Games That
Educate, Train, and Inform,” Thomson Course Technology
PTR, 2005.
[12] GTAI, “The Gaming Industry in Germany”, Berlin: Germany
Trade and
Invest,
supported by Federal
Ministery for
Economics Affairs and Energy, 2016.
[13] J. Schell, “The Art of Game Design – A Book of Lenses”, 2.
Edition, mitp, 2016.
[14] L. N. Taylor, “Video games: perspective, point-of-view, and
immersion”, Master Thesis - University of Florida, 2002.
[15] D. A. Bowman, E. Kruijff, J. J. LaViola Jr. and I. Poupyrev,
“3D User interfaces: Theory and Practise“, Addison Wesley,
USA, 2005.
[16] T. Hynninen, “First-Person Shooter Controls on Touchscreen
Devices: a Heuristic Evaluation of Three Games on the iPod
Touch”, Master Thesis - University of Tampere, department
of Computer Sciences, 2012.
[17] ISO/IEC 27001:2013 - Annex A, information technology -
Security techniques -
Information
security management
systems – Requirements, 2013.
[18] Lab
for
IT-Organization
and
Management,
“Gamified
Hacking
Offence
Simulation-based
Training”,
[Online].
Available:
http://itom.fh-
aachen.de/index.php/forschung/ghost,
Last
access:
10.03.2018, 2018.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

