Reactions to Immersive Virtual Reality Experiences
Across Generations X, Y, and Z
Zbigniew Bohdanowicz, Jarosław Kowalski, Daniel Cnotkowski, Paweł Kobyliński, Cezary Biele 
National Information Processing Institute
Warsaw, Poland
email: zbigniew.bohdanowicz@opi.org.pl, jaroslaw.kowalski@opi.org.pl, daniel.cnotkowski@opi.org.pl,
pawel.kobylinski@opi.org.pl, cezary.biele@opi.org.pl
Abstract— Immersive Virtual Reality (IVR) may potentially
effect considerable lifestyle changes in societies, comparable to
those seen with the spread of smartphones. Questions arise as
to the significance of IVR, and how people will respond to this
type of innovation. The article presents the results of a
qualitative study which assesses the reactions of adults from
Generations X, Y and Z to IVR. 18 people aged 20-55 took part
in the study; seven IVR applications were used. The study
assessed participants' reactions, level of presence, affective
response and susceptibility to cybersickness. The development
potential of IVR was also considered. It was assumed that
older generations would be less present in the IVR and their
subjective assessment of satisfaction would be lower. The
results of the study confirmed the hypothesis that, as people
age, their level of presence in IVR decreases, but surprisingly,
it emerged that satisfaction with being in IVR increases along
with the age of the participants.
Keywords - Immersive Virtual Reality; Generations; Presence;
Immersion; Emotions; Adults; Qualitative Methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
The
definition
of
presence
in
virtual
space
was
formulated as early as 2005 by Slater and Sanches-Vives, as
the degree to which people actually respond to stimuli in
Virtual Reality (VR), at the level of basic psychological
reactions as well as in terms of complex emotions and
behaviors. The simplest way to describe it is that a person
has the impression of being in a virtual space rather than in
the place where they are physically present [1].
Currently, the development of VR technology is at an
interesting stage where, on the one hand, simulations have
reached a relatively high level of advancement and can
provide a suggestive experience to the senses of sight and
hearing, while, on the other hand, there are few people (at
least in Poland) who have had actual contact with the
technology. The new devices, introduced in 2016 (Oculus
Vive in March of 2016, followed by others) opened a new
level of VR-experience quality. High resolution vision, a
wide scope of view, instant and smooth reaction to body
movements and interactive controllers enabled simulation
that had not been technically possible before. Therefore, to
distinguish the experience offered by the generation of
devices available since 2016, we shall refer to it as
Immersive Virtual Reality (IVR).
In
the
near
future,
IVR
is
expected
to
become
commonplace,
as
devices
gradually
become
more
comfortable, lighter, cheaper and simpler to use. It is likely
that IVR technology will increasingly be used by people of
all ages and will gradually become a more ordinary element
of our lives. This impending technological change leads to
questions about its use and its likely impact on people's way
of life. Who will use it? Is the user group limited to younger
people who feel at ease with adopting new technological
solutions? Will older people take full advantage of the
opportunities offered by IVR? Finally, how will the
perceptions of this technology differ among people of
different ages?
With these questions in mind, we decided to conduct the
qualitative study which is presented in this article. The study
evaluates the impressions of adult respondents after their
first contact with IVR technology. In order to capture age-
related differences, three age-differentiated groups of people
were invited to participate in the study. In Section 2, groups
representing
generations
labelled
by
sociologists
as
Generations X, Y and Z are described.
Section 3 shows
age-related differences in the reception of the IVR. Section
4 describes the dimensions on which experience of presence
in the IVR is evaluated in the literature. The study objective,
research questions and methodological details of the study
are laid out in Sections 5, 6 and 7. The results are described
in section 8, followed by discussion in Section 9 and
conclusions in Section 10.
II. GENERATIONS X, Y, Z AND TECHNOLOGY
People of different ages may have diverse approaches to
digital innovation, as Information Technology (IT) plays
different
roles
across
generations.
The
dynamic
development of the industrial economy, particularly visible
since the second half of the 20th century, has introduced a
large number of changes to the world in which subsequent
generations grew up. In order to better capture and describe
these
differences,
sociologists
have
distinguished
the
following generations [2][3]:

Generation X was born in the period between 1965-
1980. Their younger years were spent in the 'analogue'
world, without computers and the Internet. Computers
appeared only later in their adult lives when they were
either already working (in the case of people born
around 1965) or in their late teens (the younger part of
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

this generation). This generation became familiar with
smartphones as grown-ups.

Generation Y (Millennials) are those born between 1981
and 1996. Their childhoods coincide with the explosion
of the Internet and personal computing. To them,
computer literacy and Internet are natural, but in their
childhoods, small, portable devices with high-speed
Internet access (smartphones, tablets) were not yet
widely available, so their childhoods resembled those of
previous generations. Generation Y started to use
portable devices as teenagers, so they gradually entered
the digital world during adolescence.

Generation Z are those born between 1997 and 2012. To
this generation, the digital world and the Internet have
always been available. They do not remember a world
without
mobile
devices
and
broadband
Internet
access;
the
“pixel
world” functions
as a
natural
complement to the “real world”.
Each of these generations experienced their initial
contact with digital technology at a different stage of their
lives, so it is likely that they will have differing opinions
about being in a virtual world (Table 1.). One might suspect
that the opinions on IVR expressed by Generation Z, born in
a world dominated by digital technology and broadband
Internet, would be different from those who had to learn to
use digital devices when they were adults (Generation X
and, to a lesser extent, Generation Y). Evaluation of how
age
affects
users’ behaviours
and
responses
to
IVR
experience can be valuable from various perspectives.
Estimation of this technology's potential within specific age
groups may help to evaluate how IVR could influence the
lifestyle of future societies. Software developers may also
benefit from age-related insights, in order to prepare
applications more adequately suited to the needs of specific
age groups.
In order to verify whether there are any differences
between the generations in their assessments of IVR
experiences, three age groups were distinguished in the
recruitment for the interview. These represent the first years
of the X, Y and Z generations, as defined by sociologists
and
mentioned
above.
It
should
be
noted
that
the
generational
changes
described
by
sociologists
from
Western Europe and the USA arrived in Poland with a few
years' delay.
III. AGE-RELATED DIFFERENCES IN THE RECEPTION OF
IMMERSIVE VIRTUAL REALITY
Due
to
intensified
development
and
increasing
availability of IVR technology, the number of research
projects using this tool has grown rapidly. It should be noted
that the general term ‘Virtual Reality’ (VR) may be applied
to various experiences which differ from one another
significantly. Sometimes, it defines an experience with a
personal computer, some researchers designate experiences
with basic Virtual Technology devices (before 2016) as VR,
while others relate VR to the current IVR technology.
TABLE 1. PRESENCE OF A GIVEN TECHNOLOGY (TV, PERSONAL
COMPUTER, INTERNET, SMARTPHONE) DURING CHILDHOODS
OF SUBSEQUENT GENERATIONS.
Generation vs technology during
childhood
Gen X
1965-80
Gen Y
1981-96
Gen Z
1997-12
TV (analogue)
1950-60 - USA,
1960-70 - Poland
yes
yes
yes
Personal Computer
1995 - Windows 95
-
yes
yes
Internet
1995 - civilian use
-
yes
yes
Smartphone
2007 - iPhone 2G
-
-
yes
In this article, we focus on the research projects done in
2016 or later, as the previous studies would have been
carried out with earlier generations of VR technology,
significantly inferior to the type available today. The vast
majority
of
IVR
research
is
conducted
with
young
respondents. The first results currently available on the
potential of IVR technology for older people [4] indicate
that IVR may be accepted by this group of users. The
usefulness of IVR is also studied on sample groups
representing older generations in the context of training
courses, for instance, which are aimed at improving the
cognitive functions of older people [5] or the development
of new tools to assess memory functions in older people [6].
Individual reports [7][8] indicate that performance levels in
IVR may be lower among older people than among young
people. However, there is no definitive research aimed at
exploring how age impacts one's IVR reception. It is also
interesting how the age of the users may affect one's
approach to using IVR (e.g., the level of task completion),
and how the same experience is evaluated, whether in terms
of
presence,
subjectively
perceived
pleasure
or
effectiveness. It is also worth noting that all of the studies
mentioned above focus on one experience (usually through
a widely available application). In order to more effectively
capture the potential differences in the reception of IVR, we
believe it is necessary to use a wider range of experiences,
preferably including experiences created specifically for the
study [9].
IV. DIMENSIONS FOR IVR EXPERIENCE EVALUATION
Being in a virtual space is a relatively new possibility.
Scholarly sources do not yet have a well-established,
universally accepted theory that describes the parameters of
virtual
reality
experiences
and
their
psychological
dimensions. Among existing research there is work by
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Slater [10], who suggests that the experience of immersion
in a virtual environment should be described in two
dimensions: Place Illusion (PI) and Plausibility Illusion
(Psi). Slater assumes that PI pertains to the illusion of IVR
being the same as actual reality, in terms of physical
parameters. Therefore, the level of presence in the PI
dimension
depends
on
the
physical
features
of
the
simulation (image quality, resolution, field of vision, natural
simulation of head movements and other factors).
PI concerns the interpretation of events that take place in
virtual reality. The level of presence in this dimension
depends on the extent to which virtual events are perceived
by the participant as actually occurring, whereby the
participant will react to them as he/she would in the real
world. Importantly, these two dimensions are independent
of each other, i.e., it is possible to experience a presence at
the PI level (where technical excellence in the simulation is
high) while the Psi level is low (where events are interpreted
as unrealistic and therefore do not engage the participant).
The opposite situation may occur when, despite the low
technical quality of the simulation, events are perceived as
real (for example, this could be the experience of high
involvement in a game running on a simple personal
computer from the 1980s).
In 2018, a review of literature on immersion technology
was published by Suh and Prophet [11]. Based on an
analysis of 54 articles on the topic, the authors compiled a
list of the most common dimensions used to describe the
IVR experience. The analysis showed that the concepts used
are similar in meaning to the definition of presence by Slater
[10] in terms of PI and Psi. Alternative notions describing
presence
in
IVR
include
Immersion
(with
its
two
dimensions: Physical Immersion and Mental Immersion)
and Presence (with its three dimensions: Physical Presence,
Spatial
Presence
and
Social
Presence).
An
important
complement of Suh’s and Prophet’s work on the approach
proposed by Slater, is a subjective evaluation of the IVR
experience, measured by the intensity of one’s affective
reactions, such as Pleasure, Arousal, Dominance, and
Positive/Negative Emotions.
Cybersickness is an important aspect of being in virtual
reality. It describes a deterioration of well-being, resulting
from a virtual world experience. Shafer et al. conducted a
study proving that cybersickness occurs among players
using IVR technology and is particularly common in games
with higher levels of sensory conflict, like first person
games [12]. This aspect of IVR experience would also be
covered in the study.
V. THE STUDY OBJECTIVE
The study presented in this article was designed to
evaluate the reactions of adults to their first experiences
with IVR technology. In particular, the goal of the research
was to compare the reactions of people of different
generations (X, Y and Z). Our aim was to find out if the age
at which at which a person first became familiar with digital
technology has an impact on one’s sense of presence during
IVR experience and its evaluation.
Based on a literature review of virtual reality, we
decided to describe this experience on the basis of two
dimensions defining the sense of presence in virtual space,
according to Slater's methodology [10], namely physical
presence (PI) and reality of events (Psi). We assumed that a
high sense of presence is manifested by the fact that the
participant behaves in the virtual world as he/she would in
reality: moves around freely, grips and manipulates objects,
or reacts to stimuli in the same way as he or she would react
in reality.
Based on the work of Suh and Prophet [11], the
experience was also evaluated in terms of the respondent’s
affective reaction (Positive/Negative Emotions, Pleasure,
Arousal, Dominance). We assumed that affective reaction is
an indicator of subjective evaluation of the experience. A
high level of positive emotions and feelings of pleasure
following the experience indicate positive evaluation and
satisfaction from experience, while negative emotions and
unpleasant impressions indicate a negative evaluation.
Our study was also intended to find out if the
respondents were affected by cybersickness during their
IVR experiences. This issue was raised by the researchers
and was the subject of a follow-up telephone conversation
one day after.
VI. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Following a review of the literature on the subject, we
formulated
the
following
questions
concerning
the
relationship
between
age
and
reactions
to
an
IVR
experience:
Would the youngest respondents exhibit the highest
levels of presence? How might the level of presence change
as the age of the respondents increases?
Presence is understood here in two dimensions - as the
physical presence (the freedom of movement, the speed of
learning object manipulation) and as the sensed reality of
the events in the virtual world (behaves similarly as one
would in the real world).
VII. METHOD
The qualitative interview was conducted in June and
July of 2019, in Warsaw. Each interview with a respondent
took about 1.5 hours to complete and consisted of the
following three stages:
1. Introduction. An initial conversation concerning the
purpose and procedure of the research, the participants’
interests and their previous experience with IVR. At this
stage, the IVR equipment was also presented to the
participant with information about how to operate it.
2. IVR experience. At this stage, seven different
applications were used, one after another, in random order.
The total time spent in the IVR was about 40 minutes.
3. Interview. At the beginning, questions were asked
about the respondent’s general impressions, the perceived
attractiveness of the experience and about the elements that
drew his or her attention. The respondent's impressions of
the IVR experience were discussed in detail, with the
respondent comparing the experience to reality, the factors
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

that make the experience “real” and the factors negatively
impacting the feeling of presence. Questions were also
asked regarding any difficulties or barriers the respondent
felt, and about his or her interest in repeating the experience.
The interview also discussed the future applications of the
technology, the potential for its development and the
expected
benefits
and
risks
associated
with
the
dissemination of IVR.
In addition, the day after the study, the investigator
called the participants to ask if they had noticed any changes
in their mood and if they had any other observations about
the experience that they would like to convey.
The qualitative interview format was selected as the
most adequate method for exploring the subject of this
study, as the topic had not yet been well researched. The use
of qualitative interviews allows one to generate new
hypotheses
and
define
interesting
avenues
for
future
research. The data collected during the study were subjected
to qualitative analysis for commonly-recurring themes,
using the method of thematic analysis [13]. The study was
carried
out
in
compliance
with
rules
governing
the
implementation of qualitative research; a moderator and an
observer taking notes took part in the implementation of
each study.
A.
Respondents
The study involved 18 people (9 females and 9 males),
all residents of Warsaw, Poland. The respondents were
recruited in three age groups (50% F and 50% M):
- 6 people aged 20-25 (from Generation Z)
- 6 people aged 35-40 (from Generation Y)
- 6 people aged 50-55 (from Generation X)
The aim of the recruitment process was to invite
individuals typical of their respective populations in terms
of education (mostly secondary education), income and
occupation (the dominant group were employed in the
commercial and services sectors).
B.
Equipment
To conduct the research, we used a computer set
equipped with an Nvidia GTX 1070TI graphics card to
ensure the smooth operation of the applications. The IVR
set used in the study was an HTC Vive Pro with HTC Vive
controllers, selected due to its image quality, wide field of
view, easy-to-use goggles, built-in headphones and pupil
spacing adjustment mechanism.
C.
Stimuli
The study used seven applications that present different
IVR environments. We selected
the applications that
demonstrate IVR's practical capabilities in a variety of uses.
Games were deliberately not used, as these are generally
marketed to younger target users and tend to be focused
more on entertainment or competing for scores than on
simulating reality. The applications were chosen to allow for
diverse modes of transport and user interaction within the
virtual environment. Only stable, high quality and smooth-
running applications were selected for the study. The
applications were presented to respondents in randomised
order.
Two applications were created specifically with the
Vizard environment [14] (Contemporary Loft Apartment
and Walk the Plank), while the remaining applications were
selected from publicly available software on the Steam
platform. The 360° film was taken from YouTube. The
experiences presented in the study were as follow:
1. 360° Video. This 5-minute, stereoscopic 360° film
shows short shots of places of natural interest. The film
consists of several shots, including a flight next to a
helicopter over a beach in a big city in the USA, a view of a
sandy beach, swimming underwater with a turtle and diver,
swimming on a boat in Thailand, and a rocky seaside beach
with a pier. The film was played through the DeoVR Player
application. While watching, the respondents were sitting in
a chair, so the stimulus was an example of passive
transport/passive locomotion. The aim of this simulation
was to present the real world using IVR technology.
2. Dreams of Dali. This abstract world, inspired by the
works of Salvador Dali, shows the nearly unlimited
possibilities for creating spaces in Virtual Reality, which
can be governed by entirely different laws than those in the
real
world.
The
application
uses
transport
based
on
predefined points with a visual choice of a “gaze pointer”. It
was also possible to move, by walking in the physical
world.
3.
Contemporary
Loft
Apartment.
The
application
simulates an environment familiar to the participants of the
study
(living
in
an
apartment
building),
where
free
movement and interaction with objects is possible (e.g.,
lifting equipment). The participant could move physically
by walking or moving his character, using the arrows on a
controller. The environment was created in WorldViz [15].
4. Walk the Plank. This is a simulation of a suspended
board which the user is supposed to walk on. The
environment was created in Vizard software [14]. The
reason for using this application was to test the respondents’
reactions to the simulation of being at a high altitude.
5. Droid Repair Bay. This consisted of a robot repair
station on board a spacecraft, set in a world inspired by the
Star Wars series.
This application allowed for advanced interaction with
the environment (control of devices, robots, manipulation of
controllers).
6. The VR Museum of Fine Art. This is a virtual museum
with outstanding works of art (sculptures and paintings) in
their actual sizes. The user moves around the virtual
museum on
foot or by teleporting
him/herself to
a
designated location. The application is distinguished by a
very accurate representation of both the museum building
and the collected works.
7. Google Earth - Virtual Tour Landmarks. This allows
for a bird’s eye view sightseeing tour of unique tourist
attractions
worldwide
(including
Rio
de
Janeiro,
the
Vatican, the Grand Canyon and Barcelona). The user can
see the places from high above and hear sounds that are
typical of a given location. He/she is only an observer and
has no influence on the course of the tour.
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

VIII. RESULTS
A.
Opinions on IVR prior to the study
IVR is widely known in industry circles, but it does not
yet evoke many specific associations outside of the IT
environment. The respondents in this study had not had
experience with IVR prior to the study. The experience was
difficult for them to imagine in advance, and they did not
know how to describe it; they had made assumptions based
on previous experiences with 3D cinemas, sci-fi movies or
friends' opinions about IVR games played on consoles in
shopping
centres.
Some
respondents
associated
IVR
primarily with entertainment and computer games. Others
expected the study to be a virtual simulation of the world
and were curious to see how realistic it would feel.
B.
First Reactions
Only one person rated the impressions from IVR's
experience
as
average
(a
25-year-old
female).
The
remaining respondents, regardless of their age, said that
their
expectations
had
been
significantly
surpassed.
Interestingly, the most enthusiastic reactions were recorded
among the respondents from the oldest age group. While
there appeared to be a high level of satisfaction from the
experience based on the descriptions of impressions given
by people from the younger group (20-25 year olds), the
middle group (35-40 year olds) and the older group (50-55
year olds) in particular, expressed even more enthusiastic
opinions. The oldest age group reacted very emotionally to
the experience and specifically stated that it was something
they had not expected, at all. The respondents felt their IVR
experience was too short, and a few people even said that
they did not want to return to reality: “I didn't want to go
back; I'm excited, I'm fascinated, It really exceeded my
expectations”.
All respondents claimed that the time in IVR passed
very quickly: “I’d never say it took such a long time. I
thought it was only 10-15 minutes, really. It finished too
soon” (M, 50). Everyone declared that they would like to
repeat the experience, and several people said they wished
to buy IVR devices for home use.
C.
The sense of presence
Almost all respondents in the study used similar words
to describe their IVR experience: “You put on the goggles
and simply move to another world”. While younger people
(aged 20-25) highlighted new functionality offered by this
technology, the older age groups saw the study as a
surprising and very emotional experience. One person
described it thus: “I didn't think the human mind could play
such jokes on you, not at all. It seems to me that normally I
stand with my feet firmly on the ground, and that I am in
control of everything. And here, it turns out I am not. I close
my eyes, or rather (...) I put on the goggles and I think I'm
doing something different than I am doing in reality. So this
study lets you go on a collision course with yourself, with
what you expect and how you perceive reality.” (F, 51)
The sense of physical presence in IVR (PI) was
experienced by all respondents. The graphic quality and the
possibilities of interaction with the virtual environment were
highly rated, as the controllers allowed those taking part in
the study to move around freely and grip objects precisely.
Everyone claimed that the mapping of head movements, the
wide field of vision, the simulation of hand movements and
capabilities for object manipulation were so convincing that
they produced a sense of physical presence.
The applications themselves, however, aroused different
levels of sense of presence. Sometimes it was just a sense of
physical presence (PI dimension - 360° Video, Google
Earth), whereas in some applications the respondents also
felt an illusion of the reality of events (Psi - Dreams of Dali,
the VR Museum of Fine Art, Walk the Plank, Droid Repair
Bay).
The sense of presence depended on the interests of the
respondents. Those keen on art got deeply immersed in the
world of Salvador Dali:
“It was incredibly real.... I think somebody must’ve
worked hard on making sure that the person who wears the
goggles really feels as if they were in another world.
Because I felt like I’d been teleported to another world.
Everything was there actually, I had a feeling that wind was
blowing in my face. I don't know why, but it was probably
because of the realness of the experience of that other
reality” (F, 51, commenting on her experience with Dreams
of Dali).
In turn, those who liked entertainment and games were
interested in the simulation of a service station on a
spacecraft inspired by Star Wars: “You get the feeling that
you are genuinely involved in it (...) you're there and it feels
fantastic” (F, 40).
Despite positive subjective assessments from all of the
respondents, our observation of their behavior led us to
conclude that the older people explored the environment
less intensely, and ventured to try out the interaction
possibilities
less
frequently.
As
well,
the
older
the
respondents were, the more often they needed guidance
from the researcher; they needed more time to get used to
virtual reality and that process appeared more complicated.
The differences between people of different generations
were particularly pronounced when using the Droid Repair
Bay
simulation.
The
youngest
people
in
the
study
immediately looked around the room, actively explored it
and quickly learned how to operate the devices. The oldest
group (50-55 year olds) looked around to a lesser extent and
were less at ease in their attempts to interact with the
environment. It seemed that an attempt to interact with an
object that could not be manipulated was perceived as an
error and should therefore be avoided. Older respondents
needed more frequent guidance from the investigator and
advice on which actions were 'the right ones'. However, they
also positively evaluated the application and said that they
had felt present in the virtual world.
Based on the interviews with the respondents, we can
conclude that the positive evaluations of the realism in the
simulations were partly due to a large gap between low and
incorrect expectations and the surprisingly high quality of
the actual IVR experience. The experience was highly
evaluated, though it was not ideal. Respondents mentioned a
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

number of factors that reduced their sense of presence in the
virtual worlds.
The lack of other people in IVR was brought up several
times in the interviews. In particular, the youngest group
(20-25 year olds) wished to see more interactive elements
(including other people) in the assessed applications. In the
opinion of the younger respondents, the presence of people
– even those generated by the application – would have
increased the perceived realism of the experience: “Well, I
guess other people were missing. And that's what real life is
all about. I'm getting a ticket, I'm walking with it and into
the coffee shop. The waiter's offering me something. It
doesn’t need to be a long experience, but it will produce the
illusory impression that I'm really there” (F, 25).
A full immersion in the virtual world was also hampered
by stimuli from the outside world (the voice of the
researcher, the weight of the goggles, the cable connecting
the goggles with the computer) and imperfections of the
applications. Sometimes pixels were visible in the image
and the use of the controller was inconsistent across the
applications. There were also some software errors and
gaps, e.g., those enabling the user to pass through objects or
walls. Such stimuli worked as “anchors”, keeping part of the
respondent’s consciousness in the real world.
D.
Affective Response
The descriptions of the respondents’ reactions show a
clear difference between traditional flat screen media and
IVR. Virtual reality is not only perceived, but above all it is
experienced. When describing their experiences, all of the
respondents
spontaneously
talked
about
feelings
and
emotions. The content of the experience was of secondary
significance. They used such words as: pleasure, fear,
anxiety, bliss, joy, horror, excitement, relaxation.
In the youngest group (aged 20-25), the evaluation of the
experience was positive or very positive, yet at the same
time the respondents were not very surprised by what they
saw – probably due to the fact that representatives of
Generation Z have spent their lives in a world full of digital
devices, and IVR is a natural expansion of an experience
they already know. They were less emotional than the older
group, and used words such as: “cool; wow; I liked it;
great”. People aged 35-40 (Generation Y) did not expect
such a level of realism. To them, the IVR experience was
both positive and emotional. Representatives of Generation
Y use technology to a lesser extent than younger people, so
the gaps between their expectations and actual impressions
following the experience were greater than those seen
among respondents from Generation Z. They used terms
like: I am excited, stunned; I’m literally trembling inside; I
haven't experienced anything like that in my whole life.
The experience was the most surprising to the oldest
people involved in the study (50-55 year olds, Generation
X). This group rated the experience very highly – we could
even say they were enthusiastic, and their emotions seemed
the strongest of all the respondents: “I don't know if I want
to go back to the real world (...) yes... I think I'm still in a
state of great shock. | Clearly, I was overwhelmed in the
way I hadn’t expected” (M, 55); “That reality shocked me
(...) the label ‘reality’ is truly justified. Through this study
you’ve encouraged me to buy this device, seriously. (M, 51);
“I'm fascinated at the moment. I was surprised at the
realness of it” (M, 50); “I didn't want to go back because
everything was so beautiful out there” (F, 50).
One respondent (F, 50) described her experience as follows:
“I was very emotional about it. Even now I have tears in my
eyes, because when I saw the sea, I was immediately
emotional... I would like to go back to my holiday time. It
was so...gosh, it was so emotional to me...incredibly
emotional, that’s for sure. It's the first time I've ever had one
of those goggles on me. Honestly, it felt good for me there.
It was cool”.
E.
Cybersickness
The literature indicates cybersickness as a significant
factor reducing satisfaction from IVR experiences [12]. For
this reason, special attention was paid to this phenomenon in
the course of the study. In addition to raising the question of
cybersickness during the interview, the respondents were
telephoned and asked follow-up questions concerning their
mood during the day after the research.
It was surprising that the participants did not mention
any
negative
feelings
(such
as
dizziness,
imbalance,
discomfort or nausea) during the interviews, nor were they
mentioned during the telephone conversations. Shifts in
mood (if any) were caused by the intensity of the
experience, though respondents did not describe them as a
change for the worse.
This result may differ from observations described
elsewhere in the literature, as most of the reports describing
the phenomenon of cybersickness are based on IVR games,
whereas in our study, games were deliberately excluded.
Games are highly stimulating applications and often involve
controlling one’s own body movements in IVR with the
buttons on a controller, which causes unpleasant feelings
among a majority of adult users.
IX. DISCUSSION
The study has shown differences in the perception of
IVR by people at different ages. A look at IVR experiences
through the lens of generational differences is an important
complement to existing knowledge on human interactions
with IVR. At the same time, the study has shown that there
are a number of related topics that may be subject to
research and analysis.
The first of them is user experience in IVR. So far, there
have only been a few papers on this subject. The quality of
user
experience
affects
the
user's
satisfaction
and
performance in the virtual world. Another prospective
research idea concerns social interactions within IVR. Most
of the current research relates to the experience of one
person who is in IVR on his/her own. It would be interesting
to
see how several people interact
within one IVR
simulation. What would be the similarities and differences
compared to their social interactions in the real world? Yet
another interesting perspective on IVR is to measure the
acceptable cost of real versus virtual experiences, of similar
content. The first publications concerning Willingness to
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Pay (WTP) in IVR are already available, but the area is still
new.
Furthermore, the definition of the dimensions through
which IVR experiences are described may need to be
updated. The quality of IVR simulations changes quickly,
such that the theories proposed a few years ago may no
longer apply to all aspects of the experiences being made
available by today’s technologies. Another interesting area
is the analysis of factors influencing the level of presence
(immersion) in virtual reality. Information about what
affects amplification and what weakens presence in IVR can
shed new light on our understanding of the phenomenon.
Taking into account the results of this study, it can be
expected that once the technical imperfections of the
equipment
are
eliminated
and
the
simulation
is
complemented with social aspects, the sense of presence in
IVR would increase even further.
X. CONCLUSIONS
The results of the study suggest that the level of
presence in IVR decreases with age. We observed that the
older respondents moved around less freely in the virtual
world and had more difficulty using interactive objects. In
the case of the Generation X, there was a greater difference
between their behaviors in reality and in the virtual world
than in the case of the younger respondents. It is surprising,
however, that the subjective evaluation of IVR did not
decrease with the age of the participants. In fact, the oldest
group evaluated the IVR experience at the highest level.
With regard to generational differences, one explanation
of this outcome may be the fact that people from Generation
X grew up in a world with far less ubiquitous digital
technology. They have had to adapt to the use of digital
devices and as adults may need additional technological
education. Today, these people are primarily task-based IT
users who use it more to perform specific tasks, rather than
using it for fun and leisure. That is why they less frequently
play computer games and may be less interested in the
functionality of new devices. In addition, their previous
experiences with technology may have left them convinced
that new devices are usually difficult to operate and
designed for the younger generations. It is likely that to
Generation X, it was unexpected and very attractive that
IVR turned out to be surprisingly easy to operate. In IVR,
there is no need to learn an intermediate interface, such as
an operating system, a keyboard or a mouse). In order to
look around, one only needs to move one’s head; in order to
go forward, one needs to take a few steps; in order to grip an
object, it is enough to clench one’s hand on the controller.
From this point of view, IVR responds well to the needs
identified by Kowalski et al. (2019), in a study on the use of
smart speaker assistants (Google Home) by older people.
One of the needs identified is that the new technology
should offer “accessible design with low barrier of entry,
unlike regular computers” [5].
In the case of Generation Z, the reason for their
relatively low evaluations of IVR experience (still high, but
not enthusiastic) may be the fact that new technologies have
always been present in their lives. Rather unsurprisingly,
Generation Z perceived IVR as a very attractive technology.
However, from their point of view, the rise of IVR is a fully
expected stage of digital technology development. The
evaluations of the middle-aged group are situated between
the extremes described above, determined by the youngest
(Generation Z) and the oldest (Generation X). What follows
from the above is a practical recommendation for software
developers who should account for the fact that the older the
group of potential users, the easier an IVR application
should be.
Another interesting conclusion is that IVR is distinct
from other media we currently use. What is characteristic of
IVR is the fact that it is experienced, rather than received or
read, as in the case of conventional media. The respondents
talked about their impressions of IVR as if they were reports
from their real lives. They did not describe their impressions
as they would have described a book, a film or a newspaper
article. The most important elements were feelings and
emotions. The content of the application was of secondary
importance.
The results of the study indicate that IVR may already
have many practical applications. It can be a substitute for
travel, especially for people who find it difficult to travel
longer distances in reality. Virtual spaces, such as the VR
Museum of Fine Art used in the study, offer experiences
very similar to an actual museum visit. For many people,
IVR can also constitute an attractive form of entertainment.
Based on the results of the study, we can assume that
IVR technology will continue to develop because it is
highly
attractive
and
generates
positive
reactions.
Additionally, from a technical point of view, IVR devices
are becoming increasingly comfortable: this year (2019) has
seen the introduction of the first autonomous goggles; they
do not require an external computer or a cable connection
(the Oculus Quest). We believe that this process may
facilitate further expansion of IVR technology.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. V. Sanchez-Vives and M. Slater “From presence to
consciousness through virtual reality,” Nature reviews.
Neuroscience, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 332–339, Apr. 2005.
[2]
M. Dimock, “Defining generations: Where Millennials end
and Generation Z begins,” Pew Research Center, vol. 17,
2019
[Online].
Available:
http://tony-
silva.com/eslefl/miscstudent/downloadpagearticles/defgenera
tions-pew.pdf
[3]
M. McCrindle and E. Wolfinger, “The ABC of XYZ:
Understanding the Global Generations.” The ABC of XYZ,
2009.
[4]
H. Huygelier, B. Schraepen, R. van Ee, V. Vanden Abeele,
and C. R. Gillebert, “Acceptance of immersive head-
mounted virtual reality in older adults,” Sci. Rep., vol. 9, no.
1, p. 4519, Mar. 2019.
[5]
J. Kowalski et al., “Older Adults and Voice Interaction: A
Pilot Study with Google Home,” arXiv [cs.HC], 17-Mar-
2019 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.07195
[6]
É. Ouellet, B. Boller, N. Corriveau-Lecavalier, S. Cloutier,
and S. Belleville, “The Virtual Shop: A new immersive
virtual reality environment and scenario for the assessment
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

of everyday memory,” J. Neurosci. Methods, vol. 303, pp.
126–135, Jun. 2018.
[7]
J. Chen and C. Or, “Assessing the use of immersive virtual
reality, mouse and touchscreen in pointing and dragging-and-
dropping tasks among young, middle-aged and older adults,”
Appl. Ergon., vol. 65, pp. 437–448, Nov. 2017.
[8]
A. Plechatá, V. Sahula, D. Fayette, and I. Fajnerová, “Age-
Related Differences With Immersive and Non-immersive
Virtual Reality in Memory Assessment,” Front. Psychol.,
vol. 10, p. 1330, Jun. 2019.
[9]
S. A. McGlynn, R. M. Sundaresan, and W. A. Rogers,
“Investigating Age-Related Differences in Spatial Presence
in Virtual Reality,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 62, no. 1. pp.
1782–1786,
2018
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1541931218621404
[10] M. Slater, “Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic
behaviour in immersive virtual environments,” Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B,
Biological sciences, vol. 364, no. 1535, pp. 3549–3557, Dec.
2009.
[11] A. Suh and J. Prophet, “The state of immersive technology
research: A literature analysis,” Comput. Human Behav., vol.
86, pp. 77–90, Sep. 2018.
[12] D. M. Shafer, C. P. Carbonara, and M. F. Korpi, “Factors
Affecting
Enjoyment
of
Virtual
Reality
Games:
A
Comparison
Involving
Consumer-Grade
Virtual
Reality
Technology,” Games Health J, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 15–23, Feb.
2019.
[13] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in
psychology,” Qualitative research in psychology, vol. 3, no.
2, pp. 77–101, Jan. 2006.
[14] “Vizard | Virtual Reality software for researchers.” [Online].
Available:
https://www.worldviz.com/vizard-virtual-reality-
software. [Accessed: 09-Aug-2019]
[15] “WorldViz - Virtual Reality Creation and Collaboration.”
[Online]. Available: https://www.worldviz.com/. [Accessed:
09-Aug-2019]
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

