MMAssist_II- A Lighthouse Project for Industrial Assistance
Assistance in Production in the Context of Human – Machine Cooperation
Christian Wögerer
Matthias Plasch
PROFACTOR GmbH
4407 Steyr, Austria
email: christian.woegerer@profactor.at
email: Matthias.plasch@profactor.at
Manfred Tscheligi
Sebastian Egger-Lampl
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH
Center for Technology Experience, 1220 Vienna, Austria
email: manfred.tscheligi@ait.ac.at
email: sebastian.egger-lampl@ait.ac.at
Abstract—In this paper, we present MMAssist_II, a national
Austrian flagship project for research, development and
establishment of assistance systems, which could be used as a
tool box for different applications. Besides a fundamental
understanding of demands for such assistance units also a
demonstration in industrial near production settings including
an extensive evaluation is part of the project. Therefore, a
mighty consortium of 9 scientific partners and 16 industrial
partners join the consortium.
Keywords - industrial assistance; collaborative robotics;
reusable assistance systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Initial
situation:
Austrian
production
companies
manufacture goods of high quality and have a staff of well-
trained employees. However, companies currently face
technological and societal challenges to which they have to
react to in order to continually provide competitive goods on
an international level. These challenges include the demand
of customers for individualized products, which leads to
smaller lot sizes and faster production cycles. At the same
time, production machines are more and more connected and
equipped
with
sensors.
This
leads
to
an
increased
information density and more complexity for the workers,
which induces a higher workload and stress. Furthermore,
Austria is experiencing a demographic change. As Austrian
citizens get older, they stay longer in employment. All of
these trends, as well as the goal to keep up the high quality of
produced goods, lead to an increased need of optimized
assistance for the worker in the factory.
In Section II, this paper is presenting the general aspects
of the project flowed by Section III describing the technical
concept of MMAssist_II. In Section IV, the available basic
technologies are presented. The paper ends with Section V
were we present the first results after 6 months project
duration.
II.
THE PROJECT MMASSIST_II
A.
General project description
The lighthouse project MMAssist_II [1] will form a
national research network with an international scientific
board in order to find recognition and acceptance within the
Austrian economy.
Goals and innovation: The goal of the project partners
in MMAssist_II is to research and implement modular,
reusable assistance systems for employees in production
companies. Therefore, the project partners will work on the
exemplary uses cases Maintenance and Service, Arming of
Machines and Simultaneous Handling of Multiple Machines,
and Assembly to analyze the technical and socio-economic
requirements for assistance systems in these areas. Based on
a
strongly
context-oriented
requirements
analysis,
the
partners will implement so-called “Assistance Units”, which
are modular components for assistance systems. Assistance
Units are defined in a way that they can be applied to
different application contexts. The partners will implement a
software framework to enable a dynamic configuration and
interaction of Assistance Units, thus forming an assistance
system for a given application. To configure an Assistance
Unit, different input and output modalities, as well as
modules for context generation are needed, which will also
be developed in the project. In order to measure and evaluate
the efficiency and feasibility of the project's approach, the
partners will implement lab-based prototypes of defined
Assistance Units and evaluate them in real production
environments.
Expected results: The project partners expect to gain a
profound empirical and socio-technical understanding of the
demands and requirements for assistance systems in the
production context. These systems will consist of reusable,
scientifically grounded Assistance Units that are thoroughly
evaluated. The implemented assistance systems will be
evaluated, by workers of production companies, in real
production environments. This will lead to findings about the
acceptance and
user experience of workers who
use
assistance systems and a measurable reduced workload of
the workers.
B.
Key facts
MMAssit_II was launched in May 2017 and will run
until April 2020. The project involves 25 different partners
from research and industry, which are key players for
research and manufacturing in Austria [2]. The partners
expertise covers the whole manufacturing value chain from
basic research to industrial manufacturing of high tech
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

products and services. This consortium was set up to have all
necessary competences without any overlap in research, and
besides technical capacities there is also social-economic
knowledge available. The industrial partners cover a wide
range of different technical branches and provide real use
cases to demonstrate the results in a production near
environment. Key facts are shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Key facts of the MMAssist_II project
C.
Objectives
The goal of the project partners in MMAssist_II is to
explore assistance systems for employees in production
environments
and
to
develop
these
systems.
This
is
necessary to overcome future technical and socio-technical
challenges for production, by setting new paradigms of
industrial assistance. Figure 2 shows challenges for future.
Figure 2.
Challenges for Future production processes
These assistance systems should be tailored to the needs
of employees for their special context. It is also the goal of
the project partners, to develop more than only specialized
solutions and assistance systems. Moreover, the assistance
systems
being
developed
are
relevant
for
Austrian
production companies in general. Therefore, the project
partners have defined the following objectives.
OBJECTIVE 1: Exploration of modular, reusable
assistance systems. The project partners will develop
assistance systems that can be used not only for the specific
individual cases, but are applicable in different contexts and
for different applications. The purpose is to establish a
general approach for implementing assistance systems for
employees in manufacturing companies. This system should
be open and able to motivate other companies to include
there products and developments into the system later on.
OBJECTIVE
2:
Context
oriented
detection
of
assistance needs. Methods are developed, to enable the
identification of the assistance needs of people in the vicinity
of the machines from machine point of view. The purpose is
to explore intelligent assistance systems, which offer targeted
assistance only if it is needed. An important point is the
acceptance by the workers and therefore a neutralized
information exchange has to be implemented.
OBJECTIVE 3: Improve the work and assistance
experience. As a major goal, the project partners will
implement assistance systems that increase positive factors
of work and assistance experience while they are used, and
reduce negative factors. Thus, it will be achieved that the
systems
are accepted by users and
contribute to
an
improvement of their daily work.
OBJECTIVE 4: Applicability in real production
environments.
The
project
partner
aims
to
use
the
implemented assistance systems application at the industrial
partner’s production facilities and to evaluate in terms of
productivity, acceptance through the staff and ergonomics.
This evaluation should prove that the assistance systems are
also usable in real production environments and beyond the
project. For this reason leading companies are included into
the project development from the beginning to secure a real
industrial relevance and industrial standards of the developed
assistance systems.
III.
PROJECT CONCEPT
The goal of MMAssist_II is to fundamentally research
and characterize assistance in a production context. Based on
this, optimized assistance systems for future working places
focused
on
the
human
worker
(„Human-Centered
Workplace“) will be developed, implemented and evaluated
in an industrial environment. Basis for the implementation
are so called „Assistance Units“ – which are modular
components for assistance systems. Assistance Units are
defined in a way that they can be applied to different
application contexts. The partners will implement a software
framework to enable a dynamic configuration and interaction
of Assistance Units, thus forming an assistance system for a
given application.
A.
Motivation
The central motivation shown in Figure 3 is the
development of Assistance Units (Unit 1…n) based on
available and adapted basic technologies (for example mixed
reality methods, Visualization of complex data, object
recognition,
scene
interpretation
and
others).
These
Assistance units are implemented in a software framework
and the best fitting Assistance Units for an application are
composed to an assistance system that is tailored for the
given production context. The Assistance Units and the
assistance systems are implemented, tested and evaluated in
different Use Cases, first in the labs of the partners and then
in “semi” real production environment. Also some tests in
real environment are planned.
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 3.
MMAsist_II Motivation
B.
Assistance Units
A generalized description of an Assistance Unit is
shown in Figure 4 considering the example of an Assistance
Unit for assembly. Any assistance has, in addition to a clear
title and a short description of the unit, primarily a definition
which knowledge source is needed by the Assistance Unit to
work correctly. These sources of knowledge can be for
example information about the condition of the employee
that is available on the machine, or process data, such as
installation instructions. Among the needed data also the
information, when the Assistance Unit must be activated,
based on the context information of the employee and the
process, is required. A second central element of an
Assistance Unit is a description of “how and by which
equipment” the employee can make submissions to the
Assistance Unit, and also the output form, in which way the
information of the machine is given to employees. So, the
main
components
of
an
Assistance
Unit
are
name,
Assistance/Assistant task (Type), Knowledge source, Input
form, Input device, Output form and Output device.
Figure 4.
Assitance Unit description
C.
Workpackage structure
The work package structure for MMAssist_II in context
with the aim of the project is shown in Figure 5. 10 different
Work packages including the project management and
leaded by experienced project managers are the key for a
successful project implementation. Workpackages are on
different TRLs (Technology readiness level) and are well
connected to each other. The detailed structure of the
Workpackages is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 5.
Work package structure
WP (Workpackage) 1 summarizes the tasks of the project
related
to
the
management
of
the
project
and
the
dissemination of project results. AP2 parses the requests of
Assistance Units and assistance systems in the context of
production from the point of view of the users and from a
technical perspective. A planning model for the identification
of assistance needs will be developed in WP3. Moreover, a
model for structured preparation of work content and an
employee model will be designed. Based on the theoretical
results of WP2 and WP3, Assistance Units are explored in
WP4.
With
these
units
assistance
can
be
detected
automatically. WP5 develops basic algorithms for Assistance
Units. In WP6, partners develop approaches for the dynamic
configuration of Assistant Units for specified use cases. A
software
framework
is
developed
to
implement
the
dynamically configured assistance systems in AP7. This
framework is basis for WP8, in which assistance is
prototypically implemented in laboratory environments. The
assistance systems in real environment are implemented in
WP9 at the facilities of the industry partners. Finally, the
implemented assistance systems are evaluated in WP10.
D.
System architecture
Core unit of the technical system architecture shown in
Figure 6 are the single “Assistance Units” which are
integrated to an overall assistance system via the Software
Framework. The assistance system has interfaces to sensors
that allow, together with a direct user input, a context
recognition for the identification of assistance needs. Derived
cognitive or physical assistance is provided via the respective
Assistance Units. The overall system also has interfaces to
external legacy systems (especially ERP & MES), which can
retrieve, for example, job information and machine structural
analysis.
Task management module manages the orders that can be
adopted or entered directly via the administration interface
from external systems, and informs the users about a specific
job and corresponding support performance. The user
management module enables central management of user
master data and roles of all Assistance Units and interacts
with a skill database that stores relevant skills of employees
for the respective tasks. In the asset database, resources or
appropriate references are stored, which can be consumed by
the assistance units. The content management system has the
purpose to take care of digital resources that need to be
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

imported in an appropriate form, edited, saved, updated,
illustrated and re-exported.
A knowledge data base provides process knowledge from
and also knowledge about the relevance and quality of
certain assets. Here, employees can assess for a specific
resource, which was offered by the assistance system in one
specific step, how helpful it was, or correct a proposed
sequence by the system.
Figure 6.
System architecture
IV.
BASIC TECHNOLOGIES
In the MMAssist_II project, 9 scientific partners from
Austria provide different basic technologies shown in Figure
7 for various Assistance Units. Either these technologies are
ready for implementation or they were developed ready for
use. The most challenging problem is the interfaces between
this basic technologies and the software framework. Main
basic technologies are:
Object recognition, Event recognition and scene
Interpretation by Technical University Vienna [3]: A
system to generate hypotheses on the current state and events
happening in Human Robot Collaborative scenarios (HRC)
is being developed. The software modules will be based on
existing
approaches
and
software
libraries
for
object
modelling and object pose recognition, concepts to describe
events in HRC scenes, and fusion of data streams including
action recognition, robot states and object recognition.
Mixed Reality methods by Evolaris [4]: Focus of this
work is to develop methods to augment visual information
using Head Mounted Displays (HMDs) and modes for the
user to interaction with the HMD (data input). A major
challenge is given through the requirement of selecting
appropriate information given the current context and
individual needs of the user.
Visualization of complex data by Fraunhofer Austria
[5]: The main focus is developing approaches to enable real-
time visualization of large amount of data, e.g., complex
CAD models, on thin clients (data glasses). Moreover, a
model-based tracking approach based on CAD data is
developed, to facilitate position-stable augmentation of data
in industrial environments.
Interaction for robot-based Assembly processes by
PROFACTOR [6]: Within this technology package, concepts
to enable intuitive interaction in HRC scenarios will be
developed. Major challenges include the implementation of
flexible
models
to
enable
fast
adaptation
of
process
knowledge and adaptation of the human-robot interaction
(user specific needs), avoiding explicit programming.
Acoustic Interaction by Joanneum research [7]: The
main goal is to develop speech-interfaces to enable intuitive
interaction with assistance systems in an industrial setting. In
order to maximize user friendliness, the interfaces are not
restricted to a collection of commands and can cope with
different dialects and languages. Acoustic feedback is used
to inform the user about the states of the assistance system.
Iterative Interaction Design by AIT [8] and PLUS [9]:
The goal is to implement a Research through Design (RtD)
based process, where prototypes for current and present
interaction models/modes are developed by potential end-
users. This generated, valuable feedback serves as input to an
iterative
development
process
for
assistance
system
interaction design.
Figure 7.
Basic technologies avialable for MMAssist_II Assitance Units
V.
FIRST RESULTS
As the project has started in May 2017, the work
performed in the first 6 months was focused on requirements
and finding a set of basic technologies as described in
chapter IV. Also a more detailed definition of the use cases
and the Assistance Units, which will be implemented, was
done. This led to 3 different Use Cases with 7 Assistance
Units in total.
•
Service and maintenance (Use CASE 1)
• Notification of maintenance protocols (Assistance
Unit 1)
• Communication with Experts (Assistance Unit 2)
•
Setup and multi machine service (Use CASE 2)
• Guiding through setup process (Assistance Unit 3)
• Multi machine service (Assistance Unit 4)
•
Assembly (Use CASE 3)
• Notification of Assembly instructions (Assistance
Unit 5)
• Part delivery (Assistance Unit 6)
• Assembly instructions review (Assistance Unit 7)
A requirement Analyses based on the needs of Users of
the assistance systems in the context of production was done.
The goal was to capture the requirements from a technical
and a socio- economic view. First steps were done so far:
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

•
Determine the requirements for assistance units: data
collection is almost completed; current data will be
analyzed and interpreted.
•
Conceptual design and modeling of Assistance Units
to the subsequent implementation: an adequate
conceptual
base
model
for
the
taxonomy
of
Assistance
Units
and
situation
patterns
was
identified and is now further developed for the
project problems.
•
Investigation of job satisfaction and acceptance by
the use of Assistance Units: an existing framework
for the project was adapted. A data collection tool to
raise job satisfaction was developed.
•
Analysis of relevant safety and security factors
within the use of Assistant Units: Data collection
was
carried
out
and
a
knowledge
base
was
developed.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The main expected results is a software framework which
connects all main basic technologies to Assistance units
which could be used to create a Use Case sensitive
Assistance system adapted to the needs of the workers. This
is an open system which could be enlarged by contributing
(and other interested) companies.
The main challenge is to find a software solution and
architecture which is able to handle the interface problematic
between the single sub systems.
Besides first promising results, it is a challenge to
manage a research project with 24 partners and to find a
common solution for a lot of different companies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Austrian Research
Promotion Agency [10] in the program “Production of the
Future” funded project MMAssist II (FFG No.: 858623) and
the
Austrian
Ministry
for
Transport,
Innovation
and
Technology (bmvit) [11].
REFERENCES
[1]
MMAssist_II: Avialable online at www.mmassist.at [accessed
March 2018]
[2]
MMAssist_II
partners:
Avialable
on
http://www.mmassist.at/partner/wissenschaftliche-partner/
and
http://www.mmassist.at/partner/unternehmenspartner/
[accessed March 2018]
[3]
Technical
University
Vienna:
https://www.acin.tuwien.ac.at/en/ [accessed Februar 2018]
[4]
Evolaris: https://www.evolaris.net/en/ [accessed March 2018]
[5]
Fraunhofer
Austria:
https://www.fraunhofer.at/en.html
[accessed January 2018]
[6]
PROFACTOR GmbH: https://www.profactor.at/en/ [accessed
March 2018]
[7]
Joanneum Research: https://www.joanneum.at/en/ [accessed
March 2018]
[8]
AIT:
https://www.ait.ac.at/en/about-the-ait/center/center-for-
technology-experience/ [accessed March 2018]
[9]
PLUS:
https://www.uni-
salzburg.at/index.php?id=38601&L=1 [accessed February 2018]
[10] FFG – Avialable online at https://www.ffg.at/ [accessed March
2018]
[11] BMVIT- Avialable online at www.bmvit.gv.at/en/index.html
[accessed December 2017]
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

