Facilitating Robots at Home 
A Framework for Understanding Robot Facilitation 
 
Rebekka Soma, Vegard Dønnem Søyseth, Magnus Søyland, Trenton Schulz 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: [rebsaurus|vegardds|magnusoy|trentonw]@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—One of the primary characteristics of robots is the 
ability to move autonomously in the same space as humans. In 
what ways does movement influence the interaction between 
humans and robot? In this paper, we examine how work is 
changed by the deployment of service robots. Through a mul-
tiple case study, the phenomenon is investigated, both in an 
industrial and domestic context. Through analyzing our data, 
we propose a framework for understanding the change of tasks 
named the Robot Facilitation Framework. 
Keywords-robots; facilitating; tasks; work; domestic; human-
robot interaction 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Robots have been used in factories, offices, and hospitals 
for several decades. They have been cleaning floors, trans-
porting materials, keeping watch, and operating in dangerous 
environments to reduce general labor and costs [1][2]. The 
typical aim of introducing robots into workplaces is to in-
crease productivity by automating work, which will decrease 
costs by reducing the amount of manual work [3]. But often 
the result is not so much a reduction of manual work as a 
redistribution of manual work. As robots are introduced into 
work environments, the way work is performed in that envi-
ronment changes. For instance, Argote et al. [1] reported that 
the work of the operators in their study shifted from primari-
ly manual lifting activities to cognitive monitoring activities. 
Recently, the addition of robots in Amazon warehouses 
changed the workers’ days from being centered around lift-
ing to keeping an eye on the robots [4]. 
Robots in the form of machines autonomously moving 
around in space started making their way into homes in the 
beginning of the 2000s with vacuum cleaning robots [5]. 
Household robots are qualitatively different from traditional 
household appliances. Tools for home maintenance and 
cleaning are often kept at specific locations in the home from 
where they cannot move by themselves. An inherent quality 
of something stationary is that you decide where it goes, and 
it stays where you place it. Conversely, the mobile nature of 
a domestic service robot as it autonomously navigates the 
home gives the robot an element of ubiquity and sharing a 
domestic space with them is not without problems [6]. 
Historically, the way humans perform work has always 
evolved, from the very first technological advances such as 
knives and spears, through wash buckets and steam engines, 
to present day laptops and kitchen appliances. However, one 
common factor with technological advances is certain tasks 
become easier, but work never really disappears [7]. The 
work itself only changes forms as new technologies are 
introduced into our lives. A new tool requires maintenance to 
keep working and creates room for other tasks by allowing 
higher speed and precision. A vacuum cleaning robot does 
not create a void of work where you once had the traditional 
vacuum cleaner; the work associated with keeping a clean 
house merely changes form—just as it did when the tradi-
tional vacuum cleaner replaced the wash bucket and mop. 
Because the human-robot relationship is different from 
other human-computer relationships [8], we must develop a 
different understanding of other technologies. As a technolo-
gy for keeping a clean house, the ubiquitous nature of the 
technological space of domestic robots overlaps with the 
entire physical and social space of the home. Much research 
has been done on understanding how we accept robots as a 
part of the household [8]–[11]. However, there is not much 
research that examines how space is shared; what are the 
changes in practices that will eventually lead to acceptance 
or rejection of the robot. In this paper, we introduce a 
framework for understanding how tasks and task distribu-
tions (practices) change as robots are introduced into an en-
vironment.  
This paper’s contribution is to introduce the Robot Facili-
tation Framework to classify stages of facilitation of robots. 
We introduce the framework and its components: pre-, peri-, 
and post-facilitation that are the result of our analysis of our 
case studies. We start by looking at related work (Section II). 
Then, we present our method and three case studies that 
helped form our framework (Section III). In Section IV, we 
present our framework and its components. In Section V, we 
apply the framework to the cases of robots being introduced 
into homes from the studies in Section II. We find that the 
Robot Facilitation Framework does not replace other frame-
works in human-robot interaction, but provides a new way to 
understand use of robots. We also discuss the relationship 
between the different types of facilitation. In Section VI, we 
provide our conclusion and opportunities for future work. 
II. RELATED WORK 
There are a few long-term studies of service robots in 
domestic settings. These focus on how and why people ac-
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

cept robots into their homes over time and use different 
frameworks for doing so. 
Forlizzi and DiSalvo [8] use an ecological approach for 
determining how mobile, autonomous robots might fit into 
the domestic space, and how they differ from traditional vac-
uum cleaners. “The difference of physicality, autonomy, and 
mobility calls for a re-thinking of the experience of technol-
ogies in the domestic environment” [9]. They emphasize that 
robots and household members should be able to adapt to 
each other.  
Looking at the social experience people deveplop around 
the use of a product (product ecology), Forlizzi [12] shows 
how robots, like other technologies, become social products 
as they are accepted into the home. In a product ecology, the 
environment affects how the product is used, and in turn, the 
use of the product itself changes the users and the context as 
a result. The products in the ecology simultaneously shape 
roles, social norms, human behavior, and how other products 
are used. There are five dimensions to understand how a 
product influences the product ecology: functionality, aes-
thetics, symbolism, sociality, and emotionality. These can in 
combination or individually start a process of sense-making, 
linking the familiar to the unfamiliar [12]. 
Forlizzi’s study [12] compared the adoption of a tradi-
tional vacuum cleaner and a robotic one and found that the 
robotic vacuum cleaner caused a change in the product ecol-
ogies in the household while the traditional did not. The 
Roomba had a substantial and lasting impact on people, ac-
tivities, and the use of other cleaning products within the 
product ecology.  
Inspired by Forlizzi’s use of the product ecology, Sung, 
Guo, Grinter, and Christensen [8] developed the Domestic 
Robot Ecology (DRE). This framework provides a holistic 
view on long-term interactions with robots and thus people’s 
long-term acceptance of them. It looks at how people’s atti-
tudes and interactions towards robots change over time, es-
pecially as the novelty of the robot wears off (the novelty 
effect [13]).  
The DRE has several dimensions. First, there are four 
temporal steps householders experience during their robot 
acceptance: (1) pre-adoption, (2) adoption, (3) adaption, and 
(4) use and retention. Second, there are three roles for the 
robots during this time: (1) a tool to complete tasks, (2) a 
mediator to incur changes in the environments, and (3) an 
actor to elicit social responses. Sung et al. combined these 
and presented three key aspects for how robots interact 
within all the four temporal steps, taking on one of the three 
roles. These aspects are: (1) physical and social space, the 
platform where the interactions can take place; (2) social 
actors, the living members of the home, such as 
householders, guests, and pets; and (3) tasks, the activity the 
robot is designed to serve. Thus, five types of relationships 
can occur, where the robot can be a tool to perform tasks, an 
agent directly impacting the surrounding environment, a 
mediator that motivates people to make changes to the envi-
ronment, a mediator that enhances the social relationships, or 
an agent that engages with people in social events. With all 
these dimensions, the DRE provides a holistic view of the 
relationships that robots shape in the home and how these 
change over time.  
Fink, Bauwens, Kaplan, and Dillenbourg [10] used the 
DRE to understand long-term adoption and acceptance of 
Roomba robots in the home. 
III. METHOD 
The study is based on multiple case studies [14]. We used 
a set of qualitative inquiry sessions in the investigation of 
robot facilitation. Each case consists of observations or mul-
tiple interviews. Case 1 is the Automated Ground Vehicles 
(AGV) at the hospital (Section III.A). In this case, we inter-
viewed an operating manager on two separate occasions. 
Case 2 is the investigation of lawnmower robots (Sec-
tion III.B). For this case, we interviewed two different own-
ers. Case 3 is an ongoing study with older adults who borrow 
vacuum cleaning robots (Section III.C). This case is based on 
observations. The interview questions were open-ended and 
different in each case. But the questions between the partici-
pants in a case are the same. The interviews and observations 
was analyzed by coding interview transcriptions described in 
detail in Søyseth and Søyland [15]. As this was qualitative 
data, so statistics are unavailable. 
A. AGV at a Hospital 
There are numerous examples of robots within industry 
and organizations, but they are often found in separate and 
enclosed areas where only authorized personnel have access 
[16]. However, our informant told us that multiple hospitals 
have employed AGVs for several years to do most of the 
heavy-lifting transport tasks and thus decrease the need for 
human porters. These robots operate in the same areas as the 
hospital staff and thereby create an arena for observing spa-
tial encounters between robots and humans. 
Since 2008, a major Norwegian hospital has used an 
AGV system consisting of 22 robots. The robots have been 
in service for nearly ten years. This allows us to disregard the 
possibility of a novelty effect commonly caused by robots; 
the staff would regard them as commonplace. 
The AGV robots require building structure and infra-
structure to accommodate them. They follow magnetic 
markers embedded in the floor throughout their operating 
areas and use strategically placed charging stations. These 
infrastructure requirements were part of the planning and 
building process of the hospital. The robots operate mostly in 
the hospital basement where there are no unattended patients. 
A patient can only encounter a robot when it takes an eleva-
tor up to one of the hospital departments. Even then, the ro-
bots venture only a few meters into the departments to deliv-
er their goods at a dedicated delivery nook. 
According to our informant, the hospital administration 
initially assumed that the robots could operate almost entire-
ly without supervision, needing only occasional checks by an 
operator. However, the hospital staff soon realized this was a 
flawed assumption. “If you leave the screen for 10 to 20 
minutes, there is a standstill somewhere,” said our informant.  
Furthermore, he explained how a single standstill quickly 
would result in cascading failure. This would eventually lead 
to a total stop of the system since the AGVs cannot pass each 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 2: (Left) the tree stub being chopped up and removed, and 
(right) the robot going down the hill 
 
Figure 1: (Left and center) makeshift signs to tell people to leave the robot’s nooks alone; (right) a more refined sign. 
other. This highlights the importance of facilitating for seam-
less operation during the robot’s working time.  
Standstills can occur due to technical problems in the 
AGV themselves, but often it is “human error.” Our inform-
ant described how the medical staff would leave all kinds of 
objects in the magnetic path or the delivery nooks of the ro-
bot. As the AGV has no way to make its way around obsta-
cles, all obstacles are insurmountable. In these situations, the 
only solution is for an operator to find and remove the obsta-
cle. To reduce the frequency of these standstills, signs had 
been put up throughout the hospital to inform people that the 
robots need a clear path to operate, reminding them not to 
leave anything in the hallways. Some of these signs look 
very professional and refined (Figure 1, right), while others 
have more of a makeshift look (Figure 1, left and center). 
The maintenance and ongoing facilitation for the AGVs 
require three full-time employees. The employees’ main task 
is ensuring the robots do not come to a standstill, working in 
shifts to always be present for robot monitoring. As men-
tioned above, the hospital had not expected the level of robot 
supervision required. The constant monitoring now carried 
out was not in the initial plan of the deployment strategy. 
Though the AGVs require a substantial amount of facilita-
tion, their deployments give a net positive amount of work; 
they provide the same work as 15-25 full-time employees, 
based on between 400-500 assignments every day. 
During the first two to three years of using the AGV 
within the hospital, three technicians from the AGV’s manu-
facturer worked full-time on the implementation and config-
uration of the system, after which they considered the system 
stable enough for them to leave.  
B. Robotic Lawnmower 
In the case of the lawnmower robots, we interviewed two 
different individuals owning a lawnmower robot. Both robots 
were of the same brand and had the same functionality.  
When the informants had set up the robot for their garden 
environments, the amount of setup work required help from 
family members. The preliminarily work of setting up the 
perimeter fence and programming amounted to between two 
to three days for each of the informants. This workload was 
expected by the users: They were informed in advance about 
what was needed to be done to set up the robots correctly. 
However, both informants reported they needed to watch 
the robot during its working hours to make sure that it was 
not stuck somewhere. Moreover, they told us how they now 
kept their gardens clear of foreign objects, such as gardening 
tools, flowerpots and other decorations. 
One informant had a diverse garden with steep hills, 
some steps making up a tiny stair, a sandpit from when her 
children were younger, some berry bushes, a flowerbed, an 
apple tree, and a large tree stump. Most of these obstacles 
created more work in facilitating the robot’s work than she 
and her husband had anticipated. For instance, during late 
summer and early fall, apples fall from their apple tree, the 
fallen apples often caused the robot to stop altogether. Our 
informant reported picking apples off the lawn every morn-
ing to help the robot complete its job. 
Furthermore, it was difficult for the robot to access all 
parts of the garden. In most of the accessible places, it would 
often get stuck. Our informant described an issue revolving 
around her robot’s ability to get up the steep hill and the 
placement of the tree stump. The stump sat just at the top of 
the hill, right where the ground flattens out. To climb the hill, 
the robot needs momentum. The robot cannot see, and it can 
only detect obstacles by bumping into them. So, it can never 
plan its trajectory with these obstacles in consideration and 
simply moves in a randomized pattern. Thus, whenever it hit 
the tree stump, it would lose momentum and get stuck. This 
happened nearly every day and occurred more frequently on 
rainy days. 
Since the robot getting stuck and disabling it from carry-
ing out its task was inconvenient, the informant and her hus-
band decided to remove the tree stump (Figure 2). She was 
uncertain whether she and her husband would have removed 
the stump if they did not have the robot: She found the stump 
charming, and had imagined placing flowerpots on it. 
She had also contemplated removing the apple tree, but 
so far, she has not taken this measure as she has some regrets 
over removing the tree stump. Removing the apple tree, like 
removing the stump, is an irreversible action. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Robotic Vacuum Cleaner 
Setting up a robotic vacuum cleaner is a smaller job than 
setting up a robot lawnmower. Its navigational technology 
does not require a perimeter fence to move within the do-
mestic environment. The process varies between brands and 
is a little more complicated if the user decides to use the 
smartphone application, but the only required set up by the 
user is placing the robot’s docking station. 
In our study, we provided a robotic vacuum cleaner to 
five older adult participants living independently in their own 
apartments. Most participants did not have wireless internet 
or a smartphone, and could thus not use the smartphone app, 
making set-up in their apartments easy. 
While robotic vacuum cleaners can run without the 
supervision of human operators, most participants did not 
trust the robot to run while they were not home. They pre-
ferred to keep an eye on the robot during its operation time to 
prevent it from getting stuck or accessing unwanted areas. 
IV. FINDINGS 
We have seen how all the robots we have investigated al-
tered existing tasks and added new ones for them to operate 
properly. Further, we saw that the tasks varied widely; from 
small alterations in the operational environment, through 
continuous tidying tasks, to substantial infrastructure modifi-
cations. We call all such tasks facilitation. After examining 
the tasks, we saw that the tasks begin to coalesce in some 
categories: pre-facilitation, tasks done before the robot can 
operate; peri-facilitation, tasks done while the robot is oper-
ating; and post-facilitation, larger tasks done after the robot 
has been deployed a while that reduce peri-facilitating tasks.  
A. The Robot Facilitation Framework 
The Robot Facilitation Framework helps designers un-
derstand how work changes. Its central idea is understanding 
how the introduction of robots change tasks and task distri-
bution. The framework describes how we share space with a 
robot, rather than describing how we accept robots into our 
space. The framework has three components. 
1) Pre-facilitation 
The first kind of facilitation in our framework takes place 
right before the deployment of the robot. We call this pre-
facilitation. The user makes the changes both necessary for 
the robot to start, as well as alterations they think will merit 
the robot’s operations. Often, facilitation is required for start-
ing the robot, such as the placement of a docking station and 
fence cable. Other changes to the environment are made be-
cause the user assumes the facilitation will accommodate the 
robot, for example, removing power cords to avoid tangling.  
2) Peri-facilitation 
However, the changes made in pre-facilitation are rarely 
sufficient. The technologies in today’s robots require an un-
cluttered operating area, which is rarely found in domestic 
settings [17]. Consequently, to facilitate a smooth operation 
period for the robots, humans need to continuously tidy. We 
have discovered some required tasks might come as a sur-
prise to the user and are not easy to anticipate such as pick-
ing up apples. As robots today cannot take care of and repair 
themselves, users also need to perform maintenance on the 
robot. Maintenance activities include changing the blade on 
the robotic lawnmower and changing the brushes of the robot 
vacuum cleaner, as well as larger maintenance tasks as done 
by technicians from the manufacturer that delivers robots in 
systems such as AGV found in the hospital. 
We call this peri-facilitation because the tasks are re-
quired continuously during the robot’s operational time. The 
bulk of time one used to spend doing the tasks now per-
formed by the robot is replaced with smaller tasks requiring a 
few minutes every day. The tasks are performed by the user 
to make sure the robot operations run smoothly, such as re-
moving clutter to prevent it from getting stuck, assisting it 
should it get stuck in or under something, and all time spent 
on robot maintenance. In other words, peri-facilitating tasks 
are a form of everyday maintenance.  
3) Post-facilitation 
As the users find recurring patterns for facilitation re-
quired during the robot’s operations, they can decide to make 
bigger changes to their environment—such as removing a 
tree stump—as a way of reducing the need for peri-
facilitation. We call this post-facilitation. A thorough under-
standing of how the robot operates in the specific domestic 
settings is required to make post-facilitation changes. 
V. DISCUSSION 
In Section II, we briefly presented a few long-term stud-
ies of service robots in domestic settings. These studies fo-
cused mainly on how and why people accept these robots 
into their homes over time. The product ecology and the 
Domestic Robot Ecology have their focus on acceptance of 
robot technology. Our framework is a supplement to other 
frameworks on understanding use of robots. 
In this section, we compare the Robot Facilitation 
Framework to the Domestic Robot Ecology and product 
ecology. The Robot Facilitation Framework looks at how 
work changes with the introduction of a robot. The Domestic 
Robot Ecology and product ecology look at adoption and 
acceptance, but both possess elements that fit within the Ro-
bot Facilitation Framework. Finally, we discuss the interrela-
tionship between the three categories of robot facilitation. 
A. Robot Facilitation Framework in Other Cases 
Sung et al. [8] describe robot acceptance as happening in 
four temporal phases. In the pre-adoption phase, the users 
form their expectation of the robot. Because the Roomba 
requires nothing but placing the docking station before it can 
start, users with high expectations of the robot perform little 
to no pre-facilitation. When little pre-facilitation has taken 
place, the robots could cause accidents. Whenever the 
Roomba caused accidents, the participants in their study 
made changes to the environment necessary to prevent the 
same accident from reoccurring: “Some of the actions in-
cluded casual and temporary changes that they needed to 
repeat in each operation. Other changes were more perma-
nent” [8] The more temporary changes were things like fold-
ing area rugs, blocking Roomba with objects, and picking up 
clutter. The changes considered more permanent included 
things like placing books under lamps to prevent Roomba 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 3: Interrelationship between the three facilitation categories 
from climbing it, or removing rug fringe to prevent it from 
getting stuck. These are good examples of both peri- and 
post-facilitation. 
Forlizzi and DiSalvo [9] point out that the Roomba’s 
need of a clutter-free environment caused some participants 
to engage in what they refer to as “pre-cleaning activities.” 
By doing some pre-cleaning, the home environment was 
ready for Roomba to do the cleaning without supervision. 
They describe this as an “unusual dynamic between the 
product, the physical environment, and the participant” [9] 
where the participants must decide when they should inter-
vene during the Roombas operational activities. Though 
there are few concrete examples described here, the problem 
area as described where the functionalities of the Roomba 
lead users to accommodate the robot’s operations is the basis 
for peri-facilitation and key to understanding the processes 
around this type of facilitation. 
Fink et al. [10] observed that their participants made 
changes to the environment that was encouraged by the ro-
bot. They also describe how participants spent different 
amounts of time on adjusting the space before turning 
Roomba on, and that some households had to solve further 
issues such as moving away delicate objects. In their study, 
participants expressed not wanting to let the Roomba work 
by itself at home while they were out, illustrating the need to 
be there and peri-facilitate should Roomba crash, get stuck, 
or other unforeseen peri-facilitating tasks. They further de-
scribe how participants, children especially, would assist the 
robot by collecting crumbs and placing them directly in front 
of the robot, or build walls out of obstacles.  
Cesta, Cortellessa, Orlandini, and Tiberio [11] examined 
a telepresence robot in the home of an elderly couple over a 
year. The study had both pre-facilitation to prepare for the 
robot’s arrival and peri-facilitation as the robot was in use. 
Since the study had a known end, there was no post-
facilitation, but the suggestions from the couple about where 
the robot should be placed when charging indicate that post-
facilitation would be needed for the robot to be used after the 
study. 
B. Interrelationship between the types of facilitation 
Setting boundaries for categories based on qualitative da-
ta is rarely clear-cut. When analyzing human-robot observa-
tions through the Robot Facilitation Framework, we find that 
some actions of facilitation are hard to place completely 
within one of the three categories. Should the three catego-
ries be considered as types of facilitation, stages of facilita-
tion, or phases of facilitation? 
In the following, we discuss the relationship between 
these categories, as illustrated in Figure 3. The solid arrows 
represent how the process of facilitating for a robot evolves. 
A pre-facilitation task would be finding a spot for the dock-
ing station, and setting it up. As the robot works, emptying 
out the robot’s dust bin would be a peri-facilitating task. Up-
grading the infrastructure to increase the usefulness of the 
robot is a post-facilitation task, which leads back to peri-
facilitation as the robot works in the new environment.  
However, some relations are more uncertain than others. 
These are marked by dashed arrows and question marks. 
These uncertain relations raise questions such as “can one 
move from peri- and post-facilitation to pre-facilitation, or 
does pre-facilitation only happen once during the deploy-
ment of the service robot?” We need to decide what actions 
should be considered pre-facilitation. For instance, can pre-
cleaning activities, as described by Forlizzi and DiSalvo [8] 
take place after the deployment of the robot, but not during 
its operational time? In the view of the Robot Facilitation 
Framework, should activities performed during the deploy-
ment period of the robot, but not when it is currently active 
be considered a pre- or a peri-facilitating task? 
As we saw in the example of AGV, the infrastructure of 
the hospital tied to the deployment of the robots was planned 
during the construction of the hospital itself. Ozkil et al. [18] 
examined what was needed to implement service robots in a 
Danish hospital, a process which can be understood as pre-
facilitation of robots.  
This shows that pre-facilitation can be a huge process, 
starting already when planning a building, or it can be next to 
nothing should the user not feel the need to change anything 
in their domestic environment before they start the robot. 
Indeed, it seems that the extent of the pre-facilitation can 
vary greatly, and to some degree depend on the complexity 
of the environment it will be operating in, as well as its infra-
structure. From our analysis, pre-facilitation sets the founda-
tion for which new tasks arise as part of peri-facilitation 
when the robot is operationally active. Next, depending on 
how cumbersome the peri-facilitating tasks are, as well as 
their persistence and recurrence, will determine what 
measures will be taken to avoid these in the future. When 
changes are done to avoid certain peri-facilitating tasks, the 
users have post-facilitated their robot. What is unclear when 
it comes to the relationship between the stages, is whether 
the user after such a change finds themselves doing pre-
facilitation again, or if they find themselves right back doing 
peri-facilitation. 
Finally, how big is as post-facilitation change? Are only 
irreversible changes eligible post-facilitating actions, or can 
smaller one-time actions that could easily be reversed fit into 
this category? Irreversible changes include hiring full-time 
workers to look after the robot, removing a tree stump so the 
lawnmower can get up the hill, or replacing a floor lamp with 
a wall-mounted lamp so that vacuuming is easier. A reversi-
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ble change would be placing a book under a lamp to prevent 
the robot from climbing it. 
Tying all these questions together, we see that the answer 
to one of them will have consequences for the others. If plac-
ing books underneath a lamp is not post-facilitation because 
it is not irreversible, it must be either pre- or peri-facilitation. 
If peri-facilitation can only take place while the robot is run-
ning (except whenever the user is doing maintenance on the 
robot), then it must be pre-facilitation. However, if we define 
pre-facilitation as something that only takes place before the 
deployment, then it must be either post- or peri-facilitation 
after all. Is it important for the framework that post-
facilitation actions are recognized as something big and irre-
versible? Similarly, is it important for the framework to rec-
ognize pre-facilitation actions as only taking place before the 
deployment of the robot?  
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our study consisted of multiple case studies, considering 
human-robot interactions at a Norwegian hospital, in the 
gardens of two robotic lawnmower owners, and observations 
of elderly deploying robotic vacuum cleaner for one month. 
We found that work did not disappear, but that tasks were 
redistributed. We presented the Robot Facilitation Frame-
work that divides facilitation into pre-, peri-, and post-
facilitation. Using this framework, data collected from other 
studies can be understood in a different light, focusing on 
how work changes when robots are deployed. The categori-
zation simplifies targeting challenges in the interaction be-
tween humans and robotic technologies. Moreover, it may 
also indicate specific design implications for what tasks 
should be put in which category. It also helps us to under-
stand the amount of work that is included in introducing and 
keeping a robot in a location. This can help people to deter-
mine how best to introduce and use robots in new areas. 
There is more that can be done with this framework. 
There is no precise answer to which activities belong to 
which categories. To make our categories and the relations 
between them more precise, we will carry out more studies 
of robots in use and analyze them. As a part of this, we will 
explore how facilitation relates to maintenance, performativi-
ty, and mediation, and how robot users experience to share 
their space with robots. This should make it easier for others 
to apply the framework in future scenarios where robots are 
introduced at work and at home. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is partly supported by the Research Council of 
Norway as a part of the Multimodal Elderly Care Systems 
(MECS) project, under grant agreement 247697. We would 
like to thank the participants in the MECS project, Professor 
Tone Bratteteig, Associated Professor Jo Herstad, and Post-
doc Guri Verne for guidance in the design of the study, anal-
ysis, and discussion. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Argote, P. S. Goodman, and D. Schkade, “The Human Side 
of Robotics: How Worker’s React to a Robot,” Carnegie 
Mellon University, Tepper School of Business, 1–1983, 1983. 
[2] J. M. Evans, “HelpMate: an autonomous mobile robot courier 
for hospitals,” 1994, vol. 3, pp. 1695–1700. 
[3] S. Jeon and J. Lee, “Multi-robot multi-task allocation for hos-
pital logistics,” in Advanced Communication Technology 
(ICACT), 2016 18th International Conference on, 2016, pp. 
339–341. 
[4] N. Wingfield, “As Amazon Pushes Forward with Robots, 
Workers Find New Roles,” The New York Times, 10-Sep-
2017. 
[5] L. Grossman, “Maid to Order,” Time.com, 14-Sep-2002. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://web.archive.org/web/20070714093510/http://www.tim
e.com:80/time/roomba/. [Accessed: 02-Feb-2018]. 
[6] D. S. Syrdal, K. Dautenhahn, K. L. Koay, M. L. Walters, and 
W. C. Ho, “Sharing Spaces, Sharing Lives – The Impact of 
Robot Mobility on User Perception of a Home Companion 
Robot,” in Social Robotics, 2013, pp. 321–330. 
[7] S. Vikkelsø, “Subtle Redistribution of Work, Attention and 
Risks: Electronic Patient Records and Organisational Conse-
quences,” Scand. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 17, no. 1, Jan. 2005. 
[8] J.-Y. Sung, R. E. Grinter, and H. I. Christensen, “Domestic 
Robot Ecology,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 417–
429, Dec. 2010. 
[9] J. Forlizzi and C. DiSalvo, “Service Robots in the Domestic 
Environment: A Study of the Roomba Vacuum in the Home,” 
in Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Conference 
on Human-robot Interaction, New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 
258–265. 
[10] J. Fink, V. Bauwens, F. Kaplan, and P. Dillenbourg, “Living 
with a Vacuum Cleaning Robot: A 6-month Ethnographic 
Study,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 389–408, Aug. 
2013. 
[11] A. Cesta, G. Cortellessa, A. Orlandini, and L. Tiberio, “Long-
Term Evaluation of a Telepresence Robot for the Elderly: 
Methodology and Ecological Case Study,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., 
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 421–441, Jan. 2016. 
[12] J. Forlizzi, “How Robotic Products Become Social Products: 
An Ethnographic Study of Cleaning in the Home,” in Pro-
ceedings of the ACM/IEEE International Conference on Hu-
man-robot Interaction, New York, NY, USA, 2007, pp. 129–
136. 
[13] J.-Y. Sung, H. I. Christensen, and R. Grinter, “Robots in the 
wild: Understanding long-term use,” in HRI ’09 Proceedings 
of the 4th ACM/IEEE international conference on Human ro-
bot interaction, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 45–52. 
[14] R. E. Stake, “Qualitative Case Studies,” in The Sage hand-
book of qualitative research, 3rd ed, N. K. Denzin and Y. S. 
Lincoln, Eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Ltd, 
2005, pp. 443–466. 
[15] V. D. Søyseth and M. Søyland, “‘Hey, I’m walking here!’ – 
An explorative study of spatial encounters between older 
adults and autonomous robots,” 2017. 
[16] International Organization for Standardization, “ISO 10218-
1:2011 - Robots and robotic devices – Safety requirements for 
industrial robots – Part 1: Robots,” International Organiza-
tion for Standardization, Jul-2017. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/51330.html. [Accessed: 02-Feb-
2018]. 
[17] W. Edwards and R. Grinter, “At home with ubiquitous com-
puting: Seven challenges,” in Ubicomp 2001: Ubiquitous 
Computing, 2001, pp. 256–272. 
[18] A. G. Ozkil, Z. Fan, S. Dawids, H. Aanes, J. K. Kristensen, 
and K. H. Christensen, “Service robots for hospitals: A case 
study of transportation tasks in a hospital,” in 2009 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Automation and Logistics, 2009, 
pp. 289–294. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

