 
 
Adaptive Content Presentation Extension for Open edX 
Enhancing MOOCs Accessibility for Users with Disabilities  
Sandra Sanchez-Gordon 
Department of Informatics and Computer Sciences 
National Polytechnic School 
Quito, Ecuador 
sandra.sanchez@epn.edu.ec 
Sergio Luján-Mora 
Department of Software and Computing Systems 
University of Alicante 
Alicante, Spain 
sergio.lujan@ua.es
 
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a three-layer architecture 
to extend the Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 
platform Open edX to enhance course content accessibility for 
users with disabilities. Because of their open nature and global 
scope, MOOCs are a great opportunity for people with 
disabilities that might not be able to engage in learning 
otherwise. The goal of the proposed extension is to enhance 
MOOCs’ accessibility by adapting course content to student 
needs, preferences, skills and situations. In this approach, the 
user does not need to know what adaptations should be applied 
to the MOOC to make it more accessible for them. The user 
only needs to keep updated their accessibility preferences in 
their user profile. The extension automatically applies all the 
necessary adaptations as commanded by the adaptive engine 
and provides the presentation layer with the content best 
suited for the user.  
Keywords-massive open online course; MOOC; accessibility; 
adaptive content presentation; Open edX. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
With a brief six-year history, Massive Open Online 
Courses (MOOCs) constitute a relatively new model of e-
learning. From the educational perspective, a MOOC is an 
online course with no entry requirements, no participation 
limits, and free of charge. Due to their open nature and 
global scope, MOOC courses can potentially benefit 
hundreds of thousands of diverse users. The first MOOC to 
get 
really 
massive 
was 
“Introduction 
to 
Artificial 
Intelligence”, offered in 2011 by Sebastian Thrun of 
Stanford University and Peter Norving of Google, with an 
enrollment of 160,000 participants [1]. The success of this 
course promoted the development of more courses and the 
emergence of MOOC platforms to host new courses. 
Currently, the main MOOC platforms are Coursera (10.5 
million students), edX (3 million students), Udacity (1.5 
million students), MiriadaX (1 million students) and 
FutureLearn (800.000 students) [2].  
In 2014, Bohnsack and Puhl [3] conducted a study that 
determined that none of the current MOOC platforms is fully 
accessible: most lack of correct HTML syntax (e.g., 
language definition, heading structure, and labels in input 
fields) and accessible design (e.g., clean interface, keyboard 
navigation, links to skip to main content). This study 
concluded that accessibility was not in focus when these 
platforms were built, thus excluding people with disabilities 
and not fulfilling the goal of MOOCs being open to 
everyone.  
In 2013, edX opened sourced its platform so developers 
worldwide can build enhancements [4]. At the time of 
writing this paper, several organizations worldwide have 
adopted Open edX to launch their own MOOC initiatives 
[5]. According to Shah, Open edX is becoming the “de facto 
platform for organizations and groups who are looking to 
host their own MOOCs” [3].  
Open edX provides an opportunity for developing an 
extension to enhance accessibility applying adaptive user 
interface techniques. In the literature review, regarding 
adaptive user interfaces for users with special needs we 
highlight a classical work from Stephanidis et al. [6], a 
follow-up work by the same author about Universal Access 
[7], and the works of Liu et al. [8] and Sloan et al. [9]. 
Regarding the developing of extensions for Open edX, we 
found only a proposal to develop a learning analytics 
extension [10]. So far, we have not been able to find 
research on applying adaptive user interface techniques to 
content delivered to MOOC users according to their 
particular accessibility needs. With an adequate architecture, 
future MOOC platforms will be able to overcome content 
accessibility barriers for the benefit of learners, both able 
and disabled. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
describes MOOC users accessibility needs. Section III 
explains the proposed three-layer architecture to develop an 
adaptive content presentation extension for Open edX. 
Section IV presents conclusions and future work. 
II. 
MOOC USERS ACCESIBILITY NEEDS 
Not only users with permanent disabilities (e.g., 
blindness, low vision, deafness, hard of hearing, motor and 
cognitive issues) can benefit from accessible MOOCs. All 
of us could potentially experiment a temporary or 
environmental disability at some point in our lives. For 
example, difficulties distinguishing colors due to lighting 
conditions (low vision) and impediments to hear due to lack 
of headphones in noisy environments (low hearing) or must-
be-quiet places such as hospitals or libraries (deafness). 
Moreover, most of us will develop combined disabilities as 
we age naturally. Also, in the context of a MOOC, people 
learning in a language different from their own might face 
difficulties due to their level of proficiency in the course 
language (e.g., non-native speakers read at slower speed, 
which leads to information overload and cognitive issues) 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
[11]. This is significant, since 2014 statistics from the 
MOOC aggregator Class Central indicates that 80% of 
MOOCs are offered in English and in distant second place is 
Spanish with 8.5% [3]. Finally, the typical age range of 
MOOC students is 16 to 88 years old, with a growing 
tendency of elderly users engaging in lifelong learning for 
intellectual stimulation and social engagement. Elderly 
students face several accessibility barriers to access course 
content due to diminishing capacities such as vision decline, 
hearing loss, decremented motor skills and cognition issues 
[12]. 
To promote accessibility, the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C) created the Web Accessibility Initiative 
(WAI) to develop guidelines for web content (WCAG), 
authoring tools (ATAG), and browsers and other user agents 
(UAAG) [13]. These guidelines are a good starting point to 
understand users’ accessibility needs. 
Although currently there are accessibility options in 
most operating systems, special-purpose applications and 
assistive technologies for several disabilities, most of them 
require the user to explicitly invoke them. Also, the 
potential negative psychological effects caused by the 
introduction of an assistive technology that change how a 
user interacts with a computer may lead to the user rejection 
of that assistive technology or computer use altogether 
[7][9]. In this work, we propose meeting the MOOC users 
accessibility needs with an approach based in user profiling 
and the use of questionnaires that combines explicit user-
invoked adaptations with automatic adaptations.  
III. 
ADAPTIVE CONTENT PRESENTATION ARQUITECTURE  
Adaptive content presentation involves personalizing the 
contents delivered to the user to enhance their accessibility 
and usability [6]. To successfully achieve this, it is necessary 
an accurate detection of the user accessibility needs through 
user profiling and a mechanism that allows transparent 
selection and presentation of the appropriate adaptations 
according to the registered needs [9]. 
The proposed extension will provide functionality for 
both MOOC authors and users. On one hand, the solution 
will allow course authors using the extended platform to 
configure parameters and define features so the course can 
adapt to diverse potential learners. On the other hand, the 
extended platform will allow users of MOOCs hosted in it to 
manage their accessibility user profile by selecting a 
combination of accessibility issues that best suit their current 
life situation and optionally taking quick questionnaires to 
define specific accessibility preferences (e.g., text size, color 
contrast, line spacing). The use of an accessibility user 
profile represents an improvement compared with current 
approaches used in websites and web applications, where the 
user must manually select specific technical adaptations. 
Nevertheless, the Accessibility Preferences user interface has 
an “Advanced Options” feature that provides more savvy 
users with freedom to select specific adaptations if desired. 
Figure 1 shows a user interface prototype to select 
accessibility preferences. 
 
 
Figure 1.  User interface prototype to select accessibility preferences 
In this approach, the user does not need to know what 
adaptations should be applied to the MOOC to make it more 
accessible for them. User needs to know only their reality 
and keep it updated in their profile. From that, the proposed 
adaptive content presentation extension automatically applies 
all the necessary adaptations.  
The architecture of the adaptive content presentation 
extension is composed of three layers, as illustrated in Figure 
2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Three-Layer Architecture for the Extension  
The Presentation Layer receives the course content in the 
appropriate format from the Logic Layer, where the adaptive 
engine resides. To select the appropriate content format, the 
adaptive engine scans the user profile and applies the 
necessary adaption rules, as explained by Stephanidis et al. 
[6]. Figure 3 shows an extract of the adaption rule sequence 
to be executed if the user accessibility preferences profile 
indicates dyslexia, based on the guideline developed by De 
Santana et al. [14]  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Extract of adaption rule sequence for dyslexia 
FOR UserPreference[i] 
{IF UserPreference[i] EQUALS dyslexia THEN LineSpacing=1.5 
AND TextFont=Serif.Arial AND TextSize=12 AND 
TextJustification=Unjustified AND …} NEXT i 
 
Persistence  
Layer 
Logic  
Layer 
Presentation 
Layer 
User Profiles Adaption Rules 
Adaptive 
Engine
 User profile  
Adaptive MOOC Content Presentation  
Course Contents 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
The Persistence Layer contains three databases for 
storing user profiles, adaptation rules and course contents. 
The course contents' database must contain several 
alternative formats for the same content, as illustrated in 
Figure 4. The user must be able to access any of the available 
alternative formats for any course content if desired. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Example of alternative formats for same course content  
  Also, the extended platform must support different use 
scenarios, such as a student with combined disabilities (e.g., 
elderly student) or several students with different disabilities 
accessing the MOOC together. Figure 5 shows a lesson 
adapted to users with dyslexia, low vision and blindness. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Lesson interface adapted for dyslexia, low vision and blindness 
In this case, three adaption rules sequences have been 
applied: the dyslexia rule sequence explained earlier; the low 
vision rule sequence (i.e. text with contrast ratio of 4.5:1, 
border pattern to indicate current focus, data on top of graph 
bars); and the blind rule sequence (i.e. link to skip to main 
content, graph with alternative text, table readable by a 
screen reader containing the graph data).  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
Software solutions must adapt to users, not the other way 
around.  This is the best cost-effective way to design a 
solution, especially in scenarios where large numbers of 
diverse users are expected, as is the case in MOOCs. That is 
why, in this paper, we proposed an adaptive content 
presentation extension for Open edX that will allow MOOCs 
hosted in this extended platform to adapt to the specific 
needs, preferences, skills, and situations of learners, both 
able and disabled. More important, with this extended 
platform the particular situation of a person with disabilities 
may go unnoticed for both instructors and peer students, so 
the person with disabilities can be treated truly equally, 
hence assuring real inclusiveness.  
Continuing 
research 
is 
essential 
for 
increasing 
accessibility of MOOCs. As future work, we intend to 
develop a detailed design of the proposed architecture, create 
a prototype of the extension for Open edX, and perform both 
user-based and expert-based evaluations. 
REFERENCES  
[1] S. Sanchez-Gordon and S. Luján-Mora, “MOOCs gone Wild”, in 
Proceedings of the 8th International Technology, Education and 
Development Conference, March 2014, pp. 1449-1458. 
[2] W. Shah, MOOCs in 2014: Breaking Down the Numbers. edSurge. 
[Retrieved: December 2014] https://www.edsurge.com/n/2014-12-26-
moocs-in-2014-breaking-down-the-numbers 
[3] M. Bohnsack and S. Puhl, “Accessibility of MOOCs”, In Computers 
Helping People with Special Needs, Springer International 
Publishing, 2014, pp.141-144. 
[4] edX, 
The 
Open 
edX, 2014. [Retrieved: 
December 
2014] 
http://code.edx.org/   
[5] gitHub, Sites powered by Open edX, 2014. [Retrieved: December 
2014] 
https://github.com/edx/edx-platform/wiki/Sites-powered-by-
Open-edX 
[6] C. Stephanidis et al., “Adaptable and adaptive user interfaces for 
disabled users in the AVANTI project”, in Intelligence in Services 
and Networks: Technology for Ubiquitous Telecom Services, 
Springer, 1998, pp. 153-166. 
[7] C. Stephanidis, “Adaptive techniques for universal access”, in User 
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 11 (1-2), 2001, pp. 159-179. 
[8] J. Liu, C. K. Wong, and K. Hui, “An adaptive user interface based on 
personalized learning”, in IEEE Intelligent Systems, 18 (2), 2003, pp. 
52-57. 
[9] D. Sloan, M. Atkinson, C. Machin, and K. Li, “The potential of 
adaptive interfaces as an accessibility aid for older web users”, in 
Proceedings of the International Cross Disciplinary Conference on 
Web Accessibility, ACM, April 2010, doi: 10.1145/1805986.1806033  
[10] J. Ruiz, H. Pijeira Díaz, J. Ruipérez-Valiente, P. Muñoz-Merino, and 
C. Delgado Kloos, “Towards the development of a learning analytics 
extension in open edX”, in Proceedings of the 2nd. International 
Conference 
on 
Technological 
Ecosystems 
for 
Enhancing 
Multiculturality, 
ACM, 
October 
2014, 
pp. 
299-306, 
doi: 
10.1145/2669711.2669914 
[11] S. Sanchez-Gordon and S. Luján-Mora, “Web Accessibility 
Requirements for Massive Open Online Courses”, in Proceedings of 
5th International Conference on Quality and Accessibility of Virtual 
Learning, May 2014, pp.530-535. 
[12] S. Sanchez-Gordon and S. Luján-Mora, “Web accessibility of 
MOOCs for elderly students”, in Proceedings of the 12th 
International Conference on Information Technology Based Higher 
Education 
and 
Training, 
October 
2013, 
pp. 
1-6, 
doi:  
10.1109/ITHET.2013.6671024  
[13] W3C. “WAI Guidelines and Techniques”, 2011. [Retrieved: January 
2015] http://www.w3.org/WAI/guid-tech.html 
[14] V.F. de Santana, R. de Oliveira, L.D.A. Almeida, and M.C.C. 
Baranauskas, “Web accessibility and people with dyslexia: a survey 
on techniques and guidelines”, in Proceedings of the International 
Cross-Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibility, ACM, April 
2012, doi:10.1145/2207016.220704 
 
Lesson 1 video with subtitles in 
different languages 
Lesson 1 video with audio description 
Lesson 1 video transcription 
Lesson1 slides with text and images 
L
e 
s 
s 
o 
n 
 
1 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

