Reducing the User Burden of Identity Management:
A Prototype Based Case Study for a Social-Media Payment Application
Till Halbach Røssvoll, Lothar Fritsch
Norwegian Computing Center, Oslo
http://nr.no
Abstract—Payment applications inside social media dealing
with privacy and security sensitive content require, besides
trust in the involved parts like ﬁnancial institutions and
providers of electronic identities, in particular the trust of
the users. The e-Me project focuses on this trust and aims
at providing multimodal, adaptive authentication and autho-
rization methods for social media that are usable for all users.
In an integrated social-payment application connected to online
banking, an OpenID provider has been developed by means of
inclusive-identity management methods. The provider is used
for both the social-media access control and the embedded
payment service. This work describes the design decisions and
eventual design made for the prototypes with considerations
concerning both e-inclusion and information security and
privacy.
Keywords-Trust, security, privacy, identity management; e-
inclusion, accessibility, usability, universal design; social me-
dia/networking applications
I. INTRODUCTION
For architects and developers of the ever growing num-
ber of social media and electronic services, access and
identity management (AIM) is a substantial part of the
system design. AIM refers to techniques for determining
and organizing the identity of a user in order to grant access
to a service or data, also referred to as authentication, or to
authorize the execution of a task [1]. In addition, electronic
identities are used to organize personal data, and to provide
advanced identity management systems [2].
In the context of information technology, accessibility
describes the degree to which a solution is accessible for
as many people as possible, in particular those with impair-
ments, and those using assistive technology together with the
product or service. Usability refers to the ease with which
people can use a particular product or service. Obviously,
AIM applications have to be both secure and privacy aware,
and should at the same time be as accessible and usable
as possible. Researchers have previously pointed out the
need for inclusive access and identity management [3], as
only few of these systems pay attention to accessibility and
usability issues [4].
This work discusses how to design for trust, privacy, and
security regarding online services and applications inside
social media, while at the same time meeting the requirement
for universal design. Examples of such applications are
image galleries, music sharing services, online games, and
news feed services. The term trust is used here in its most
generic sense as the degree of reliance of one entity on
another [5]. The deﬁnition of privacy in this work is based
on the EU Data Protection directive [6], in the spirit of the
data subject’s informed participation, while security in this
work bears the meaning “degree of protection to safeguard
the asset, here personal data, against threats in terms of data
exposure, damage, or loss”.
Parts of this work have been presented on a previous
occasion [7]. The novel contributions of this article are
1) an in-depth description of the prototypes, including
privacy and security aspects,
2) a discussion of technical decisions regarding the uni-
versal design of the system,
3) the discussion of design considerations regarding the
system’s functionality for privacy and security, and
4) a discussion of the implications of the design for the
user’s experience of trust.
The work is organized as follows. First, the scope provid-
ing research project is introduced, followed by a description
of the proof-of-concept application developed in the course
of the project. Then, e-inclusion, trust, and privacy aspects
are discussed, and a number of trust establishing measures
is presented as a checklist before the paper concludes.
II. THE E-ME PROJECT
The research project e-Me sets the context for this work
[8]. The main goal of the project is to provide new know-
ledge to improve the usability and accessibility of access
and identity management systems, including authentication
mechanisms, in social media without compromising privacy
and security, and without offending legal frameworks.
In the course of the project, the example application
PayShare has been developed. The starting point for the
development of a highly usable and accessible prototype was
a literature review on the ﬁeld of accessibility and usability
issues of personal identiﬁcation systems [9], recommending
—- among others:
• an open and universally designed solution with an
accessible, adaptive, and personalized multimodal user
interface,
364
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

• a minimally exposed user proﬁle with reasonable de-
faults and opt-ins,
• and the application [1] of privacy-enhancing technol-
ogy.
With this in mind, several hypotheses were set up:
1) The majority of users is suffering from having to
handle too many user names and passwords for au-
thentication.
2) The majority of current authentication mechanisms is
not accessible to users with impairments.
3) Users have different requirements and preferences for
privacy and security in electronic products.
4) Users experience multiple authentication processes in
case of frequent authorization as cumbersome.
5) Authentication as used in social media can be applied
to privacy and security aware applications without a
degradation of the level of security or privacy.
In short, the solutions provided by PayShare are:
1) OpenID cuts down the numbers of service accounts to
remember for the user.
2) Authentication adaptation by means of several OpenID
login alternatives, namely password, a series of pic-
tures, a series of sounds, pattern, and personal ques-
tion, which — in total — have a higher degree of
accessibility than just a single login method.
3) User deﬁned threshold for the application of more
frequent authentications.
4) Validity of a person’s authentication for a user deﬁned
time span.
5) OpenID as an authentication means to authorize pay-
ments in an ﬁnancial application inside a social
medium.
All aspects of the solution are subsequently explained in
more detail.
Figure 1.
Identity federations and identity doors in the PayShare applica-
tion
III. THE PAYSHARE APPLICATION
The proof-of-concept prototype PayShare is a means to
test design principles, user interface, and system function-
ality. It can be described as an online payment service.
Figure 2 shows the ﬂow diagram of the PayShare appli-
cation. The application’s three entry points are “Add new
claims”, “View claims”, and “View single claim”. The user
is automatically guided through the block sequence {“Read
about”, “View/accept terms”} before anything else can be
done inside the application.
Figure 2.
The ﬂow in the PayShare application, which equals the
application’s pages/screens. The dashed arrow indicates a path that is only
open to creditors. The dashed box refers to the external OpenID provider.
Upon registration, which basically requires the user’s
acceptance of the Terms&Conditions of the service, users
can ﬁle payment claims for the entire group, assuming
all group members are also connected through a particular
social medium. For instance, consider a group of friends
out to travel. One of them, here called creditor, pays for
the travel tickets of the entire group and ﬁles claims against
all “friends”, here referred to as debtors, in PayShare. The
debtors then get notiﬁcations that there are open claims that
they have to pay, and the creditor can conveniently track any
payment progress, i.e., see who has paid or not. Payments
can be made directly in the PayShare service, meaning inside
the social medium, to/from a virtual wallet in form of so-
called credits, or to/from an account in a trusting bank. There
is the possibility to transfer money from the bank account
to the virtual wallet. PayShare in its entirety meets the
requirement represented by the ﬁfth hypothesis (Section II).
Figure 3 shows the screen shot of the “View single claim”
block which is central to the application. It consists of two
logical units. One unit gives all necessary claim details,
such as amount, creditor, explanatory message, date, and the
subclaims for all the other group members. Strictly speaking,
the latter information is not mandatory for the debtor to
know in order to pay the claim, but it serves as an additional
explanation and justiﬁcation of the claim. In the logical unit
365
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

below the claim details, the debtor is asked for her choice;
that is, pay the claim from the wallet, pay the claim from
the bank account, reject the claim, or postpone the payment.
Concerning the latter, the claim will be maintained, and a
reminder about it is send to the debtor from time to the other.
As mentioned, the debtor could also reject the claim, with
or without a personal comment to the creditor. Before the
navigation buttons are shown on the page, a brief message
is displayed informing the debtor about the payment; i.e., if
(and why) an additional authentication might be necessary,
or — if applicable — just informing the debtor that the
payment is carried out without authentication. A hyperlink
to the appropriate part in the settings is given where these
security preferences can be changed.
A. Privacy & security aspects
To solve security and privacy challenges, PayShare aims
at the separation of identity spaces from each other, see
Figure 1. To achieve this, electronic identities and their use
have been organized in Identity Spaces. These spaces are
organized with PayShare as a intermediary separating the
identity spaces. We use the concept of an “Identity Door”
to describe the handling of e-ID when authenticating to a
service or when authorizing a transaction. In Figure 1, we
show how three such identity doors are deﬁned in PayShare:
• Door 1 is the entrance door to the social media platform
that will provide the social context for PayShare.
• Door 2 is the registration to PayShare, which in general
is entered from the social media platform (but can be
accessed through its own user interface).
• Door 3 is the additional authorization and interface
against the online banking transaction server.
Since security usability — especially of authentication
mechanisms — is the primary objective of the e-Me project,
compromises between the security infrastructure, privacy
design, and usability had to be taken. These will be discussed
further below.
Regarding other security ensuring measures, there is
a user-deﬁned threshold for the payment amount. If the
amount is above the threshold, an additional OpenID au-
thentication of the user is required to authorize payments, as
illustrated in Figure 1 with Door 3. However, as the authen-
tication mechanisms used by banks are numerous, and as an
extra authentication door is perceived as a hindrance by sen-
sitive users, PayShare acts rather as a payment intermediary.
This approach allowed us to restrict Door 3 authentication
to cases where the wallet is charged or discharged. As such,
users are enabled to put a price at the convenience of not
having to go through an authentication process for small-
amount payments. Payments with an amount below the
threshold are one-click payments. This measure meets the
requirement represented by the third hypothesis Section II.
At the same time, the OpenID provider can offer user
friendly and inclusive authentication methods both on Door
1 and Door 2.
Figure 3.
Screenshot of the “View single claim” page in PayShare.
Authentication is delivered by an OpenID provider, which
has the advantage that only a single password has to be
remembered by the user, even for a variety of applications,
authentication contexts, and web sites. This measure meets
the requirement as formulated by the ﬁrst hypothesis Sec-
tion II. Theoretically, the solution works together with any
OpenID provider with full support of the OpenID protocol,
but in practice only a few selected providers may be found
suited due to trust reasons. An own OpenID provider has
been developed as one of the deliverables of the e-Me
project.
Data from any authentication, be it login to the social
medium or authorization of a payment, expires according
to a user-deﬁned time span for authentication validity. This
measure meets the requirement put forward by the fourth
hypothesis (Section II) and aims at avoiding frequent cum-
bersome authentications as the user’s ID is remembered
for this speciﬁc time span. Consequently, an authentication
process is only invoked when the payment’s amount is
above the threshold, and when the time elapsed since the
last authentication has exceeded the authentication validity
duration. More on the reasoning for the respective design
choices in Section IV-B.
IV. DISCUSSION
In the following, it is discussed how accessibility and
usability issues as well as trust, security, and privacy matters
are reﬂected in the PayShare application.
366
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A. e-Inclusion
As mentioned before, the project’s focus is on inclusion
aspects of the solution. Its target groups consist of users
with various impairments, and the elderly. Acknowledged
impairments are cognitive challenges such as dyslexia and
dyscalculi, orientation, and memory problems, sensory chal-
lenges like vision and hearing reduction, and motor chal-
lenges like trembling hands. Elderly users are likely to
have a combination of impairments. However, apart from
these focus groups, PayShare is required to be universally
designed, meaning that it can be used by virtually all
persons.
To meet the requirement as formulated by the second
hypothesis (Section II), the aforementioned OpenID solution
offers in total ﬁve login alternatives:
• Password memorizing,
• recognition a series of pictures,
• recognition of a series of sounds,
• pattern drawing, and
• knowing the answer to a personal question.
What login method is used is up to the user to decide.
Each of the alternatives aims at a particular target group (but
is, of course, not restricted in use to this group): Password for
user without particular login problems, picture series for the
hearing impaired, sound series for the vision impaired, pat-
tern drawing for dyslectic individuals, and personal question
for users with short-/medium-term memory deﬁcits. In total,
e-Me authentication has a higher degree of accessibility than
just a single login method.
Apart from login, the system’s inclusiveness is met by
a number of measures concerning universal design. For
instance, the user interface is tailored to the needs, pref-
erences, and context of the respective user by means of a
user proﬁle, satisfying major parts of the ﬁrst requirement
from the literature review.
B. Privacy implications
The PayShare application accounts for privacy concerns
in a number of ways.
The service follows the privacy requirements [6] derived
from the EU Data Protection Directive [10]. In addition,
it considered the potentially harmful actions laid forth by
Solove [11], and places particular attention on the handling
of electronic identiﬁers according to the PETweb II risk
taxonomy [12]. According to Solove, harmful actions on
personal data are:
• Information Collection: Collection and accumulation of
personal information can cause harm.
• Information Processing: Handling of collected personal
data that can cause harm.
• Information Dissemination: Harms of spreading, or
threat of spreading information.
• Invasion: Risks of intrusion and decision interference.
The following requirements from the uTRUSTit privacy
requirement report [12] were used as the essential require-
ments following from the EU data protection directive [10].
• Personal data is only processed after the person gave
informed consent for the processing.
• A person has the right to inquire about the own personal
data stored with another party.
• A person can revoke consent for personal data process-
ing given earlier at any time.
• The data processor can only process personal data
according to the given consent (e.g. according to a
privacy policy).
• The data processor makes sure that personal data is
sufﬁciently protected from unauthorized access, manip-
ulation, abuse or loss.
• The data processor makes sure to be able to react ac-
cordingly to consent revocation for any given personal
data.
The PETweb II risk taxonomy for electronic identity man-
agement systems found a number of factors that constitute
privacy risk in handling identiﬁers [11]. Major risks found
include the possibility for identiﬁers to get proﬁled, to get
stolen, and to get remotely used. In the PayShare scenario,
Door1 authentication leads the users into a personalized
proﬁle. The purpose of authenticating is to access the same
proﬁle every time. The same holds for PayShare’s Door
2 authentications , where personal money is administered.
The risks for stolen identiﬁers is strongly dependent on the
authentication technologies offered by the OpenID provider.
In e-Me, experiments are performed with easy-to-use pass-
word replacements, and with signature strength smart card
solutions [13].
A number of compromises have been made. In the given
scenario – payment among a group of users registered to a
social media platform, in connection to their bank account
– full anonymity was nowhere possible. The social media
proﬁle, even if it should be created under pseudonym,
gets through the PayShare service connected to a bank
account that is connected to a veriﬁed person. In addition,
pseudonymity on the social media is of limited usefulness
in a scenario where friends split the dinner bill – as the
identities are known between the friends anyway. The critical
pieces of personal information were identiﬁed to relate to
the occurrence, frequencies and destinations of payments.
By inclusion into a social media, PayShare is principally
able to trace a friends network’s payment behavior. Repeated
payments between friends can indicate closer relationships,
reveal business secrets, or prove social relationships to oth-
ers. The introduction of the Wallet for low-value payments
loosens the connection between the bank and the social
media activities. By acting as a “wallet ﬁlled with small
change” up to the set threshold, the bank gets only involved
into higher-value transactions. However, as ultimately, bank
367
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

transactions will be used beyond Door 3, there is no way
around compliance with ﬁnancial market regulation, and
thus full identiﬁcation of sender and receiver in a bank
transaction.
Regarding concrete privacy measures, there are several
hyperlinks to the service’s Terms such that the user can view
this document also after its acceptance upon registration. In
case the user does not agree with the Terms anymore, an
option to delete the user account is provided. There is also
a hyperlink from the settings to the deletion of the user
account, as the user might ﬁnd the security and privacy
settings inappropriate for own needs.
As mentioned in Section III, the view of a single claim
contains the display of the subclaims for group members.
However, all names (except the own one, of course) are
anonymized per default to honor the privacy of all involved
persons. The visibility of claims can be set to “Visible to all
group members” in the settings, if desired.
The deletion of a user’s account includes the irreversible
removal of the user’s proﬁle which in turn includes settings
like bank account number, visibility of claims, OpenID
address, threshold for additional authentication, and duration
for storage of authentication realm. Additionally, the user’s
ID is removed from all open and archived claims in the
database, following this policy: Where the user is a creditor
and the (sub-)claim is open, the (sub-)claim is deleted. In
archived (sub-)claims with the user as a creditor, the user ID
is erased from the database entry. Other claims, in particular
those where the respective user has been named as a debtor,
are not touched.
Creditors may delete own claims, but here the restriction
is that only open claims may be deleted, while archived
claims cannot. In this case and in the instance of the
user account deletion, the privacy of the creditor and the
privacy of the debtor have to be weighted against each
other. PayShare accounts for the debtor’s privacy by keeping
archived records, but at the same time also honors the
creditor’s privacy and erases her user ID from the record, as
this is information provided by the creditor herself. A debtor
cannot, however, delete claim records as the information
concerning who is the claim’s debtor has been provided by
the creditor and is hence out of control for the debtor.
C. Trust implications
As a payment service that voluntarily relies on OpenID
for authentication, and that is linked to a bank account, there
are a number of trust chains. Figure 4 illustrates all paths of
trust.
PayShare acts as an identity broker against the social
media and the bank identity space. The bank (the trustor)
has, as a minimum requirement, to trust PayShare (the
trustee)
• that all virtual credits are safe and properly handled
with the service,
• that all payments are correctly executed, and
• that personal data are handled in a conﬁdential way.
The same applies to the trust chain from the user (the
trustor) to PayShare (the trustee). Needless to say, the user
has to trust the bank in the same way as she trusts PayShare.
In addition, the user needs to trust the social medium,
which provides the framework for services like PayShare,
for data that PayShare and the medium have in common,
like user names, and the OpenID provider, for handling
authentications in a secure and privacy aware way. PayShare
needs to trust the underlying social medium as well as the
OpenID provider for proper and secure authentication.
Besides the robustness of the OpenID provider’s authen-
tication methods, PayShare itself must be seen as the most
critical point in the privacy infrastructure. PayShare is the
entity that collects and combines both information about
the users’ social media identity, their bank identity, and
their payment requests. Therefore is the correct handling
and deletion of payment requests and payment information
at PayShare of utter importance. The issue of the trusted
3rd party is a well-known problem for privacy and trust
research. Often, for instance when personal data is part of a
business model, some form of 3rd party (e.g. intermediaries
and brokers) are needed to perform the business function.
These brokers can help to protect privacy by separating
identity spaces and personal data between the participating
stakeholders. The concept has successfully been used to
anonymize location data in location-based services [14],
[15]. In PayShare, the PayShare service itself handles the
identity spaces with a direct mapping rather than using
anonymizers [16] and advanced attribute credentials [17]
due to the fact that banking transactions cannot legally be
anonymized.
Figure 4.
Chains of trust among the PayShare stakeholders.
Is is argued here that especially impaired users need
particular measures to develop the same degree of trust like
the average user to make up for the impairment. For instance,
a blind person who is enabled to use an audio-based authen-
tication scheme will have more trust in such a system that
accounts for the user’s preferences than systems that only
offer visual CAPTCHAs. Similarly, a person with orientation
and problem solving problems is likely to develop more
trust in a system showing explaining messages about what
368
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

is about to happen on the current screen than systems that
do not have the same degree of usability.
All users build their trust on pieces of information, about
what is about to happen, why certain things happen, what
the user’s choices are, etc. The picture is never entirely
complete; rather, the more information the user has at a given
point in time, the better in order to be able to carry out a
particular task. Impaired users are likely not to get as much
information as ordinary users, except when the solution is
universally designed and thus accessible to virtually all.
On the other hand, too much information can result in the
disorientation of the user, especially those with orientation
and learning challenges [18]. The solution should therefore
limit the amount of information the user is confronted with,
and should also ease its processing, in terms of a weighting
of the information’s importance for the context the user
currently is in. To sum up, it is crucial in particular for
impaired users — but also for all users in general — that
the system provides and makes accessible all the information
the user needs in order to carry out a task by herself, not
less but not more either to avoid user confusion.
V. CONCLUSION
User control and information are crucial to achieve a
high degree of trust of the user to the service. There is
a connection between e-inclusion and trust in terms of
the fact that a high degree of accessibility and usability
empowers the user in certain situations to use the respective
service at all. In other situations, it increases the user’s
control or feeling of control and thereby the user’s trust.
The perception of increased trust is not only applicable
to users with impairments but rather all users, as it is
widely recognized that e-inclusion measures for particular
focus groups generally increase the service’s usability for
everybody.
A particular challenge in the realization of PayShare
was its connection to several identity spaces. Social media
identities and online banking identities are different in scope,
robustness, and use. PayShare had to accept the role as
an identity broker or identity intermediary to bridge the
respective identity spaces. The resulting privacy issues were
analyzed and led to the above requirement list for PayShare.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The e-Me project is funded by the Norwegian Research
Council under project no. 201554.
REFERENCES
[1] K.
S.
Fuglerud
and
T.
H.
Røssvoll,
“Usability
and
accessibility of personal identiﬁcation management systems
in electronic services,” in Proceedings of eChallenges-2011.
Florence (Italy): IIMC International Information Management
Corporation
Ltd.,
Oct.
2011.
[Online].
Available:
http://echallenges.org/e2011/default.asp?page=paper-
repository&ﬂtyear=all&ﬂttheme=all&ﬂttype=all&ﬂttitle=
&ﬂtauthor=halbach&pagesize=100&submit=Search
[2] WP3, “Fidis Deliverable D3.1: Structured overview on proto-
types and concepts of identity management systems,” FIDIS
Consortium, Tech. Rep., September 2005.
[3] L. Fritsch, K. S. Fuglerud, and I. Solheim, “Towards inclusive
identity management,” Identity in the Information Society,
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 515–538, 2010.
[4] G. Sauer, J. Holman, J. Lazar, H. Hochheiser, and J. Feng,
“Accessible privacy and security: a universally usable human-
interaction proof tool,” Universal Access in the Information
Society, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 239–248, 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://www.springerlink.com/content/j801373hw352514r/
[5] L. Fritsch, A.-K. Groven, and T. Schulz, On the Internet of
Things, Trust is Relative, ser. Communications in Computer
and Information Science.
Amsterdam: Springer, 2011, vol.
277, ch. 9, pp. 267–273.
[6] European Council and Parliament, “Directive 2002/58/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002
concerning the processing of personal data and the protection
of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive
on Privacy and Electronic Communications),” 2002.
[7] T. H. Røssvoll, “Trust implications for universal design
of social-networking applications,” User-Centered Trust in
Interactive Systems Workshop at NordiCHI 2012, Oct. 2012.
[Online]. Available: http://www.nordichi2012.org
[8] Norwegian Computing Center, “e-Me — Inclusive identity
management in new social media,” 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://nr.no/pages/dart/project ﬂyer e-me
[9] K. S. Fuglerud and T. H. Røssvoll, “Previous and related
research on usability and accessibility issues of personal
identiﬁcation management systems,” Norwegian Computing
Center, Oslo (Norway), Tech. Rep. DART/10/10, Oct. 2010.
[Online]. Available: http://publ.nr.no/5371
[10] L. Fritsch, “Social media, e-ID and privacy - background
for the e-Me project,” Norsk Regnesentral, Tech. Rep.
DART/02/2011, April 2011.
[11] D. Solove, “A taxonomy of privacy,” University of Pennsyl-
vania Law Review, vol. 154, no. 3, pp. 477–564, 2006.
[12] E. Paintsil and L. Fritsch, A Taxonomy of Privacy and Security
Risks Contributing Factors, ser. IFIP Advances in Information
and Communication Technology. Springer Boston, 2011, vol.
352, pp. 52–63.
[13] L. Fritsch, “Privacy visualization requirements in the Internet
of Things - a uTRUSTit FP7 ICT project note,” Norwegian
Computing Center, Tech. Rep., September 2012.
[14] ——, “Utprøving av Buypass e-ID og Altinn.no - resultat
av smartkort-studie i e-Me-prosjekt,” Norwegian Computing
Center, Tech. Rep. NR Note DART/03/2011, April 2011.
[15] T. Koelsch, L. Fritsch, M. Kohlweiss, and D. Kesdogan,
Privacy for Proﬁtable Location Based Services.
Boppard:
Springer, 2005, vol. 3450, pp. 164–179.
369
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[16] J. Zibuschka, L. Fritsch, M. Radmacher, T. Scherner,
and K. Rannenberg, “Privacy-friendly LBS: A prototype-
supported case study,” in 13th Americas Conference on In-
formation Systems (AMCIS), P. o. t. A. C. o. I. Systems, Ed.,
2007.
[17] D. Chaum, “Untraceable electronic mail, return addresses,
and digital pseudonyms,” Communications of the Acm, vol. 4,
no. 2, pp. 84–88, 1981.
[18] T. Halbach, “Towards cognitively accessible web pages,” in
Proceedings of Third International Conferences on Advances
in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI-2010), International
Academy, Research, and Industry Association (IARIA).
St.
Maarten (Netherlands Antilles): IEEE Computer Society,
Feb.
2010,
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2010/ACHI10.
html. [Online]. Available: http://publ.nr.no/5236
370
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

