Industry 4.0 and the Futur Revolution for Human-Centered Industry 
 
Adrien Brunet, Steffen Scholz 
Institute for Applied Computer Science 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
E-Mail: [adrien.brunet;steffen.scholz]@kit.edu 
 
 
Abstract— The development of new technologies namely in the 
microelectronic and the communication domains drives a new 
industrial revolution. As every revolution, industry 4.0 will 
change our way of working and bring new opportunities and 
challenges. This paper presents the new technologies and 
human-centred applications related to industry 4.0. and 
concludes on what it will bring to humans and societies. 
Keywords-Human-centered industrial technology; additive 
manufacturing; Augmented reality; industry 4.0; Robotic. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION ON INDUSTRY 4.0 
The first industrial revolution appeared in the end of the 
18th century in Europe. It has seen the development of the 
steam engine that tremendously increased the work force of 
the industry. Tasks that required before many men and 
horses have been replaced by machine. This new invention 
lead to the creation of railway systems with the steam 
locomotive.  
The second revolution came at the turn of the 20th century 
with the electrification of the industrial production and the 
adoption of the Fordism and Taylorism for the mass 
production.  
The third industrial revolution appeared in the second 
part of the 20th century. It concerns the development of 
semiconductors and programmable logic. Repetitive tasks 
executed my human workers have been replaced by robots 
and only the most complex jobs have been left to human.  
Each 
previous 
industrial 
revolution 
happened 
simultaneously with changes in how human live and work. 
Today a new revolution is coming, it has different names, 
some call it the industrial internet of things [1] and others 
call it the industry 4.0. or  even smart factories [2]-[4] This 
new revolution is emerging from the digitalisation and the 
connection of the industry to the internet. Figure 1 
summarises the evolution of the industry since the first 
industrial revolution.     
Considering those changes, it is important to ask the 
question: what will bring and change industry 4.0 for the 
human. The technological evolution that enable this new 
revolution are presented in Section II. In section III are 
listed the new human-centred applications. Then the hurdles 
on the road of lifework and societal improvement are given 
in Section IV and Section V is the conclusion. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The four stages of the industrial revolution source DKFI 2011 [2] 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
THE ORIGINE OF INDUSTRY  4.0: TECHNOLOGICAL 
EVOLUTIONS AND INVENTION 
Various 
technological 
evolutions 
and 
inventions 
(described in the following paragraphs) appeared in the last 
decades enabling the emergence of industry 4.0.  
A. Miniaturisation  
The first enabling technology for the industry 4.0 is 
actually an incremental development of the chip and 
semiconductor industry. Computer calculation power went 
in few decades from basic logic to complex meteorological 
model calculations. The miniaturisation and cost reduction 
of micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) filled our 
world of sensors, recording huge amounts of data.  Dozens 
of sensors can be found in a smartphone such as 
accelerometer, gyrometer, heart rate monitor, fingerprint, 
light sensor, etc. In modern cars, even more sensors can be 
found. 
B. Communication technology  
The 
communication 
technologies 
made 
great 
improvement, such as in wireless communication system; 
nevertheless, the development of the internet was the 
breakthrough. It is now possible for anybody with an access 
to the World Wide Web to communicate with somebody 
else everywhere in the world. This changed radically our 
ways to exchange data and to conceive services. Nowadays 
many exchanges are dematerialized: books and music are 
files that can be download and read from everywhere at 
anytime. Object are less and less things that are made of 
atoms but made of bytes. This phenomenon of digitalisation 
is named the internet of things (IoT) [5].  
C. Cyber physical system  
Cyber physical systems (CPS) integrate computation, 
networking and physical process. It is this ability of 
machine to calculate (“to think”) and to communicate that 
make the current evolution of the industry a revolution.  
Indeed, machine can harvest data, compute them locally, 
and adapt their reaction without human actions to be taken. 
For example, on a manufacturing line a temperature sensor 
send a voltage analysed by the machine as a value out of the 
safety range, then using an adapted algorithm the machine 
stops the process, and reduces the heat. The same machine 
connected to the internet and knowing more about the 
product history could take another decision. 
D. Cloud and big data 
The cloud and “big data” are enabling the CPS. As 
explained before sensors took place everywhere in our lives 
and this is even true in the manufacturing processes. Those 
sensors create data that are usually thrown away. The cloud 
enables company to store and compute big amount of data 
while they do not have locally super computer and 
important storage capacity. Big data analysis make it 
possible to answer the questions : “what is the pattern?”, 
“what will happen next?” “what if we try this?” and “what is 
the best action?” This new way of analysing big amount of 
data is called predictive and prescriptive data analysis [1].   
 
E. Digitalisation and additive manufacturing  
Improvement in the previously quoted technologies as 
well as development in computer assisted design (CAD) 
technology and more recently 3D scanning of objects, 
accelerated the digitalisation of the industry. Nowadays 
libraries of 3D object exist in open source (3Dwarehouse, 
thingiverse, 
archive3D) 
[6]-[8] 
accelerating 
the 
democratisation 
of 
additive 
manufacturing. 
Additive 
manufacturing made possible for everyone to print a wide 
range of object, creating a breakthrough in spare part but 
also rapid prototyping and health along with other markets.  
F. General consequences of the tecnological evolutions 
and inventions  
It is expected that with the ability of factories to store, 
access and compute an increasing amount of Data, they will 
be able to:  
 
Control their energy consumption. They will be 
connected to a smart grid and will know when 
the power is available and the cheapest.    
 
Know the incoming and outcoming flows of 
raw materials, products, energy, waste, ect. 
 
Know when is the raw material at its best price 
and adapt purchasing to the manufacturing, 
stock and market situation.  
 
To be informed when a delivery will be made 
and if some delays are to be expected. 
 
Compare the actual data with previously 
recorded data and improve decision-making.  
III. 
NEW  HUMAN-CENTERED APPLICATIONS 
Section II listed the technological evolutions that enable 
industry 4.0 and some of their consequences. This section 
focuses on the human-centred applications derived from the 
previous section and presents how industry 4.0 could 
change labour and human life in the new industrial 
revolution.  
A. Safe Human-Robot cooperation 
The German companies Festo [9][10] and ABB (ABB’s 
YUMI) [11] designed robots that can work in cooperation 
with human. Indeed, standard robots move fast and are 
made of stiff material that if they interact with human they 
would most probably hurt them. To avoid any problem most 
of the robots are isolated and kept in a safe room. The idea 
of this new type of robot is to be able to help the worker in 
his tasks while preventing to hurt him. Repetitive, tiring and 
strength demanding task are ideal for robots while human 
have more dexterity and can solve more complex task. 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Augmented reality  
Augmented 
reality 
(AR) 
is 
“a 
technology 
that 
superimposes a computer-generated image on a user's view 
of the real world, thus providing a composite view”. AR and 
namely smart glasses such as the famous “google glass” [12] 
can improve work experience and productivity. AR has 
many different applications. Among the applications that 
already exist are the (1) IKEA AR catalog application that 
can be downloaded on tablets and allow the user to visualise 
virtual furniture in his/her apartment using the tablet’s 
camera [13]; (2) Converse AR catalog application that let 
users to try shoes while they stay home [14]. Implemented 
in the industry, augmented reality could guide the worker 
through complex tasks, for example assembly and reduce 
the potential mistakes [15]. It could help localizing an object 
in a store house, to visualise the inside of an object for 
maintenance or to guide worker by superimposing useful 
information on real object to achieve complex processes 
such as in Figure 2.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Augmented reality application to guide workers wearing smart 
glass [16] 
 
C. Telepresence/remote maintenance  
Thanks to the increasing number of sensors, many 
parameters of a machine can be harvested and coupled with 
a CAD model, thus creating a virtual twin of the machine. 
Instead of disassembling or coming on site for inspection, 
the employee can visualise and analyse the problem 
remotely from his office on screen. The telepresence allow 
the employee to remotely take action to solve the issue. 
D. Agile manufacturing 
Nowadays, manufacturing chains are dedicated mostly to 
one product and can accept changes in return for a 
substantial effort.  With indusdustry 4.0 the production 
chain will be made of manufacturing modules that can be 
quickly reorganizised according to the demand and the 
available workforce while mastering the costs and the 
quality. This new way of conceiving production is called 
„Agile manufacturing“ and is part of the answer to the 
increasing demand of mass customization and reduced lead 
time.  
IV. 
THE HURDLE ON THE ROAD OF  INDUSTRY 4.0 
The report of the German federal ministry of education 
and research (Recommendations for implementing the 
strategic initiative INDUSTRY 4.0) [2] published in April 
2013, lists the actual challenges as follow: 
 Standardisation and open standards for a reference 
architecture 
 Managing complex systems 
 Delivering 
a 
comprehensive 
broadband 
infrastructure for industry 
 Safety and security as critical factors for the 
success of industrie 4.0 
 Work organisation and work design in the digital 
industrial age 
 Training and continuing professional development 
for industrie 4.0 
 Regulatory framework 
 Resource efficiency 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Similarly, to the theory of creative destruction expressed 
by J.Schumpeter [17] robots will have to replace the work 
previously done by human. Nevertheless, products are 
becoming more and more complex and so does the 
production; thus, skilled workers will be more than ever 
required in the factories. Nevertheless, in industry 4.0 the 
worker will not have to follow the pace of rigid and 
automated production, on the contrary robots will adapt to 
the workers.  
The productivity will be improved by the new evolutions 
offered by the industry 4.0. Indeed, AR allow workers to 
efficiently complete more complex tasks in less time. An 
employee using telepresence can also improve his 
productivity by completing more task per day while he/she 
does not have to travel to carry out maintenance. This 
increase in productivity will reduce the costs and improve 
the competitiveness of every factory that will adopt industry 
4.0. Because it allows machines to better control their 
energy consumption and reduce the travel of workers, the 
industrial internet of things is fundamentally environmental 
friendly. 
To finish, it has been demonstrated that industry 4.0 will 
help our societies to sustain growth by increasing 
productivity and overcome great challenges, such as climate 
change, while keeping humans at the centre of the 
production.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
REFERENCES 
[1] A.Gilchrist, Industry 4.0 the industrial internet of things, 2016 
[2] Forschungsunion & Acatech, Recommendations for implementing 
the strategic initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0, 2013 
[3] K. Schwab, The fourth Industrial Revolution, 2017 
[4] R Davies - European Parliamentary Research Service, Briefing, 
industry 4.0. Digitalisation for productivity and growth, 2015 
[5] A. Rayes and S. Samer, Internet of Things From Hype to Reality: The 
Road to Digitization, 2016 
[6] www.thingiverse.com [retrieved: february 2017] 
[7] https://3dwarehouse.sketchup.com [retrieved: february 2017] 
[8] archive3d.net [retrieved: february 2017]  
[9] www.festo.com [retrieved: february 2017] 
[10] S. Scholz, A. Brunet, T. Müller and A. Fuchsbauer, “Novel 
Nanoparticle Enhanced Digital Materials for 3D Printing and their 
Application Shown for the Robotic and Electronic Industry”, 
proceding of the CENICS 2016 conference, pp. 27-30. 
[11] ABB, A new age of industrial production. The Internet of Things, 
Services and People,2016.  
[12] https://developers.google.com/glass/ [retrieved: february 2017] 
[13] www.ikea.com [retrieved: february 2017] 
[14] http://www.converse.com [retrieved: february 2017] 
[15] World Economic Forum, Industrial Internet of Things Unleashing the 
Potential of Connected Products and Services, 2015 
[16] www.itizzimo.com [retrieved: february 2017] 
[17] J.Schumpeter, 1942, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy 
 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

