Designing Ụbụrụ: The Alpha Stage  
Executive Function Rehabilitation Application for Mild Traumatic Brain Injury 
Akuadasuo Ezenyilimba 
Human Systems Engineering, Arizona State University 
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship 
Mesa, United States of America 
email: aezenyi1@asu.edu 
Nancy J. Cooke 
Human Systems Engineering, Arizona State University 
Center for Human, Artificial Intelligence & Robot Teaming 
Mesa, United States of America 
email: Nancy.Cooke@asu.edu 
 
Jennifer Wethe 
Psychiatry/Psychology, Mayo Clinic 
Mayo Clinic Arizona Concussion Program 
Phoenix, United States of America 
email: Wethe.Jennifer@mayo.edu 
Troy McDaniel 
POLY, Arizona State University 
Center for Cognitive Ubiquitous Computing (CUbiC) 
Mesa, United States of America 
email: troy.mcdaniel@asu.edu
 
Abstract— Ụbụrụ is an executive function computerized 
rehabilitation application specifically designed for mild 
Traumatic Brain Injury (mTBI) individuals. Ụbụrụ utilizes 
serious games to train cognitive flexibility, planning, and 
organization. 
This 
paper 
explores 
the 
rationale 
and 
components behind the alpha stage of the application’s 
development, and its first design iteration. Currently, 
individuals with a history of mTBI have limited rehabilitation 
options as a result of lack of knowledge in terms of available 
services, access, time, or financial and insurance constraints. 
Due to the invisible nature of mTBIs, perception of injury 
severity is diminished, individuals are not properly equipped 
with how to proceed forward with rehabilitation, and 
awareness of injury can be inadvertently compromised. The 
intention behind the Ụbụrụ application is to be a computerized 
cognitive 
rehabilitation 
alternative 
and 
additive 
when 
limitations such as time, finances, or insurance exist. 
Keywords-mild traumatic brain injury; executive function; 
serious games; computerized cognitive rehabilitation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Non-standardization of care for (mTBI) continues to 
stagnate an individual's ability to have an effective recovery 
process. Currently mTBIs account for 70 – 90 % of the 69 
million Traumatic Brain Injuries (TBI) that occur each year 
[8]. The common misconception that continues to persist is 
that all mTBI patients will make a full recovery within a few 
days of injury onset. Further research has shown that mTBI 
individuals can still continue to experience Post Concussive 
Symptoms (PCS) for years if not decades after injury [1]. Of 
those deemed recovered, at least 25% present with some 
form of PCS [1]. 
Symptoms of this nature can delay an individual’s ability 
to return to work and impede individuals with prolonged 
Executive Functioning (EF) deficits [8]. Subcortical 
networks and frontal lobe structures are particularly 
vulnerable in traumatic brain injury. Damage within these 
areas of the brain can result in varying levels of Executive 
Dysfunction (ED) that can make it challenging to complete 
independent, goal-oriented behavior and tasks; thus, 
infringing on everyday activities [13]. Having a history of a 
mTBI has demonstrated that individuals can face 
decrements related to planning, organization, reasoning, set 
shifting, and monitoring [13]. 
Less than 30% of individuals with mTBI report seeking 
or receiving next line care in terms of rehabilitation [2]. 
With very few individuals actively seeking or receiving 
treatment, mTBIs can be deemed an invisible injury, leaving 
people improperly equipped with tools to improve their 
overall quality-of-life post injury. For mTBI individuals 
especially it can be hard to accept the severity of a mTBI 
injury, due to the lack of diagnostic testing to pinpoint 
shortcoming, and the lack of concreteness surrounding the 
injury [4]. In addition to the invisible nature of mTBIs, 
cognitive processes such as awareness and acceptance can 
be negatively impacted. Impediments of this nature can limit 
the recovery process. If these processes are not 
appropriately engaged, successful recovery is less than 
likely [2]. Many mTBI individuals, especially athletes, 
report not seeking help because they initially perceived their 
injury as not being severe enough; they believed symptoms 
resolved; they were not sure who to contact; or they were 
unaware that such services were available [3]. 
In addition to non-standardized mTBI care, the strain of 
COVID-19 has shed light on confounding factors in the 
form of present challenges, such as treatment access and the 
priority of mTBI patients [9]. COVID-19 has put many 
medical concerns on the backburner to prioritize public 
safety. Regardless of the present challenges, the needs of the 
TBI community are still imminent. 
With referral rates being as low as 2% for next line care 
when a TBI is classified as mild, there are not many 
available options to further rehabilitation [7]. Additionally, 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

at least 65% of TBI individuals are discharged without any 
sort of rehabilitation plan or checkups [10].  
 
Although current research is limited, it has been 
demonstrated that computerized cognitive rehabilitation can 
be an effective tool in assisting mTBI individuals during 
their recovery [14]. Presently one of the main focus areas 
for mTBI rehabilitation, and computerized training is 
vision-based 
interventions, 
for 
instance 
oculomotor 
rehabilitation [5]. Of those interventions that do not solely 
focus on vision related training, there are only aspects of 
cognition, for example Lumosity, that do not feature EF 
specific training [13]. Furthermore, other challenges related 
to current mTBI interventions include studies being 
conducted only at the military level that do not include 
civilians, thus continuing to add to the ongoing limitation of 
limited knowledge or awareness provided to the general 
public for mTBI rehabilitation. Lastly, current computerized 
interventions do not have the ability to equip individuals 
with the necessary tools to transfer skills learned in 
rehabilitation to activities of daily living that stem beyond 
motor skills, such as reading [5]. 
In order for mTBI individuals to be able to make the most 
out of their recovery process it is important to be able to: 1. 
have a sense of individual autonomy, 2. have access to 
available resources and services, and 3. have knowledge of 
available services and resources. Furthermore, rehabilitation 
initiatives and programs need to address dysfunction-
specific mechanisms associated with mTBI (i.e., executive 
function). Tailored programs that pinpoint areas of ED are 
necessary and would be most beneficial for sustainable 
long-term outcomes [13]. This paper will further explore 
how to incorporate the aforementioned needs and objectives 
to make mTBI rehabilitation more attainable through the 
implementation of an EF computerized rehabilitation 
application that utilizes serious games. The proposed 
application will be described in its alpha stage. 
The purpose of this paper is to: 1. further explore 
rehabilitation limitations facing the traumatic brain injury 
(mTBI) community 2. address the needs of mild Traumatic 
Brain Injury (mTBI) individuals specifically, and 3. explore 
a proposed intervention in its alpha stage. 
With the proposed intervention being in its alpha stage a 
potential limitation to consider moving forward is the fact 
that the application is internet/Wi-Fi dependent. The 
following paper will first discuss in section two the 
application overview related to the proposed application’s 
objectives, the incorporation of EF training through serious 
gamification, the rationale behind the initial application 
assessment, and the intended serious games and other 
application features for EF rehabilitation. The third section 
of the paper will discuss the anticipated experimental 
procedures. Finally, the fourth section of this paper will 
highlight the intended next steps for the development of the 
application. 
II. 
APPLICATION OVERVIEW 
The following sections will describe the components of 
the proposed application in detail. Within these sections the 
application objectives, executive function focus, and serious 
gamification approach will be explained. 
A. Application Objective 
Ụbụrụ (pronounced Oh-bow-roo; from the Igbo 
language; English translation: brain; see Figure 1) is an EF 
rehabilitation application intended to be an alternative 
and/or additive to rehabilitation for the mTBI community. 
The aim of Ụbụrụ is to help individuals mitigate common 
areas of ED for mTBIs through cognitive flexibility, 
organization, and planning training. The goal of Ụbụrụ is to 
allow mTBI individuals to have awareness and control 
during their rehabilitation journey by actively being able to 
1. see progress and/or regression, 2. receive feedback, and 3. 
set realistic goals on a weekly basis.  
 
 
 
With many mTBI individuals not being fully aware of 
their limitations, due to their inherent nature to adapt to their 
new normal or simply not being aware of the severity of 
their ailments, Ụbụrụ’s design aims to bring awareness to 
the forefront of its training [4]. In addition to goal setting, 
Ụbụrụ seeks to overcome awareness challenges through 
feedback in the form of scores, tips, and weekly self-report 
surveys. Ụbụrụ is also designed to actively encourage 
participants to seek and take advantage of other local 
resources by 1. providing recommendations, if necessary, at 
the end of each EF game session, and/or 2. having a readily 
available and accessible resources page built into the 
application. 
Figure 1. Ụbụrụ start page. 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Executive Function Training Through Serious 
Gamification 
For mTBI individuals, EF is one of the most at-risk 
cognitive processes [6]. When left untreated, ED via mTBI 
injury can result in psychological stress that can stem 
beyond the damage acquired by the initial injury, hindering 
an individual's ability to engage in everyday functioning. To 
overcome ED challenges, reduction and monitoring of post 
concussive symptoms is needed, awareness of available 
resources within a community are a must, and quality of life 
needs to actively be considered and improved [6]. 
To address these concerns, Ụbụrụ takes a serious 
gamification approach. Through gamification, participant 
motivation can be increased, and participants will be more 
willing to participate and are more likely to stay engaged 
[11]. With Ụbụrụ aiming to be a computerized cognitive 
rehabilitation alternative when time, access, finances, or 
insurance are an issue, gamification will allow users to 
engage in necessary rehabilitation even when a physician is 
not able to be present. In addition to present limitations 
hindering recovery, Ụbụrụ aims to have skills acquired 
during rehabilitation be transferable to activities of daily 
living. By pinpointing transferability, Ụbụrụ is tailored to 
reduce the psychosocial stress brought on by vocational, 
recreational, and / or interpersonal functioning [6]. 
C. Ụbụrụ Assessment 
To begin using Ụbụrụ, all participants will start by 
taking the initial Ụbụrụ assessment. Upon completing the 
assessment participants will be able to see firsthand their 
primary, secondary, and tertiary focus in terms of cognitive 
flexibility, planning, and organization (see Figure 2). 
 
 
The initial assessment will contain tasks that test 
participants ability to engage in the aforementioned EF 
skills. From here participants will complete weekly EF 
serious games. There will be a total of five games with 
varying levels of cognitive flexibility, planning, and 
organization incorporated.  
D. Cognitive Flexibility Games 
Challenges brought on by additional psychological stress 
from mTBI can impair the ability to effectively engage in 
tasks that are dependent on cognitive flexibility. Cognitive 
flexibility, much like psychological flexibility, is dependent 
on shifting perspective to adapt to situational demands [6]. 
Oftentimes mTBI individuals do not have a full 
understanding of decrements they are facing, resulting in 
mTBI individuals avoiding tasks that require engagement of 
EF skills that have been diminished post-injury. Avoidant 
behavior of this nature consequently results in a 
misinterpretation whereby individuals believe that they are 
fine. Since individuals are not actively training these EF 
skills, persistent decrements continue to hinder activities of 
daily living [6]. 
To address cognitive flexibility challenges, Ụbụrụ has 
users engage in tasks that are designed to train participants 
to switch between different tasks, while engaging  working 
memory. Within the app there are three cognitive flexibility 
specific games (Beat the Value, Keeping Track (also 
incorporates aspects of planning and organization), and This 
or That). The aforementioned cognitive flexibility games are 
designed to encourage users to adapt their thinking in order 
to adjust to their current environment (i.e., the serious 
games). By encouraging users to actively change their 
approach when dealing with ongoing challenges that require 
problem solving, Ụbụrụ, aims to improve the EF skill of 
cognitive flexibility through, task switching, attention to 
detail, and maintaining pertinent information.  
Beat the Value. One of the main challenges TBI 
individuals face is being able to problem solve [1]. Beat the 
Value is designed to help participants sharpen their 
problem-solving skills through math, while engaging in task 
switching. As levels continue to progress users will be 
responsible for maintaining instructions while completing 
the task. 
Keeping Track. Many mTBI individuals with ED face 
challenges with maintaining and holding on to information 
to achieve an overarching goal [13]. Keeping Track focuses 
on training participants ability to differentiate between items 
while paying attention to detail. Through the game of 
Keeping Track participants will be responsible for task 
switching during a subordinate task in order to acquire 
information for a superior task. 
This or That. This or That builds on task switching with 
an emphasis on paying attention to instruction detail. The 
focus of this game is to allow participants to maintain 
relevant information to achieve an overarching goal. As 
users continue to progress through the levels of This or That 
Figure 2. Ụbụrụ homepage. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

they will need to be abreast of information related to the 
task, and prioritize the instructions given to them to 
complete the task at hand. 
E. Organization Game 
Deficits with organization can be attributed to issues 
with early stages of encoding, resulting in ineffective 
processing of information needed to achieve a task [12]. 
Challenges with organization can impede the ability to 
follow and create schedules, prioritize and follow logical 
steps, and coordinate activities. Additionally, organization 
deficits can hinder mTBI individuals’ ability to effectively 
break down tasks [1]. 
Rank Order. To address problems with organization, 
Rank Order focuses on teaching users how to break down an 
overarching event or goal into smaller tasks. The game of 
Rank Order has participants look at a list of items and then 
determine where to start first and order events logically. As 
levels progress, users will also be responsible for 
deciphering which events are most urgent, flexible, and/or 
are able to be rescheduled. 
F. Planning Game 
mTBI individuals are known to face difficulty when it 
comes to engaging in activities that require planning. 
Deficiency in planning can lead to plans that are ineffective 
or poorly developed, resulting in needing more time to 
correct and redirect plans [1]. 
Train of Thoughts. The planning game, Train of 
Thoughts, provides real world scenarios that allow 
participants to see the end result of their decisions. During 
the Train of Thoughts game users are responsible for 
helping a civilian determine the necessary sequence of 
events (i.e., making it to a doctor’s appointment on time) in 
order for the ‘train to leave the station’ while utilizing 
aspects of working memory and prioritization. These 
scenarios are designed to resemble activities of daily living 
so knowledge and skills can be applied to the participant’s 
life. 
G. Weekly Survey 
Weekly Surveys will be made available at the end of the 
week for all participants once all tasks and sessions are 
completed. The survey will consist of three types of 
questions: Likert scale, multiple choice, and open-ended 
questions. The self-report nature of the survey serves as a 
check in for user feedback, keeps users aware of progress, 
and keeps users accountable of their program. 
III. 
ANTICIPATED EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 
Prior to the experimental stage Ụbụrụ will undergo 
usability testing. Upon completion of usability testing the 
experimental stage will commence. For the purposes of this 
study Ụbụrụ will be used as a cognitive rehabilitation 
additive in the form of a web-based application. 
During the experimental stage of Ụbụrụ, participants will 
be able to access weekly tasks via the Executive Function 
Dashboard (see Figure 3). Ụbụrụ will track participants' 
performance on a weekly basis and customize treatment 
plans in the following weeks accordingly.  
A. Duration 
The study will take place over the span of eight weeks. 
Each week will contain three sessions. Every week based on 
participant performance, the level of difficulty will increase, 
decrease, or remain the same. For study purposes, all 
participants will complete all five of the Ụbụrụ games. 
B. Levels 
At the start of the study, all participants will begin at 
level one and move through the application’s levels from 
there. 
Based 
on 
participants' 
weekly 
performance, 
progression will be customized to each user based on their 
scores.  
 
 
 
In addition to level customization, recommendations for 
external resources will be provided to participants who need 
them based on game scores. For participants whose scores 
do not auto populate an external resource recommendation, 
a resource page will be readily available throughout the 
application and provide users with relevant local resources.  
C. Measures 
Participants' scores on the Ụbụrụ Assessment will be 
collected at the beginning and end of the study. In addition 
Figure 3. Ụbụrụ executive function 
dashboard. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

to assessment scores, participant’s weekly individual game 
scores, time to complete each game, and self-report surveys 
will be points of measure. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The future of Ụbụrụ is still underway. As Ụbụrụ begins 
to enter its beta stage, the development of this application 
allows for a testbed to further explore ED amongst mTBI 
individuals. The hope for this application is to begin to 
narrow the gap for rehabilitation limitations and non-
standardization of care for the mTBI community, by testing 
a new computerized cognitive rehabilitation alternative and 
additive. Ụbụrụ will explore the potential of a new approach 
for mTBI rehabilitation, by training specific EF decrements 
to help mitigate extraneous factors that continue to persist as 
a result of PCS. With Ụbụrụ as an experimental study, the 
application will be able to further explore user feedback, 
mTBI rehabilitation needs, and potential shortcomings. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a grant from the National 
Science Foundation [1828010]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Bottari, N. Gosselin, J. Chen, A. and Ptito, “The impact of 
symptomatic mild traumatic brain injury on complex 
everyday activities and the link with alterations in cerebral 
functioning: Exploratory case studies,” Neuropsychological 
Rehabilitation, vol. 27 no. 5, pp. 871-890, April 2015, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2015.1110528 
[2] J. Brown, K. Ackley, and K. Knollman-Porter, “Collaborative 
goal setting: A clinical approach for adults with mild 
traumatic brain injury,” American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 2394–2413, 
November 2021, https://doi.org/10.1044/2021_ajslp-21-00078  
[3] J. Brown, and K. Knollman-Porter, “Continuum of care 
following sports-related concussion,” American Journal of 
Speech-Language Pathology, vol. 29 no. 3, pp. 1389–1403. 
August 2020, https://doi.org/10.1044/2020_ajslp-19-00131 
[4] P. W. Buck, R. G. Laster, J. S. Sagrati, and R. S. Kirzner, 
“Working with mild traumatic brain injury: Voices from the 
Field,” Rehabilitation Research and Practice, vol. 2012, pp. 
1–6,  February 2012, https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/625621 
[5] K. Ciuffreda, N. Yadav, P. Thiagarajan, and D. Ludlam, “A 
Novel Computer Oculomotor Rehabilitation (COR) program 
for Mild Traumatic Brain Injury (mTBI),” Brain Sciences, 
vol. 
7 
no. 
99, 
pp. 
1-9,. 
August 
2017, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci7080099  
[6] J. W. Faulkner, et al., “Psychological flexibility: A 
psychological mechanism that contributes to persistent 
symptoms following mild traumatic brain injury?,” Medical 
Hypotheses, vol. 
143, 
pp. 
1-10, 
October 
2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2020.110141 
[7] K. Knollman-Porter, J. A. Brown, T. Wallace, and S. Spitz, 
“First-Line Health Care Providers Reported Knowledge of 
and Referrals to Speech-Language Pathologists for Clients 
With Mild Traumatic Brain Injury,” American Journal of 
Speech-Language Pathology, vol. 30 no. 5, pp. 2214-2227, 
September 
2021, 
https://doi.org/10.1044/2021_ajslp-20-
00373 
[8] Y. Kraemer, et al., “Post-traumatic headache after mild 
traumatic brain injury in a one-year follow up study – risk 
factors and return to work,” The Journal of Headache and 
Pain, 
[Online], 
February 
2022, 
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-1117390/v1  
[9] S. Manivannan, et al., (2021). “Management of neurotrauma 
during COVID-19: A single centre experience and lessons for 
the future,” Brain Injury, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 957–963. May 
2021, https://doi.org/10.1080/02699052.2021.1934731  
[10] J. O’Neil, J.V. Ierssel, and H. Sveistrup, “Remote supervision 
of rehabilitation interventions for survivors of moderate or 
severe traumatic brain injury: A scoping review,” Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 26 no. 9, pp. 520-535, May 
2019, https://doi.org/10.1177/1357633x19845466  
[11] G. Oatley, T. Choudhury, and P. Buckman, (2021). “Smart 
textiles for improved quality of life and cognitive 
assessment,” Sensors, vol. 21 no. 23, [Online], November 
2021, https://doi.org/10.3390/s21238008  
[12] C. Oldenburg, A. Lundin, G. Edman, C. Nygren-de Boussard, 
and A. Bartfai, “Cognitive reserve and persistent post-
concussion symptoms—a prospective mild traumatic brain 
injury (mTBI) cohort study,” Brain Injury, vol. 30 no. 2, pp. 
146–155, 
August 
2015, 
https://doi.org/10.3109/02699052.2015.1089598  
[13] E. Pang, “Different Neural Mechanisms Underlie Deficits in 
Mental Flexibility in Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
Compared to Mild Traumatic Brain Injury,” Frontiers in 
Psychiatry, 
vol. 
6, 
pp. 
1-6, 
December 
2021, 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2015.00170 
[14] A. Westphal, et al., “A-140 computer based cognitive 
rehabilitation interventions for visual attention following mild 
traumatic brain injury” Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 
vol. 
36 
no. 
6, 
pp. 
1193, 
August 
2021, 
https://doi.org/10.1093/arclin/acab062.158
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

