An Interface for Visual Information-Gathering During Web Browsing Sessions: 
BrainDump - A Versatile Visual Workspace for Memorizing and Organizing Information 
Marius Brade, Joerg Heseler, Rainer Groh 
Chair of Media Design 
Technische Universität Dresden 
Dresden, Germany 
marius.brade@tu-dresden.de, joerg.heseler@gmx.de, rainer.groh@tu-dresden.de 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— We propose a new method for visualizing the 
strength of associations based on a fluid metaphor and cell 
structure. This enables users to place gathered information 
visually in relation, while solving complex information tasks. 
Both, vague and precise relations can be visualized. We applied 
our approach to a scenario of information retrieval during web 
browsing sessions. In this paper we describe our novel visual 
information-gathering system called BrainDump. To support 
the user’s sensemaking process, this system provides the 
possibility to change the initial associations, follow links back 
to 
the 
source 
of 
information, 
annotate 
content 
and 
hierarchically group collected items. A preliminary user test 
was designed and conducted. 
Keywords-graphical user interface; visual information 
gathering; visual sensemaking; personal web information system 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Complex web information tasks involving answers to 
more than one question to satisfy a user’s goal are called 
information-gathering tasks. Users executing this kind of 
task are called knowledge workers and are defined by Sellen 
et al. as people “whose paid work involves significant time: 
gathering, finding, analyzing, creating, producing or 
archiving information”  [36]. 
Working on complex information-gathering tasks, know-
ledge workers have to understand unfamiliar contexts – a 
process which has been coined sensemaking [12][35]. This 
complicated, iterative process occurs in everyday life and 
requires a high cognitive load. For instance, when a 
researcher faces an unfamiliar field of research, he or she has 
to gather information from an unfamiliar field and make 
sense of that information. 
Considerable research has investigated how people 
organize information making use of spatial memory 
[24][27][31]. Spatial layouts are often used to manage 
transient or temporary information in current visual 
interfaces. Examples include web bookmarks [34], spatial 
hypertexts [38] and desktop icons [2]. In most systems, a 
cluster represented by a spatial aggregation of elements, 
exists only in the user's mind. However, internal mental 
representations perform poorly on making sense of complex 
and rich object relations or associations. In contrast, well 
designed 
external 
representations 
can 
support 
this 
sensemaking process [35]. 
Especially at the beginning of this process, the user 
anticipates associations and potential relationships. While 
making sense, there are a lot of changes in the user's mind, 
concerning the structure of collected information. Organizing 
information with the help of spatial layouts is far more 
flexible and lightweight than using explicit grouping 
mechanisms such as bookmark-folders [1][3]. This makes 
spatial 
layouts 
an 
excellent 
technique 
to 
organize 
information in the transient, temporary states of a 
sensemaking process. 
To understand the relations between the contents found 
in a complex web information-gathering task, knowledge 
workers use bookmarks, tabs, browsing history, different 
browser-windows, 
virtual 
documents, 
folders, 
offline 
documents, and sketches. The challenge is to keep in mind 
where specific information is located. This problem has been 
called information fragmentation [22][34]. Users might lose 
the big picture of their task or the context of the currently 
112
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
 
pursued question, during a long session on the web. Since 
most information-gathering tasks require multiple web 
sessions to satisfy a goal [24], annoyance and frustration 
with current systems is increased [28]. Loss of context 
happens when users are getting sidetracked, forgetting their 
original questions involved in the information-gathering task 
or when the title of a bookmark cannot be remembered. The 
results of a study by Kaasten et al. [37] show that thumbnails 
of visited websites support the recognition considerably. In 
this study, color, distinctive images, layout, and pieces of 
text on the webpage are features helping the user to 
recognize the exact page. Plain use of titles, like in browser-
tabs and browser-windows cannot take this into account, and 
therefore may not be enough to remember the websites 
behind them. Hence, a part of the task already achieved has 
to be repeated in order to reacquire the lost information. 
We are addressing the problems discussed above with 
our new approach. A knowledge worker can use a highly 
flexible visual map to represent and refine his current 
understanding of a task using the human strength in spatial 
memory. A metaphor based on fluids and cell structure 
allows the user to visually memorize anticipations about 
relations with the option of using textual annotations. We 
assume that resuming an interrupted task, or continue an 
earlier finished research is highly accelerated by utilizing a 
map that helps the user in information retrieval and to 
remember his last status of understanding. The concept aims 
towards offering the user a high degree of recognition for 
collected elements. 
This paper consists of four parts: the first part shows 
related work, the second part explains our design decisions 
while the third part describes the interface of our prototype 
named BrainDump from a user's perspective. The fourth part 
briefly describes our first short preliminary user study. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, related work of different fields concerning 
the BrainDump approach is presented. 
A. Spatial Layout and Aggregation 
Spatial layout has been a basic feature in window based 
systems, like the early Macintosh. It has long been used for 
document management. There are several extensions to this 
2D layout, for example ZUIs (Zoomable User Interfaces). 
ZUIs aim on solving the problem of having more 
information, than fits on the screen by providing panning and 
zooming operations. The first system to explore this 
approach was Pad [33]. Bederson defines ZUIs as "systems 
that support the spatial organization of and navigation among 
multiple documents or visual objects [4]." 
Spatial aggregation plays 
an 
important role 
in 
management of information using spatial layout. As a part of 
an original experimental workshop [9][10] we collected 
ideas how to visualize relations between objects based on the 
properties of fluids. For example, a person can drag parts of 
fluid substances over a surface and form them to bigger or 
smaller groups (see Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Snapshot of our experiments with fluids [9] 
An interface for manipulating spatial aggregations of 
objects is Bubble Clusters [41]. A spatially efficient bubble 
shape is drawn around objects, leveraging the natural 
expectation of users concerning the behavior of bubbles. 
This approach in line with a visual gimmick named 
Realtime Blobs, found on the website of the designer Ivanov 
[20], inspired us to use rotund shapes in our system. 
B. Techniques for Mapping the Mind 
Several techniques to create different kinds of external 
representations exist [14]. One of the most commonly used is 
the mind mapping technique. Eppler defines a mind map as 
"a multicolored and imagecentred, radial diagram that 
represents semantic or other connections between portions of 
learned material hierarchically" [14]. The typical application 
context is personal note taking and reviewing. In addition to 
Concept Maps, Conceptual Diagrams, Semantic Maps [18], 
and Topic Maps [32], the major advantage is that these 
techniques mostly provide a concise overview. Inspired by 
these approaches, our vision is to give the user a permanent 
and reliable overview of the context of his information-
gathering tasks while working on them. 
C. Systems Supporting Web Tasks 
An example for the 3D arrangement of Bookmarks is 
Data Mountain [34]. In this approach the user can place 
documents on an inclined plane textured with landmarks. It 
follows an interesting approach that takes advantage of 
human spatial memory skills.  
For sensemaking and manual collection via drag and 
drop of web-scraps like pieces of text, pictures, and URLs, 
Scratch Pad [7] is a conceptual approach. The simple way to 
collect items from websites via drag and drop is extended in 
our approach by displaying a visual metaphor for the 
collected items. 
III. 
DESIGN DECISIONS 
Our contribution is a system, where the user defines a 
visual map of his or her comprehension of relations between 
content, established while working on web information-
gathering tasks. Manually collected information can be 
spatially arranged, visually related, and annotated.  
113
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
 
 
A. Visual Metaphor 
For displaying associations and relationships between 
collected objects, we use a visual metaphor. As described in 
Section II, it is based on the idea of fluids, Bubble Clusters, 
and Realtime Blobs. The authors of Bubble Clusters proved 
that users can quickly create, merge, and split groups by 
moving objects on the screen. In addition to the existing 
approaches, we display visual real-time feedback of the 
strength of relations, while a user drags two objects next to 
each other. Thus, different intensities of a relationship can be 
defined as shown in Figure 2: objects labeled 1, 2 and 3 are 
dragged at a position, where they have a visually loose 
connection (left) or a rather visually strong connection 
(right). Due to the real-time visual feedback while dragging 
objects next to others, it seems as if the user is dealing with a 
fluid substance. 
Figure 2.  Metaphor for displaying relationships of different intensities. 
Left: weakly related objects. Right: strongly related objects 
B. Visualization Algorithm 
Objects are represented as white filled circles. The visual 
relation depending on the distance between two objects is 
represented by several white filled circles, drawn on a non-
visible straight line between the center points of these objects 
(see Figure 3). This visual relation is displayed by an 
algorithm based on our observation of Realtime Blobs [20].  
Figure 3.  Schema of the drawing-algorithm: distance d between two 
objects and the circles expansion distance f  
If the distance d between two objects falls below a prior 
defined limit, the particular circles for the relation are drawn 
by the system. They become linear smaller until one third of 
the original objects diameter is reached. If the user drags an 
object half the distance of the prior defined limit of d the 
circles reach the center of the other object. Until this point 
the circle expansion distance f increases - and therefore the 
number of circles drawn. As one object is dragged closer to 
another object, f decreases again, until it reaches zero. The 
objects appear to attract each other (see Figure 2). This 
algorithm achieves a reasonable balance between aesthetics 
and performance. 
C. Hierarchical data structure 
With our current concept we are combining the flexibility 
of spatial layouts with the benefits of hierarchical grouping. 
An object in our system can be an item or a topic. Items are 
manually collected parts from websites (see Table 1) with a 
white circle in the background - imitating a cell with a core 
(see Figure 4). They are created by the user to represent a 
hyperlink to that specific website. The users' collected items 
can be grouped into topics. These topics are slightly bigger 
than items, with a colored background (see Figure 4) and can 
be put into other topics to build a hierarchy. The data 
structure provided by the BrainDump system is a tree 
structure with one single root node. Every node is a topic and 
every leaf is an item. The user can decide to work in the root 
topic alone or to create other topics for hierarchical grouping. 
For navigation and organization in our system, we are 
using the technique of a ZUI with animated transitions and a 
multi-level layout [5][15]. By accessing the different 
hierarchical structured topics the predefined zoom levels are 
helping the user in navigation tasks. Studies on how people 
learned from zoomable spaces imply that users working with 
ZUIs may be more engaged and may remember the spatial 
structure of the content better [8][16].  
D. Representation and Handling of Gathered Items 
One of the design guidelines for ZUIs by Bederson is 
only to use ZUIs, if there is a small visual representation of 
the data available [4]. Thus, our concept lets the user choose 
his or her personal small representation for a collected 
website displayed in the center of an item. In addition, the 
title of the website is displayed under the representation and 
can be edited by the user (see Figure 4).  
Table 1 shows which parts of a website can be manually 
collected using what kind of interaction.  
TABLE I.  
ADDING OBJECTS TO THE SYSTEM 
Web 
browser 
source 
Representation in the 
system 
Interaction 
for 
selection 
for 
collecting 
URL 
Thumbnail of the actual 
entire  website 
Drag 
Drop 
Picture 
Picture 
Drag 
Drop 
Videoa 
Video 
(playing 
while 
hovering cursor) 
Drag 
Drop 
Pieces of text 
Thumbnail of user selected 
text 
with 
direct 
surroundings 
Marking, 
dragging 
Drop 
User-defined 
clipping of a 
websitea 
Thumbnail showing the 
respective part 
Lasso/ 
rectangle 
selecting, 
drag 
Drop 
search queries 
outline around object, with 
favicon 
of 
the 
search 
engine used before finding 
the respective object 
added 
automatic
ally 
added 
automatic
ally 
a. not included in the current implementation of the prototype 
114
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
Figure 4.  Look and feel of BrainDump prototype interface with hierarchically clustered topics (colored) and items (white). A: Screen-capture of the green 
main topic with three items and one blue topic. B: Screen-capture of the zoomed-in view on the blue topic 1 with no items and one topic. C: Zoomed-in view 
on the chartreuse topic 2 with two items. The rings on the left side of the screens B and C  can be clicked to zoom-out and get up the hierarchy.
The only element which is added automatically to the 
system is a search query the user submitted to find a 
collected item. This query will appear at the respective 
website representation in the system (see Figure 4, A and 
Figure 7 - black outline), making it easy to recall successful 
queries later. The website's favicon - a small graphic that is 
associated with a website - is displayed on top of the outline.  
To recognize a collected website later, we are expecting, 
that choosing his or her own representative for this site helps 
the user, since learning techniques rely on associations 
between easy-to-remember constructs and the data that has 
to be remembered [14]. Despite being carefully chosen, the 
items in a user's collection are sorted and their relevance is 
questioned by the user. Since any changes in the layout are 
only made by the user himself, a consistent layout is 
provided. This can help the user to build up an internal map 
over time and make it easy to recognize objects. Using a 
consistent layout is another design guideline by Bederson [4] 
which is fulfilled by our concept. 
In addition to gathering items, the user can include 
annotations in his collection (see Figure 4, A - white text on 
green background). This is achieved by a right-click of the 
mouse on the background at the position where text should 
be inserted. The font-size is always constant in relation to the 
pixel dimensions of the display. Thus, the user can place 
different sizes of annotations into the system by changing the 
actual zoom-level before adding an annotation. 
E. Summary of Design Decisions 
To give an overview of our design decisions, we list them 
in form of requirements for Information-Gathering Systems: 
 
manual visual definition of relations with optional 
textual description 
 
definable strength of relations between objects 
 
free spatial sorting and arranging of objects 
 
hierarchical structuring of items with topics 
 
automatic saving of item related search queries 
 
manually collected representations of websites, 
according to interesting content for the user (e.g., 
pictures, text, videos) 
 
making annotations to the collection 
 
local saving of websites related to collected items to 
prevent the loss of outdated websites 
 
local saving of links (URLs) referring to the 
respective website 
F. Implementation of the prototype 
As proof of concept, we implemented a first prototype, a 
windows application, running on Windows XP and higher 
versions. The current version is based on the .NET-
Framework and uses OLE (Object Linking and Embedding) 
for embedding and linking to documents and other objects. 
Therefore, the prototype can be used in combination with 
Microsoft Internet Explorer 7 or higher. The collected data is 
stored in an XML-file. For realizing the ZUI, we used the 
Piccolo.NET framework [6]. 
IV. 
THE BRAINDUMP INTERFACE 
The BrainDump interface consists of two parts: The 
Dropping Area and the Management Mode. We will describe 
them in the first two subsections. The third subsection 
describes navigation in BrainDump. 
A. Dropping Area 
This part of the interface appears at the right side of the 
browser in a separate window (see Figure 5). The dropping 
area can be equipped with links referring to topics existing in 
the user's collection. We call these links Topic Portals (see 
Figure 5, right column). The user can drag pictures, pieces of 
text, and URLs onto these links. While hovering over a 
Topic Portal its size increases (see Figure 5, B). The user can 
place his dragged content and define the strength of the 
visual relationship to other gathered items. He can also put 
items into topics existing in the Topic Portal. These portals 
are shortcuts for the user to optimize his conduct of 
information-gathering tasks. Portals avoid changing the 
115
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

  
 
  A                                                   B    _ 
 
 
application window for placing or moving an object. 
Moreover, the user can have multiple topics easily accessible 
while browsing. 
B. Management Mode 
The Management Mode offers a fullscreen view of the 
user's collection. Here he can manage and organize all 
collected items and topics (see Figure 6) - labeling of topics 
included (see labels in Figure 4. A and B).  Furthermore, the 
user can manage the Dropping Area and utilize Topic Portals 
as shortcuts for moving objects to topics in different 
hierarchies. He can create a Topic Portal by dragging a 
chosen topic from the canvas onto the Dropping Area. Topic 
Portals can be deleted without any consequences for the 
actual topic inside the system. As a result, the user can 
optimize his dropping area for the context of his current 
information-gathering tasks. 
Figure 5.  Dropping area on the right side of the browser, A: Marking a 
pice of text and B: Dragging the piece of text into a topic portal 
Figure 6.  The Management Mode with the Dropping Area on the right 
To create a new empty topic the user can press the “+” 
button in the upper left of the dropping area. To create a new 
topic with an object already in it, an item or topic can be 
dropped on this button. This instantly creates a new topic in 
the one currently viewed. Thus, a new node is inserted into 
the internal tree of the systems data hierarchy, as described 
in Section III.C.  
C. Navigation in BrainDump 
The user can zoom in on a chosen topic by double 
clicking it. By doing so an interactive ring on the left side of 
the screen appears (see Figure 4, B). More rings appear if the 
user navigates deeper into the hierarchy (see Figure 4, C). 
These rings enable zooming out of a topic and thus 
navigating up in the hierarchy. Additionally, these rings 
provide an overview at which hierarchy level the currently 
viewed topic is located. Backtracking can be done step by 
step up the hierarchy or directly jumping to an upper topic. 
The transitions are animated to support user orientation. An 
example is shown in Figure 4: First the user views the green 
main topic with three items and one topic in it (A). Then he 
navigates inside the blue topic named topic 1 (B). Being 
inside this topic, a green ring for backtracking to the main 
topic appears on the left side of the screen (B). Similarily, an 
additional blue ring appears when the user navigates into the 
chartreuse colored topic 2 (C).  
Depending on the zoom scale, the text in an item may not 
be legible. To address this problem, an alternative, 
summarized representation is chosen by the system. When a 
text line is small on the screen the user may only want to see 
its beginning. As the item is magnified, this may be 
augmented by a short summary or outline. At some point, the 
entire text line is revealed. This technique is called semantic 
zooming [33]. As shown in Figure 7, we have implemented 
semantic zooming for displaying a reduced (A) and full (B) 
display of search queries and titles of items. 
Figure 7.  A: minimum and B: maximum of displayed information. Items 
consist of: representation of the respective website (here a picture), title of 
the website and search query displayed through favicon and black outline. 
In doing so, we follow the suggestions by Kaasten et al. 
[23], who found out that right truncation of website titles 
allows for best recognition. 
V. 
PRELIMINARY USER TEST 
Since our prototype is in an early development stage, we 
chose to conduct a formative evaluation, a process of 
ongoing feedback to improve and optimize our concept. 
Thus we conducted a preliminary user test with nine 
participants to elicit first directions concerning three 
questions: 
 
116
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

1. Do users get lost while navigating in the ZUI? 
2. How is the acceptance of the used metaphor? 
3. Can users recognize collected visual information? 
The average age of the test persons was 29, two of the 
nine participants were female, no one used the Internet 
Explorer during their work before. 
A. Design 
In order to obtain valid results, we made a checklist for 
ensuring exactly the same course of actions for each test 
user. A task was designed including a scenario, where the 
users had to plan a trip to an exhibition. The participants 
should imagine they want to attend the conference games 
convention. To prepare for the visit, they should get an 
overview 
through 
saving 
related 
information 
using 
BrainDump. The scenario was described in detail with 
three subtasks: getting started, getting information about 
exhibitors and getting information about the conference. For 
each 
subtask 
the 
participants 
were 
given 
detailed 
information, what they have to look for, e.g. "Because you 
are interested in browser games you want to meet the 
company gamigo AG". 
This scenario consisted of two stages: training and 
evaluation. The training stage aimed at providing some 
practice in the use of information-gathering functions of the 
prototype and to support the test persons in understanding 
the purpose of BrainDump. The target of the evaluation stage 
was to identify usability problems referring to the three 
questions mentioned above. We provided precise subtasks 
for the test persons in the given scenario. 
To get impartial results, we observed the participants 
during the evaluation and recorded their sessions, including 
mouse clicks, keystrokes and voice using the software Morae 
3 from Techsmith [30]. Apart from that, we wrote down 
comments and reactions of the participants (think aloud 
protocols). 
A questionnaire was given to the test persons to 
investigate their subjective attitude towards the usage of the 
prototype. This questionnaire was divided into ten sections 
with 75 questions in total: the first section covered feedback 
about the evaluation itself, and if the scenario including 
subtasks was comprehensible. The second section served to 
estimate general usability problems by means of the System-
Usability-Scale. Detailed usability questions were asked 
within sections three to seven, using a standardized heuristic. 
Section 
eight 
investigated 
aspects 
of 
visualization, 
interaction, and user satisfaction. In the ninth section, 
participants 
were 
asked 
to 
state 
missing 
features. 
Demographic questions together with earlier used software 
were asked in the last section. Throughout the questionnaire, 
a five point Likert scale was used to examine the 
participants' level of agreement to each statement. 
B. Procedure 
In total, the evaluation took about 35 minutes per test 
person. At first, the purpose of BrainDump was explained 
briefly. In order to not affect the results, no further aims of 
the evaluation and software were revealed. Exactly three 
features of BrainDump were shown to all participants to 
create equal starting knowledge: 1. How to collect and put 
items into a Topic Portal in the Dragging Area. 2. Making 
annotations in the system. 3. Creating a new topic. 
With handing out the scenario descriptions, the recording 
started. The practical part took about 25 minutes to complete. 
Afterwards the questionnaire was given to the test persons. 
C. Results 
The purpose of BrainDump was understood completely. 
All of the participants would like to use the application more 
often in their daily work. They especially liked the fast way 
to visually change relations and associations between 
information. 
Some shortcomings of the current implementation were 
identified: Four of the nine test users thought that the 
software does not provide sufficient information about which 
actions are currently permitted. An equal number of the 
participants found the font size used for the labels too small. 
Six persons were irritated by the automatically drawn 
relation between objects. Four persons expected the 
possibility of manipulating the drawn relations. Three 
participants expected by mistake that some of their topics 
were empty, because the content was not visible. Two of 
them deleted such a topic that was not empty. Five test 
persons expected to be able to select multiple objects at once. 
Four users where irritated by topic portals or rather did not 
recognize them as links referring to topics. 
Further additional features were requested: A solution to 
cut off unwanted relations with a gesture, manipulation of 
relations between items and scaling of objects to highlight 
importance. 
D. Discussion 
The results can be interpreted by taking the three initial 
questions into account. Since the number of nine participants 
is hardly representative, no generalized conclusion can be 
drawn at this point. The results have to be treated carefully. 
Further, the participants had no possibility to get used to the 
system which increases irritation, especially when not being 
used to a ZUI. In addition, the performance of the prototype 
was slowed down by the capturing software Morae. This 
made dragging of items from websites into the system 
extremely slow - thus further irritating users. 
1) Do the users get lost while navigating in the ZUI? 
The deletion of non empty topics may be a result of the 
fact that users got lost while navigating. Bederson discovered 
that when objects are placed at many different levels - and 
therefore very small sizes - users won't remember that they 
exist [4]. To solve this problem, the concepts' spatial layout 
can be designed to indicate hidden objects to the user. 
Another possibility is to minimize the depth of the hierarchy 
to circumvent undersized objects. As observed, some people 
had problems understanding and using Topic Portals. A 
study by Hornbæk showed that an integration of overview 
and detail windows requires mental and motor effort [19] - 
since Topic Portals are very similar, this might indicate that 
this problem does not necessarily depend on being used to it. 
In a following study, it has to be investigated whether this 
117
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
problem stems from graphical representation or the concept 
itself. 
A solution for these problems might be to use a hybrid 
system - a combination of a ZUI with traditional approaches 
like facets or folders. 
2) How is the acceptance of the used metaphor ? 
Despite liking the visually changeable relations and being 
engaged with the systems use, some participants were 
irritated by the automatically drawn relations and missed 
direct manipulation of these.  
One possible explanation for this irritation might be that 
the relation depends solely on distance - which was not 
expected by the user and might be a less critical factor when 
participants are used to the system. To minimize these 
irritations, the metaphor could be refined to a more natural, 
expected behavior and with regard to connecting items 
independently from distance. Direct manipulation of the 
relations has already been part of our concept, but not yet 
included in the current prototype.  
3) Can users recognize collected visual information? 
Despite observing the problems with font size, the 
duration of the evaluation was too short to simulate an 
interruption long enough for the users to be a handicap. 
Therefore, a study taking several days with a long break in 
between will be necessary. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND  FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents a new approach to ease the process of 
memorizing and organizing information during complex 
tasks using the internet. This is achieved by a visual 
approach to connect objects to unique shaped groups and the 
possibility to relate objects in different visual intensities. The 
user can choose what part of a website he wants to be the 
representation of his bookmark. Manifold associations can 
be mapped on one simple and powerful metaphor. Since the 
user places objects in space and no one else is moving them 
except himself, he can build up a personal internal map over 
time. Indicated by considerable research [4], a consistent 
layout can help the user to recover objects. 
As proof of concept, we implemented a prototype and 
conducted a first preliminary user test, showing that 
participants enjoy using such a system, but also indicating 
that several parts of the prototype and concept have to be 
refined. Based on the results, we will improve the 
presentation of items in the next version of our prototype to 
improve legibility. The approach of Strobelt et al. uses 
interesting algorithms and heuristics which we want to take 
into account for a refined concept [40]. Apart from 
displaying well designed representations, Klemmers' work 
on Design History [25] suggests that also the history of 
creation may be important to reconstruct meaning. We plan 
to integrate this idea in the current concept. 
Since zooming in and out repeatedly is typically straining 
[4], this should be minimized. Therefore, we will consider 
using a hybrid system - a combination of a ZUI with 
traditional approaches to minimize depth of zoom levels. A 
further improvement in orientation could be to use 
landmarks, as seen in Data Mountain [34]. Inspired by this 
idea, we will enhance our concept with structured 
background pictures.  
To minimize user irritation, the visual metaphor will be 
refined to a more natural behavior, possibly enhancing it to 
enable visual relation apart from using distance. We already 
made first experiments with new algorithms (see Figure 8) 
derived from experimental observations [9][10].  
Figure 8.  First Experiments with new algorithms 
Besides, we plan to enable the use of documents other 
than websites. For example contact files, office files, e-mails, 
and information from the file system or social networks. 
Thereby, we are addressing the problem that users lose track 
of their project documents and relations, studied by Bergman 
et al. [7], the authors called this project fragmentation. 
Furthermore, we plan to conduct a qualified user study and 
compare other systems to our system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
On behalf of Marius Brade this research project (contract 
no. 080951799) is funded by the European Social Fond and 
the Free State of Saxony as well as SAP Research. 
The authors would like to thank Matthias Baumgart for 
his support on user testing. Further, we would like to thank 
the test participants for their helpful and valuable feedback 
and Dietrich Kammer for his valuable proofreading.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Abrams, D., Baecker, R., and Chignell, M. Information archiving 
with bookmarks: personal web space construction and organization. 
In CHI ’98: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors 
in computing systems. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
New York, NY, USA, 1998, 41–48 
[2] Agarawala, A. and Balakrishnan, R. Keepin'it real: pushing the 
desktop metaphor with physics, piles and the pen. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems. ACM, 
2006, 1283--1292  
[3] Bauer, D., Fastrez, P., and Hollan, J. Spatial Tools for Managing 
Personal Information Collections. HICSS'05. Proceedings of the 38th 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE, 
2005, 104b. 
[4] Bederson, B.B. The Promise of Zoomable User Interfaces. In Proc. 
CHI 2009, ACM Press, 2009, 4-9. 
[5] Bederson, B.B. and Boltman, A. Does animation help users build 
mental maps of spatial information? In INFOVIS, 1999, 28–35. 
[6] Bederson, B. B., Grosjean, J., and Meyer, J. (2004). Toolkit Design 
for Interactive Structured Graphics, IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering, 30 (8), pp. 535-546. 
118
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

[7] Bergman, O., Beyth-Marom, R., and Nachmias, R. The project 
fragmentation problem in personal information management. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in 
computing systems, ACM, 2006, 274 
[8] Boltman, A., Druin, A., Bederson, B., Hourcade, J.P., Stanton, D., 
O'Malley, C., Cobb, S., Benford, S., Fast, C., Kjellin, M., and 
Sundblad, Y. (2002). The nature of children's storytelling with and 
without technology. Proceedings of American Educational Research 
Association (AERA) Conference, New Orleans. 
[9] Brade, M., Kammer, D., Keck, M., and Groh, R. Immersive Data 
Grasping using the eXplore Table. TEI’11, Funchal, Portugal. ACM 
Press, 2011 (In press) 
[10] Brade, M., Kammer, D., Keck, M., and Groh, R. Immersive Data 
Grasping. 
Workshop 
at 
TU 
Dresden, 
2010. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ygAq8JHGtvM 
[11] Buzan T. Using Both Sides of the Brain. Dutton: New York, 1974. 
[12] Dervin, B. An overview of Sense-Making research: Concepts, 
methods and results. Paper presented at the meeting of the 
International Communication Association, Dallas, TX (May 1983). 
[13] Eklund, J. Sawers, J., and Zeiliger, R. Nestor naviga-tor: A tool for 
the collaborative construction of knowledge through constructive 
navigation. In R. Debreceny & A. Ellis (eds.) proceedings of 
Ausweb99, The Fifth Australian World Wide Web Conference. 
Southern Cross University Press., Lismore, 1999, 396–408  
[14] Eppler, M. A comparison between concept maps, mind maps, 
conceptual diagrams, and visual metaphors as complementary tools 
for knowledge construction and sharing. Information Visualization 
2006 Volume 5, Palgrave Macmillan Ltd. 2006, 202 -210 
[15] Furnas, 
G.W. 
and 
Bederson, 
B.B. 
Space-scale 
dia-grams: 
understanding multiscale interfaces. In CHI ’95: Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, ACM 
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., New York, NY, USA, 1995, 
234–241 
[16] Good, L. and Bederson, B. B. 2002. Zoomable user interfaces as a 
medium for slide show presentations. Information Visualization 1, 1 
(Mar. 2002), 35-49. 
[17] Gotz, D. The scratchpad: sensemaking support for the web. In WWW 
’07: Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World Wide 
Web, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2007, 1329–1330 
[18] Hodel, M. Organisationales Lernen - dargestellt an der Erarbeitung 
und Implementierung eines durch Mind Mapping visualisierten 
Qualitätsleitbildes. 
Theoretische Überlegungen und praktische 
Erfahrungen aus einer Fallstudie, St. Gallen (Dissertation). 1995 
[19] Hornbæk, K., Bederson, B. B., and Plaisant, C. 2002. Navigation 
patterns and usability of zoomable user interfaces with and without an 
overview. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 9, 4 (Dec. 2002), 
362-389. 
[20] Ivanov, D. Realtime Blobs. Den Ivanov blog. 
 
http://www.cleoag.ru/labs/flash4/009/blobs.html 20.10.2010 
[21] Jones, W., Phuwanartnurak, A.J., Gill, R. and Bruce, H. Don’t Take 
My Folders Away! Organizing Personal Information to Get Things 
Done. In Proc. CHI 2005, ACM press, 2005, 1505-1508. 
[22] Jones, W.P. and Teevan, J. Personal Information Management. 
University of Washington Press, Okt. 2007 
[23] Kaasten, S., Greenberg, S., and Edwards, C. How people recognize 
previously seen web pages from titles, urls and thumbnails, 2002. 
[24] Kirsh, D. The intelligent use of space. Artificial intelligence, volume 
73, Elsevier 1995, 31--68.  
[25] Klemmer, S.R., Thomsen, M., Phelps-Goodman, E., Lee, R., and 
Landay, J.A. Where do web sites come from?: capturing and 
interacting with design history. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems: Changing our 
world, changing ourselves. ACM, 2002, 8. 
[26] MacKay, B. and Watters, C. Exploring multi-session web tasks. In 
CHI ’08: Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference 
on Human factors in computing systems, ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 2008, 1187–1196  
[27] Malone, T.W. How do people organize their desks?: Implications for 
the design of office information systems. ACM Transactions on 
Information Systems (TOIS), Volume 1, ACM, 1983, 99--112. 
[28] Mark, G., Gudith, D., and Klocke, U. The Cost of Interrupted Work: 
More Speed and Stress. Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 
2008, 107--110. 
[29] Mayer, M. and Bederson, B.B. Browsing Icons: A Task-Based 
Approach for a Visual Web History. In HCIL-200119, CS-TR-4308, 
UMIACS-TR-2001, vo-lume 85, 2001.  
[30] Morae 3 - Kundenwünsche wirklich verstehen | TechSmith 
http://www.techsmith.de/morae.asp 20.10.2010 
[31] Nakakoji, K., Yamamoto, Y., Takada, S., and Reeves, B.N. Two 
dimensional spatial positioning as a means of reflection in design. 
Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems: 
processes, practices, methods, and techniques. ACM, 2000, 154.  
[32] Park, J. and Hunting, S. XML Topic Maps: Creating and Using Topic 
Maps for the Web. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc. 
2002. Boston, MA, USA 
[33] Perlin, K. and Fox, D. Pad: an alternative approach to the computer 
interface. In SIGGRAPH ’93: Proceed-ings of the 20th annual 
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 1993, 57–64 
[34] Robertson, G., Czerwinski, M., Larson, K., Robbins, D.C., Thiel, D., 
and van Dantzich, M. Data Mountain: Using Spatial Memory for 
Document Management. Proc. of User Interface and Software 
Technology (UIST 98) ACM Press, 1998, pp. 153-162.Scr 
[35] Russell, D., Stefik, M., Pirolli, P., and Card, S. The cost structure of 
sensemaking. Proceedings of ACM CHI '93. New York: ACM, 1993, 
269-276 
[36] Sellen, A.J., Murphy, R., and Shaw, K.L. How know-ledge workers 
use the web. In CHI ’02: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human factors in computing systems, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
2002, 227–23  
[37] Shaun Kaasten, Saul Greenberg, and Christopher Edwards. How 
people recognize previously seen web pages from titles, urls and 
thumbnails, 2002.  
[38] Shipman III, F.M., Marshall, C.C. Spatial hypertext and the practice 
of information triage. Proceedings of the eighth ACM conference on 
Hypertext, April 06-11, 1997, Southampton, United Kingdom, 124-
133. 
[39] Shipman III, F.M., Marshall, C.C., and Moran, T.P. Finding and 
using implicit structure in human-organized spatial layouts. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
New York, NY, USA, 1995, 346–353. 
[40] Strobelt, H., Oelke, D., Rohrdantz, C., Stoffel, A., Keim, D. A., and 
Deussen, O. Document Cards : A Top Trumps Visualization for 
Documents. First publ. in: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and 
Computer Graphics 15, 2009, 6, pp. 1145-1152 
[41] Watanabe, N. Washida, M., and Igarashi, T. Bubble clusters: an 
interface for manipulating spatial aggregation of graphical objects. 
Proceedings of the 20th annual ACM symposium on User interface 
software and technology, ACM Press, 2007, 173--182. 
 
 
119
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

