RIDES: Realistic and Immersive Dental Education Simulation 
Using Virtual Reality and Haptic Device Implementation 
Casey Melrose, Daniel Briz, Charlotte Atwill, Hao 
Huang, Andrew Marlow, Markus Santoso 
Digital Worlds Institute 
University of Florida 
Gainesville, FL. US 
markus.santoso@ufl.edu 
Cortino Sukotjo 
Restorative Dentistry Department 
University of Illinois at Chicago 
Chicago, Illinois. United States 
csukotjo@uic.edu
 
Abstract— Virtual reality (VR) is an emerging technology for 
simulation and training experiences in a variety of fields. It is 
becoming widely available and increasingly accessible in cost. 
The field of dentistry can greatly benefit from the use of this 
technology as it presents breakthroughs that augment the 
education process. In this paper, the authors developed 
RIDES: Realistic and Immersive Dental Education Simulation. 
In this project, the authors implemented VR technology and a 
haptic device to allow dental students to train their 
psychomotor skill virtually, all while maintaining a realistic 
experience and an easy to navigate interface. This simulation 
can be experienced from anywhere, given a sufficiently 
powerful computer, and does not require the professor to be 
physically present. This distinction was vital to the continued 
education of students after the Covid-19 global pandemic. The 
social distancing restrictions that were implemented for public 
safety severely limited in-person education, which prompted 
the exploration of digital methods. It allows for a digital 
approximation of a task that gives the user freedom to explore 
the subject without fear of damaging expensive equipment 
before given the proper training to handle it. By utilizing the 
immersive virtual reality capabilities of the VR headset and the 
realistic tactile feedback of the haptic pen, the authors 
developed a unique and realistic simulation for dental 
education.  
Keywords-virtual reality; haptic device; dental simulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
At the end of 2019, the world was alerted to a high 
number of pneumonia-like disease cases in Wuhan, China. 
This disease was identified to be caused by a novel 
coronavirus, named by the International Committee for 
Taxonomy of Viruses as Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The World 
Health Organization (WHO) later announced this disease as 
the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). COVID-19 was 
known to be an airborne transmission disease because the 
virus efficiently spread from person to person through 
respiratory droplets by sneezing, coughing and direct 
contact. This infection affected 222 countries and territories 
around the world, prompting WHO to declare COVID-19 as 
a pandemic in March 2020. As the situation worsened, many 
countries implemented restrictive mass quarantines and 
lockdowns to decelerate and break the chain of infection.  
The COVID-19 pandemic led to a sudden shutdown of 
institutions in 2020, including the United States of America. 
The US government implemented a lock down order to 
encourage the public to stay at home and practice social 
distancing. This condition forced all educational institutions 
to be closed, halting all face to face education. For dental 
students, all clinical and lab practice sessions were halted. 
As a consequence of this pandemic, all universities in the 
US were strongly affected and were forced to face the new 
challenge of implementing “distance/online learning”.  
In restorative dentistry, cavity preparation concepts have 
evolved towards a tissue-sparing approach, requiring a high 
level of skill and precision when preparing cavities. 
Traditionally, 
preclinical 
dental 
instruction 
was 
accomplished in a bench-type laboratory environment where 
students learned psychomotor skills using hand-held 
dentiform or mannequin heads mounted on metal rods.  
Recently, computer-assisted training systems such as 
Simodont are developed and used for the practical training 
of dental students. However, this technology showed some 
limitations. The cost, both hardware and learning modules, 
is expensive. The product’s size and dimension also pretty 
big therefore it is site-dependent. Student needs to come to 
the college to operate the machine.  
Virtual simulation such as VR could potentially provide 
efficient educational pathway to achieving a high level of 
practice. The use of haptic simulators coupled with virtual 
reality is expected to address the limitations of native VR 
controller regarding tactile feedback. The objective of 
RIDES project is to develop a VR simulator coupled with 
haptic device as an educational tool for tooth cavities 
preparation. While an integration of VR and haptic has been 
explored in several directions previously, the application of 
these technologies for dental education specifically cavities 
preparation teaching session is a novel direction. 
In section 2, it covers several related previous works that 
we observed as references. Section 3 discusses about our 
project, RIDES. In this section, authors describes technical 
aspects including VR headset and haptic device that we used. 
Authors also explain about the VR experience related with 
this project. Finally, in section 4 authors will close it with 
summary and potential future development. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
PREVIOUS WORKS 
Related with VR applications for implant surgery, 
Matsuo et al developed a virtual reality head-mounted 
display for endoscopically-assisted implant surgery [1]. 
Several VR haptic projects were explored. The group of 
researchers published a paper regarding haptic interaction 
for needle insertion training in medical applications. In this 
project, the authors developed a virtual needle insertion 
training simulation based on haptic interaction [2].  
Our project is inspired by the work done by a previous 
research group [4]. In that project, authors implemented VR 
for implant surgery simulation as shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. VR for implant surgery simulation  
 
Based on the conducted study, it was concluded that the 
application of VR technology in dental education was 
promising and offered positive learning enhancement. 
However, several study participants suggested the lack of 
haptic sensation including feeling the tissue density when 
using rotary and surgical instruments. 
III. 
RIDES PROJECT 
To tackle the tactile/haptic limitations from previous 
study, 
our 
current 
research 
team 
explored 
the 
implementation of haptic device into VR learning module, 
specifically cavities preparation training. In the beginning, 
the authors tried to integrate haptic gloves as shown in 
Figure 2. Since the primary goal in the cavity preparation 
simulation is to drill into a tooth, the authors observed that 
the haptic gloves were not an appropriate input device for an 
accurate simulation because it has no resistance feel. The 
glove also proved to be unintuitive for new users, as well as 
generally unrealistic for the purposes of the simulation. 
 
 
Figure 2. VR Learning with haptic glove 
 
Due to this issue, the authors decided to switch over to a 
3D Systems Touch Haptic Pen (see Figure 3). It is a desktop 
stylus that hangs on rotating motors that can lock on any axis 
to simulate the stylus coming into contact with an object in 
the virtual world. The haptic pen provides a more realistic 
approximation of using a handheld drill, while making it 
easier for the user to interact with the dentistry experience. 
The combination of rumble motors and locking arms could 
simulate tooth drilling, largely because the user is holding an 
object in the physical world that they are also using in the 
virtual realm to manipulate the tooth. 
 
Figure 3. 3D Systems touch haptic pen 
 
The purpose of this project was to simulate dental 
training, specifically tooth cavities preparation, with virtual 
reality and haptic feedback as shown in Figure 4. This 
would enable dental schools to provide their students with 
the real life experience that they require without spending 
the usual amount of time and resources needed to teach 
them in person. When students are given training in a virtual 
environment we expect it can help them to become more 
confident when working and practicing in the real world, 
potentially reducing or eliminating mistakes. This also gives 
students more time and accessibility to practice skills 
they’ve learned in classes. Techniques that need many hours 
of practice to master are more easily rehearsed with a virtual 
reality program that can be used anytime outside of the 
classroom. 
 
Figure 4. VR and haptic integration 
A. Cavities Preparation VR Training Session 
One of the essential activities for cavity preparation is 
drilling. The haptics pen allows us to replicate the drilling 
experience 
inside 
computer-generated 
environment. 
Furthermore, the haptic pen could also provide a resistance 
sensation that is important to achieve the learning goal.  
 
Figure 5. Drill session with virtual handpiece 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

As shown in Figure 5, the virtual hand piece controlled 
by the haptic pen is able to deform the mesh of the tooth and 
mimic the conventional cavities preparation training session. 
The authors also arranged the drill to vibrate at different 
frequencies to emulate the different layers of the tooth by 
tracking the depth of the pen in the tooth’s mesh.  
To complement the training session, the authors offered a 
“pop-through” feature that enables users to pop through the 
drilled tooth and analyze their result as shown in Figure 6. 
When user in this state, they also have an option to change 
the transparency of the dentin layer. This will allow them to 
compare their drill result with the overall tooth anatomy 
structure, including nerves (see Figure 7) 
 
Figure 6. ‘Pop-through’ feature to analyze drill result 
 
 
Figure 7. Transparency adjustment feature 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The COVID 19 pandemic surged the urgency to utilize 
distance learning for all education levels including higher 
education. However, it is quite challenging to deliver 
psychomotor skill-related training using conventional online 
learning 
modalities. 
Immersive 
learning 
using 
VR 
technology is one of the emerging solutions and in this 
project, the authors also integrated a haptic device to 
provide a more realistic immersive learning experience in 
the dentistry direction.  
For this project, the authors developed a haptic VR 
learning simulation for cavities preparation entitled RIDES: 
Realistic and Immersive Dental Education Simulation. 
When this project started the authors explored BeBop haptic 
gloves, however this device lacked the resistance feel that is 
essential for the cavity preparation learning process. 
Therefore, authors switched to the haptic pen which offered 
a more realistic learning experience and the possibility to 
mimic a conventional training session. The implementation 
of the haptic pen is expected to answer limitations from 
previous study, namely the lack of a resistance sensation.  
In the future, the authors plan to extend this project so it 
could accommodate multiple VR users interacting with each 
other at the same time. Therefore, the instructor or professor 
could meet with their student and run the training session 
inside the VR environment. This multiplayer feature will 
also open an opportunity to run a test session where the 
professor or instructor could examine their student’s progress 
from distance. The authors also plan to conduct several user 
studies including measuring the effectiveness of this project, 
the user perception, and others. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Matsuo, H. Hamada, H. Oba, K. Shibata, Virtual reality 
head-mounted display for endoscopically-assisted implant 
surgery, British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, 
Volume 56, Issue 7, 2018, Pages 636-637, ISSN 0266-4356. 
[2] Chen, X., Sun, P., & Liao, D. (2018). A patient-specific 
haptic drilling simulator based on virtual reality for dental 
implant surgery. International journal of computer assisted 
radiology and surgery, 13(11), 1861-1870. 
[3] Correa C, Nunes F, Ranzini E, Nakamura R, Tori R. Haptic 
interaction 
for 
needle 
insertion 
training 
in 
medical 
applications: The state-of-the-art. Medical Engineering and 
physics, Volume 65, 2019, pages 6-25 
[4] J. Iqbal, N.G. Tsagarakis and D.G. Caldwell, Design of a 
wearable direct-driven optimized hand exoskeleton device, 4th 
International Conference on Advance in Computer-Human 
Interaction (ACHI), France, 2011, pp. 142-146. 
[5] Katić, 
D., 
Spengler, 
P., 
Bodenstedt, 
S., 
Castrillon-
Oberndorfer, G., Seeberger, R., Hoffmann, J., ... & Speidel, S. 
(2015). A system for context-aware intraoperative augmented 
reality in dental implant surgery. International journal of 
computer assisted radiology and surgery, 10(1), 101-108. 
[6] Kusumoto, N., Sohmura, T., Yamada, S., Wakabayashi, K., 
Nakamura, T., & Yatani, H. (2006). Application of virtual 
reality force feedback haptic device for oral implant surgery. 
Clinical oral implants research, 17(6), 708-713. 
[7] Lin, Y. K., Yau, H. T., Wang, I. C., Zheng, C., & Chung, K. 
H. (2015). A novel dental implant guided surgery based on 
integration of surgical template and augmented reality. 
Clinical implant dentistry and related research, 17(3), 543-553. 
[8] Lungu, A. J., Swinkels, W., Claesen, L., Tu, P., Egger, J., & 
Chen, X. (2021). A review on the applications of virtual 
reality, augmented reality and mixed reality in surgical 
simulation: an extension to different kinds of surgery. Expert 
review of medical devices, 18(1), 47-62. 
[9] Sohmura, T., Hojo, H., Nakajima, M., Wakabayashi, K., 
Nagao, M., Iida, S., ... & Takahashi, J. (2004). Prototype of 
simulation of orthognathic surgery using a virtual reality 
haptic device. International journal of oral and maxillofacial 
surgery, 33(8), 740-750. 
[10] Steinberg, A. D., Bashook, P. G., Drummond, J., Ashrafi, S., 
& Zefran, M. (2007). Assessment of Faculty Perception of 
Content Validity of PerioSim©, a Haptic‐3D Virtual Reality 
Dental Training Simulator. Journal of dental education, 
71(12), 1574-1582. 
[11] Sukotjo C, Schreiber S, Li J, Zhang M, Chia-Chun Yuan J, 
Santoso M. Development and Student Perception of Virtual 
Reality for Implant Surgery. Education Sciences. 2021; 
11(4):176. 
[12] Zhu, M., Liu, F., Chai, G., Pan, J. J., Jiang, T., Lin, L., ... & Li, 
Q. (2017). A novel augmented reality system for displaying 
inferior alveolar nerve bundles in maxillofacial surgery. 
Scientific Reports, 7(1), 1-11. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

