Technology Concepts to Improve Knowledge Sharing During Maintenance
Susanna Aromaa, Iina Aaltonen, Antti Väätänen
Human Factors in Complex Systems
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd
Tampere, Finland
email: susanna.aromaa@vtt.fi; iina.aaltonen@vtt.fi; antti.vaatanen@vtt.fi
Abstract—Industrial maintenance is a complex and knowledge-
intensive field. Maintenance technicians need to have special
professional skills and easy access to versatile and situationally
relevant knowledge. The aim of this paper is to understand the
nature and needs of maintenance work and to propose new
technology concepts so as to support knowledge gathering and
sharing. As a result of studies in two maintenance cases, it was
found  that  communication  between  different  actors  is  a  key
element in maintenance. Therefore, three different technology
concepts were proposed in order to support and enhance
communication. These concepts include augmented reality and
wearable technologies that will provide new and efficient ways
to help maintenance technicians in gathering and sharing task-
specific information and long-term knowledge. In the next
phase of this on-going research project, these technology
concepts will be tested and evaluated with maintenance
technicians.
Keywords: maintenance; knowledge; technology concept;
augmented reality; wearables.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The nature of maintenance work can be described as a
“combination of all technical, administrative and managerial
actions during the life cycle of an item intended to retain it
in,  or  restore  it  to,  a  state  in  which  it  can  perform  the
required function” [1]. Reason [2] defines maintenance
activities as (1) unscheduled operations, including corrective
maintenance, 
and 
disturbance- 
and 
failure-preventive
operations (opportunity-based maintenance); (2) scheduled
disturbance- 
and 
failure-preventive 
operations; 
(3)
inspections; and (4) calibration and testing.
To define knowledge in a maintenance task, it is
important to understand different types of knowledge:
explicit and tacit. Explicit or codified knowledge refers to
knowledge that is transmittable in formal, systematic
language [3]. Tacit knowledge has a personal quality, which
makes it hard to formalize and communicate. Tacit
knowledge is deeply rooted in action, commitment, and
involvement in a specific context [4]. In addition, it is
essential to distinguish knowledge from information and
data. For this purpose, Mertins et al. [5] use a continuum
ranging from data via information to knowledge in
knowledge management. Data can be facts and figures which
relay something specific, but are not organized in any way.
Information is a flow of messages, while knowledge is
created and organized by the very flow of information,
anchored in the commitment and beliefs of its holder [4]. We
consider communication here as a means to share
knowledge.
Several studies have compared augmented reality (AR)
technologies and the more traditional ways to provide
maintenance 
instructions 
[6][7][8][9][10][11][12]. 
By
definition, AR allows the user to see the real world, with
virtual objects superimposed upon or composited with the
real world [13]. Results suggest that AR technologies are
usable in providing instructions because they are often faster
to use, errors occur less frequently, and operators approve of
the use of the technology. Nee et al. [14] have summarised a
few AR-assisted maintenance systems. There are only few
studies about the use of AR for remote collaboration where
service personnel can discuss with each other [15][16].
Baber et al. [17] have shown that wearable computing
human-computer interaction can be divided into three main
activities: (1) using interaction devices; (2) using display
devices, and (3) domain activity. Their study also considers
what kind of dialogues these activities generate. New
wearable technology solutions, such as head-mounted
displays (HMD) and smart watches, enable new interaction
methods 
and 
online 
connectivity 
in 
an 
industrial
environment. In the military domain, various HMDs and
wearable solutions have been developed and tested in future
soldier projects for example [18][19][20]. For industrial
maintenance, however, demonstrators and concepts of
wearable maintenance systems have been developed
[21][22], but – to the best of our knowledge – field trial
studies with HMDs and smart watches have not been
conducted in the work context.
The purpose of this study was to propose new technology
concepts to support knowledge gathering and sharing during
maintenance. Two different industrial maintenance cases
were studied, and three technology concepts to support
communication were proposed. The paper is organized as
follows. Section 2 describes the conducted field studies and
Section 3 presents the findings. The three technology
concepts are defined in Section 4 and discussed in Section 5.
Conclusions are drawn in Section 6.
II.
FIELD STUDIES
Maintenance work was studied in two cases. The first
observation and evaluation session was related to the marine
domain, and the second study was made in the crane
industry. In both of these, data collection followed the same
429
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1.
Checking the condition and function of an engine’s overhaul
hatch.
procedure. The data were collected in two phases, by
applying a semi-structured interview method and by direct
observations of maintenance tasks. Two maintenance
workers were observed and interviewed at both sites.
The interviews followed the principles of core-task
analysis [23]. The interviews consisted of the following
themes: demographics, description of the maintenance
activities, safety risks, collaboration, tools and information
systems, reporting, procedures and manuals, and tacit
knowledge of the work community and maintenance work.
The interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed by a
subcontractor. The observations ranged from a general
overview of a maintenance site to a selected and detailed
maintenance task. In all observation sessions, photos, videos
and notes were taken during the process of maintenance
tasks. The observations each lasted from one to two hours.
In the first case – solutions for the marine industry
(Figure 1) – the focus was on a planned and preventive field
service related to engines in a mid-sized oil tanker. The
maintenance work included main and auxiliary engine
overhauls. The overhaul work was done by seven
maintenance workers over a period of two weeks.
The second case was related to a crane company and
service activities in their customer’s facilities (Figure 2). The
crane company’s five-membered service team was located in
Figure 2.
Inspecting and lubricating a hoist system.
a large steel company’s factory where the team performed
planned and preventive services and on-demand corrective
maintenance. Most of the equipment serviced – hoists and
cranes – were from the crane company but the team also
services other manufacturer’s lifting equipment at the
customers’ facilities.
III.
MAINTENANCE WORK IN INDUSTRIAL CASES
Based on the field study, three things arise as core
demands in the maintenance task: it is important for the
maintenance technician (1) to know the object/product/item
and how to repair it; (2) to keep downtime as short as
possible; and (3) to have good communication skills. The
first two issues are included in the maintenance terminology
standard EN 13306 [1] (e.g. time related terms are defined in
it), but the communication aspect is not mentioned. The
importance of the social and communication related
activities in maintenance work have been noted by [24], and
was also supported by our findings. Three out of four
maintenance technicians answered the question “What are
the qualities of a good maintenance technician?” that he/she
needs to have good communication skills. Maintenance
technicians need to communicate with many people, such as
co-workers, technical support and customers. In the marine
case, communication can take place with people from the
shipyard, the ship’s crew, co-workers and also people from
other maintenance companies. In addition, there can be
several different people who represent one of these groups.
In the crane case, the customer was a manufacturing
company and their representatives were, for example, the
factory foreman and a crane driver. From a model created for
knowledge gathering and sharing in maintenance [25], it is
possible to see that there are many people (and also other
agents) involved in maintenance.
In the studied cases, communication took place mainly
face-to-face or via mobile phones: the service technicians
asked for help or other information from other co-workers or
technical support. According to Orr [26], most of the
communication between service technicians is related to the
maintenance work they have done to the machines and other
work issues such as timetables. Furthermore, service
technicians often tell each other stories about past fixes and
difficulties in them by a broken machine or over a cup of
coffee. Franssila [27] reported that, according to the
maintenance technicians, the most reasonable way to share
tacit knowledge is face-to-face conversations with people
working on the field.
The management of knowledge in the service industry
can be challenging. Franssila [27] has listed several
challenges, such as (1) the inadequacy of formal
documentation; (2) unreliable networks preventing efficient
knowledge management; (3) information of new products
(e.g., new updates) is difficult to share in the field; and (4)
tacit knowledge from the field is difficult to channel to other
members in an organization. In our study, maintenance
technicians reported that there is a great deal of information
available, but sometimes it is difficult to find it from the
430
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

information systems. It is also possible that the information
is in multiple places such as in emails, manuals, notebooks or
other systems. In addition, it is sometimes difficult to say
whether the information in paper manuals is current and up-
to-date. Most of the information gathered from the field is
reported in written form. However, maintenance technicians
use also their mobile phones to take pictures to add to
reports.
Knowledge management in maintenance activities can
contribute to the safety and reliability of industrial plants.
Dhillon [28] has listed causal factors for critical incidents
and reported events concerned with human maintenance
errors in power plants, and many of these are directly or
indirectly linked to knowledge: faulty procedures, poor unit
and equipment identification, poor training and work
practices. In addition, Dhillon and Liu [29] have given a
comprehensive review of human error in maintenance.
Maintenance technicians need to be skilled workers.
Tasks are often technically demanding and safety-critical,
and there is always a time pressure. These are reasons for
novice workers to work with more experienced co-workers
in the beginning. Based on our interviews, most of the
learning happens in a real environment from other co-
workers: apprentices learn to work with their mentors
through observation, imitation and practice. It can also be
called on-the-job learning. The use of these approaches
means that there is great deal of tacit knowledge that does
not transfer just through manuals, instructions or training. In
Nonaka’s [4] tacit knowledge theory called “Dynamic
Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation”, this process
of creating tacit knowledge through a shared experience
between a novice and an expert is termed “socialization”.
The modes of knowledge creation introduced in the theory
describe the knowledge transfer in our study well.
The context of work creates challenges to the
maintenance work. In these two cases, it could be observed
that the working environment can be noisy, dark, greasy and
hot. Work could also include working in high places (e.g., on
the top of cranes) or confined spaces (e.g., inside engines).
For example, during the main engine overhaul in the marine
case, the maintenance worker had to get inside the engine
through a small hatch on its side. In addition, the
maintenance work can be performed in an environment
where there is other traffic such as automatic vehicles and
pedestrians. Technicians also carry different tools such as
hand tools, power tools and special measuring instruments
with them. In addition, the operating environment can
sometimes be too challenging to use smartphones or tablet
PCs or laptops, or a wireless network may not be available.
IV.
PROPOSED TECHNOLOGY CONCEPTS
Based on the findings from the field studies, we selected
two communication-related themes for investigation: getting
help and reporting. Getting help and support from others is
one key element in maintenance work. At the moment, it is
mainly done by calling other people using a mobile phone.
Additionally, reporting is a key element in sharing the
knowledge to other people. Currently, the service companies
can have several different reporting systems, including the
customers’ reporting systems, to be completed after the
maintenance task. The documentation format is mainly in
written form, although some pictures are taken with mobile
phones. In addition, writing is done “back” in the office,
located some distance from the maintenance site.
Three technology concepts were suggested by the
research 
study 
group 
(researchers 
and 
company
representatives) so as to improve the communication
(knowledge sharing) when requesting help/information or
reporting. The concepts are: (1) remote assistance; (2)
instructions delivery; and (3) data collection/reporting. These
technologies were selected based on the company interests
and also based on an idea that maintenance technicians have
an online access to up-to-date knowledge, and that
knowledge can be shared in a more comprehensive and
interactive way. There was interest towards many different
use cases and, finally two technology concepts were selected
for the marine case and one concept for the crane case.
A.
Concept 1: Augmented reality guidance
In this concept (Figure 3), the maintenance technician
receives help that is available in information systems via a
tablet PC and an AR application.  In planned and preventive
service, the technician goes through a set of tasks. The
purpose of this system is to give more comprehensive and
interactive instructions to the maintenance technician. The
maintenance technician will be given a list of maintenance
steps and visual guidance on what to do in the following
steps. The system allows the maintenance technicians to
proceed  at  their  own  pace  and  acknowledge  when  a
maintenance step is completed. The system therefore ensures
that all necessary maintenance procedures are performed,
and enables the information to be updated in the customer’s
system. Other technical support personnel are not needed.
B.
Concept 2: Remote assistance
In this concept, technical help is provided to the
maintenance technician via a tablet PC (Figure 4). The idea
is to support communication and information sharing
between different professionals. In maintenance work,
technicians can face a situation in which they do not know
Figure 3.
 Augmented reality guidance concept
431
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4.
 Remote assistance concept
how to proceed or else need support in doing so. A similar
situation occurs when there is no guidance on a specific tool
nor written instructions on the values of how a certain system
is trimmed. In these situations, the technicians typically call
their colleagues for help. The purpose of the remote
assistance system is to support the maintenance technician on
site. The maintenance technician will receive help and advice
online from a technical support person located in a remote
office. The maintenance technician will use the tablet PC and
its camera as a medium to transfer images or video of the
object being maintained. He/she can discuss with the
technical support and be given visual indicators to the
images on the tablet on how and with which components to
proceed next. They are able to share the same visual image
of  the  maintenance  object.  The  system  can  also  be
implemented using AR technology, which – presumably –
makes it easier for the technician to locate the targeted
objects. The technical support will use a computer to see
what the maintenance technician is doing and give
instructions to him/her. The support person can also ask the
technician to reposition the tablet’s camera to a better
viewing angle. This type of system gives the possibility for
the related information to be saved to an information system
for later access.
C.
Concept 3: Data collection and reporting
In this concept (Figure 5), the communication between
information systems and a maintenance technician is
maintained using wearable devices. The concept utilizes a
combination of three different wearable devices: a smart
phone,  a  smart  watch  and  smart  glasses.  The  system
facilitates checking information on the work tasks and
maintenance object on-site. The maintenance procedures
performed need to be reported back to the customer’s
information system. This concept was proposed in order to
make reporting easier on site and to shorten the reporting
time. With the smart watch, the maintenance technician is
able to select the maintained object and component from a
structured interface, and choose either picture-taking or
Figure 5.
 Data collection and reporting concept
error reporting, which are directly linked to the component
selected. The smart glasses are used for checking
information and taking pictures hands-free. The smart phone
is used for adding text to the reports and for locating a
maintenance target. This concept supports working in
conditions where both hands are needed, and enables fast
online reporting. It can also be used in situations when the
technician needs information on earlier procedures, or
numerical and statistical data on the functioning of the
object maintained.
D.
Traditional and envisaged practices
The difference between traditional and envisaged
practices is illustrated in Figure 6.  In addition, we
hypothesize that benefits are gained from improvements in
the quality of knowledge sharing and time savings in
reporting.
V.
DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study was to understand the key
features and requirements in maintenance work, and to
propose new technology concepts to support knowledge
gathering and sharing during maintenance. Based on the
studies, it was found that social and communicational aspects
are also important in maintenance work. Therefore, the
project group focused on developing new technology
concepts to support these aspects, especially the activities of
getting help and reporting. Finally, three technology
concepts were proposed and they are discussed here.
The augmented reality guidance concept is quite
thoroughly researched as an instruction delivery tool in many
studies [6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][30][31]. Those results
suggest that AR technologies are usable in providing
instructions. In particular, this concept can be useful in
demanding maintenance tasks that are rarely carried out or in
situations where it is not possible to contact other people.
432
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 6.
Comparison of current and future maintenance practices . The arrows show the expected benefits.
One of the advantages of this concept is that these
instructions are easier to keep updated, and they can be more
illustrative than paper manuals. It is possible, however, that
this kind of technology concept is usable only in rare cases.
Usually the maintenance staff is skilled and do not need
instructions, or if help is needed, it is easier and faster to call
a colleague. The selection of a medium for this purpose is
also an issue, e.g., is the tablet-PC the best medium?.
Similarly, it is also important to thoroughly consider how the
information is presented in the AR solution [32].
The remote assistance concept is promising in the sense
that it makes it possible to share the same visual image of the
situation with others [15][16]. In addition, positive results
have been reported using shared visual 3D images during the
design [33][34][35]. In these studies, a virtual representation
of the design object has supported knowledge sharing and
provided a platform to communicate with each other in a
more intuitive way. The intuitiveness is supported by the
remote assistance concept by enabling a technical support
person to point out some essential objects or give other
interactive guidance. Compared to the currently used mobile
phone calls this brings knowledge sharing closer to Nonaka’s
[4] “socialization” mode of creating knowledge in which
tacit knowledge is created through shared experience. A
possible challenge in this concept is that an online
connection may not be available or it does not work reliably
and uninterrupted. Furthermore, advanced remote assistance
communication may take more time than using a mobile
phone and increase distraction from the maintenance work.
The concept of using wearables for data collection and
reporting has a chance to shorten the reporting time and
improve the quality of the knowledge sharing to the
customers and other people reading the reports. The expected
benefit is in the automation of time-consuming secondary
tasks in maintenance. Another benefit in this concept is the
aim to keep maintenance both of the technicians’ hands free
so that they can focus on performing repair tasks. The
working environment may require free hands, e.g., when
using tools, climbing stairs or supporting oneself with the
railings in high places. However, wearable devices have very
limited screen sizes and input methods: a touch screen or
gesture recognition may not be applicable in all demanding
maintenance environments. Challenges can also arise from
the simultaneous use of multiple devices and the selection of
the best technology combination for maintenance work.
The adoption of new technologies may generate new
benefits for various stakeholders such as maintenance
technicians, companies and/or customers. Most of the
benefits for maintenance technicians derive from the
availability of up-to-date knowledge, and automated
secondary tasks. Therefore, the maintenance technicians can
focus on their core tasks, and allow them to work more
safely, and work faster and with less mistakes and
frustration. At the service company level, this will provide
433
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

benefits such as improved productivity and better quality in
maintenance. Customers will gain most benefits from short
downtime in production, better scheduled services and
enhanced communication with the maintenance company.
These concepts are the first showcases of the iterative
design process. In the future, the concepts will be tested in
the field so as to analyse their potential in supporting
knowledge gathering and sharing during maintenance. Next,
showcase generation and demonstration systems will be
developed based on the results gathered from the analyses.
The field studies will be performed in real usage
environments with real end users, i.e., service technicians.
Two technicians will test each concept. Because of the small
number of test participants, a qualitative approach for
evaluation is needed, and therefore the subjective opinion of
the technicians – with their knowledge and practical
experience of working in the field – will be the starting point.
The field study will include an experimental part with
demonstrators, followed by a customized questionnaire with
a subjective rating scale (a combination of Technology
Acceptance Model (TAM Satisfaction Questionnaire) [36]
and usability questions modified from System Usability
Scale [37], and interviews. The interviews will include
questions concerning the added-value to the technicians’
work, and training needs, work practices and future
expectations of the technicians. In the demonstrator testing
phase, the qualitative evaluations are expected to give a
broader  set  of  results  than  could  be  achieved  with
quantitative performance metrics (e.g., time elapsed in
maintenance, time spent with communicating with technical
support or using the technology), which are more useful in
later phases of the design process.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
Industrial maintenance is a complex and knowledge-
intensive field. Maintenance technicians need to have easy
access to versatile and situationally relevant knowledge. The
aim  of  this  paper  was  to  understand  key  features  in
maintenance work and to propose new technology concepts
to support knowledge gathering and sharing during
maintenance.
Maintenance work was studied in marine and crane
industry cases. The data were collected by interviews and
direct observations of maintenance tasks were recorded. As a
result of these studies, it was elicited that communication
between different actors is a key element in the maintenance,
in addition to more self-explanatory activities such as
repairing a maintenance object. Finally, three technology
concepts were suggested to support communication and
knowledge sharing: (1) augmented reality guidance, (2)
remote assistance, and (3) data collection and reporting with
wearables.
This is an on-going research project. In the next phase,
demonstrators will be developed based on the suggested
concepts and tested in the field with service technicians.
Findings from this study can be used to improve the
understanding of the social and communication aspects in
maintenance work. In addition, the technology concepts are
usable in other domains, such as design and assembly, to
improve knowledge gathering and sharing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was funded by Tekes – the Finnish Funding
Agency for Innovation – and was carried out as part of the S-
STEP research project under FIMECC (Finnish Metals and
Engineering Competence Cluster). The authors are grateful
to all the researchers and company representatives who
contributed to and supported the work presented in this
publication.
REFERENCES
[1]
EN 13306 (European Standard), Maintenance – Maintenance
terminology. European Committee for Standardization,
Brussels, 2010.
[2]
J. Reason, Managing the Risks of Organizational Accidents.
Ashgate Publishing Ltd., London, 1997.
[3]
M. Polanyi, The Tacit Dimension. Anchor-Day, New York,
1966.
[4]
I. Nonaka, “A Dynamic Theory of Organizational Knowledge
Creation,” Organization Science, vol. 5, 1994, pp. 14–37.
[5]
K.  Mertins,  P.  Heisig,  and  J.  Vorbeck  (Eds.),  Knowledge
management: concepts and best practices. Springer Science &
Business Media, 2003.
[6]
K. M. Baird and W. Barfield, “Evaluating the Effectiveness of
Augmented Reality Displays for a Manual Assembly Task,”
Virtual Reality, vol. 4, 4, 1999, pp. 250-259.
[7]
P.  N.  Day,  G.  Ferguson,  P.  O.  B.  Holt,  S.  Hogg,  and  D.
Gibson, “Wearable Augmented Virtual Reality for Enhancing
Information Delivery in High Precision Defence Assembly:
an Engineering Case Study,” Virtual Reality, vol. 8, 3, 2005,
pp. 177–184.
[8]
K. Kunze, F. Wagner, E. Kartal, E. M., Kluge, and P.
Lukowicz, Does context matter? - a quantitative evaluation in
a real world maintenance scenario, In Pervasive Computing,
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 372–389, 2009.
[9]
S. J. Henderson, and S. Feiner, “Evaluating The Benefits of
Augmented Reality for Task Localization in Maintenance of
an Armored Personnel Carrier Turret,” 8th IEEE International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR),
2009, pp. 135–144.
[10] S.  Henderson  and  S.  Feiner,  “Exploring  the  Benefits  of
Augmented Reality Documentation for Maintenance and
Repair,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 17, 10, 2011, pp. 1355–1368.
[11] A.  Tang,  C.  Owen,  F.  Biocca,  and  W.  Mou,  “Comparative
Effectiveness of Augmented Reality in Object Assembly,” In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, ACM, 2003, pp. 73–80.
[12] B. Schwerdtfeger and G. Klinker, “Supporting Order Picking
with Augmented Reality,” In Proceedings of the 7th
IEEE/ACM
 international
 Symposium
 on
 Mixed
 and
Augmented Reality,  IEEE Computer Society, Sep. 2008, pp.
91–94.
[13] R. T. Azuma, “A Survey of Augmented Reality,” Presence,
vol. 6, 4, 1997, pp. 355–385.
[14] A. Y. C. Nee, S. K. Ong, G. Chryssolouris, and D. Mourtzis,
“Augmented 
Reality 
Applications 
in 
Design 
and
Manufacturing,” CIRP Annals-Manufacturing Technology,
vol. 61, 2, 2012, pp. 657–679.
[15] G. M. Re and M. Bordegoni, An augmented reality
framework for supporting and monitoring operators during
maintenance tasks. In Virtual, augmented and mixed reality.
434
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Applications of virtual and augmented reality, Springer
International Publishing, pp. 443–454, 2014.
[16] F.  Ferrise,  G.  Caruso,  and  M.  Bordegoni,  “Multimodal
Training and Tele-Assistance Systems for the Maintenance of
Industrial Products,” Virtual and Physical Prototyping, vol. 8,
2, 2013, pp. 113–126.
[17] C. Baber, “Wearable Computers: A Human Factors Review,”
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, vol.
13, 2001, pp. 123–145.
[18] J. Laarni, et al., “Supporting Situation Awareness in
Demanding Operating Environments through Wearable User
Interfaces,” 8th International Conference of Engineering
Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics (EPCE), Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Jul. 2009, pp. 13–21.
[19] L. R. Elliott, J. B.F. van Erp, E. S. Redden, and M.
Duistermaat, Field-based validation of a tactile navigation
device, “IEEE Trans Haptics”, vol. 3, 2, 2010, pp.78–87
[20] R. Mynttinen, Evaluating spatially directing cues on a
wearable user interface in a field setup, Masterarbeit,
University of Vienna, Austria, 2010
[21] X.  S.  Zheng,  et  al.,  “Wearable  Solution  for  Industrial
Maintenance,” In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, ACM, Apr. 2015, pp. 311–314.
[22] SAPEnterpriseMobile. SAP and Vuzix Bring you Augmented
Solutions for the Enterprise. [Online]. Available  from:
https://youtu.be/9Wv9k_ssLcI 
and
https://youtu.be/UlpGDrSmg38,  2016.01.05
[23] L. Norros, Acting under uncertainty: The core-task analysis in
ecological study of work. VTT Publications 546, VTT
Technical Research Centre of Finland, Espoo, 2004.
[24] H. Kuoppala, S. Riihiaho, P. Mannonen, and A. Salovaara,
Huollon tämänhetkinen työnkuva (Present work context in
maintenance). 
In 
S. 
Riihiaho, 
(ed.). 
Proaktiivisen
tietotekniikan vaikutukset huoltotyöhön. Helsinki University
of Technology, Espoo. 2003.
[25] S. Aromaa, A. Väätänen, I. Aaltonen, and T. Heimonen, “A
Model for Gathering and Sharing Knowledge in Maintenance
Work,” Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
European Association of Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE '15),
Article 28, 2015.
[26] J. Orr, Talking about machines: an ethnography of a modern
jog. ILR Press, Ithaca, N.Y., 1996.
[27] H. Franssila, Sähköisen tietämyksenhallinnan mukauttaminen
ja integrointi työkäytäntöihin asennus- ja huoltotyössä
(Integrating digital knowledge management in assembly and
maintenance work). Hypermedia Laboratory Net Series 16,
University of Tampere, 2008.
[28] B. S. Dhillon, Human Reliability, Error, and Human Factors
in Power Generation. Springer Series in Reliability
Engineering, Springer International Publishing, Switzerland,
2014.
[29] B. S. Dhillon and Y. Liu, “Human Error in Maintenance: a
Review,” Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering, vol.
12, 2006, pp. 21–36.
[30] S.  K.  Ong,  M.  L.  Yuan,  and  A.  Y.  C.  Nee,  “Augmented
Reality 
Applications 
in 
Manufacturing: 
a 
Survey,”
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 46, 2008,
pp,. 707–2742.
[31] J. Zhu, S. K. Ong, and A. Y. C. Nee, “An Authorable
Context-aware Augmented Reality System to Assist the
Maintenance Technicians,” The International Journal of
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2013, vol. 66, pp.
1699–1714.
[32] K. Helin, et al., “Usability of the ARgh! Augmented Reality
System for On-the-job Learning,” 19th Triennial Congress of
the International Ergonomics Association (IEA), Aug. 2015.
[33] D. Ma, X. Zhen, Y. Hu, D. Wu, X. Fan, and H. Zhu, (edit.),
Collaborative Virtual Assembly Operation Simulation and Its
Application. Virtual Reality & Augmented Reality in
Industry, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Press, Shanghai and
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
[34] S. Aromaa, S.-P. Leino, J. Viitaniemi, L. Jokinen, and S.
Kiviranta, “Benefits of the Use of Virtual Environments in
Product Design Review Meeting,” 12th International Design
Conference, University of Zagreb,   May 2012, pp. 355–364.
[35] M. Bordegoni and G. Caruso, “Mixed Reality Distributed
Platform for Collaborative Design Review of Automotive
Interiors,” Virtual and Physical Prototyping, vol.7, 2012, pp.
1–17.
[36] F.  D.  Davis,  R.  P.  Bagozzi,  and  P.  R.  Warshaw,  User
acceptance of computer technology: a comparison of two
theoretical models, “Management science”, vol. 35, 8, 1989,
pp. 982–1003.
[37] J. Brooke, SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale. Usability
evaluation in industry. Taylor and Francis Ltd, vol. 189, pp.
4–7, 1996.
435
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

