Immersive Learning with AI-enhanced Virtual Standardized Patient (VSP)  
to Improve Dental Student’s Communication Proficiencies
Aadithya Gowthaman, Linda Kirova, Bingyu Li, 
Patrick Molen, Ines Said, Jordan Smith, Austin 
Stanbury, Markus Santoso PhD 
Digital Worlds Institute 
University of Florida 
Gainesville, Florida. United States 
markus.santoso@ufl.edu 
Cortino Sukotjo DDS, PhD 
Restorative Dentistry Department 
University of Illinois at Chicago 
Chicago, Illinois. United States 
csukotjo@uic.edu
Abstract— COVID-19’s lockdown policy is causing the dental 
schools to halt their preclinical curricular and clinical 
activities, including a learning session with Standardized 
Satient (SP) to train student’s communication proficiencies. In 
this project, we developed Virtual Standardized Patient (VSP): 
an immersive learning with Artificial Intelligence (AI)-
enhanced Virtual Standardized Patient to improve dental 
student’s communication proficiencies. Augmented Reality 
(AR) was used to immerse the virtual patient into user’s space, 
user also has an option to switch to Virtual Reality (VR) to 
fully immerse the user with the digital environment. AI 
element facilitates a seamless communication between virtual 
patient and user, and we also added an adaptive storytelling to 
allow student to explore several discussion’s options. 
Keywords-virtual standardized patient; immersive learning; 
artificial intelligence; adaptive storytelling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Dental practitioners require not only psychomotor skills 
but also communication skills. Previously, an immersive 
technology was developed as an alternative solution to drill 
psychomotor skills in preclinical education [1]. As part of 
this paper, authors explored faculty perceptions about related 
project and faculties enjoyed the immersive experiences and 
suggested that the virtual set-up provides a holistic and 
realistic view of a dental operatory for students.  
Other research group developed a conversational Virtual 
Standardized Patient to enable students to practice history-
taking skills [5]. Their project allowed students to take a 
history of a VSP, develop a differential diagnosis, and 
document the encounter in the electronic medical record [5]. 
In this paper, authors introduced an immersive 
technology 
application 
to 
increase 
dental 
student’s 
communication proficiencies. Traditionally, dental schools 
provide a face-to-face sessions between student and 
Standardized Patient (SP) to mainly focus on improving their 
communication skills.  
SP is a ‘patient-actor’ who has been trained to 
consistently portray a specific patient role, outlined by a 
script devised by topic content experts [4]. SPs have been 
used in dental curricula to address skills in working with 
tobacco cessation counseling, emergencies, interprofessional 
skills, 
and 
complete 
denture 
treatments 
[2]. 
The 
individualized experience of having a student work with a SP 
to develop communication skills has been an effective means 
of teaching communication, data-gathering, promoting 
interpersonal skills, and cultural sensitivity [7].  
Conventionally, this learning sessions take place on-site 
and required in-person interaction between student and actor. 
However, lockdown caused by COVID-19 pandemic has 
forced most of schools to close and suspend their academic 
activities including the face-to-face session between student 
and SP. The motivation of this paper is to introduced our 
project: Virtual Standardized Patient (VSP). VSP is an 
immersive learning module that utilize an AI-enhanced 
virtual standardized patient to overcome the limitation of 
SP’s conventional approach. 
This paper will be structured into several sections. 
Section 1 will cover about project’s introduction. In section 
2, authors will discuss about the main project, Virtual 
Standardized Patient, including assets and the technology 
behind it such as the AI-Natural Language Processing, 
immersive technology (AR-VR), and adaptive storytelling 
feature. In section 3 we will conclude our discussion by 
discussing about limitations and future plan for this project.  
II. 
VIRTUAL STANDARDIZED PATIENT 
To offer a digital simulation that replicates the traditional 
learning session, VSP project employed an user with the 
learning modules. We also implemented an AI’s Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) to facilitate a seamless 
communication 
between 
user 
and 
virtual 
patient. 
Furthermore, VSP also added an adaptive storytelling 
approach to allow student to explore different answers and 
observe difference patient’s responses. Assets (Environment 
and Virtual Patient) 
The discussion between patient and dentist most of the 
time happened inside the dentist’s room. To replicate this 
situation, we prepared similar assets that inspired from the 
real objects starting from the color tone, layout, and others. 
The assets includes dental room and chair. The room is also 
completed with supporting objects including cabinets, sink, 
office desk, computer, and television screen as shown in 
Figure 1.  
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. VSP’s assets. 
A. Virtual Patients 
In this project, we included two virtual patients that 
represent different races and communities, as shown in 
Figure 2. The virtual patients wear casual dress code and 
they are rigged and animated following the prepared 
dialogue.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. VSP’s Virtual Patients 
B. Markerless-AR & VR session  
VSP project is an immersive learning platform that 
employed both AR and VR technology. AR is a technology 
that allow user to see the real worlds, with virtual objects 
superimposed upon or composited with the real world [4]. 
Furthermore, AR is a system that have the following three 
characteristics: combines real and virtual, interactive in real 
time and registered in 3D [6]. For VSP’s AR session, we 
applied a markerless experience powered by Google ARCore 
Software Development Kit (SDK). With ARCore, user could 
scan their room, place the virtual patient on the designated 
spot, and the virtual patient will be immersed onto user’s real 
space without any printed marker as shown in Figure 3.   
  
 
Figure 3. VSP’s Markerless AR session. 
 
VR is defined as a computer-generated digital 
environment that can be experienced with as if that 
environment was real [3]. In VSP project, user has an option 
to switch from AR to VR mode. In this session, they will be 
fully immersed into the dentist room and interact with the 
virtual patient there as shown in Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4. VSP’s VR session.  
 
C. Seamless Communication & Adaptive Storytelling 
Improving user or student’s communication skills is the 
main objective of VSP project therefore it is critical for them 
to be able to communicate verbally with the virtual patient. 
To facilitate a well-flow verbal communication, we 
implemented AI’s NLP service provided by IBM Watson. 
NLP is the set of methods for making human language 
accessible to computers [3]. The speech recognition in NLP 
will convert an audio signal to text [3]; therefore, it will 
facilitate a verbal communication between the dental student 
and virtual patient.  
Compared to the basic speech recognition, NLP allow the 
system to identify the appropriate word, phrase or response 
by using context clues and this feature is essential in VSP to 
offer a smooth communication flow between user and virtual 
SP. In this project, we trained the AI system to detect user 
response and give an appropriate feedback including the 
ability to understand several phrases and detect it as 
‘greeting’. 
Virtual simulation allow us to offer many scenarios that 
sometime could not be offered in conventional learning 
sessions. In VSP project, we implemented an adaptive 
storytelling to allow student to explore several answers to 
observe possible patient’s responses therefore they could be 
more prepared when they handle the real patient. Figure 5  
showed the diagram of VSP’s adaptive storytelling. 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
CONCLUSION 
Real time speech interaction in immersive environment 
between real user and virtual character has been 
implemented including for Human Resource (HR) training 
purposes and for general medical student training. However, 
our VSP project that mainly focus for the dental student is a 
novel application of immersive learning platform. COVID-
19 lockdown mandate also shows a demand for dental 
learning module that mobile and less site-dependent. VSP 
could be a key breakthrough as an alternative solution that 
overcome the existing learning tool’s limitation. Even 
though there were several VSP projects previously 
developed for the medical education, our project is novel 
since it explores the application of VSP for the dentistry 
education direction. 
For current progress, VSP is still limited to one scenario: 
handling an angry patient and in the future we are planning 
to expand to another scenarios including delivering news to 
the young or child patient, educating senior patient about 
certain procedure, and others. We also plan to add 
supervision features both a real time supervision by faculty 
and including an AI-based supervisor. Our team also plan to 
run a quantitative study with potential user to learn about 
their perception about this project.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Sukotjo, S. Schreiber, J. C. Yuan, and M. Santoso, 
“Faculty perceptions of virtual reality as an alternative 
solution for preclinical skills during the pandemic,” Journal of 
Dental Education, 2020. DOI: 10.1002/jdd.12499.   
[2] C. T. McKenzie, K R. Tilashalski, D. T. Peterson, and M. L. 
White, “Effectiveness of Standardized Patient Simulations in 
Teaching Clinical Communication Skills to Dental Students,” 
Journal of Dental Education, 2017; 81(10): 1179-86. 
[3] J. Einstein, “Natural Language Processing,” 2018. 
[4] J. Jerald, “The VR Book: Human-Centered Design for Virtual 
Reality,” 2015, ACM Books.  
[5] K. Maicher, D. Danforth, A. Price et al. “Developing a 
Conventional Virtual Standardized Patient to Enable Students 
to Practice History-Taking Skills,” Simul Healthc 2017; 
12(2):124-31. 
[6] R. Azuma, “A Survey of Augmented Reality,” Teleoperators 
and Virtual Environments, 1997; 6(4): 355-85. 
[7] R. C. Wiener, C. Water, J. Doris, D. W. McNeil, 
“Comparison of Dental Students’ Self-Evaluation and Faculty 
Evaluation of Communication Skills During a Standardized 
Patient Exercise,” Journal of Dental Education, 2018; 82(10): 
1043-50 
 
 
Figure 5. VSP’s Adaptive Storytelling Diagram. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

