 
Analyzing the Effects of Virtualizing and Augmenting Trading Card Game  
based on the Player’s Personality 
Mizuki Sakamoto, Todorka Alexandrova, Tatsuo Nakajima 
Department of Computer Science and Enginnering 
Waseda University, JAPAN 
{mizuki, toty, tatsuo}@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we focus on the Trading Card Game 
(TCG), which offers two versions of playing. One is the version 
of the TCG played with paper-based cards, and the other is the 
TCG played on a computer. We discuss the lost reality and the 
lost enjoyment by playing the computer based TCG compared 
to the paper based one. For analyzing the virtuality in the 
computer game, we propose a scenarios-based analysis based 
on the player’s personality. We believe that the personality 
analysis described in the paper is useful to analyze the human 
social relationships in various games and social media, and also 
clarifies the possible obstacles and reasons for dissatisfaction in 
using social media and playing computer based games for each 
type of personality.  
   Our study also claims that computer technologies can solve 
the problems caused due to the virtuality introduced in a game 
by using augmented reality techniques. We present Augmented 
Trading Card Game (Augmented TCG), and describe the results 
of some experiments with it that show how some problems and 
pitfalls of the remote trading card game play on the Internet 
could be improved. We believe that the case study and the 
scenario analysis given in this paper would be useful to 
improve the current realizations of games. 
Keywords - Virtualization and augmentation; Personality; Game 
design; Augmented reality; Scenarios-based analysis. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
   Our daily life becomes more and more virtual by making 
the surrounding daily artifacts more intelligent [6, 14]. Our 
definition of virtual is something that does not really exist, 
but has a real effect on our daily life as if it exists. Jean 
Baudrillard explains our consumption behavior as we 
consume symbols associated with things, not the things 
themselves [3]. Since the symbolization of things will 
accelerate by embedding computers in our life, our virtual 
consumption will progress rapidly.  
   The impact of introducing virtuality in our daily life has 
not been discussed well, although digital books have 
become very common everywhere, and virtual worlds like 
The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim [26] are creating almost 
indistinguishable 
real 
worlds 
within 
a 
computer. 
Specifically, it is an important issue to discuss the effects of 
replacing real things with virtual things by using computers. 
In recent games, physical tangible things are replaced by 
virtual things in the computers, and multiple players can 
enjoy easily a remote game play without meeting each other. 
Even though the rules of a game do not change, the play 
style significantly changes according to the game’s 
realization method. However, currently, there is no good 
way to analyze the effects of the different realization 
methods in a systematic way. 
   In this paper, we mainly consider the effects of 
virtualization in the Yu-Gi-Oh! trading card game [27] as a 
case study of the virtualization of daily objects. The Yu-Gi-
Oh! trading card game (TCG) as shown in Fig. 1 is a turn 
based game that uses paper cards and is played in a one-to-
one or two-to-two manner. A player collects cards by 
buying packs of cards that contain sets of randomly chosen 
cards or by exchanging cards with other players. Yu-Gi-Oh! 
cards are categorized into three types: monster cards, spell 
cards and trap cards. A player chooses his/her favorite cards, 
and constructs his/her own original deck, which consists of 
at least 40 cards.  We call the battle with Yu-Gi-Oh! cards a 
duel. Each player starts a game with a certain number of 
points called life points and performs the duel by 
summoning his/her monsters, battling against the opponent 
player with his/her monsters or using spells and traps. 
Depending on the action taken and the outcome of it the life 
points decrease or increase. If the life points of a player 
become zero or the player cannot draw cards from his/her 
own deck any more, then that player loses the duel and the 
game ends. 
 
Figure 1. Playing Trading Card Game. 
   There are several versions of the Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG that can 
be played on personal computers and allow players to play 
348
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
the game remotely. The cards are represented in the 
computer virtually, and players manipulate the cards using a 
mouse. A single player can also play the game, and in such 
case the duel is performed “against the computer”, i.e., the 
game AI. In this paper, we focus on a version of the game 
that is played on Nintendo DS as a computer-based TCG. 
We call this version the DS version and it can also be either 
played by one person with the game AI as an opponent or 
by two people, who play against each other by connecting 
two Nintendo DSs through WiFi connection. Also, we call 
the version of TCG that uses paper-based cards the paper 
version. 
   For analyzing the player’s behavior in the DS and the 
paper version, we classify the Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG players 
based on the three personalities proposed by Karen Horney 
[7]. For each personality we first create a scenario that 
describes the typical behavior of the corresponding player. 
Then, we discuss how the scenarios change in case of the 
paper and the DS version. The Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG involves 
various sources of pleasure besides just playing, such as, 
completing 
collections 
of 
cards, 
structuring 
decks, 
communicating with other players, trading, battling and 
making links to Yu-Gi-Oh! TV animations and Yu-Gi-Oh! 
comics. However, players with different personalities focus 
on and enjoy different aspects of the game. That is why it is 
important to analyze the effects of the different realizations 
of the game for the different players’ personalities. 
   There are two main contributions of our research. The first 
contribution is to propose a scenario-based analysis of a 
computer game based on the player’s personality. In our 
research, we also show that Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG offers multiple 
ways to play the game, and these ways are identified by 
analyzing the player’s personality. We believe that the 
personality analysis described in the paper is useful to 
analyze the human social relationships in various games and 
social media, and also clarifies the possible obstacles and 
reasons for dissatisfaction in using social media and playing 
games for each type of personality. As a second contribution, 
our study claims that computer technologies can solve the 
problems caused due to the virtuality introduced in a game 
by using augmented reality techniques. We present 
Augmented Trading Card Game (Augmented TCG), and 
describe the results of some experiments with it that show 
how the pitfalls in the remote trading card game on the DS 
version could be improved. We believe that the case study 
and the scenarios analysis given in this paper would be 
useful to improve the current realizations of games. 
   The remaining sections are structured as follows. In 
Section II, we present some related work to our research. 
Section III introduces scenarios of trading card game plays 
based on three personalities, and in Section IV, we analyze 
the scenarios and how the virtuality is introduced when 
implementing the remote trading card game on the DS 
version. Section V presents Augmented TCG that augments 
the trading card game by using augmented reality 
technologies, and shows how the augmentation influences 
the game play according to the player’s personality. Finally, 
in Section VI, we conclude the paper and show some future 
directions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
   In this paper, we adopt the Karen Horney’s personality 
theory, but we also consider using other personality theories 
to analyze the game. Richard Bartle analyzes the personality 
of a player in a role playing game [2]. He describes eight 
personalities: opportunists, planners, politician, scientists, 
hackers, networkers, friends, griefers as roles used in the 
game, and he claims that a player changes his/her roles 
according 
to 
the 
current 
situation. 
However, 
the 
classification does not take into account the human 
relationship that is important when analyzing trading card 
games. On the other hand, Karen Horney’s personality 
theory is based on the essential desires in the human 
relationship. In TCG, the human relationship is the most 
important factor to define the game. Thus, we consider 
Karen Horney’s classification as more appropriate to 
analyze TCG.  
   The big five theory claims that human personality can be 
analyzed by five factors: openness, conscientiousness, 
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism [15]. The 
factors are demonstrated by rigorous scientific experiment. 
On the other hand, the Karen Horney’s personality theory is 
classified based on the human relationships like isolation, 
cooperation and conflict. At the moment, there is no 
psychological discussion to show the relationship between 
these two theories.  
   In [4], the scenarios analysis focuses on only one 
personality: moving toward people because the personality 
is the majority in our real world. We focus on more 
comprehensive analysis based on three personalities. One of 
the essential contributions of our paper is that players of 
trading card games are classified into three personalities, 
and the players of all personalities can enjoy the game. 
   The product attachment theory [16] explains that a user 
feels more empathy when the personality of a product 
matches the user’s personality. Applying the theory to TCG, 
TCG has three personalities and they correspond to the 
player’s personalities. Daily products also have multiple 
personalities [20], and our approach to analyze scenarios 
based on multiple personalities will be useful to design daily 
products.  
   There are several ways to augment the Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG. 
Duel Accelerator [24] is an online-based Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG 
where each player chooses an avatar that identifies him/her 
from the other players, and special effects on cards make 
players more excited to play the game. Also, the Skype duel 
uses Skype to show remotely each player’s card on the 
opposite player’s display and the voice communication 
between the two players is possible as well. 
   CyberOne [23] is a new TCG that enhances previous TCG. 
Each paper card has a sequence number. When the number 
is input, the corresponding virtual card appears in the online 
349
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
TCG. The player can exploit the tangibility of cards, but 
he/she can also enjoy additional special effects, which is an 
example of the advantages of the virtual cards. Also, since 
the rules are simplified, the duel is automatically progressed 
without the player doing anything. However, the enjoyment 
of constructing an original deck carefully, remains for the 
player. Moreover, the two players do not need to play the 
game at the same time because they just need to construct 
their decks. One significant advantage of this type of TCG 
is that for a player with the moving away from people 
personality there is no obstacle to play a duel. However, 
since the TCG does not encourage the communication in the 
game, it may not be suitable for a player with moving 
toward people personality. 
   Augmented reality techniques may be used to enhance the 
existing games. For example, in [21], there are several 
augmented reality games that enhance traditional games. 
Specifically, Augmented Go [9] is a promising approach to 
maintain the advantages of the physicality, but to add 
virtuality to the Go board game. In [19], a pervasive game is 
designed with virtual and tangible objects, and two 
approaches are compared to investigate the effect on social 
interaction and physical activities. Also, in [5], Pacman and 
Ghosts are human players in the real world experiencing 
computer graphics fantasy-reality by using wearable 
computers on them. 
   The most significant difference between our approach and 
previous approaches is that we propose the usage of virtual 
characters 
from 
animation 
and 
game 
stories 
[18]. 
Specifically, this approach is very different from using 
avatars that identify users. The virtual characters in our 
approach add the fictional atmosphere of the stories to the 
trading card games and enhance players’ experiences if 
players know the stories well. 
   The interaction between the virtual environment and the 
physical environment is one of the hottest topics in the game 
research. In [13], authors present an introduction and 
overview of the field of pervasive games that can blend real 
and virtual game elements. Our analysis can be extended to 
discuss how the games in virtual environments lose the 
reality, and to consider how the techniques of pervasive 
games can be used to improve the lost reality. Also, in [18], 
we discussed how a virtual character is effective when the 
virtual and real world are blended. Specifically, a virtual 
character used in animation and game stories can give us an 
enhanced feeling to seamlessly blend our real life and the 
fictional world of the animation and game stories. 
III. 
SCENARIO ANALYSIS BASED ON 
PERSONALITY THEORY 
   The personality classification used in this paper is based 
on the Karen Horney’s personality theory [7]. TCG offers 
several ways to enjoy the game, and giving a good 
classification of the players’ personalities would allow us to 
analyze the ways to play the game in a more systematic way. 
We believe that the way and attitude of playing TCG for a 
certain player is identical to creating his/her own original 
and personal story. Even though each player emphases on a 
different way to play the game, it is possible to classify the 
players into few patterns. Therefore, creating scenarios 
based on the personality theory concepts is an appropriate 
approach to analyze the behavior and intention in the game 
play. 
A. 
Player’s Personality Analysis for Trading Card 
Game 
   Personality refers to how people evaluate the personalities 
of other people, including: 1: the characteristics or qualities 
that form an individual’s character, 2: qualities that make 
someone interesting or popular (Oxford Dictionary, 2006). 
Karen Horney classifies human personalities into three 
types: moving away from people, moving toward people, 
moving against people. In this paper, we consider three 
scenarios based on this personality classification for Yu-Gi-
Oh! trading card game players.  
1) Moving Away from People: A person belonging to this 
category likes to seek completeness and perfectionism in a 
closed world, and attempts to establish his/her identity by 
self-satisfaction. Therefore, the person usually collects cards 
alone, and is really determined and concentrated to collect 
all the cards he/she wants. A player with this personality has 
a strong attachment to his/her cards, and the story to 
encounter the cards is very important for him/her. This 
means that he/she establishes his/her identity and deepens 
the attachment to the cards by knowing and exploring 
carefully the background of each card. 
2) Moving Toward People: A person belonging to this 
category attempts to establish his/her identity by acquiring 
the approval and affection from others and seeking a partner. 
He/she likes the interaction with others by using cards, and 
constructs his/her original story by deepening the friendship 
with his/her friends and achieving self-realization together 
with others. 
3) Moving Against People: A person belonging to this 
category attempts to establish his/her identity by obtaining 
social evaluation and praise from others, and creates his/her 
story by seeking his/her perfection. Also, he/she likes to be 
superior to the other party and satisfies his/her pride by 
showing his/her advantages to others. 
B. A Scenario for Moving Away from People 
   “Mizuki is a university student who likes Yu-Gi-Oh! cards. 
Her favorite deck type is Light Sworn. The illustrations on 
the cards of the Light Sworn series are very lovely and 
pretty to her, and she really enjoys just arranging her cards 
and looking at them. However, she still does not have all the 
cards from the Light Sworn series. Specifically, she does not 
have the Lightsworn Sorceress Lyla card, but she really 
wants to have it. Lyla is a beautiful lady, and the card 
350
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
depicting it is twinkling as well, which makes it even more 
attractive. Moreover, the card of Lyla would make Mizuki`s 
deck stronger. But, the card is extremely rare, and it is very 
hard to get it. She has the chance to get the card as a used 
one, but she does not like the idea since she would not feel 
the card as hers. However she is determined to find the card 
and for that purpose she goes to the card’s shop and buys 
two boxes of cards that may contain the Lyla card. Each box 
costs 4500 yen and contains 30 packs, where each pack 
contains 5 cards.  
   After coming back home, Mizuki impatiently starts 
opening the packs. She is so excited, her heart beats fast, 
and she carefully opens the packs, one by one. She hopes to 
get the card whenever she finds a card whose edge has the 
same color as the Lyla card. Unfortunately, just the edge of 
the card is the same color and the illustration on the card is 
a different monster. She is very disappointed not to get the 
desired card again and again. Unfortunately, she could not 
find the Lyla card in the two boxes she bought this time. 
Although she is disappointed, she carefully sorts and keeps 
all the cards bought today in her collection. She could get 
some other rare cards this time as well, but she could not be 
very happy about that. She really wants to get the Lyla card, 
so she decides to buy seven more boxes and look for it. No 
matter how expensive it is, she will continue buying boxes 
until she gets the Lyla card.  
   Again, in the first box, she could not find the Lyla card. 
She also could not find the card in the second box. Now she 
thinks she will not be able to find the card this time as well 
and feels desperate. But, finally, she could find the Lyla 
card in the third box. Mizuki becomes really happy, inserts 
the Lyla card very carefully in a sleeve and adds it happily 
to her deck. However, she has no plan to use the deck to 
play Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG, but just to keep it for herself. She 
continues to open the fourth and the fifth box still excitedly, 
and finds another Lyla card in the fifth box. Thus, she 
becomes super happy again. After opening all the boxes, she 
is able to complete fully her collection of cards in the Light 
Sworn series and is very satisfied about that.  Although she 
gets more than ten same cards, she is really happy to have 
completed her goal. “. 
C. A Scenario for Moving Toward People 
   “Toty has started to play the Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG with the 
recommendation from her friend Eiji. Since Eiji has more 
experience with the Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG than her, he teaches 
her how to play and enjoy the game. Eiji takes her to a card 
shop near their homes. Eiji plays the game with the deck of 
the Elemental Hero series, and he wants to get cards from 
the Elemental Hero series. Each of them buys 10 packs. 
Then, they go back to Toty’s home together and start 
opening their packs. There is a super rare card in Toty’s 
Elemental hero series pack that he really wants to have. Eiji 
negotiates with Toty to exchange the card with him for 
another super rare cards that he currently has and she 
agrees since she does not consider to use the card in her 
deck. Toty passes the card, and asks Eiji to exchange cards 
with her again when he gets a card that she wants to have in 
the future. Then, finally, they start to play a duel.  
   Although Toty really loves playing the duel, she does not 
really understand the game’s rules yet. Thankfully to Eiji’s 
kind help and explanations after playing several duels, Toty 
increases her playing skills and understands how to use the 
super rare card she got from Eiji. They play ten duels, in 
which Toty has three wins and seven losses, but in all the 
three wins, the super rare cards that she has got from Eiji 
plays a key role. Now, it becomes dinnertime, Eiji returns to 
his house and both of them are looking forward to their next 
duel. 
   At home, Eiji starts to rearrange his deck by selecting 
some more suitable cards for dealing with the super rare 
card that Toty has in the next duel. He raises his fighting 
spirit and says to himself “Well, that deck will not lose in 
the next duels with Toty. 
   After dinner, Toty also looks carefully at the cards she has 
got from Eiji. She has enjoyed today’s duels and chats with 
Eiji a lot and is satisfied with the score, but she promises to 
herself to win the duels with Eiji next time.  
   They both had a great day and are really excited and 
looking forward to their next duels and talks about Yu-Gi-
Oh! Cards”. 
D. A Scenario for Moving Against People 
   “Tatsuo is more than 10 years advanced Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG 
player. For him, wining the duel is the most important issue, 
and he is very interested in increasing the power of his deck. 
Tatsuo has also participated in tournaments a couple of 
times. Today, he visits again one of his favorite cards shop 
and plays duels there. Since he visits the cards shop every 
week, he has some friends there to play with. They all are 
advanced players, and use a variety of decks and tactics. In 
their play, all decisions are completely effective. All of them 
know the effects of the cards by just looking at the 
illustrations of the cards, without reading any of the 
explanations. They all play the duels very seriously and 
concentrated without even chatting during the play. 
Specialized words like: “Draw”, “Summons”, “Attack”, 
“Trigger Monster Effects”, “Trigger Magic Effects”, 
“Trigger Trap Effects”, “Chain”, “Turn End” are the only 
communication among them during the play. Although 
Tatsuo is a strong player, it is not easy for him to win the 
duel today. Just one mistake would make him lose, so he 
feels great thrill for the play. He needs to predict the 
opponent player’s tactics from the opponent player’s field 
and graveyard and from the opponent’s gaze and face 
expression, and choose the most effective card towards it. 
Finally, he wins the duel and feels extremely happy and 
satisfied. Then, his friend starts a new duel with another 
player after changing his deck with a deck, which would be 
more effective for the new opponent player’s deck.  
351
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
   Some of his friends start to return to their homes and 
Tatsuo also decides to quit playing for today. He has lost two 
duels today. He analyzes the reasons to lose, and considers 
how to improve his play next time by choosing more 
appropriate and stronger card.  Immediately, he tries to buy 
that card as a used card before coming back home.  Only in 
case he cannot find the card as a used card, he will try to 
buy some new packs and look for that exact card in them. In 
such case, if he cannot find the target card in the packs, he 
will sell all the cards at the shop. Tatsuo will definitely come 
to the shop next week, and try to win all duels.” 
IV. 
THE INFLUENCE  OF VIRTUALITY THROUGH 
SCENARIO ANALYSIS: LOST REALITY 
   In the previous section, we have presented three scenarios 
for the case when players use real paper cards in the game. 
In this section we consider how scenarios change in the case 
of the DS version of the TCG that uses digitally 
implemented virtual cards. In this paper, we call lost reality 
the situation in which a player loses some of the realities, he 
feels during the play with the real paper cards, while playing 
the DS version. In this section, we consider the lost reality 
issues in the scenario of each personality. 
A. Moving Away From People 
   In the scenario described in Section III.B, the physical and 
visual value of the real paper card is essential for a player 
with this personality. As described in the scenario, the 
player can achieve a feeling of fulfillment just by the 
arrangement of the cards and by looking at them. Also, she 
feels that the twinkling super rare cards are very precious 
for her. The digitally implemented virtual cards are difficult 
to offer detailed visual information and a sense of twinkling. 
Also, in the scenario, the player obtains more than 10 same 
cards. Virtual cards lose the sense of quantity because the 
quantity is represented just as a digital number, while real 
paper cards offer the sense of the quantity as the thickness 
of the set of cards. Buying boxes of cards, opening packs 
and keeping and arranging cards in sleeves carefully is 
related to the sense of touch. However, even though virtual 
cards lose all these physical senses they have some 
advantages as well. Virtuality makes it easy to manage the 
cards, i.e., it is easy to sort the cards and keep them together. 
But, virtual cards may make the collection of cards a boring 
task.  
   Virtual economy is also one of the ways to recover the 
reality [11]. In the DS version, duel points (DP) are added to 
the game. A player can get cards by using his/her DP. DP 
can be increased in various ways in the game such as 
winning a duel with the game AI. Thus, without spending 
money on collecting cards, a player can obtain the cards 
he/she likes using his/her DP. Therefore, the will to increase 
his/her DP winning percentage encourages a player to play 
the game with the game AI or other player through a WiFi 
connection. A player with the moving away from people 
personality is  discouraged to play the game when the card 
is virtual because virtual cards decrease the player’s 
motivation to collect the cards. Introducing virtual economy 
increases the values of the cards, which offers the possibility 
to recover the motivation to play the game. 
B. Moving Toward People 
   In the scenario described in Section III.C, the player with 
the moving toward people personality considers that the 
relationship and the communication with other people are 
the most important conditions to enjoy the game. Going to a 
nearby cards shop together with a friend, visiting a friend’s 
house to play together and opening packs of cards together 
are some typical important actions in the scenario. It is not 
easy to buy cards and open packs together when using 
virtual cards. Especially, in the DS version, each player does 
these actions alone. Also, changing the rules, such as 
exchanging a card for two, is a limited action since it is hard 
to change the rules in a flexible way in the DS version. 
Moreover, it is impossible to chat with friends when playing 
the DS version remotely against them. Also, while playing a 
duel, it is difficult for friends to support each other and give 
advices to each other. 
   As described above, a play with real cards involves a duel 
that is performed by players located at the same place, who 
can communicate with each other directly. On the other 
hand, a player performing the game with virtual cards may 
lose the chance to enjoy the communication with the 
opponent player. However, if the two players are located at 
the same place, then even using the DS version of the game 
will not bring any communication difficulties to them, since 
they can see and talk to each other.  In [12], there is a 
similar discussion for the case when online RPG game is 
played among people who are located at the same place. Of 
course, the sense of physical presence increases the pleasure 
of the game, but it is more important whether the two 
players can use a rich communication channel or not. 
   A player with the personality of moving toward people 
would be mostly motivated and excited to play a duel with 
his/her opponent face-to-face. 
C. Moving Against People 
   In the scenario described in Section III.D, for the player 
with the moving against people personality, wining the 
duels is the most important pleasure and goal in the game. 
Since winning against real human is different from winning 
against game AI, a player of this type is much more satisfied 
to win duels against strong human players. However, one 
worth mentioning feature of computer games is the fact that 
it is possible for a player to reset the game by simply turning 
off the computer if the current situation and score are not 
convenient and favorable for him/her. In the scenario, the 
player feels a strong sense of thrill because just one mistake 
in his play would make him lose the duel, while in the 
virtual world, it is easy to reset the game when the game 
does not advance according to his preferences. Thus, in the 
352
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
virtual world, the sense of thrill, challenge and risk is 
decreased with the possibility to terminate or reset the game 
at any time.  
   Also, in the scenario, the player predicts the opponent 
player’s tactics and move by observing his/her gaze and face 
expressions. This reality is completely lost when players 
cannot see each other, which decreases the excitement and 
enjoyment of the game, as well as the satisfaction of 
winning the game. Moreover, since the player does not see 
the opponent player, he/she tends to easily cheat in the game.  
For example, in the DS version, the winning percentage is 
recorded, and this becomes a big incentive for the players 
with this personality to win the duels. Being determined to 
win the game, many players using the Nintendo DS, tend to 
disconnect the connection with the remote opponent player 
once they realize they might be losing the game. Currently, 
this becomes a serious problem for players who play the DS 
version, which shows that it might be difficult to maintain a 
good moral ethics in case the sense of presence of the 
opponent player is lost.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Augmented Trading Card Game. 
353
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
V. 
AUGMENTED TRADING CARD GAME 
A. Motivation and Overview of Augmented TCG 
   As described in the previous section, if the reality of a 
game is lost, the incentive to play the game and the 
enjoyment of the play decrease. For a player with the 
moving away from people personality, the lost reality of the 
physical sense of the cards decreases his/her motivation to 
collect cards. Also, for a player with the moving toward 
people personality the incentive to play a game when the 
communication between players becomes difficult or 
inactive, diminishes. And for a player with the personality 
for moving against people, the motivation to play a game 
weakens if it is impossible for him/her to look at the face of 
the opponent player in order to observe his feelings and thus 
predict his tactics and moves. Moreover, such player does 
not feel the self-esteem when other people do not see his/her 
victory. This means that it is hard for a player to create a 
story based on his/her own memories by the lost reality.  
   When analyzing a player’s intention and behavior, 
behavior economy plays an important role. Behavior 
economy demonstrates that human intention and behavior 
are greatly influenced by a frame defined for each condition 
[1]. This means that a frame defines how to offer pleasure to 
a player and also changes according to the realization of the 
game. In this section, we consider a new frame to support 
remote TCG play that covers all the personalities. The frame 
also offers the physical tangibility of paper cards. The case 
study will show our personality analysis is effective to 
analyze the pitfalls of the current game design. 
   Jean Baudrillard proposed a concept called hyper reality 
[3]. Augmented reality technologies are used to introduce 
virtuality in a game, but also they are used to increase the 
hyper reality that is lost by the virtuality. In this section, we 
present Augmented TCG, which offers one possible frame to 
play the Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG that recovers the realities lost in 
the DS version.   
   We have designed Augmented TCG taking into account 
our pre-observations and analysis of the scenarios described 
in the previous section. The basic design approach is similar 
to the one in the augmented reality games introduced in [21]. 
As shown in Fig. 2, the two players are located in different 
places. Each player’s cards (real paper cards), in his/her duel 
field on the table in front of him/her, are captured by a 
camera and projected on the opponent player’s table. Also, 
each player is represented as the 3D model of a virtual 
character used in popular animations and games, and this 
character is shown to the opponent player. In the current 
implementation, MikuMikuDance [25] is used to show the 
3D models of the virtual characters. MikuMikuDance is free 
software for creating 3D movies by using virtual characters. 
The virtual character is controlled using MS Kinect and its 
movement is synchronized with the movement and the 
behavior of the player it represents. Moreover, the two 
players can communicate with each other via Skype if 
desired, and thus it is possible for them to introduce each 
other directly instead of using virtual characters. This option 
will allow us to compare the case of the players 
communicating with each other through virtual characters 
and the case of the players directly communicating with 
each other. 
   Fig. 2 also shows a basic configuration of Augmented 
TCG. The most important design issue of Augmented TCG 
is the approach to use real paper cards not virtual cards, 
implemented digitally in a computer as shown in the figure, 
and the player performs the duel with a virtual character as 
an opponent. The system is useful to discuss the issues how 
virtual and real components in the TCG game affect the 
player’s game play. 
B. Experiments and Design Implications 
   We have conducted a user study to show some 
experiences and observations with Augmented TCG. We 
have recruited five participants who are familiar with Yu-Gi-
Oh! TCG, have more than three years experience with Yu-
Gi-Oh! TCG, and know both the paper version and the DS 
version well. Three kinds of experiments have been 
performed for each participant and each participant 
performed the duels in the experiments against one of the 
authors of the paper, who has deep knowledge about the 
TCG and could lead and control the experiment so that all 
participants play the game under the same conditions.  After 
the experiments we made an interview with the participants 
through semi structured focused group. In this subsection, 
we explain an overview of each experiment, and show some 
experiences extracted during the user studies.  
   In the first experiment, each participant played a duel 
against an opponent, represented by a virtual character, 
whose movement was synchronized with the movement of 
the opponent player by using MS Kinect. After the 
experiment a participant told us that if the virtual character 
was his favorite character, he could enjoy the duel better. 
Another participant said that he focused mostly on the 
opponent player’s card, and presenting the virtual character 
was not important for him. However, most of the 
participants claimed that the virtual character was not 
enough to feel the presence of the opponent player because 
Kinect was unable to extract face expressions and eye 
movement. Also, the movement of the virtual character was 
not natural because Kinect interpreted the movement of the 
player based on only few body points.  
   We also compared the case of the player directly seeing 
his/her real opponent player with the case of using a virtual 
character to represent the opponent player as shown in Fig. 
3. From the interview we have found that if a participant 
knows the opponent player well, then the real person view is 
more preferable and increases the reality of the game, while 
in the case of the opponent player being a stranger, some of 
the participants claim that using virtual character is 
preferable because they do not feel comfortable either 
354
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
showing themselves or seeing their opponents. A participant, 
whose personality is the moving away from people type, 
does not like to see the opponent player directly if he/she 
does not know the player well. For him/her, representing the 
opponent player as a virtual character is helpful to increase 
his/her motivation to play the duels. A participant with the 
moving toward people personality would prefer to see the 
real view of the opponent player. Therefore, the right 
representation of the opponent player depends on each 
player’s personality. Finally, for a participant whose 
personality is moving against people the real gaze and face 
expression of the opponent player is essential in order to 
predict his/her tactics and consequent moves. That is why in 
such case it does not matter whether the opponent player is 
real or is represented with a virtual character, but the most 
important is that if he/she is represented by a virtual 
character then that character should offer a gaze and a face 
expression exactly the same as the real opponent player’s 
one at that moment. The discussion teaches us that the 
reality of the virtual character is essential to satisfy and 
motivate all personalities.  
 
Figure 3. Playing against a Real Opponent Player. 
   In the second experiment, the card that the opponent 
player draws is shown on a small display near the 
participant as shown in Fig. 4. As described in the scenarios 
presented in the previous section, virtual cards significantly 
decrease the motivation and the game enjoyment for players 
with the moving away from people personality. However, if 
the opponent player’s cards are projected on the table, it 
might be hard to clearly see and understand the characters 
on them if they are too small or with low resolution and thus 
more difficult for a player to make a right decision.  That is 
why in our settlement we show the card drawn by the 
opponent on a small display near a player. However, the 
necessity of such details strongly depends on the personality 
of a player. If a player’s personality is moving away from 
people type, then he/she usually likes to win a duel because 
it is important for her/him to show the superiority of his/her 
favorite deck, but he/she may not have enough knowledge 
about other players’ cards. Hence, he/she needs to see 
enough information of the opponent player’s cards in order 
to play well. For a player with the moving toward people 
personality, winning a duel is not the most important point 
but the fact that he/she would be able to communicate and 
enjoy a game with a friend. In such case, the offered 
information by the displayed card is not so important since 
he/she can always ask his/her friend opponent for more 
information if necessary and such communication would 
even strengthen their friendship.  A player with the moving 
against people personality has a lot of knowledge for most 
of the cards and just seeing the shape of the illustration on 
the card is enough for him/her to know its functionality. 
Thus, for him/her, it is not so important to show the small 
details of the cards. However, we believe that the possibility 
to show detailed card information would have a positive 
impact on the enjoyment of the game for each personality.  
 
Figure 4. Showing a Card in a Small Display. 
   In the third experiment as shown in Fig. 5, while playing 
the game, another virtual character depicted on one of the 
player’s cards appears on a small display near the player 
once that card is drawn out of the deck, and supports and 
encourages him/her to win the game until the end of the 
game. After the experiment one of the participants said that 
it was desirable that the card depicting the character shown 
on the small display did not lose from the attack of the 
opponent player. Another participant, who was not 
interested in the character shown, told us that it would have 
been more enjoyable if his/her favorite character encouraged 
him/her. Most participants said that the presence of the 
character was enjoyable, but it was hard to consider winning 
the game just from the character’s encouragement. The 
participants’ comments showed that they were aware that 
exactly the character depicted on one of their cards appeared 
on the small display without them being informed in 
advance about this feature of the system. A player with the 
moving away from people personality feels the importance 
to show the character depicted on his/her favorite card. 
355
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Especially, a female player likes a card depicting a lovely 
character and the approach is very effective for encouraging 
her to win the duel. For a player with the moving toward 
people personality, showing such a character is also a kind 
of special effect for encouraging him/her in the duel. So, if 
the character shows the current state of the duel, i.e. wining 
or losing, it may increase the pleasure of the duel. Therefore, 
the effect should be customized for each player’s 
personality, but we believe that offering the encouraging 
effect to the duel would be useful for all personalities. 
 
Figure 5. Encouraging a Player by a Virtual Character. 
C. Discussions and Future Directions 
   In this subsection, we give some discussions on the 
observations and results obtained from the experiments with 
the Augmented TCG. In Augmented TCG, the physicality of 
the cards is the most important design decision, since virtual 
cards do not offer the sense of tangibility and thus lead to 
the loss of the reality in Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG. However, physical 
tangibility is a very important concept to offer enjoyment of 
the game to a player [8, 10]. Especially, for a player with 
moving away from people personality, collecting Yu-Gi-Oh! 
TCG cards is the most significant fount of pleasure, but 
virtual cards lose the sense of ownership and thus decrease 
the enjoyment and satisfaction of the game. However as a 
positive observation, adding virtuality may help to increase 
the empathy on the cards. For example, showing the special 
character depicted on one of the cards on a display near the 
player increases the empathy with that character. If the 
character were the player’s favorite character then playing 
together and communicating with the character during the 
game would make the game even more enjoyable and 
exciting. Furthermore, even in case the card depicting that 
character is a very rare one, the player would make a great 
effort to get the card and enjoy the interactive play with the 
character.  
   For a player with moving toward people personality, 
feeling empathy with the virtual character representing the 
opponent player is important to maintain the incentive to 
play the game. In this case, the sense of the remote player is 
an important issue. If the player knows which virtual 
character his/her friend likes, using that character to 
represent the player increases the empathy during their play 
because he/she considers playing with his/her friend. The 
effect is similar to using an avatar. If a player knows the 
avatar of his/her friends well, he/she does not distinguish the 
avatar from his/her friends. However, using virtual 
characters from games and animations may enhance the 
conversation between a player and his/her friend if both are 
interested in the stories of these characters. 
   A player with moving against people personality feels 
more excited to play against Yugi or Kaiba, which are very 
skillful players in the Yu-Gi-Oh! animation story, because 
that player has a strong motivation to win the game against 
an expert player. Then, he/she feels the illusion of playing 
the game inside the animation story. However, in this case, 
as described in the previous section, the reality of the virtual 
character is essential. Augmented TCG synchronizes the 
movement of the remote player with the movement of the 
virtual character, but to maintain the reality of Yugi and 
Kaiba, the movement needs to be modified to reflect their 
natural characteristics in the animation story.  
   In our recent projects, analyzing the personality becomes a 
common tool when designing a new service. We especially 
believe that the analysis based on a user’s personality can be 
used when designing social media. Recently, social media 
like Twitter and Facebook become very common as a tool to 
connect people and increase human creativity. However, 
from the aspect of the personality theory, the current social 
media does not support well people with the moving away 
from people personality. The scenarios analysis described in 
the paper is useful to improve the current social media for a 
larger number of people. Specifically, the personality 
analysis framework described in the paper would be useful 
to analyze the social aspect of any services, and we hope 
that the proposed approach can contribute to the progress of 
the future social media and services. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION 
   In this paper, we discussed the Yu-Gi-Oh! Trading Card 
Game, which offers two versions of playing. One is the 
version of the TCG played with paper-based cards, and the 
other is the TCG played on a computer. We discussed the 
lost reality and the lost enjoyment by playing the computer 
based TCG compared to the paper based TCG. For 
analyzing the effect of the virtuality, we proposed a 
scenarios-based analysis of a computer game based on the 
player’s personality. Our study also presented that computer 
technologies can solve the problems caused due to the 
virtuality introduced in a game by using augmented reality 
techniques. We introduce Augmented Trading Card Game, 
and describe the results of some experiments with 
Augmented TCG that show how the pitfalls in playing 
356
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
trading card game among remote players on the Internet 
could be improved. 
   Computer games attract people by creating the illusion of 
being immersed in an imaginative virtual world with 
spectacle computer graphics and sound. The goals of 
computer games are more interactive than that of traditional 
games, and it brings players a stronger desire to play the 
game. Computer games designed with an optimal level of 
information complexity can provoke players’ curiosity. 
Therefore, computer game intrinsically motivate players by 
bringing them more fantasy, challenge, and curiosity, which 
are the three main elements contributing the fun in games.  
Augmenting and virtualizing our daily life by using 
computer games is a promising way to extend traditional 
gamification. Our approach is also useful to analyze the lost 
reality of augmenting and virtualizing our daily life. We 
need to discuss these issues in our future research. 
   As a next step, it is necessary to identify metrics to analyze 
the scenarios more systematically. In [17], we identify five 
values to analyze the values of products and services and 
would like to investigate whether these metrics can be used 
to analyze the described scenarios. We need to consider how 
each value is related to the player’s personality. We may 
change the values dynamically according to the current 
player’s personality. Also, we are interested in designing 
gamification scenarios [22] based on the personalities. Each 
player’s personality requires different incentives to motivate 
a user of the gamification service. That is why, future 
gamification frameworks need to take into account how to 
successfully incentivize players depending on their specific 
personality and we believe that the personality analysis given 
in this paper would be helpful in that direction. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Dan Ariely, “Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That 
Shape Our Decisions'', Harper, 2009.  
[2] Richard Bartle, “Virtual Worlds: Why People Play”, MMP 
Game Development 
[3] Jean Baudrillard, The Consumer Society: Myths and 
Structures, Sage Publications Ltd, 1998. 
[4] Bandai Character Research Center, “Card Game as a Drama 
to Create with Friends, Dandai Character Research Center 
Jidai 
Report 
No.2, 
2001, 
http://www.chara-
labo.com/report2.pdf. (September 28 2012) 
[5] Adrian David Cheok, Kok Hwee Goh, Wei Liu, Farzam 
Farbiz, Sze Lee Teo, Hui Siang Teo, Shang Ping Lee, Yu Li, 
Siew Wan Fong and Xubo Yang, “Human Pacman: a mobile 
wide-area entertainment system based on physical, social, 
and ubiquitous computing”, In proceedings of Advances in 
Computer Entertainment Technology 2004, pp.360-161, 2004. 
[6] Wimer Hazenberg and Menno Huisman, “Meta Products: 
Buidling the Internet of Things”, BIS Publisher, 2011. 
[7] Karen Horney, “Self-Analysis'', W W Norton & Co Inc; 
Reissue, 1994. 
[8] Hiroshi Ishii and Brygg Ullmer, “Tangible Bits: Towards 
Seamless Interfaces Between People, Bits and Atoms”, In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pp.234-241, 1997. 
[9]  Takahiro Iwata, Tetsuo Yamabe and Tatsuo Nakajima, 
“Augmented Reality Go: Extending Traditional Game Play 
with Interactive Self-Learning Support”, In Proceedings of 
the 17th IEEEE Conference on Embedded and Real-Tie 
Computing Systems ad Applications, pp.105-114, 2011. 
[10] Patrick W. Jordan, “Designing Pleasurable Products: An 
Introduction to the New Human Factors”, Routledge, 2002. 
[11] Vili Lehdonvirta,  “Virtual Consumption”. Publications of the 
Turku School of Economics, A-11:2009. 
[12] Silvia Lindtner, Bonnie Nardi, Yang Wang, Scott Mainwaring, 
He Jing andWenjing Liang, “A Hybrid Cultural Ecology: 
World of Warcraft in China'', In Proceedings of the 2008 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 
pp.371-382, 2008. 
[13] Carsten Magerkurth, Adrian David Cheok, Regan L. Mandryk 
and Trond Nilsen, “Pervasive Games: Bringing Computer 
Entertainment Back to the Real World”, ACM Computer in 
Entertainment, Vol.3 , No. 3, 2005. 
[14] Tatsuo 
Nakajima 
and 
Vili 
Lehdonvirta, 
”Designing 
Motivation in Persuasive Ambient Mirrors”, Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp.107-126, 2013. 
[15] Daniel Nettle, ”Personality: What Makes You the Way You 
Are”, Oxford Univ Pr., 2009. 
[16] Mugge Ruth, Jan P. L. Schoormans, and Hendrik N. J. 
Schifferstein, “Product Attachment: Design Strategies to 
Stimulate the Emotional Bonding with Products,” in Product 
Experience, Elsevier, pp.425-440, 2007. 
[17] Mizuki 
Sakamoto, 
Tatsuo 
Nakajima 
and 
Todorka 
Alexandrova, ”Digital-Physical Hybrid Design: Harmonizing 
the Real World and the Virtual World”, In Proceedings of the 
7th International Conference and Workshop on the Design & 
Semantics of Form & Movement, pp.211-222, 2012. 
[18] Mizuki Sakamoto, Todorka Alexandrova and Tatsuo 
Nakajima, ”Augmenting Remote Trading Card Play with 
Virtual Characters used in Animation and Game Stories – 
Towards Persuasive and Ambient Transmedia Storytelling –”, 
In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 2013. 
[19] Iris Soute, Maurtis Kaptein and Panos Markopoulos, 
“Evaluating Outdoor Play for Children: Virtual vs. Tangible 
Game Objects in Pervasive Games”, In Proceedings of the 8th 
International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, 
pp.250-253, 2009. 
[20] Jane Fulton Suri, “Thoughtless Acts?”, Chronicle Books, 
2005. 
[21] Tetsuo Yamabe and Tatsuo Nakaima, “Playful Training with 
Augmented Reality Games: Case Studies towards Reality-
Oriented System Design”, Multimedia Tools and Applications, 
Vol. 62, No. 1, pp.259-286, 2013. 
[22] Gabe 
Zichermann 
and 
Christopher 
Cunningham, 
“Gamification by Design: Implementing Game Mechanics in 
Web and Mobile Apps”, O’Reilly, 2011. 
[23] CyberOne 
TCG, 
http://www.c-
1cyberone.com/official_top/official_top.html (September 28 
2012) 
[24] Duel 
Accelerator, 
http://www.yugioh-
online.net/v3/newvisitors/. (September 28 2012) 
[25] MikuMikuDance, 
http://www.geocities.jp/higuchuu4. 
(September 28 2012) 
[26] The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim, http://www.elderscrolls.com . 
(September 28 2012) 
[27] Yu-Gi-Oh! 
Trading 
Card 
Game, 
http://www.yugioh-
card.com/en/. (September 28 2012) 
 
 
357
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

