Personality Traits in the Relationship of Emotion and Performance in Command-
and-Control Environments  
 
 
Alina Schmitz-Hübsch, Sophie-Marie Stasch, Ron Becker, Sven Fuchs 
Fraunhofer Institute for Communication, Information Processing and Ergonomics FKIE 
53343 Wachtberg, Germany 
e-mail: {alina.schmitz-huebsch, sophie-marie.stasch, ron.becker, sven.fuchs}@fkie.fraunhofer.de 
 
 
Abstract—Affect-adaptive systems are capable of adapting 
human-machine interaction with respect to the current emo-
tional user state and situational needs. To set the ground for a 
future affect-adaptive system, we examined interindividual 
differences in the relationship between emotional user states – 
composed of emotional valence and arousal - and performance 
in a command-and-control environment in a lab experiment (N 
= 51, 19-57 years, M = 32.75 SD = 9.8). We suspect that ob-
served interindividual differences are caused by two personali-
ty traits: neuroticism and conscientiousness. We used personal-
ity, valence, and arousal to model task performance in a linear 
mixed-model and found significant effects for valence as a ran-
dom effect and arousal as a fixed effect. Furthermore, we 
found interaction effects with neuroticism and conscientious-
ness. Our results suggest that future affect-adaptive systems 
may benefit from considering personality traits to address in-
terindividual differences in the relationship of emotional user 
state and performance. 
 Keywords–Affective computing; Affect-adaptive systems; Affec-
tive user state; Command-and-control; Personality traits. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In human-machine interaction, critical user states, such as 
fatigue [1] or an incorrect focus of attention [2], may impair 
the performance of the human-machine system. Some adap-
tive systems permanently observe the user state and adapt 
their interaction mechanisms when critical or undesired 
states are detected to mitigate performance decrements [3]. 
This investigation focuses on the emotional user state as one 
of the dimensions in a multidimensional model of user state 
[4]. [5], such as command-and-control (C2) environments. 
Considering that emotion and performance are closely linked 
[6][7], a deeper understanding of the emotional user state and 
its correlation with performance is necessary for our goal of 
developing an affect-adaptive C2 system. In a simulated C2 
task, we examined the influence of personality traits on this 
correlation. In accordance with [8], both the valence compo-
nent and the arousal component of the emotional state were 
analyzed.  
Following this introduction, we provide theoretical back-
ground regarding the correlation of emotional user state and 
performance and the role of personality (Section 2). Section 
3 describes the method we used to investigate the research 
question.  Section 4 presents the results of the statistical 
analyses that are then discussed in Section 5.  The paper 
closes with our conclusions drawn from this investigation 
(Section 6). 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
In previous investigations [9][10], we observed remarka-
ble interindividual differences in the correlation of the emo-
tional user state and performance. While a state of low 
arousal and neutral valence was beneficial for many subjects, 
some benefitted from states of positive or negative valence. 
About 50% of the subjects did not show any association be-
tween emotional user state and performance. These results 
pose a challenge for affect-adaptive mechanisms as there 
may be a group of users that performs best in a state of neu-
tral valence, while others thrive in a positive or negative 
emotional state. An affect-adaptive system that does not con-
sider these individual differences in its adaptation mecha-
nisms could actually hinder performance, for example by 
promoting neutral valence in a subject that performs best in a 
positive state of valence. We therefore aim at testing the fea-
sibility of developing distinct Affective Response Categories 
of users that benefit from different emotional user states. An 
effective affect-adaptive system should be able to distinguish 
these categories, assign users to them, and adapt interaction 
accordingly. 
Our approach to assign users to these categories is based 
on the Appraisal Theory of Emotion [11]. According to this 
theory, emotions are caused by the appraisal of a stimulus 
and matching it with individual goals and expectations. Mul-
tiple processes like bodily sensations and situational factors 
contribute to the emotional experience [12]. We suspect that 
the individual differences observed in our previous investiga-
tions emerge at the stage of appraisal. For example, if an 
individual tends to an anger-prone appraisal style, events are 
often appraised in a way that leads to an anger experience 
[13]. Previous research indicates that personality traits have a 
key role in this process [14][15]. Personality traits are asso-
ciated with certain coping strategies for emotional states. 
Neuroticism, for example, has been associated with low per-
ceived coping ability, experience of negative emotions such 
as anxiety, and emotion-focused coping strategies. Conscien-
tiousness, on the other hand, appears to be correlated with 
problem-focused coping and high perceived coping ability 
[16]. These findings indicate that the personality-appraisal 
relationship differs between individuals and could offer an 
explanation for the interindividual differences in the correla-
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

tion of the emotional user state and performance we found in 
earlier investigations [9][10]. 
Supporting evidence for the moderating effect of person-
ality on emotional reactions is also provided by Brouwer, 
Van Schaik, Korteling, van Erp and Toet [17], who investi-
gated the relationship between conscientiousness, stress sen-
sitivity, and arousal. Subjects with a low conscientiousness 
score showed a higher increase in heart rate than subjects 
with a high conscientiousness score during a stressful situa-
tion. Additionally, Roslan et al. [18] found an increase in 
emotional arousal, measured by physiological correlates, for 
subjects scoring high on neuroticism. During a speaking 
task, subjects with high neuroticism scores showed a higher 
increase in skin conductance and heart rate than subjects 
with a low neuroticism score.  
We therefore suspect that personality traits, particularly 
neuroticism and conscientiousness, moderate the interindi-
vidual differences and would like to test the feasibility of 
determining a user’s Affective Response Category by his or 
her personality characteristics. 
1) Hypothesis 1: The emotional user state is associated 
with task performance. 
a) Higher pupil width is significantly associated with 
low performance for all subjects.  
b) The relationship between emotional 
valence 
(positive, neutral, negative) and performance varies across 
subjects. 
2) Hypothesis 2: Personality traits have a moderating 
effect on the emotion-performance relationship. 
a) There 
are 
significant 
interaction 
effects 
of 
neuroticism with valence (I) and arousal (II).  
b) There 
are 
significant 
interaction 
effects 
of 
conscientiousness with valence (I) and arousal (II). 
c) There 
are 
significant 
interaction 
effects 
of 
neuroticism and conscientiousness with valence (I) and 
arousal (II). 
The present investigation aims to test these hypotheses in 
a simulated C2 task as a step towards an affect-adaptive C2 
environment that considers individual differences in the af-
fective response.  
III. 
METHOD 
A laboratory experiment was conducted to test the hy-
potheses. 
A. Sample Description 
Fifty-one (N = 51) subjects aged 18 to 57 years 
(M = 32.75, SD = 9.8) participated in the experiment. All 
participants were employees of the Fraunhofer Institute for 
Communication, Information Processing and Ergonomics 
(FKIE) who were invited via e-mail. Thirty-three percent of 
the participants were female. Participation was not generally 
compensated, but the three best-performing subjects earned a 
voucher for motivational purposes.  
B. Experimental Task 
To simulate a C2 task, we used the Rich and Adaptable 
Test Environment for C2 (RATE) [19], a modular and scala-
ble task environment that allows for flexible design of exper-
imental tasks and customized performance scoring. Inspired 
by the Warship Commander Task [20], we developed an air 
defense task using a simulated radar display (Figure 1). In 
order to protect their own ship, participants had to perform 
three subtasks.  
1) Identify: All unknown tracks need to be assigned an 
identification (hostile, neutral or friendly) according to 
certain parameters and rules. 
2) Warn: Hostile tracks approaching the ship must be 
warned upon entering the outer safety zone.  
3) Engage: Hostile tracks entering the inner safety zone 
despite prior warning must be engaged. 
 
Figure 1.  Rich and Adaptable Test Environment (RATE) for C2 [19]. 
All participants went through a training session followed 
by twelve scenarios of varying difficulty. Each scenario last-
ed 3:30 minutes. Based on the cognitive task load model 
validated in a C2 task by de Greef and Arciszewski [21], 
difficulty levels were determined by the total number of 
tracks and the relative proportion of enemy tracks. The num-
ber of tracks in each scenario was 6, 12, 18, or 24. The rela-
tive percentage of enemy tracks was 17%, 33%, or 47%. To 
avoid sequence effects, difficulty levels were randomized 
between subjects. 
C. Variables 
1) Independent Variables:  
a) Big Five Personality Factors were assessed by the 
German version of the NEO-FFI [22]. In the present investi-
gation, we focused on conscientiousness and neuroticism 
only.  
b) Scenario difficulty varied across all twelve scenarios 
to cover a broad spectrum of difficulty levels. 
c) Emotional valence was derived from facial expres-
sions using Emotient FACET, an emotion detection tool that 
analyzes facial expressions in real time using a regular 
webcam. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

d) Emotional arousal was indicated by pupil width, 
measured with a Tobii Pro Spectrum 300 Hz eye tracker. 
2) Dependent Variables:  
Performance was assessed via a performance score that 
considered priority of the tasks, accuracy, and response time 
[17]. The score was visible in the upper left corner of the 
screen (see Figure 1), so that participants were able to assess 
their own performance at all times.  
D. Statistical Analysis 
A linear mixed-model was calculated using the lme4 
package [23] in R (Version 4.0.5) [24]. Performance was 
included as the dependent variable. The median of a time 
window of 10 seconds was calculated for the performance 
score, emotional valence values, and pupil width, respective-
ly. To control for confounding variables we included diffi-
culty level, gaming experience and age as fixed effects be-
fore adding the emotional state. Pupil width was included as 
fixed effect as we expected that higher pupil width is associ-
ated with low performance across all subjects. 
As fixed effects, we added difficulty level, gaming expe-
rience, age, and pupil width. Since previous investigations 
showed individual differences in emotional valence, classifi-
cation outcome for neutral, positive, and negative valence 
was included as random effects. Moreover, conscientious-
ness and neuroticism were included as fixed effects to test 
the moderating effect of personality on the emotion-
performance relationship.  
The lmerTest package [25] was used to test for the signif-
icance of fixed effects. The Akaike information criterion 
(AIC) was used to compare models. All independent varia-
bles were centered within subjects to perform group-mean 
centering before running the statistical analysis. All models 
were fitted with the maximum-likelihood estimation.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we describe the results of our analyses. 
A. The fixed effect model:  
The Intraclass-Correlation-Coefficient (ICC) of the ran-
dom-intercept-only-model was 0.21, showing that 21% of 
the observed variance in performance can be attributed to 
between-subject factors. The AIC of the first model was 
86092.62. The estimate of the significant intercept was 
72.87, representing the average performance value of all 
subjects across all levels of difficulty. The second model 
included difficulty level as a fixed effect. The AIC of the 
second model decreased to 75851.911, ANOVA comparison 
between the random-intercept-only-model and the second 
model showed a significant increase in model fit on a 
p < 0.001 level. Gaming experience was added as the sec-
ond fixed effect to the third model. The AIC decreased sig-
nificantly (p < 0.01) from 75651.911 to 75646.272. The 
fourth model included age as a fixed effect. The AIC of the 
fourth model decreased significantly (p < 0.001) from 
75646.272 to 75631.464. The fifth model included pupil 
width as a fixed effect. The AIC decreased from 75646.272 
to 74162.670 and was a significant improvement in model 
performance (p < 0.001), confirming H1a. 
B. The random effect model 
The addition of positive valence as a random effect de-
creased the AIC to 73765.647, the addition of neutral va-
lence decreased the AIC to 73532.586, and the addition of 
negative valence decreased the AIC to 73449.612. ANOVA 
comparison showed a significant improvement (p < 0.001) 
of each model, respectively, confirming H1b.  
C. The interaction model  
The interaction models tested the moderating effects of 
the personality traits conscientiousness and neuroticism on 
the relationship between emotions and performance. We 
tested for model improvement using ANOVA comparisons 
between the random effects model and interaction model of 
interest.  
1) Neuroticism * emotional valence 
The addition of an interaction term between positive va-
lence and neuroticism to the model increased the AIC to 
73452.544. The interaction between neutral valence and 
neuroticism increased the AIC to 73455.242. The interaction 
between negative valence and neuroticism showed an AIC 
of 73455.387. None of the interactions models showed a 
significant improvement in model fit compared to the ran-
dom effects model that included valence as a random effect.   
Therefore, the moderating influence of neuroticism on the 
relationship between valence and performance stated in H2a 
(I) was not confirmed in the current experiment. 
2) Conscientiousness * emotional valence  
The addition of an interaction term between positive va-
lence and conscientiousness to the model increased the AIC 
to 73450.694. The interaction between neutral valence and 
conscientiousness increased the AIC to 73452.165. The in-
teraction between negative valence and conscientiousness 
showed an AIC of 73452.277. Similar to the interaction 
between neuroticism and valence, none of the interactions 
models showed a significant improvement in model fit to 
the random effects model. The moderating effect of consci-
entiousness on emotional valence stated in H2b (I) was not 
confirmed in the current experiment. As neither of the per-
sonality traits interacted with valence, H2c (I) was rejected.  
3) Neuroticism * arousal 
Although neuroticism had no direct influence on perfor-
mance as a fixed effect, it significantly influenced pupil 
width. The model including an interaction between neuroti-
cism and pupil width demonstrated an AIC of 73439.335, 
representing a significant increase in model fit on a 
p < 0.001 level compared to the random effects model, con-
firming H2a (II). In low-arousal conditions, as indicated by 
smaller pupil size, participants with a low neuroticism score 
performed better than subjects with a high neuroticism score 
(see Figure 2). 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 2.  The Interaction between Pupil Width and the Personality Factor 
Neuroticism. 
4) Conscientiousness * arousal  
Similar to neuroticism, conscientiousness had no direct in-
fluence as a fixed effect on performance. However, the addi-
tion of the interaction term between conscientiousness and 
pupil width also gained a significant increase in model per-
formance. The AIC decreased significantly from 73439.335 
to 73436.082 (p < 0.05), supporting H2b (II). In high arous-
al conditions, as indicated by higher pupil size, low consci-
entiousness is associated with low performance.  
5) Neuroticism * conscientiousness * pupil width  
Given that both personality traits interacted with pupil 
width in the current experiment, a three-way interaction 
between neuroticism, conscientiousness, and pupil width 
was investigated as well. Compared to the model including 
both two-way interactions terms, the current model showed 
an AIC of 73433.829. This increase in model fit of the 
three-way interaction model compared to the model includ-
ing both two-way interactions was significant (p < 0.05), 
supporting H2c (II). Subjects scoring high on neuroticism 
and low on conscientiousness demonstrate in highly arous-
ing states, as indicated by a higher pupil size, an association 
with low performance.  
D. The final model  
The final model (see Table 1) includes the fixed effects of 
difficulty level, gaming experience, pupil width, and age, 
the random effects of emotional valence and the three-way 
interaction between neuroticism, conscientiousness, and 
pupil width. While difficulty level is a negative predictor of 
performance with an estimate of -2.58, gaming experience 
shows a positive influence on performance with an estimate 
of 2.89. Furthermore, pupil width and age are negative pre-
dictors of performance with an estimate of -34.42 and -0.41, 
respectively. While the interaction between neuroticism and 
pupil width is still significant on a p < 0.01 level, the inter-
action between conscientiousness and pupil width was no 
longer significant. However, the higher order interaction 
between neuroticism, conscientiousness, and pupil width 
explains that finding. We therefore limit the interpretation to 
the higher-order interaction. Figure 3 visualizes this three-
way interaction effect. The influence of neuroticism on pu-
pil width in the two-way interaction was positive with an 
estimate of 11.66. The inclusion of conscientiousness within 
the three-way interaction moderates this relationship by 
shifting the estimate to -3.35.  
In instances of low performance, participants with a high 
neuroticism score and a low conscientiousness score 
demonstrate a higher pupil width than subjects with a high 
neuroticism score and a high conscientiousness score (see 
Table 1 and Figure 3).  
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF FIXED EFFCTS, RANDOM EFFECTS, AND THE  
INTERACTION BETWEEN PUPIL WIDTH AND PERSONALITY 
 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 3.  The Interaction between Pupil Width and the Personality 
Factors Neuroticism and Conscientiousness. 
V. 
DISCUSSION  
We investigated the correlation of the emotional user 
state and performance in a C2 environment, as well as the 
influence of personality traits on this correlation. All three 
classifiers of emotional valence were associated with per-
formance and contributed significantly to the performance 
model as random effects. This replicates our earlier findings 
of interindividual differences in the correlation of emotion 
and performance [9][10] and confirms H1b. Unsurprisingly, 
low performance was associated with high difficulty level, 
low gaming experience, and high age. As hypothesized in 
H1a, low performance was also associated with high pupil 
width, indicating higher arousal during more demanding 
scenarios. Although conscientiousness and neuroticism 
showed no significant main effect on performance, partici-
pants with a higher neuroticism score tend to perform better 
on the task. 
We found significant improvements of model perfor-
mance when including arousal and emotional valence. Pre-
vious findings regarding the association between low con-
scientiousness [17] as well as high neuroticism [18] with 
increased arousal are in line with the results of the present 
study. Thus, it would be beneficial for affect-adaptive C2 
systems to consider both these dimensions of the emotional 
user state. However, this investigation only analyzed the 
correlational relationship of emotion and performance. To 
ensure that emotions causally influence performance, we 
suggest an experimental design that includes the induction 
of emotional user states.  
We earlier proposed to create Affective Response Cate-
gories to cluster users based on what emotional user states 
are most beneficial for their performance. This would allow 
affect-adaptive systems to adapt interactions in an appropri-
ate manner based on category membership. Our results sug-
gest that a categorization based on personality traits may be 
possible, given that we observed interaction effects of (1) 
neuroticism with arousal and performance, and (2) neuroti-
cism and conscientiousness with arousal and performance. 
In conditions of low arousal, participants that score higher 
on the neuroticism scale show lower performance compared 
to participants that score lower on the neuroticism scale. 
Therefore, we assumed that subjects with a tendency to neu-
roticism put in less effort in less demanding situations. We 
confirmed this hypothesis by analyzing the interaction effect 
of difficulty level, neuroticism, and pupil width on perfor-
mance. The results indicate that affect-adaptive systems 
should monitor participants with higher scores on neuroti-
cism closely, as they tend to lower performance in low 
arousal conditions. 
In order to further investigate this subgroup of partici-
pants, we analyzed the interaction of pupil width, neuroti-
cism, and conscientiousness on performance. Subjects with 
high neuroticism scores and high conscientiousness scores 
showed higher arousal during low performance than those 
with low conscientiousness scores. This three-way interac-
tion was significant with a negative estimate of – 3.35. 
Therefore, we suspect that more conscientious subjects in 
the subgroup of high neuroticism tried harder to counter the 
low performance state than those who are less conscien-
tious. 
We proposed that interindividual differences observed in 
our previous investigations emerged at the stage of appraisal 
and that personality traits have a key role in this process 
[14][15]. Based on the reported results, appraisal theory 
offers an explanation for differences in the correlation of 
arousal and performance. Participants that scored higher on 
neuroticism and higher in conscientiousness performed 
worse when arousal was high. Possibly, more conscientious 
participants executed tasks more carefully and required 
more time than less conscientious subjects. Especially in 
high workload scenarios that demand fast task execution in 
order to avoid score deductions, less conscientious subjects 
might have had an advantage. To test this theory, a closer 
look at accuracy and response time would be necessary to 
analyze the speed-accuracy trade-off [19].  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Our results indicate that people who differ in their per-
sonality characteristics also differ in their correlation of 
emotional arousal and performance. Participants scoring 
high on neuroticism and low on conscientiousness exhibit a 
higher arousal level than participants scoring low on neurot-
icism and high on conscientiousness.  Hence, we conclude 
that the proposed categorization by personality traits shows 
promising potential for further research.  
A starting point for how to consider personality in inter-
active systems is offered by Sarsam and Al-Samarraie [26], 
who demonstrated the benefits of integrating a user’s per-
sonality trait into the design of the user interface. Users 
scoring high on neuroticism prefer calm colors as well as 
more structured and divided texts. Furthermore, the use of a 
personality-tailored interface also increased visual attention 
during a learning task. 
An affect-adaptive system that considers Affective Re-
sponse Categories to adapt interactions according to the 
user’s individual emotional needs could assist in achieving 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

consistently high performance in a human-machine-system. 
For example, in a high workload scenario, a user belonging 
to the subgroup of high neuroticism and high conscientious-
ness might need extra support in executing the tasks at the 
required speed, as compared to a user with high neuroticism 
but low conscientiousness. In a low workload scenario, if 
the current user belongs to the “high neuroticism” subgroup, 
it may be possible – according to our results – to avoid per-
formance decrements by increasing arousal. An appropriate 
adaptation strategy might be to decrease the use of automa-
tion. With increasing workload, this user’s arousal would 
increase and performance would improve. In contrast, a user 
in the “low neuroticism” subgroup may not require adaptive 
intervention in the same situation.  
The preliminary parameters of the Affective Response 
Categories outlined herein demonstrate the feasibility for the 
creation of distinct categories and offer a starting point. In 
order to construct more holistic categories, further associa-
tions of individual characteristics and the correlation of 
emotion and performance will be necessary.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Mitja Galkin for his val-
uable contributions to the customization of the RATE task 
environment.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Åkerstedt, R. Mollard, A. Samel, M. Simons, and M. Spender, 
“The role of EUFTL legislation in reducing cumulative fatigue in 
civil aviation,” ETSC Meeting, 2003. 
[2] M. S. Young and N. A. Stanton, “Malleable attentional resources 
theory: a new explanation for the effects of mental underload on 
performance,” Hum. Factors: J. Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc., pp. 365–
375, 2002. 
[3] S. Fuchs et al., “Application-oriented realization of adaptive human-
machine interaction for safety-critical systems (ARAMIS),“ Final 
project report, grant no. E/E4BX/HA031/CF215, Fraunhofer FKIE, 
Wachtberg, 2019. 
[4] J. Schwarz and S. Fuchs,“Multidimensional real-time assessment of 
user state and performance to trigger dynamic system adaptation,“ 
International Conference on Augmented Cognition, July 2017, pp. 
383-398, Springer, Cham. 
[5] E. Hudlicka, “To feel or not to feel: The role of affect in human-
computer inter-action,” International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 
vol. 
59, 
no. 
1-2, 
pp. 
1-32, 
2003, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1071-5819(03)00047-8. 
[6] J. R. Gray, “Emotional modulation of cognitive control: Approach–
withdrawal states double-dissociate spatial from verbal two-back task 
performance,” Journal of Experimental Psychology, pp. 436–452, 
2001. 
[7] G. Tenenbaum, ”A conceptual framework for studying emotions–
cognitions–performance linkage under conditions that vary in 
perceived pressure,” Progress in Brain Research: Mind and Motion: 
The Bidirectional Link between Thought and Action,  Elsevier, pp. 
159–178, 2009. 
[8]  J. A. Russell, “A circumplex model of affect,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, vol.   39, no. 6, pp. 1161–1178, 1980. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0077714 
[9] A. Schmitz-Hübsch and S. Fuchs, “Challenges and Prospects of 
Emotional State Diagnosis in Command and Control Environments,” 
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, July 2020, 
pp. 64-75, Springer, Cham. 
[10] A. Schmitz-Hübsch, S. M. Stasch, and S. Fuchs, “Individual 
Differences in the Relationship between Emotion and Performance in 
Command-and-Control Environments,” International Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction, July 2021, in press. 
[11] R. S. Lazarus, “Emotion and adaptation,” Oxford University Press on 
Demand, 1991. 
[12] A. Moors, “Appraisal Theory of Emotion,” In: Zeigler-Hill V., 
Shackelford T. (eds) Encyclopedia of Personality and Individual 
Differences. Springer, Cham., 2017,  https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-28099-8_493-1. 
[13]  I. J., Roseman, “A model of appraisal in the emotion system,” 
Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory, methods, research, pp. 68–
91, 2001. 
[14]  E. Tong et al., “The role of the Big Five in appraisals,” Personality 
and Individual Differences,vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 513-523, 2006. 
[15] P. Kuppens and E. M. W. Tong, “An appraisal account of individual 
differences in emotional experience,” Social and Personality 
Psychology Compass, vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 1138–1150, 2010. 
[16] J. A. Penley and J. Tomaka, ”Associations among the Big Five, 
emotional responses, and coping with acute stress,” Personality and 
Individual Differences, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 1215–1228 , 2002. 
[17] A. M. Brouwer, M. G. Van Schaik, J. H. Korteling, J. B. van Erp and 
A. Toet, “Neuroticism, extraversion, conscientiousness and stress: 
physiological correlates,“ IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. Vol. 6, no.2, 
pp. 109–117, 2014. 
[18] N. S. Roslan et al., “An Investigation of Physiological Correlates of 
Neuroticism During Speaking Task: A Preliminary Study,“ In 2018 
IEEE-EMBS Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Sciences, 
IECBES, Dec. 2018, pp. 515-519, IEEE. 
[19] R. Becker, S. M. Stasch, A. Schmitz-Hübsch, and S. Fuchs, 
“Quantitative Scoring System to assess Performance in Experimental 
Environments,” International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions, July 2021, in press. 
[20] Warship Commander 4.4; Computer Software; San Diego, CA: 
Pacific Science & Engineering Group; 2003. 
[21] T. D. Greef and H. Arciszewski, ”Triggering adaptive automation in 
naval command and control,” Frontiers in adaptive control, 2009. 
[22] P. Borkenau and F. Ostendorf, ”NEO-FFI : NEO-Fünf-Faktoren-
Inventar nach Costa und McCrae,” Manual, 2nd ed., Göttingen: 
Hogrefe, 2008. 
[23] D. Bates, M. Mächler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker, “Fitting Linear 
Mixed-Effects 
Models 
Using 
lme4,” Journal 
of 
Statistical 
Software, vol. 67, no.1, pp. 1–48,  2015. doi: 10.18637/jss.v067.i01 
[24] R Core Team, ”R: A language and environment for statistical 
computing,” R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, 
Austria, 2021, [retrieved: March, 2021 from https://www.R-
project.org/]. 
[25] A. Kuznetsova, P. B. Brockhoff, and R. H. B. Christensen, “lmerTest 
Package: Tests in Linear Mixed Effects Models,” Journal of 
Statistical 
Software, 
vol. 
 82, 
no. 
13, 
pp. 
1–26, 
2017 
doi: 10.18637/jss.v082.i13. 
[26] S. M. Sarsam, and H. Al-Samarraie, “Towards incorporating 
personality into the design of an interface: a method for facilitating 
users’ interaction with the display,“ User Model User-Adap Inter 28, 
pp. 75–96, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-018-9201-1 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

