Interactions with Projected Augmented Relief Models (PARM) 
 
Nachnoer Arss 
School of Geography 
University of Nottingham 
Nottingham, United Kingdom 
e-mail: 
lgxnna@nottingham.ac.uk 
Alastair D. Smith 
School of Psychology 
University of Nottingham 
Nottingham, United Kingdom 
e-mail: 
alastair.smith@nottingham.ac.uk 
 
Gary Priestnall 
School of Geography 
University of Nottingham 
Nottingham, United Kingdom 
e-mail: 
gary.priestnall@nottingham.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—Techniques for enhancing physical landscape models 
with 
dynamic 
maps 
and 
imagery, 
termed 
Projected 
Augmented Relief Models (PARM), are part of a revival of 
interest in the power of relief models as tools for geographic 
visualization. This method enables the creation of dynamic and 
engaging public displays, which appear attractive but also 
promote discussion and interaction as revealed through direct 
observation and video. This paper explores the capabilities of 
physical relief models as tangible displays for geographic 
information, and considers the role of interaction using the 
Kinect sensor for finger detection. The focus of interaction is 
on making solid landscape models of real geographic areas 
reactive to touch. 
 
Keywords: Physical 3D model; augmented reality; landscape 
visualisation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
From ancient times, geographic visualization has played 
a significant role in human life and it has become even more 
popular during the digital age. The evidence of ancient 
people using geographic visualization includes cave 
paintings and carvings that look like maps. The techniques 
of map creation have continually developed to make human 
life easier by supporting many daily activities, as well as 
being of fundamental importance to diplomacy and defence 
from the early modern period.  
In the past, people drew maps using cartographic 
methods in 2-dimensional (2D) form to represent the terrain 
of the earth. They developed these methods further and 
visualized the landscape in 3-dimensional (3D) models, 
some of the earliest examples being for military purposes 
[1]. This kind of model was considered the most 
representative ‘map’ before the digital era. 
The starting point of digital technology was between the 
late 1950s and the early 1970s, during which time 
technology developed rapidly in every field, including 
geography. The development of mapping technology started 
with field data acquisition, data processing and data 
representation. Drawing maps using digital technology 
helps users produce maps faster and more precisely, and the 
development of geographical information systems combined 
spatial analysis with map making. However, such complex 
maps remained the preserve of specialists until the late 
1990s, when the increasing popularity and use of the 
internet popularized digital 
maps and 
made them 
increasingly desirable and useful. In contrast, developments 
in geographic physical models were not as rapid as with 
digital maps, being considered less practical for many 
applications despite their inherent value as representations 
of terrain. 
Since the turn of the 21st Century, the nature of 3D 
physical geographic models has become more dynamic and 
there has been a revival in their use, in part due to 
technologies to increase their interactivity. The Illuminating 
Clay project [2] illustrated how landscape models made 
from clay could be manipulated by hand and the resulting 
changes in the surface model detected, triggering new 
contour and water flow maps that could be projected back 
on to the model. TanGeoMS [3] used a malleable surface 
model connected to the GRASS Geographical Information 
System (GIS). The Illuminating Clay approach was further 
extended to use sand as a more modifiable surface in the 
Augmented Realty Sandbox (Fig. 1) which has been used in 
an educational context to engage students with topographic 
mapping and earth science [4].   
 
 
 
Figure 1: The Augmented Reality Sandbox. Sandbox unit when not in 
operation (left).  In operation with projected contours and water flow 
(right) [4]. 
 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Whilst the ability to manipulate surface models offers a 
powerful environment for education and outreach in relation 
to generic landform and process relationships [5] there are 
contexts where more geographically specific models are 
required. Solid relief models are able to replicate details of 
real geographic environments, with digital elevation data 
being used to manufacture faithful representations of the 
terrain. It is easier than ever before to produce physical 
models either through subtractive techniques like milling or 
additive techniques like 3D printing, where layers of 
material build up a surface. Today accurate physical relief 
models are produced commercially, including examples by 
manufacturers such as Solid Terrain Modelling [6] and 
Howard Models [7]. At certain scales it is possible to 
represent surface features like buildings to allow urban 
environments to be visualised. Conventional relief models 
are static in terms of surface texture, typically painted to 
reflect the land cover. When augmented with projection, 
solid models can allow alternative forms of information to 
be displayed, but are generally limited in terms of 
interaction except where buttons around the model 
illuminate certain points of interest within the model.  
In terms of interactivity the sandbox approach used the 
Kinect sensor, initially introduced by Microsoft to support 
the Xbox games console, to detect deformations of the 
surface, as well as to detect certain gestures for example to 
instigate rainfall over the model. For solid models the 
interaction could involve making the static surface 
responsive to touch. This could trigger certain algorithmic 
responses for example to route water from that point or to 
display a visibility map (or view-shed) but could also 
simply act as a query operation to display information about 
that place on the model. 
This paper describes work in progress towards exploring 
the potential of making solid relief models more dynamic in 
terms of surface representation and interactivity.  It 
describes an experimental approach building upon previous 
work to develop the Projection Augmented Relief Model 
(PARM) technique for public display, as described by 
Priestnall et al [8]. The investigation aims to examine 
whether they offer measurable benefits for the presentation 
of geographic information to people, and whether people’s 
expectations of interactivity can be addressed, so that 
interaction delivers geographic information that is best 
suited to the needs of the viewer. In particular the potential 
for adding a degree of interaction so the solid model 
responds to touch, exploiting the ability of the Kinect sensor 
to detect the position of the finger [9] is being explored. 
 
II. PROJECTION ONTO SOLID RELIEF MODELS 
Projection onto solid objects [10] effectively allows 
dynamic texture maps to be applied to physical models in 
the real world as might be applied to virtual models. These 
textures could be a series of static images of video. An 
example of a landscape model being textured by video is the 
Dresden Elbe Valley model exhibited in Dresden Museum 
[11]. A solid terrain model measuring 2m x 1.5m was 
augmented by a film showing the development of the area 
since the year 8000 BC.  
The development of design and evaluation protocols for 
projecting detailed spatially referenced information onto 
equally detailed static physical landscape models has been 
the focus of the PARM project (Fig. 2). The typical PARM 
configuration comprises a physical landscape model, a 
projector, a monitor to display related information and a 
computer to synchronise digital map and image content 
across model and monitor. The combination of model and 
projected content creates a holographic effect that has been 
seen to be both engaging and informative for viewers, 
enabling them to explore the model by inspecting it closely 
from different angles or taking in the broader overview. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Projection Augmented Relief Model (PARM): Tangible Displays 
for Geographic Information. A selection of data layers used for projection 
(upper left); demonstrating at a community event at the University of 
Nottingham, 2011 (upper right and bottom) [8]. 
 
An opportunity to study PARM in a public context over a 
long period of time came with the Spots of Time display at 
the Wordsworth Trust gallery in Grasmere, Cumbria, UK. 
The model was used to represent key events in the childhood 
of the poet William Wordsworth (1770 – 1850), connecting 
them with particular parts of the landscape. Furthermore, 
those key events also related to poetry that Wordsworth 
created in adulthood, notably The Prelude. The purpose of 
the model was not only to raise the awareness of the 
importance of place and memory in Wordsworth's work, but 
also to encourage the visitor to study the original 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

manuscripts on display elsewhere in the gallery. The PARM 
configuration used for this display also features a touch 
screen to trigger three separate projected sequences and an 
audio shower above the display to allow passages from the 
poems to be played aloud. 
The Spots of Time display was in the gallery for over nine 
months and for around four weeks video observation was 
undertaken at the display, in addition to direct observation in 
the gallery. The observation data showed the display was 
effective in holding visitor attention but also for promoting 
discussion, often accompanied by pointing or tracing 
gestures. Even though the model surface itself was not 
interactive there seemed to be an expectation from some 
visitors of some kind of touch sensitivity, especially when 
certain landscape features were highlighted through 
projection (Fig. 3). 
 
 
Figure 3: Finger-based interactions observed from video analysis of the 
Spots of Time display 
 
 
The Spots of Time display went some way towards 
demonstrating that physical relief models offer viewers a 
rapid overview of a landscape with the added attraction of 
physical touch. There is clearly potential for some form of 
touch-based interaction to extend the capabilities of 
techniques such as PARM. To underpin this it would be 
valuable to understand more about the particular aspects of 
physical models that proved effective, for example in 
increasing people’s ability to orient themselves, to measure 
distances or relative elevations, and to achieve a quick 
understanding of a location or recognizing landmarks. A set 
of experiments is being undertaken to establish whether 
such subtle measurable differences can be observed. 
 
III. 
EXPLORING THE CAPABILITIES OF PARM 
A first experiment was designed to explore PARM’s 
capabilities in the portrayal of relief features using the 
model of the Lake District used in the Spots of Time display. 
The experiment posed questions of participants about 
topographic characteristics on both the relief model and a 
flat surface. A number of different measures were designed 
to gauge people’s understanding of the landscape form in an 
attempt to unpick the elements that could be seen as 
contributing to the viewer’s spatial frame of reference, these 
were: 
 
Deciding which of two points was the highest 
 
Deciding which of two lines was the steepest 
 
Deciding which of two target points would receive 
water flow from a single origin point 
 
Deciding which of two target points was visible 
from one observer point  
 
Deciding 
which 
cone 
of 
vision 
symbol 
corresponded to a first person perspective image 
shown on screen 
These measures therefore ranged from a simple 
comparison of two local topographic characteristics to more 
complex measures which required a degree of landscape 
interpretation, and in the case of the cone of vision the 
ability to take the perspective of viewers ‘on the landscape’. 
As well as the projected shapes to implement the above tests 
the backdrop images on the model were also a variable. 
Earlier observation had indicated a number of projected 
backdrop textures were effective but it was of interest here 
to establish if they helped viewers make judgements about 
various characteristics of the landscape. These backdrop 
images were a satellite image, a hillshade effect image, a 
map including contours and a subdued version of the 
hillshade image.   
In order to assess whether there were benefits to adding a 
third dimension a core manipulation was to present half of 
the questions about landscape characteristics over the relief 
model, then the other half over a flat surface. The order of 
presentation was counterbalanced across all participants and 
questions were fully randomized. From observation of a 
pilot study the viewing position of each participant was not 
the same, so it was decided that the participants’ head and 
body movement should be restricted to control against some 
participants gaining additional information from changing 
their perspective (Fig. 4) even though in practice this would 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

be common, and is one of the virtues of having free 
movement around a relief model. 
 
 
 
Figure 4: The environment for PARM experimentation. 
 
Outcomes from ongoing analysis suggest that for all 
measures the relief model generated more accurate 
performance across participants particularly when the 
satellite image was the backdrop. The model proved 
particularly effective in terms of accuracy of response when 
asking participants to interpret the landscape scene, 
particularly the judgement of water-flow, the cone of vision 
test and intervisibility. Overall response times were slower 
for these tests than simple height comparisons, though were 
quicker for the model than the map. This may suggest that 
the extra information provided by the physicality of the 
model allows viewers to construct more complex cognitive 
models more effectively to support their decisions. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The Nottingham University Park Campus Model. 
 
Since the model in this first experiment was an 
unfamiliar environment to most participants, an ongoing 
follow-up study uses a model that represents a familiar area, 
so that we can observe whether existing knowledge affects 
the utility of PARM. Here we modelled the University Park 
Campus at the University of Nottingham (Fig. 5). As well as 
being a familiar environment for participants, the scale and 
the nature of the data (airborne laser-scanning) also meant 
that the model was able to represent major buildings and 
landmarks. Questions were based on the measures from the 
first experiment but adapted for the current environment. 
Early results suggest that the model is most effective in 
supporting cone of vision judgements along 
with 
assessments of intervisibility. We are also interested in the 
ability of participants to judge the location of newer 
buildings that are not represented on the model, and there is 
evidence to suggest that PARM facilitates accuracy for this 
task, compared to the flat equivalent. 
 
IV. 
INTERACTING WITH PARM 
A third experiment is focussing on direct interaction 
with the model surface, in particular to establish whether 
finger point detection algorithms can be used to identify the 
coordinate where a finger touches the model. This kind of 
interaction had been observed at the Spots of Time display 
when there was no prompt to interact and no mechanism to 
offer a response. The aim is to explore whether the Kinect 
sensor could be exploited to identify the last position of the 
finger when it touches the model and whether this offers an 
accuracy which is fit-for-purpose for general geographical 
query or even analytical activities. 
The PARM rig for this experiment has the addition of 
the Kinect sensor mounted 47cm above the relief model. 
From experimentation (Fig. 6) this proved to be the most 
effective distance to discriminate the finger location. The 
projector is an Optoma HD131Xe mounted 2m above the 
model which measured 60cm x 60cm. The specification of 
the computer is an AMD FX-6100 of processor, 16 Gb of 
memory DDR3 and 4 Gb NVidia GeForce GTX 970 
graphic card. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Distance between Kinect sensor and PARM, from top to bottom, 
47 cm, 51 cm, 37 cm, shown variations in ability to detect fingertips. The 
coordinates of the finger as it approaches the model can be tracked and the 
last coordinate recorded before the finger merges with the model object is 
indicated in blue (right). 
 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Sequences of finger point coordinates are detected as the 
finger approaches the model and the last coordinate in 
theory represents the position of the model just before it 
merges with the model. Early experimentation suggests the 
accuracy of this finger point touch detection is in the range 
of 1.5 – 2.5cm. A full and rigorous test will be conducted to 
explore the repeatability and robustness of this process by 
projecting randomized points of interest over the models 
and recording finger touch coordinates against the known 
target coordinates. These points should include a wide range 
of conditions over the model that represent typical points of 
interest which for rural models may include mountain peaks 
and valleys and for urban models may include buildings and 
flat areas between buildings. The aim is to assess how the 
accuracy of touch relates to the scale of geographical 
features represented on the model. This would inform both 
the design of future interactive PARM models and also the 
nature of any interaction design built in to the system. The 
proposed query interface (Fig. 7) includes a projected 
information panel beside the model so touch actions can 
trigger responses in terms of information about the object 
queried so as to confirm this response matched the user’s 
expectations.  
V. 
FURTHER POSSIBILITIES 
The discussion of previous research presented above 
indicates a niche between geospatial visualization, spatial 
cognition and tangible interface that requires further 
research to improve human perception about topographical 
surfaces in relation to certain potential application domains. 
Interactions could relate to simple query operations but 
could also be task-driven. There are many possible 
application to explore including: Storytelling in a cultural 
heritage setting; Military training; Disaster management 
simulation and awareness (for example flooding); Route 
planning and tourist orientation, showing visitors the shape 
of the landscape and relative positions of features of interest 
around them.  
 
 
 
Figure 7. Proposed query interface 
Tablet-based Augmented Reality (for example AR 
Toolkit) could also be explored in order to add dynamic 3D 
content to augment the projected surface. This could be used 
to explore elements with a vertical dimension that cannot 
easily be portrayed using projected images over the model, 
for example volcanic eruptions, tornadoes, or glaciation. 
One could also simulate past structures on the surface, such 
as reconstructing building structures over their landscape 
footprint. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
This work has begun to demonstrate that solid relief 
models of real geographic environments can be usefully 
augmented with projection, and that there is some potential 
for detecting finger point touch on the model surface. 
Experiments that attempt to isolate the most useful aspects of 
physical relief models in judging landscape characteristics 
have suggested that models may support more complex 
understandings of topographic form. Observations of 
displays have also indicated some expectation of touch-based 
interaction and early experiments with the Kinect sensor 
show some promise. The accuracy of such touch interactions 
need to be fully investigated and assessed against the scale of 
object in the model that would be the focus of such actions.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is funded by Indonesia Ministry of 
Research, Technology and Higher Education (Kementrian 
Riset, Teknologi dan Pendidikan Tinggi) and supported by 
Indonesia Geospatial Information Agency (Badan Informasi 
Geospasial) 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A.W Pearson, “Allied military model making during world 
war II”,  Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 
vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 227-241, 2002. 
[2] B. Piper, C. Ratti, and H. Ishii, “Illuminating clay: a 3-d 
tangible interface for landscape analysis”. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, 355-362, 2002. 
[3] L. G. Tateosian, H. Mitasova, B.A. Harmon, B. Fogleman, K. 
Weaver, and R.S. Harmon, “Tangible geospatial modeling 
system”. IEEE Transactions on Visualization & Computer 
Graphics 16, 6: 1605-1612, 2010. 
[4] K. Oliver, “Augmented reality sandbox”. Institute Data 
Analysis and Visualization (IDAV). Retrieved February 19, 
2017, available  from http://idav.ucdavis.edu/~okreylos/ 
ResDev/SARndbox/, 2012 
[5] T. L. Woods, S. Reed, S. Hsi, J.A. Woods, and M.R. Woods, 
“Pilot study using the augmented reality sandbox to teach 
topographic maps and surficial processes in introductory 
geology labs”, Journal of Geoscience Education, vol. 64, pp. 
199–214, 2016. 
[6] Solid Terrain Models, Solid Terrain Models,  Retrieved 
February 
19, 
2017, 
available 
from: 
http://www. 
solidterrainmodeling. com 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[7] E. Howard, “Architectural models, renderings, terrain models 
- howard models”. Retrieved February 19, 2017, available 
from http://www.howardmodels.com/index.html, 2014 
[8] G. Priestnall, J. Gardiner, J. Durrant, and J. Goulding, 
“Projection augmented relief models (PARM): Tangible 
Displays 
for 
Geographic 
Information”. 
Electronic 
Visualisation and the Arts, 180-187, 2012 
[9] A. Kulshreshth, C. Zorn, and J. J. LaViola Jr.,  “Real-time 
markerless kinect based finger tracking and hand gesture 
recognition for HCI”. In IEEE Symposium on 3D User 
Interfaces 2013, 187-188, 2013 
[10] P. Dalsgaard and K. Halskov, “3D projection on physical 
objects: design insights from five real life cases”, In Proc 
CHI. ACM Press, pp. 1041-1050, 2011. 
[11] T. Hahmann, C. Eisfeldwer, and M. F. Buchroithner, 
“Cartographic 
representation 
of 
dresden's 
historical 
development by projecting a movie onto a solid terrain 
model”. In True-3D in Cartography: Auto stereoscopic and 
solid visualization of geodata (revised ed.), Manfred 
Buchroithner (Ed.). Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 281-296, 
2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

