Development of the Support Tool Preventing Violations in Nuclear Power Plants 
 
Dawoon Jeong, Sung H. Han, Dong Yeong Jeong, Bora Kang 
Department of Industrial & Management Engineering 
POSTECH 
Pohang, Republic of Korea 
email: {jdw0303, shan, comnet924, purple31}@postech.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract— The aim of this study is to develop guidelines and 
the support tool for preventing violations in nuclear power 
plants and to evaluate the effects of developed support tool. 
Nuclear industry needs ways to prevent violations, which is one 
of human errors. Human error is the major reason of nuclear 
accidents which result in a global impact. For fundamental and 
effective prevention of human errors, approach by types of 
human errors is needed. For idea generation, morphological 
analysis and brainstorming were conducted. Guidelines were 
used as one factor of morphological analysis for support tool 
idea generation. Six high scored ideas of support tool functions 
in feasibility were developed into smart safety helmet. Effects 
of developed smart safety helmet were evaluated through 
interview and survey. Participants responded positively in 
usability and effectiveness. The result of this study can be used 
for preventing violations in nuclear power plants. Also it is 
applicable to various industry where workers wear a safety 
helmet. 
Keywords-violations; nuclear power plant; prevention; 
support tool; guidelines; safety helmet; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The accident at a nuclear power plant is very rare [1]; 
however, it can lead severe damage [2]. The results of the 
nuclear accident are not only death of workers and 
neighborhood residents, but also contamination of soil and 
water. Neighboring countries can also suffer from the 
radiation leakage issues [3]. Typological approach of 
accident causes is needed to find effective ways preventing 
nuclear accidents. 
Human error is one of the reasons of nuclear accident. It 
is usually classified under ‘slips and lapses’, ‘mistakes’, and 
‘violation’ [4]. This study focuses on ‘violation’ because 
research about ‘slips and lapses’ and ‘mistakes’ is relatively 
popular [5][6][7]. For example, Itoh et al [8] considered only 
slips and mistakes for understanding of internal mechanisms 
on a man-machine interface used by nuclear power plant 
operators. Also, Yun and Lee [9] evaluated only safety of 
smart mobile from slips or mistakes of workers in nuclear 
power plants. 
Although research about violations is not popular, basic 
research about violation was carried out through defining 
violation based on failure analyses [10] and classifying types 
of violations [11]. However, the practical approach is 
necessary for preventing violations because present violation 
prevention methods such as campaign and posters are limited 
to activate workers. One of the practical approach is the 
support tool based on Internet Of Things(IoT). IoT can 
collect workers’ information through sensors and give 
feedback on their work behavior. Also, IoT can lead hands-
free communication among workers so it could catch their 
violation and make them stop to do violation. Moreover, IoT 
support tools enable workers to communicate each other and 
check progress of task frequently. Thus, data from IoT 
devices can be used for current violation analysis and 
personalized task suggestion. Accordingly, IoT can make 
smart workplace of the nuclear power plant. 
Therefore, this study developed guidelines and the 
support tool preventing violations in nuclear power plants 
and evaluated the effects of the support tool. This research 
focused on routine violations. Routine violation can be 
happened more frequently than other types of violation in 
nuclear power plants. To generate ideas of guidelines and 
support tool, morphological analysis(MA) and brainstorming 
were used. Support tool is mainly for operators and 
test/repair workers who are work at the coalface.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Research process 
The research process is shown as Figure 1. This paper 
explains the study step-by-step. 
II. 
DEVELOPMENT OF GUIDELINES FOR PREVENTING 
VIOLATIONS IN NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS 
First, three user experience(UX) engineering experts 
developed the guideline ideas for preventing routine 
violations in nuclear power plants. They used MA and 
brainstorming for idea generation. 
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A. Ideation by morphological analysis and brainstorming 
MA is one of idea generation tools by combining factors 
which stimulate ideas. This method is effective when 
generating ideas for solving problems because as many as 
possible number of cases can be considered [12][13]. The 
factors used for achieving guideline ideas are three; 
organization-related 
violation 
characteristics, occurring 
mechanisms of routine violation, and job types. Kang et al. 
[10], which is a prior study founded organization-related 
characteristics(OC) and occurring mechanisms of routine 
violation. 
In this study, OC which is composed of 11 factors about 
operation 
of 
organization/safety 
and 
3 
factors 
in 
education/training and 3 occurring mechanisms of routine 
violation were combined. After that, possible combinations 
and three job types in the nuclear power plant were 
combined to generate ideas. 
Additionally, experts conducted brainstorming based on 
the causes and definition of routine violation. Consequently, 
total 58 ideas were derived. 
B. Evaluation of ideas 
Three UX experts evaluated ideas using 3-point Likert 
scale based on the viability and suitability. Poor ideas were 
ruled out and then 30 ideas were derived. 
These ideas were developed as guidelines. One example 
of guidelines is “design interface in workspace through 
worker-centric ergonomic design to conduct tasks according 
to manual easily”. 
III. 
DEVELOPMENT OF SUPPORT TOOL IDEAS 
PREVENTING VIOLATIONS IN NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS 
A. Ideation by morphological analysis and brainstorming 
Three UX engineering experts chose the three factors for 
MA; form factor of support tools, types of support functions, 
and guidelines in section 2. Support tool ideas were derived 
by combining these three factors. 
The form factor of support tools means device or tool 
such as smartphone/tablet, safety helmet, and big display to 
realize functional ideas. Also, the types of support function 
refers to functional role of the idea such as provision of 
information, monitoring/feedback, and reporting system. The 
20 form factors of support tools and 6 types of support 
function were collected from the literature about preventing 
human error in various fields such as information and 
communication and safety engineering and industrial fields 
such as construction, shipbuilding, and chemistry. 
Guidelines for preventing violations are the result of 
section 2. Similar guidelines in 30 guidelines were merged 
into 8 guidelines. Then, this eight guidelines were used in 
MA. 
For efficient process of support tool idea generation, the 
form factor of support tools was combined with support 
function. Then, 67 possible combinations between them were 
combined with guidelines. 74 ideas were deducted from MA. 
Brainstorming was additionally conducted to supplement 
ideas. Violation occurrence situations were derived and 
classified as cue in brainstorming session. 13 situations were 
drawn from analysis of 27 representative cases of nuclear 
accidents in Republic of Korea by human error since 2005. 
Furthermore, seven situations were extracted from industrial 
accidents by human error in recent five years. Based on these 
20 situations, researchers brainstormed 16 ideas. 
B. Evaluation of ideas 
Researchers evaluated ideas by feasibility. Feasibility 
means how easy the idea be realized technically. This is 
because ideas which can be conducted a spot inspection 
should be prototyped. Three UX experts assessed ideas using 
5-point Likert scale. Ideas over 3.5 average points in 
feasibility were selected.  
IV. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE SUPPORT TOOL AS A SAFETY 
HELMET  
A. Selection of the form factor of the support tool after a 
field trip on the nuclear power plant 
The ideas which were generated using one specific form 
factor can be matched with other form factors. For example, 
the idea; “The support tool gives warning to the cofactors 
when they becomes far away from each other” was derived 
based on a wearable band. However, this idea can be applied 
to 
other 
form 
factors 
such 
as 
safety 
helmet, 
smartphone/tablet, and emergency beeper. For that reason, 
the ideas were matched with all possible form factors 
thorough discussion. 
To select the form factor of the support tool, researchers 
visited the nuclear power plant. After the field trip, safety 
helmet was selected as the form factor of the support tool. 
This is because safety helmet is existing protect equipment. 
Accordingly, workers would feel less burdensome than other 
form factors such as wearable band and emergency beeper. 
Also, workers should wear the safety helmet in workplace in 
nuclear power plants. Therefore, applicable place is more 
various than other form factors such as large displays and 
smartphone/tablet. 
B. Selection of functional support tool ideas through the 
interview with a worker in a nuclear power plant 
Interview with a worker in the nuclear power plant was 
conducted to consider viability of functional ideas of the 
safety helmet. 
Based on the interview, researchers exclude functions 
which already existent and are unnecessary. In case of ideas 
related to wireless communications, interviewee said that 
they were hard to be applied because of technological 
problem such as interference. However, technological 
problem 
could 
be 
solved 
after 
the 
technological 
developments naturally. Therefore, we included ideas which 
cannot be applied because of technology. Selected functional 
ideas are shown in Table 1. 
 
 
 
 
294
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.  
SELECTED FUNCTIONAL SUPPORT TOOL IDEAS 
Types of 
Functional Ideas 
Functional Ideas 
Management 
of 
wearing a safety 
helmet 
• 
Turn on/off of the safety helmet when a 
worker contacts the safety helmet to a 
terminal on entrance/exits 
• 
Warning 10 seconds after when a worker 
takes off the safety helmet 
• 
Providing voice message about safety when 
a worker wears/takes off the safety helmet 
• 
Sensing health information of a worker 
through sensors in the safety helmet and 
providing the information for health care 
Communication 
aid 
• 
Communication with workers within 
certain distance 
• 
Communication with workers in certain 
workplace 
• 
One to one communication 
• 
Communication between a supervisor and a 
worker periodically for checking attention 
to work 
Assistance 
in 
Maintaining 
of 
distance 
among 
workers 
• 
Warning if workers are too far apart for 
maintaining distance among them during 
cooperation work 
 
C. Prototype of the support tool 
Selected of functional support tool ideas realized in form 
of the safety helmet(Figure 2, Figure 3). It has sensors on the 
forehead part and headset. Display which shows health 
information was made. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Prototype of the support tool(Safety helmet) 
 
Figure 3.  Prototype of the support tool(Terminal) 
TABLE II.  
FUNCTIONS OF THE SUPPORT TOOL 
Types of 
Functions 
Functions 
Management 
of 
wearing a safety 
helmet 
• 
Warning and providing messages about 
safety when a worker does not wear the 
safety helmet during 10 seconds 
• 
Warning and providing messages about 
safety when a chin strap comes untied 
Wireless 
communication 
• 
Communication with a cooperator 
• 
Communication between a director and a 
worker 
Assistance 
in 
Maintaining 
of 
distance 
among 
workers 
• 
Warning if the distance among workers 
over 10 meters 
Health care 
• 
Providing health information such as heart 
rate and oxygen saturation when a worker 
contact the safety helmet to the terminal on 
entrance/exit 
 
Functions were refined as Table 2 because of time and 
cost. 
V. 
EVALUATION OF EFFECTS OF DEVELOPED SAFETY 
HELMET 
The experiment including interview and survey was 
conducted to evaluate effects of the prototype of the support 
tool. Eight workers participated and they wear a safety 
helmet during working in the nuclear power plant. Their 
work experience is over one year. The average of work 
experience is 5.69 years and standard deviation(s.d.) is 4.28 
years. They are all male and their average age is 37.38 and 
s.d. of age is 7.67. 
The experiment was progressed as Fig. 4. Subjects 
listened to explanation about the support tool and then 
operated it himself for understanding. In the interview, they 
said pros and cons of functions of the support tool freely 
based on experience in the previous stage. Also they should 
try all functions again. Therefore, they could consider 
usability and effectiveness of preventing violations. After the 
interview, the survey was conducted. The survey was 
composed of questions about usability and effectiveness of 
violation preventive functions. Participants answered in 5-
point Likert scale. Detail questions in the survey are shown 
in Table 3. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Process of the experiment 
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE III.  
CONTENTS OF SURVEY 
Question 
No. 
Description 
1 
The sound of warning messages to wear a safety helmet is 
clearly heard. 
2 
Warning messages to wear a safety helmet will reduce cases 
that a worker does not wear a safety helmet. 
3 
The way to check health information of the worker such as 
heart rate and oxygen saturation is easy to learn and memorize. 
4 
A worker can check his/her health information such as heart 
rate and oxygen saturation clearly on the display. 
5 
A worker can check his/her health information such as heart 
rate and oxygen saturation easily and quickly on the display. 
6 
Health care function can induce workers to wear a safety 
helmet. 
7 
The sound of warning messages to maintain distance among 
workers is clearly heard. 
8 
Warning messages to maintain distance among workers will 
reduce cases that a worker works individually during 
cooperative work. 
9 
The way to use voice communication function is easy to learn 
and memorize. 
10 
Information about status of voice communication function is 
clearly provided. 
11 
A worker can use voice communication function easily and 
quickly. 
12 
Voice communication function can reduce cases of not 
checking working status between a work director and a field 
worker. 
13 
The sound of voice messages before/after the work is clearly 
heard. 
14 
Voice messages before/after the work can raise safety 
consciousness. 
15 
This safety helmet will reduce violations which happen 
routinely such as not wearing a safety helmet, unchecking work 
status, and working individually during cooperative work. 
 
The results of the survey are shown in Figure 5 and 
Figure 6. Almost every participant agreed that the developed 
safety helmet prevents violations. Also everyone said that 
health care function can lead workers to wear the safety 
helmet except one participant who answered “disagree”. 
Therefore, this support tool is expected to reduce violations. 
Participants 
responded 
positively 
to 
usability 
questionnaires. There is no negative answer in whole 
questions about usability. Thus, it means that people can use 
the prototype of the support tool without great difficulty. 
Considerations to improve the support tool were 
extracted from the results of the interview. There were total 
22 considerations. Among them, considerations which are 
mentioned by more than two participants are shown in Table 
4. Improvement proposals came up based on subjects’ 
opinions in the interview and discussion between two UX 
engineers. 
Improvement proposals related to functions were drawn. 
In case of health care function, providing more detail health 
information in real time would be better. In case of 
assistance function to maintain a certain distance among 
workers, distance set up function is needed because keeping 
distance among workers would be different depending on 
task types. Also, workers should be able to turn off the 
function maintaining distance if a task does not need to keep 
a certain distance. Communication among all collaborative  
 
Figure 5.  The freqeuncy of response by evaluation questions – Possibility 
of preventing violations 
 
Figure 6.  The freqeuncy of response by evaluation questions – Usability 
TABLE IV.  
THE FREQUENCY OF CONSIDERATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT 
Considerations for Improvement 
Related 
Function/Design 
Factor 
Frequency 
A lot sweat 
Headset 
5 
Short distance for maintaining 
Assistance in 
Maintaining of 
distance among 
workers 
4 
Difficulty in binding a chin strap 
Chin strap 
2 
Impossibility of providing health 
information in real time 
Health care 
2 
No turn off button of assistance in 
maintaining of distance among 
workers 
Assistance in 
Maintaining of 
distance among 
workers 
2 
Undue pressure 
Headset 
2 
Heaviness 
Safety helmet 
2 
 
296
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

workers would be better than one-to-one communication. 
Moreover, process of changing communications target 
should be easier. 
Improvement proposals related to design elements were 
generated. Location of the switch should be changed to the 
site where a worker does not press the switch by mistake. 
Otherwise, it would be better to make the power of the 
support tool be turned on or off automatically when a worker 
goes in or out the workplace. A form of earphone is also 
recommended. This is because earphone arrest noise enough 
and more convenient for workers in the workplace which 
does not product noise a lot. Wearing recognition should be 
moved to optimal position where it can sense well. Optimal 
position could achieve through the ergonomic experiments. 
In other researches about development of a safety helmet 
to prevent safety accident, there are some possible 
improvement proposals. Jang et al. [14] made check system 
for wearing a safety helmet with wireless sensor network. 
This system logs whether a worker wears a safety helmet or 
not through sensor module at chin strap in real time. 
Therefore, it aids a work director to check wearing condition 
easily and quickly. Providing information and warning about 
safety helmet wearing condition to both a worker and a work 
director would be better. Also, data from logging safety 
helmet wearing condition can be used to analyze violations. 
Hong et al. [15] developed the safety helmet with alarm 
bell to prevent safety accident. They said that the alarm bell 
rings 
when 
stress 
and 
heart 
rate 
from 
electrocardiogram(ECG) and brain wave sensors go over 
certain range. This safety helmet has similar function 
compared to health care function. However, this tracks health 
information and alarm in real time and uses different sensors. 
To provide various and helpful health information, ECG and 
brain wave sensors can be added. 
In this study, support tool ideas were generated mainly 
based on guidelines about prior checking and task guidelines. 
Therefore, tracking data and collecting data were out of our 
research scope. However, tracking and storing health 
information and warning immediately such as safety helmets 
in Jang et al. [14] and Hong et al. [15] can be good health 
care function. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, guidelines and support tool ideas for 
preventing routine violations were generated using MA and 
brainstorming. Through visiting real nuclear power plant and 
interview, ideas were selected and developed to the functions 
of the support tool, safety helmet. After the development, the 
effects of this safety helmet were evaluated by workers who 
wear safety helmets during working in the nuclear power 
plant. As a result, the safety helmet is not difficult to use and 
good for preventing violations such as not wearing helmet 
and rare communication. 
The developed safety helmet will prevent not wearing 
safety helmet and performing alone during cooperative work. 
Moreover, communication support function induces workers 
to converse actively and smoothly so every task can go 
according to plan. Also this support tool could be applied to 
other industries where workers wear safety helmets. 
Additionally, guidelines and developed support tool help 
workers 
in 
nuclear 
power 
plants 
cultivate 
safety 
consciousness. If the safety helmet will be designed with 
consideration for comfort, more workers will try to wear the 
safety helmet. Also, violations because of not wearing a 
safety helmet will decrease a lot. 
People in nuclear industry tend to avoid talk about 
violations because violation receives negative attention in the 
society. Accordingly, it was hard to recruit workers as 
participants and collect their ideas and experience. This is 
because various opinions of workers were not reflected in 
idea generation and development of the support tool. 
Currently, the wireless communication technology is 
difficult to be applied in nuclear power plants because of 
interference. After solving that problem and developing 
various support tool based on IoT, a nuclear power plant can 
be a smart workplace. 
Therefore, more ideas for preventing violations could be 
generated by collaboration with workers in nuclear power 
plants later. Additionally, various form of support tool could 
be developed besides the safety helmet. Thus, this 
methodical approach could be applied to study other 
violations. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by grants from Korean Federation 
of Science and Technology Societies (Grant-# NRF-
2015M2A8A4025069). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Lee, “A Comparison of the Recent Human Errors in 
Nuclear Power Plants,” Jornal of the Ergonomics Society of 
Korea. vol. 31, pp. 288-292, 2012. 
[2] C. Shim and J. Hong, “The Impact of Radioactive Disasters 
on Human and Ecosystems,” KEI Working Paper, pp. 1-59, 
2011 
[3] L.R. Anspaygh, R. J. Catlin, and M. Goldman, “The global 
impact of the Chernobyl reactor accident,” Sience. vol. 242, 
pp. 1513-1519, 1988. 
[4] J. K. Park and Y. Lee, “A Human Error Classification 
according to the Task Information Requirements in Nuclear 
Power Plants,” Proceedings of the Ergonomics Society of 
Korea, p. 91-95, 2008. 
[5] D.A. Norma, “Design Rules based on Analyses of Human 
Error,” Communicationsof the ACM. vol. 26, pp. 254-258, 
1983. 
[6] J. Julius, E. Jorgenson, G. W. Parry, and A. M. Mosleh, “A 
Procedure for the Analysis of Errors of Commission in a 
Probabilistic Safety Assessment of a Nuclear Power Plant at 
Full Power,” Reliability Engineering & System Safety. vol. 
50, pp. 189-201, 1995. 
[7] D.Y. Jeong, S. H. Han, H. Moon, B. Kang, and Y. Lee, 
“Characteristics of Human Violations in a Nuclear Power 
Plant,” Proceedings of the Ergonomics Society of Korea, pp. 
27-32, 2015. 
[8] J.I. Itoh, S. Yoshimura, T. Ohtsuka, and F. Masuda, 
“Cognitive Task Analysis of Nuclear Power Plat Operators 
for Man-Machine Interface Design,” Proceedings of the 
297
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

topical meeting on advances in human facotrs research on 
man/computer interactions, pp. 96-102, 1990. 
[9] J.H. Yun and Y. Lee, “Development of a Human Error 
Evaluation Method for Introducing Smart Mobile to Nuclear 
Power Plants,” Proceedings of the Ergonomics Society of 
Korea, pp. 190-195, 2011. 
[10] B. Kang, S. H. Han, H. Moon, and Y. H. Lee, “A New 
Definition of Violation Based on Accident/Failure Analyses 
in Nuclear Power Plants in a Nuclear Power Plant,” 
Proceedings of the Ergonomics Society of Kroea, pp. 22-26,  
2015. 
[11] B. Kang, S. H. Han, D. Y. Jeong, and Y. Lee, “Conceptual 
Models of Violation Error in Nulcear Power Plant,” Journal of 
the Korean Society of Safety. vol. 31, pp. 126-131, 2016. 
[12] M. Lee, S. H. Han, J. Park, and H. Jang, “A framework for 
developing smart device design guidelines with consideration 
of UX of the disabled,” Proceedings of the Ergonomics 
Society of Korea, pp. 170-175, 2016.  
[13] G. Q. Huang and K. L. Mak, “Web-based morphological 
charts 
for 
concept 
design 
in 
collaborative 
product 
development,” Journal of Intelligent Manufactiruing. vol. 10, 
pp. 267-278, 1999. 
[14] M. Jang, M. Yeom, I. Song, O. Kwon, E. Kee, and S. Choi, 
“Check system for wearing hard hat with wireless sensor 
network,” Proceedings of Conference on Information and 
Control Systems, pp. 209-210, 2007. 
[15] C. Hong, M. Shin, J. Yoon, and H. Kim, “Safety helmet with 
alarm bell to prevent safety accident,” Proceedings of the 
Ergonomics Society of Korea, pp. 65, 2016. 
 
 
298
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

