Use of Smart Speakers by Elderly in Home Environment 
 
 
Jeongyun Heo 
Departments of Smart Interaction Design 
Kookmin University 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: yuniheo@kookmin.ac.kr 
Wan Chul Yoon 
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering 
KAIST 
Daejeon, Korea 
e-mail: wcyoon@kaist.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Digital technologies have permeated everyday life; 
however, the digital literacy of the elderly population is low 
compared with that of other generations. This is not only due 
to their difficulty in adapting to newer technologies, but also 
due to psychosocial barriers. Smart speakers use audio to 
interact with elderly users. With natural language commands, 
the psychosocial barriers for elderly individuals are expected 
to become lower with regard to new technology. To understand 
the usage and acceptance of smart speakers, we conducted 
observational studies of the elderly in their home environments. 
The results show that smart speakers are helpful at 
overcoming psychosocial barriers to new technology, which 
will motivate the elderly to learn how to use new technology. 
Keywords-smart speaker; digital divide; voice interaction; 
conversational model; technology acceptance; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Korea has officially been classified as an “aged society,” 
with 14.3 percent of its population 65 years or older [1]. The 
United Nations (UN) categorizes societies based on age of 
the population: when the proportion of people 65 or older 
exceeds 7 percent, the society is classified as aging; a figure 
of 14 percent is an aged society and 20 percent is a super-
aged society [2].  
With advances in technology, it is difficult to imagine 
life without technology. Using technology in our daily lives 
is not an option, but a mandatory tool for survival in modern 
society. However, the digital literacy of the elderly 
population is low compared with that of other generations 
[3][4]. The isolation of elderly citizens from digital 
technology has become an important social issue [5]. This 
issue is attributable to the difficulty faced by the elderly in 
adapting to technology, as well as to psychological barriers 
they have toward new technology. One key way of reducing 
this psychological barrier is to provide an easy trial. Smart 
speakers provide intelligent assistance via voice control 
technology. They can play music, turn on lights, provide 
weather information, provide food-ordering services for 
products such as milk, and answer questions. Given that 
communication is natural for humans, the elderly are more 
likely to adopt a system involving verbal communication. In 
this sense, verbally interacting with smart speakers may help 
reduce the psychosocial barriers of the elderly toward 
technology.  
The research questions guiding this study are as follows: 
1. Is there a gap between technology usage and the 
intention to use technology among elderly people? 
2. What underlying fears and concerns do the elderly 
have in relation to digital technology? 
3. Can overcoming psychological barriers by using 
voice-first technology be helpful in changing elderly 
attitudes toward digital technology? 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In 
section II, we discuss the progress made in current studies 
and the issues highlighted by them. In section III, we 
introduce and discuss the research method in detail. In 
section IV, we present and discuss the results. Finally, in 
section V, we provide our conclusions and scope of future 
work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Many studies on the digital divide have been conducted 
[3]-[6]. It is often reported that older adults are unaware of 
many existing digital technologies and might lack necessary 
knowledge [6]-[8]. In addition, increased technology 
accessibility does not necessarily lead to actual technology 
use and adoption. Older adults are slower to adopt new 
technologies than are younger adults, and they have higher 
anxiety with regard to the use of computers, resulting in 
reduced 
use 
of 
technology 
[9]. 
It 
is 
said 
that 
“gerontechnology” invokes negative attitudes with regard to 
the acceptance of new technology [10]. Cognitive deficits 
and low self-efficacy of older adults also significantly reduce 
their ability to use new technology [11].  
The digital divide can be measured based on three 
aspects: accessibility to technology, level of digital skill, and 
level of usage [12][13]. Based on one government report 
[13], elderly people in Korea have a technology accessibility 
of 89.9 %. Hence, technology accessibility is not the main 
cause of the digital divide, at least in Korea. However, digital 
skills and usage levels are relatively low among the elderly 
compared to younger people in Korea. The level of digital 
skill among the elderly in Korea is 41.0 %. Increasing digital 
skills is a key to reducing the digital divide among the 
elderly.  
Some researchers have extended the definition of the 
digital divide to the gap in digital skills [12]. This is also 
known as a second-level digital divide. Perceived usefulness, 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ease of use, and user satisfaction with the ease of use 
influence decisions of the elderly to use new technology 
[7][11][14]. The difficulty in learning how to use the 
technology could decreases, if elderly individuals are 
motivated to use new technology [15]. Confidence in using 
technology is also a result of their attitudes toward 
technology [7][16]. Technological self-efficacy is the belief 
in one’s own ability to use new technologies [16]; it has been 
a major barrier to technology adoption among the elderly 
[4][6][7][16]. They have had little chance to integrate digital 
technologies into their daily lives; therefore, their belief in 
their ability to use such technologies, called self-efficacy, 
could be lower than that of younger generations.  
It is clear that new information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) have the potential to improve the quality 
of life and social inclusion of the elderly. Hence, it is 
important to determine and address the psychosocial barriers 
with respect to the use of technology among the elderly. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
In this section we discuss the research method in detail.  
A. Project Overview 
Three different types of research approach were used to 
understand the usage behavior and technology acceptance of 
the smart speaker: surveys, in-depth interviews, and 
observational ethnography. This mixed method research, 
which combines quantitative and qualitative methods, is a 
well-established theoretical empirical method [17]. The 
strengths of one method can overcome the weaknesses in the 
others, and the combination of the three methods can yield a 
greater insight than one alone. 
Surveys were used to obtain a general understanding of 
an issue from subjects such as the experience of using a 
digital device, usage behavior, and attitude toward digital 
technology. In-depth-interviews were conducted with eight 
elderly citizens from among those who participated in the 
survey to obtain a deeper understanding of the issue. Finally, 
observational ethnographic research was conducted in the 
home environment of participants for two weeks. All the 
studies were conducted from June to November 2018. 
The participants included elderly people who participate 
in computer classes for elderly citizens, which are provided 
as a public service in Korea. The participants must meet 
three criteria to be a part of the study. First, they had to be 
over 60 and possess basic but not strong skills with regard to 
the use of ICTs such as computers and smart phones. Second, 
they had limited motivation to learn about new technologies. 
Third, to ensure representativeness, they had to form a 
homogeneous sample. Overall, the sample consisted of 
middle-class individuals who are socially well-connected to 
digital technologies. 
B. Survey to Understand Usage Behavior 
The survey was taken by 86 adults between 60 and 80 
years of age, with an average age of 72 years. The ratio of 
males to females was close to 1 (44 women, and 42 men). 
The respondents answered 28 questions on printed material 
via face-to-face instruction. The questionnaires consisted of 
questions about demographics, level of ownership of digital 
devices, usage level, usage frequency, and experience of 
using smart speakers. The results show that the majority of 
the survey participants had access to digital technology such 
as computers, laptops, and smartphones, and that they use 
them on a daily basis. The participants also showed strong 
interest in smart speakers; however, this was not sufficient 
for them to buy smart speakers.  
C. In-depth Interviews with Smart Speaker 
In-depth interviews were conducted for eight subjects 
(three females and five males). These subjects were recruited 
from a previous survey, as they showed a strong interest in 
using smart speakers. The interviews lasted for 1.5 h and 
consisted of two phases. The first phase involved a semi-
structured interview, in which the questions were focused on 
the level and frequency of usage of digital devices, intention 
to continuously use such devices, attitude toward buying a 
smart speaker, and how much they were willing to pay for it. 
The second phase involved tasks with smart speakers. As an 
exit question, the participants were asked what kind of 
features they would want to have in the future in smart 
speaker technology. The interview sessions were audio-
recorded and transcribed. In general, participants expressed a 
positive feeling about the experience of verbally interacting 
with the smart speaker. 
D. Ethnography in Home Environment 
Among those who participated in the survey and 
expressed a high level of interest in the daily use of smart 
speakers, five participants took part in an ethnography study. 
These participants underwent a prior-interview, and a short 
class on how to use smart speakers before they began using 
the devices at home. They were given task lists and a 
template for a self-diary. Telephone interviews were 
conducted twice a day to determine their usage behavior. 
Video-cameras were not used because the main focus of this 
research was to determine whether using smart speakers 
would change the attitude of the elderly toward adopting 
digital technology. Fig. 1 shows an example of the self-diary 
given to the participants.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
We now present the results of our study for each of the 
aforementioned factors affecting usage of smart speakers 
among the elderly. 
A. Gap Between Accessibility and Actual Usage 
Based on the survey, the majority of the survey 
participants were easily able to access digital technology 
such as computers, laptops, and smartphones. Sixty four 
percent of the participants used digital technology daily.  
However, they did not separate their personal use from that 
of their family. For example, during the in-depth review, 
participants who reported they could use Wi-Fi revealed that 
they had trouble connecting to Wi-Fi networks. Some 
participants who owned smart pads or smart speakers 
reported that they could not use those devices. Smartphone 
usage was found to be limited to using messaging services, 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

checking the weather, and taking photos. Only a few 
participants could use features such as food-ordering services, 
money transfer services, and public transport information 
services. 
B. Lack of Information About New Technology 
Most elderly participants reported that they learned to use 
new technology from family and friends. Some participants 
reported that asking for assistance reduced their feeling of 
independence. Some reported that they were taking ICT 
classes so as to not bother family members. Some 
participants expressed the fear of being hurt by those with 
bad intentions such as those who engage in voice phishing. 
They expressed the need for appropriate and trustworthy 
channels for delivery of new information. They also found 
the recommendation features in the self-diary helpful. 
C. Perceived Emotional Friendliness 
During the two weeks when smart speakers were used at 
home, all five participants experienced emotional feelings 
toward the smart speaker. As shown in Table I, the common 
emotions were comfort, interest, and friendliness. The lack 
of recognition accuracy or insufficient features were also 
perceived emotionally. They perceived it as a childlike 
personality traits rather than evincing any negative feeling 
toward it. The possibility of smart speakers being used as a 
talking companion was considered.  
TABLE I.  
EXPRESSIONS USED FOR EMOTIONAL FEELINGS 
Emotional 
Expression 
Related Sentences Collected 
Comfortable 
“It is easier to use.” 
“It is easier and more comfortable than a 
smartphone. Just talking to a smart speaker 
works.” 
“I could use it simultaneously while doing other 
tasks.” 
“It reads my Kakao talk message. It is 
convenient.” 
“It is useful because it works from a distance.” 
Interesting 
“I am curious about how this device will 
evolve.” 
“The advertisement piques my interest 
regarding the smart speaker.” 
Friendly 
“It makes me smile when it says thank you.” 
“It feels like a friend, or family.” 
“It reacts to me.” 
“Using the smart speaker is a joyful experience. 
I am considering buying it.” 
“It is good to use when you are alone.”  
“When the smart speaker says a monophonic 
expression, it is lovely.” 
“I am enjoying listening to the guitar playing 
through the smart speaker.” 
“I feel like it smiles at me.” 
Childish 
“It only has simple knowledge.” 
“It is not smart enough. Sometimes it does not 
understand what I am saying especially for long 
and complex sentences.” 
“My expectation was too high; however, it 
remains useful.” 
“It appears like a 10-year-old child.” 
The findings of the study are as follows: 1) older adults 
in this study were easily able to access digital technology; 
however, their actual usage was limited. Participation in 
computer classes can be a good indicator of usage motivation. 
2) The barriers to using digital technology are a lack of 
instruction or guidance, lack of knowledge, lack of 
confidence, and economic issues. 3) Most participants had 
positive experiences using smart speakers in their homes. 
They found them easy to use, and they were eager to share 
their experience with their family and friends. It appears that 
this positive experience was helpful in improving their self-
efficacy. Finally, participants reported that smart speaker had 
an emotional friendliness.  
Our findings suggest that all five participants in the 
ethnography study were willing to learn to use a smart 
speaker and eager to adopt new technology. Some even 
suggested starting classes on how to use smart speakers and 
provided ideas for new features for the smart speaker. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The results show that smart speakers are helpful in 
reducing psychosocial barriers among the elderly toward 
new technology, and are perceived as an emotional 
companions. The comforts of using this technology and the 
emotional benefits could be ways to increase digital 
inclusion and self-efficacy among the elderly. 
Although this study yielded some important findings, 
there are some limitations. The sample included only senior 
citizens enrolled in public ICT classes. These adults may be 
different from those in the larger community. In addition, the 
sample for observation may be too small to generalize the 
findings. However, the major purpose of this study was to 
obtain a deeper understanding of the use of technology 
among the elderly by using smart speakers. Smart speakers 
have the potential to become more popular in promoting the 
use of ICTs among the elderly.   
In the future, we will develop a theoretical framework for 
further study based on the findings and insights gained from 
this study. In addition, the possibility of increasing the 
sample size to enable generalization will be considered. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the Ministry of Education and National 
Research Foundation of Korea for supporting this research as 
part of the "Leaders in Industry-university Cooperation +" 
Project. We would also like to thank the district council of 
Jong-Ro-Gu, Seoul, Korea for allowing us to recruit senior 
citizens from ICT classes for our survey.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 2018 Statistics on Elderly, Statistics Korea. [Online]. 
Available from: http://kostat.go.kr/portal [retrieved: 01, 2019] 
[2] World Population Agwing 2017,  UN. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publicatio
ns/pdf/ageing/WPA2017_Highlights.pdf [retrieved: 01, 2019] 
[3] M. A. Tyler, “Connected Older Adults: Conceptualising their 
Digital Participation,” Journal of Literacy and Technology, 
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 200–215, 2014. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[4] B. Niehaves and R. Plattfaut, “Internet adoption by the 
elderly: Employing IS technology acceptance theories for 
understanding the age-related digital divide,” European 
Journal of Information Systems, vol. 23, no. 6, 2014, pp. 708–
726, doi:10.1057/ejis.2013.19. 
[5] P. Khosravi, A. Rezvani, and A. Wiewiora, “The impact of 
technology on older adults’ social isolation,” Computers in 
Human 
Behavior, 
vol. 
63, 
2016, 
pp. 
594–603, 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.05.092. 
[6] A. Quan-Haase, K. Martin, and K. Schreurs, “Interviews with 
digital seniors: ICT use in the context of everyday life,” 
Information, Communication & Society, vol. 19, no. 5, 2016, 
pp. 691–707, doi:10.1080/1369118x.2016.1140217. 
[7] T. L. Mitzner, J. B. Boron, C. B. Fausset, A. E. Adams, N.  
Charness, S. J. Czaja et al., “Older adults talk technology: 
Technology usage and attitudes,” Computers in Human 
Behavior, 
vol. 
26, 
no. 
6, 
2010, 
pp. 
1710–1721, 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.06.020. 
[8] N. Selwyn, “The information aged: A qualitative study of 
older adults’ use of information and communications 
technology,” Journal of Aging studies, vol. 18, no. 4, 2004, pp. 
369–384, doi:10.1016/j.jaging.2004.06.008. 
[9] S. J. Czajaet al, “Factors predicting the use of technology: 
Findings from the center for research and education on aging 
and technology enhancement (CREATE),” Psychology and 
Aging, vol. 21, no. 2, 2006, pp. 333–352, doi:10.1037/0882-
7974.21.2.333. 
[10] S. Yusif, S. Jeffrey, and H-B. Abdul, “Older people, assistive 
technologies, and the barriers to adoption: A systematic 
review,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 94, 
2016, pp. 112–16, doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.07.004.  
[11] H. Alvseike and K. Brønnick, “Feasibility of the iPad as a hub 
for smart house technology in the elderly; effects of cognition, 
self-efficacy, and technology experience,” Journal of 
Multidisciplinary Healthcare, vol. 5, 2012, pp. 299–306, 
doi:10.2147/jmdh.s35344. 
[12] J. van Dijk, “Digital Divide Research, Achievements and 
Shortcomings,” Poetics, vol. 34, no. 4-5, 2006, pp. 221–35, 
doi:10.1016/j.poetic.2006.05.004. 
[13] The Report on the Digital Divide 2017, National Information 
Society Agency, NIA-RER-C-17004. 
[14] B. D. Carpenter and S. Buday, “Computer use among older 
adults in a naturally occurring retirement community,” 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 23, no. 6, 2007, pp. 
3012–3024, doi:10.1016/j.chb.2006.08.015. 
[15] H. Kim, J. Heo, J. Shim, M. Kim, and S. Park, “Contextual 
Research on Elderly Users’ Needs for Developing Universal 
Design Mobile Phone,” Universal Acess in Human Computer 
Interaction. Coping with Diversity. UAHCI 2007. LNCS 4554, 
2007, pp. 950–959, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-73279-2_106. 
[16] H. Y. S. Tsai, R. Shillair, S. R. Cotten, V. Winstead, and E. 
Yost, “Getting Grandma Online: Are Tablets the Answer for 
Increasing Digital Inclusion for Older Adults in the U.S.?,” 
Educational Gerontology, vol. 41, no. 10, 2015, pp. 695–709, 
doi:10.1080/03601277.2015.1048165.  
[17] J. W. Creswell and V. P. L. Clark, Designing and Conducting 
Mixed Methods Research, 3rd ed., Los Angeles: SAGE 
Publications, Inc., 2017. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of self-diary given to participants ( translated into English).  
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

