A New Scientometric Dimension for User Profile 
Nedra Ibrahim, Anja Habacha Chaibi and Henda Ben Ghézala 
RIADI Laboratory 
ENSI, University of Manouba 
2010, Manouba, Tunisia 
e-mail: nedra.ibrahim@ensi-uma.tn, anja.habacha@ensi.rnu.tn and henda.benghezala@ensi.rnu.tn 
 
Abstract— Personalization aims to facilitate the expression of 
user needs and enables him/her to obtain relevant information. 
The data describing the user are grouped in a profile, which 
varies according to the application context and the type of 
users and their needs. By focusing on a particular type of 
applications (dedicated to scientific research) and a particular 
type 
of 
users 
(researchers), 
we 
note 
that 
existing 
personalization approaches only partially solve problems 
related to personalization quality (accuracy, freshness, validity 
period, response time, source credibility), but lacks a model 
involving scientific quality (content, author, container and 
affiliation quality). The scientific quality is assessed by a set of 
quantitative and qualitative measures, which are the 
scientometric indicators. In this paper, we propose a profile 
model based on scientometrics to involve the qualitative 
relevance of information in a retrieval system dedicated to 
scientific research. The proposed model will be the basis of 
building an ontological user profile able to store scientometric 
preferences. 
Keywords-user modeling; scientific quality; scientometrics; 
quality evaluation; user profile; profile model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Faced with a large number of heterogeneous information 
resources, the user is unable to express his preferences and 
select relevant information while referring to reliable sources 
of confidence. 
Particularly, in the field of scientific research, the validity 
of scientific production and even the scientific process relies 
on the quality of the information. The users of information 
systems dedicated to scientific research are researchers. This 
particular kind of users is interested in the relevance of 
information as well as in its scientific quality. In this context, 
we define scientometrics, which is the set of quantitative 
methods that are devoted to the evaluation of scientific 
production (researcher, scientific paper, research group, 
laboratory...). Scientometrics is based on a set of quantitative 
metrics and measures called scientometric indicators, which 
include publications, citations, h-index, g-index, hi-index, 
hc-index, AWCR, and AW-index [1], and the qualitative 
measure HX [2]. 
In this paper, we are interested in the personalization of 
user profile in the field of scientific research to meet the 
needs of researchers. Our user profile personalization 
approach comes to fill the absence of a personalization 
approach that involves the scientific quality of the 
information. This approach is based on the proposal of a 
profile model integrating scientific quality measured by 
scientometric indicators. This model is able to collect quality 
preferences from the user.  It is based at the first level on the 
quality of: content, containing, author and affiliation. At the 
second level, going up a level of abstraction, we find the 
quality of: the source of document, the editor of the scientific 
journal, the association of the conference, the research 
organization and career of the authors. 
This work comes as part of the proposal and the 
implementation of a personalized information retrieval 
system dedicated to scientific research and based on the 
scientific quality of the information processed at different 
stages. 
This 
paper 
is 
organized 
as 
follows: 
Section II 
summarizes the state of the art on personalization, profile 
modeling, scientometrics and the works oriented to the 
ontological user profiles. In Section III, we present the 
profile models that we propose. In Section IV, we show the 
process of building the profile ontology and its evaluation. 
We finish with a conclusion in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The user profile is the core concept of personalization in 
information retrieval (IR). The user profile is defined by 
contextual elements directly related to the user, such as their 
interests, search preferences, etc. All of this information is 
represented in profile model. A profile model includes all the 
knowledge necessary for efficient query evaluation and 
production of relevant information tailored to each user. A 
profile can be defined as a personalized access to 
information model while a query is the expression of detailed 
needs that the user wishes to see in his/her profile. 
The user profile is part of the user's cognitive context 
according to the multidimensional taxonomy presented in 
context [3]. Several definitions of the profile have been 
discussed in the literature. We distinguish the cognitive 
profile 
[4][5], 
the qualitative profile 
[6] 
and the 
multidimensional profile [7][8]. The cognitive profile 
exploited in several customized systems is analog to the 
user's cognitive context addressed in the context of the 
multidimensional taxonomy [3]. The qualitative profile in [6] 
is linked to the user's search preferences for the quality of 
information returned by the system (freshness, credibility of 
sources of information, consistency, etc.). These criteria 
concern the context of qualitative document processed in the 
context of the multidimensional taxonomy [3]. In some 
studies, the profile covers in addition to the interests and 
preferences of the user, the characteristics of the 
environment 
and 
the 
system, 
thus 
defining 
a 
251
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

multidimensional profile [8][9]. A multidimensional profile 
covers all possible dimensions involved in the interaction of 
the user with the system. P3P (Policy Languages Interest 
Group) [9] standard to secure the profiles, allows to define 
classes that distinguish between demographic attributes, 
professional and behavior attributes. In [8], Amato and 
Straccia proposed a profile model for users of a digital 
library consisting of five categories: personal data, collected 
data, delivery data, behavior data and safety data. Moreover, 
the authors simple profile information categories make their 
model extensible with difficulty. In [7], Kostadinov proposed 
a profile model based on Amato and Straccia profile model 
[8] and consisting of eight classes: centers of interest, 
ontologies, personal data, quality, customization, security, 
client feedback and divers. Based on Kostadinov’s profile 
[7], Bouzeghoub and Kostadinov [9] enriched the profile by 
two other categories: delivery preferences and query history.  
In [11], the authors proposed a profile model combining 
profile content, context and preferences. 
The quality was incorporated into the profile models of 
[9][11]. In these works, they involve the quality of 
personalization process and content quality: 
 
The quality of the query execution process and the 
quality of delivery data: measured by the response 
time. Other measures of the personalization process 
have been proposed by Mobasher et al. [12] as the 
Weighted Average Visit Percentage (WAVP), 
precision, coverage, F1 measure and R measure. 
 
The quality of content and information provider: 
characterized by the freshness of the information, 
which 
include 
the 
time 
elapsed 
since 
the 
establishment of the information or the time of the 
last update. Also the precision and accuracy of the 
data, which requires the opinion of an external 
expert. 
Recent researches are oriented to design a new 
generation of personalization systems based on context, 
social networks and ontologies. In [13], the authors 
combined search technologies and knowledge about query 
and user context into a single framework. The works in [14] 
and [15] added the notion of context and situation. In [16], 
the authors proposed an ontological user profile modeling for 
context-aware personalization. In [17], the authors proposed 
an ontology-based user profile for modeling user behavior. 
In [11], the authors proposed an ontological user profile able 
to store the profile dimensions, the context and preferences. 
In [18], the authors used the social network annotation in 
user profile. 
All of these techniques already mentioned are not 
dedicated to recognize users while remaining independent of 
the quality. For this, our work is oriented to design a new 
personalization system based on scientific quality. Our 
contribution aims to deliver qualitative information relevant 
and appropriate to the researcher needs. 
The quality that has been integrated into existing 
personalization approaches is process oriented (independent 
of the information), or content oriented (decided by an 
expert). In this case, we confront the problems of 
information independency and relativity and subjectivity of 
experts’ judgment. 
We focused in this paper on the representation of an 
extension of existing personalization approaches.  
III. 
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODEL FOR REPRESENTATION 
OF SCIENTOMETRIC PREFERENCES 
To solve the problem of absence of personalized 
approach involving scientific quality, we propose a new 
qualitative dimension to represent the expectations of 
researchers. Our contribution is the integration of a new 
dimension “scientometric preferences” to construct a 
multidimensional user profile concerned with the quality of 
scientific research.  
In our approach, we study all the elements of the 
scientific process, which affect the scientific quality. To each 
element we associate the scientometric indicators, which 
measure its quality.  
Based on works already done in the context of 
multidimensional profile modeling [7][9], we propose a 
reusable multidimensional profile that involves the scientific 
quality. We define a generic model, which will be 
instantiated to draw the profile model, which can be 
exploited by other user profiles. 
A. Generic model 
Figure 1 shows our representation of the generic profile 
model. This representation can be structured in the form of 
hierarchy of classes which are: 
 
Figure 1.  Generic model. 
 
Profile: describes the criteria that characterize a user. 
It contains several dimensions. For example: 
personal data, centers of interest, scientometric 
preferences, etc.  
 
Dimension: describes information characterizing 
user preferences; this information is grouped and 
structured in the form of a set of open dimensions. 
To each dimension we associate a weight describing 
its importance compared to other Dimensions 
relative to the user. 
 
SubDimension: information that is grouped and 
structured as part of a specific dimension. To each 
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

SubDimension we assign an id, a name and an 
importance weight.  
 
ExtSubDimension: information that is grouped and 
structured 
as 
an 
extension 
of 
a 
specific 
SubDimension. This information is from a higher 
level of abstraction. To each ExtSubDimension we 
assign an id, a name and an importance weight.  
 
Attribute: this class represents an elementary 
attribute to which we assign (id, name, value type 
and importance weight).  
 
AttributeValue: describes the possible values that are 
associated with each attribute. To delimit the interval 
of the values of preference, the user has to specify a 
precise value accompanied by a comparison operator 
(<,<=,>,>=,=). 
Our proposed generic model is: 
 
Open: it can be extended by other kinds of profiles in 
an easy way;  
 
Flexible: it is able to acquire the main categories of 
knowledge in the current personalization systems; 
 
Multifacets: it can be analyzed from different angles 
(dimensions, attributes, etc.);  
 
Evolutionary: it allows any changes or updates; 
 
Independent of any information system or any 
technology and the specialization, generalization and 
instantiation of this model is easy. 
B. Profile model 
Our profile model is an instantiation of the generic model 
described in the previous section. This model is one of the 
possible instances of the generic model. Because the 
proposed generic model is open, flexible and independent of 
any data, it can be instantiated with different values. 
 
Figure 2.  Profile model. 
Based on the profile model of Bouzeghoub and 
Kostadinov [9], we propose a set of existing dimensions 
enriched by a new qualitative dimension which is the 
scientometric preferences. This proposed dimension contains 
the different information characterizing the scientific quality 
preferences introduced by the user. 
In Figure 2, we present our proposed model enriched by 
the 
new 
scientometric 
dimension 
(scientometric 
preferences). 
Our 
model 
can 
be 
exploited 
in 
a 
personalization process of a scientific retrieval system. 
Scientometric 
preferences 
store 
the 
necessary 
information describing the quality of a scientific document 
according to the researcher’s needs. These preferences are 
organized into five SubDimensions which are the scientific 
entities affecting the scientific quality of documents. The 
quality of each scientific entity is measured by a set of 
scientometric indicators which represent the attributes of 
each SubDimenson. On the other hand, each SubDimesnion 
is extended on ExtSubDimension by moving to a higher 
level of abstraction. Each ExtSubDimension will be 
organized into attributes which represent the scientometric 
indicators measuring its quality. 
In the following, we detail the elements of the dimension 
“scientometric preferences.” 
1) Quality of author and career 
The quality of author is one of entities which affect the 
scientific quality of documents. Author quality is measured 
by the mean of four scientometric indicators (Figure 3):  
 
H-index (Hirsh index): is an indicator of the 
researcher impact. A researcher has an index of h if 
his/her papers are cited at least h times each [1]. 
 
Citation number: is the number of citations received 
by his/her published scientific papers. 
 
Author position: is the position of the author in the 
co-authors list. He/she can be the first author, second 
co-author, third co-author and so on. 
 
Publication number: is the number of scientific 
papers published by the author. 
 
Figure 3.  Quality of author and his career. 
By ascending a level of abstraction, we associate the 
quality of career to the author quality as an extension. The 
quality of author career is measured by the number of years 
spent by the author on research in a specific discipline, and 
his current scientific grade (PhD student, assistant professor, 
professor, etc). 
2) Quality of content and source 
Another entity that affects the scientific quality of 
documents is the quality of content, to which we assign the 
following attributes (Figure 4): 
 
Citation number: the number of citations received by 
the published scientific document. A larger number 
of citations reflects a better quality of document 
content. 
 
Co-authors number: the number of authors who 
contributed to the realization of the scientific 
document.  
 
Figure 4.  Quality of content and its source. 
253
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

We designate by the source of scientific documents the 
bibliographic databases such as: Google Scholar, Scopus, 
dblp, MS Academic Search, etc. The quality of information 
source is measured by the number of publications, the 
interval of time and the number of domains covered by the 
source.  
3) Quality of journal and publisher 
Scientific journals are containers of scientific documents. 
A good quality of the journal promotes the selection of the 
document. As shown in Figure 5, the quality of a journal is 
evaluated by: 
 
Impact factor: is a measure of the frequency with 
which the average article in a journal has been cited 
in a particular year or period. Thus, the impact factor 
of a journal is calculated by dividing the number of 
current year citations by the source items published 
in that journal during the previous two years. The 
journal 
impact 
factor 
is 
provided 
by 
the 
annual Journal Citation Report (JCR) [19] of 
Thomson Reuters or by SCImago Journal & Country 
Rank (SJR) [20]. 
 
Ranking: journal ranking is the classification of 
journals according to its quality. SCImago Journal & 
Country Rank (SJR) provides a journal ranking into 
four classes: Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4. Another type of 
journal ranking is provided by ERA [21] into four 
classes: A*, A, B and C. 
 
Citation number: the number of citations received by 
all the journal publications. 
 
Self-citation number: when a paper published in a 
journal cites a previously published paper in that 
same journal. 
 
Response time: the time period taken by the 
publisher to provide the first response to submitted 
manuscript. 
 
Publication number: the number of publications in 
the journal. 
 
Figure 5.  Quality of journal and its publisher. 
The quality of journal can be extended to the evaluation 
of publisher quality which can affect the scientific quality of 
documents. As examples of journals’ publishers we cite: 
Elsevier [22], Springer [23], Emerald [24], Sage [25], ACM 
[26] etc. The publisher quality is measured by the number of 
specialties, the number of published journals and the number 
of published books. 
4) Quality of conference and association 
In the same way, we describe the SubDimension “quality 
of conference” and its extension “association quality”. 
Conferences are the other type of document container. In 
Figure 6, we describe the different measures of the 
conference quality consisting on: 
 
Conference 
ranking: 
is 
the 
classification 
of 
conferences according to their quality. ERA provides 
conference ranking into four classes: A*, A, B and 
C. 
 
Citation number: the number of citations received by 
all the papers published in the conference. 
 
Self-citation number: when a paper published in a 
conference cites a previously published paper in that 
same conference. 
 
Publication number: the number of papers published 
by the conference. 
 
Figure 6.  Quality of conference and its association. 
To each conference, we join its association, such as: 
IEEE [27]. The quality of conference association is measured 
by the number of specialties and the number of conferences 
organized by the association. 
5) Quality of affiliation and organization 
In our profile model, we consider the quality of author(s) 
affiliation. The author affiliation is represented by the 
research environment or the research community such as: 
laboratory, research unit, university department or group of 
researchers working in the same discipline. Affiliation 
quality is measured by specific scientometric indicators 
represented in Figure 7: 
 
Group H-index: Hirsh index of a researchers group 
having the same affiliation is defined as the number 
of all the articles of the group which have been cited 
at least h times each. 
 
Citation number: the number of citations received by 
the papers published by the group of researchers 
having the same affiliation. 
 
Self-citation: when two members of the same 
affiliation site each other.  
 
Publication number: the number of papers published 
by the group of researchers having the same 
affiliation. 
 
Figure 7.  Quality of affiliation and its organization. 
The quality of affiliation is influenced by the quality of 
the organization or the institution of reference, such as 
universities. So, we extended the affiliation quality to the 
organization quality measured by the Shanghai ranking [28] 
(in the case of academic organizations), the number of papers 
published by the different research entities belonging to the 
same organization and the number of citations received by 
the papers published by the different entities belonging to the 
same orginization. 
IV. 
SCIENTOMETRIC ONTOLOGY 
The profiles are containers of knowledge about the user. 
The user’s preferences represent the expectations of the user. 
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

To apply the model of the proposed profile, we opted for an 
ontology to represent the scientometric preferences of the 
user. An nntology is a good candidate for representing 
knowledge about users. It allows having a shared 
understanding between people or software agents and their 
relations, and a controlled vocabulary, which implies a 
formal definition of concepts. In addition to their 
contribution in terms of reusability, modularity and 
knowledge sharing, ontologies are used to define a precise 
vocabulary, which is the basis of communication between 
different users.  
A. From the generic model to ontology 
Ontology, such as generic models of UML (Unified 
Modeling Language), models the universe of discourse by 
means of hierarchical classes by properties association. 
However, an ontology has five differences compared to 
generic UML models [29]: 
 
Semantics: Ontologies are used in an Open World 
Assumption (OWA). In contrast, UML models are 
used in a Closed World Assumption (CWA).  
 
Goal: In ontology, the focus is generally on concepts 
and relations between them. In contrast, a generic 
model of UML emphasized the operational side of a 
particular computer system.  
 
Atomicity: In UML, each concept only makes sense 
in the context of the model in which it is defined. In 
ontology each concept is individually identified and 
is a basic unit of knowledge.  
 
Consensuality: In ontology of domain, concepts are 
represented as consensus of a community. Similarly, 
the semantic integration of all systems based on the 
same ontology can be easily made.  
 
Canonicity: Unlike generic models that use a 
language (UML) to describe domain information, 
ontologies use (OWL) formal semantics (describing 
logic).  
The next step is to transform the classes and attributes of 
the profile model into concepts and slots of ontology. 
B. Implementation of the scientometric dimension 
In this section, on the basis of the generic model that we 
proposed in Section III, we will show the process of building 
our ontological user profile following the Noy’s method 
[30]. 
Most ontologies were created using the OWL (Web 
Ontology Language) [31]. OWL is designed for use by 
applications that need to process the content of information 
instead of just presenting information to humans. OWL 
facilitates greater machine interpretability of Web content 
than that supported by XML (Extensible Markup Language), 
RDF (Resource Description Format), and RDF-S (RDF 
Schema) [31]. It provides additional vocabulary along with a 
formal semantic. OWL has three increasingly-expressive 
sublanguages: OWL Lite, OWL DL, and OWL Fulls [31]. 
Proposals for the design of ontologies on the theoretical and 
practical view can be found in [30]. Our ontological profile 
was implemented using OWL-DL. There are many methods 
for ontology engineering. In our case, we opted for Noy's 
method [30] proposed by Stanford University. We 
considered the fact that the tool with which we will build the 
ontology in this case PROTÉGÉ [32] which is developed by 
the same university.   
The ontology design process can be summarized in the 
following steps:  
 
Step 1: determine the domain, scope and users of the 
ontology. The ontology domain is going to cover the 
scientometric domain (assessment tools, measures 
and indicators) conducted for a scientific research 
evaluation. The purpose of using our ontology is to 
describe the qualitative preferences of the user 
(researcher). The ontology must respond to user 
requests, taking into account the semantics of those 
requests. 
 
Step 2: consider reusing existing ontologies: 
Existing ontologies in the field of personalization 
systems did not satisfy our needs. So, we built our 
ontology fully based on our research.  
 
Step 3: our study of both scientometric field and user 
profile management, allowed us to identify a list of 
important terms. We can list some terms: dimension, 
attribute, sub-dimension, author quality, affiliation 
quality, source quality, citation number, journal 
impact factor, conference ranking etc. 
 
Step 4: the definition of classes and class hierarchy 
described in Figure 8: classes provide an abstraction 
mechanism for grouping resources with similar 
characteristics. Like RDF classes, every OWL class 
(OWL:class) is associated with a set of individuals 
called the extension of class. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Class hierarchy. 
 
Step 5: define properties of classes. A property can 
be considered as an attribute (a value, the importance 
weight of the class, the comparison operator of the 
attributes etc.), or as a binary relation between two 
classes. OWL distinguishes two kinds of properties:  
Data property: the properties of data type (class 
properties) have a range of data value, and bind 
individuals to data values. For example: property 
“Name” for class “User”. 
Object property: object properties (relationship) have 
a range of values of class individuals. For example, 
the property "Extends" applies to an object of class 
called "ExtSubDimension" and takes its values in the 
class called "SubDimension". 
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Step 6: create instance: the instances are all objects 
of classes.  
C. Profile validation 
To test the profile ontology, we use the Pellet reasoner 
available directly from PROTÉGÉ. Pellet is a complete and 
capable OWL-DL reasoner with very good performance, 
extensive middleware, and a number of unique features [33]. 
Pellet is written in Java and is open source under a very 
liberal license. It is used in a number of projects, from pure 
research to industrial settings. 
Pellet is the first sound and complete OWL-DL reasoner 
with extensive support for reasoning with individuals 
(including nominal support and conjunctive query). It 
has user defined data types, and debugging support for 
ontologies [33]. It implements several extensions to OWL-
DL including combination formalism for OWL-DL 
ontologies, a non-monotonic operator, and preliminary 
support for OWL/Rule hybrid reasoning. It has proven to be 
a reliable tool for working with OWL-DL ontologies and 
experimenting with OWL extensions. 
In this section, we describe three tests provided by Pellet: 
consistency checking, classification test and queries test. 
 
Figure 9.  Inferred class hierarchy. 
1) Consistency test 
Consistency checking provided by Pellet is made based 
on the class description, which ensures that ontology does 
not contain any contradictory facts. Each class must have at 
least one individual member. A class is considered 
inconsistent if it cannot have any instance. The result of this 
test is shown in Figure 9 representing inferred class 
hierarchy after invoking the reasoner. All classes are 
consistent. 
2) Classification test 
The classification test can check whether a class is a 
subclass of another class or not. It computes the subclass 
relations between every named class to create the complete 
class hierarchy. The class hierarchy can be used to answer 
queries such as getting all or only the direct subclasses of a 
class. 
When this test is invoked, the consistency test is first 
performed for all classes of the ontology, because 
inconsistent classes cannot be classified correctly. Once the 
classification test is performed on the class hierarchy 
containing the logical expressions, it is possible for the 
classifier to infer a new hierarchy "inferred ontology class 
hierarchy". This is, a hierarchy where classes are classified 
according to the relationship superclass/ subclasses. In this 
case the classification test shows that no suggestion has been 
produced by the reasoner Pellet and that "Asserted 
hierarchy" and "Inferred hierarchy" are identical, indicating 
the validity of classification of our ontology. 
3) Test queries 
PROTÉGÉ allows querying your project and locating all 
instances that match the criteria you specify. You can create 
a simple query, or combine multiple criteria to restrict or 
expand your results. Queries are not part of our knowledge 
base, but are a way to identify the instances in your project, 
based on class and slot properties. We have created different 
queries using SPARQL tool [34].  
 
Figure 10.  Query execution. 
In Figure 10, we present an example of the execution of 
the following query: Find the importance weight preferences 
of all SubDimensions. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The research activity has become increasingly selective 
considering the importance given to the quality of scientific 
production and the diversity of tools and systems evaluating 
research activity. Researchers become selective in their 
choice and are more interested in the quality of information. 
To meet the needs of researchers, we proposed a 
personalization 
system 
dedicated 
to 
the 
researcher 
integrating scientific quality in the user profile. 
Our contribution begins with the proposal of a generic 
profile model enriched by a new type of component which is 
the extended sub-dimension linked with an extend 
relationship to the sub-dimension. Our profile model was 
designed to be open, flexible, evolutionary, and independent 
of any information or technology. Its specialization, 
generalization and instantiation were easy. Next, we 
proposed a qualitative user profile which was an instantiation 
of our generic profile model. The novelty was the integration 
of a new scientometric dimension for assessing the scientific 
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

quality of the selected information. Our contribution was to 
improve the performance of the retrieval system in terms of 
information relevance and to satisfy the researcher’s needs. 
All elements affecting the scientific quality were studied and 
incorporated into the user profile. 
To represent user qualitative preferences, we opted for 
ontology. Our profile ontology is characterized by its 
reusability, 
facility 
of 
expansion, 
integration 
and 
instantiation. The major advantage of our ontological profile 
is its coherence and its consistency shown by tests on it. 
Thus, it is ready for future use in any personalization system 
that is based on user profile.  
Practically, our contribution can improve the research 
quality and relevance. Indirectly, it can positively influence 
research attitudes and affect the quality of research by 
limiting unscientific practices, such as: considering older 
articles are qualitatively better; considering the number of 
citations as an indicator of quality; and giving equal 
consideration to publications at conferences and publications 
in journals or even publications at conferences of different 
classes or in journals having different impact factors. 
 By integrating our ontological user profile into a 
scientometric information retrieval system, as perspectives, 
we plan to apply a model for ontology evaluation based on 
metrics to validate our contribution. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Okubo, “Bibliometric indicators and analysis of research 
systems: 
methods 
and 
examples,” 
OECD 
Science, 
Technology and Industry Working Papers, Jan. 1997, OECD 
Publishing, Paris. 
[2] N. Ibrahim, A. Habacha Chaibi, and M. Ben Ahmed, “New 
scientometric indicator for the qualitative evaluation of 
scientific production,” New Library World Journal, Vol. 116, 
Iss. 11/12, 2015, pp. 661-676. 
[3] L. Tamine, M. Boughanem, and M. Daoud, “Evaluation of 
contextual information retrieval : overview of issues and 
research,” Knowl Inf Syst (Kais), Vol. 24 No.1, 2010, pp. 1-
34. 
[4] H. Lieberman, “Letizia : an agent that assists web browsing,” 
Proc. International Joint Proceedings of the Fourteenth 
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(IJCAI 95), 1995, pp. 924–929. 
[5] C. W. Leung, S. C. Chan, and F. Chung, “A collaborative 
filtering framework based on fuzzy association rules and 
multiple-level similarity,” Knowledge Information System, 
Vol. 10 No. 3, 2006, pp. 357–381. 
[6] R. Harrathi and S. Calabretto, “ A model of information 
quality,” Proc. Extraction et gestion des connaissances (EGC 
2006), 2006, pp. 299–304. 
[7] D. Kostadinov, “Personalization of information, definition of 
user profile model,” Master’s thesis, Université de Versailles, 
France, 2003. 
[8] G. Amato and U. Straccia, “User Profile Modeling and 
Applications to Digital Libraries,” Proc. 3rd European Conf. 
Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries 
(ECDL 99), 1999, pp. 184-197. 
[9] S. Abbar, M. Bouzeghoub, D. Kostadinov, S. Lopes, A.  
Aghasaryan, and S. Betge-Brezetz, “A personalized access 
model: concepts and services for content delivery platforms,” 
Proc. of the 10th International Conference on Information 
Integration and Web-based Applications & Services, ACM,‏ 
Nov. 2008, pp. 41-47. 
[10] P. Vakkari, “A theory of the task-based information retrieval 
process : a summary and generalisation of a longitudinal 
study,” Journal of documentation, Vol. 57 No. 1, 2001, pp. 
44–60. 
[11] Y. El Allioui and O. El Beqqali, “User profile Ontology for 
the Personalization approach,” International Journal of 
Computer Applications, Vol. 41 No. 4, 2012, pp. 31-40. 
[12] B. Mobasher, H. Dai, T. Luo, and M. Nakagawa, “Discovery 
and Evaluation of Aggregate Usage Profiles for Web 
Personalization,” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 
Vol. 6 No. 1, 2002, pp. 61-82. 
[13] J. Allan et al., “Challenges in information retrieval and 
langage modelling,” Workshop held at the center for 
intelligent information retrieval, Septembre, 2002, pp. 31-47.   
[14] T. Saracevic, “The stratefied model of information retrieval 
interaction : extension and applications,” Proc. the 60th 
annual meeting of the American Society for Information 
Science, Medford, NJ, 1997, pp. 313-327.  
[15] M. Sutterer, O. Droegehorn, and K. David, “UPOS: User 
profile 
ontology 
with 
situation-dependent 
preferences 
support,” Proc. First International Conference On Advances 
in Computer-Human Interaction (ACHI08), IEEE, Feb. 2008, 
pp. 230-235. ‏ 
[16] K. L. Skillen, L. Chen, C. D. Nugent, M. P. Donnelly, W. 
Burns, and I. Solheim, “Ontological user profile modeling for 
context-aware application personalization,” Proc. Springer 
Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient Intelligence, Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 261-268‏.  
[17] L. Razmerita, “An ontology-based framework for modeling 
user 
behavior—A 
case 
study 
in 
knowledge 
management,” Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part A: 
Systems and Humans, IEEE Transactions, Vol. 41 No. 4, 
2011, pp. 772-783.   
[18] M. Mezghani, C. A. Zayani, I. Amous, and F. Gargouri, “A 
user profile modelling using social annotations: a survey,” 
Proc. ACM 21st international conference companion on 
World Wide Web, Ap. 2012, pp. 969-976.   
[19] http://scientific.thomsonreuters.com/imgblast/JCRFullCovlist-
2014.pdf 2016-01-10.    
[20] http://www.scimagojr.com/index.php 2016-01-10. 
[21] http://portal.core.edu.au/conf-ranks/ 2016-01-10. 
[22] https://www.elsevier.com/ 2016-01-10. 
[23] http://www.springer.com/gp/ 2016-01-10. 
[24] http://www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/ 2016-01-10. 
[25] https://uk.sagepub.com/en-gb/eur/home 2016-01-10. 
[26] http://dl.acm.org/ 2016-01-10. 
[27] https://www.ieee.org/index.html 2016-01-10. 
[28] http ://www.shanghairanking.com/fr/index.html 2016-01-10. 
[29] C. Atkinson, M. Gutheil and K. Kiko, “On the Relationship of 
Ontologies and Models,” WoMM, Vol. 96, 2006, pp. 47-60.‏ 
[30] N. F. Noy and C. D. Hafner, “Ontological foundations for 
experimental science knowledge bases,” Applied Artificial 
Intelligence, Vol. 14 No. 6, 2000, pp. 565-618.‏ 
[31] G. Antoniou, and F. Van Harmelen, “Web ontology language: 
Owl,” In Handbook on ontologies, Springer Berlin Heidelberg 
2004,  pp. 67-92.  
[32] http://protege.stanford.edu/ 2016-01-10. 
[33] E. Sirin, B. Parsia, B. Grau, A. Kalyanpur, and Y. Katz, 
“Pellet: A practical OWL-DL reasoner. Web Semantics: 
Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web”,  
Software Engineering and the Semantic Web, Vol. 5 No. 2, 
Jun. 2007, pp. 51-53. 
[34] J. Pérez, M. Arenas, and C. Gutierrez, “Semantics and 
complexity of SPARQL,” ACM Transactions on Database 
Systems (TODS), Vol. 34 No. 3, 2009, pp. 16-43. 
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

