Gamiﬁed Point System Based On Mobile Devices
Boyang Liu
Graduate School of Information,
Production and Systems
Waseda University
Fukuoka, Japan 808–0135
Email: waseda-liuboyang@moegi.waseda.jp
Jiro Tanaka
Graduate School of Information,
Production and Systems
Waseda University
Fukuoka, Japan 808–0135
Email: jiro@aoni.waseda.jp
Abstract—Point system is a system providing points to customers
according to the consumption. People can accumulate points
and these points can be used to redeem for money off in the
next purchase. The purpose of point system is to encourage
consumption and maintain the current customers by allowing
them to get a sense of satisfaction from accumulating points.
However, the reduction in redemption rate increases the difﬁculty
of accumulating points, which leads to a decrease in user interest.
The goal of our research is to build a new point system framework
to increase user engagement. This paper calls for a multi-player
approach based on augmented reality game design to engage
users. Compared with existing methods, our system generates
engaging gaming experience through multi-player game design.
Keywords–Gamiﬁcation; User Interactions; Interface Design;
Augmented Reality.
I.
INTRODUCTION
User engagement is an important research topic in many
ﬁelds. Loyalty programs are structured marketing strategies
designed by merchants to encourage customers to continue to
shop at or use the services of businesses associated with each
program [1]. Therefore, a lot of research has been conducted to
improve customer retention from different perspectives [2]-[3].
Point system is the most common loyalty program method-
ology [4]. It provides an interesting possibility for retailers
in customer relationship management [5]. Customer purchases
toward a certain amount of points to redeem their reward. This
framework was proved to be revolutionary. For customers,
point system can help them reduce the cost of buying. For
retailers, they can collect personal data, including demographic
data (name, age, gender, postcode, etc.) and individual level
purchase data (who bought what, where, when, and at what
price) [4]. This data enables retailers to build a customer
database, to proﬁle their customers, to target them with tailored
incentives, and thus to maximize the proﬁtability of their
promotional and pricing strategies. Speciﬁcally, a card is used
to identify the card holder as a participant in the point system
[6]. Typically, it has a barcode or magstripe that can be easily
scanned. By giving such a card, purchasers can receive either
a discount on the current purchase, or points that they can use
for future purchases. With the development of mobile devices,
digital point cards are also being used.
In the current system, point is the only feature to engage
users and it is no longer as attractive as it used to be. One
reason is that the customers perceive the rewards as too
difﬁcult to earn. Another reason is that current point systems
focus on economic value but ignore other perceived value
designs. Kreis et al. [7] divided the perceived value into
three dimensions including economic value, interaction value
and psychological value. Economic value relates primarily to
utilitarian, instrumental beneﬁts. Interaction value is derived
from interaction with others and psychological value is derived
from recognition.
There are two challenges we need to solve. One challenge
is that we need to ﬁnd a way to increase user engagement with-
out changing the redemption rate. The other is that we need to
consider interaction and psychological value to improve user’s
perceived value.
To address these limitation, we design a new multiplayer
gamiﬁed point system to engage users. Since current point
system is designed for single user, it is difﬁcult to take
advantage of user interactions. Our goal is to build a frame-
work for the next generation point system. Important value
including interaction value and psychological value should also
be considered in the design of new point system. Besides,
users desire for user interactions could be combined to in-
crease user engagement. In this system, all users can join the
game voluntarily. Users can get mission from our system in
mission interface and get value points and experience value
as reward in value point & pet interface after completing
mission. We explore two variations of user interactions - one
is the competition where the users can compete face-to-face
with other users and try to win the competition to gain a
sense of accomplishment, and one in which users can do non-
competitive interaction with their partners to gain happiness.
By adding a multiplayer element, users have the opportunity
to not only accumulate rewards in the system, but also have
the opportunity of compete with opponents or sharing their
rewards with friends. It is considered to potentially increase a
users motivation to use the system and improve the interaction
between users.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Second
2 describes related work. Section 3 and Section 4 describe the
design and implementation of our system. Section 5 describes
some discussion on our system and current point system. In
Section 6, we make a conclusion about our system and come
up with some ideas about our future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we discuss previous research in the areas
of point system, social inﬂuence, gamiﬁcation, and augmented
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

reality game.
A. Point System
Enzmann et al. [3] think that users refuse to use point sys-
tem because they may fear an invasion of privacy. Therefore,
they present two variants of a privacy-friendly loyalty system
to be used by online vendors for issuing points.
In the study of Coskun et al. [8], the design of Near
Field Communication (NFC) enabled loyalty system on smart
cards of NFC mobiles and development details are presented.
NFC technology is a short-range, high frequency, and low
bandwidth wireless technology which occurs between two
devices within few centimetres. With this model, loyalty and
payment applications share and exchange valuable information
through NFC Loyal Database system on smart card.
Lim et al. [9] study online loyalty programs from a search-
ability perspective. The goal of their research is to explain how
searchability can inﬂuence participation in loyalty programs.
All above research aims at increasing user engagement
through utilitarian motives such as improving the security,
convenience and functionality of current point system. Our
research focus on enhancing symbolic motives, which are
related to needs for self-esteem and social approval.
B. Social Inﬂuence
The social impact is particularly signiﬁcant in commerce.
For example, many people read what other people think about
products by logging on to social media sites before making a
purchase. Social media users trust what their friends, family,
and even strangers say online about a brand or product. In-
store shopping decisions are also affected, as customers use
their mobile devices to look at reviews and ratings to reinforce
their purchasing decisions [10].
Lee et al. [11] proposed a multi-phased model for internet
shopping, which fully takes the characteristics of the internet
and cyber shopping into consideration in their paper. Their
results indicate that diverse communication affects the level
of trust. If customers share more values with other customers
and if they have more diverse means of communication, they
would intend to revisit the site more repeatedly.
In the study of Zhu et al. [12], they designed and ran an
experiment to measure social inﬂuence in online recommender
systems. Their results show that social inﬂuence could sway
peoples own choices signiﬁcantly.
Li et al. [13] found that emotion played a signiﬁcant role in
the mobile consumption experience in their research. They sug-
gest that attention should be paid on the social communication
process between humans to improve consumption experience.
The above research shows that social inﬂuence has a
positive effect in commerce. Our research is based on the
combination of social inﬂuences and commerce. Speciﬁcally,
we have designed two kinds of user interactions in our system
to study how different social types affect user engagement.
C. Gamiﬁcation
Gamiﬁcation refers to the application of using game design
elements and game mechanisms in a non-game contexts to
enable users to solve problems and improve the contribution
of users [14]. Commonly, gamiﬁcation employs game design
elements to improve organizational productivity, user engage-
ment and more. Lots of research about gamiﬁcation indicates
that a majority of studies on gamiﬁcation reveal that it exerts
good effect on individuals. The gamiﬁcation techniques are
aiming at leveraging peoples natural desires for achievement,
competition, socializing or simply their response to the framing
of a situation as game or play.
Li et al. [15] design a gamiﬁed multiplayer software tutorial
system called CADament. Compared with existing gamiﬁed
software tutorial systems, their system generates engaging
learning experience through competitions. Their study shows
that their system has an advantage over pre-authored tutorials
for improving learners performance, increasing motivation, and
stimulating knowledge transfer.
In the paper of Dergousoff et al. [16], they think clas-
sic ways of gathering data on human behavior are time-
consuming, costly and are subject to limited participant pools.
Therefore, they combine both gamiﬁcation and crowdsourcing
techniques into a smartphone-based platform to motivate vol-
untary participation and provide researchers with a framework
that can be used to investigate multiple research questions
without the need to develop costly specialized games.
For the purpose of inspiring customers, some ideas of com-
bining game and marketing are proposed to engage customers.
Zichermann et al. [17] thought that traditional advertising is
losing effectiveness as competition for consumer attention and
game playing is on the rise and vying for customers attention.
Gamiﬁcation is also used in education and health. Arawjo
et al. [18] present a puzzle game that builds student understand-
ing of programming concepts. Their results from a lab study
demonstrate that novices can learn programming concepts by
playing the game and the game was well received. In the paper
of Zhao et al. [19], they present the design and ﬁndings of
a study on the motivational effects of using activity tracker-
based games to promote daily exercise. The results of their
study show that participants preferred the gamiﬁed exercise
experience over regular exercises and features related to social
factors played a relatively more important role in this game
experience.
The above research shows that gamiﬁcation is a universal
and effective means to increase user engagement. Our system
incorporates gamiﬁcation elements to enhance user experience.
D. Augmented Reality Game
In the research of Bai et al. [20], they present an augmented
reality system enhancing social pretend play by young chil-
dren. Observations showed that children are highly engaged
with the augmented reality system.
Mulloni et al. [21] present an augmented reality game
that strongly exploits mobility and social interaction between
players as core gameplay elements. The user study showed
a general enthusiasm for their game by young adults with
varying interest in gaming. Simple user interface resulted in an
enjoyable player experience and users asked for multisensorial
feedback and 3D animations.
Baudisch et al. [22] present imaginary reality games that
mimic the respective real world sport, such as basketball or
soccer. Their game maintained many of the properties of
physical sports, such as unencumbered play, physical exertion,
and immediate social interaction between players.
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III.
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
To realize the purpose of leveraging user to engage users,
we designed and implemented an augmented reality based
gamiﬁed point system deployed on mobile devices. Our system
should be designed based on current system: 1) points will
be rewarded if users complete shopping; 2) redemption rate
should be consistent with current system.
We present a multi-player approach based on game design
in our system to improve user engagement. A theme of raising
a pet is chosen in the proposed system because 1) pet reﬂects
user’s status; 2) user can get the satisfaction of accumulating
value points because redeeming gifts can be much easier in
the game; 3) the theme of pet raising can create a relaxing
and enjoyable game environment for user interaction.
A. System Structure
In the current point system, shopping is the input and the
point is the output. However, points can compensate users
for their spending but cannot support value creation in the
purchase. For example, an environmental protection enthusiast
may be more likely to buy energy-saving lamps because it
is for the purpose of protecting the environment rather than
accumulating points. Therefore, we designed a new point
system on the current point system framework. As shown
in Figure 1, the blue line part indicates the current system
framework while the red line part is our new design.
Our system can be divided into two modules. One module
is the individual module (see Figure 1). In the individual
module, new input (mission) is designed. To motivate users
to create value from shopping activities, we designed new
feedback including value points, pet and food as new output.
Figure 1. Individual module.
The other module is the user interaction module (see
Figure 2). The design of these new feedback increases user
engagement by leveraging user interactions including compe-
tition and non-competitive interaction. Value point and food are
designed to motivate the non-competitive interaction between
users. Pet is designed for user competition.
Figure 2. User interaction module.
B. Mission
The mission is designed to remind users of multi-value cre-
ation. We developed a set of mission for shopping for our pro-
totype. In an actual deployment, we can create various mission
with different value guidance or mission that includes multiple
value guidance. Personalized mission could be created based
on the purchase information and user information recorded in
the point system to provide personalized experience. Previous
mission can be easily replaced by new mission and displayed in
this interface. The mission could be completed in the purchase.
At checkout, mission will be automatically conﬁrmed. For
example, a user selects the mission that requires the user
to buy low calorie food. The product information will be
read automatically by scanning the barcode of the product to
conﬁrm whether the mission is completed at checkout. The
difﬁculty of mission could increase gradually and eventually
reach a reasonable level. Users can select the mission they
want to accomplish in a set of mission.
C. New Feedback
Our gamiﬁed points system does not force users to par-
ticipate. After the users complete the shopping and mission,
our system will give feedback to participants to promote their
intentions. In our system, users can still earn points from
shopping as current system. At the same time, we design some
new feedback.
More precisely, there are three new elements:
1) Value Point: We propose a design named value points
inspired by the design that users can get points from shopping.
Users can get the value points if they complete mission. Value
points can be used to buy virtual food to feed pet. Value point
is the feedback for mission.
2) Pet: In our system, user can feed a virtual pet. Pet will
gain EXP if user completes the mission. If the EXP of pet
reaches threshold, the pet will level up. The energy of pet will
gradually lose and it will inﬂuence the upgrades of pet (if the
pet is more energetic, it can get more experience points for
the completion of mission). It is designed to motivate users to
complete mission continuously. Pet reﬂects the status of the
user.
3) Virtual Food: In this system, user can use value points to
buy virtual food. The food can be used to help pet get energy.
Users need to get value points continuously to keep their pets
in good condition. Food can also be given to other players
as gift. The food given to other players can also help the pet
get energy. The design of food not only motivates users to
accumulate value points, but also encourages them to interact
with others.
D. Usage
During shopping, users can start the system deployed on
the mobile devices. In the mission interface, users can view the
content of mission and select mission. Users can select goods
according to the selected mission. At the time of checkout,
goods information such will be read and the data will be
used to conﬁrm whether the mission selected by the user is
completed or not. If purchased is conﬁrmed, user can get points
as current system. If mission is conﬁrmed, user can get value
points and users pet will get EXP.
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

E. Game Types
In our design, we leverage user interactions to engage users
and help them to create value from purchase. By designing
user interfaces, we want to build interactions between users.
We explored two different game modes to motivate users,
competition and non-competitive interaction.
In competition mode, users can use the point card as an
identiﬁcation of personal status to compete with other users.
It will motivate users to continuously improve their personal
status to win the competition. Figure 3 shows the assumption
scenario where three users participate in the competition. Each
of the three users has a mobile phone with a gamiﬁed point
system installed. Each of them has a digital point card in their
client. When three users participate in competition, they put
their digital point cards together on the table. The gamiﬁed
point system on the laptop is running and captures the video
stream through the web camera. Based on the level information
obtained from the database, the result of competition will be
displayed in competition interface.
Figure 3. Assumption scenario for competition.
In non-competitive interaction mode, users can interact
with other users. Figure 4 shows the non-competitive inter-
action between two users. Users can get the joy of sharing
from giving virtual food to their friends via mobile devices.
Figure 4. Non-competitive interaction.
Both designs attempt to engage users through interac-
tions between users. In competition mode, users can gain
a sense of accomplishment from defeating other users. In
non-competitive interaction mode, users can gain the joy of
accumulating value points by sharing virtual food with friends.
F. User Interface
In the gamiﬁed system, we mainly designed four different
user interfaces based on augmented reality visualization.
1) Mission Interface: In the mission interface, user can
browse different mission by swiping the screens. The content
will be displayed to the user in text form (see Figure 5). Users
can click the left arrow and right arrow to view the content
of different mission. When users decide to select mission as
a shopping target, they can click the choose button. Then,
mission information will be stored in the database. It will be
conﬁrmed at checkout. If it is conﬁrmed, user can get reward.
If it is not ﬁnished, it will be deleted from database after
checkout.
Figure 5. Mission interface.
2) Value Point & Pet Interface: In this interface, we can
view the visualization of value points and pet which is super-
imposed on a digital point card (see Figure 6). If user gets
new value points, the volume of value points will increase.
This design allows users to get intuitive visual feedback from
accumulating value points. The pet will gradually lose energy
and the movement of pet will change according to its energy.
Therefore, user needs to buy virtual food to help pet recover
energy. This design motivates users to complete mission or
get food from friends to feed pet. When the user completes
a certain amount of mission, users level will increase. This
change will be reﬂected in the size of pet and the level of pet.
The level of pet is shown near the pet. Pet needs to research
speciﬁc level to unlock a new shape.
Figure 6. Value point & pet interface.
3) Competition Interface: We designed a face-to-face com-
petition interface for multiple users. In this interface, users
can see their pets. When multiple users put their point cards
together, the gamiﬁed system deployed on the mobile device
will identify their cards and get their level information from
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the database. Users level information will be reﬂected in their
pets level. In this interface, our system will give ranking results
according to the level. For example, the pet with the highest
level will stand on the highest podium with a golden crown
over its head while the pet with the second highest level will
stand on the second highest podium with a magenta crown
over its head (see Figure 7).
Figure 7. Competition interface.
4) Non-competitive Interaction Interface: Users can pur-
chase virtual foods with value points in the non-competitive
interaction interface. When the value point is spent, the volume
of the value point will decrease. The virtual food bought will
be displayed in the interface. Users can use virtual food to feed
their pets or give food to their friends. If the pet is fed, it will
get a certain amount of energy and give motion feedback to
the user. If a user receives food from his or her friend, the food
will be displayed in the user’s interface with a label indicating
the sender. This design allows users to socialize with other
users by sharing their reward (see Figure 8).
IV.
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
The main hardware devices used for the development of
our prototype system include a tablet PC, a webcam and a
smartphone. Windows 10 Home Edition is installed in the
tablet PC. The processor is Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-6500U CPU
@2.50GHz 2.59GHz. The RAM is 8.00 GB. Webcam is
connected to the tablet PC to capture real-time video and send
video stream to the tablet PC for processing. The development
software is Unity 2017.2.0f3 (64-bit), a cross-platform game
engine. Unity 3D is used to build and render our three-
dimensional system. Vuforia SDK is used for augmented
reality implementation, which uses computer vision technology
to recognize and track images. After recognizing the image of
point card on the smartphone, virtual objects created in Unity
3D will be superimposed on the smartphone. After that, users
can see the 3D objects and interact with them. As for the
database, we used WampServer Version 3.0.6 32bit consisting
of the Apache web server, OpenSSL for SSL support, MySQL
database and PHP programming language. Apach and MySQL
Figure 8. Non-competitive interaction interface.
are always running on the server. Communication between the
mobile devices and the server is implemented in PHP.
Our system is implemented based on client-server network
structure (see Figure 9). Gamiﬁed point system will be de-
ployed on mobile device as a client. The retailers can manage
and update user information. Users access data when register-
ing their own information and obtaining their information from
database. We use the WWW class and the WWWForm class
to send and receive data from Unity. When receiving from
the database, the information is converted to JSON format and
received. After receiving it on the Unity side, it is decoded
into a string format.
Figure 9. System network structure overview.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Point system is a system designed to attract consumers.
However, due to some problems like the decrease of redemp-
tion rate and changes in consumption choice, the attractiveness
of system goes down. In this paper, a gamiﬁed point system on
mobile devices is introduced. Gamiﬁed point system presents a
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

method for engaging users using multiplayer game design. As
an important advantage over current point system, each user
can participate in a game experience to interact with others.
Compared to the current point system, our system has the
following advantages:
1)
Multi-value shopping guidance by mission.
2)
Engaging game experience by four game elements
design.
3)
User interaction by
a)
Competition.
b)
Non-competitive interaction.
Current point systems only focus on the economic feed-
back. If users complete the shopping, they can get points as
rewards. However, many other value factors should also be
considered in consumption such as health and environmental
factors. Our system is designed based on current system
structure. By adding mission into our system, we remind
users of multi-value factors. To motivate users to pay attention
to value creation, we design new feedback to improve the
system. By adding these game elements, we create a game-
like environment for users. Users can get more enjoyable
game experience by participating in our system than current
system. In order to improve user engagement, two kinds of user
interactions are designed with the four game elements. Users
cannot only conduct individual mission to get rewards but
also can get satisfaction from competition and non-competitive
interaction with other users.
Users can choose to participate in the game or not. In
the game, there are four game elements. The mission is the
task that users need to accomplish. The content of mission
combines multiple values. For users that go shopping with the
goal to get a particular object and leave the store, we can
add some mission related to consumption so that they can
also participate in the game. For example, when they spend
a certain amount of money, they will also get value points.
If users complete the mission during shopping, they can get
value points and their pets can get EXP. Users can use value
point to buy virtual food which can be used to feed their pets.
When the EXP reaches a certain amount, the pet will upgrade.
If the pet is not fed for a long time, the pet will become
inactive. Therefore, users need to constantly earn value points
in exchange for virtual food to keep pets active.
Pet and virtual food are designed for user interaction. In
competition interface, users can compete with others with pet.
The ranking result will be displayed in the interface according
to level of pet. In non-competitive interaction interface, users
can buy virtual food and share the food with others. Both of
two designs take advantage of users’ desire for socializing.
In the future, we would like to investigate other important
elements in multiplayer games, such as collaboration and social
communities. It would be interesting to further investigate the
effect of each game elements. In the future, we would like
to further evaluate the effect of our gamiﬁed point system by
carrying out some experiments. First of all, we will compare
gamiﬁed point system with the baseline condition to verify
that if our system increases engagement by evaluating usage
frequency and duration. Then, we will evaluate game elements
in our system. We will evaluate three kinds of mission (buy
local goods, buy low calories foods and buy recyclable goods)
by evaluating mission completion rate. Three kinds of pet (cat,
dog, turtle) will be evaluated to understand the impact of pet.
Two kinds of user interaction will be evaluated to study the
impact of different interaction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the China Scholarship Council for
sponsoring Boyang Liu studying at the Waseda University.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Sharp and A. Sharp, “Loyalty programs and their impact on
repeat-purchase loyalty patterns,” International journal of Research in
Marketing, vol. 14, no. 5, 1997, pp. 473–486.
[2]
A. Hupfeld and C. Speed, “Getting something for nothing?: A user-
centric perspective on loyalty card schemes,” in Proceedings of the 2017
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM,
2017, pp. 4443–4453.
[3]
M. Enzmann and M. Schneider, “Improving customer retention in
e-commerce through a secure and privacy-enhanced loyalty system,”
Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 7, no. 4-5, 2005, pp. 359–370.
[4]
S. G. Magatef and E. F. Tomalieh, “The impact of customer loyalty
programs on customer retention,” International Journal of Business and
Social Science, vol. 6, no. 8, 2015, pp. 78–93.
[5]
A. D. Smith and J. A. Potter, “Loyalty card programs, customer
relationship and information technology: an exploratory approach,”
International Journal of Business Innovation and Research, vol. 4, no.
1-2, 2009, pp. 65–92.
[6]
C. Mauri, “Card loyalty. a new emerging issue in grocery retailing,”
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, vol. 10, no. 1, 2003, pp.
13–25.
[7]
H. Kreis and A. Mafael, “The inﬂuence of customer loyalty program
design on the relationship between customer motives and value percep-
tion,” Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, vol. 21, no. 4, 2014,
pp. 590–600.
[8]
V. Coskun, B. Ozdenizci, K. Ok, M. Alsadi, and F. Soylemezgiller, “De-
sign and development of nfc enabled loyalty system,” in Proceedings
of the 6th international conference of advanced computer systems and
networks: Design and application, Lviv, Ukraine, 2013, pp. 16–18.
[9]
S. Lim and B. Lee, “Online loyalty programs viewed from a search-
ability perspective,” in Proceedings of the 14th Annual International
Conference on Electronic Commerce.
ACM, 2012, pp. 255–262.
[10]
Y. Kim and J. Srivastava, “Impact of social inﬂuence in e-commerce
decision making,” in Proceedings of the ninth international conference
on Electronic commerce.
ACM, 2007, pp. 293–302.
[11]
J. Lee, J. Kim, and J. Y. Moon, “What makes internet users visit cyber
stores again? key design factors for customer loyalty,” in Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2000, pp. 305–312.
[12]
H. Zhu, B. Huberman, and Y. Luon, “To switch or not to switch:
understanding social inﬂuence in online choices,” in Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
2012, pp. 2257–2266.
[13]
M. Li, Z. Dong, and X. Chen, “Factors inﬂuencing consumption expe-
rience of mobile commerce: a study from experiential view,” Internet
Research, vol. 22, no. 2, 2012, pp. 120–141.
[14]
K. Huotari and J. Hamari, “Deﬁning gamiﬁcation: a service marketing
perspective,” in Proceeding of the 16th international academic MindTrek
conference.
ACM, 2012, pp. 17–22.
[15]
W. Li, T. Grossman, and G. Fitzmaurice, “Cadament: a gamiﬁed
multiplayer software tutorial system,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2014,
pp. 3369–3378.
[16]
K. Dergousoff and R. L. Mandryk, “Mobile gamiﬁcation for crowd-
sourcing data collection: Leveraging the freemium model,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems.
ACM, 2015, pp. 1065–1074.
[17]
G. Zichermann and J. Linder, Game-based marketing: inspire customer
loyalty through rewards, challenges, and contests. John Wiley & Sons,
2010.
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[18]
I. Arawjo, C.-Y. Wang, A. C. Myers, E. Andersen, and F. Guimbreti`ere,
“Teaching programming with gamiﬁed semantics,” in Proceedings of
the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2017, pp. 4911–4923.
[19]
Z. Zhao, A. Arya, A. Whitehead, G. Chan, and S. A. Etemad, “Keeping
users engaged through feature updates: A long-term study of using
wearable-based exergames.” in CHI, 2017, pp. 1053–1064.
[20]
Z. Bai, A. F. Blackwell, and G. Coulouris, “Exploring expressive
augmented reality: The ﬁngar puppet system for social pretend play,” in
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2015, pp. 1035–1044.
[21]
A. Mulloni, D. Wagner, and D. Schmalstieg, “Mobility and social inter-
action as core gameplay elements in multi-player augmented reality,” in
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Digital Interactive
Media in Entertainment and Arts.
ACM, 2008, pp. 472–478.
[22]
P. Baudisch, H. Pohl, S. Reinicke, E. Wittmers, P. L¨uhne, M. Knaust,
S. K¨ohler, P. Schmidt, and C. Holz, “Imaginary reality gaming: ball
games without a ball,” in Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology.
ACM, 2013,
pp. 405–410.
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

