Basic Study for a New Analysis Method for Biological Signals to Evaluate in Human 
Walking 
 
Tatsuo Hisaoka, Naoki Hashimoto,                 
Yusuke Kobayashi, Masaya Hori                      
Tokyo Univ. of Science, Suwa 
Engineering, management graduate course  
Engineering, specialization in management 
Chino-city, Japan 
e-mail: {GH16608, GH16607, GH17608, 
GH17612}@ed.tus.ac.jp 
Mayu Maeda, Hiroaki Inoue                                        
Tokyo Univ. of Science, Suwa 
Faculty of Engineering  
Chino-city, Japan 
e-mail: S314052@ed.tus.ac.jp 
e-mail: hiroaki-inoue@rs.tus.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Shunji Shimizu 
Tokyo Univ. of Science, Suwa / Faculty of Engineering 
Jichi Medical University / Psychiatric Course 
Chino-city, Japan 
e-mail: shun@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Abstract—Recently, in developed countries, especially in Japan, 
the population of elderly people has grown. The care load for 
elderly people has been steadily growing. Most important for 
such care is to provide support for elderly people in walking. 
There are many reports on analyses of Human Walking, but 
there are few commercially available products that are able to 
provide support for Human Walking. The utilization rate of 
such support is 8.7% in Japan. Therefore, it is bionic, and the 
development of expensive walk apparatus for such applications 
is necessary. The purpose of this study is to propose a new 
analysis method for biological signals to evaluate in human 
walking. Concretely, in this experiment, a new measurement 
system was developed for human walk movement analysis with 
an embedded system including a microcomputer chip and a 
motion tracking device. Using this measurement system, 
electrical muscular potential and the acceleration of toe or 
instep of foot. In our results, this measurement system was 
found to clearly discriminate the difference in walking 
movements when wearing a pair of sandal or not. We think 
that these data are useful to design guidelines for a new 
accessibility system for human walking. 
 
Keywords-Human walking; Surface myoelectric potential; 
Walk assisting apparatus; Analysis method; Biological signal. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recently, in developed countries, especially in Japan, the 
population of elderly people has grown. There is a high risk 
of falling among elderly people, with about a 28 to 35% 
chance of falls in those over 65 years old [1]. In severe cases, 
it may be a serious problem because their physical strength 
may be lowered due to bed rest and being bedridden may 
result. Especially preservation therapy is performed in 90% 
of such cases as a cure for degenerative joint disease and 
arthrogryposis. It is a serious problem in that chances of 
healing and recovery to a self-reliant life are less than 50% 
[2]. Methods for increasing functional base of support 
(FBOS), such as a cane for walk assistance and stabilization 
are effective for posture maintenance, but their rate of 
dissemination is poor [3]. As a result, rehabilitation stations 
are being expanded more frequently, and there seems to be a 
demand for lower limb orthotic conservative therapy. 
However, according to the research on age care payment 
costs, it was 8.7% in 2017 and, considering the present 
conditions of the diffusion rate of a walk aid being covered 
by nursing care insurance, cannot be said to be spreading [4]. 
Accordingly, our laboratory, aimed for the development of a 
walk aid which has a high bionic application level. In 
addition, we developed a new measurement system and, for 
walk movement analysis, introduced it and performed a 
surface electromyography (EMG) of the group of muscles 
being used in conjunction with the walk movement and 
simultaneous measurement of the acceleration of the foot 
part. Thus, the experiment extracts a quantitative index for 
the development of the walk aid and could in this way 
perform an analysis of the physical load and evaluation of 
the lower limb orthotic in a walking motion. Therefore, we 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

tested footwear in which the load of the foot bottom was 
differentiated to be examined and reported [5]. 
The structure of this paper is Section 5. In Section 1, we 
describe the background, necessity and purpose of this 
research. In Section 2, we introduce a simple measurement 
system and experiment method. In Section 3, we explain 
using a figure how little foot subduction is taken. In Section 
4, we will examine the results. Section 5 describes the 
usefulness of this experiment and future tasks. 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD 
In this study, we tried to measure transformation of the 
arch of foot. The transformation of minute joint was ignored 
in the current measurement device such as force plate and 
the Three-dimensional motion capture system. Therefore, 
there are few examples that the transformation of the joints 
is considered in the development of welfare device. In order 
to measure the very small deviation of the foot during 
walking, we developed measuring system by using 
accelerometer and measured the walking movement. 
1. 
Subjects 
The subjects were five healthy men who had no history 
of orthopedic disease or neurological disease. Age, heights, 
weights, the average and standard deviation of age, height 
and weight was 23.8±0.9, 168.8±3.6cm, 66.5±9.9kg 
respectively. 
 
2. 
Informed consent 
We carried out this experiment with sufficient informed 
consent of the subjects after the approval of the Tokyo Univ. 
of Science, Suwa Ethical Review Board. 
 
3. 
Measurement system 
The use apparatus used Raspberry Pi 3 and MPU6050. 
The MPU6050 is a device that measures acceleration. 
Specifications of the MPU-6050: 
l 
Digital-output 
triple-axis 
accelerometer 
with 
a 
programmable full scale range of ±2g, ±4g, ±8g and 
±16g (Table 1). 
l 
The MPU-6050 then communicates with a system 
processor as a slave through an I2C serial interface. 
l 
Chip built-in 16 bit AD converter, and 16 bits data 
output. 
l 
A sampling rate that is programmable from 4 to 
1,000Hz. 
l 
Two I2C addresses. 
The measurement system connected two MPU6050 to 
Raspberry Pi 3 and communicated using I2C. The program 
used python and executed things with Raspberry Pi 3. The 
range of measurement confirmed that ±16g was not 
necessary in a preliminary experiment. Therefore, the range 
of measurement was set to ±8g and had better precision. The 
sampling rate was measured at 1,000Hz. The data obtained 
from the sensor was corrected to the physical value by the 
following formula. 
Acceleration = 16 bit value of sensor / LSB sensitivity 
[6]. 
The measurement data were saved to a PC through 
wireless communication of RaspberryPi3. 
4. 
Method 
A. 
Arrangement of accelerometer on the instep 
Acceleration measurement of the instep was made by 
placing an accelerometer on the navicular bone to accord 
with Acceleration measurement of the arch. The x axis, the 
y axis and the z axis are of adduction direction, advancing 
direction, and the height direction to plus respectively. 
 
B. 
Measurement of accelerometer on the instep 
An accelerometer is put under the navicular bone to 
accord with the Acceleration measurement of the instep. 
The x axis, the y axis and the z axis are each of adduction 
direction, advancing direction, and the height direction to 
plus respectively. 
 
C. 
Measurement by accelerometer on the instep 
Acceleration at the time when hallux was stepping 
was measured. The accelerometer was adjusted to be placed 
 
 
Figure 1. Surface EMG adhesion position  
Table 1. The accelerometers sensitivity per LBS 
 
Full Scale Range 
LSB Sensitivity 
±2g 
16384 LSB/g 
±4g 
8192 LSB/g 
±8g 
4096 LSB/g 
±16g 
2048 LSB/g 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

under the rough surface of the first metatarsal bone. The x 
axis, the y axis and the z axis are of adduction direction, 
advancing 
direction, 
the 
height 
direction 
to 
plus 
respectively. 
D. 
Placement of surface electromyogram 
The surface electromyogram (EMG) measured a 
muscular group (Tibialis anterior muscle, Gastrocnemius 
muscle) concerning the walk movement (Figure 1). In the 
experiment, a sufficient amount of fat and keratin was 
removed, and electrodes (Advance; LecTrode) were affixed.  
 
E. 
The experiment method 
The subjects attached two accelerometer and surface 
EMG meters to the lower limbs, and walked straight for 
approximately 10m indoors. During that time, we measured 
each eight times walking bare foot and wearing sandals. 
A) The subject stands by in the standing position, 
starts measurement, and then starts to walk on 
the measurement person's signal. 
B) 
The subject walks about 10 m. 
C) 
The subject stops walking on the signal of the 
experimenter and waits in the standing position. 
D) The subject keeps standing till there is a sign 
that the experiment has ended. 
 In addition, subjects were asked to press the switch at 
the time of heel contact and used as an indication of the 
start of the walk cycle. The accelerometer was connected 
with a microcomputer and saved acceleration data to the 
personal computer with a wireless connection.  
EMG derived data with a multi telemeter (Nihon 
Kohden Tomioka Corp; Multi-telemeter), performed A / D 
conversion (ADinstrulmental; PowerLab), and saved EMG 
data to the personal computer (SONY; PCG-5M5N). The 
trigger input used an LED circuit of 5V output to 
synchronize with other data. While walking, the trigger was 
given to the examinee and was pressed when the toes left 
the ground and the heel made contact [7]. Furthermore, 
rectification, Root Mean Square analysis and examination 
was performed on the EMG data. 
 
F. 
Analysis method 
We thought of my legs as a simple model (Figure 2). 
From the motion picture at walking time, the angle from the 
center of gravity to the foot which was measured in 
advance from the front / side of the subject was 
mathematically examined. Compare the extension and 
deformation of the foot with the accelerometer and the 
extension / deformation at the resting standing position. 
Regarding the walking motion from terminal stance to 
loading, the position change due to acceleration was 
obtained by the following equation by integration. X is the 
variable distance, a is the acceleration obtained from the 
accelerometer, and g is the gravitational acceleration.  
 
III.  EXPERIMETAL RESULTS 
A. 
Measurment  
As for experimental results, the acceleration of instep, 
arch and hallux was measured and a correspondence between 
the Tibialis anterior muscle and Gastrocnemius muscle could 
be confirmed.  
Figure 3 shows the waveform of one subject 
accelerometer as a representative example. It represents one 
cycle from heel contact to heel contact. The vertical axis is 
the gravitational acceleration applied in each direction, the 
horizontal axis is time, x, y, z are the direction orthogonal to 
the traveling direction, the traveling direction and the height 
direction. 
l 
Figure 3-a shows the results when placing acceleration 
on the instep and arch of the foot while walking with 
bare feet. 
l 
Figure 3-b shows the results when placing acceleration 
on the instep and arch of the foot while walking with 
sandals. 
l 
Figure 3-c shows the results when placing acceleration 
on the instep and the first toe while walking with bare 
feet. 
l 
Figure 3-d shows the results when placing acceleration 
on the instep and the first toe while walking with 
sandals. 
Figure 3 also shows the movement distance by one subject 
from the loading to the terminal stance as a representative 
example. 
 
B. 
Analysis method 
From the equation (1), we compare the changes in the 
long axis direction and the short axis direction of the foot 
with the micro displacement distance between the stationary 
state and the dynamic state. At that time, the area and norm 
were examined using the micro displacement distance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Simple skeleton model: Load response to feet as viewed from 
the side 
𝑥 = #  
%
&'(
{T(i) − T(i − 1)}1×𝑎×𝑔 
 
(1) 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

This seems to be related to foot changes due to 
accelerometer load. In addition to not extending the 
elongation of the foot in one direction, it tends to elongate in 
the long axis direction due to individual differences and it 
tends to stretch in the minor axis direction, so compare the 
major axis direction, minor axis direction, area and norm. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. 
Measurement  
In this research, we focused on the deformation of the 
arch during walking by using an accelerometer at walking in 
a force plate and a three - dimensional motion analyzer, and 
measured a minute displacement of the biological motion 
difficult to measure. We simulate a human body model that 
 
 
Figure 3-d. Walking with sandals 
 
 
 
Figure 3-c. Walking with barefoot 
 
 
 
Figure 3-a. Walking with barefoot 
 
 
 
Figure 3-b. Walking with sandals 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

approximates a rigid body using a force plate and a 
three-dimensional motion analysis device used for the 
current gait analysis, and in many cases do not consider 
joints of the forefoot part. Therefore, at this time, there are 
no useful goods and welfare equipment. Thus, in order to 
measure minute displacement of walking feet, walking 
analysis was carried out using an accelerometer, and 
advanced bioengineering application was developed. We will 
explain experimental considerations on acceleration data, 
addition average, standard deviation, simple skeleton model, 
measurement deviation distance. Especially, consider area 
and norm. Regarding the arch change in the direction of 
travel and transverse direction by walking, norm and inner 
product value are obtained, and as a result of comparing the 
load change, the norm of the foot has a higher proportional 
relationship, the arch variable has the norm, I Found a 
possibility to be an indicator of the load evaluation on the 
foot. 
This experiment yields the results that the hallux 
becomes the main axis from the moving distance of the 
instep, plantar arch, and hallux of the foot, and the 
possibility of center of gravity movement is considered. 
According to Kanabe et al., "The hallux has supportive 
action at the position in front of the center of gravity". We 
think that the hallux also supports the center of gravity while 
walking. We consider that it is important not only to support 
the vertical direction but also to support the hallux, which is 
thought to have the support function of the center of gravity 
with respect to the horizontal force. The amount of change of  
 
Table 2. Comparison with area 
subjects 
Total load 
(𝒎𝒎𝟐) 
Barefoot change 
due to 
acceleration 
(𝒎𝒎𝟐) 
Acceleration of 
sandals and 
change during use 
(𝒎𝒎𝟐) 
A 
32.0 
1.85 
1.23 
B 
130.0 
3.4*1089 
0.09 
C 
16.0 
1.8*1089 
0.04 
D 
20.0 
0.81 
0.17 
E 
18.0 
0.13 
1.38 
F 
18.0 
18.44 
1.16 
 
Table 3. Comparison with norm 
subjects 
Total load 
(mm) 
Barefoot change 
due to 
acceleration 
(mm) 
Acceleration of 
sandals and 
change during use 
(mm) 
A 
90.0 
2.77 
7.25 
B 
25.0 
0.43 
0.73 
C 
17.0 
0.03 
0.16 
D 
19.0 
1.93 
0.93 
E 
18.0 
0.76 
2.72 
F 
13.0 
3.69 
2.63 
the foot bottom is different from a bare foot in conjunction 
with having an insole or not. 
In conclusion, this study proposed a new gait analysis 
method to measure microtremors of muscles and bones. In 
order to develop the insole which enables easy posture 
maintenance, we measured the parameters used as the index 
of the insole. The deformation of the arch that is difficult to 
measure with the method frequently used for biometric 
measurement was able to be grasped as the area and norm 
from the deviation distance. From this result, shock 
absorption of walking can be seen, and it is possible to 
quantitatively measure the change of the arch considering the 
bow of the foot which is greatly involved in the walking 
function. However, it is still inadequate to develop insole, 
which is the object of this research, and it is necessary to 
further improve the system, experiment and inspection, but it 
is necessary to further improve system, experiment and 
inspection by a simple and simple method suggesting the 
possibility. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this experiment, the subduction of the foot during 
walking was measured using an accelerometer. I think that it 
is the first step of a system which can analyze walking 
anywhere, rather than using expensive equipment such as 
force plates or 3-dimensional motion analysis equipment. It 
can be used in limited space and is relatively inexpensive. 
Moreover, it is possible to observe the subduction of the foot 
and to estimate the subduction with the footwear. This study 
is relatively simple and can capture minute fluctuations of 
the foot. At the present stage, attention was focused on the 
vertical component at the time of grounding, aiming for new 
obstacles to the assistive devices by confirming minute 
fluctuations of the feet, but also comparing and examining 
the free legs and the horizontal component and further 
concrete Try to become an indicator. For that purpose, we  
will do further data analysis, discussion and proceed 
with development of sole for practical use.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Orthopedics new patient investigation. Nonprofit foundation 
Japan orthopedics society 2012. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.joa.or.jp/media/comment/pdf/investigation_2012
.pdf 2017.12.13 
[2] M. Suzuki, “WHO Global Report on Falls Prevention in 
Older Age,” Japan: QUALITY-CARE CO., Ltd. 2010. 
[3] M. B. King, J. O. Judge, L. Wolfson, ”Functional Base of 
Support Decreases With Age,” Journal of Gerontoligy, vol. 49, 
pp. 258-263, 1. 11. 1994 
[4] K. Kanabe, K. Kurosawa, Y. Nishida, Y. Nakata, et al, “The 
Study of Relationship between Toe and Dynamic Postural 
Control,” Society of Physical Therapy Science (SPTS)., 
Vol.17, No. 3, pp. 199-204, 2002 
[5] U. B Rao, B. Joseph,” THE INFLUENCE OF FOOTWEAR 
ON THE PREVALENCE OF FLAT FOOT,” Kasturba 
Medical College, Manipal: India, 1991 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[6] InvenSense Inc, MPU-6000/MPU-6050 Register Map and 
Descriptions. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.invensense.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/MPU-
6000-Register-Map1.pdf. 2018.2.2. 
[7] N, Yamazaki. ASHI NO JITEN. Asakura Publishing Co., Ltd. 
vol, 6. 2011 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

