Study of Gross Muscle Fatigue During Human-Robot Interactions
Azeemsha Thacham Poyil∗, Farshid Amirabdollahian† and Volker Steuber‡
School of Computer Science
University of Hertfordshire, Hatﬁeld, United Kingdom AL10 8HJ
Email: {∗a.thacham-poyil, †f.amirabdollahian2, ‡v.steuber}@herts.ac.uk
Abstract—This study explores the utility of Electromyogram
(EMG) signals in the context of upper-limb exercises during
human-robot interaction considering muscle fatigue of the par-
ticipant. We hypothesise that the Electromyogram features from
muscles and kinematic measurements from the robotic sensors
can be used as indicators of fatigue and there is a potential
to identify the muscle contribution during the activity where
the Electromyogram data is correlated with the kinematic data.
Electromyogram measurements were taken from four upper limb
muscles of 10 healthy individuals. HapticMaster robot in active
assisted mode together with a virtual environment was used to
guide the participants for moving the robotic arm in a prescribed
path in a horizontal plane consisting of four segments. The
experiments were conducted until the participants reached a state
of fatigue or until a deﬁned maximum number of 6 trials were
reached. Comparing the ﬁrst and last trials indicated that the
muscle fatigue had caused an increase in the average power and
a decrease in the median frequency of EMG, which was more
visible in Trapezius (TRP) and Anterior Deltoid (DLT) muscles
in most of the analysed cases compared to Biceps Brachii (BB)
and Triceps Brachii (TB) muscles. As the muscles came to a
state of fatigue, the kinematic position also showed an increase
in tracking error between the ﬁrst and last trials. The ’near-the-
body’ segment movements (S1 and S4 segments) were found to
have less increase of tracking error compared to the ’away-from-
body’ movements (S2 and S3 segments). A further analysis on
this proved that the tracking error observed was mainly due to
fatigue building up over the number of trials when performing
’away-from-body’ movements, and not a bi-product of perception
errors. We identify that Deltoid and Trapezius muscles were
fatigued more. These EMG fatigue indications can be mapped to
kinematic indications of fatigue mainly in the segments S2 and S3,
which required away from body movements because of the role
of these two muscles in lifting the arm to the shoulder height
in order to perform the activity. Our extracted features have
shown the potential to identify the fatigued muscles as expected.
The study also showed that the Electromyogram and kinematic
features have a potential to be used to highlight the extent of
muscle involvement.
Keywords–Robotic Rehabilitation; Upper Limb Training; Fa-
tigue Detection; Electromyogram; Kinematic Fatigue Indicators.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Stroke patients during physical therapies may easily come
to a state of fatigue due to their reduced muscle and cognitive
capabilities. Repetitions in training exercises are thought to
impact on their neuro-plasticity that aids the recovery after
stroke [1], but the repetitions often result in a faster occurrence
of muscle fatigue. Robots can be used to help rehabilitation
exercises due to their potential to deliver large number of
repetitions. But the existing physical therapies are designed
without sufﬁciently considering the implications (pain or state
of fatigue) to the patient [2][3][4]. Hence, closed loop control
and adaptability to individuals becomes important criteria for
the acceptance of such rehabilitation solutions. Even though
adaptive robotic interactions for upper limb rehabilitation have
been studied before [2][5], a commercially accepted solution
for robotic interaction considering muscle fatigue could not be
found yet. Electromyogram (EMG) features from the involved
muscles can be used to understand the current physical state
and the effort exerted by the patient [2][3] and then to alter
the intensity of the training. The study may be done initially
on healthy control groups in various testing conditions and
for different muscle combinations before applying the solution
on real patients. Such a solution can also be used in a
wide-range of human-machine or human-human interactions
by providing insights into the state of individual’s ability to
actively contribute to the interaction.
This study is focused on exploring a practical solution for
better therapeutic interaction by considering the muscle fatigue
indicators. The study used HapticMaster (HM) as the robotic
platform, which is an admittance controlled robot developed
by MOOG BV, The Netherlands. Admittance control strategy
is a force-in, and displacement-out system where the user’s
applied force is measured and the haptic device is controlled
to move proportional to that force. The robot had been utilised
in a stroke rehabilitation project, GENTLE/S where 3 different
interaction modes namely passive, active-assisted and active
where developed [6]. The active-assisted mode is utilised in
this current study, where the robot automatically compensates
for the lag or lead in subject arm’s position with reference to an
internal trajectory model by offering support to achieve the task
in time. The current research studied the fatigue development
in the upper limb muscles of 10 healthy individuals using EMG
and kinematic features recorded during the experiment.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, the past researches in this area and current gaps are brieﬂy
discussed. Section III explains the materials and methods used
in the study. In Section IV, the results of the data analysis
are discussed and further discussion on the results is done in
Section V. Finally in Section VI, the conclusions, limitations
and possible future work are presented.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Muscle or physical fatigue is deﬁned as the decline in
the ability of muscles to generate force or power during a
physical task. Fatigue usually results in a feeling of tiredness
because of the lack of strength and it develops gradually
during a physical activity and is typically temporary in duration
[7]. Fatigue analysis based on EMG data during upper limb
exercises have been studied in the past in different contexts
and it was identiﬁed that the fatigue affects the movement
duration, position sense and task performance. Few researchers
in the past had investigated the effect of repetitive tasks
and muscle fatigue on upper limb tasks during rehabilitation
training [8][9][10]. The subjects were found to get easily
fatigued mentally and physically when the tasks were of long
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

duration and of high precision [9]. The results suggested that
muscle fatigue need to be considered as an important parameter
during the treatment of musculoskeletal injuries as well as
athletic/rehabilitation training [8][11].
EMG was used in some of the robot-assisted rehabilitation
studies for detection of user’s intention. For example, a robot-
assisted stroke rehabilitation training system with an interactive
training game was controlled through an EMG based detection
of user’s intention [3]. Another study detected user’s intention
to move based on EMG measurements, but without interactive
games [4]. Even though few of them had actually tried to
address the adaptability of rehabilitation training in different
ways, the participant’s state of fatigue is an overlooked area,
which can potentially beneﬁt the adaptation algorithms.
The HapticMaster robot was used in the past to assist
(through anti-gravity compensation) in improving the difﬁculty
in reaching away movements by chronic stroke survivors
during shoulder abduction tasks [12]. An increase in the upper
limb reach area was achieved through robot assisted progres-
sive shoulder abduction loading exercises, which reduced the
abnormal coupling of shoulder abduction with elbow ﬂexion.
As possible expansion of this study, robotic assistance in
combination with muscle EMG studies were also proposed. A
further research had experimented HapticMaster based upper
limb rehabilitation training in a virtual learning environment
[13]. The effects of intensive robot-assisted training were
studied in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. The hand path ratio
was used as an indicator for the variation from the optimal
trajectory between the start position of the hand and the target
position. However, the idea of the paper was not to develop
a solution that can directly read the physiological state of the
patient say for example, using the muscle EMG. The user’s
state of fatigue and the possibility of using EMG features as
fatigue indicators were not explored in either of these studies.
The study had also indicated that other interfacing technologies
for example, lightweight sensor-based technologies, may be a
more appropriate solution [13].
HapticMaster robot and adaptive games were also used for
the rehabilitation training of multiple sclerosis (MS) patients
based on EMG data from shoulder muscles (Deltoid and
Trapezius) [2]. The EMG data were used only for detecting
whether or not the muscle fatigue develops in the patients.
Only low frequency (0.8-2.5Hz) mean EMG amplitudes were
used as fatigue indicators and no spectral/frequency domain
features of EMG were studied. Also no kinematic study was
conducted, which could help to understand the corresponding
kinematic implications of muscle fatigue. The main upper
limb movement involved in the training game was lifting
and holding tasks. All the game movements were parallel to
the frontal plane (either Left/Right or Top/Bottom) and the
game did not involve any movements parallel to the sagittal
plane. The HapticMaster robot in this study was used just
as a haptic input/output device and no robotic assistance was
used during the exercise. Hence, the EMG fatigue indicators
were statistically signiﬁcant in all the participants for Deltoid
(DLT) and Trapezius (TRP) muscles. In presence of robotic
assistance/guidance the impact of fatigue could be improved
and the fatigue indicators would indicate lesser fatigue, and
this was not covered in this study.
In another similiar study [5], the Root Mean Square (RMS)
amplitude and median frequency of EMG signals from the
Deltoid muscles (the prime mover in the task) were stud-
ied to compare the muscle fatigue in 16 MS patients and
16 healthy individuals, during a robot mediated upper limb
training exercise using HapticMaster robot and a virtual game.
Only vertical movements (e.g., lifting tasks) were involved and
no movements parallel to sagittal plane were deﬁned in this
experiment. The study showed that the game performance was
not affected by fatigue possibly due to the contribution from
other compensatory muscles and there was no relation between
the subjective and objective fatigue indicators for the MS
patients. Even though the experiment involved movements with
dynamic muscle contraction, the EMG used for fatigue study
was collected during another 30 seconds isometric muscle
contraction task with 90 degree shoulder anteﬂexion after each
training bout. The maximum voluntary contraction (MVC)
force was also measured at this position using HapticMaster.
The changes in median frequency and RMS amplitude during
fatigue were less in the MS patients than in the healthy
individuals possibly due to the different weights used or the
difference in muscle physiology between the two groups.
However, kinematic trajectory (position) parameters were not
under the scope of this study. Also the interaction was not
guided by the robot and hence, the experiment rythm was not
ﬁxed. The patients should have exercised longer time to get
the same amount of repetitions or use a higher weight for the
exercise. As a result, the comparison of results between the
MS patients and healthy participants could not give a clear
picture on the usage of EMG fatigue indicators.
The HapticMaster robot was also used in another rehabil-
itation project, GENTLE/S for upper limb training of stroke
survivors [6][14]. As an extension of these studies, [15] had
tried to identify the contribution of the participants and the
robot during different human-robot interaction modes and to
identify who was leading (robot or the person) this interaction.
The actual performance of the participant was compared with
the minimum jerk model used by the robot. An adaptive
algorithm was developed based on altering the movement
duration and resistance parameter of the robot to change the
task difﬁculty level. The adaptability of the system using the
robot was tested against the performance of the user. But
the study did not consider the muscle fatigue state of the
participant during the exercise and no EMG studies were
employed.
III.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This section describes the experimental setup and pro-
tocol used in the study. Additionally, the signal processing
methodologies for EMG and kinematic feature extraction are
brieﬂy explained here. The muscle fatigue indicators used in
the analysis are also mentioned.
A. Experiment Setup
Biometrics Ltd DataLINK hardware was used for EMG
data acquisition. HapticMaster robot was conﬁgured to run in
active assisted mode [15]. The Virtual Reality (VR) environ-
ment and the graphical user interface (GUI) was conﬁgured to
follow a rectangular path as shown in Figure 1 and Figure 3.
B. Experiment Protocol
An experiment was designed as shown in Figure 2 and
ethics approval was obtained from the University of Hert-
fordshire under approval reference: COM/PGT/UH/02002. Ten
healthy individuals took part in this explorative study. EMG
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. HapticMaster, EMG Device and Virtual Reality Environment
measurements were taken from four upper limb muscles;
Trapezius (TRP), Anterior Deltoid (DLT), Biceps Brachii (BB)
and Triceps Brachii (TB) muscles. The experiment involved
interaction with the HapticMaster robot in active assisted mode
where the robot and human participant both contributed to
activities and the corresponding position of the robot end-
effector was measured during interaction. In the exercise,
participants moved the robotic arm in a prescribed path in a
two dimensional horizontal plane consisting of four segments
S1, S2, S3 and S4. The experiment consisted of 6 trials, and
each trials included 10 repetitions of the rectangular motions
as shown in Figure 3. The experiments would stop if a total
of 6 trials were completed, or if a participant reported fatigue.
Figure 2. Experiment Protocol
The sitting position and upper limb position of participants
during the experiment were as shown in Figure 3
C. Methodology
1) EMG Features: Signal processing algorithms for pre-
processing and feature extraction were developed in MATLAB.
The EMG signals were band pass ﬁltered in the frequency
band of 20-450 Hz using Chebyshev Type II ﬁlter [16][17][18].
A narrow notch ﬁlter was used (50Hz) to remove the power
line interferences [16]. The EMG average power and median
frequency were calculated for each segment and each trial.
2) Kinematic Features: The kinematic data like position
and segment parameters were logged from the HapticMaster
robot and the kinematic features were calculated. Minimum
Jerk Trajectory (MJT) position coefﬁcients were calculated
from the actual position parameters as described by [6]. The
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) between the actual and
MJT position vectors was calculated and used to assess the
tracking error in position. It was believed that tracking error
will increase as the muscles fatigue.
Figure 3. Sitting Position of Participants During the Experiment - Top View
3) Muscle Fatigue Detection: Kinematic (root mean square
error (RMSE) in position) and EMG (Average power and
median frequency) features corresponding to different trials
and segments were analyzed. The change in EMG and kine-
matic features were studied to understand the development of
fatigue in the upper limb muscles in different trials. As the
muscle fatigue develops the frequency spectrum and hence,
the median frequency will start shifting to lower frequency side
and the EMG amplitude will start increasing [16][10][9]. Some
studies had also used kinematic position parameters to indicate
the performance of participants during robotic interactions
[6][14][15] .
IV.
RESULTS
This section explains the different results obtained during
the analysis of EMG and kinematic data. IBM SPSS version
22 was used for the statistical analysis of the results.
A. EMG Fatigue Indicators
Box plots of the features were generated for each segment
to identify trends in median values of EMG features as the
trials progressed. The box plots for average power and median
frequency as the trials progressed for a typical subject for
Trapezius muscle and 1st segment are shown in Figure 4 and
Figure 5. A decrease of median frequency and an increase of
average power could be noted as the trials progressed [10][5].
Summary tables were created based on the variation of
different EMG features across trials as shown in Table I and
Table II. Since the EMG features were normally distributed,
the mean value of features in each trial for each segment was
used to make decisions on the state of fatigue. The mean
values between the initial and ﬁnal trials were compared. The
hypothesis for fatigue detection using average power parameter
was that, the mean value of average power in the ﬁrst trial will
be smaller that the last trial [10][9]. A ”1” in the corresponding
cell indicates that the hypothesis is true; meaning that there is
an increase in the average power as the trials progresses. A
”0” indicates that there is no increase or there is a decrease
in its mean value between trials. The table highlights that for
the majority of cases, the average power of EMG displays an
increasing trend as the trials progressed. As seen in Table I,
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. Box Plots for Median Frequency in Trapezius Muscle and
Segment 1
Figure 5. Box Plots for Average Power in Trapezius Muscle and Segment 1
a majority of the analysed cases in Trapezius and Deltoid
muscles show an increasing trend (60% and 70% respectively)
compared to Biceps and Triceps muscles (37.5% and 40%
respectively).
TABLE I. SUMMARY TABLE FOR EMG AVERAGE POWER
Similarly, the hypothesis for fatigue detection using median
frequency parameter was that, the mean value of the feature
in the ﬁrst trial will be larger that of the last trial [19][20].
A ”1” in the corresponding cell indicated that the hypothesis
was true, which meant that there was a decrease in the median
frequency as the trials progressed. A ”0” meant that there was
no decrease or there was an increase in its mean value. As
seen in Table II, the median frequency of EMG displayed
a decreasing trend as the trials progressed in Trapezius and
Deltoid muscles in majority of the analyzed cases (57.5% and
62.5% respectively) compared to Biceps and Triceps muscles
(37.5% and 27.7% respectively). This might be probably due to
the increased fatigue state of TRP and DLT muscles compared
to BB and TB muscles.
TABLE II. SUMMARY TABLE FOR EMG MEDIAN FREQUENCY
B. Kinematic Fatigue Indicators
The RMSE feature was studied using SPSS box plots
and MATLAB plots and summary tables were generated by
comparing the median values of ﬁrst and last trials. An increase
of RMSE error was noted between the ﬁrst and last trials.
In the summary table (Table III), a value of 1 means that
there was an increase in the error between ﬁrst and last trials.
A value of 0 means there was no increase or there was a
decrease in the error. The hypothesis was that there will be
an increase of RMSE error between ﬁrst and last trials when
the muscles come to a state of fatigue. 70% and 60% of the
subjects displayed an increase of RMSE for the S2 and S3
segments respectively, whereas S1 and S4 segments had the
least percentage(40% for both). The RMSE fatigue indication
was hence, more during S2 and S3 segments than during the
S1 and S4 segments. This might be possibly due to the fatigue
developed during the trials in association with the ’away-from-
body’ movements involved in S2 and S3 segments.
V.
DISCUSSION
This section presents further discussion on the results, the
possible inference from the results and their linkage to similar
studies in the past.
A. Discussion on EMG Analysis
It was noticed that most of the participants were challenged
especially on the DLT and TRP muscles due to the horizontal
position of the upper limb. It was observed that none of the
participants were able to hold their upper limb in the horizontal
position continuously (as it was supposed to be). This was
due to the intentionally complex movement requirements [12].
Subjects could only complete the trials by lowering their upper
limb below the shoulder level (hence, by not following the
preferred position in the experiment design).
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE III. SUMMARY TABLE FOR RMSE ERROR IN POSITION
CONSIDERING FIRST AND LAST TRIALS
During the analysis of EMG signals, the expectation was
that there will be an increasing trend for the average power and
a decreasing trend in median frequency as the trials progressed.
The results had indicated that both the parameters displayed
such a trend as explained by the summary tables Table I and
Table II. However, the average power seems to be a better
indicator of fatigue compared to median frequency due to the
higher percentage scores achieved. In the current experiment,
the fatigue was mainly caused by the horizontal position of
upper limb hence, the fatigue had affected mainly the DLT and
TRP muscles. Comparison of mean values of EMG features
across trials displayed higher percentage fatigue scores for
Trapezius and Deltoid muscles in majority of the analyzed
cases (60% and 70% respectively) compared to Biceps Brachii
and Triceps Brachii muscles (37.5% and 40% respectively).
B. Discussion on Kinematic Data Analysis
The study of the kinematic features showed that there was
an increase of RMSE error more visible in S2 and S3 segments
than in S1 and S4 segments. This could be because S2 and
S3 were the most difﬁcult segments, which were away from
the body and hence, tracking error was more visible in them.
To ascertain if the increase of RMSE error between ﬁrst and
last trial is due to fatigue or perception error, we compared
the error between the ﬁrst and second trial. Another summary
table was formed by comparing the median values of RMSE
error between the ﬁrst and second trials as in Table IV. The
fatigue percentage for S2 and S3 segments were found to be
40% and 50% respectively in this case compared to the case
considering the ﬁrst and last trials (70% for S2 and 60% for
S3). This indicated that the RMSE error due to fatigue was not
as visible in the second trial as was the case in the last trial
in majority of the analysed cases. This study implied that the
increased fatigue score during S2 and S3 segments was not
attributed to the perception error in locating the 3 dimensional
reach points but was due to the development of fatigue as the
trials progressed.
The S2 and S3 segments for majority of the subjects
involved too much variations at the reaching point of the
segment possibly due to the difﬁculty in accurately judging
the end position of the segments. It seems that this inaccu-
racy increased when the subjects got fatigued as the trials
progressed. This might have resulted in an increased RMSE
in the ﬁnal trials of S2 and S3 segments compared to the
initial trials as implied by the higher percentage scores. On the
TABLE IV. SUMMARY TABLE FOR RMSE ERROR IN POSITION
CONSIDERING 1ST AND 2ND TRIALS
other hand, the smaller percentage for the S1 and S4 segments
(40%) might be because, they involved movements in space
where the upper limb was closer to the body. This might make
the movements easier than the other segments. This might
mean that the subjects were in a more comfortable upper limb
position during S1 and S4 movements or it was more easy
to follow the robot in these segments. These results can be
related to the ﬁndings of [15], which stated that the ’reaching
away’ movements were longer than the ’returning towards’
movements. However, there could be a further explanation for
the error in movements away from the body. The perception
errors when trying to reach virtual objects away from the body
could cause larger tracking errors due to overestimation of the
distance to peripheral targets, which might lead to overshooting
reaching movements [21][22].
The results of EMG fatigue analysis had indicated that
the DLT and TRP muscles were fatigued more. Similarly, the
results from the analysis of RMSE error had indicated that S2
and S3 segments displayed more error and variation in position
compared to S1 and S4 segments. Hence, it can be inferred
that the indication of fatigue by EMG signals (mainly from
TRP and DLT muscles) were kinematically correlated with
the errors and variations in position mainly in the segments,
which were difﬁcult to execute (S2 and S3) as shown by the
summary tables of kinematic and EMG features.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The research studied quantitatively which muscles where
involved and fatigued in a robot assisted exercise in a 3 dimen-
sional space in presence of a virtual environment. The EMG
analysis indicated that Trapezius (TRP) and Anterior Deltoid
(DLT) muscles were more in a state of fatigue compared
to Biceps Brachii (BB) and Triceps Brachii (TB) muscles.
The study also looked into how the kinematic features from
the robot represented the muscular fatigue. The variation in
tracking error during the robot assisted upper limb interactions
were found to indicate physical fatigue in the muscles involved.
Similar to the study by [12], we identify that DLT and TRP
muscles were fatigued more. This is because of the role of
the two muscles in lifting the arm to the shoulder height in
order to perform the activity. The higher fatigue indication
in Trapezius and Deltoid muscles can be mapped to kinematic
indications of fatigue mainly in the segments S2 and S3 which
were away from body, because these muscles were actively
contributing to keep the horizontal position of the upper limb.
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Our extracted features have shown the potential to identify the
fatigued muscles as expected. The study also showed that the
EMG and kinematic features have a potential to be used to
highlight the extent of muscle involvement, as the positioning
of the segments and the required articulations for performing
those segments relate to the EMG observations. For example,
the increase of RMSE error was the least in S1 and S4
segments, which were comfortable ’near-the-body’ movements
and considering musculoskeletal physiology, Biceps Brachii
and Triceps Brachii muscles play the major roles in these
segments. The summary tables for tracking error also implied
that the increased fatigue score during S2 and S3 segments
was not attributed to the perception error in locating the 3
dimensional reach points but due to the development of fatigue
by the end of the experiment.
In the experiment, the HapticMaster robot was conﬁgured
in the Active Assisted mode and all the participants in the
experiment were healthy individuals. The robot was providing
some assistance/guidance to the participant when there was
less effort from the participant to move the end-effector along
the different segments. A limitation of this study was that,
the robotic assistance resulted in a reduced the muscle fatigue
to the participant. However, it was also noticed that the
indications of fatigue were observed even with this robotic
assistance. Additionally, the experiment protocol had also
deﬁned 1-2 minutes of break period between each trial. This
period was introduced in order not to harm the participant’s
muscles due to over challenging. However, this break period
could result in a recovery from the state of muscle fatigue
developed during the trial (short term fatigue) before they
started the next trial. Hence, the continuity of any trend in
the features used as fatigue indicators were partly lost. Hence,
the experiments could have been be made a bit more difﬁcult
and the break period could be avoided so that the muscles
are sufﬁciently tired to produce better indications of fatigue.
Probably due to this reason, at the end of the experiments
all the participants stated (through a questionnaire) that they
were only slightly fatigued. A further study is hence planned
to address these aspects.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. E. Fisher and K. J. Sullivan, “Activity-Dependent Factors Affect-
ing Poststroke Functional Outcomes,” Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation,
vol. 8, no. 3, oct 2001, pp. 31–44.
[2]
J. R. Octavia, P. Feys, and K. Coninx, “Development of Activity-Related
Muscle Fatigue during Robot-Mediated Upper Limb Rehabilitation
Training in Persons with Multiple Sclerosis: A Pilot Trial.” Multiple
sclerosis international, vol. 2015, 2015, p. 650431.
[3]
R. K. Y. Tong, W. W. F. Leung, X. L. Hu, and R. Song, “Interactive
robot-assisted training system using continuous EMG signals for stroke
rehabilitation,” Proceedings of the 3rd International Convention on
Rehabilitation Engineering & Assistive Technology - ICREATE ’09,
2009, p. 20.
[4]
L. Dipietro, M. Ferraro, J. Palazzolo, H. Krebs, B. Volpe, and N. Hogan,
“Customized Interactive Robotic Treatment for Stroke: EMG-Triggered
Therapy,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, vol. 13, no. 3, sep 2005, pp. 325–334.
[5]
D. Severijns, J. R. Octavia, L. Kerkhofs, K. Coninx, I. Lamers, and
P. Feys, “Investigation of Fatigability during Repetitive Robot-Mediated
Arm Training in People with Multiple Sclerosis,” PloS one, vol. 10,
no. 7, jan 2015, p. e0133729.
[6]
F. Amirabdollahian, R. Loureiro, and W. Harwin, “Minimum jerk trajec-
tory control for rehabilitation and haptic applications,” in Proceedings
2002 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (Cat.
No.02CH37292), vol. 4.
IEEE, 2002, pp. 3380–3385.
[7]
Christian Nordqvist, “Fatigue: Why Am I So Tired?” 2015. [Online].
Available: http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/248002.php, [Ac-
cessed on 2017-01-15].
[8]
A. K. Vafadar, J. N. Cˆot´e, and P. S. Archambault, “The effect of muscle
fatigue on position sense in an upper limb multi-joint task.” Motor
control, vol. 16, no. 2, 2012, pp. 265–83.
[9]
H. R. Zadry, S. Z. M. Dawal, and Z. Taha, “The relation between upper
limb muscle and brain activity in two precision levels of repetitive light
tasks,” International Journal of Occupational Safety and Ergonomics,
vol. 17, no. 4, 2011, pp. 373–384.
[10]
I. Hostens, J. Seghers, A. Spaepen, and H. Ramon, “Validation of the
wavelet spectral estimation technique in Biceps Brachii and Brachiora-
dialis fatigue assessment during prolonged low-level static and dynamic
contractions,” Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology, vol. 14,
no. 2, 2004, pp. 205–215.
[11]
S. Minning, C. a. Eliot, T. L. Uhl, and T. R. Malone, “EMG analysis of
shoulder muscle fatigue during resisted isometric shoulder elevation,”
Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology, vol. 17, no. 2, 2007, pp.
153–159.
[12]
M. D. Ellis, T. M. Sukal-Moulton, and J. P. A. Dewald, “Impairment-
Based 3-D Robotic Intervention Improves Upper Extremity Work
Area in Chronic Stroke: Targeting Abnormal Joint Torque Coupling
With Progressive Shoulder Abduction Loading.” IEEE transactions on
robotics : a publication of the IEEE Robotics and Automation Society,
vol. 25, no. 3, jun 2009, pp. 549–555.
[13]
P. Feys, K. Coninx, L. Kerkhofs, T. De Weyer, V. Truyens, A. Maris, and
I. Lamers, “Robot-supported upper limb training in a virtual learning
environment : a pilot randomized controlled trial in persons with MS.”
Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 12, no. 1, jan 2015,
p. 60.
[14]
R. Loureiro, F. Amirabdollahian, M. Topping, B. Driessen, and W. Har-
win, “Upper limb robot mediated stroke therapy - GENTLE/s ap-
proach,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 15, no. 1, 2003, pp. 35–51.
[15]
R. Chemuturi, F. Amirabdollahian, and K. Dautenhahn, “Adaptive
training algorithm for robot-assisted upper-arm rehabilitation, applicable
to individualised and therapeutic human-robot interaction.” Journal of
neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 10, no. 1, 2013, p. 102.
[16]
D. G. E. Robertson, “Electromyography: Processing,” 2015. [On-
line]. Available: www.health.uottawa.ca/biomech/courses/apa4311/emg-
p2.pps, [Accessed on 2017-01-15].
[17]
L. C. Miller and J. P. a. Dewald, “Involuntary paretic wrist/ﬁnger ﬂexion
forces and EMG increase with shoulder abduction load in individuals
with chronic stroke,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 123, no. 6, 2012,
pp. 1216–1225.
[18]
S. Arjunan and D. Kumar, “Decoding subtle forearm ﬂexions using
fractal features of surface electromyogram from single and multiple
sensors,” Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 7, no. 1,
oct 2010, p. 53.
[19]
L. Grover, A. Arcelus, R. Wang, R. Huq, K. Zabjek, and D. Hebert,
“Investigation Of EMG Fatigue Patterns While Using An Upper Limb
Rehabilitation Robotic Device,” Proceedings of the RESNA 2013 An-
nual Conference, no. 1, 2013, pp. 1–4.
[20]
N. A. Dimitrova and G. V. Dimitrov, “Interpretation of EMG changes
with fatigue: Facts, pitfalls, and fallacies,” Journal of Electromyography
and Kinesiology, vol. 13, no. 1, 2003, pp. 13–36.
[21]
A. I. Ross, T. Schenk, C. Hesse, and S. Ullman, “The Effect of Gaze
Position on Reaching Movements in an Obstacle Avoidance Task,”
PLOS ONE, vol. 10, no. 12, dec 2015, p. e0144193.
[22]
S. M. Beurze, S. Van Pelt, and W. P. Medendorp, “Behavioral Refer-
ence Frames for Planning Human Reaching Movements,” Journal of
Neurophysiology, vol. 96, no. 1, mar 2006, pp. 352–362.
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

