 
 
Exploring the Role of Children as Co-Designers – Using a Participatory Design 
Study for the Construction of a User Experience Questionnaire 
Lea Wöbbekind, Thomas Mandl and Christa Womser-Hacker 
Institute for information science and natural language processing 
University of Hildesheim 
Hildesheim, Germany 
email: woebbek@uni-hildesheim.de, mandl@uni-hildesheim.de, womser@uni-hildesheim.de  
 
 
Abstract—The evaluation of interactive products and systems 
based on hedonistic and pragmatic qualities is an important 
part of user-centered design. Human-Computer Interaction 
(HCI) research provides many validated and standardized 
questionnaires for usability and user experience assessment. 
However, these questionnaires are not suitable for children as 
younger users of digital products, as these surveys are 
developed and evaluated by usability professionals for adult 
users. Problems may arise due to the length, rating scales and 
difficulties to understand the content of user experience (UX) 
questionnaires. This paper focuses on the involvement of 
children in UX research as co-designers and describes the 
development of a semantic differential scale for measuring the 
user experience of children and teenagers (up to age 14). In 
order to involve children as users in UX studies, little attention 
has been paid to participatory research as a useful and 
innovative approach to do user experience research with 
children. Consequently, the usefulness of the implementation 
of a workshop with 6 children to develop and design a user 
experience questionnaire for an interactive learning app for 
children is discussed. It aims to get a better understanding of 
the effects of doing research with young teenagers. The results 
of the workshop show a UX questionnaire measuring UX on 
pragmatic as well as hedonistic qualities for a specific product. 
A first evaluation study demonstrates a high internal 
consistency of the scales.  
Keywords - participatory design; workshop; UX evaluation; 
semantic differential scale; pupils; user experience. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Questionnaires can measure user experience quickly and 
in a simple way while covering a wide-ranging impression of 
a product. They are commonly used tools for user-centered 
evaluation of software and digital products. An important 
definition of user experience is introduced by the ISO 9241-
210 and outlines user experience as “a person’s perceptions 
and responses that result from the use or anticipated use of a 
product, system or service” [1]. It highlights emotional, 
hedonic, affective and aesthetic components and is typically 
characterized as fun, pleasure or negative feelings when 
interacting with a product [8]. Quantitative data about the 
user's perceptions of a product can be a helpful addition to 
other methods to assess the strengths and weaknesses of 
interactive products [7]. In particular, the research field of 
Child Computer Interaction has focused not only on how to 
design and evaluate products with and for children, but also 
on the modification and adaption of suitable survey methods 
for children and young adults [2][10]. Results show that user 
experience is not measurable with younger participants 
without modifications of already established (quantitative) 
methods [5][16]. Therefore, researchers need to work closely 
with the target group to identify useful approaches that 
encourage their perspectives and opinions. Methods need to 
be adjusted to children and young people´s strength, context 
and also culture. Therefore, this paper investigates the use of 
a participatory design study to construct a suitable and 
understandable UX semantic differential scale questionnaire 
for children up to 14 years based on the creation of common 
UX questionnaires [7]. The research question under 
consideration is whether young teenagers are able to 
participate in the construction of a questionnaire for a 
specific product. The development process involves the 
selection of semantic differential pairs, categories for item 
pairs, the overall length and a rating scale.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
describes related work. In Section III, the used method and 
challenges are illustrated in more detail, whereas Section IV 
presents findings and results. Section V summarizes the 
conclusion and future work.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The following section gives an overview of the related 
work regarding models of participatory design with children 
as well as the construction process of user experience 
questionnaires. Based on these approaches, this study 
combines the idea of children as co-designers in the 
construction process of one user experience questionnaire.  
Afterward, the questionnaire was applied in a user test study 
to evaluate its reliability.  
A. Participatory research with children 
The Child Computer Interaction community highlights 
the advantages of children as active participants in design as 
well as evaluation studies. The motive arises out of different 
needs, beliefs and contexts of uses of digital products of 
experts, adults and children [10][11]. Participatory research 
with children can mean many things. Normally, it takes the 
theoretical viewpoint that children are experts and having 
competencies in specific settings. The level of involvement 
varies. Listening to children’s opinions, supporting them to 
reflect on their opinion and include their views into research 
processes is one approach to perform participatory research 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
with children [13]. Different stages of participation can also 
mean that children as researchers identify and develop 
research questions, choose appreciate research methods, 
overtake the role of a researcher and are also included in the 
interpretation and evaluation of collected data [6]. The 
approach includes the design and development of a UX 
questionnaire in the context of a UX-workshop with 6 pupils 
from one class from a comprehensive school (grade 7, age 
between 12 and 13, m=3, f=3) in Germany. The pupils act as 
co-designers and are put in charge of the questionnaire 
creation. This approach is based on the construction process 
of many standardized UX questionnaires [3].  
B. Construction of UX questionnaires  
Good user experience is important for the success of 
interactive products. There is a large number of standardized 
UX 
questionnaires 
for 
measuring 
user’s 
subjective 
perception 
and opinions of products and different 
components of UX. The AttrakDiff [3], as well as the User 
Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) [7], apply a semantic 
differential scale to measure UX, whereas the Modular 
Valuation of Key Components of User Experience (meCUE) 
[9] and the Visual Aesthetics of Websites Inventory 
(VisAWI) [14] consist of statements with a 7-point Likert 
scale. They have in common to quickly measure user 
experience, but are not suitable for the needs of children and 
teenagers. In general, UX questionnaires are developed 
within a workshop of usability professionals and validated in 
several user studies [12]. In the case of the German User 
Experience Questionnaire, the authors describe user 
experience based on aspects of pragmatic and hedonistic 
qualities. A set of 229 items were brainstormed and reduced 
in several studies to 80 items. 6 scales, as well as 26 items, 
were extracted by factor analysis. The scales include 
attractiveness, 
perspicuity, 
efficiency, 
dependability, 
stimulation and novelty [7]. In the research area of Child 
Computer Interaction, Hanna et al. [2] recommend the use of 
pairwise comparisons for the evaluation of interactive 
products with children. Zaman [16] introduced a pairwise 
comparison scale for the evaluation of UX with preschoolers. 
The author suggests that a pairwise comparison scale with 5 
items leads to reliable answers from preschoolers in terms of 
system preferences, but the multidimensional of UX is not 
quantitatively measurable.  
III. 
METHOD 
The next sections report on the construction process of a 
UX questionnaire within a creative workshop by using 
participatory design. The workshop is divided into two parts. 
The first phase aims to give the pupils detailed and adapted 
information about the concept of user experience and UX 
questionnaires and the need to evaluate interactive systems 
within a user-centered design. Moreover, the UEQ [7] and its 
elements (number and order of items and scales) are 
explained and serve as an example for a UX questionnaire. 
This phase also includes a 30-minute testing time of an app 
under consideration on two mobile devices. After creating a 
profile and choosing one subject, the participants can play 
and use the different functions of the learning app [4]. The 
app itself consists of five different subjects. The user has to 
complete lessons to earn points. The collected rewards can 
be redeemed in several games. With this approach, the pupils 
get a better impression and understanding of the system. 
After this introduction follows the construction phase of the 
questionnaire. The task is to develop and design a 
questionnaire that includes all the necessary elements and 
items that are needed to evaluate the app. The pupils work 
together to find and discuss useful contrasting words and 
phrases for the evaluation of the learning app. In the 
beginning, the participants had difficulties to get started, as 
they cannot find words to describe the app. Therefore, the 
researcher asked the children again about their feelings and 
emotions when interacting with the app. It presented a 
starting point for further suggestions from the children. 
Figure 1 shows a translated version of the constructed UX 
Kids questionnaire.  
 
Figure 1. The created UX questionnaire (translated version) 
 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
In the beginning, the brainstorming session is based on 
an oral discussion, whereas later the pupils use a whiteboard 
to write down randomized words and phrases. In the end, 
the pupils decide to organize antonyms in categories. The 
workshop took place during school time and lasted 2 hours 
with the absence of teachers. During the workshop, the 
researcher provided a passive role and did not participate in 
the discussion. To avoid further influence through the 
researcher, the shown presentation excludes judgmental 
statements about the app. In case of a possible failure of the 
workshop process, several slides with potential words and 
synonyms were prepared for discussion and selection with 
the participants. Observation, as well as writing notes, are 
used to document the development process by the 
researcher. Cronbach´s Alpha as an index for scale 
reliability is used to assess the questionnaire [15]. 
Regarding the selection and participation of children, 
teachers were given an introduction to the research topic. 
Written consent by parents or legal guardians was essential 
to participate in this study. Moreover, all children gave oral 
consent for each activity.  
Examining the construction process and the interactions 
of the pupils, some challenges and effects appeared that need 
to be addressed. The workshop format illustrates that the role 
of the researcher is to be a contact person for questions or 
problems that might arrive during the construction process. It 
seems as the pupils are hesitant in the beginning and not sure 
how to start the brainstorming session. To support the 
discussion session, the researcher asked about their feelings 
and impressions of the app while interacting with it.  In the 
following hour, the workshop is being maintained by word 
suggestions and discussion of opposing words or phrases, 
item pair by item pair by all children. For example, there is a 
long debate about the opposite of the word “fun”. In the end, 
the pupils decide on the word “serious”. The pupils decided 
on an approach to collect as many words as possible to 
evaluate the app and debate the usefulness of the words.  
It appears that overall not more than 20 antonyms are 
being reviewed. Regarding the scale, the pupils discussed 
several options and decide on a 5-point Likert scale with 
stars, as they argue that it might be easier to understand and 
looks more aesthetic than points. To create greater 
comprehensibility of the questionnaire, the children consider 
adding words like good, medium and bad on top of the 
answer categories. They notice that giving an answer and 
competing the questionnaire, based on the contrasting items, 
already shows a tendency towards a word and therefore 
decide against this idea. As a result, it is questionable if the 
pupils fully understand the concept of a rating scale. 
Simplicity is also one reason to order pairs into positive (left 
side) and negative (right side) on the questionnaire. To 
provide extensive feedback, two additional questions were 
added. It consists of one closed question and one free text 
field for written responses. The workshop ends with the 
organization of words into categories, which is initiated by 
one pupil. It is questionable whether the concept of the 
workshop design is fully understood by the children, as 
finding words to evaluate the app seemed to be a difficult 
task. Nonetheless, the participants understood the need to 
design and adapt a questionnaire based on children's 
competences, as the understandability for younger pupils 
was taken into account during the brainstorming session and 
discussion of useful words.  
IV. 
FINDINGS & DISCUSSION 
The following section presents the findings of the study for 
the workshop results and the newly developed user 
experience questionnaire designed by children.  
A. Comparison to the User Experience Questionnaire 
(UEQ) 
All in all, the UX Kids questionnaire contains 16 
antonyms 
in 
3 
categories. 
It 
includes 
“learning 
development”, which deals with the quality of the content, if 
the system motivates or if it is adequate for learning. The 
category “overall impression of the app” contains item pairs 
for functionality, efficiency, fun and entertainment. The third 
category is called “design and appearance” and contains 5 
items of color design and purpose. Additionally, an overall 
evaluation with one closed question: “Are you satisfied with 
the app?” and one free-text field for further explanations was 
added. Interestingly, not only the word selection but also an 
appealing design of the questionnaire seemed to be 
important. In comparison to the UEQ [7], many differences 
can be identified: The UX questionnaires differ in length, the 
number of items, rating scale and the number of scales. The 
UX Kids questionnaire also includes an overall evaluation 
question as well as a qualitative free-text field option to give 
a detailed review of the learning app. Interestingly, both 
questionnaires evaluate UX based on pragmatic as well as 
hedonistic qualities of an interactive product. Therefore, 
children view not only design and aesthetics as important 
factors for evaluating a learning app, but also the quality of 
content, usability and functionality. In particular, the content 
of a system is typically not part of UX instruments.  
The comparison shows that children can take the role of 
an “expert” to do user experience research. It shows that a 
participatory approach can support children as co-designers 
to conduct user-centered studies, as the result consists of 
similar assumptions of the concept of user experience.  
B. Evaluation of the UX Kids Questionnaire 
To analyze the performance of the newly developed UX 
instrument, it is applied in a user test study to evaluate the 
UX of the learning app with 230 pupils from grades 6 and 7 
of a comprehensive school in Germany. During a playtime 
of 20 minutes, the pupils explored the app on mobile 
devices in groups of three or four children. Afterward, the 
participants were asked to fill out the questionnaire in order 
to evaluate the app. 207 children completed the 
questionnaire and gave useful feedback about their opinion 
and possible improvements. Table 1 shows the Cronbach´s 
Alpha values for the full questionnaire and all three scales.  
The statistical analysis demonstrates a Cronbach’s Alpha of 
0.88 for the newly developed questionnaire, which proves 
the high internal consistency of the scales [15].  
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
TABLE I.  
CRONBACH´S ALPHA PER SCALE 
Scale 
α 
Overall 
0.88 
Learning development 
0.75 
Overall impression of the app 
0.80 
Design and appearance 
0.71 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper investigated the use of participatory design to 
construct a UX questionnaire for and with children and 
teenagers based on participatory design and early user 
involvement. The workshop approach shows that with an 
appropriate introduction to the topic of UX and evaluation, 
participatory design is a valuable method to do user 
experience research with children. Due to children’s different 
perceptions, abilities and use context of interactive products, 
methods need to be adapted to their needs. Within a 
collaborative brainstorming session, the target group is able 
to do identify words and item pairs to evaluate the learning 
app and discuss them. Based on this research, it can be 
concluded that quantifying the user experience of younger 
users is possible within a participatory design study. The 
questionnaire is suitable to be used with qualitative methods 
to measure the multidimensional construct of UX of a 
specific product.  
Further research involves the evaluation of the UX Kids 
questionnaire in user studies with pupils from 
a 
comprehensive school in Germany to verify the reliability 
and validity of the questionnaire with a statistical analysis 
and also with different learning applications. More research 
into suitable methods for measuring children’s user 
experience is needed, as the participatory design study 
revealed some difficulties in regard to UX research with 
children. In particular, quantitative UX methods for younger 
children aged between 12 old and younger need to be 
explored and validated. Further research should also go more 
deeply into other possibilities to measure UX quantitative or 
in mixed methods approaches. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] DIN EN 9241 210, Ergonomics of human-system interaction - 
Part 210. Human-centered design for interactive systems. 
Berlin: Beuth, 2011.  
[2] L. Hanna, D. Neapolitan, and K. Risden, “Evaluating 
computer game concepts with children” Proceedings of the 
conference on Interaction design and children, 2004, pp. 49-
56, doi:10.1145/1017833.1017840. 
[3] M. Hassenzahl, M. Burmester, and K. Koller, “AttrakDiff: A 
questionnaire for measuring hedonic and pragmatic 
qualities” Human and Computer. Interaction in Movement, 
2003, pp. 187-196, doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-322-
80058-9_19. 
[4] L. Heine and D. Hörmeyer. Lerne einfach mit Spaß für die 
Schule! [in English: Learn easily and with fun for school!]. 
[Online]. Available from: https://anton.app/de/ 2020.01.27. 
[5] A. Hinderks, M. Schrepp, M. Rauschenberger, S. Olschner, 
and J. Thomaschewski “Konstruktion eines Fragebogens für 
jugendliche zur Messung der User Experience [in English: 
Construction of a questionnaire for teenagers and young 
adults 
for 
measuring 
user 
experience]” 
Conference 
Proceedings of Usability Professionals, 2012, pp. 78-83.  
[6] G. Lansdown, “Can you hear me? The right of young children 
to participate in decisions affecting them” Working paper 36. 
2005, Bernhard van Leer Foundation, The Hague, The 
Netherlands.  
[7] B. Laugwitz, B. Held, and M. Schrepp, “Construction and 
evaluation of a user experience questionnaire” The 4th 
Symposium of the Workgroup Human-Computer Interaction 
and Usability Engineering of the Austrian Computer Society, 
Nov. 2008, pp. 63-76, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-89350-9_6. 
[8] E. Law, V. Roto, A. Vermeeren, J. Kort, and M. Hassenzahl, 
“Towards a shared definition of user experience” Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA) 
ACM, 
2008, 
pp. 
2395–2398. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1145/1358628.1358693.  
[9] M. Minge, M. Thüring, I. Wagner, and C.V. Kuhr, “The 
meCUE Questionnaire. A modular tool for measuring User 
experience” The 7th Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society Conference, Advances in Ergonomics Modeling, 
Usability & Special Populations, 2016, pp. 115-128. 
[10] J. Read. “Children as participants in design and evaluation” 
Interactions, vol. 22, 2015,  pp. 64-66, 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1145/2735710.    
[11] J. Read, P. Markopoulos, N. Parés, J. Hourcade, and A. Antle   
“Child computer interaction” Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA) ACM, April. 2008, 
pp. 2419-2422, doi:10.1145/1358628.1358697. 
[12] M. Schrepp, A. Hinderks, and J. Thomaschewski, “Applying 
the user experience questionnaire (UEQ) in different 
evaluation scenarios” 3rd international Conference of Design, 
User Experience and Usability. Theories, Methods and Tools 
for Designing the User Experience, June 2014, pp. 383-392, 
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-07668-3_37.  
[13] H. Shier, “Pathways to participation: Openings, opportunities 
and obligations” Children & Society, vol. 15, no. 3, 2001,  pp. 
107-117. 
[14] M. Thielsch and M. Moshagen, “Erfassung visueller Ästhetik 
mit dem VisAWI [in English: Capturing visual aesthetics with 
the 
VisAWI]” 
Conference 
Proceedings 
of 
Usability 
Professionals, 2011, pp. 260-265. 
[15] K. Wright, “An Introduction to Cronbach's α: It's the GLM 
(Again)!”Annual meeting of Southwest Educational Research 
Association, Feb.  2013, doi:10.13140/2.1.1816.8328. 
[16] B. Zaman, “Introducing a pairwise comparison scale for UX 
evaluations with preschoolers,” Human-Computer Interaction 
– INTERACT. Berlin, Heidelberg, vol.  LNCS 5727, pp. 634–
637, 2009.  
 
 
 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

