Evaluation of a Driver Assistant Client in the Context of
Urban Logistics and Electric Vehicles
Christian Stolcis, Johan Buchholz, and Volkmar Schau
Chair of Software Technology
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
Email: {christian.stolcis, johan.buchholz, volkmar.schau}@uni-jena.de
Abstract—The use of Electric Vehicles (EVs) is limited. Uncer-
tainty concerning the short range and the lack of solutions
matching the users needs are factors that hinder widespread use
of the technology in business and logistics contexts. In Smart
City Logistik (SCL) project, a Driver Assistant Client (DAC)
was developed to help to overcome fears, limited information
and uncertainty in the context of urban logistics. To evaluate the
users needs and intentions, an iterative and open approach was
designed and consequently used. Triangulation helped to get the
best possible insights out of each of three phases of development
and the ﬁndings were used to improve the DAC. The beginning of
the project was accompanied by a lot of uncertainty, so qualitative
information was gathered to understand how the drivers work
routines look like and which attitudes towards new technologies
prevailed. A more quantitative approach helped to gather a broad
range of opinions on speciﬁc usability topics, before the actual
users will be asked about their daily experience with the system.
This agile and iterative approach helped to identify important
aspects while designing the DAC and to compare different so-
lutions, e.g. regarding important functionalities, menu-structure,
font, button-size, and other parameters. The implementation of
these ﬁndings enabled the project partners to develop a broadly
accepted user interface and system that will be used in electric
vehicles in urban logistics.
Keywords–Survey; Usability; Electric Vehicles.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Since the need of delivering goods increased massively in
the past decade and will increase further in the next years
[1], the use of Electric Vehicles (EVs) for last-mile delivery
could help to reduce substantially the air and sound pollution,
especially in inner cities. In fact, most researchers agree that
even well beyond 2020, the capacity of batteries will not ﬁt
future range demands [2]. This restriction affects especially
available EVs, that are designed for the transportation of
goods. Therefore, many companies have qualms to use this
new technology because of range limitations, low density of
recharging stations and long charging time [3]. Nevertheless,
no matter which technological restrictions appear with EVs
compared to traditional vehicles, for most companies it all
comes down to the ability to plan the vehicle usage, including
the certainty that the planed tour can be done. In fact, many
companies interviewed during the Smart City Logistik (SCL)
project, have already tours within the range of an EV, or at
least are able to adopt tours with little effort. The research
project SCL pursues the goal to develop such a system, that
provides important information on EV-speciﬁc restrictions and
helps to overcome fears and to support the usage within
urban logistics. As part of the German special federal research
program for Information and Communication Technologies for
Electric Mobility II (ICT II) [4], the SCL project supports the
integration of EVs in ﬂeets through the usage of Information
and Communications Technology (ICT).
One of the most important parts in such a holistic system
is the assistance of the driver. In a complex socio-technical
system where EVs are used within urban logistics, the driver
needs to cope with additional information (such as range,
battery status, etc.) in order to fulﬁll his main task of delivering
goods. To reduce stress and uncertainty resulting from these
important additional parameters, a Driver Assistant Client
(DAC) focussing on the needs of drivers was developed, eval-
uated and implemented as a prototype during the SCL project.
Therefore, a concept for technology assessment was developed,
combining existing methods from social and computer sciences
for the speciﬁc project. In an agile managed project, we needed
to focus on methods, that provided ﬂexibility and direct user
feedback to overcome different phases of non-knowledge, that
came along with the novelty of the topic. The results help
to achieve the goal, to develop and improve mockup and
demonstrator along the users needs. This general concept can
be applied to other projects in the ﬁeld of computer-human
interaction, that are confronted with similar conditions and
challenges regarding uncertainty and user expectancies.
In Section II existing work regarding the DAC and the
prototype evaluation will be outlined brieﬂy, before a more
detailed overview on the problem, the purpose of the DAC
and its main functionality will be given (Section III). Subse-
quently, the research design to improve the DAC in an iterative
procedure and to assess the users expectancies will be outlined.
It consists of three main qualitative and quantitative surveys:
In a ﬁrst step, seven drivers were interviewed to get insights
into their daily routines and attitudes towards supporting
technology (Section IV) and the ﬁndings were used to build
the prototype (Section V). Secondly, 43 participants tested two
different DAC prototypes and evaluated them with a focus on
usability (Section VI). The third part includes the development
of the functional demonstrator and is accompanied by a beta-
phase with a few drivers of EVs, followed by a qualitative
interview. Additionally, a simulator-based test with a higher
number of participants from logistic companies is part of the
research design (Section VII). Finally, a short outlook and
critical reﬂection of the used approach and the gathered results
will conclude this paper (Section VIII).
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II.
STATE OF THE ART
Previous work on methods for software design show a
broad range of techniques, that can be applied in different
development stages. Cognitive walkthroughs, heuristic eval-
uation, formal usability inspections [5] offer interesting and
valuable insights in a development process. More theoretical
work focusses on the users needs and expectancies as relevant
factors for technology acceptance. Factors that inﬂuence the
use of a socio-technical system cover the perceived usefulness,
the attitude towards using a technology and others [6], [7].
Other work in the ﬁeld of DACs or EVs point out important
factors, that are relevant in the given context [8], but focus too
much on the economic decisions of private households and
cannot be adapted completely to our project. Unfortunately,
knowledge about important factors while using the DAC in
a commercial context in EVs, is rare. When it comes to a
long-term research project in a ﬁeld, where user acceptance
is rather unknown, a ﬂexible methodology is needed, that
provides different forms of knowledge in different project
stages. Therefore, methods from social sciences were used. A
qualitative research part is used to gather knowledge [9] and
quantitative research helps to evaluate existing knowledge and
design with a broader range of participants [10].
III.
THE DRIVER ASSISTANCE CLIENT
In the context of urban logistics, the driver has to cope with
a lot of information, which often comes along with stress and
the insecurity about the actual range of an EV. Since the range
depends on a lot of parameters (e.g., battery capacity, driving
speed, weather conditions, weight, etc.), the consideration of
all those inﬂuencing parameters would be a complex process
while driving. To reduce stress and eliminate insecurity, the
DAC was developed. Basically, it works as a navigation sys-
tem, providing optimized routes for EV, considering different
range-affecting parameters of the vehicle while focussing on
the planned tour. At the start of a tour, the driver can retrieve
the tour on the DAC, which is already optimized and considers
all parameters for the EV he is using. During the tour, the
driver will be navigated to each point, and informed about
possible changes of the tour and all relevant information (e.g.,
trafﬁc and weather conditions). Hereby the driver is relieved
from thoughts about the range of the vehicle, because the tour
is always optimized and adapted to changes, so that the driver
will be able to perform his tour and drive back carefree to the
starting point.
Since the DAC should assist the driver while driving and
reduce the added complexity, it needs to be easy-to-use in
a vehicle. To ﬁnd an optimal way to support the driver we
elaborated an approach for the realization of the DAC, where in
each iteration the acceptance and usability has been evaluated
systematically. The ﬁndings were used to improve further
versions of the DAC.
IV.
THE INTERVIEW
In theoretical discourses on technology use, EV and driver
assistance systems, different factors, that inﬂuence the attitude,
expectations, and acceptability towards these technologies in
general public, are described [6, p. 188] [7, p. 447]. Beside
these common factors, there may be speciﬁc ones among
employees in logistics who use EV, that result from their
speciﬁc situation (e.g., the employer-employee relationship
leads to an involuntary use of the system). In the ﬁrst place,
the professional drivers need to perform their work task
without unwanted disruptions by technological peculiarities
and EV-speciﬁc uncertainties. To overcome the theoretical
debate on barriers and drivers of technology acceptance, em-
pirical evidence was gathered in qualitative interviews. Seven
drivers from different companies were interviewed, using a
semi-structured guide that was developed in advance. The
interviewees were asked about their individual common work
tasks, their attitude towards new technologies in general and
EVs in detail, their expectations towards a DAC and some
demographic items as well as their employment biography.
A content analysis of the interviews was conducted and the
deductive-inductive creation of categories [11] shed light onto
possible acceptance factors and requirements regarding a DAC
in EV-based urban logistics. In theoretical debates, the general
acceptance factors are described as perceived usefulness, per-
ceived ease of use, the attitude towards using a technology [6,
p. 188], and some models include the behavioural intention
to use the system as well. These factors are inﬂuenced by
moderators such as subjective norms, experience, the image
of a technology, job relevance, output quality or the the
voluntariness of use for example [7, p. 447]. We found empiric
evidence in the interviews regarding these items. Using the
computer-assisted qualitative data analysis software f4analyse
[12], we found out, that the drivers tend to prefer a passive
system, that gives them useful information on important events
during their tour, while not forcing them to act in a single,
speciﬁed way. Other hints pointed in the direction of up-to-date
maps, estimation and inclusion of time and range restrictions,
the ease of use of and favoured support while implementing
the system. These important factors for technology users were
considered, while developing the ﬁrst versions of the DAC.
V.
BUILDING THE PROTOTYPE
Taking into account the requirements that were identiﬁed in
the interviews, as well as previous research, a ﬁrst horizontal
prototype was developed. Horizontal means in this case, that
the prototype has no real functionality, and was designed
as a draft for the evaluation of the user interface. Figure 1
shows the tour overview and Figure 2 shows the information
overview of the prototype. Both ﬁgures offer an impression of
the main design. The main menu has been arranged on the top
to allow switching directly between the main views such as
tour information, navigation, map, vehicle status, direct call,
messages and common information. To allow the navigation
through different information, the submenu is arranged on the
left side in each view. Since the DAC should be used on
a mobile device with touch screen, big buttons were used,
enriched with understandable and clear icons. After login
the user directly views the tour overview with all relevant
information on stops and clients. While driving, the user will
mainly use the navigation view, which represents the route
guidance.
During the development of the ﬁrst prototype, some details
of the design were questioned. So, a second prototype was
build, which offers the same basic functionality, but has a
slightly different User Interface (UI) regarding the views.
Figure 3 shows the tour overview for the second prototype.
The main menu is also situated on the top of the screen and
the submenu also on the left side, whereas the view of the
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. Tour overview of prototype 1
content is divided into two parts, the item list and the content
of the selected item. In prototype 1, the list disappears when
an item is selected, in prototype 2 the item list remains visual,
so the user can always see which item is currently selected.
Another difference compared to prototype 1 is the overview
of the main menu shown in Figure 4, which shows up directly
after login. This should provide an overview about all available
functionalities. Creating two prototypes allowed to evaluate
more options and the advantages and disadvantages from
slightly different views. The evaluation itself and the results
are described in the next section.
VI.
PROTOTYPE EVALUATION
After developing the ﬁrst two DAC-prototypes, possible
users were asked for feedback in an online survey, targeting
possible difﬁculties that may appear while using EVs in
logistics. Before the users performed some basic tasks using
the two prototypes, they were asked about different aspects of
usability, using a standardized questionnaire focussing on the
EN ISO 9241-110 norm [13] , which was slightly adapted to
the research context. For questions regarding the functions of
the DAC, perceived ease of use, and intuitiveness, the user was
asked to rank the speciﬁc characteristics of the prototypes on
a 7-step-scale and to add qualitative information in free-text
ﬁelds. Due to limitations in availability of interview partners
at the partner companies who took part in the research project
(and the resulting inefﬁciency to carry out the study on-site),
an online questionnaire was developed using LimeSurvey [14],
and an additional device with the DAC prototypes was brought
to the partner companies. In each company, a contact person
Figure 2. Navigation view of prototype 1
Figure 3. Tour overview of prototype 2
was instructed and responsible for conducting the evaluation.
The access to the questionnaire was restricted by a 6-digit
access code, which was handed out to the interviewees by the
contact person in an envelope with some further instructions
on the evaluation procedure. While the code itself was in a
non-personalized envelope, it was possible to track the respon-
dents company and the order in which both prototypes were
evaluated. The evaluation order was randomized based on the
access code, which also made it possible to match the answers
to the proper prototype. With this step, distortions as a result
of answer patterns were prevented and this procedure offered
a high level of de-personalization. The online questionnaire
was accessible for a period of 14 weeks and the users were
able to participate independently, at their individual best point
in time. When participating, the users opened the envelope,
accessed the online questionnaire and answered some basic
questions before the ﬁrst prototype was shown on the second
screen. After performing some tasks, the users were asked
to answer questions and rate the usability of the prototype,
before the same procedure started for the second prototype.
The questionnaire concluded with free-text ﬁelds for ideas of
improvement and some demographic questions.
With this approach, standardized and comparative informa-
tion, as well as qualitative insights into the perceived usability
of the two evaluated prototypes were gathered from 45 users.
While 2 answers were excluded from the analysis due to
reasonable doubt of sufﬁciency (e.g., when the evaluation of
DAC was carried out in just a few seconds), the remaining
43 cases gave us some interesting insights on the usability
Figure 4. Main menu of prototype 2
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 5. Tour overview of the demonstrator
of the evaluated prototypes. So it turned out that, in general,
none of the two prototypes was evaluated better than the other.
According to our SPSS analysis, prototype 1 showed better
results regarding the usability, while prototype 2 achieved
better results in clearness of the design and intuitiveness. Based
on these results, a set of adaptations was elaborated. Basically,
it combines the positive characteristics of both prototypes.
Finally, these adaptations were used to build a functional
demonstrator of the DAC, which is described in the next
section.
VII.
THE FUNCTIONAL DEMONSTRATOR AND
EVALUATION
The most important difference regarding the prototypes
and the demonstrator is that the latter is fully functional.
Compared to the indicated functionality of the prototypes, the
demonstrator has been reduced, based on the results of the
evaluation. The remaining main functionality covers the tour
overview, turn by turn navigation, status overview and settings.
Figure 5 shows the tour overview and on the upper border
the main menu. The submenu has been removed completely,
so that the available space could be used in a better way.
Also, the navigation view has been improved by removing
unimportant buttons, such as the zoom in and out buttons (see
Figure 6). To save space and reduce complexity, the vehicle
status and common information (e.g., weather, trafﬁc, etc.)
have been merged into the status overview, and the direct call
and messages views have been removed.
After two iterations, the DAC has been implemented as a
fully functional demonstrator based on the recommendations.
To ensure a high quality and a high usefulness, another
iteration step will conclude the project. In order to get further
information about usability, the driver should use the DAC
during his normal working day. To collect more data on
possible insufﬁciencies, two ﬁnal evaluations will be carried
out. The ﬁrst one will target drivers with experience in driving
EVs in an EV-logistic context and will be performed as a
qualitative interview. The second one will focus on drivers
without speciﬁc EV-experience and is planned as a quantitative
questionnaire.
For the ﬁrst evaluation, drivers from the participating com-
panies will use the DAC during their normal working day for
a period of two months. Finally, they will be asked about their
experiences using the DAC in a semi-structured interview, to
bring to light possible deﬁcits regarding usability. The results
will be generated through a content analysis, similar to the
approach described in Section IV. Due to the fact that only
Figure 6. Navigation view of the demonstrator
a few drivers at the partner companies can participate while
actually using EVs and the DAC, the signiﬁcance of the results
is restricted as a consequence. To overcome this problem, the
demonstrator will be evaluated by a higher number of profes-
sional drivers in Eltrilo [15], a simulator that was developed
during the SCL project and is capable of simulating a real
world environment based on map data. Speciﬁc scenarios (e.g.,
transportation from a hub into town with multiple stops) can be
simulated and be part of the evaluation. In order to use Eltrilo,
the DAC will be installed into the simulator and connected
to the live-system via a mobile network connection. In a ﬁrst
step, the participants will get some detailed instructions on
what they should do on their tour and use the DAC while
performing their tasks in the simulator. During the simulation,
some events affecting the tour will be triggered, in order to
simulate unpredictable changes of plans. In a second step,
the participants will be asked to answer some questions on
their experience in the the demonstrator, as well as questions
regarding usability. The approach is similar and comparable
to the investigation described in Section VI but bases on the
improved demonstrator.
This approach guarantees valuable insights from qualitative
interview data as well as a usability evaluation by a broad
range of possible users. The results can be compared to earlier
research and help to improve the system in further development
stages.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The development of a technological solution requires mul-
tiple iteration steps, a fact that is crucial for the evaluation and
that is considered in the presented research design: opening
up for qualitative information in the beginning of the project,
where knowledge is limited and uncertainty about important
acceptance factors is high, before focussing on the gathered
knowledge and comparable evaluation questions with regard to
existing norms and standards, is one way to assess technology
development and to gain valuable information on user ex-
pectancy and experience. Due to the agile project management,
the technology evaluation has to be open at any point in time
for new information and changes, and needs to combine a va-
riety of existing qualitative and quantitative research methods.
This helps to achieve the best possible results, that can be
implemented in further technology development.
The ﬁrst interview showed important aspects in the drivers
daily work routines, that had to be considered while developing
the DAC. A passive system, that gives hints and relevant, up-
to-date information is preferred by the drivers. The prototype
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

evaluation revealed the positive aspects of two slightly different
mockups that were implemented in the functional demonstra-
tor. Two iterations resulted in a fully functional prototype
of the DAC, which is broadly accepted by possible users.
The third iteration step will include two parts, focussing on
qualitative information from a small number of real world EV-
users as well as a higher number of professional drivers, using
a driving simulator. Both evaluations should help to identify
ﬁnal enhancements regarding usability.
Finally, these results will help developers while creating
DACs in the context of EVs. As a next step, the evaluation
can be carried out by a higher number of participants from
different contexts (e.g., private users as well) to ﬁnd additional
use cases for the developed technological system.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank all members of the SCL research
team here at FSU Jena – there are too many to name them
all in person. We would also like to extend our gratitude to
our partners within the research consortium, end users as well
as research institutions and industrial developers. This project
is supported by the German Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Energy in the IKT-II fur Elektromobilitat program
under grant 01ME121(-33).
REFERENCES
[1]
European Commission, A roadmap for completing the single market
for parcel delivery.
Brussels: European Commission, 2013.
[2]
K. Young, W. Caisheng, L. Y. Wang, and K. Strunz, Electric Vehicle
Battery Technologies, 1st ed.
New York: Springer Science+Business
Media, 2015.
[3]
Nationale Platform Elektromobilit¨at, Ladeinfrastruktur f¨ur Elektro-
fahrzeuge in Deutschland. Statusbericht und Handlungsempfehlung
2015 (Recharging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles in Germany.
Status Report and Recommended Action.
Nationale Platform Elek-
tromobilit¨at, 2015.
[4]
Bundesministerium
f¨ur
Wirtschaft
und
Energie,
“IKT
f¨ur
Elektromobilit¨at
(ICT
for
Electromobility)
II,”
Internet,
http://www.bmwi.de/BMWi/Redaktion/PDF/Publikationen/
Technologie-und-Innovation/ikt-elektromobilitaet,property=pdf,
bereich=bmwi2012,sprache=de,rwb=true.pdf, 2016.03.16, 2013.
[5]
J. Nielsen, “Usability inspection methods,” in Conference Companion
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’94.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 1994, pp. 413–414. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/259963.260531
[6]
V. Venkatesh and F. D. Davis, “A theoretical extension of the technol-
ogy acceptance model: Four longitudinal ﬁeld studies,” Management
Science, vol. 46, no. 2, 2000, pp. 186–204.
[7]
V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, “User
acceptance of information technology: Toward a uniﬁed view,” MIS
Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, 2003, pp. 425–478.
[8]
S. Arndt, Evaluierung der Akzeptanz von Fahrerassistenzsystemen.
Modell zum Kaufverhalten von Endkunden.
VS, Verl. f¨ur Sozial-
wissenschaften, 2011.
[9]
J. Gl¨aser and G. Laudel, Experteninterviews und qualitative Inhaltsanal-
yse.
Wiesbaden: VS Verlag f¨ur Sozialwissenschaften, 2009.
[10]
R. Schnell, P. B. Hill, and E. Esser, Methoden der empirischen Sozial-
forschung.
M¨unchen [u.a.]: Oldenbourg, 2008.
[11]
U. Kuckartz, Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse. Methoden, Praxis, Com-
puterunterst¨utzung (Qualitative Content Analysis. Methods, Practice,
Computer-assistance).
Weilheim und Basel: Beltz Juventa, 2012.
[12]
Dr. dresing and Pehl GmbH, f4analyse 1.0.0-rc4- Computer Assisted
Qualitative Data Analysis Software (CAQDAS), Internet, https://www.
audiotranskription.de/f4-analyse, 2016.03.16, Marburg.
[13]
J. Pr¨umper, “Isonorm 9241/110-s: Evaluation of software based
upon
international
standard
iso
9241,
part
110
-
manuscript
questionnaire,”
Internet,
http://people.f3.htw-berlin.de/Professoren/
Pruemper/instrumente/ISONORM 9241 110-S 2010.pdf, 2016.03.16,
Berlin, 2010.
[14]
C. Schmitz and LimeSurvey Core Development Team, “Limesurvey -
free open source survey tool,” Internet, https://www.limesurvey.org/en/,
2016.03.16.
[15]
V. Schau, S. Apel, K. Gebhardt, J. Kretzschmar, M. Mauch, and
C. Stolcis, “Evaluating ict-systems for electric vehicles within simulated
environments,” in Proceedings for the 19th Gulf Engineering Forum
Smart Solutions, Kuwait City, in press.
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

