Supporting Improvisatory Story Creation for
Children by Storing Their Storytelling
Yuto Suzuki，Shumpei Akahoshi，and Mitsunori Matsushita
Kansai University, Graduate school of Informatics, Japan
emails: k834596@kansai-u.ac.jp，k854371@kansai-u.ac.jp，mat@res.kutc.kansai-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In workshops for children participating in production
activities, it is important to review not only the production
activities but also completed works. However, when works are
created that have no tangible shape, such as oral stories, a record
of the work is needed to enable review of the works. Currently,
digital devices, such as video cameras are used to record such
works. However, it is difﬁcult for children to manipulate digital
devices to record and review their storytelling. Therefore, in
this paper we propose a recording system that children can
manipulate and use to store their own works. Based on the
opinions of the designer of the workshop, we iteratively developed
the system. In order to verify the usefulness of the proposed
system, we conducted an evaluation experiment comparing our
app with the standard iOS camera application. As a result, it
was suggested that the proposed system has useful functions for
recording and viewing works.
Keywords–story creation; children; workshop; reviewing; com-
puter interaction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There is a workshop to support children’s stories. Story
creation workshops aim to help children develop their imagina-
tion and expressive power by allowing them to have fun while
creating stories. One example of a story creation workshop
is “PeKay’s Little Author Workshop”[1]. In this workshop,
children freely arrange characters and text using the software
“PeKay’s Little Author” to complete an original digital picture
book. This system was developed by Asakura. Asakura designs
and implements the workshops [2]. In these workshops, the
children print the completed digital picture books with a
printer. Also, at the end of the workshops, the children share
their digital picture books with other participants through
presentations．As seen in this example, it is important not
only to produce works but also to review the works produced
during the workshop by allowing participants to review their
completed works by themselves or by showing them to each
other. By reviewing, we can acquire new consciousness and
expression techniques.
In story creation workshops, it is necessary to record the
works to enable them to be reviewed. At present, digital equip-
ment such as voice recorders and video cameras are generally
used. However, these digital devices have not been developed
for the purpose of reviewing works produced in story creation
workshops. For this reason, there arises a problem that it
is difﬁcult to easily ﬁnd a desired work from a large set
of recorded data in story creation workshop where work is
recorded a plurality of times. Therefore, in this research, we
target the story creation workshops for children, and support
the review of the produced story. In this paper, we propose a
recording system that considers the contents of activities by
interviewing workshop designer for one workshop.
In Section 2, we introduce several examples of research
that supports the creation of stories, and described the posi-
tioning of this research. In Section 3, we describe the content
of ”PeKay’s Storytelling Picture Card Workshop” which we
covered in this paper. In Section 4, we describe the design
guidelines for the recording system were made by clarifying
the problem of the recording of the work by the video
camera in the ”PeKay’s Storytelling Picture Card Workshop”
by interview with the designer. In Section 5, we describe
the ”prototype system Ver.1” and its problems. In Section 6,
we describe the prototype system Ver. 2 which improved the
problems of the prototype system described in Section 5. In
Section 7, we describe the experiments we conducted to verify
the usefulness of the proposed system. In Section 8 we describe
the results and considerations of the experiment. In Section 9,
we describe conclusions, including future prospects.
II.
RELATED STUDIES
In this section, we introduce several examples of research
that supports the creation of stories for children, and described
the positioning of this research.
A. Supporting children’s story creation
Many approaches have been employed to support children’s
story creation. Vaucelle et al. developed a doll-type system
“DollTalk” that records and reproduces children’s utterance
contents and movements [3]. DollTalk aims to objectively
review and improve the stories produced by children by
allowing them to listen to their stories in a voice different
from their own voices. Vaucelle et al. also developed a type of
doll device called “Picture this!”[4]. In these devices, sensors
and cameras are built in dolls, and by speaking using dolls
and props, it is possible to create video works with simple
operations. Ryokai et al. developed “StoryMat”, which can
create stories by recording story utterances and toy movements
while children are moving toys on mats [5]. In this system,
when a child plays on the mat, the previously recorded story
is played as an animation. This allows children to create stories
in collaboration with others. In these studies, by using dolls
and props, they take the form of play seen in early childhood
as a basis and support the creation of children’s stories with
natural ﬂow.
Sato developed a system that allows adults and children to
create stories in a way that they read stories from one another
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. PeKay’s Storytelling Picture Card
[6]. In this system, the introductory part of a story in which
the main character is in trouble is expressed with letters and
text, and it is conveyed to the child by parental talk. The child
arranges texts and characters and thus creates a continuation of
the story, providing a solution of the problem, and tells it to the
parent. Annany developed a caterpillar-type recording system
called “TellTale”[7]. The system consists of ﬁve bodies and
one head, each of which has the role of a recording device
and a reproducing device. Recording speech individually by
using the ﬁve bodies, the user can create various stories by
switching the order of combination. In these studies, the goal
is to cultivate the ability to think about stories and the whole
composition.
Bonsignore et al. developed a mobile application called
“StoryKit” that can be used to create and share stories [8].
In this system, the user can make a story using the collected
images, texts, and sounds. Also, because it is a mobile ap-
plication, the user can create a story while collecting photos
outdoors, without being conﬁned to one place. Furthermore,
stories can be shared with other people easily by sending a
URL. In this study, it is a feature that it is possible to make
stories such a diary and share them with others.
B. Position of this research
In previous research, as a creative support for children’s
stories, they provide new activities through their systems.
However, we support the creation of children’s stories by
supporting existing creation activities.
In addition, Nakae et al. are assisting in creative activities
workshop by recording the activities [9]. In this research, they
focus on the production process, but we focus on the created
works and support reﬂection.
From the above, in this research the purpose is located in
both “support for story creation” and “support for workshop”.
III.
TARGET WORKSHOP
In this work, we developed a recording system that takes
into consideration the activity of “PeKay’s Storytelling Picture
Card Workshop”. Development of the system was realized
through cooperation with TamieAsakura (GoodGrief Co., Ltd.)
who designs and conducts this workshop. Here, we will brieﬂy
outline “PeKay’s Storytelling Picture Card Workshop”. The
participants of this workshop are children aged 5 to 10, who
create stories using “picture cards”. The picture cards are
divided into six genres: “character”, “toy”, “food”, “vehicle”,
Figure 2. Work example
“place”, “weather” (Figure 1). There is a total of 43 cards,
including 8 character cards and 7 cards for each of the other
categories. Using these picture cards, participants can create
stories with the pictures functioning as prompts. The basic
steps in the story creation procedure are summarized below.
1)
Select a card freely.
2)
Place the selected card on the desk and consider the
story while changing its position.
3)
Talk while presenting a card.
An example of the work created according to this procedure
is shown in Figure 2. There are several possible ways to select
a card. For example, besides choosing a card freely, it is also
possible to randomly select a card, limit the number of cards,
and so forth. Also, since one work can be made in a short time,
many works are made through the workshop. In addition, the
facilitator uses a video camera to record the state of utterance
of the child’s story, and the work is recorded in the form of
a video. At the end of the workshop, as a general review, all
the participants watch the work.
IV.
DESIGN GUIDELINES
We interviewed Asakura to determine the design guidelines
for the recording system. Three interviews were conducted on
March 2, May 21, and September 13, 2017. In the interview,
we asked about the problem of the video camera used for
the recording of the work. The results of the interviews are
organized and presented below. The following three points
were cited as problems. (A) Because a child moves during
recording of a work, the card to be presented may not be
visible to the camera. (B) When a child faces the camera, he
or she should not speak shyly.(C) When viewing the work,
the appearance of the child is displayed as part of the work,
and this can interfere with concentrating on the content of the
work. These problems are thought to be due to the fact that the
facilitator is recording the story work of the child and that the
presenter and the recollector are separated. Therefore, in this
paper, to solve these problems, we propose a recording system
for children to operate themselves and record the creation of
their stories.
To implement this system, four design guidelines were
set with reference to Asakura’s opinions. First of all, for
children, it is considered difﬁcult to tell a full story at one
time. Therefore, a story may be divided into segments and
recorded in stages. Second, to enable the child to intuitively
operate the system, the operation can be performed with simple
interaction. Third, it is necessary to prevent extra information
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 3. Prototype System Ver.1；When you tap Works with “1.TitleScreen”, you can go to “7.View” and watch the works on images 7-8.Then, when you tap
Make, you can go to “2. Record” and record the work on images 2-6.
from entering the story work, because there is a possibility that
it may interfere with viewing the work intensively if the work
contains extra information. The extra information here refers
to information that is not related to the story, such as a part
of the body of the child or the surrounding landscape. Finally,
since many works are recorded, it should be easy to identify
an individual work.
V.
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTOTYPE SYSTEM VER.1
In this Section, we describe the ”prototype system Ver.1”
developed based on design guidelines and its problems.
A. System overview
We implemented a prototype system Ver.1 (hereinafter
Ver.1) based on the design guidelines described in Section 4.
To satisfy design guideline (1), the ability to divide stories and
record in stages, we alternately repeat the selection of cards
and the recording of sounds so that the story work is recorded
in stages. To satisfy design guideline (2), according to which
the operation should be able to be performed with simple
interaction, all screen transitions were realized by tapping a
button. In addition, regarding the card selection method, image
recognition that automatically discriminates by holding the
camera over the card was adopted. To satisfy design guideline
(3), to prevent extra information from entering the story work,
we adopted a slide show format in which images and sounds
are switched correspondingly to reproduce the work. Finally,
to satisfy design guideline (4), that individual works should be
easily identiﬁed, we made it possible to record and display the
title of each work. The above contents are organized and the
functions implemented are summarized below.
•
Image recognition function of the card to be used
•
Audio recording function
•
Work piece reproduction function in slide show format
•
Title input function
Ver.1 with these functions was implemented as an iOS applica-
tion on an iPad. Figure 3 shows the screen transition diagram of
Ver.1. For development of the system, Unity.Ver.5.4.1f1, which
can easily correspond to various platforms was used [10]. In
addition, image recognition was realized by characterizing the
image of each picture card and registering it as a marker using
Vuforia.Ver.6.5 of SDK [11].
B. Problems of Ver.1
To clarify the problems of Ver.1, we had a discussion with
Asakura. The discussion took place on November 8, 2017. We
considered the following problems.
1)
Operation in the horizontal screen may force the use
of both hands.
2)
The operation required to shift from the recording of
a work to viewing will increase due to the title screen.
3)
Since the number of cards that can be recorded at a
time is limited to 4, the range of expression of the
work is narrowed.
4)
Because the story is divided for recording, there is a
possibility of forgetting the contents already recorded
during the recording.
5)
At the time of card selection, it automatically tran-
sitions to sound recording screen at the moment of
recognizing the card, which causes erroneous opera-
tion.
6)
Buttons are located at the lower right or the lower
left, and the hand with the terminal unintentionally
touches the button, possibly causing a mistake in
operation.
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

By improving these problems, improvement of system oper-
ability is expected. In Section 6, we will explain the prototype
system Ver. 2, which incorporated improvements to address
these problems.
VI.
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROTOTYPE SYSTEM VER. 2
This Section introduces the prototype system Ver.2 (here-
inafter Ver. 2). In Ver.2, the following changes were made.
1)
Changed the top screen to the work list.
2)
Changed so that the list of works recorded on the top
screen can be seen.
3)
Made it possible to freely select cards to be used from
1 to 12 cards.
4)
Add the previewing works function.
5)
Add the redoing function Image recognition and
recording.
The ﬁrst change has been implemented to solve the
problem clariﬁed in the previous section “Operation on the
horizontal screen may force use of both hands.” This made
it possible to operate the device with one hand and to have
a card and a recording system at the same time. The second
change has been implemented to solve the problem that “the
operation required to shift from the recording of the work to the
viewing will increase due to the title screen.” This change made
it possible to operate the system smoothly (Figure 4-1). The
third change has been implemented to solve the problem that
“the number of cards that can be recorded at a time is limited
to 4, so the range of expression of the work becomes narrow.”
The fourth change was implemented to solve the problem that
“because the user records the story by dividing it into parts,
the user may forget the content that was already recorded in
the middle of recording.” With this change, it was possible to
record works while conﬁrming the contents (Figure 4-6). The
ﬁfth change was implemented to solve the problem that “it
automatically transitions to the sound recording screen at the
moment of recognizing the card at the time of card selection,
which causes erroneous operation.” The redo function allows
the user to redo operations as many times as necessary until the
user taps the button to select a card or start a voice recording
(Figure 4-3,4).
VII.
EXPERIMENT
In this section, we describe the experiments we conducted
to verify the usefulness of the proposed system.
A. Outline of experiment
To verify the usefulness of the proposed system in the
work record of “PeKay’s Storytelling Picture Card Workshop”,
we compared it with the standard camera application of an
iOS terminal (hereinafter referred to as “camera application”).
Although the proposed system is targeted at children aged 5-
10, it is expected that there will be large differences among
individuals in the ability of children. Therefore, in this paper,
we investigate the functionality of the proposed system by
targeting students of the same university which are thought to
have less differences in abilities before conducting experiments
for children. For this time, we covered 6 university students,
including 3 males and 3 females. Two tasks were to be carried
out by the experiment participants. The ﬁrst was to select
cards according to three kinds of rules, and to create six
works of two pieces each. The second task was to record the
created works three by three, using the camera application,
and Ver.2 in order. After completing the recording of the
works, the participants were given a questionnaire form with
question items to ﬁll out. Also, the participants were orally
asked questions about actions at the time of recording the
work. To record the operation contents of the system, we
obtained permission and photographed the subject’s hand with
a video camera. The picture cards used for the experiment were
limited to 33 pictures with a high recognition rate of the image
recognition function, and an iPad was used as the experiment
terminal. The time required for this experiment was about one
hour per person.
B. Experimental questionnaire
This subsection will brieﬂy explain the questionnaire about
the recording of the work, which was done after the experi-
ment. First, we asked the experiment participants to respond
to the questionnaire that asked the questions about the two
types of recording systems. The contents of the questionnaire
are presented below.
Q1
Have you experienced any inconvenience in
recording with the camera application? Yes, No
Q2
Please tell me the reason for Q1. (Free descrip-
tion)
Q3
Have
you
experienced
inconvenience
during
recording with this application? Yes, No
Q4
Please tell me the reason for Q3. (Free descrip-
tion)
Q5
Did you feel that a function that can save titles is
necessary? Yes, No
Q6
Please tell me the reason for Q5. (Free descrip-
tion)
Q7
Please tell me about the function that you feel is
unnecessary. (free description)
Q8
Please let me know if you have thought of any
additional functions that you feel are necessary
for this system. (free description)
We also orally asked questions about the conditions and
procedures during the experiment. At that time, We asked all
the experiment participants, “You recorded the work with two
kinds of systems, which one do you like better? Why?”.
VIII.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This section will consider the experimental results obtained
from the questionnaire from the viewpoint of the recording
works, the viewing of the works, and the problems of the
proposed system.
In response to the questionnaire, three of the six partici-
pants said that it is difﬁcult to tell a whole story at once for
recording using the camera application. On the other hand,
regarding recording using Ver.2, two of the six participants
answered that they did not experience any inconvenience
because the contents were arranged by dividing and recording
the story in segments. These ﬁndings suggest that the function
of dividing and recording the story in parts for each card
used, which was implemented in Ver.2, was able to alleviate
the burden of telling the user’s story at once. Also, in this
experiment, both systems allowed recording to be redone.
However, in the recording by the camera application, the
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

chch
Figure 4. Prototype System Ver.2；When you tap Works with “1.TitleScreen”, you can go to “8.Playwork” and watch the work.Then, when you tap Make, you
can go to “2. Record” and record the work on 2-7 images.
recording was not redone. On the other hand, in the recordings
made using Ver.2, ﬁve participants re-recorded parts of their
recordings, modifying their speech errors and expressions. We
asked the experiment participants who redid their recordings
only when using Ver.2, the reason for this. Regarding recording
by Ver.2, one participant made the following comment: “I
thought that I wanted to improve the quality of the work
because I could re-record my voice at each stage.” Regarding
recording by the camera application, a participant made the
following comment: “When redoing the recording of the work,
it was necessary to redo the recording from the beginning of
the story. When I tried recording again, I felt it was likely that
I made mistakes again and compromised.” These responses
suggest that recording mistakes can be reduced by allowing
the user to re-record parts of a story more easily when stories
are divided and recorded in parts. In addition, this function
was used to eliminate coughing and discontinuation, forgetting
the contents of utterance, changing contents of utterance, and
changing expressions in a story. Also, the number of times
that the work-previewing function was used is summarized for
each experiment participant, it was A: once, B: 4 times, C: 10
times, D: 3 times, E: 3 times, and F: 5 times. This function was
used to check the contents of the work being recorded, and to
conﬁrm whether the recorded sound was recorded correctly.
In the viewing of the works recorded using camera appli-
cation, ﬁve participants found that the appearance of hands,
shadows, and screen blur interfered with the viewing quality.
However, regarding the viewing of the works using Ver.2,
the image and the sound switched correspondingly, so the
participants had the general opinion it provided a clean im-
pression and good viewing quality. These opinions suggest
that the function of playing the work in a slideshow format
is effective for viewing this kind of work. Also, in response
to the title input function, ﬁve participants answered that “the
title function is necessary to distinguish between works that
have the same cover.”
During the experiment, all of the participants made some
errors in operating Ver.2, such as accidentally pushing a button,
unintentionally changing the screen, and proceeding to the next
screen. To address these problems, a button could be added
to allow the user to return to the previous screen. Thus, the
user would be able to redo a recording even in the case of an
operation error.
IX.
CONCLUSION
In this study, we developed a work recording system that
children can operate. The system was speciﬁcally designed for
participants in “PeKay’s Storytelling Picture Card Workshop”,
in which children create stories. By referring to the opinions
of the designer and provider of the workshops, we designed
the system considering the activities of the workshop. As a
development procedure, we interviewed the workshop provider
and developed a prototype system Ver.1 based on the design
guidelines identiﬁed through the interviews. In addition, we de-
veloped Prototype System Ver.2, which addressed the problems
of Ver.1, which were identiﬁed by conducting discussions.
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Moreover, in order to verify whether prototype system Ver.2 is
an appropriate system for “PeKay’s Storytelling Picture Card
Workshop”, we conducted an evaluation experiment of the
function with the participation of 6 college students. As a
result, it was suggested that the proposed system has useful
functions for recording and viewing works. However, the
subjects of “PeKay’s Storytelling Picture Card Workshop” are
5 to 10-year-old children, and it is expected that there will be
differences in system evaluation between university students
and children. Therefore, we will improve the proposed system,
and conduct an evaluation experiment of the system with
children as the participants.
REFERENCES
[1]
“PeKay’s Little Author for iPad,” URL: http://www.pekay.jp/pkla/
ipaden [retrieved: January, 2019].
[2]
T. Asakura, “Development of storybook creation software —To help
nurture a Secure Base in the hearts of children—,” Journal of Informa-
tion Processing, vol. 2, 2011 (in Japanese), pp. 103–116.
[3]
C. Vaucelle and T. Jehan, “Dolltalk: A computational toy to enhance
children’s creativity,” CHI ’02 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, 2002.
[4]
C. Vaucelle and H. Ishii, “Picture this! Film assembly using toy ges-
tures,” Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Ubiquitous
computing, vol. 344, 2008, pp. 350–359.
[5]
K. Ryokai and J. Cassel, “Computer Support for Children’s Collabora-
tive Fantasy Play and Storytelling,” Proceedings of the 1999 Conference
on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning, 1999.
[6]
T. Sato, “Development of Software that Supports Young Children’s
Narrative Productions,” Proceedings of ED-MEDIA 2008–World Con-
ference on Educational Multimedia, 2008.
[7]
M. Annany, “Supporting Children’s Collaborative Authoring: Practicing
Written Literacy While Composing Oral Texts,” Proceedings of Com-
puter Supported Collaborative Learning Conference, 2002.
[8]
E. Bonsignore, A. J. Quinn, A. Druin, and B. B. Bederson, “Sharing
Stories “in the Wild”: A Mobile Storytelling Case Study Using Sto-
ryKit,” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI),
vol. 20, 2013, pp. 18:1–18:38.
[9]
K. Nakae and K. Tsukada, “Support System to Review Manufacturing
Workshop through Multiple Videos,” Proceedings of the 23rd Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces Companion, 2018.
[10]
“Unity,” URL: https://unity3d.com/jp [retrieved: January, 2019].
[11]
“Vuforia Developer Portal,” URL: https://developer.vuforia.com/ [re-
trieved: January, 2019].
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

