Ergonomic Criteria for the Evaluation of Context-Aware User Interface  
Ines Riahi, Faouzi Moussa, Riadh Dziri 
National School of Computer Sciences, Cristal Laboratory 
University of Manouba, Tunisia 
Emails: {ines.riahi@yahoo.fr, faouzimoussa@gmail.com, riadh.dziri@gmail.com} 
 
Abstract— The need of a permanent and ubiquitous access to 
information is becoming increasingly apparent with the advent 
of new materials and the success of handheld devices. This led 
to the emergence of new paradigms in human-machine 
interaction, such as mobility and ubiquitous computing. The 
concept of user interfaces’ adaptation has several facets. It 
requires a dynamic modeling approach. In this context, our 
paper is about designing an evaluation experiment for context-
aware User Interface (UI). This evaluation is based on 
ergonomic rules proposed by experts. The non-contextualized 
ergonomics rules were adapted for the contextualized ones. In 
order to demonstrate context aware UI contribution, we chose 
to work on a critical area which is the medical field and 
especially on the diabetes disease. 
Keywords-Context-aware User Interface; User Interface 
Evaluation ; Ergonomic Rules. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With increasing of devices‟ variety number and their use 
in ubiquitous environments by various types of users, user 
interfaces‟ adaptation has become a necessity rather than an 
option. Existing systems lack the ability to satisfy the 
heterogeneous needs of many users. These needs also vary 
according to the context, where context comprises of 
environmental conditions, the characteristics of device used 
to interact with the application, and the user characteristics. 
There is a need for techniques that can help the User 
Interface designer and developer to deal with a myriad of 
contextual situations. Also, the user should be provided with 
the facility to have an adaptive interface that adapts to 
changing user needs. 
The final phase in the process of User Interface (UI) 
designing is the evaluation phase. Each created interface 
must be evaluated according to definite criteria. Several 
methods for user interface evaluation exist in the literature 
such as the work of Senach [1] or Grislin and Kolski [2]. 
However, we noted the scarcity or even the inexistence of 
those dedicated to contextualized interfaces.  
In this paper, we propose an initial version of 
contextualized interfaces evaluation using some ergonomic 
criteria 
proposed 
specifically 
for 
non-contextualized 
interfaces.  
We proposed in our recent works an approach for 
specification and generation of context-aware interfaces [3].  
In this paper, we will evaluate the obtained interfaces.  These 
interfaces are the interfaces of our application named 
DiaMon [3]. To test our approach, we propose DiaMon for 
monitoring of diabetic patients. Then, we conduct a 
statistical study with a medical team to evaluate our 
interfaces. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses 
some literature reviews of interface evaluation approaches. 
In Section III, we present our approach. It is illustrated, in 
Section IV, with an application called DiaMon that concerns 
the monitoring of diabetic patients suffering from 
hypoglycemia in a smart hospital. In Section V, we propose 
the ergonomic rules for context-aware evaluation. Finally, in 
Section VI, we present our contextualized user interfaces 
used for the experimentation.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Several methods for evaluation UI exist in the literature. 
Senach [1] classified the interface evaluation methods into 
two types: 
 
Empirical evaluation methods (predictive): They are 
used to gather data related to user‟s behavior using 
the system. Such methods require a prototype or the 
real system. 
 
Analytical methods (experimental): they aim at 
evaluating the design of the system and not the 
usage. The use of abstract representations allows 
predictions of performance that cannot be performed 
in a purely empirical approach [1]. 
Grislin and Kolski [2] distinguish three main evaluation 
methods: 
 
The method centered on the opinions and/or user 
activities, 
 
The method centered on expertise. These approaches 
are based on the judgment of experts in Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI) or on the evaluation 
forms or questionnaires classifying the qualities of 
an HCI. 
 
Analytical methods based on HCI modeling. These 
approaches are typically used to perform inspection 
using objective metrics from a human task model or 
a screen pages description. 
In order to evaluate UI, some authors define some 
ergonomics rules. We can cite for example those proposed 
by Vanderdonckt [4] or Smith [5]. Ergonomics is the 
scientific discipline concerned with the understanding of 
interactions among humans and other elements of a system. 
Through our study, we distinguish three types of ergonomics 
[6]: 
 
Physical ergonomics: represents the characteristics 
of human interaction with physical activity such as 
work posture, manipulation of objects, repetitive 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

movements, arrangement of the workplace, the 
health and safety of the user. 
 
Cognitive ergonomics: is interested in mental 
processes involved in human interaction with the 
system components. It aims to analyze and verify the 
compatibility between the interface and the user. 
 
Organizational 
ergonomics: 
focuses 
on 
the 
optimization of socio-technical systems, which are 
composed of the organizational structure, processes, 
cooperative work, communication and resource 
management. 
In general, the ergonomic knowledge is described as 
ergonomic rules used for the design and evaluation of 
interactive software. 
In the literature, there is a great variety of ergonomic 
rules. To facilitate the use of ergonomic rules for designers, 
analysts and programmers, more research has focused on 
their classification in categories called ergonomic criteria. 
Ergonomic guides were proposed. These include, for 
example Vanderdonckt recommendations [4], Smith [5] and 
Scapin [7].  
Scapin and Bastien [7] proposed eight ergonomics rules: 
guide, workload, explicit control, adaptability, errors 
management, consistency/coherence, significance of codes 
and names, compatibility. 
All these methods were used for non-contextualized 
interfaces evaluation. We combined several of these 
techniques in order to evaluate the contextualized interfaces. 
Before focusing on the resulting interfaces, we present in the 
following section, our approach to specification and 
generation of these interfaces. 
III. 
FORMAL APPROACH FOR SPECIFICATION AND 
GENERATION OF CONEXT-AWARE USER INTERFACE 
The objective of our research is to develop a global 
approach for specification and generation of context-aware 
interfaces in a medical field. Our methodology is based on 
the use of formal tools to cover gradually and consistently all 
stages, from the Human-Computer System (HCS) analysis 
and modeling to the generation of different graphic views. 
The first step in our approach, shown in Figure 1, is the 
detection of contextual information. Once the data are 
received from the sensor layer, they will be modeled and 
decomposed into a user model (we model here the different 
user‟s profiles), a platform model (we present here the 
various platforms hosted on our application and exploited by 
different users); and an environment model (it describes the 
various environment characteristics such as geographical 
location, schedule, etc.). This decomposition is based on the 
definition proposed by Calvary et al., [8]. In parallel, the 
analysis of the HCS is necessary. 
The second step consists in the user's task analysis 
specifying the sequence of actions to be performed. This 
analysis leads to the task modeling and the user 
requirements' identification. 
The third step ensures the context and task modeling. 
This will be accomplished via the Petri Nets (PN) database 
that contains structures and elementary compositions of PN. 
PN were proposed by Carl Adam Petri in 1962 and were 
considered as a promising tool for task modeling [9]. PN are 
a mathematically based formalism dedicated to the modeling 
of parallelism and synchronization in discrete systems. PNs 
are continuously expanding and are a suitable tool for HCS 
modeling. Initially, they were only used to describe tasks that 
were computerized. However, later, especially with the 
emergence of High Level Petri Nets, they have been used to 
model Human-Computer Interaction [10]. Formal modeling 
of the Human-Computer Interaction, with Interpreted Petri 
nets allows the identification of all necessary user 
requirements in each point of interaction [10]. 
The fourth step ensures the detection of the user's current 
situation. It aims to identify the pair of (Context, Task). After 
a critical review, established in our last paper [11], none of 
the approaches gives full consideration to the user's activity 
or the task to be accomplished. Thus, we have associated the 
user task to its context of use. All couples "context, task" are 
therefore, previously stored in a database. At a given time, 
the status of different models determines the current context 
of the user (Ci). The identification of the adequate task Ti 
requires browsing the database "context, Task". 
The fifth step provides the user interface specification. In 
this stage, user's requirements are identified in terms of 
interface's objects taking into account the ergonomic rules 
for the presentation of a mobile interface. 
The last step in this approach is dedicated to the 
interface's creation. More details are presented in [3]. 
We consider our approach as a formal one because we 
used formal tools (Petri Nets) for the analysis and the 
modeling of contextualized user interface. The use of a 
formal method to describe the behavior of a context-aware 
system allows us to deduct the properties of the system and 
the users‟ requirements in order to generate the appropriate 
and valid interface at a given time. 
After giving an overview of the advocated approach, we 
will present in the next section, our application called 
DiaMon. 
IV. 
DIAMON: A CONTEXTUAL USER INERFACE ASSISTING 
MEDICAL TEAMS FOR MONITORING HYPOGLYCEMIC PATIENTS 
The overall objective of our application is monitoring 
diabetic patients in a "smart hospital". Equipped with 
biological sensors implanted under their skin, the system 
periodically checks the patient's Glucose Level (GL). Thus, 
it regularly observes the patient's status to alert by mobile 
devices the medical staff in case of an intervention. 
The application is continuously connected to the 
monitoring system. While collecting information by the 
server, the system can, at any time, notices an unusual value 
of GL. That's why; an alert is displayed on medical teams' 
mobile devices. The user then has access to the patient's 
information for better intervention. 
Several problems can arise from such an application. For 
example, in case of urgent and immediate intervention, how 
to alert the medical team and how to generate valid and 
significant interfaces guiding the doctor/nurse to fulfill their 
tasks?  
 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
Figure 1.  Proposed approach. 
In case of hypoglycemic coma, how can we instantly 
notify those present in hospital to ensure a rapid 
intervention? And if the treating doctor is not present at the 
moment, how will the application interface adapt to the 
user's profile and his knowledge? 
First, the application must identify the user's profile 
taking into account his knowledge in diabetology. Secondly, 
DiaMon has to detect the platform used to adjust and display 
the interface's graphical components. Finally, it must 
consider the environment in which the user evolves such as 
geo location and time response. Furthermore, the interface 
must adapt according to GL value. The graphical interface's 
components will change from one value to another. The 
originality of our application resides in the way it is designed 
to be used by all medical team regardless of their specialty or 
status (specialist, generalist, emergency physician or nurse). 
DiaMon fits to its context of use. It takes into account the 
user task, its environment, its profile and its level of 
knowledge. In addition, the user requirements are adapted 
continuously for each situation. 
In this example, we are particularly interested in diabetes 
type 2. 
For a patient with type 2 diabetes, there is a great risk of 
hypoglycemia. The latter represents an abnormally low sugar 
concentration in the blood. Hypoglycemia can result in a 
hypoglycemic coma that may cause the patient's death. We 
can recognize hypoglycemia through several signs: nausea, 
stomach cramps, palpitation, headache, tremor, etc. 
Hypoglycemia may cause a hypoglycemic coma. This 
condition occurs due to a sudden onset of a state of agitation, 
muscle contracture, sharp reflexes and profuse sweating. 
Curative treatment of hypoglycemia depends on the patient's 
condition and his blood sugar. Two scenarios are possible: 
patient conscious or unconscious (Table 1) [12]. 
TABLE I.  
HYPOGLYCEMIA CURATIVE TREATMENT 
Hypoglycemia with 
disturbance of consciousness 
Moderate hypoglycemia 
Condition : 
Blood glucose level between 
0.3 and 0.4 g / l. 
Unconscious patient 
Condition : 
Blood 
glucose 
level 
between 0.4 and 0.7 g / l 
conscious patient 
Treatment:  
Slow intravenous infusion of 
30 to 50 ml of 30% glucose 
solution, relayed by a slow 
infusion of serum 10% until 
patient wakes up. 
A slow intake of sugar (bread) 
is then recommended. 
Treatment: 
Re-sugaring orally: 15g of 
fast sugar (3 sugar cubes 
diluted in water or juice) 
followed by a slow sugar 
intake (20g bread) 
Wait 15 minutes and 
repeat the Re-sugaring . 
 
The two types of hypoglycemia treatment have a slow 
sugar intake (bread). In this case, we must consider the 
diabetics allergic to gluten (a substance into the bread). For 
this type of patients, it must replace the bread with gluten-
free bread such as rice our, corn or buckwheat. A diabetic 
patient may be allergic to fructose. In this case, we must 
avoid the three pieces of sugar and fruit juice in case of 
moderate hypoglycemia. The sugar must be replaced by 
saccharin, aspartame, maltose or malt syrup. 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Our approach resulted in a tool which produces 
contextualized interfaces. DiaMon provides adaptable 
interfaces to user profile and its current environment. The 
following stage is the evaluation of these interfaces. The 
problem with existing evaluation work is that they are 
primarily intended for non-contextualized interfaces. So, we 
have adapted those criteria to evaluate our interfaces. 
The long term goal is to be able to propose new 
ergonomic criteria evaluation intended for contextualized 
interfaces. 
V. 
ERGONOMIC RULES FOR  CONTEXT-AWARE INTERFACE 
EVALUATION REGARDING NON-CONTEXTUALIZED INTERFACE 
The evaluation of an interface is primarily intended to 
verify the reliability, quality, usability and usefulness of the 
HCI. The evaluation of the usefulness is demonstrated by 
answering these two questions: (i) Does the HCI meet the 
specifications? (ii) Can the users accomplish his task? 
Concerning the usability of the HCI, it is verified by 
evaluating: (i) Efficiency: to achieve the expected result, (ii) 
User satisfaction, (iii) Ease of learning and (iv) Ease of use. 
These parameters can be evaluated through an 
experimental evaluation (observation, data collection, 
interviews and questionnaires) or an analytical assessment 
(usage scenario and expert judgments). 
In our research, experimental evaluation was conducted 
via questionnaire and analytical assessment was made via a 
scenario and expert questioning of the domain (pharmacists 
and doctors). 
These evaluation criteria mainly concern the non-
contextualized interfaces. We have noticed during this work 
the scarcity of ergonomic criteria for contextualized 
interfaces. However, some criteria proposed in the literature, 
have seemed interesting for the evaluation of dynamic 
interfaces. For example, we can mention the adaptability 
criterion regarding the ability of an interface to react 
depending on the context and the user's needs and 
preferences. 
In order to assess the quality and the reliability of our 
interfaces, several measures criteria were defined. For 
clarity, we have broken our evaluation criteria into two sets: 
the observable and unobservable criteria. 
A. Observable criteria 
The observable data consist in what the subjects have 
been doing during the simulation such as selecting tabs, data 
entry or changing icons. We can also consider the simulation 
start or the elapsed time. 
B. Non observable criteria 
These criteria can be derived through interviews, 
questionnaires or other data collection techniques. For our 
work, we choose to use the questionnaire technique. The 
development of our questionnaire was governed by 
ergonomic rules proposed in the literature. These rules can 
be applied on contextualized interfaces. 
We asked twelve participants to take part in the 
evaluation stage and go through the simulation platform 
then fill the survey. We have developed the interfaces of this 
scenario and we asked the participants to try them and 
answer the questionnaire. 
The participants were from different backgrounds and 
different range of age and experience. Some of them were 
generalists; others were diabetologists (private and internal 
to Tunisian hospitals), an emergency physician and two 
pharmacists. 
C. Ergonomics rules for context-aware user interface 
We modified ergonomic rules for non-contextualized 
interface to make them relevant for contextualized interfaces. 
Indeed, the existing rules do not take into account the user„s 
preferences, the environment in which he evolves and his 
current activity. 
First, we are interested in the adaptability criterion, 
proposed by Scapin. The original definition of this criterion 
is as follows: “The adaptability of a system refers to its 
capacity to behave contextually and according to the users‟ 
needs and preferences. The criterion Adaptability is 
subdivided 
into 
two 
criteria: 
Flexibility 
and 
User 
Experience.” 
We decomposed the adaptability into four criteria: 
 
Adaptation to the user profile: The user interface 
must automatically adapt to the user's profile; 
 
Environment adaptation: The user interface must 
adapt its content according to environmental data; 
 
Adaptation to the user‟s knowledge: The user 
interface must identify the user's profile in terms of 
knowledge. It must provide the appropriate 
information to his level of expertise; 
 
User preferences: The user interface must adapt its 
content to the user preference. 
Then, we focused on utility, ease of use, usability and the 
quality of UI criteria: 
 
Utility: The user should be able to accomplish its 
task using its interface. The interface must satisfy 
the user; 
 
Ease of use: The interface should be easy to use. It 
must be understandable and clear; 
 
Usability: The extent to which a UI can be used by 
users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, 
efficiency and satisfaction; 
 
Quality: The information displayed in the interface 
must be relevant. 
The criteria have been modified as follows: 
 
Utility of contextualized UI: The user should be 
able to accomplish its task using its interface and 
the UI should consider environment's changes. The 
interface must satisfy the user by automatically 
changing these components if the user‟s task 
evolves; 
 
Ease of use: The interface should be easy to use for 
the user. It must take into account the user profile 
by adopting its components; 
 
Usability: The extent to which a UI can be used by 
users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of 
use. The user's goals can change according to the 
current environment, so the UI must change. 
 
Quality: The information displayed in the interface 
must be relevant, valid and understandable by the 
user. The information must be reliable and suitable 
to the display area of the mobile device. 
All these criteria are used in our evaluation experiment, 
in order to evaluate the contextualized interfaces. 
VI. 
EVALUATION EXPERIMENT  
A. Context-aware user interface for experimentation 
By applying our approach to our application, we were 
able to generate contextualized interfaces. This generation is 
done manually for the evaluation experiment.  Following the 
application of our approach, we got the interfaces 
specification. These interfaces were the subject of an 
experimental study. The majority of user interfaces 
evaluation work is based on ten to fourteen participants. We 
have succeeded in our work to test these interfaces on 
twelve doctor and pharmacist users.  
During the evaluation phase, we have set up a scenario 
that describes an emergency physician that rescues, in the 
ambulance, a diabetic patient with a hypoglycemic coma. 
We are inspired by the principles and general criteria for 
ergonomic 
contextualized 
interfaces 
to 
produce 
an 
evaluation questionnaire for DiaMon produced interfaces. 
The DiaMon first interface, shown in Figure 2, displays 
the patient‟s personal information, the type of intervention 
that can be committed, the patient‟s allergies and the 
glucose level. The information displayed to the interface is 
adapted to the users profile by indicating the most suitable 
intervention and patient‟s allergies; and the patient‟s status 
by indicating the GL. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Initial patient status. 
Once the patient glucose changes/increases, the alert 
message changes its position (displayed in the screen center), 
size and content. A message dialogue appears to alert the 
user to react (Figure 3). The interface‟s components change 
according to the environment‟s change. The alert and 
message dialogue adapts to this new situation (the change of 
Glucose Level). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Glucose Level change 
When a hypoglycemic coma occurs, a new message 
appears announcing the patient‟s condition. The GL values 
change and the type of intervention is adapted (from a patient 
conscious to an unconscious patient (Figure 4)). 
 
 
Figure 4.  UI for unconscious patient 
After testing our application, users answered a 
questionnaire. For more clarity and understanding; and in 
order to identify the exact view of our participants, we used 
the 4-point Likert scale [13]. Their responses were as 
follows. 
B. Results and analysis 
For the user profile adaptation, environment adaptation, 
adaptation to user‟s knowledge and user‟s preferences 
criteria, the following questions were asked: 
1. Does the GL label‟s change help you for your 
intervention? 
2. Is the appearance of the unconscious patient‟s 
label beneficial to you? 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

3. Does the appearance of gluten allergy‟s 
information help you to avoid making mistakes 
in your intervention? 
4. Are the changes appeared in the interface   
beneficial for your contribution? 
For the first question (Figure 5), eleven person of twelve 
have affirmed the usefulness of the occurrence of the label 
containing the glucose levels in the patient during the user‟s 
intervention. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Appearance of GL label in the contextualized interface. 
In Figure 6, over than 65% of the users found that the 
appearance of an alert about the fainting of the patient is 
excellent, while less than 25% found it good and below 5% 
said it was an average. 
 
 
Figure 6.  A question about the appearance of an alert message. 
Regarding the question “what is the appearance of 
information “gluten allergy” was beneficial? 100% of 
participants affirmed that this information was necessary for 
the accomplishment of their tasks (Figure 7). 
 
 
Figure 7.  Appearance of information “gluten allergy”. 
For the last question, the majority (nine out of twelve) 
preferred the graphics components changes occurred in the 
dynamic interface. They have affirmed the advantages of the 
message appear on glucose levels and change of the 
intervention for the accomplishment of their tasks (Figure 8).   
 
 
Figure 8.  Graphics components changes in the dynamic UI. 
For the ease of use and the quality criteria, the users‟ 
responses were as follows: the contextualized interfaces 
seemed to fulfill the participants‟ satisfaction with six out of 
twelve said it was good and three out of twelve said it was 
excellent as shown in Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9.  Information displayed in context-aware UI. 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Through this study conducted with doctors and 
pharmacists, we confirmed that contextualized interfaces 
meet the ergonomic criteria listed above. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we stated some related work about existing 
UI evaluation methods and ergonomics rules. Then, we 
presented a formal and global approach for specification and 
generation of context-aware UI in six steps. We then 
presented our application named DiaMon, which is 
dedicating to health care staff to monitor their diabetes (type 
2) patients‟ glucose level. This application was designed 
with context-aware user interfaces. 
We also proposed ergonomic rules for context-aware 
evaluation where we modified some already existing ones 
and adopted them to the context-sensitive UI with respect to 
the HCI principles. Finally, an evaluation experiment was 
presented to apply our proposal to assess our Application 
DiaMon, and then followed by a statistical study to evaluate 
the contextualized interface. 
In the near future, we will try to test our interfaces on 
more people and expand this study in order to develop clear 
and precise rules for the evaluation of contextualized 
interfaces.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Senach, “ Ergonomic Evaluation of Human-Computer Interface”, 
une revue de la littérature, Research Report, INRIA Publications, 
1990. 
[2] 
M. Grislin and C. Kolski,  “Evaluation of Human-Computer 
Interfaces in the development of interactive systems”, Technique et 
Science Informatiques (TSI), vol. 15, no. 3,  1996, pp. 265-296. 
[3] 
I. Riahi and F. Moussa, “A formal approach for modeling context-
aware 
human-computer 
system”, 
Computers 
& 
Electrical 
Engineering, vol. 44, 2015, pp. 241-261. 
[4] 
J. Vanderdonckt, “The presentation of an aided design ergonomic 
Human-Computer interface for a highly interactive management 
application”. Thesis University of Notre-Dame de la Paix, France, 
1997. 
[5] 
J. N. Mosier and S. L. Smith, “Application of guidelines for designing 
user interface software”, Behaviour & information technology, vol. 5, 
no. 1, 1986, pp.39-46. 
[6] 
R. Baggen, J.P. Correia, K. Schill and J. Visser, “Standardized code 
quality 
benchmarking 
for 
improving 
software 
maintainability” Software Quality Journal,  vol. 20, no. 2, 2012, pp. 
287-307. 
[7] 
D. L. Scapin and J. C. Bastien, “Ergonomic criteria for evaluating the 
ergonomic quality of interactive systems”, Behaviour & information 
technology, vol. 16, no. 4, 1997,  pp. 220-231. 
[8] 
G. Calvary, A. Demeure, J. Coutaz, and O. Dassi, “Adaptation of 
human-computer interfaces in their context of use: plasticityof HCI”, 
Revue d‟Intelligence Artificielle, vol. 18, no.  4, 2004, pp. 577-606. 
[9] 
C.A. Petri, « Kommunication mit automaten », PhD Dissertion. 
University of Bonn, 1962. 
[10] M.Moalla, “Interpreted Petri Nets”, TSI de l‟AFCET, vol.4, 1985. 
[11] I. Riahi and F. Moussa, “Formal Modeling For Pervasive Human-
Computer Interface Design”, UBICOMM, 2014, pp. 35-43. 
[12] F. Chaker and N. Mchirgui, “ Diabetes mellitus”, Technical Report. 
34, Faculty of Medecine Tunis, 2013. 
[13] G. Norman, “Likert scales, levels of measurement and the “laws” of 
statistics”,  Advances in health sciences education, vol. 15, no. 5, 
2010, pp. 625-632. 
 
 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

