Comparisons among Different Types of Hearing Aids 
A Pilot Study on Ergonomic Design of Hearing Aids 
 
Fang Fu 
School of Design 
 Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hong Kong SAR 
Email: fang.fu@connect.polyu.hk 
Yan Luximon 
School of Design 
  Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hong Kong SAR 
Email: yan.luximon@polyu.edu.hk
 
 
 
Abstract—Hearing aids are widely used by people with hearing 
loss. In the current market, various hearing aids can be selected 
based on the users’ demands. Previous research mostly 
concentrated on ear anthropometry and auditory function to 
explore fit and comfort of hearing aids. Even though Computer-
Aided Design (CAD) simulation and virtual reality methods 
were used to examine the fit of earphones and specific hearing 
aids, how to achieve a proper fit for different types of hearing 
aids was not sufficiently studied. This study compares sizes and 
shapes among existing commercial hearing aids, and further 
proposes guidance in ear anthropometry for ergonomic design 
of hearing aids. Product parameters, including width, height, 
length, and weight, were measured for Behind-The-Ear (BTE) 
aids, In-The-Ear (ITE) aids, and In-The-Canal (ITC) aids 
individually. Selected hearing aids were fitted on the external 
ear of participants while recording their fit and comfort 
preferences. The findings of the study revealed the differences 
among BTE, ITE and ITC aids, and highlighted the 
anthropometric data for hearing aid design. Based on the 
findings of the study, potential research gaps were identified for 
future research. 
Keywords - hearing aids; product size and shape; fit and 
comfort. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
An ergonomic design is increasingly important with the 
cumulative demands of customers. Human-centered designs 
are especially applied in everyday used products, such as 
devices 
providing 
protections 
or 
achieving 
other 
functionalities. Hearing aid is one of these products in the 
health care industry. Hearing aids amplify the collected sound 
for people with hearing loss. These devices normally require 
long-time wearing by the users. Hence, resolving any fit issues 
between products and users is crucial when designing hearing 
aids.  
Nowadays, different types of hearing aids, such as Behind-
The-Ear (BTE) aids, In-The-Ear (ITE) aids, In-The-Canal 
(ITC) aids, and Completely-In-The-Canal (CIC) aids, are 
available to meet the different demands of customers. BTE aid 
consists of a plastic case at the backside of the ear, a clear 
tubing, and an earplug or an earmold. The aids are usually 
used for young children considering that the tubing and 
earplug parts can be adjusted along with the children physical 
growth [1]. ITE aid contains a small shell which fills outside 
the ear canal, which is considered as a relatively easy-to-
handle device [1]. ITC aid is in a small case with a partial fit 
in the ear canal. The comparatively invisible sizes of ITC aids 
provide cosmetic appearance and efficient sound transfer for 
the users, but the devices are difficult to handle [1].  Figure 1 
presents product shapes of three different hearing aids. 
 
Figure 1.  Different types of hearing aids 
Fit evaluation has been studied for various products, such 
as shoes [2] and chairs [3]. For hearing aids, researchers have 
conducted various studies on the fit issues. Most of the 
previous research focused on ear anthropometry [4]-[6], 
auditory performance [7] [8], and cognition [9] for ear-related 
products, while physical fit of the product shape and size has 
not been systematically studied.  Shapes of Bluetooth 
earphone were verified to influence users’ comfort and fit 
perception 
[10]. 
However, 
the 
association 
between 
anthropometric data and design patterns has not been 
sufficiently evaluated. To address the design problem, there is 
a need to evaluate the fit for various hearing aids.  
Evaluation methods, including CAD simulation and 
virtual reality, mock-up evaluation, and prototype evaluation, 
were the commonly used methods in design process [11]. 
CAD simulation models were applied to evaluate the product 
and related usability at the early designing stage. Ear-related 
products, such as earphone design [12] and ITC aids [13], 
were examined with CAD techniques. However, considering 
the different shapes and functionalities of ear-related products, 
methods to evaluate the fit of hearing aids have not been 
generalized comprehensively. Therefore, differences among 
different hearing aids should be studied for further research on 
ergonomic design of hearing aids.  
 
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

This paper aimed at comparing sizes and shapes among 
different hearing aids. As a work-in-progress study, the 
findings can be useful to study fit evaluation of hearing aids 
in future research, and it also have referential significance for 
other ear-related product designs. The rest of the paper is 
structured as follows. In Section 2, three widely used types of 
hearing aids were selected and different parameters, such as 
length, width, height and weight, were compared along with 
the user experience of fit and comfort. In Section 3, we present 
the differences of sizes and shapes among these products, and 
the specific ear regions and parameters are discussed for 
designing different hearing aids. In the last section, we 
conclude the differences among selected hearing aids, 
identified anthropometric data with application in hearing aid 
design, and propose future work regarding the research topic. 
II. 
METHODS 
In this paper, BTE Fun P, ITE Vibe Mini 8, and ITC Vibe 
Nano 8 aids (Siemens®) were measured and compared. 
Product parameters, including length, width, height, and 
weight, were measured to evaluate the product. These 
parameters can be compared with anthropometric data to seek 
proper fit. Participants were asked to wear each hearing aid 
for 5 minutes as shown in Figure 2. Fit and comfort perception 
of the participant was recorded. Contact area with the human 
ear was marked for further discussion on association between 
anthropometric data and product design. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Fitting hearing aids on human ear 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Despite the functionalities of different hearing aids, this 
study focused on the sizes and shapes of hearing aids from the 
fit and comfort perspective. The section showed the 
differences among BTE, ITE, and ITC aids based on the 
product shapes and sizes. While fitting different hearing aids 
with the human ear, reference ear regions were highlight for 
hearing aid design, and anthropometric dimensions were 
selected accordingly.  
A. Differences among commericial hearing aids 
Hearing aids normally require long-time usage, so the 
components with directly contacting external ear are vital for 
hearing-aid comfort and fit. Other product parameters, 
including size and weight, were investigated in the study. 
Comparison of sizes, weights, and components directly 
contacting the external ear are demonstrated in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
HEARING AIDS 
Type 
Hearing aids 
Components 
contacting with 
human ear  
Size 
Weight  
BTE 
 
 
Round earplug 
in soft plastic 
material; 
Tubing 
contacting the 
ear root. 
Earplugs were 
designed with 
selectable sizes. 
7.16g 
ITE 
 
 
Special shape in 
direct contact 
with ear 
concha. 
Width:8.71mm 
Height:12.97mm 
Length:19.88mm 
1.42g 
ITC 
 
 
Special shape in 
direct contact 
with ear canal. 
Width:5.72mmg 
Height:12.52mm 
Length:17.28mm 
0.97g 
Among the investigated hearing aids, BTE aids have the 
largest weight and size, followed by ITE and ITC aids 
sequentially. In the meanwhile, participants gave best scores 
on fit and comfort perception for BTE, followed by ITE and 
ITC aids in decreasing order. The parameters were difficult to 
compare directly, considering different aids need to fit with 
distinct ear region. Hence, there is a need to associate the 
product dimensions with anthropometric data to examine the 
comfort and fit. As for the product weight, load analysis can 
be conducted in specific ear region for the specific type of 
hearing aids.  
B. Anthropometry for hearing aid design 
Considering the fit issues, BTE, ITE, and ITC aids should 
be designed to match with specific ear regions individually, as 
presented in Figure 3. For BTE aids, tube and earplug were 
adjustable part, so the most important part in product design 
was the main body rested behind the ear. BTE should be 
designed considering ear root area and the back part of the ear, 
same as the support location of the aid. Ear root was also 
mentioned for earphone design in previous study [12].  ITE 
aids tightly fit with the ear concha, so the aid shape should be 
designed based on the concha shape in the contacted area.  ITC 
aids fit with the entrance area of ear canal including part of the 
first bend of the canal, which was consistent with previous 
study [13]. Proper product size and shape can improve the 
comfort and fit perception during the usage of the hearing aids. 
 
 
278
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Thus, future research should focus on these areas to define the 
shape and size when designing different hearing aids. 
Figure 3.  Ear reference area for designing hearing aids: Ear root (A) and 
back part of the ear (B) asscoiated with BTE aids; Ear concha (C) 
associated with ITE aids; Ear canal (D) associated with ITC aids. 
To seek proper fit, anthropometric data were essential for 
designing 
distinct 
types 
of 
hearing 
aids. 
Related 
anthropometric dimensions can be used to define the product 
sizes. As the reference ear areas mentioned above, 
anthropometric dimensions were selected for hearing aid 
design. According to definitions of ear dimensions in the 
literature [14], different dimensions were chosen for specific 
hearing aids. Specifically, ear protrusion and pinna flare angle 
can be used for designing BTE aids; cavum concha length, 
center of concha to incisura intertragica length, and ear canal 
entrance circumference can be valuable for designing ITE 
aids; and ear canal entrance height, ear canal entrance width, 
ear canal entrance to 1st bend length, and ear canal 1st bend 
circumference can be applied in ITC aid design. To design the 
hearing 
aids 
products 
for 
different 
markets, 
these 
anthropometric dimensions can be applied to examine the 
product sizes.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This pilot study tried to compare the shapes and sizes of 
different hearing aids, and examined the application of ear 
anthropometry in hearing aid design from comfort and fit 
perspective. Generally, BTE aids have the largest size and 
weight but the highest fit and comfort perception, while ITC 
have the smallest size and weight but has the lowest fit and 
comfort perception. Different contact areas on the external ear 
were recorded with diverse types of hearing aids. 
Accordingly, anthropometric dimensions were selected for 
different hearing aids based on the literature. Based on the 
findings in the study, potential research gaps were identified 
for future research. With the preliminary findings in the study, 
next step is to apply CAD simulation to examine the fit of 
different hearing aids, and use prototypes to explore the users’ 
experience. Future research can be conducted with larger 
sample size and more hearing aids in different markets to 
improve the fit of ear-related products with the use of CAD 
simulation technique.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The study was supported by Hong Kong RGC/GRF 
project B-Q57F.  
REFERENCES 
[1] U.S. Food & Drug Administration. Hearing Aids. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/ 
consumer-products/hearing-aids. [retrieved: 28.11.2019]. 
[2] E. Y. L. Au and R. S. Goonetilleke, “A Qualitative Study on 
the Comfort and Fit of Ladies’ Dress Shoes,” Applied 
Ergonomics, vol. 38, pp. 687-696, 2007.  
[3] M. Helander and L. Zhang, “Field Studies of Comfort and 
Discomfort in Sitting”, Ergonomics, vol. 40, pp. 895-915, 2010. 
[4] H. Jung and H. Jung, “Surveying the Dimensions and 
Characteristics of Korean Ears for the Ergonomic Design of 
Ear-Related Products,” International Journal of Industrial 
Ergonomics, vol. 31, pp. 361-373, 2003. 
[5] W. Chiou, D. Huang, and B. Chen, “Anthropometric 
Measurements of the External Auditory Canal for Hearing 
Protection Earplug,” Advances in Safety Management and 
Human Factors, Springer, pp. 163-171, 2016.  
[6] M. A. Mououdi, J. Akbari, and M. M. Khoshoei, “Measuring 
the External Ear for Hearing Protection Device Design,” 
Ergonomics in Design, vol. 26, pp. 4-8, 2018. 
[7] V. Rallapalli, M. Anderson, J. Kates, L. Sirow, K. Arehart, and 
P. Souza, “Quantifying the Range of Signal Modification in 
Clinically Fit Hearing Aids,” Ear and Hearing, vol. 1, pp. 1-9, 
2019. 
[8] J. L. Vroegop, A. Geodegebure, and M. P. Schroeff, “How to 
Optimally Fit a Hearing Aid for Bimodal Cochlear Implant 
Users: A Systematic Review,” vol. 39, pp. 1039-1045, 2018.  
[9] E. Convery, G. Keidser, L. Hickson, and C. Meyer. "Factors 
Associated with Successful Setup of a Self-Fitting Hearing Aid 
and the Need for Personalized Support," Ear and Hearing, vol. 
40, pp. 794-804, 2019. 
[10] H. P. Chiu, H. Y. Chiang, C. H. Liu, M. H. Wang, and W. K. 
Chiou, “Surveying the Comfort Perception of the Ergonomic 
Design of Bluetooth Earphones,” Work, vol. 49, pp. 235-243, 
2014.   
[11] S. Porter and J. M. Porter, “Product Evaluation Methods and 
Their Importance in Designing Interactive Artifacts,” Human 
Factors in Product Design: Current Practice and Future Trends, 
Taylor & Francis, pp. 26-36, 1999.  
[12] W. Lee, H. Jung, I. Bok, C. Kim, O. Kwon, T. Choi, and H. 
You, “Measurement and Application of 3D Ear Images for 
earphone design”, Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, SAGE, vol. 60, pp. 
1053-1057, 2016. 
[13] S. S. Jarng and G. Ting. “CAD/CAM Method Application for 
Ear Shell Auto-Manufacturing,” ICMIT 2009: Mechatronics 
and Information Technology, International Society for Optics 
and Photonics, vol. 7500, pp. 750008, 2010. 
[14] W. Lee, X. Yang, H. Jung, I. Bok, C. Kim, O. Kwon, and H. 
You, “Anthropometric Analysis of 3D Ear Scans of Koreans 
and Caucasians for Ear Product Design,” Ergonomics, vol. 61, 
pp. 1480-1495, 2018. 
 
 
 
279
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

