Industry 4.0 Human-Oriented Challenges using the example of Additive 
Manufacturing Technologies 
 
Daniel J. B. S. Sampaio 
School of Engineering – Guaratinguetá 
São Paulo State University (Unesp) 
Guaratinguetá, Brazil 
e-mail: dsampaio@feg.unesp.br 
Marc-André Weber 
Division Field Corporate Excellence 
Institut fuer angewandte Arbeitswissenschaft 
Duesseldorf, Germany 
e-mail: m.weber@ifaa-mail.de
Steffen G. Scholz 
Institute for Applied Computer Science 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology  
Karlsruhe, Germany 
e-mail: steffen.scholz@kit.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Digitalization of the industry opens new possibilities 
to fulfill customer requirements such as individualized 
products. Additive Manufacturing is an example of a technology 
to do so and is part of a development towards Systems 
Engineering. Adapting the qualification of the workforce is a 
decisive factor to use successfully new technologies within the 
broad field of industry 4.0. This paper addresses the issue of how 
to integrate workforce in the changing process of digitalization 
based on providing examples from the Additive Manufacturing 
technology. It shows that work content will change and 
generally higher skill levels are required. Subsequently, 
continuous learning and the determination to do so are 
necessary. Implementing this is a major task for workforce and 
employers.  
Keywords - Industry 4.0; Digitalization; Additive Manufacturing; 
Workplace Change; Job Content; Qualification Needs.  
I.      INTRODUCTION 
Industry 4.0 stands for the current revolution of the 
industrial production, driven by the internet technologies, and 
describes the technological change of today's production 
technology to cyber-physical production systems, so-called 
Smart Factories [1]. In the Smart factories environment, the 
manufacturing will completely be equipped with sensors, 
actors, and autonomous systems [2]. The term "Industry 4.0" 
was first presented at the 2011 Hannover Fair and describes 
the fourth development stage of the industrial production. The 
three previous stages started with the invention of the steam 
engine in the eighteenth century, which supported the working 
people in energy-intensive activities. Subsequently, the 
division of labor was introduced in the late nineteenth century 
and allowed for mass production by means of the assembly 
line. The use of electronic control systems, such as Numeric 
Control (NC) and Computer Numeric Control (CNC) 
machines, since the 1970s allowed faster and more precise 
production of goods [3]. Since the introduction of Industry 
4.0, much research has been focused on it generating an 
extensive number of scientific, as well as practically oriented 
papers and contributions to this field [4]. 
The historical development of production techniques 
shows that the desire to automate production is nothing new 
[5], however, computational power and technical equipment 
was previously not as developed as it is nowadays. Decades 
ago, the example of "Hall 54" of the Volkswagen AG showed 
the practical problems of the past associated to the relation 
between human and machining development in the industrial 
production environment [6]. On top, there have been 
considerable problems with the operational implementation 
[7]. With the technological development of the last few years, 
a clearly improved technical infrastructure is now available, 
especially regarding the information technology aspect, with 
which many ideas of the connected industry can now be 
realized. 
This paper focuses on additive manufacturing as an 
example of a part of industry 4.0. Additive manufacturing was 
first introduced in the 1980s and is becoming more important 
nowadays with the development of industry 4.0. We will 
exemplify human-related challenges for the use of this 
technology based on a qualitative description of changes. 
Additive manufacturing describes production of tools and 
products based on the computer-internal data models from 
formless material – such as powder – or form-neutral material 
– such as fiber and wires – by means of chemical or physical 
processes. 
Within 
additive 
manufacturing, 
different 
technologies are combined whose common feature consists in 
the fact that components are layered and material is only 
connected where the final product should be produced [8]. For 
all people using additive manufacturing, skills required will 
change compared to the ones necessary for “traditional” 
production. This covers knowledge about different types of 
additive manufacturing, their machine and process parameters 
as well as properties of the goods produced. 
In Section 2, the human-oriented challenges in industry 
4.0 are discussed based on the features identified in the 
industry 4.0 framework. In Section 3, the additive 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

manufacturing is presented as example of industry 4.0 and 
changes in the way of working entailed by this technological 
evolution are described. In Section 4, conclusions on the 
major changes induced by industry 4.0 within work relations 
are presented. 
 
II.      HUMAN-ORIENTED CHALLENGES IN INDUSTRY 4.0 
The issue of what will happen to the working people is 
nowadays critically discussed as it had been in time of the 
third industrial revolution of the 1970s [9][10]. If job losses or 
workplace growth is predicted, is not only a question of the 
time horizon taken into regard and the specific type of industry 
in scope, but also of the political thinking and attitude of the 
forecasting institution. It is a question of “which type” of 
industry 4.0 is regarded as well, as industry 4.0 covers several 
topics from using a tablet computer for work up to 
collaboration with robots. What can be taken as given is that 
work itself changes by industry 4.0, and this will also lead to 
a change in work skill requirements on the one hand and how 
work will be performed in future on the other hand. 
In a process inside industry 4.0, the identification of seven 
features as shown in Figure 1 is normally expected. It is 
important to note that the human is a central actor in this 
revolution. All other features, such as self-organized and 
distributed artificial intelligence, fast and automatic network 
integration with high flexibility, open standards, virtual real-
time picture of the process, digital integrated life-cycle-
management and safe and secure added-value networks have 
their outcomes established to achieve the requirements and 
needs of the central actor. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Industry 4.0 and its features - the human in the center. 
The companies are transforming themselves by combining 
investments in information technology with changes in work 
practices, strategy, products and services. They are carrying 
on changes not only in their own company, but also in supplier 
relations and customer relationship [11]. This brings major 
challenges like changes in the decision rights, in the authority 
and responsibilities of the workers as well as in the process 
and workflow. The intensity of interactions with customers 
and suppliers will significantly increase, and so will 
augmented lateral communication. Among others, there might 
be further reductions in the management layers, and products 
and processes will undergo a concurrent engineering. All 
these factors will bring changes to the companies, and they 
need to find strategies of how successfully cope with those 
changes. 
There are some general recommendations that can be 
given. When implementing industry 4.0, employees should be 
involved as early as in the planning stage, and their wishes and 
concerns should be taken into regard by management. It is of 
great use to have practical test spaces where employees can 
gain their own experiences with new technologies. Such pilot 
test environments can illustrate the benefits of digital change 
and may lead to a high identification with it, and finally to the 
recognition of its benefits. The fast development of digital 
technologies requires a high level of learning and change 
attitude as well. The management of the company plays a 
critical role in implementing this attitude. Only by good 
leadership and an appropriate fault culture, a change in 
thinking can be achieved [3]. 
Maybe it will be the case that some workers tend to retain 
elements of the now almost outdated work practices. Some 
believes, as the key for productivity is to avoid stopping the 
machine as long as possible and produce goods in large 
quantities at low rates of variety, negates the chances of 
flexibility offered by new production processes in industry 
4.0. 
III.      ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING AS EXAMPLE 
Additive manufacturing, as example of industry 4.0, offers 
the chance to produce individualized products at lot size one. 
Therefore, it is necessary for the workers to set their mind on 
each new product and machine parameters required to the 
specific needs for these products. Although the main process 
will be additive manufacturing, in detail it will make a big 
change if the product consists of metal or plastic, and the type 
of metal or plastic requires further knowledge about how to 
process it. The thickness of layers, therefore the number of 
layers, the distance of melting points next to each other and 
temperature are some examples that need to be taken into 
regard. The workers using additive manufacturing may also 
need knowledge for product designing, especially if the need 
of supporting structures for production is required. The latter 
shows that successful production of a product using additive 
manufacturing begins at the design stage when computer-
aided design (CAD) models are created, therefore designers 
need to understand the production process and the workforce 
printing the products should be able to adjust data files with 
the designers.  
To handle with the identified conditions – based on the fact 
that products will generally be less produced in large 
quantities by using additive manufacturing but at a higher 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

level of customer individuality – the workers should be able 
to make decisions that were not required in their job functions 
before. This example shows that industry 4.0 increases the 
demand for skilled labor, which may in return reduce the need 
for low-skilled workers. It is important especially for low-
skilled workers, in order to be able to work in these more 
complex highly skilled jobs, to undergo intense learning and 
a process of continuous education. 
There is a consensus that industry 4.0 may not only have 
consequences for low-skilled workers and their operational 
shop floor activities, leading generally to a replacement of 
simple and repetitive jobs in production assembly and quality 
control, but also for high-skilled management representatives 
in administration and planning. Figure 2 shows the changes in 
the way of working in the industries caused by technological 
evolution over the last decades. In the 1960s, the industry was 
almost totally composed of mechanical equipment and 
processes with a small use of electrical systems and 
equipment. This reality had been changing over the years with 
an increasing participation of electrical systems and 
equipment and with the gradual introduction of software 
engineering and – at a later stage – of systems engineering. 
The trend is that by 2020 software and systems engineering 
will have almost as great a share as mechanical and electrical 
construction in the constitution of industrial production 
systems. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Technological evolution and changes in the way of working 
Nevertheless, if the overall number of jobs will decline or 
improve is a question that cannot be answered now. However, 
it can be noted that – as in previous industrial revolutions – 
new jobs and needs for qualification are emerging and will 
continue to emerge. It is a task for each company on the one 
hand and for designing new governmental policies on the 
other hand, that will be required in future to help to balance 
the effects of industry 4.0 on the labor market. 
The changes driven by industry 4.0 on the labor market are 
derived of the changes of the consumer markets on the one 
hand and of the changes of the technologies available for 
production on the other hand. As consumers require more 
individuality of products and additive manufacturing offers 
the possibility to do so, each industry and every company need 
to think of what are specific consequences they need to cope 
with. Digitalization affects the entire company, therefore 
prerequisites for a successful digitalization of the own 
company needs to be established both in production as in 
supporting indirect areas. To succeed, it is necessary to 
involve all people at hand and to establish standardization of 
processes taking into regard the principles of lean 
management. The change to industry 4.0 requires 
fundamentally questioning the existing structures and 
processes, and adapting them as far as necessary and possible. 
This includes qualification and skills as well. 
A practical example is the Smart production of 
Microsystems based in laminated polymer films research 
project (SMARTLAM) research project, which was carried 
out under the European Union program FP7 - Factories of the 
Future. The main aim was to create a new concept for the 
manufacturing of functional micro devices based on a 
modular, flexible and scalable 3D integration scenario. 
Combining state-of-the-art 3D-compatible technologies, such 
as aerosol-jet printing, and laser technologies, which are 
capable of manufacturing three-dimensional structures and 
parts, with modules for handling and inspection together with 
a recipe-based control software, as shown in Figure 3, allowed 
for the successful development of a modular, scalable and 
easy-to-synchronise manufacturing environment for the 
production of complete 3D-Microsystems.  
 
 
Figure 3.  SMARTLAN Integrated Modules 
It has shown that the 3D integration approach proposed is 
capable of creating the flexibility and scalability that is 
95%
85%
70%
30%
5%
10%
17%
25%
0%
5%
10%
30%
0%
0%
3%
15%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
1960
1980
2000
2020
Technological Evolution and 
the Changes in the Way of 
Working
Mechanical Construction
Electrical Construction
Software Engineering
Systems Engineering
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

necessary to take the manufacturing of micro devices to 
another level by making it profitable outside of the area of 
mass production. It became clear to the project partners the 
need for changes in the business model and in the 
requirements and qualification of employees in order to face 
and adapt themselves to the new production paradigms from 
the Industry 4.0. 
IV.      CONCLUSION 
We have shown by means of the descriptive example of 
additive manufacturing that industry 4.0 leads to significant 
changes of the industry. This is mainly driven by two 
developments, the wish of customers for individualized 
products and the upcoming of technologies that enable the 
companies to produce individualized products at lot size one. 
Additive manufacturing is an example of such a technology. 
Printing products according to specific customer wishes 
requires new skills of those creating and producing the goods, 
and calls for more interaction between all people on all levels 
involved in the production process.  
The opportunities and challenges resulting from a 
comprehensive use of industry 4.0 appear to be far-reaching, 
but offer considerable potential for improvement. However, 
aspects, such as decisions based on insufficient process and 
product knowledge in respect with interdependencies of many 
inter-related decisions, maybe in a sense of non-cooperative 
use of information asymmetries, pose major challenges to the 
implementation of industry 4.0. The success of industry 4.0 is 
often a question of the system boundaries in which it is applied 
and operated, and one important part of it includes human 
aspects. Practical and scientific research is therefore 
confronted with major challenges that lie in the detail of how 
to successful use technologies such as additive manufacturing, 
in addition to the broad generalization of the advantages of 
industry 4.0 [12]. This paper addresses these issues and shows 
by means of examples that qualification is a major success 
factor and that companies need to focus on providing all 
possible options to appropriate skills. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M.-A. Weber and K. Benkel, "Industry 4.0 and Quantitative 
Optimization Approaches", Magazine for the entire value chain 
of the automotive industry, v.18, n.3, pp.12–15, 2015. 
[2] H. Lasi, P. Fettke, H. G. Kemper, T. Feld, and M. Hoffmann, 
"Industry 4.0, " Business & Information Systems Engineering, 
v. 6, n. 4, pp. 239, 2014. 
[3] M. Börkircher et al., "Digitization and Industry 4.0: As 
individual as needs - productivity gains through information,"  
Heider Druck, Bergisch Gladbach, 2016. 
[4] T. Bauernhansl, M. Hompel, and B. Vogel-Heuser, "Industry 
4.0 in Production, Automation and Logistics: Applications, 
Technologies, Migration," Springer, Wiesbaden, 2014. 
[5] W. Weller, "Automation technology in the course of time: 
development history of a fascinating field," [Online]. Available 
from:http://edoc.hu-berlin.de/oa/books/reDxmEBBdAgU/ 
PDF/22L08GZ1anEiI.pdf. [retrieved: february, 2017] 
[6] M. Heßler, "Hall 54 at Volkswagen and the limits of 
automation: Reflections on the man-machine ratio in the 
industrial production of the 1980s," Studies in Contemporary 
History, v.11, p.56–76, 2014. 
[7] A. Zerfaß and M. Piwinger, "Handbuch Unternehmens-
kommunikation: Strategie, Management, Wertschöpfung, " 
2nd ed. Springer Gabler, Wiesbaden, 2014. 
[8] M. Schmid, "Additive Fertigung mit Selektivem Lasersintern 
(SLS): Prozess- und Wekstoffüberblick," Springer Vieweg, 
Wiesbaden, 2015. 
[9] Verein Deutscher Ingenieure. VDI: Status report: Working 
Environment 
4.0. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.vdi.de/fileadmin/vdi_de/redakteur_dateien/gma_
dateien/2016_11_GMA_Arbeitswelt_Statusreport.pdf. 
[retrieved: february, 2017] 
[10] Spiegel, "We are facing a catastrophe,“ Spiegel, v.32, n.16, 
pp.80–100, 1978. 
[11] R. Gibbons and J. Roberts, "The handbook of organizational 
economics, " Princeton University Press, 2013. 
[12] M.-A.Weber and K. Benkel, "Importance of Optimizing 
Approaches and their Integration into Data Systems of Industry 
4.0," In: Proff H, Fojcik TM (eds) Industry 4.0: National and 
international trends in mobility: technical and business aspects. 
Springer, Wiesbaden, pp. 435–447, 2016. 
 
 
 
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

