Designing Healthcare Information System in Non-urban Area Using Neuroscientific 
Approach 
Karim Fraoua, Christian Bourret 
Equipe Dispositifs d’Information et de Communication à l’Ere Numérique (DICEN) 
Université Paris-Est 
77454 Marne-la-Vallée, France 
fraoua@univ-mlv.fr, bourret@univ-mlv.fr 
 
 
Abstract— We will  present at the beginning the situation of the 
Healthcare System in a non-urban area, and how to design a 
new conceptual framework in a Healthcare Information 
System. We will describe all the parameters of a significant 
good Healthcare System as viewed by a consumer. We will 
focus our works of what nowadays is known as human 
behavior or neuroscience. The analyses of information system 
must take into account much more the neuroscience approach, 
than limiting this analysis to the system components. We will 
focus our study to the non-urban people's interaction with an 
information system in a Healthcare area. We use a new 
approach especially neuroscience to represent the expected 
reactions in the human behavior and the impact expected in a 
medical healthcare information system. This consideration is 
due because of the wide range of motivators, and rewards that 
may induce irrational reactions that people show when they 
face to any new situation, especially those in non-urban area. 
Keywords- Information System; HCI : Human Computer 
Interaction; neuroscience; non-urban area; healthcare 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The non-urban areas know nowadays a major expansion 
that conducts cities to expand into rather rural areas for 
various reasons despite a lull observed during the 90’s. 
Several types of non-urban areas have been identified, they 
have a lowest socio-economic indicators conjugated to a 
high demand of care. Geographically, these areas are located 
between the cities or urban area with highest infrastructure 
and rural areas devoid of any heavy hospital infrastructure, 
where the populations have changed their behavior to adapt 
to this lack of equipment and in which medicine is organized 
around the local doctor (primary care).  
The population of non-urban area is displaced due to the 
enhancements of the property prices and the limited 
adaptation of the offer to a big family. The majority of these 
middle class populations consist of workers or employees. 
There are also a large community of immigrated from the 
first and second generation, the majority of these populations 
can be considered as currently disadvantaged groups, having 
low access to internet (50% for employees whereas it is more 
than 80% for urban population). The non-urban area 
represents only 18% of the Corsica area, but 75% of the Ile 
de France area [1]. Healthcare offer in these areas is 
relatively low as compared to urban area, with a density of 
medical offer below that of Paris or other city centers [1].  
Nowadays, the medical situation in the non-urban Ile de 
France, which seems to be very similar to other cities, is 
considered as being in crisis [1,3]. The situation, according 
to the latest report of DREES (Direction de la recherche, des 
études, de l’évaluation et des statistiques) seems more 
disturbing especially from 2030 [4]. The same phenomena 
exist in United States for example, whereas disparities in 
access to medical care and utilization of services exist 
between urban and non-urban populations [2]. We observe in 
our preliminary results the same phenomena inside non-
urban area. This result must be deeply investigated due to the 
fact that the population of non-urban area must be 
discriminated between well informed user and non educated 
user. This would be due to different reasons, as ethnicity, 
cultural effect, and non-connected population.  
Our idea is to provide new theoretical approach of an 
Information System (IS) that will have a role in correcting 
social inequalities and to permit the access to a Healthcare 
Information System (HIS), in a context of cost reductions of 
healthcare system. This IS would be specifically developed 
for a non-urban people which suffer of a lack of access to 
existing IS or medical website. The main challenge remains 
the construction a system that matches user’s capabilities. 
We will try in to open a new way for the construction of 
friendly and usable HIS. 
II. 
DISCUSSION 
It is admitted that the Healthcare Information Systems 
must be constructed in the perspective of the final users. 
Nevertheless, it is observed that a large number of HIS are 
designed 
without 
consideration 
of 
user-centered 
requirements. In consequence, when systems are created 
without further consideration such human behavior, users are 
dissatisfied and systems are not used, causing a lost of 
money and the degradation of the level of information of this 
population [5]. Numerous of health and medical information 
systems exist on the Internet in the form of aggregations of 
health data, but most of them are inaccessible to the 
population in non-urban area due principally to the 
symptoms described above, specially the low social level of 
this population. In a general observation, only 61% of 
Information System projects meet the requirements of the 
user needs [6]. A precise analysis of end-user permits to 
profile his characteristics such education, skill level, cultural 
environment, frequency of use, acceptance, expertise, 
knowledge, skills, cognitive capacities and limitations, 
1
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

cultural background, times available for learning and training, 
and familiarity with IS. 
Furthermore, it is admitted that the place and conditions 
in which the IS is located can play a great role in the 
interaction with the “patient” [7]. Experts agree that when 
the patients are more educated, they are more prompt to take 
their medication and to manage their own care [17].  
This lack of these considerations make that many HIS are 
abandoned. This is not because misfit of technology, it is 
mainly due to the lack of systematic considerations of human 
being and behavior during the design and the implementation 
processes [8]. In designing of the most HIS, the importance 
of informing and actively engaging health care seekers in the 
planning and execution of their own treatment cannot be 
overstated.  Efforts to achieve these goals must be based on 
integration of findings in studies from a wide range of 
disciplines bearing on motivation and decision making. To 
start this study, we must analyze in details the health’s user 
behavior trends which make them acting more as consumers 
than traditional patient, by describing the best medical 
ontology and whereas the IS can be located in a secure place 
for such user as a result of neuroscience trends, , in order to 
determine the most appropriate information system that can 
be deployed. 
A. Theory of choice: From rational choice to 
neuroeconomic choice 
In the rational model, the user is viewed as assigning 
utilitarian values to a range of presented options, both for 
information gathering and decision making.  The preference 
based on utility function is the primary notion of economic 
rationality: the decision theory, game theory and the theory 
of general equilibrium model are based on this concept. This 
model of rational decisions making, based on VNM utility 
(von Neumann Morgenstern) [9], persists in contemporary 
decision theory and game theory. The rational agent is one 
who selects optimal decisions or strategies from his point of 
view or his self-interest. This last point seems important in 
this model, because it consider that agent have merely stable 
preferences and likelihood that all agents reason in the same 
manner. Nevertheless in neuroeconomic theory, the choice of 
human may be noted as puzzling in regard to rational model. 
The neuroeconomic theory gives a new sight of human 
choices.  
Most of these choices are guided by psychological 
aspect, sometimes related to learning process. Indeed, in a 
recent report on the strategic development of health care 
system, Thaler et al. [10] show clearly these new trends of 
development of healthcare behavior. In this way the IS must 
be developed in preventive strategies that should not be 
intended only to inform but also encourage people to have 
new behavior in order to access to the IS. It was clearly 
identified that the difference between urban and non-urban 
people in use of services can be seen as differences in 
attitudes and behaviors toward seeking medical care [18]. 
B. The process of webdesign 
Classical Human Computer Interaction (HCI) approaches 
remain indispensable to develop an information system, 
despite the fact that they are unable to answer to the 
complexity of healthcare information system. For this 
purpose, this study cannot be conducted without talking 
about HCI. Indeed, the HCI field is precisely positioned at 
the intersection of social sciences, behavioral sciences, 
computer sciences and information technology, in other 
words between psychology and informatics. Aiming in 
design a successful Information System depends on many 
elements as described above and they must be included 
during their implementation and evaluation, in order to 
satisfy the final users. Several models have been proposed in 
HCI, one of them that define the best information offer is 
described by The DeLone and McLean model [11,12].  
Indeed this model contains six factor and some of them 
are interconnected: System quality, information quality, 
system use, user satisfaction, individual impacts and 
organizational impacts. In this way, an efficient system can 
be considered as an ineffective one if users don’t adopt it 
[19]. Moreover and until now, the HCI model gives a large 
place to the human characteristic, especially by the side of 
cognitive psychology and the social science. In support of 
this point of view, it has been shown that the social 
environment of the users affects also the information system 
process. From this analysis two parameters have been 
extracted [20]: 
 
(1) Must share the same information by the users. 
(2) Which resources are available to assist the users. 
 
In this work, we choose to focus to the two main effects, 
structure effect and neuroeconomic approach, bridged to a 
classical approach used in HCI analysis as psychological and 
sociological approach, with implementing the healthcare 
information system in a secure place, and by building an 
ontology that correspond to level of the end-user and their 
aversion to the risk.  
The main challenge in our innovative approach is to 
bring the patient to the information point access. Indeed the 
individual characteristics include attitude towards innovation 
and level of the user. In that way, the neuroscientific 
approach seems fundamental because it tends to study the 
factors which govern this acceptance. We recall briefly that 
the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) has as a purpose 
to predict, and explain the user’s attitude toward an 
information system, by studying the factors which may 
influence him to accept or reject an IS [21]. 
Moreover, the style of the website is very important. 
Some websites use high or low medical jargon whilst some 
others are more or less formal. In both case, they seems 
inaccessible for a people with a low educational level, for 
this purpose the role of paramedical staff present in this place 
is to help them and to guide such user in their information 
research. They will play a role of assistance. 
The adapted ontology must fit the behavioral attitude of 
these populations, otherwise it can put off someone who’s 
new to the information center disease and can be entirely 
appropriate by knowledgeable patients who belong generally 
to a high educated urban population. Describing purely 
formal ontologies or semiotic one, requires explicit and 
2
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

,
shared conceptualization, which are not be necessarily shared 
by these population having a low education level.  In the 
configuration where the ontology is well adapted, the patient 
will be in a situation that may be considered as a very low 
risk for him and finally it will push him to act in favor to use 
the IS as a pre-diagnosis system or on self-medicament effect 
for example, which causes in France more than 10 000 
death/year. From this point of view, the presence of forum in 
the website can plays a great role in avoiding this risky 
behavior specially addressed to these populations. Indeed, 
moderating forum embedded on the website could be critical 
to avoid potentially dramatic auto-medication.  
Based on this approach describe above, the main 
contribution of this work, is to define a new way to create 
and validate an ontology in the field of medical IS, especially 
for the population situated in a low level area density of 
medical offer. For this reason, we try to extend the 
neuroscientific approach to the development of new IS and 
new ontology mainly related to a neuroscience using for 
example positive words that mimic reward, which is no 
longer a purely formal [13] or semiotic [14] which derives 
from Semantic Web or a “Socio-Semantic Web” and can be 
adopted only by a high educated people. Indeed, Zhang 
scheme gives a functional analysis that product an ontology 
of a given work domain. These considerations match with 
formal ontology. It includes (a) objects and their attributes, 
(b) resources and their types, (c) relations among entities and 
constraints on relations, (d) operations on single or multiple 
objects, transformations, relations, and constraints, and (e) 
workflow structures [8]. 
C. Information Point Access 
The implementation of an information system must be 
made in a secure place like a city hall or a nursery office, or 
whatever paramedical office. It will create a confidence for 
the patient-user and this is the major opportunity to use a 
neuroeconomic approach in addition to a specific ontology 
derived from this theory. This can be considered as the 
reward by the end-user. Effectively, the reward in the case of 
healthcare system can be regarded as the result of the 
consultation in doctor’s office and the main goal of this 
action: to get the information on therapy or to cure from 
disease. Indeed the presence of paramedical staff in a secure 
place, linked to a hospital network, with agreed information 
system, will make the patient more confident in such new 
medical approach.  It has been proven that most frequently 
used quality criteria include accuracy, completeness and 
readability [15].  
This can be obtained by a trustmarks website or when the 
IS is delivered by official organization. A recent experiment 
in an information systems shows, for those suffering from 
diabetes type II, one of the fastest growing health problems 
around the world, that such tools are more effective when it 
is designed to inform patients and integrate them as an actors 
into multiple-actor treatment teams including paramedical 
and social service personnel, along with nurses and doctors 
[16].  Within the Ile de France area, as in many similar 
communities elsewhere, this approach is particularly 
promising because it empowers patients to take an active role 
in their own treatment, and also because the distribution of 
nurses, social service and paramedical personnel is uniform 
throughout the non-urban areas. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
This work is an exploratory work and still in progress; 
the observation made here about the difference between 
urban and non-urban populations is also observed elsewhere. 
The approach presented in this article indicates that 
efficiency dictates the patient choice and the user defines the 
quality of care as the primary utility function. The 
information tools for patients, is essential to improve the 
quality of care in non-urban areas. The IS must interact with 
local city hall or a paramedical staff, as it will involve the 
hospital network, to share data with the doctor offices and 
allow local hospital to act as a sentinel for access to these 
databases and to respond to outbreaks. The interface of 
Information System should be accessible, well designed and 
must correspond to the population’s sociology, it is the main 
factor during the building of the ontologies. The importance 
of data will be crucial to regaining the trust of patients by 
ensuring the security of personal private data. The most 
important point of our approach focuses on the development 
of technologies needed to build and maintain public 
confidence in computer systems. This will help the e-health 
Information System to become ubiquitous for public 
whatever his education level or cultural belonging and 
especially for people socially and territorially isolated 
These considerations invite us to plead for a new 
approach to build user-machine interfaces and to create 
neuroeconomic ontologies that user can use and which 
supports the reasoning of patients especially in decision 
making, rather than forcing them into a mode of thought 
which may be natural for machines or for well informed 
urban people, but not very useful for these populations, 
which are for the majority of them, socially excluded for a 
different reasons. In fact, the information system can’t be 
considered as efficient if it is poorly adapted to their users, 
especially in their ways to use and to practice information. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Le Fur P. and Lucas-Gabrielli V., Rapport IRDES, 86,          
November 2004. 
[2] Shi L., Macinko J., Starfield B., Politzer R., Wulu J. and Xu J., Public 
Health 119(8), 2005, pp. 699–710. 
[3] La santé des franciliens, ORSIF, 2003. 
[4] Numéro thématique,  Les inégalités sociales de santé en France en 
2006, Bulletin épidémiologique hebdomadaire, 2- 3, 23 janvier 2007. 
[5] Johnson M. C., Johnson R.T. and Zhang J.,  Journal of         
Biomedical Informatics, 38, 2005, pp. 75–87. 
[6] Williams D. and Kennedy M., In Proceedings of the 9th Annual 
International Symposium on Systems Engineering, International 
Council on Systems Engineering, Brighton, England, June 6–11, 
1999. 
[7] Bouwhuis D.G., Ergonomics, 43(7), 2000, pp. 908–919. 
[8] Zhang J., Journal of Biomedical Informatics,  38(1), 2005, pp. 1-3.  
[9] Neumann J. von, and Morgenstern O., Theory of Games and 
Economic Behavior, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press, 1944. 
3
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

,
[10] (a) Oullier O., Aldini R., Thaler R. H.  and Mullainathan S., In 
Nouvelles approches de la prévention  en santé publique, 25, 2010, 
pp. 44-54. 
(b) Oullier O. and Sauneron S., In Nouvelles approches de la 
prévention en santé publique, 25, 2010, pp. 55-65. 
[11] DeLone W.H. and McLean E.R., In Proceedings of the 35th Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS_02). 
Big Island, Hawaii: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 
Inc, 2002, pp. 238-248. 
[12] DeLone W.H. and McLean E.R., Journal of Management           
Information Systems, 19(4), 2003, pp. 9-30. 
[13] Guarino N., in Proceedings of the AIII Spring Symposium on 
Ontological Engineering, 1997, pp. 45-47. 
[14] Zacklad M., In. Ingénierie des connaissances, IC’2005, Nice, Juin 
2005. 
[15] Eysenbach G and Köhler C., BMJ, 324, 2002, pp. 573-577. 
[16] Mousquès J., Questions d'économie de la santé, Rapport          
IRDES, 89, Décembre 2004. 
[17] Berg S., Asthma Magazine, 10(4), 2005, pp. 28-30. 
[18] Harju B.L., Wuensch K.L., Kuhl E.A. and Cross N.J., Journal of 
Rural Health, 22, 2006, pp.  359–363. 
[19] Ives B, Olson M. H. and Baroudi J.L., Commun ACM, 26(10), 1983, 
pp. 785–793. 
[20] Hackos J. T., Redish J. C., User and task analysis for interface           
design, New York: Wiley; 1998 
[21] Despont-Gros C., Mueller H. and Lovis C., Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, 38,  2005, pp. 244–255. 
 
 
 
4
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

