Evaluation of Cognitive Effort in the Perception of Engineering Drawings as 3D 
Models 
Florin Gîrbacia 
Computer Aided Design and Virtual Reality Department 
Transilvania University of Brasov 
Brasov, Romania 
garbacia@unitbv.ro 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, an experiment aiming at estimating 
the cognitive complexity of engineering drawings by measuring 
the reaction time and the accuracy of mentally reconstructing 
3D objects from engineering drawings is presented. The 
performed experiment emphasizes the complexity that the 
engineer is facing in the product development process, shown 
by increased reaction time and reduced accuracy of 3D 
reconstructed objects. The precision and the reaction time 
were not considerably improved by using 3D stereoscopic 
viewing. Based on the results obtained from the experiment, a 
new class of technical drawings called Augmented Reality 
Technical Drawings (ARTD) is proposed. This solution 
enhances the visual perception by co-locating the 3D virtual 
object with the corresponding engineering drawing and offers 
the quick recognition of the object with less perceptive 
ambiguities. 
Keywords-computer aided design; product development; 
engineering drawings; mental reconstruction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since the industrial age, engineering design has become 
an extremely demanding activity. New instruments and tools 
have been continuously invented in order to aid the engineer 
during this activity and this increase their productivity. One 
of the most important technologies from the last century that 
significantly increased the productivity in design is 
Computer Aided Design (CAD). Nowadays, CAD is a 
mature technology, without which the industrial design 
cannot be conceived.  CAD systems have been proved to 
reduce the design time, costs and improve the design quality 
[6]. 
Engineering design requires sketches as well as 
drawings, commonly referred to as engineering drawings, 
taught in most engineering colleges [10]. Engineering 
drawings store geometrical data relating to mechanical 
components and assemblies, in the form of 2D planar views, 
either on paper or computer files. CAD systems are the main 
tools that help the engineer create accurately and correctly 
2D drawings. CAD tools improve the productivity and the 
cognitive complexity by using comprehensive databases and 
intuitive (real-like) 3D graphic representations. Although 
CAD systems use 3D representation, the actual technical 
drawings are based just on 2D planar representations of the 
product. These techniques require the perception and 
understanding of spatial information from 2D planar 
representation of a 3D object. The reconstruction problem is 
difficult because the 3D perception is determined from 2D 
planar projections and sections of the part. The user has to 
create a 3D image in the brain, by using 2D projections, 
which than is used in the manufacturing process of the 
respective product. In the case of a product with a high 
complexity, the mental effort can have a negative effect on 
the reaction time and the accuracy of the mentally 
reconstructed 3D image of the product. 
Our research activities are focused on reducing the 
cognitive complexity that the engineer is facing. This paper 
presents an experimental study conducted with the purpose 
of analyzing the cognitive effort of using 2D engineering 
drawings for mentally reconstruction of 3D objects. The role 
of 3D stereoscopic visualization is also investigated. The 
paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews prior work, 
Section 3 describes the conducted experiment, Section 4 
points up the results, and Section 5 presents conclusion and 
sketches possible directions for future work.  
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
The investigation of perceiving 3D object has been 
carried out for many years [1], [5], [9]. There is, however, a 
shortage of reported work that qualifies the cognitive effort 
of using 2D engineering drawing for mental reconstruction 
of 3D parts. 
Hoffmann et al. [7] evaluate the perception of 3D 
surfaces that have been rendered by a set of lines drawn on 
the surface and the role of binocular disparity as a depth cue. 
Their results indicate that binocular and monocular 
mechanisms for 3D shape reconstruction from contours 
involve similar mechanisms. 
More recently, in [8], the reaction time and the accuracy 
of creating brain images of 2D or 3D figures are explored.  
The set-up consists of performing four types of tasks: simple 
2D, selective 2D, 2D-3D and 3D tasks. Their results indicate 
that the task of constructing the image of 3D objects in the 
brain has the longest reaction time. In the study were used 
simple and basic figures but in engineering drawings are 
used complex shapes. 
With this in mind the objective of this research was to 
carry out the human factors evaluation related to mentally 
reconstruction of 3D parts from 2D engineering drawing via 
the use of a comparative assessment of monoscopic visual 
perception with 3D stereoscopic visual perception. 
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL 
This study tries to answer to the following research 
questions: 
1)  What is the accuracy and the reaction time needed to 
mentally reconstruct a 3D model from 2D engineering 
drawing? 
2) What is the advantage of using 3D visualization for 
the recognition of mentally reconstructed 3D CAD models? 
3) How engineering drawings can be improved in order 
to reduce the cognitive complexity? 
Thus, we have devised and conducted an experiment to 
record and measure the reaction time and the accuracy in the 
brain images from several 2D engineering drawings. The 
results of this experiment allow us to answer the three 
research questions and to assess the relative impact of VR 
technologies on the users’ performance. 
A. Subjects 
In the experiment, eleven volunteered subjects with 
healthy sense of vision were tested. One subject was familiar 
with the stimuli and with the research. The other subjects 
never used VR immersive stereoscopic 3D visualization for 
the perception of 3D CAD models until the experiment. 
Instead, they had extensive experience in using 2D 
engineering drawings and good computer skills. 
B. Stimuli 
In the conducted experiment was needed a set of sixty 3D 
CAD parts with medium complexity. The test parts were 
selected from a mechanical engineering drawing handbook 
and had different topology. In the first phase, each part was 
modeled using the legacy CATIA CAD software. In the 
second phase, 2D engineering drawings corresponding to 
CAD models were created via the drafting module of CATIA 
CAD 
software. 
The 
engineering 
drawings 
include 
orthographic views and for some parts sections and detailed 
features (Fig. 1).  
 
 
Figure 1. Components of an engineering drawing  
Orthographic projections are a collection of 2D drawings 
that represent projections from different directions of a 3D 
object. Usually front, side and plan views are drawn so that a 
person, looking at the drawing, can reconstruct the 3D 
object. The sectional view is applicable to objects where the 
interior details are difficult to understand through the usage 
of dotted lines on an orthographic projection. The sectional 
view is obtained by cutting the object by a plane so that the 
hidden details are visible. Because we want to investigate the 
influence of stereoscopic binocular 3D vision, the parts 
where exported in Virtual Reality Modeling Language 
(VRML) neutral format and then imported in a custom 
developed software application. 
 
C. Display technology 
The 3D models were visualized using two type of 
devices: a universal 2D LCD display with the diagonal of 
19" for desktop interface and an active stereoscopic system 
for 3D perception (fig. 2). For perceiving the 3D 
stereoscopic images, a standard solution based on desktop 
CRT monitors with wireless Crystal Eyes shutter glasses was 
used. The display renders the images at 120 Hz. For 
rendering the 3D environment was used the BSContact 
Stereo VRML visualization player integrated with a 
dedicated software C++ application (fig. 2). 
Figure 2. The subject selecting a 3D model using 3D display active 
stereoscopic visualization system 
D. Tests set-up 
Before conducting the experiment, each participant had 
the opportunity to become familiar with the system. The 
users had ten minutes prior the experiment, for practicing the 
navigation 
interaction 
modalities 
in 
a 
3D 
testing 
environment. After that they pressed the “Start” button. A 
random 2D drawing is initially presented and the subjects 
imagine a 3D model in the brain. In order to evaluate the 
cognitive effort of the mental reconstruction and the reaction 
time, for the first five parts of the experiment, the 2D 
drawing were presented for maxim 20 seconds. If the 
subjects clearly constructed in the brain the 3D model before 
the time passed, they click the “OK” button and step forward 
to the 3D environment. 
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Immediately after that, the subjects chose between the 
imaged 3D model and the other three slightly different 3D 
models (Fig. 3). To create a difference between the presented 
3D models some features where added or removed from the 
part displayed in the 2D drawing (for example adding a slot 
to the part, or removing the ribs features). Subjects where 
instructed to pick with the mouse the 3D model considered 
to be the correct one. Each of the first five versions of 3D 
models was presented for maxim 25 seconds. If the user 
didn’t make a selection, the trial is considered to be a failure. 
For the other five model used in the experiment, the 2D 
drawing was presented for maxim one minute and the 3D 
parts were presented for maxim 20 seconds. Half of the users 
first took the test using the traditional desktop system, then 
after a break of 10 minutes, they were asked to take the test 
using stereoscopic visualization system. Simultaneously, the 
other half of subjects first selected the correct 3D models by 
using stereoscopic system and then using monoscopic 
desktop system. There were used for the test different sets of 
CAD models. Each subject accomplished 20 trials. Log files 
recorded time stamps for the selected 3D part. This provided 
a task completion time (TCT) in milliseconds for each 
subject. The log files where used afterward for the 
assessment of the results. Before accomplishing the test, each 
participant becomes familiar with the system. 
 
 
Figure 3. The process of mentally reconstruction and identification of a 
3D model from a engineering drawing 
IV. 
RESULTS EVALUATION 
In Table 1, the mean of the correct answers from all the 
subjects that participated to the experiment is presented. The 
main reason of the significantly decreased accuracy might be 
the limited short term memory capacity of humans, which 
makes it difficult to choose between the three different 3D 
models, considering the 3D model that they constructed in 
the brain. There might occurs the situation when the mentally 
reconstructed 3d model is not the same with the visualized 
one. In this case, the used does not recognize the 3D object 
independently on the type of visualization (2D or 3D). When 
the time for visualizing the 2D drawing is increased to 
maximum 60 seconds, the accuracy is superior because the 
model could be comprehended better with the use of external 
working memory. Another significant result is that the 
stereoscopic 3D visualization does not considerable increase 
the recognition accuracy of imaged 3D models. 
TABLE I.  
MEAN REACTION TIME OF SUBJECTS 
Maxim time (s) 
Accuracy 
monoscopic 
viewing 
Accuracy 
stereoscopic viewing 
25 
43,20% 
46,60% 
60 
56,60% 
63,20% 
 
Figure 4 presents the mean of the reaction time measured 
in the experiment. The analysis of these data indicates that 
monoscopic and stereoscopic 3D shape reconstruction 
involve similar methods and do not have major influence on 
the reaction time. The increased reaction time shows the 
complexity the engineer facing in the process of developing 
the product. The main cause might be due to the mentally 
manage of a large amount of information. 
 
Figure 4. Mean reaction time of the subjects 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the process of developing the product the engineer 
must mentally manage a large amount of important 
information which leads to high cognitive complexity. 
Available engineering drawings do not reduce the 
complexity that the engineer is facing or help him handle it. 
The 2D engineering drawings should be easy to use and 
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

should help the engineer manage the design-related 
complexity. The cognitive complexity can lead to a situation 
in which important design factors are not taken into 
consideration and this leads to failure. 
From the conducted experiment, because of the reduced 
accuracy and the high reaction time, we can conclude that 
the user should visualize a three dimensional model of the 
part co-located with the 2D drawing.  
Realistic perception of the 3D models from 2D 
engineering drawings plays an important role in decision 
making of design engineers. Recent studies [3], [4], [11] 
show that a system with a three dimensional representation 
of the model increases the performances of the users carrying 
out tasks which require the perception and understanding of 
spatial information. Unlike Virtual Reality (VR) systems, in 
which users are completely immersed in the virtual 
environment, AR users see the virtual objects and the real 
world co-existing in the same space (co-located). The co-
location of the 3D CAD models in the real environment 
provides the possibility of a realist perception of the physical 
engineering drawing. Further work is focuses on the 
development of a new class of engineering drawings based 
on AR technologies. In Figure 5, a prototype of a developed 
Augmented Reality Engineering Drawing (ARTD) is shown. 
ARTD enhances the visual perception by co-locating the 3D 
virtual object with the corresponding engineering drawing 
and offers the quick recognition of the object with less 
perceptive ambiguities. This is an improvement for 
engineering applications where users must have a precise 
and direct appreciation of product shape. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research activities where supported by the Sectoral 
Operational Programme Human Resources Development 
(SOP HRD), financed from the European Social Fund and by 
the Romanian Government under the contract number 
POSDRU/89/1.5/S/59323. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Butler, “Predicting the perception of three-dimensional 
objects from the geometrical information in drawings,” 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, Oct. 1982, vol. 8, pp. 674-692, doi: 
10.1037/0096-1523.8.5.674. 
[2] D. Dori and K. Tombre, “From engineering drawings to 3D 
image models: are we ready now?,” Computer-Aided Design, 
vol. 27, April 1995, pp. 243-254, doi:10.1016/0010-
4485(95)91134-7. 
[3] P. Dunston, X. Wang, M. Billinghusrt, and B. Hampson, 
“Mixed reality benefits for design perception,” in Proc. of 
19th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics 
Construction (ISARC 2002), Sept. 2002, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology Special Publication, vol. 989, pp. 
191-196. 
[4] M. Fiorentino, G. Monno, and A. E. Uva, “Tangible digital 
master for product lifecycle management in augmented 
reality,” International Journal on Interactive Design and 
Manufacturing, vol. 3, May 2009, pp. 121-129, doi: 
10.1007/s12008-009-0062-z. 
[5] S. Grossberg, “Cortical Dynamics of Three-Dimensional 
Figure–Ground Perception of Two-Dimensional Pictures,” 
Psychological Review, vol. 104, Jul 1997, pp. 618-658, doi: 
10.1037/0033-295X.104.3.618. 
[6] F. Garbacia, A. Beraru, and E. Butila, “Depth Perception 
Evaluation of 3D Virtual Prototypes Using Immersive Cave 
Systems,” in Proc. of Romanian National Conference of 
Human-Computer Interaction (RoCHI 2010), Matrix Rom 
Publisher, Sept. 2010, pp. 51-54. 
 
Figure 5. Augmented Reality Engineering Drawing prototype  
[7] C. Hoffmann, Z. Pizlo, V. Popescu, and S. Price, “Pictures 
Perception of surfaces from line drawings,” Displays, vol. 28, 
Feb. 2007, pp. 1-7, doi:10.1016/j.displa.2006.11.001. 
[8] K. Kashihara, “Evaluation of the Cognitive Process during 
Mental Imaging of Two- or Three-Dimensional Figures” 
Proc. of the 2009 Second International Conferences on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI '09), IEEE 
Press, Feb. 2009, pp. 126-130, doi: 10.1109/ACHI.2009.57. 
[9] D. Lowe, “Three-dimensional object recognition from single 
two-dimensional images,” Artificial Intelligence, vol. 31, 
March 1987, pp. 355-395, doi: 10.1016/0004-3702(87)90070-
1. 
[10] L. Piegl, “Ten challenges in computer-aided design,” 
Computer-Aided Design, vol. 37, April 2005, pp. 461-470, 
doi:10.1016/j.cad.2004.08.012. 
[11] A. E. Uva, S. Cristiano, M. Fiorentino, and G. Monno, 
“Distributed design review using tangible augmented 
technical drawings,” Computer-Aided Design, vol. 42, May 
2010, pp. 364-372, doi:10.1016/j.cad.2008.10.015. 
 
 
 
 
 
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

