When Simple Technologies Makes Life Difficult 
Pursuing experienced simplicity in welfare technology for elderly 
Suhas Govind Joshi 
Department of Informatics 
Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
joshi@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we use the case of elderly living with 
welfare technology to demonstrate how technology intended to 
be simple often defeats its own end. We discuss why simplicity 
requires attention and consideration not only to the context-
detached design but also to the design in use as applying 
analytic 
and 
imagined 
simplicity 
does 
not 
guarantee 
experienced simplicity. We provide examples and evaluation 
results to help argue for our perspective on simplicity and 
present five implications for design pursuing simplicity. 
Keywords — simplicity; elderly; welfare technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the large-scale rollout of welfare technology many 
elderly find themselves living a life surrounded by 
technology. One of the technological devices found in the 
apartment of an 84 year old lady residing in a local care 
home in Oslo is an automated light sensor in her living room. 
Because of the small size of her apartment she sleeps with 
the door open, and when she turns in bed at night the sensor 
in the living room registers her movement and the light is 
activated throughout the apartment. Her solution to this was 
to cover the sensor with tinfoil (as illustrated in Figure 1).  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Covering a sensor with tinfoil (Photo: S. Finken [1]) 
 
This observation exemplified how simple technology may 
end up making life difficult, and served as a trigger for us to 
explore the matter of simplicity. This paper investigates 
difficulties with making technology simple for others, in this 
particular case making welfare technology simple for the 
elderly. The discussion is grounded in data gathered with 
three different evaluation methods spanning over six months 
involving 45 participants, including 30 elderly with an 
average age of 86 years. 
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we give 
an analysis of simplicity in the literature, as well as our 
perspective on the matter. In Sections 3 and 4, we outline the 
research context and research methods of our study before 
presenting the results in Section 5. We end the paper with a 
discussion in Section 6 on why simplicity is challenging 
through five implications for design pursuing simplicity. 
II. 
SIMPLICITY 
Simplicity in its most elementary definition describes 
something with an uncomplicated quality or condition. 
Researchers have applied the concept of simplicity to 
various research studies within various disciplines of 
computer science. Over time, this vague definition of 
simplicity has made it applicable to different areas of 
computer science, and in several disciplines the term has 
evolved into an established term with a more refined and 
tailored use mainly applicable to that specific discipline or 
context. As a philosophical principle, simplicity can be 
differentiated into ontological, following the principle of 
parsimony, and syntactical (structural) simplicity, perceived 
as elegance [2]. Hence, the theoretical perspective of the 
researchers in the debate of philosophy of science can 
heavily influence how they perceive and apply such a term. 
Lee et al. [3] describes simplicity within the area of Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI) as “not only simple page layout 
but also interface organization, functionality, structure, and 
workflow and framework”. Following this definition, 
simplicity in HCI encompasses various elements and 
researchers tend to find their own perspectives and 
definitions to simplicity. One of the most cited authors on 
simplicity, Maeda [4], defines his ten laws of simplicity 
(reduce, organize, time, learn, differences, context, emotion, 
trust, failure and the one). On the other hand, Colborne [5] 
concentrates on only four strategies (remove, organize, hide 
and displace) in his discussion on simplifying devices and 
experiences. Simplicity has also been analyzed through the 
notion of minimalism by Obendorf [6] who defines four 
types of minimalism (functional, structural, compositional 
and architectural) and utilize this perspective on minimalism 
to discuss simplicity in HCI. However, as Picking et al. [7] 
points out, design principles are in general often formulated 
as brief guidelines that aim to cover wide areas of 
application and apply to multiple domains simultaneously; it 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

is difficult to use these guidelines consistently as they rarely 
specify which specific design choices to make. Since laws, 
strategies and principles for simplicity can serve as 
everything from minor inspirations to governing factors, 
Obendorf [6] have called for more differentiated and 
concretized definitions of how simplicity is understood, and 
exactly how it influences the design outcome. 
Several researchers have pointed out the importance of 
simplicity as a design principle in systems designed for the 
older population [8]-[10], however prior studies [2] suggest 
that perceived simplicity is context-dependent and relies 
heavily on the users’ previous exposure. Our understanding 
of simplicity is anchored in two main elements, namely 
mastery and context. Both of these elements revolve around 
the users' experience and perception of the system in use 
rather than the isolated and context-detached design itself; 
simplicity is a characteristic of a system that manifests itself 
once the intended users take use of the system in its 
appropriate context. When using simplicity as a design 
guideline, one should always envision the act of 
simplification resulting in positive effects on the mastery of 
the user in the desired context. Blindly following simplicity 
as a design principle, e.g., reducing or hiding elements 
because general rulebook on simplicity says so, ignores the 
true 
intention 
behind 
the 
design 
choice, 
namely 
disentangling the perceived complexity. However, analyzing 
the simplicity laws and principles of Maeda, Colborne and 
Obendorf one quickly register that these laws mainly 
consider 
simplicity 
as 
context-independent. 
All 
of 
Colborne’s four principles encourage modification to the 
design detached from the eventual context. Similarly, 
Obendorf relies on minimalism which itself does not 
automatically ensure systems free of complexity; it only 
encourages basic design with deliberate lack of decoration 
without discussing the perceived simplicity. From Maeda's 
ten laws we can extract five laws considering the relational 
use of the system rather than the system itself, namely time, 
learn, context, emotions and trust. Only these laws reflect 
how we understand simplicity, i.e., rather than being a term 
of size, quantity or volume, it should first and foremost 
reflect the contextual experience. Thus, simplicity in a 
system is not something one adds to the design; it is 
something achieved once mastery is uncomplicated in its 
appropriate context.  
Our view on simplicity aligns with the research of Eytam 
& Tractinsky [11] suggesting that the ability to design own 
complexities can be a desire among users. They define this 
contrast between advocated guidelines for simplicity and the 
observed behavior as the paradox of simplicity, and argue 
that simplicity is not defined in objective guidelines but 
rather be understood through how the users perceive 
simplicity. The explicit focus on the users’ side of the 
interaction in HCI influences how we discuss the concept of 
simplicity how it is a matter of more than just reducing 
complexity; simplification is an intricate and dynamic design 
principle embracing factors such as mastery and context of 
use as examples of decisive factors of simplicity. This is also 
in line with [2] who suggest that simplicity as a design 
principle should be a complex and flexible design paradigm 
rather than a simple dichotomous variable, incorporating 
elements such as user interface design, as well as contextual 
factors (for example integration to other IS). Keay-Bright & 
Howarth [12] focus on designing intuitive interfaces and 
describe simplicity not as a compromise in richness or 
diversity of human experience, but rather a minimal interface 
that empowers the users to design their own complexities 
that ensures mastery. 
III. 
RESEARCH CONTEXT 
A. Empirical context 
This study is part of a larger long-term research project 
focusing on newly acquired welfare technology in local care 
homes in Oslo Municipality. The particular local care home 
involved in this study consists of 91 individual apartments 
for the elderly (with an average age of 84 years) organized 
with common reception, cantina and recreation room. There 
is no medical services provided, and those in need organize 
their own arrangements with the district home care services, 
however the elderly have access to basic services such as 
hairdressing, foot therapist, gym and cinema. The goal of 
the local care home is to be a smart house, for example 
actively utilizing technology in order to prolong the time 
elderly can remain independent in their own homes before 
being admitted to a nursing home. Each individual 
apartment comes pre-installed with a set of new 
technologies, including automated lighting, heating and 
ventilation control, stove guard, electrical sockets with 
timers, motion sensors in all rooms, video calling, door 
locks with radio-frequency identification (RFID), and a 
customized tablet. Since the building opened in 2012, our 
research group has been present at this facility, and this 
local care home is an excellent arena to study existing 
technology. It also serves a venue where we experiment 
with new and alternative welfare technology. 
B. Technology under evaluation 
In this study, we included the tablet and some of the room 
control devices in the local care homes. The main objective 
was initially to concentrate solely on the tablet, however we 
feared that only studying this touch-based device would 
restrict the discussion of simplicity to an analysis of touch-
screen interfaces rather than being an open discussion on 
how the user experience simplicity in the welfare 
technological devices that surround them. As a result, we 
included a set of devices in the room, i.e., light, temperature 
and ventilation systems, as well as the RFID door locking 
system. 
 
1) Tablet 
The tablet illustrated in Figure 2 comes pre-installed in all 
apartments and introduces a new way of arranging, planning 
and keeping an overview of everyday activities, as well as 
allowing residents to order meals from the downstairs 
cafeteria straight from the device. The tablet also provides 
basic opportunities for communication, namely telephoning 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and text messaging, as well as entertainment services, e.g., 
radio and an Internet browser. However, the tablet only 
comes with one mode and offers few options for 
customization, hence flexibility and robustness is of great 
importance as it needs to support the daily activities of all 
residents and employees. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The tablet 
 
2) Room controls devices 
Some of the pre-installed technologies and devices in each 
apartment is lightning, heating and ventilation control in 
every room of the apartment. This includes automated 
motion-activated light sensors, automated thermostat and 
automated adjustment of ventilation. The three photos in 
Figure 3 depicts a close-up of the heating interface as well as 
the RFID door locking system used to access each 
apartment. The door locks automatically, but opens with a 
RFID-card, and represents an interface few had experienced 
before.  Since all these devices come pre-installed there is no 
option for the residents to utilize other interfaces or 
interaction methods, e.g., traditional door locks with keys or 
two-button light switches, and these can all be seen as a part 
of the "welfare package" in each apartment. As a result, they 
were tested together during the evaluations, and we will refer 
to these devices as "room control devices" in this paper. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Heating control (left) and RFID door (right) 
 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHOD  
The data for this study was gathered over a six months 
divided into two phases. We were motivated by prior 
experiences with elderly and welfare technology [13][14] 
where findings suggest that giving enough time helps 
avoiding or eliminating bias. Three different methods of 
evaluation (Table I) were used during these two phases, and 
Figure 4 illustrates the outline of the research phases. We 
applied different methods of evaluation partly motivated by 
methodical triangulation, although the main reason was 
giving the participant more than just one opportunity to 
express their perspectives on simplicity. The task-based 
group evaluation allowed the participants to freely address 
simplicity issues during task walkthrough independent of 
schemas, heuristics or guidelines. Through the simplicity 
evaluation participants had a chance to evaluate the 
simplicity by grading pre-selected factors of simplicity, and 
during the usability assessment we did not ask them, but 
rather observed and measured them in order to discuss 
simplicity through their performance. The first phase 
included a task-based group evaluation, a simplicity 
evaluation and a usability assessment. The initial plan was 
to conduct these three activities during the first phase and 
then follow up with an equivalent usability assessment after 
six months with the same participants and the same usability 
criteria. However, due to the feedback and results 
discovered during the second usability assessment, we chose 
to repeat the simplicity evaluation as well. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Outline of the research phases 
 
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF METHODS 
# 
Method 
Participants  
Phase 1 
Participants 
Phase 2 
Participants 
Phase 1+2 
A 
Task-based group 
evaluation 
21 
- 
21 
B 
Usability 
assessment 
11 
11 
22 
C 
Simplicity 
evaluation 
12 
12 
24 
A. Task-based group evaluation 
The task-based group evaluation was a part of a broad 
study where altogether 21 participants were engaged, 
namely 11 elderly, 7 employees and 4 experts. This dataset 
include several factors out of which some are not relevant 
for this study, although this evaluation has previously 
contributed to another study [13]. Nevertheless, the 
evaluation included a total of 6 sessions, 3 sessions with 
groups of elderly, 2 sessions with groups of employees, and 
1 session with a group of HCI-experts. The sessions were 
structured 
as 
group 
walkthroughs 
of 
pre-selected 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

representative tasks where the participants were asked to 
grade the severity of identified issues and then engage in a 
plenary discussion. Examples of representative tasks were 
ordering a meal and signing up for activities on the tablet 
and controlling lighting and ventilation in the room. During 
this session all participants labeled issues with predefined 
categories. The data included in this study are those issues 
labeled by the participants as “simplicity” issues. All 
participants were free to individually define what issues 
they considered to be simplicity issues. 
B. Usability assessment 
The usability assessment involved 11 participants; 
altogether, 7 elderly and 4 experts participated. The 
participants were given a set of 10 representative tasks to 
perform while completion time and error rates were 
measured and the sessions photographed. The tasks are 
listed in Table II. The tasks were distributed evenly between 
the tablet and the room control devices. Errors were counted 
and also divided into deliberate errors and accidental 
errors; the former represents errors where the user 
performed an action intentionally although performed the 
wrong action, while the latter represents unintentional 
actions. An example of a deliberate error is intentionally 
pressing the channel button on the television remote control 
when you want to adjust the volume because you in your 
best judgment consider the channel button to be the correct 
action for the desired outcome (i.e., adjust the volume), and 
you intentionally press that button. On the other hand, if you 
want to change the channel and while reaching for the 
correct button you unintentionally bump into the power 
button instead, then it is a case of an accidental error. 
 
TABLE II. OVERVIEW OF PERFORMED TASKS 
Task # 
Task description 
Task 1 
Locking and unlocking the RFID door 
Task 2 
Playing a game on the tablet 
Task 3 
Browsing on the tablet 
Task 4 
Sending and receiving text messages on the tablet 
Task 5 
Listening to radio on the tablet 
Task 6 
Ordering food from the cafeteria on the tablet 
Task 7 
Activating room control devices with movement 
Task 8 
Setting and adjusting the ventilation 
Task 9 
Turning on and off wall and ceiling lighting 
Task 10 
Adjusting the heating level 
 
These evaluations were carried out in the homes of 5 of 
the 7 participants, while 2 participants preferred to have the 
test conducted in an adjacent meeting room along with the 
experts. The usability assessment was repeated during the 
second phase in order to study changes in behavior, 
performance and satisfaction after six months. The 
conditions and environmental factors were similar between 
the two assessments with the exception that 1 additional 
elderly participant chose to not have the test in her 
apartment.  
C. Simplicity evaluation 
The goal of the simplicity evaluation was to provide the 
elderly with an opportunity to evaluate the simplicity 
without being restricted to certain tasks (as in method A) or 
tied to their performance (as in method B). Hence, the 
participants were asked only to grade the simplicity of the 
tablet and the room control systems. Each participant were 
given an individual oral and written explanation of each 
factor and was then asked to grade the simplicity factor 
from 1-5. The evaluation comprised 7 factors redefined 
from the 5 laws of Maeda coinciding with our perspective of 
simplicity, namely the symbiotic relationship between 
mastery and context. The 7 elements were intuitivity, 
organization, memorability, error rate, time, learnability 
and trust. Intiutivity reflects the perceived easiness when 
first approaching the system in the given context, while 
learnability and memorability describes the system’s ability 
to foster mastery and maintain it over time. With 
organization we did not look at organization of the interface, 
e.g., icon clutter, but studied how the system fitted within its 
context. We also included time, i.e., their experience on 
their own performance and error rate, i.e., how many errors 
they encountered, in order to study their own perspective on 
mastery.  
D. Participants 
The three methods involved 45 participants altogether 
and the participants divided into four user groups described 
in Table III. The elderly (n = 30) participated in all methods 
during both phases, while the usability experts (n = 8) 
participated during both phases of the simplicity evaluation 
and the usability assessment. Finally, the employees only (n 
= 7) participated in the task-based group evaluation. The 
elderly were recruited among the residents at the local care 
home and their age ranged from 79-94 (μ = 86). Upon 
moving into this local care home, all elderly were 
cognitively cleared by medical experts, i.e., possessing at 
least an acceptable level of cognitive and reasoning abilities. 
They struggled with various medical conditions, e.g., 
reduced motor abilities or reduced vision, and they 
represented a broad range of social difficulties. 
 
TABLE III. OVERVIEW OF PARTICIPANTS 
User 
group 
User role 
Use 
frequency 
Expertise 
Participated 
in method # 
N 
The 
elderly 
End-users 
Every day 
(none) 
A, B, C 
30 
Daytime 
employees 
End-users 
and 
trainers 
Every day 
Health and 
domain 
A 
4 
Shift work 
employees 
End-users 
and 
trainers 
Once a week 
Limited 
domain-
expertise 
A 
3 
Usability 
experts 
None 
One-time 
only 
HCI and 
usability 
A, B 
8 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V. 
RESULTS 
A. Task-based group evaluation 
Out of a total of 39 identified issues, 17 were considered 
simplicity issues by at least one of the user groups. Each 
group that had identified the issue was then asked to grade 
the severity of the issue as minor (M), serious (S) or critical 
(C). All identified issues are listed in Table IV. The 
aggregated degree of seriousness reflects the final level of 
seriousness assigned to the issue based on the grading of the 
groups. If there were disagreements between only two 
groups, the most serious grading took precedence; otherwise 
the number of occurrences decided this aggregated degree 
of seriousness. Out of these 17 identified issues 5 were 
labeled as critical issues, 7 were categorized as serious 
issues, and 5 were considered minor issues. The group of 
elderly reported a total of 14 issues, out of which 36 % were 
graded as minor. The similar percentage was lower for the 
two other groups, respectively 25 % for the employees and 
27 % for the experts. Since both the employees and experts 
reported fewer issues overall that the other two groups, this 
implies that the employees and experts regarded identified 
issues as more severe that the elderly, with a percentage of 
75 % (employees) and 73 % (experts) graded as either 
serious or critical against only 64 % for the elderly. 
We also wanted to study the balance of simplicity, i.e., 
identify the level of simplicity where the system was neither 
too simple nor too complex. As a result, we also asked the 
participants to differentiate between issues they considered a 
result of the vendor making the interface or interaction too 
simple, i.e., a matter of oversimplification, and issues they 
considered too complex and wished were further simplified. 
13 issues were considered a result of oversimplification and 
participants expressed usability issues due to interface, 
language, symbols etc., being too simple for their liking. 4 
of the 5 critical and 6 of the 7 serious issues were labeled 
oversimplified. It should be noted that similar to the 
aggregated 
degree 
of 
seriousness, 
the 
expressed 
simplification desire is the aggregated evaluation of the 
group(s) who brought forward the issues, however all 
groups answered unanimously for all issues. As a result, 
their individual answers are not presented as with the degree 
of seriousness where we encountered variations between 
groups. 
Most of the issues had a clear consensus on the grade of 
severity. Only those 3 cases where two groups addressed an 
issue and simultaneously gave it different grades did we 
encounter any disagreements. Rather than considering the 
grade of one group as more important than other, we chose 
instead to always use the highest grade. This was considered 
an acceptable solution by the participants; for example, the 
elderly labeled the highest number of issues as minor issue, 
but for 3 of the 5 issues that the elderly labeled as minor 
issues (#1, #10, #29) the aggregated grading was upgraded 
to serious since either the employees or the experts regarded 
the issue as serious. For the two remaining issues one was 
only reported by the elderly (#11) and one group disagreed 
with the elderly on the severity grade of the last issue (#28). 
Additionally, only in 3 cases were the issue only addressed 
by one group (out of which two were minor issues), and the 
overall consistency of the grading of the issues was 
therefore considered to be good.  
B. Usability assessment 
The usability assessment included 10 tasks (Table II) 
tested by 7 elderly and 4 experts in each of the two phases, 
and Figure 5-7 presents the completion time and error rate 
for each of the tasks in both phases. The completion time 
listed for each task is the average time spent by all 11 
participants to complete the task, while the error rate is the 
average error rate for deliberate and accidental errors.  
On average, the experts performed their tasks during the 
first phase within half the time of the elderly (μexperts = 
173.11 against μelderly = 330.57), and did so with half as 
TABLE IV. IDENTIFIED SIMPLICITY ISSUES 
Issue # Issue description 
Aggregated 
degree of 
seriousness 
Group 1 
Elderly 
Group 2 
Employees 
Group 3  
Experts 
Imbalance issue 
1 
The device screen always stays on (even in standby mode) 
S 
M 
S 
S 
Too simple 
5 
The phone icon color is misleading 
S 
S 
M 
S 
Too complex 
7 
There is no indicator of remaining battery 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Too simple 
8 
There is no indication of the device being charged or already fully charged 
S 
- 
S 
- 
Too simple 
10 
The system signals two new messages when just one message arrive 
S 
M 
S 
- 
Too simple 
11 
The system uses separate indicators to indicate the same message 
M 
M 
- 
- 
Too complex 
15 
There is one phone number for texting (12-digit) and another for calling 
C 
C 
S 
C 
Too complex 
20 
The default values in text boxes are misleading and unpractical 
S 
S 
C 
S 
Too simple 
21 
It is impossible to grad the on-screen keyboard in certain views 
C 
S 
- 
C 
Too simple 
24 
The language is inconsistent 
S 
S 
S 
- 
Too simple 
25 
It is too easy to delete everything 
M 
- 
M 
M 
Too simple 
28 
The events in the calendar are not chronologically ordered 
M 
M 
S 
M 
Too complex 
29 
The duration of phone calls is missing 
S 
M 
- 
S 
Too simple 
34 
There is no comment feature on activities and events 
M 
- 
- 
M 
Too simple 
35 
The language is confusing 
M 
S 
M 
- 
Too simple 
36 
The icons are confusing 
C 
S 
- 
C 
Too simple 
38 
The notifications are misleading 
C 
C 
S 
- 
Too simple 
 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

many deliberate (μexperts = 1.82 against μelderly = 3.90) and 
accidental (μexperts = 1.18 against μelderly = 3.18) errors. Their 
standard deviation also confirms a more consistent 
performance throughout the 10 tasks both time wise (σexperts 
= 11.90 against σelderly = 36.66) and error wise (σexperts = 
0.52 against σelderly = 1.06 and σexperts = 0.32 against σelderly = 
0.59). The average completion time for all 10 tasks 
increased slightly between the first and second phase (Δμ = 
8.29, Δσ = 7.36) for the elderly. There is no clear 
consistency in how the user performs on average in each 
task. The completion time of 4 tasks went down with an 
average of 9.46 seconds, while the completion time of the 
remaining 6 tasks went up with an average of 15.98 
seconds. The deliberate error rate dropped for 6 tasks (Δμ = 
0.36) and increased for the other 4 tasks (Δμ = 0.46), and 
the accidental error rate increased for 4 tasks (Δμ = 0.29), 
dropped for 4 tasks (Δμ = 0.32) and remained unchanged for 
the remaining 2 tasks. However, there is no correlation 
between which tasks that went up in deliberate or accidental 
error rate. Only for one of the tasks (#4) did the sum of 
deliberate and accidental errors decrease when the 
completion time decreased. For the other 3 tasks, where the 
completion time dropped (#1, #2 and #10), one increased 
the sum of errors by 0.14 (#1) while the two other had no 
change in error rate even though the completion time 
decreased.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Overview of average completion time (s) 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Overview of average number of accidental errors 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Overview of average number of deliberate errors 
 
We registered that these two last tasks had the lowest 
completion time in both cases for all participants, as well as 
the lowest error rate (both deliberate and accidental) for 
both groups. A similar performance pattern was also 
registered among the experts, a group with less performance 
fluctuation than the elderly, and these were the two tasks 
with highest mean deviation in both phases for both groups. 
These two tasks were also the only tasks where the group of 
elderly matched the performance of the experts. The average 
difference in completion time between elderly and experts 
in phase 1 was 110.23 seconds (σ = 30.9) and 117.55 
seconds (σ = 26) in phase 2, while the difference for task #9 
and #10 were only 66.43 in phase 1 and 67.88 in phase 2. 
Similarly, the difference in deliberate error rate had an 
average of 1.46 (σ = 0.69) in phase 1 and 1.68 (σ = 0.73) in 
phase 2, while the difference for task #9 and #10 were only 
0.48 in phase 1 and 0.41 in phase 2; the accidental error rate 
had an average difference of 1.4 (σ = 0.45) for phase 1 and 
1.57 (σ = 0.48), compared to 1.2 difference in phase 1 and 
0.55 in phase 2 for task #9 and task #10. Consequently, this 
anomaly is not a result of learning effect but rather a sign of 
tasks that were significantly easier than the rest.  
C. Simplicty evaluation 
Figures 8 and 9 present the results from both phases of 
the simplicity evaluation. During the first phase, there were 
clear differences in opinion between the participants. While 
the average score of the 12 participants ended up on the 
upper half of the scale, the deviation within the data was 
large (μ = 3.4 and σ = 0.79), and participant #10 gave 4.4 
out of 5 on average for the 7 factors of simplicity, whereas 
participant #11 only gave 1.7 out of 5. The average score 
given to each of the 7 factors were much more evenly 
distributed with only half the deviation (σ = 0.4) despite 
some of the factors having a much higher internal deviation 
(e.g., memorability with μ = 3.0 and σ = 1.0). The second 
phase yielded results very similar to the first phase. There 
were few changes in how the users perceived and rated the 7 
factors with the highest factor difference between the two 
phases being as low as 0.3 (intuitivity and trust), while the 
rest averaged at 0.15. However, almost all participants have 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

changed their perception of simplicity since the first phase. 
Participant #10 and #12 both end up with an average score 
0.1 below their previous average, and for some participants, 
e.g., participant #6 with a 0.9 difference, the change in 
opinion is much more evident. 5 of the participants end up 
giving a higher average score during the second phase (Δμ = 
0.53), while the remaining 7 reduce their average score (Δμ 
= 0.37). Hence, even though the number of participants 
increasing their score between the two evaluations is lower 
than those reducing it, the difference in their average score 
brings the total average up (Δμ = 0.1). While the overall 
perception of simplicity does not necessarily change much, 
the reduced deviation between participants carefully suggest 
that their opinions have harmonized during the six months 
between the two evaluations (σphase2 = 0.51 against σ phase1 = 
0.79). 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Average score given by each participant 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Average score given for each simplicity factor 
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Ensuring familiarity and transferability 
Mastery requires understanding and learning. It also 
relies heavily on the users’ previous exposure, and design 
following simplicity should evoke a connection to prior 
experiences. Thus, the elderly rely heavily on transferring 
prior skills and knowledge in order to adapt a level of 
understanding and learning that nurtures mastery. One of the 
key challenges with both systems evaluated in our study 
was the lack of consistent metaphors. Several elderly with 
prior experience with devices similar to those used in our 
evaluation were unable to utilize prior knowledge due to 
metaphors not being consistent; simplicity also encompasses 
other design principles, e.g., consistency and affordance. 
Actions, icons, symbols and other metaphors should 
mediate experiences rather than direct [11]. And the diverse 
backgrounds of the elderly made us very aware of the 
difficulty of reducing complex information into simplified 
metaphors where everyone understands both the metaphors 
and the symbolic meaning or feeling they encompass. This 
challenge has been addressed by previous studies [15] who 
relied on a simplified design to trigger a nostalgic effect in 
order to help familiarizing metaphors.  
In our studies, several elderly struggled with the tablet 
responding to their actions with unexpected outcomes. One 
example included elderly trying to use prior knowledge like 
familiarized gestures on the tablet, e.g., pinching and 
dragging to zoom or sliding actions to scroll, when visiting 
websites during task #3 (Table II). The system being of a 
different operating system than what they had previously 
used responded differently than expected; the slider scrolled 
the website in the opposite direction and the pinch and drag 
gesture were not recognized by the system at all. Another 
prominent example was the RFID doors automatically 
locking if they were closed, i.e., a contrast from the 
traditional method of locking doors, by turning a key. The 
doors were heavy and closed automatically, and once closed 
they would also lock automatically like a spring lock, only 
without any sound or click. It was especially confusing 
during the first evaluation as the elderly still had not 
memorized that the redundant key hole affording use of 
traditional keys (Figure 3) served no purpose, and 
repeatedly expected the door to be locked manually with a 
key after closing the door, when instead the door would 
automatically close and lock behind them. In fact, the 
accidental error rate for the task involving the doors (task #1 
in Table II), was one of the tasks with highest combined 
average error rate was one out of only four cases where the 
deliberate error rate increased between the first and second 
phase. This was a matter of confusion and reported as one of 
the main issues responsible for the degree of learnability 
dropping between the two simplicity evaluations (see Figure 
9). A third example included problems during text 
messaging (task #4 in Table II). When asked to send and 
receive text messages, several old and familiar metaphors 
were suddenly replaced by new unfamiliar metaphors where 
the elderly struggled with applying old knowledge to the 
new system. For example, the phone number was not their 
usual phone number, nor did it resemble a traditional phone 
number (issue #15), and the icons used to symbolize 
contacts and messages were not recognized (issue #36). The 
task of text messaging yielded the highest number of 
deliberate errors during both evaluations, and this was 
clearly a result of their attempt to perform actions associated 
with prior experience or applying old metaphors to the new 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

system that were no longer compatible or purposeful. 
Through these three examples we discovered that the most 
confusing and frustrating situations arose when the elderly 
performed an action where the outcome was unclear or 
unfamiliar. Familiarity and transferability became strong 
indicators of the ability to master new systems; when 
actions became disconnected from their meaning, the 
purposefulness in the actions disappeared and mastery 
suddenly became a challenge. 
B. Maintaining purposeful actions 
In order to further discuss purposeful actions we gave 
the participants six months to familiarize themselves with 
the systems before asking them to evaluate the simplicity a 
second time. 3 participants (#1, #3, #6 in Figure 8) reported 
a higher average score during the second simplicity 
evaluation, suggesting a more positive attitude towards the 7 
elements of simplicity we evaluated. As a result, we 
investigated whether this was a result of increased learning 
and understanding, or just a matter of increased use 
frequency. When discussing the mastery of the system, we 
need to distinguish between increased ease due to more 
frequent use and increased ease due to actions, metaphors 
and language suddenly making more sense. It was 
unanimously agreed upon that the participants reported a 
higher score as a result of increased frequency rather than 
actions, metaphors and language making sense. Confusing 
metaphors were still confusing and during the six months 
participants had learned certain use patterns by heart. To 
them, adopting strategies to avoid problems uncomplicated 
and improved the efficiency once memorized. However, it 
was evident that time did not contribute to increased 
understanding of metaphors, but rather resulted in 
incorporated strategies and workarounds. Confusing actions, 
metaphors and language remained confusing even after six 
months of use, also for those reporting a higher average 
score, and the increased perception bloomed out of the 
development of personal strategies for memorizing or 
working around troublesome tasks. This is an important 
finding as patience is often considered a virtue when elderly 
adapt to new technology, including in our own previous 
work [13][14]. In this study however, we observed that 
actions, metaphors and language confusing the ended up 
remaining confusing after six months as well; providing 
more time might heal all wounds, but it does not guarantee 
disentanglement of perplexities and disorientations. 
Another argument for ensuring purposeful actions is to 
maintain good mapping. Natural mapping is understood as 
designing the interface in such a manner that the user can 
readily determine the relationship between the action and 
the outcome into the world [16]; i.e., a design where the 
user is able to associate cause with effect, thereby 
understanding expected output for provided input. As an 
example, the autonomy and intangibility of the automated 
light sensor evaluated during the usability assessment (task 
#9 in Table II) imposed several challenges to mapping. The 
physical zone in the room where movements were 
recognized was not clear, and there were no indications in 
the interface towards the intensity of the light or the 
duration of the light. One participant claimed that the best 
mapping for her was a traditional light switch where up 
meant on and down meant off in the middle in the room 
where the left switch controlled the lamp to the left and the 
right switch controlled the lamp to the right. Similarly, 
replacing traditional door keys with RFID cards to unlock 
doors had similar effects on the natural mapping; the users 
were unable to properly answer how long the door remained 
unlocked once the RFID card was scanned or determine the 
minimum required distance between the RFID card and the 
scanner on the door. 
C. Adapting to evolving perceptions of simplicity 
Trier & Richter [2] argues that the application of 
simplicity as a design guideline requires flexibility. Between 
the two phases we observed two participants undergo 
changes in their overall health level. There were significant 
differences in their cognitive and reasoning abilities. For 
example, one of these participants could no longer explain 
the numbers on the display used to adjust heating levels 
(Figure 3). She had a custom color marker that indicate up 
and down for temperature as the up- and down-facing 
arrows no longer served as metaphors for increasing and 
decreasing the room temperature. While the arrows and 
display offered sufficient explanation during the first 
evaluation, she could no longer explain the details of the 
system during the second evaluation, e.g., the meaning of 
“1.4oC” on the display (as illustrated in Figure 3). Instead, 
she found that blue and red colors helped her remembering 
that if she pressed those buttons long enough it would 
eventually get colder or warmer. This exemplifies how 
typical aging symptoms, e.g., reduced cognitive capacities, 
clearly influenced both their performance and their 
assessment of simplicity. Related work [8] discuss how only 
paying attention to physical and perceptual characteristics of 
elderly end up struggling with coping with the cognitive 
behavioral characteristics and traits of becoming elderly. 
Consequently, we consider achieving simplicity among 
elderly especially difficult as the elderly undergo rapid 
cognitive, physical and social changes in their lives that 
alter their attitude and opportunities towards technology. As 
metaphors lose their abilities to aide us with understanding 
and interacting with the system, our perception of the 
simplicity of the system deteriorate over time. Simplicity is 
not a constant factor that remains the same throughout of 
life, but rather one of the dynamic and flexible factors that 
evolves along as we evolve; acquiring new knowledge, 
entering new contexts and adapting new technologies 
contribute to reshaping our view on simplicity and what we 
perceive as simple. Similarly, s changes in our lives can 
contribute to complicating systems we once considered 
simple; it often becomes a matter not only of preference, but 
also a matter of limited opportunities. Over a period of six 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

months the perspectives of all the elderly participants 
changed in both the simplicity evaluation and the usability 
assessment. A design offering simplicity should therefore 
adapt according to the changing behavior and abilities of the 
elderly. 
Cooper et al. [17] also discusses the phenomenon where 
visual simplicity leads to cognitive complexity due to an 
unbalanced reduction. Several participants struggled with 
adapting to new technology due to cognitive load and 
preferred to rely on old knowledge and metaphors instead; 
they 
preferred 
familiar 
technologies, 
even 
those 
comparatively inefficient and impractical, because they 
could rely on habits. Examples of such desires included 
installing old landline telephones rather than telephoning 
from the tablet even though the latter was free, and using 
old televisions with large physical buttons instead of new 
flat screen television even though it involved getting out of 
the couch every time to change channel. A frequent counter-
argument is that this behavior is a result of their attitude 
towards technology in general rather than a matter of 
cognitive overload, however their attitude during the rest of 
discussions clearly suggested that they were positive 
towards technology but struggled with adapting to certain 
aspects of the system, in this particular case it was the 
misleading colors (#5), the two separate phone number 
(#15) and the confusing language (#35) that caused the 
perceived complexity (Table IV). If those aspects of the 
systems are metaphors intended to bridge the gap between 
the system and prior experiences, achieving mastery can 
become difficult, sometimes also impossible. As a result, we 
argue that design striving for simplicity should be open to 
seemingly inefficient and impractical features if they evoke 
positive stimuli for the users, e.g., allowing them to take 
advantage of old habits rather than adapting new ones.  
D. Avoiding forcing ways of reasoning 
By oversimplifying technology, we limit the users' 
freedom and make decisions on their behalf by forcing them 
into predefined patterns of behavior that do not necessarily 
comply with their needs. The participants in our study 
disliked the predefined settings and missed working with a 
system that could adapt or be customized to fit their 
cognitive and bodily capabilities. Similar to studies of 
Eytam & Tractinsky [11], several participants desired the 
ability to design their own complexities. Our principal 
example was the tablet which did not offer any 
customization options or the option to install custom 
application with services that the system did not currently 
offer. Once one participant discovered a way to override the 
system and install own application, in this case a video chat 
application, several others asked for instruction on how to 
do so as well. This case exemplified how the intention of 
simplifying the system by removing seemingly undesired 
features became a restriction of the users’ desires. By 
directing, limiting or forcing decisions on the elderly, the 
outcome might end up being stigmatizing rather than 
inspiring [18]. For the elderly who feel they are losing 
control and influence over their own life, this stigma 
through oversimplification may further assume a role as a 
reinforcing factor counteracting dignity and integrity by 
depriving them of their opportunity and right to autonomy 
[13]. This may again influence the ability to learn how to 
operate such systems as more general suggestions on 
simplicity in learning advocates the use of environments 
where users feel good and able. From their own results, 
Keay-Bright & Howarth [12] conclude that environmental 
factors that stimulate and encourage without prejudgment is 
a vital requirement for learning. Besides decelerating or 
even preventing the process of mastering, inhibiting 
learning has also proven to result in negative experiences for 
the elderly. The feeling of helplessness that comes with 
aging makes the elderly more aware of their own 
dependability, and previous findings from our studies 
showed several participants felt deprived of their 
independence due to oversimplified and restrictive systems 
limited their opportunity to function at their best level [13].  
E. Balancing the simplicity 
The phenomenon of systems involving simplification 
measurements that end up having the opposite effect is often 
referred to as fake simplicity. Colborne [5] describes fake 
simplicity as the idea unable to ever meet its initial promise, 
instead just making everything unnecessarily complex and 
less effective. One example was the microwave of one of 
the participants that instead of using time or watt as input, 
used pictures of a pizza slice and a cup of tea to signal the 
duration and strength. Another example mentioned by a 
participant was his washing machine with only predefined 
programs where neither duration nor temperature was 
specified. Oversimplification can prevent mastery by 
concealing important components of the interaction thereby 
preventing the user from learning the relationship between 
action and effect. It also demonstrates how mastery requires 
balance. On one hand, the system needs to foster mastery 
through a design that is perceived as free of complexities; 
on the other hand, the system should encourage mastery by 
challenging and exciting the user and simultaneously 
avoiding oversimplified and condescending interfaces. 
Finding this balance where users are both presented with 
challenging tasks and at the same time provided with 
enough help to solve them helps us preventing that the 
system tips over in either direction. 
During the task-based group evaluation, the participants 
were asked to identify simplicity issues as either too simple 
or too complex systems. As a result, they were asked to 
clarify whether it was a case of lack of simplicity or 
abundance of simplicity, i.e., a complex issue that could 
benefit from simplification or an issue that was simplified to 
such an extent that it had become oversimplified and 
demeaning. Surprisingly, 13 out of 17 issues were classified 
by the participants as matters of oversimplification, i.e., that 
the simplification of the interface or interaction resulted in 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

either poor usability or led undesired user experiences. The 
most important finding from these results was that 
simplicity is not a principle where “one size fits all”. One 
argument presented by an elderly lady for not liking the 
phone function of the tablet was that with tablets and mobile 
phones, the action of answering a call required an additional 
step. With a traditional land line phone, picking up the 
phone initiated the call, while on newer device she would 
first have to press an answer button and then pick up the 
phone, thereby complicating it for her by introducing 
additional step. Secondly, the internal disagreement between 
the groups further suggests that the elderly might have a 
different outlook on simplicity relatively compared to the 
two other groups, thereby demonstrating a variation not 
only between individuals but also between groups of 
individuals. What remains a matter of simplicity for the 
elderly seems to deviate from what the employees and 
experts consider simplicity issues further suggesting that 
simplicity in use is different from analytic simplicity or 
imagined 
simplicity. 
Achieving 
simplicity 
without 
simultaneously weakening the functionality is one of the 
great struggles of designers, and it is vital to find this point 
of intersection where constructive simplification suddenly 
begins to defeat its own end. Simplicity is not only a matter 
of aesthetics; it is also a matter of balanced functionality.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
This study was motivated by the old lady covering up her 
automated light with tinfoil because the intended simplicity 
ended up complicating her life. In this paper, we have 
demonstrated additional examples of simple technology 
aggravating the lives of elderly, thereby illustrating how we 
believe simplicity in context-detached design to be different 
from experienced simplicity; analytic and imagined 
simplicity does not ensure simplicity in use. We argue that 
simplicity is anchored in mastery and context and that 
simplicity should (1) build on familiarity and the ability to 
utilize old knowledge to help mastering the system; (2) 
ensure purposeful actions where the user can understand and 
learn to master the system; (3) adapt along with the evolving 
contextual factors; (4) avoid limiting the users to predefined 
patterns of behavior and allow them to use and master the 
system as they find appropriate; and (5) find the balance 
where the design is simple enough to be understood and 
learned, yet challenging enough to allow users to progress 
towards mastery. Only by doing so, we can achieve mastery 
in the intended context of use, which is what we believe 
simplicity to be. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Finken and C. Mörtberg, “Performing Elderliness – 
Intra-actions with Digital Domestic Care Technologies”, in 
ICT and Society, K. Kimppa, et al., Editors. 2014, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg. p. 307-319. 
[2] 
M. Trier and A. Richter, " I Can Simply…"-Theorizing 
Simplicity As A Design Principle And Usage Factor, in 
ECIS 2013. 2013. p. 2-3. 
[3] 
J. Lee, D. Lee, J. Moon, and M.-C. Park, “Factors affecting 
the perceived usability of the mobile web portal services: 
comparing simplicity with consistency”. Information 
Technology and Management, 2013. 14(1): p. 43-57. 
[4] 
J. Maeda, “The laws of simplicity”. 2006: MIT press. 
[5] 
G. Colborne, “Simple and usable web, mobile, and 
interaction design”. 2010: New Riders. 
[6] 
H. Obendorf, “Minimalism: Designing Simplicity”. 2009: 
Springer. 
[7] 
R. Picking, V. Grout, J. Mcginn, J. Crisp, and H. Grout, 
“Simplicity, consistency, universality, flexibility and 
familiarity: the SCUFF principles for developing user 
interfaces for ambient computer systems”. International 
Journal of Ambient Computing and Intelligence (IJACI), 
2010. 2(3): p. 40-49. 
[8] 
H. Akatsu, H. Miki, and N. Hosono, “Design principles 
based 
on 
cognitive 
aging”, 
in 
Human-Computer 
Interaction. Interaction Design and Usability. 2007, 
Springer. p. 3-10. 
[9] 
F. H. A. Razak, N. A. Razak, W. A. Wan Adnan, and N. A. 
Ahmad. “How simple is simple: our experience with older 
adult users”. in Proceedings of the 11th Asia Pacific 
Conference on Computer Human Interaction. 2013. ACM. 
p. 379-387. 
[10] 
S. Sulaiman and I. S. Sohaimi. “An investigation to obtain 
a simple mobile phone interface for older adults”. in 
Intelligent 
and 
Advanced 
Systems 
(ICIAS), 
2010 
International Conference On. 2010. IEEE. p. 1-4. 
[11] 
E. Eytam and N. Tractinsky. “The Paradox Of Simplicity: 
Effects Of User Interface Design On Perceptions And 
Prefence Of Interactive Systems”. in MCIS 2010. 2010. p. 
30. 
[12] 
W. Keay-Bright and I. Howarth, “Is simplicity the key to 
engagement for children on the autism spectrum?”. 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 2012. 16(2): p. 129-
141. 
[13] 
S. G. Joshi, Emerging ethical considerations from the 
perspectives of the elderly, in Ninth International 
Conference on Cultural Attitudes in computer-Human 
Interactions, M. Strano, H. Hrachovec, and S. Fragos, 
Editors. 2014. p. 1-15. 
[14] 
S. G. Joshi and A. Woll, “A Collaborative Change 
Experiment: Telecare as a Means for Delivery of Home 
Care Services”, in Design, User Experience, and Usability. 
User Experience Design for Everyday Life Applications 
and Services. 2014, Springer. p. 141-151. 
[15] 
M. Nilsson, S. Johansson, and M. Håkansson. “Nostalgia: 
an evocative tangible interface for elderly users”. in 
CHI'03 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. 2003. ACM. p. 964-965. 
[16] 
D. A. Norman, “The design of everyday things”. 2002: 
Basic books. 
[17] 
A. Cooper, R. Reimann, and D. Cronin, “About face 3: the 
essentials of interaction design”. 2007: John Wiley & Sons. 
[18] 
L. Rosenberg, A. Kottorp, and L. Nygård, “Readiness for 
Technology Use With People With Dementia The 
Perspectives of Significant Others”. Journal of Applied 
Gerontology, 2012. 31(4): p. 510-530. 
 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

