Using the Pepper Robot in Cognitive Stimulation Therapy for People with Mild
Cognitive Impairment and Mild Dementia
Berardina De Carolis,
Valeria Caroﬁglio,
Ilaria Grimaldi,
Nicola Macchiarulo
Department of Computer Science
University of Bari
Bari, Italy
email: name.surname@uniba.it
Giuseppe Palestra
Hero srl
Martina Franca, Italy
email: giuseppepalestra@gmail.com
Olimpia Pino
Department of Medicine and Surgery
University of Parma
Parma, Italy
email: olimpia.pino@unipr.it
Abstract—Social Assistive Robotics (SAR) has successfully
been used in healthcare interventions from the functional and
socio-emotional points of view. In particular, they have been
used in therapeutic interventions for elderly people affected by
cognitive impairments. This paper reports of our research aiming
at investigating the role of the social robot Pepper in aiding
therapists during cognitive stimulation sessions for elders with
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and Mild Dementia (MD). To
this purpose, an experimental study was performed with a group
of 8 participants in a 3-weeks cognitive stimulation program. To
assess and monitor the results, each session was video recorded
for further analyses. The collected videos were analyzed by three
human raters, in order to evaluate them in terms of participation
and engagement operationalized as eye gazes, number of correct
answers and displayed emotions. Results show that Pepper has
been positively accepted by the seniors, who were very attentive
and involved in session tasks, during which the participants have
rarely experienced negative emotions. Moreover, some correla-
tions between the gathered data also emerged that emphasize
the effectiveness of the proposed approach. In particular, seniors
with lower impairment experienced less happiness; however, they
were very engaged during the training with the robot.
Keywords—Social Assistive Robots; Cognitive impairment; Cog-
nitive Stimulation; Elderly people.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid growth of the older population worldwide,
dementia and cognitive impairments are increasingly impor-
tant issues in elderly care. Alzheimer’s Disease International
estimates that 24.4 million people worldwide suffer from
dementia and that the number of patients will increase to 82
million by 2040. People suffering from dementia and cognitive
impairments present problems with memory, thinking and
behavior, and symptoms usually develop slowly and get worse
over time [1] with devastating effects on the psychological
well-being of the individuals.
MCI is an intermediate stage between the cognitive decline
associated with typical aging and more severe serious forms
of dementia. Individuals with MCI frequently show memory
loss or forgetfulness and may have issues with other cognitive
functions, such as language, attention or visuospatial abilities.
MCI treatments aim to reduce existing clinical symptoms or
to delay the progression of cognitive dysfunction and prevent
dementia. The potential evolution of this disease makes it
unavoidable to provide such people with increasing assistance
over time. Therefore, it is especially relevant to offer them
timely and engaging cognitive training to slow the progres-
sion of their decline, while signiﬁcantly cutting down the
associated socio-economic costs. The increasing attention for
cognitive rehabilitation and neuropsychological interventions,
in this case, is justiﬁed by the poor outcomes obtained with
pharmacological treatments. Non-pharmacological treatments
to these problems focus on physical, emotional and mental
activation.
There is growing evidence that cognitive interventions may
be associated with small cognitive beneﬁts for patients with
MCI and dementia. Based on recent trials, computer train-
ing program has particular positive effect on cognition and
mood [2]. In particular, cognitive stimulation and rehabilitation
therapy focus on protocols in which different types of tasks
are used for recovering and/or maintaining cognitive abilities,
such as memory, orientation and communication skills [3].
Also, motor activities are important to help individuals with
dementia to rehabilitate damaged functions or maintain their
current motor skills for preserving autonomy over time. Ac-
cording to some studies carried out on older subjects with
MCI, several positive effects of physical exercise on cognition,
executive function, attention and delayed recall are showed.
This cognitive and physical training require a trained therapist
that besides supporting the patient through their execution has
to give feedback during the therapeutic session and keep track
of the user’s performance in order to monitor the progress over
time [4]. In particular, humanoid robots seem promising since
they can support more engaging interactions with users, and
there have already been some work exploring the use of robots
for aiding cognitive treatments [5].
Currently, there is a focus on humanoid robots and tablets
to investigate how seniors with MCI relate with and perceive
serious games accessed through humanoid robots, as part of
a training program aimed to improve their cognitive abili-
ties.Interestingly, few investigations exist currently that explore
the impact of robots as tools to provide cognitive training for
the elderly. Recently, Socially Assistive Robotics (SAR) is be-
452
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ing effectively used in dementia care and several commercially
available robots have been employed with satisfactory results
in cognitive stimulation and memory training [6]–[8].
Following these ﬁndings, in collaboration with a local asso-
ciation (”Alzheimer Bari” ONLUS), we set up an experimental
study aiming at evaluating the effectiveness and acceptance
of SAR technology in providing therapeutic interventions
to people suffering from cognitive changes related to aging
and dementia. In this paper, we focus on the results of this
pilot study in which we used Pepper, a semi-humanoid robot
developed by SoftBank Robotics, as support to psychothera-
pists in cognitive stimulation sessions. The experiment and its
protocol have been co-designed with therapists, following the
paradigm of cooperative and participatory design, in dedicated
sessions in order to make how Pepper administered the tasks
as similar as possible to the method adopted by the human
therapists in their training sessions [9]. After this preliminary
phase, the intervention protocol was deﬁned and the robot
was programmed to execute the planned exercises used during
the training sessions. In total, we planned to run 4 sessions
with Pepper as a tool to convey the planned therapeutic
intervention. Unluckily, due to the COVID-19 emergency, we
had to suspend the experiment one session earlier. Each session
was video recorded, with the consent of participants and their
legal representative, to be subsequently analyzed by three
expert raters to evaluate them in terms of participation and
engagement through eye gazes [10], the number of correct
answers and expressed emotions. From the analysis of the
obtained results, we can conclude that Pepper is a fairly good
technology for cognitive stimulation because it expands the
accessibility of control synthesis for social robots for people
of all programming skill levels across many domains. In
general, all the seniors participated actively in the experiment
experiencing more positive than negative emotions during
the intervention, and the correlation analysis showed that
individuals with lower MCI expressed less happiness even if
the eye gaze estimation showed that they were more engaged
by the robot. These results encourage us to to continue the
current work, also carrying out the comparison with a control
group in which the same stimulation protocol will be executed
without the use of social robots.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, motivations
and background of the research are reported. Section III
describes the study and reports its results. Finally, in Section
IV, conclusions and possible future works are discussed.
II. MOTIVATIONS AND BACKGROUND
Cognitive Stimulation Therapy (CST) is a short-term,
evidence-based, group, or individual intervention program for
people with mild to moderate dementia or Alzheimer’s disease.
The goal of CST is to stimulate people with dementia through
a series of themed activities designed to help them continue
to learn and stay socially engaged. SAR describes a class
of robots that is the intersection of assistive robotics (robots
that aid a user) and socially interactive robotics (robots that
communicate with a user through social and nonphysical
interaction) [11].
One goal of an effective SAR system is to establish a
relationship with the user that leads toward intended ther-
apeutic goals. SAR has successfully been used in Human-
Robot Interaction research (HRI) by including social robots
in healthcare interventions by virtue of their ability to engage
human users in both social and emotional dimensions [12].
The integration of robotics into both formal and informal
MCI care opens up new possibilities for improving the lives of
patients and alleviating the burden on caregivers and healthcare
services. Early studies have shown that SAR has the advantage
of improving mood, social relationships among patients and
emotional expression of individual dementia sufferers [13].
Several investigations on the effects of robot therapy, using
commercially available animal type robots has been investi-
gated in [14] [15]. Other research aims instead at the creation
of assistive humanoid robot therapists, using NAO robots [6].
Researchers [8] also investigate how patients with dementia
relate to humanoid robots and perceive serious games accessed
through it, as part of a training program aimed to improve their
cognitive status. Here, it has been observed that elders became
more engaged with Pepper along with sessions and there was
a positive view towards the interaction with it.
In [3], NAO has been used to reproduce physical exercises
to a group of seniors. NAO was also employed in individual
and group therapy sessions [6] [16] to assist the therapist with
speech, music, and movement. Indeed it has been argued that
Pepper is easy to use by the patients with dementia, relatives,
and caregivers, it brings patients with dementia in a more
positive emotional state and in music sessions stimulating
patients to recall memories and talking about their past [17].
In the CST intervention reported here, we used Pepper as a
social robot.
III. THE EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
This section describes the study performed to investigate
how seniors with MCI relate to and perceive the CST program
performed with the aid of the social robot Pepper. The CST
program during which the experiments were conducted lasted
3 weeks, with weekly meetings of about 35 minutes. Eight
subjects were selected for the experimental study among the
members of the Alzheimer Bari” ONLUS Association accord-
ing to their MMSE score (Mini-Mental State Examination)
and their willingness to take part in the study.
A. Material
1) The Robot Platform: The robot platform used in the
current study is Pepper, a semi-humanoid robot developed by
SoftBank Robotics (Figure 1). It is an omnidirectional wheeled
humanoid robot 1.21 m tall, with 17 joints and 20 degrees
of freedom. The interactivity is the key feature of Pepper. It
has multimodal interfaces for interaction: touchscreen, speech,
tactile head, bumper, and 20 degrees of freedom for motion in
the whole body. The robot is equipped with several LEDs
that can be programmed to change colors and intensity to
453
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 1. (a) An example of physical exercises. (b) Memory training (c) Positive feedback.
signal and support communication. It is equipped with four
directional microphones in its head that allow it to detect
the origin of entries and thus to turn its face to whoever is
talking. These microphones can eventually be used to analyze
the voice tone and therefore interpret the emotional state of
the interlocutor. Pepper can operate in complex environments
thanks to its 3D video camera and the two HD cameras that
allow it to identify movements and recognize the emotions
on the faces of its interlocutors. The robot is equipped with
20 motors that allow it to move its head, back and arms. In
addition, it has several sensors to provide information on the
distance of objects placed up to 3 meters, in addition to its
three cameras (two RGB and one 3D inserted in its head).
Pepper has also tactile sensors on the head and hands, which
are used for social interaction. The LEDs located in the eyes
can take one of any RGB color: this feature is particularly
useful when it is necessary to simulate emotions by changing
the color of the eyes. Pepper has also a tablet to display videos,
images and allowing the user to interact with it.
2) Neuro-psychological Evaluation: For the evaluation of
the neuro-psychological state, the Mini Mental State Exami-
nation (MMSE) [18] was administered 1 week before starting
the experimental phase to all the members of the association
willing to participate in the study. The MMSE score was used
to select seniors in order to have a group as homogeneous as
possible.
3) The Tasks: The tasks to be performed during the CST
program with Pepper were selected by the staff of specialized
therapists of the center essentially from the volumes of “A gym
for the mind” [19] and were adapted to Pepper communicative
capabilities.
Three sets of cognitive stimulation tasks were created, all
designed to be carried out in a group format. Each weekly
session was planned to last between 30 and 40 minutes,
according to the therapists’ estimation of the duration of the
patients’ attention during the exercises. In Table I the exercises
for each session are reported.
The opening and closing of each session with recreational
activities were designed to make the therapy sessions less
TABLE I
DESCRIPTION OF THE EXERCISES FOR EACH SESSION.
Session 1
Session 2
Session 3
Motor imitation
Word completion
Verbal
associative
memory
Motor imitation
Memory of prose
Verbal
associative
memory
Motor imitation
Visual-verbal associa-
tive memory
Memory of prose
Verbal
associative
memory
stressful for patients. The motor imitation task was chosen
to open each session since it was evaluated as pleasant by
all seniors in the group. In Figure 1a, Pepper is showing
some movements to be imitated by seniors. For visual-verbal
associative and word completion tasks, two levels of difﬁculty
have been designed speciﬁcally to the type of exercise they
have been associated with. During each session the levels of
the activities to be carried out were performed one after the
other, increasing the difﬁculty level. The tasks were based on
vocal, visual, and touch-based interaction (through the tablet
placed on Pepper’s torso) in order to avoid some errors due
to natural language understanding, such as: a) false positives:
when the patient gives a wrong answer, but Pepper takes it as
right, giving positive feedback and passing directly to the next
question; b) false negatives: when the patient answers exactly,
but the robot interprets it as wrong. For these reasons, the
correctness of the answers to Pepper’s questions was handled
directly by the therapists by touching a different sensor on
Pepper’s head (for the correct answers it was decided to use
the sensor closest to Pepper’s face and for the wrong ones the
last sensor behind the head and the central sensor was used to
repeat the questions). In general, if the participant’s answer
was correct, Pepper reinforced it with positive feedback,
showing a thumbs up on the tablet and body movements
manifesting how happy it was with that response (Figure 1a).
In the case of a wrong answer, Pepper encouraged the patient
to try again without using negative words (e.g., bad, wrong).
Further support was given by the LEDs positioned in Pep-
per’s eyes and used to provide either positive (green eyes) or
454
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

negative feedback (red eyes) basing on the answers provided.
If the subject answered correctly, after complimenting the
patients, the robot moves on to the next step of the task and,
after a short pause, it moves on to the next question. After three
wrong answers to the same question, before moving on to the
next question, the robot communicates the correct answer.
Figure 1b shows an example of a Visual-Verbal Associative
Memory Task in which Pepper shows on the tablet the image
of a famous person and asks for his/her name. The interaction
between the robot and the patients is vocal.
B. Context and Environment Settings
The study was carried out with the collaboration of the
”Alzheimer Bari” ONLUS Association in Bari, Italy. It was
founded in 2002 and offers memory training and cognitive
stimulation courses to subjects who have been diagnosed with
mild or mild-moderate cognitive impairment (MCI), bringing
together family members, doctors, psychologists, socio-health
workers, and other ﬁgures all involved in various aspects of
the management of Alzheimer’s Disease patients and their
family members. They also offer physiotherapy cycles, music
laboratory, artistic and laboratory activities. Furthermore, as-
sistance is provided to the patients’ family members, who are
also distinctly followed by neuro-psychologists and educators
during the sessions dedicated to loved ones. Patients often
follow multiple courses per week, in order to perform an
intervention program as complete as possible, based on the
stage of their illness.
The choice of the experiment room was important. We
selected, according to the suggestion of the therapists, the
room in which usually patients carried out musical sessions.
In general, the seniors participated with joy in these exercises
and then this environment for them represented a place where
they had positive experiences. In addition, the chosen room
is large enough to contain the two therapists, the patients and
the robot, guaranteeing to the latter enough space to perform
the movements, which, in the presence of obstacles, would
not have been allowed by its safety sensors. The patients were
seated in front of therapists and Pepper, and behind a wall,
there was the technician in order to solve technical problems
arising during the exercises with the robot.
Pepper was positioned about one meter away from each
patient, respecting its range in which it manages to be engaged
and perceive the people around it. Besides the Pepper’s internal
video camera located inside its mouth (which allowed to better
capture the faces of the patients), another video camera was
positioned in the room in order to have a front view of patients’
faces and to be able to analyze the entire group behavior.
Figure 2 shows the setting of the environment.
C. Participants and Procedure
The study involved 8 elderly people (see Table II for a
description) enrolled among the population of members of
the “Alzheimer Bari” ONLUS, considering as a condition
of patient inclusion an MMSE score between 13 and 26.2,
since patients with these scores can make progress with CST.
Fig. 2. The environment setting.
The group included participants with MCI, MD and two
with subjective cognitive impairment. Among the users of the
Association, the subjects eligible for the experimental study
were contacted to ask them to participate. A week before
the experiment, the therapists carried out neuropsychological
assessments on future participants in the experiments. Before
running the CST with Pepper, participants and their relatives
received detailed information about the study and subsequently
signed a consent to be video recorded during the experiments.
The consent was also signed by their legal representatives.
TABLE II
PARTICIPANTS’ MMSE
ID
Gender
Age
MMSE
1
F
89
23.4
2
F
77
26.2
3
M
82
24.1
4
M
89
21.1
5
M
82
13.0
6
F
79
13.2
7
F
69
20
8
F
72
17
In the same week, Pepper was presented to the Association
for the ﬁrst time to favor familiarization for the successive
sessions. In the ﬁrst ﬁve minutes of each session, the therapists
put the elderly at ease, then Pepper was introduced already
active, to avoid negative emotions and connected to the un-
animated look of the robot. Once placed in the center of the
room, Pepper greeted the elderly and conversed with them for
a few minutes (directed by the technician who was sat on
his hidden desk and exploited the Wizard of Oz technique).
Subsequently, the set of exercises planned for that day was
implemented. In the absence of answers, it encouraged patients
to answer, asking the question again and helping them if
necessary. Therapists intervened only to touch the sensor
corrected on its head to direct the feedback provided by Pepper
to each answer and to move on to the next question. At
the end of each experimental session, the robot greeted the
participants and was led out of the room to leave the patients
with the therapists for a few minutes. The cognitive stimulation
program lasted for 3 weeks, one day per week, performing a
battery of tasks of about 30 minutes per day.
455
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Fig. 3. (a) Valence of experienced emotions in each session. (b) Experienced emotions for each exercise.
D. Measurements
We collected the video-recording of the 3 sessions. Record-
ings were segmented in order to have one video for each
exercise. In order to measure the number of correct answers,
eye contact and emotions experienced by each participant
during each session, three expert observers (two women and
one man, of average age 37.67 y.o.) were selected. They had
an almost perfect agreement index (0.83), calculated through
the Fleiss’ kappa [20].
To count the number of correct answers, they had the set
of correct answers for each exercise. Subsequently, the total
time each senior looked at Pepper during each exercise of
the session was calculated. To annotate basic emotions (angry,
disgust, fear, happy, sad, surprise, and neutral) expressed by
the seniors the annotators were ﬁrst trained on the Facial
Action Coding System (FACS) [21].
E. Results
From the analyses of correct answers, we can say that the
patients participated actively in the experiment. Overall, it has
been noted that patients, in general, experienced problems with
the prose memory exercise since the percentage of correct
answers has been 0.2% in contrast to the average of the
other exercises (55%), this type of task is inherently difﬁcult
and, in our opinion, the voice of the Pepper robot did not
facilitate the story comprehension. Since this exercise was
present only in the second session, we can ascribe to this the
lower engagement in this day of the CST. As far as emotions
are concerned, the level of negative emotions experienced
by the seniors during the entire experiment is acceptable
(0.59% for Session 1, 2.02% for Session 2 and 1.08% for
Session 3). Considering the videos, it has been noticed that
these emotions emerged when subjects disagreed with the
statements made by the other participants and not towards
Pepper. Besides the ”neutral” state (on average 79.44% per
day), seniors experienced more positive emotions (on average
19.33%) than negative ones. Figure 3a shows the valences of
the emotions recognized in each session of the CTS. Ana-
lyzing the emotional experience for each task (see Figure 3b),
during the visual-verbal associative memory one the maximum
”happy” rate was achieved (30.75% ), followed by the motor
imitation task (25.32%). The observers also recorded the eye
gaze of each participant’s towards Pepper, by considering this a
measure of engagement [22]. Figure 4a and Figure 4b show the
engagement of seniors for each session and for each exercise,
respectively. The session in which participants resulted most
engaged in the interaction is the third one. In particular, during
that session, they showed more engagement in the motor
imitation task, in which they paid attention to Pepper for
76.53% of the exercise duration. The tasks on visual-verbal
associative memory were also particularly successful (74% on
average).
The Pearson coefﬁcient was calculated to observe linear
correlations between the results of the behavioral observations
and the neuro-psychological evaluations’ scores. In particular,
seniors with a lower MCI tended to experience mostly neutral
emotions (r=0.70) and were less happy (r=-0.80); this could
be attributed to the need for separate sessions for them with
tasks more stimulating. Positive correlations emerged between
the eye gaze engagement estimation and the MMSE scores
(r=0.42).
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented the results of an experimental
study carried out in the context of rehabilitation interventions
for reducing cognitive decline in the elderly people with MCI
and mild dementia based on the use of the Social Robot
Pepper. The reported study aimed at investigating how this
technology can be used to support therapists in training pro-
grams for improving subjects’ cognitive status. The evaluation
and feedback from participants showed also that the system
was appreciated and that the seniors involved in the study
approached Pepper as a human and perceived it as a stimulus
to go to the centre for the rehabilitation program. For example,
participants talked to the robot as an entity having its own
personality. Results obtained so far are encouraging but we
must recognize some limitations. First of all we could not
make a comparison with a control group as planned, due to
the COVID-19 emergency. A second limitation concerns the
sample size in that the research was implemented with only
one group of people, which is not homogeneous for cognitive
disease. Therefore, future work should involve a larger sample
considering also a greater number of trials extended over more
sessions. This will allow to make comparisons between people
with different level of cognitive impairment and gender also
456
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Fig. 4. (a) Percentage of Engagement in each session. (b) Percentage of Engagement in each exercise type.
exploring the effect of cognitive training on non cognitive
functions, as mood and distress.
A further aspect that we plan to develop in the future,
is the automatic analysis of engagement and emotions with
the purpose of adapting the robots behaviour to the users
for increasing their engagement in the rehabilitation program.
It is desirable that robots applied to real world applications
perform their activities in reactive but ﬂexible manner. Thus,
a robot architecture capable to adapt to human interaction is
very suitable. Although the current paper concerns speciﬁc
tasks, other abilities can be included. Besides, the investigation
is a very common application of SAR, projected mainly for
rehabilitation purposes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the ”Alzheimer Bari” ONLUS, the ther-
apists C. Lograno and C. Chiapparino for their support, and
all the seniors who participated in the study.
REFERENCES
[1] W. M. van der Flier and P. Scheltens, “Epidemiology and risk factors of
dementia,” Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, vol. 76,
no. suppl 5, pp. v2–v7, 2005.
[2] C. Cooper et al., “Systematic review of the effectiveness of non-
pharmacological interventions to improve quality of life of people with
dementia,” in Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE):
Quality-assessed Reviews [Internet].
Centre for Reviews and Dissem-
ination (UK), 2012.
[3] O. Pino, “Memory impairments and rehabilitation: evidence-based ef-
fects of approaches and training programs,” The Open Rehabilitation
Journal, vol. 8, no. 1, 2015.
[4] N. Rouaix et al., “Affective and engagement issues in the conception
and assessment of a robot-assisted psychomotor therapy for persons with
dementia,” Frontiers in psychology, vol. 8, p. 950, 2017.
[5] M. Law et al., “Developing assistive robots for people with mild
cognitive impairment and mild dementia: a qualitative study with older
adults and experts in aged care,” BMJ open, vol. 9, no. 9, p. e031937,
2019.
[6] M. Valent´ı-Soler et al., “Social robots in advanced dementia,” Frontiers
in Aging Neuroscience, vol. 7, 05 2015.
[7] O. Pino, G. Palestra, R. Trevino, and B. De Carolis, “The humanoid
robot nao as trainer in a memory program for elderly people with mild
cognitive impairment,” International Journal of Social Robotics, vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 21–33, 2020.
[8] M. Manca et al., “The impact of serious games with humanoid robots
on mild cognitive impairment older adults,” International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, p. 102509, 2020.
[9] E. A. Bj¨orling and E. Rose, “Participatory research principles in human-
centered design: engaging teens in the co-design of a social robot,”
Multimodal Technologies and Interaction, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 8, 2019.
[10] K. Kompatsiari, F. Ciardo, D. De Tommaso, and A. Wykowska, “Mea-
suring engagement elicited by eye contact in human-robot interaction,”
in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), 2019, pp. 6979–6985.
[11] M. J. Matari´c and B. Scassellati, “Socially assistive robotics,” in Springer
handbook of robotics.
Springer, 2016, pp. 1973–1994.
[12] G. Kim et al., “Structural brain changes after traditional and robot-
assisted multi-domain cognitive training in community-dwelling healthy
elderly,” PloS one, vol. 10, no. 4, p. e0123251, 2015.
[13] A. A. Vogan, F. Alnajjar, M. Gochoo, and S. Khalid, “Robots, ai, and
cognitive training in an era of mass age-related cognitive decline: a
systematic review,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 18 284–18 304, 2020.
[14] T. Tamura et al., “Is an entertainment robot useful in the care of elderly
people with severe dementia?” The Journals of Gerontology Series A:
Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. M83–M85,
2004.
[15] T. Shibata and K. Wada, “Robot therapy: a new approach for mental
healthcare of the elderly–a mini-review,” Gerontology, vol. 57, no. 4,
pp. 378–386, 2011.
[16] F. Mart´ın, C. E. Ag¨uero, J. M. Ca˜nas, M. Valenti, and P. Mart´ınez-
Mart´ın, “Robotherapy with dementia patients,” International Journal of
Advanced Robotic Systems, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 10, 2013.
[17] R. De Kok et al., “Combining social robotics and music as a non-medical
treatment for people with dementia,” in IEEE Int. Symposium on Robot
and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN), 2018, pp. 465–467.
[18] M. F. Folstein, S. Folstein, and P. R. McHugh, “Mini-mental state:a
practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the
clinician,” Journal of psychiatric research, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 189–198,
1975.
[19] D. Gollin, A. Ferrari, and A. Peruzzi, Una palestra per la mente.
Stimolazione cognitiva per l’invecchiamento cerebrale e le demenze (A
gym for the mind. Cognitive stimulation for brain aging and dementia).
Edizioni Erickson, 2007, 2011.
[20] J. Fleiss, “Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters,”
Psychological bulletin, vol. 76, no. 5, p. 378—382, November 1971.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1037/h0031619
[21] E. Friesen and P. Ekman, “Facial action coding system: a technique for
the measurement of facial movement,” Palo Alto, vol. 3, 1978.
[22] Y. I. Nakano and R. Ishii, “Estimating user’s engagement from eye-
gaze behaviors in human-agent conversations,” in Proceedings of the
15th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, ser. IUI
’10.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2010, p. 139–148.
457
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

