Analysis of Volumetric Tactile Symbols Produced with 3D Printing  
 
Jaume Gual 
Dept. of Industrial Systems 
Engineering and Design 
Universitat Jaume I, UJI 
Castellón, Spain 
jgual@esid.uji.es  
Marina Puyuelo 
Dept. of Graphic Expression 
in Architecture  
Universitat Politècnica de 
Valencia 
Valencia, Spain 
mapuca@ega.upv.es 
Joaquim LLoveras 
Dept. of Engineering Design 
Universitat Politècnica de 
Catalunya 
Barcelona, Spain 
j.lloveras@upc.edu  
 
Abstract— The morphological elements of design used for 
designing tactile maps and symbols for visually impaired users 
are points, linear, and areal elements. One of the main 
characteristics of these elements is their two-dimensional and 
graphic nature. However, since three-dimensional design came 
to be a fourth group of elements, volumetric elements, has 
come into use. The key questions of this study are: Is it possible 
to extend the range of a discriminatable set of symbols by using 
volumetric elements with height contrast extended in the Z 
axis? Can some formal variations of these volumetric symbols 
be distinguished using the sense of touch? The results of this 
study show that some tactile symbols with simple volumetric 
forms are easily recognizable using the sense of touch. In the 
absence of further studies, this could suggest an affirmative 
answer to the first research question posed. 
Keywords-tactile symbols; tactile maps; inclusive design; 
visual impairment 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This study presents the first results of a doctoral thesis 
carried out on tactile maps and symbols for the guidance of 
the visually impaired. The work reported here has been 
included in a research project from the Universitat 
Politècnica de València (project DPI2008-03981/DPI), 
Spain).  
Tactile maps, as tangible graphic resources, are a group 
of devices showing graphic information using relief. Tactile 
symbols are contextualized within this type of device and are 
normally used with their corresponding keys. These products 
help blind people understand the features of the environment 
around them through the sense of touch.  
The use of these devices is almost always combined with 
audio descriptions to facilitate a correct understanding of the 
tactile exploration. This means that these resources are not 
used independently. Thus, the challenge is focused on 
designing more user-friendly and efficient tactile maps. To 
achieve this goal it is vital to improve two aspects of the 
information on these devices, on one hand, user-friendliness 
[1], and on the other, the interaction with sound outputs. This 
study focuses on improving the former. 
All graphic information can be expressed using different 
elements in relief. Thus, tangible graphics can represent all 
kinds of graphs, maps, plans, etc, which are difficult to 
express through text. As will be shown, there are three 
elements used to compose the tangible graphics: points, 
lines, and areas. However, a fourth category of design 
elements, volumetric elements, are barely used in the design 
and production of this type of devices, due partly to the 
conditions 
of 
traditional 
production 
systems: 
microencapsulation and thermoforming [2]. The novelty of 
this work is the study of some possible applications of 
volumetric elements, basic prisms, specifically in their 
application as tactile symbols, to improve the usability of 
tactile maps. The manufacturing technique used in this case 
to make these symbols is 3D printing which can produce 
more complex geometries than traditional methods [3]. 
In contrast, one of the fields of knowledge which has 
focused most on the issue of tactile devices is that of 
Cartography and Geography. The integration of other areas, 
such as Psychology and Education Science, has also paid 
serious attention to this issue. 
From the perspective of product design, it is possible to 
observe how these products have barely been addressed in 
depth, despite the fact that the philosophy of Inclusive 
Design [4] seems an ideal framework to study these objects.  
This paper has the following structure: 
• 
Section I. Introduction; 
• 
Section II. Tactile Perception, Typology and 
Particularities of Relief Maps; 
• 
Section III. Study Description; 
• 
Section IV. Results, and 
• 
Section V. Conclusions and Further Work. 
II. 
TACTILE PERCEPTION, TYPOLOGY AND 
PARTICULARITIES OF RELIEF MAPS 
On the other hand, tactile perception is a relatively new 
field of study. David Katz was a pioneer and in 1925 
published a classic monograph on the subject, Der Aufbau 
der Tastwelt (The world of touch), which laid the foundation 
for later studies [5]. These early studies give us a better 
understanding of the attributes and characteristics of the 
sense of touch and enable us to design more efficient 
tangible graphics. 
There are different types of tactile maps used for 
communicating and teaching geography, and also orientation 
skills, to facilitate movement through certain environments. 
According to Edman [6], these products can be classified as:  
• 
Mobility Maps; 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

• 
Topological Maps; 
• 
Orientation Maps; 
• 
General Reference Maps, and 
• 
Thematic Maps.  
It should be noted that the usefulness of these types of 
devices in facilitating mobility, spatial orientation, and the 
autonomy of visually impaired people has been clearly 
demonstrated in previous studies [7][8][9]. 
However, reading a tactile map also depends on the 
skills, strategies of exploration, experience, and training of 
the people using it [10]. These factors allow blind users to 
recognize the information offered in a tactile product more 
accurately and effectively, even in real contexts [11]. 
Another important aspect in blind users is haptic memory, 
since a blind person explores tactile graphics in a sequential 
way. In contrast, the phenomenon of visual perception is 
simultaneous and less time is required to assimilate the same 
amount of information [12]. This means that the design of 
tactile devices should be simple, with less information than 
in the visual version. 
Finally, the contexts for the use of tactile maps can be 
varied, depending on map format and user preferences. 
These can be previously used at home or at a specific 
location with the support of a Mobility Instructor. There are 
even some formats that are portable and can be used in situ. 
Some studies show that blind users prefer to use them at 
home, in their own time [13]. 
A. Inclusive Design and Usability 
Generally, in order to make this type of product easy to 
use, and taking into account that tactile perception is not as 
sharp as visual perception, any tactile-graphic device must 
contain synthesized information in order to ensure it is easily 
legible using the sense of touch. If the tactile device includes 
corresponding visual information, such as colour contrasts or 
large type, adapted to the specific requirements of other 
groups, the number of users that may benefit from it may 
grow to include, for example, the elderly or partially sighted, 
in keeping with the philosophy of Inclusive Design [4]. 
There are general requirements that must be mentioned 
now in order to acknowledge the specific nature of the 
design process for these products for the sense of touch. 
However, there are no set criteria and the general 
requirements greatly depend on the specific experience of 
each designer. 
The maximum size of any tangible graphic must be 
designed taking into account the space needed using both 
hands together. A comfortable hand position would include 
an area approximately the size of an A3 sheet, although maps 
may be bigger or smaller based on the different formats and 
types of information to be represented. On the other hand, 
the scale is conditioned by the constant dimensions of Braille 
code and the purpose and type of information to be 
represented. The minimum distance between the elements 
represented, such as the symbols of a map, must be carefully 
designed. A minimum separation of 3 mm is needed between 
elements so they can be recognized using the sense of touch. 
In any case, these data only represent a small part of all the 
requirements studied for the design of a correct tactile map. 
Extended and more detailed information can be found in 
reference publications [6] [14] [15]. 
However, most of the design guidelines published for 
relief maps are focused on the traditional methods of 
production, rather than on the techniques used in this study: 
3D printing from Rapid Prototyping (RP). 
B. Manufacturing systems of tactile maps. Rapid 
Prototyping 
There is extensive literature on the manufacture of tactile 
maps in the field of geography. The usual methods of 
production are thermoforming of plastic sheets (Fig. 1) and 
microencapsulation (Fig. 2) [2] [16]. 
It is important to mention the possibilities opened up by 
RP for blind people, producing pieces from virtual Computer 
Aided Design (CAD) models. According to some studies, 
three-dimensional configurations can improve visually 
impaired people’s understanding of these products [17]. 
In any case, these techniques enable the production of 
single pieces or small series in a relatively short time 
compared to traditional systems of production. Hence their 
name of ‘rapid’. At the same time, they can be used in the 
early stages of production as master models, that is to say, as 
preliminary prototypes for long series. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Thermoform copy. 
 
Figure 2.  Microencapsulated copy. 
But, the main novelty of techniques, such as 3D printing, 
for the production of tactile maps is the possibility of 
introducing complex geometries and polychromed pieces. In 
contrast, the usual techniques employed in the production of 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

tactile maps, thermoforming and microencapsulation, are 
somewhat limited in this respect. One of the main 
disadvantages is their poor surface quality, which makes the 
model rough to the touch, although this can be corrected with 
subsequent surface treatments, although so far this implies 
high costs when producing long series. There have been 
several previous experiences in the field of haptic devices, 
especially for the field of tactile scale models [18] [19] [20], 
but also with tactile maps [21]. 
C.  Morphological elements for designing tactile maps 
According to the literature, there are three morphological 
elements for designing tactile maps, tactual symbols, or any 
tangible graphic for the visually impaired [6] [22] [23]: 
• 
Points 
• 
Lines 
• 
Areas 
But, if we concentrate on the fundamentals of design, it is 
apparent that these three types of elements are also called 
visual or conceptual design elements [24] [25]. Specifically, 
they are employed in the world of graphic design. The 
common denominator of these elements is their two-
dimensional nature, that is to say, the fact that they are 
expressed in visual formats within the two dimensions of a 
flat framework. 
However, it is also known that when product designers 
work in a three-dimensional space, i.e., when objects are 
represented in relief or in three dimensions, light and volume 
play a special role. Light models dark bodies and allows a 
clear perception of volumes in space. Thus, volume is 
commonly known as the fourth element of conceptual design 
and can be perceived using the sense of touch. 
D. Symbology in relief maps 
The symbology of tactile maps has been widely studied 
in the above mentioned disciplines, particularly Cartography 
[26]. Recognition, legibility, and discrimination of symbols 
are the factors that various studies have taken into account to 
verify the usability of these sorts of products and their 
efficient use in maps [15] [27] [28].   
Standardization of tactile symbols is an issue demanded 
by those involved but at the same time, it is proving 
controversial, given the difficulty in reaching efficient 
agreements. On the one hand, there have been efforts as 
proposed in the International Conference on Mobility Maps 
in Nottingham in 1972 [29] and, on the other, some countries 
such as Australia [30], Brazil [31], and Japan [32] among 
others, have adopted or are in the process of adopting 
specific standards. 
Beyond the difficulties in the standardization of tactile 
symbols, in this case, some design considerations in its use 
should be noted. In his manual, Edman talks about point, 
linear, and superficial symbols. Each of these types is used to 
present specific information. In mobility plans, point 
symbols represent specific locations, lines can express 
direction and guidance, and superficial symbols cover certain 
areas. All these symbols are informative and can be 
categorized as ‘flat symbols’, which are in fact those used 
most regularly at present. 
In summary, and from the point of view of design and 
usability, the difficulty of identifying symbols in a map 
increases with the amount included. Therefore, the use of 
symbols in a map is always the minimum possible: if more 
than 6 symbols are included a blind person could have 
trouble memorizing them. The space between symbols 
should be no less than 3 mm to ensure proper differentiation 
in relief. It is best not to use similar symbols together as they 
may be confused, for example, two circles of similar sizes, 
one outlined, and the other filled in. The minimum size for a 
symbol to be recognized is around 5 mm. These are just 
some of the considerations cited by Edman [6]. 
However, the representation of symbols on conventional 
tactile maps follows the guidelines of using the three design 
elements mentioned above, which are part of an essentially 
two-dimensional nature and are exposed to the sense of 
touch by the slight elevation. 
However, other areas of knowledge such as ergonomics 
[33], also focused on the study of displays adapted to human 
use, show that it is possible to use volumetric elements in 
tasks where one of the requirements is a high degree of 
tactile discrimination. This is the case with the controls of an 
airplane which should be distinct and discriminatable to 
touch in order for pilots to avoid fatal errors. These controls 
use keypads which the discipline of ergonomics studies from 
the standpoint of efficiency of use [34]. 
III. 
STUDY DESCRIPTION  
A. Objective and contextualization 
The research team planned a series of tests to select a 
range of easily identifiable and legible volumetric symbols 
using the sense of touch. 
Thus, the main objective of these tests was the selection 
of a series of three-dimensional symbols easily identifiable 
using the sense of touch. As a starting point, basic solid 
figures were chosen by the authors, taking into account that 
the literature barely deals with these shapes used as tactile 
symbols. This also followed some earlier studies carried out 
by the authors suggesting the possibility of this line of 
research [35] [36]. This is the main innovation in this study. 
This selection of symbols will be used in further works in 
order to determine if this type of symbol can be useful in the 
configuration of tactile maps.  
In contrast, this work focuses only on the study of shape 
and size factors and does not examine texture and surface 
quality, resistance, production, cost, or other possible factors 
that could be of interest in future studies or research. 
B. Methodology   
The 
methodology 
used 
for 
data 
collection 
is 
fundamentally based on the use of tasks with users and 
prototypes (mock-ups) [37]. In addition, qualitative research 
techniques and direct observation [38] are used. 
C. Material used in the study 
The material used in this study has been produced using 
3D printing. In order to improve the surface quality of this 
system, a thin transparent acrylic layer was applied to the 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

surface of the tactile symbols. However, it must be 
emphasized that the study does not attempt to tackle the 
differences in surface texture, but the differences in shape 
and size. 
Fifteen categories of tactile symbols have been designed 
and analysed, with eleven of these categories belonging to 
volumetric elements while the rest are flat elements. 
Elementary forms like spheres, cubes, rectangular prisms, 
cylinders, pyramids, inverted pyramids, cones, inverted 
cones, and rings (hollow cylinders) have been used in the 
design of the category of volumetric symbols. As regards the 
category of flat symbols, the ‘U’, ‘L’, ‘V’ and ‘O’ shapes, 
some of these are shown in Fig. 3. The proportion of some 
simple shapes (cylinder, pyramid, rectangular prism, etc.) 
used in this study were chosen using direct ratios (1, 1/2, or 
1/4, or their respective multiples), as for example, in the case 
of the rectangular prism, 1 × 2 × 1. 
In addition, a select group of symbols has been generated 
using some formal variations, adding complexity to the 
initial form: angled cut, angled concave cut… in order to 
assess the users’ ability to identify added features using the 
sense of touch (Figs. 4 and 7). 
In 
addition, 
to 
determine 
the 
minimum 
sizes 
recognizable, each category of symbols has also been 
represented in a reduction scale of three different dimensions 
at the base (0.25; 0.5, and 0.75 cm) (Fig. 5). Following 
Edman’s recommendations a standard size of 5 mm was 
considered [6] (Figs. 5 and 6). 
All symbols were coded according to their geometry, 
size, and additional features, and presented on a white 20x20 
mm square base. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Sample of symbols used in the study. 
 
Figure 4.  Sample of formal variations to add complexity to some 
symbols. The picture shows simple shapes on the left (sphere and 
rectangular prism), incline cut operations in the centre and concave cut 
transformations on the right.  
 
Figure 5.  Sample of reduction scale of pyramid and cube. 
 
Figure 6.  Sample of symbol dimensions on square base (millimeters).  
D. Test content 
 Tests consisted of verbal descriptions of the symbols 
while participants touched the 80 symbols one by one. This 
assumed that if a symbol is verbally describable, then it will 
be perceptible and recognizable under other conditions using 
the sense of touch. The correct answer rates for the 80 
symbols were measured. 
E. Sample and user profile 
A sample of 23 participants, 22 blindfolded and one blind 
user, performed the test. The age range of participants (12 
male and 11 female) was from 25 to 55 years old. 
F. Test procedure  
The research team showed participants the symbols one 
by one, asking them to provide verbal descriptions. The 
symbols were shown in no particular order until all 80 had 
been completed. Each symbol was shown on its base. 
Participants were seated in a comfortable and relaxed 
position. Users could rotate and manipulate them freely, but 
not pick them up off the surface of the table. 
The description had to be as precise and short as possible. 
The research team ensured, when beginning the test, that 
users knew the nomenclature of the geometric shapes in 
order to refine the description and avoid misunderstandings. 
In addition, the research team provided participants with a 
brief introduction to the kind of forms and shapes that they 
were likely to find, also warning them that some symbols 
had additional features which participants were to describe if 
they perceived them. 
Participants could use analogies to describe the perceived 
forms. There was no time limitation, although participants 
were invited to get the task over with quickly. The research 
team only intervened with encouraging comments, without 
providing clues. All the descriptions of symbols which did 
not adjust to the features were considered errors. Moreover, 
if participants did not perceive and describe the formal 
variations of some symbols with additional features, the 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

research team also considered this an error. The average time 
spent on the test was around 50 minutes per participant. 
G. Record 
The test was recorded in summary reports and Excel 
spreadsheets. Summary reports included some interesting 
comments for the study. Some details were collected using 
direct observation, including gestures and individual 
exploration strategies. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
After carrying out the process with all 23 users, the 
highest percentage of correct answers occurred in single 
symbols, i.e., those not including special features (more 
complex and with additional information). Symbols with 
angled and concave cutting operations generally produced a 
greater number of errors, while the angled cutting operation 
had a greater average of correct answers than the angled 
concave cutting (Fig. 7). In three cases with symbols with 
formal variations, the cylinder, the ‘U’, and the ‘L’, these 
reached equal or better results than their corresponding 
simple versions (Table 1). The concave cut tended to be 
confused with the angled cut, especially in small-scale 
symbols. As the graphs for symbols measuring 0.75 cm per 
side (Fig. 8) and 0.5 cm (Fig. 9) show, it is possible to 
appreciate a pattern in which the symbols with no formal 
variation have a greater amount of hits. 
Moreover, in the second graph of 0.5 cm, compared with 
the first graph, it is possible to appreciate a slight decrease in 
hits due to the loss of tactile acuity resulting from the 
reduced 
scale 
of 
the 
symbols. 
The 
figures 
show 
discontinuities as formal variants were applied only in some 
cases, as explained above, in order to reduce the number of 
symbols in the tests or prolonging these excessively. 
Thus, as regards the size of the tactile symbols, the 
general pattern was that a larger size of symbol produced 
fewer errors of perception (Fig. 10). Some of the symbols 
tested – the rectangular prism, the cube and the ‘V’ – 
obtained better results in the small versions than in the larger 
ones, although the differences were minimal. 
The best described volumetric symbols were the 
pyramid, the ring (100% of correct answers in all sizes), and 
the thin cylinder, although the cube and the rectangular prism 
also produced a high index of correct answers. Generally, all 
of the symbols mentioned were described quickly and 
spontaneously. Cylinders tended to be confused with cones 
due to their similar rounded shape, but the reverse was not 
the case. Pyramids were distinguished from cylinders and 
cones thanks to the tactile reading strategy of detecting the 
edges of the pyramid. Symbols ending in a point were 
spontaneously distinguished when fingertips touched a 
pointed form. Spheres had a relatively high error rate, and 
were often described as a cylinder with a rounded head, 
errors increasing with the reduction in size. Cubes produced 
some perceptual illusions as when describing them some 
participants thought they had unequal sides. Inverted shapes, 
as is the case of inverted cones or pyramids, produced 
relatively greater numbers of errors than their corresponding 
forms in their usual positions, although the larger sizes (0.5 
and 0.75 cm side) did produce a higher index of hits: 91.30 
%. Using the fingertips to access the lower part of these 
forms with smaller bases, was a key factor in recognizing 
them. 
As regards the flat symbols, all had an optimum success 
rate. The least number of errors occurred with the circles 
(‘O’) and the ‘V’ shapes. There was a tendency for ‘U’ to be 
confused with ‘V’, as one of the lines could not be perceived, 
or alternatively, in the case of small-scale symbols, with two 
parallel lines. ‘L’s with equal sides caused perceptual 
illusions, as some users perceived one side higher than the 
other. 
Finally, through direct observation, some significant 
hand gestures have been detected while participants were 
exploring using the sense of touch. An example of this is the 
strategy of pinching with several fingers to feel the height in 
order to distinguish the symbol. This occurred when users 
explored volumetric symbols such as the thin cylinder, 
pyramid, or cone. This strategy allows greater precision 
when distinguishing some tactile forms [33]. On the other 
hand, some forms were even detected spontaneously through 
feeling the point with their fingertips, as is the case, for 
example, of pyramids and cones with pointed tops.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Sample of shape variations of tactile symbols. On the left, 
simple cylinder or inverted cone shapes; in the centre, shapes with an 
angled cut; on the right, shapes with an angled concave cut. The last ones 
obtained the worst rates. 
TABLE I.  
DIFFERENCES OF AVERAGE BETWEEN SIMPLE AND 
COMPLEX SHAPES FOR SET OF 0.5 CM SYMBOLS  
Correct answer rates (%) 
Sample of Tactile 
Symbols 
Simple shape 
Inclined cut 
Concave cut 
Sphere 
91.30 
56.52 
* 
Rectangular prism 
91.30 
82.61 
68.18 
Cylinder 
91.30 
91.30 
* 
Inverted cone 
91.00 
* 
65.22 
L 
73.91 
82.61 
17.39 
U 
82.61 
82.61 
26.09 
V 
95.65 
56.52 
52.17 
Total 
88.20 
75.36 
50.49 
* Not all the variations were tested for all the sizes in order to reduce the duration of the user test to 
50 minutes. 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 8.  Percentage of correct answers for symbols with formal 
variations: simple, angled cut, and concave. It shows how simple symbols 
produced better results. 
 
Figure 9.  Percentage of correct answers for symbols on different scales. 
The graph shows a decrease of correct answers compared to figure 8. 
 
Figure 10.  Percentage of correct answers comparing tactile symbols of 
different sizes. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
A first conclusion is drawn from the results obtained: 
given the amount of errors in identifying tactile symbols with 
formal variations, simple volumetric symbols are more easily 
perceptible to the sense of touch than complex symbols, thus 
answering the second research question proposed at the start. 
This could indicate that, in this case of tactile perception, it 
seems to fulfil the visual gestalt principle of simplicity.  
Furthermore, as expected, larger symbols were more 
easily identifiable than small symbols. There were no 
significant variations between the symbols measuring 0.5 cm 
and 0.75 cm square. Although three of the symbols – the 
rectangular prism, the cube and the ‘V’ – seem to have an 
optimum size of less than 0.75 cm, it would be interesting to 
study this phenomenon in depth in later studies, as certain 
larger shapes may produce unexpected results outside the 
general pattern. 
 However, in the 0.25 cm square symbols, the number of 
errors increased significantly. This leads us to the conclusion 
that a size of 0.5 cm square or larger may be appropriate for 
the design and implementation of three-dimensional symbols 
in future tactile maps. After analysing the data collected, the 
best volumetric symbols have been: pyramid, thin cylinder, 
cube, and rectangular prisms. These presented 100% correct 
answers in at least one of three sizes. 
Regarding two-dimensional symbols, the circle ‘O’ and 
the ‘V’ achieved optimal hit rates. The flat symbols could be 
placed on a second level of volumetric accuracy after those 
mentioned above, but with no significant differences. 
Some of the gestures observed during the tests with 
users, for example, the way in which fingers are used to 
pinch and explore some volumetric symbols, could be an 
interesting subject of study. 
The fact that some forms have been detected, even 
spontaneously, thanks to certain formal attributes could open 
future paths of experimentation in terms of strategies for the 
exploration of tactile maps. One such example is the effect of 
pinching fingertips when examining volumetric forms such 
as pyramids, cylinders, or thin cones. This fact suggests that 
these sorts of symbols could be used as point symbols. Also, 
the process for scanning relief maps with volumetric features 
requires specific strategies that have no place in flat formats. 
In addition, certain perceptual illusions detected during 
the experiment suggest that some curious phenomena, 
known in detail in the field of visual perception, also play a 
part in the sense of touch. In future work it would be 
interesting to study the differences in the proportion of the 
different solid shapes, for example, the ratios for correctly 
distinguishing a rectangular prism from a cube. 
Regarding the first research question posed, the results of 
this study suggest that it would be possible to extend the 
range of discriminatable symbols to include the category of 
volumetric symbols within the current set of symbols, 
specifically some basic prisms, which are apparently easily 
identifiable. Although we must add that it is still early to 
assert this claim rigorously, and it is necessary to test these 
symbols in future volumetric tests, for example, in context in 
real tactile maps with different symbols close to each other, 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and not just isolated like those in this study. The optimal 
distance for correctly distinguishing the set of symbols when 
these are employed together should also be taken into 
account. 
Thus, the authors assume that these two categories of 
symbols, ‘flat symbols’ and ‘solid shapes’, are difficult to 
confuse with each other, and would therefore be easy for the 
users to memorize when used together. Therefore, it would 
be possible to use more than 6 symbols per key or, at least, to 
use 6 symbols per key with formal differences that would 
allow us to avoid discrimination mistakes when using a 
tactile map. Further studies should deal with the maximum 
amount of tactile symbols that can be used in a map key to 
be memorized by users, including those discussed here and 
those proposed by the authors. 
Thus, following the completion of this first trial, further 
works are pending to clarify the initial. Some of these works 
have already started in pilot mode using an improved sample 
of visually impaired persons, showing some initial positive 
results (Fig. 11). 
 
 
Figure 11.  Pilot study of 3D symbols on relief maps. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The work reported here has been a part of the research 
project ‘Estudio y diseño de elementos de orientación, 
soportes de comunicación y otros accesorios para la mejora 
de la accesibilidad en distintos ámbitos de interpretación del 
patrimonio natural y/o construidos’ supported by the 
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (project 
DPI2008-03981/DPI). The authors wish to thank the Centre 
de Recursos Educatius (ONCE) and the Associació 
Discapacitat Visual Cataluña B1+B2+B3, Barcelona, for 
supporting this research. Finally, this work has been 
supported by the Programa de Mobilitat del Personal 
Investigador de la Universitat Jaume I (E-2010-32) and the 
Fundació Caixa Castelló-Bancaixa.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
AENOR, "UNE-EN ISO 13407, Procesos de Diseño para Sistemas 
Interactivos Centrados en el Operador Humano", 2000. 
[2] 
 J. Rowell and S. Ungar, "The World of Touch: an International 
Survey of Tactile Maps. Part 1: production", British Journal of Visual 
Impairment, vol. 21, 2003, pp. 98-104. 
[3] 
C. K. Chua, K. F. Leong, and C. S. Lim, Rapid Prototyping: 
Principles and Applications, New Jersey: World Scientific, 2003. 
[4] 
J. L. Clarkson, R. Coleman, S. Keates, and, C. Lebbon, Inclusive 
Design: Design for the Whole Population, Berlín, Germany: Springer- 
Verlag, 2003. 
[5] 
D. Katz, "Der Aufbau der Tastwelt (The World of Touch). Translated 
by L. Krueger (1989)", Der Aufbau der Tastwelt (The World of 
Touch). Translated by L. Krueger (1989), 1925. 
[6] 
P. Edman, Tactile Graphics, New York American Foundation for the 
Blind, 1992. 
[7] 
J. Lillo-Jover, "Gráficos Tangibles y Orientación en el Invidente", 
Psicothema, vol. 4, 1992, pp. 429-444. 
[8] 
M. Blades, S. Ungar, and C. Spencer, "Map Use by Adults with 
Visual Impairments", The Professional Geographer, vol. 51, 2010, pp. 
539-553. 
[9] 
C. Spencer and J. Travis, "Learning a New Area with and without the 
Use of Tactile Maps: a Comparative Study", British Journal of Visual 
Impairment, vol. 3, 1985, pp. 5-7. 
[10] J. Lillo-Jover, "Tacto inteligente: El papel de las Estrategias de 
Exploración Manual en el Reconocimiento de Objetos Reales", 
Anales de Psicología, vol. 8, 1992, pp. 91-102. 
[11] C. Perkins and A. Gardiner, "Real World Map Reading Strategies", 
The Cartographic Journal, vol. 40, 2003, pp. 265-268. 
[12] S. Ballesteros, "Percepción Háptica de Objetos y Patrones Realzados: 
una Revisión", Psicothema, vol. 5, 1993, pp. 311-321. 
[13] J. Rowell and S. Ungar, "Feeling Our Way: Tactile Map User 
Requirements- 
A 
Survey." 
Proc. 
International 
Cartographic 
Conference, La Coruña. 2005. 
[14] J. Rowell and S. Ungar, "The World of Touch: an International 
Survey of Tactile Maps. Part 2: Design", British Journal of Visual 
Impairment, vol. 21, 2003, pp. 105-110. 
[15] E. P. Berlá, "Haptic Perception of Tangible Graphic Displays", 
Tactual Perception: a Sourcebook, 1982, pp. 364-386. 
[16] D. McCallum, K. Ahmed, S. Jehoel, S. Dinar, and D. Sheldon, "The 
Design and Manufacture of Tactile Maps Using an Inkjet Process", 
Journal of Engineering Design, vol. 16, 2005, pp. 525-544. 
[17] L. Thompson and E. Chronicle, "Beyond Visual Conventions: 
Rethinking the Design of Tactile Diagrams", British Journal of Visual 
Impairment, vol. 24, 2006, pp. 76-82. 
[18] A. Voigt and B. Martens. "Development of 3D Tactile Models for the 
Partially Sighted to Facilitate Spatial Orientation." Proc. 24th 
eCAADe Conference (Education and Research in Computer Aided 
Architectural Design in Europe), Bruselas, 2006. 
[19] L. F. Milan and M. G. C. Celani, "Maquetes Táteis: Infográficos 
Tridimensionais para Orientação Espacial de Deficientes Visuais", 
2008. 
[20] G. C. Celani and L. F. M. Milan, "Tactile Scale Models: Three-
Dimensional Info Graphics for Space Orientation of the Blind and 
Visually Impaired", Virtual and Rapid Manufacturing: Advanced 
Research in Virtual and Rapid Prototyping, London, UK: Taylor & 
Francis Group, 2007, pp. 801-805. 
[21] V- Vovzenílek, M. Kozáková, Z. vSt'ávová, L. Ludíková, V. 
Ruuvzivcková, and D. Finková. "3D Printing Technology in Tactile 
Maps Compiling." Proc. 24th International Cartographic Conference. 
2009. 
[22] M. P. Corre-Silva, "Imagen Táctil: una Representación el Mundo", 
Universitat de Barcelona, 2004 (Thesis). 
[23] R. L. Welsh and B. B. Blasch, Foundations of orientation and 
mobility, American Foundation for the Blind, 1980. 
[24] Wong, Wucius, Fundamentos Del Diseño Bi y Tri Dimensional. 
Barcelona: G. Gili, 1986. 
[25] D. A. Lauer and S. Pentak, Design Basics, Wadsworth Pub. Co., 
2007. 
[26] R. Rener, "Tactile Cartography: Another View of Tactile 
Cartographic Symbols", The Cartographic Journal, vol. 30, 1993, pp. 
195-198. 
[27] L. L. Lambert and S. L. Lederman, "An Evaluation of the Legibility 
and Meaningfulness of Potential Map Symbols", Journal of Visual 
Impairment & Blindness, vol. 83(8), 1989, pp. 397-403. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[28] D. McCallum, S. Ungar, and S. Jehoel, "An Evaluation of Tactile 
Directional Symbols", British Journal of Visual Impairment, vol. 24, 
2006, p. 83. 
[29] G. A. James, "Mobility Maps", Tactual Perception: A Source-Book, 
1982, pp. 334-363. 
[30] A. D .O. N. Mapping, Symbols for Tactual and Low Vision Town 
Maps, [Canberra]: The Division, 1986. 
[31] R.E. Nogueira and B. Florianópolis-Santa Catarina, "Standarization 
of Tactile Maps in Brazil". 
[32] H. Fujimoto, "Standardization of Display Methods for Tactile Guide 
Maps for Buildings, Stations and Other Public Facilities." Proc. 
Tactile Graphics 2005, 2005 
[33] S. Pheasant and C. M. Haslegrave, Bodyspace: Anthropometry, 
Ergonomics, and the Design of Work, Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis, 
2006. 
[34] M. S. Sanders, Human Factors in Engineering and Design, New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1993. 
[35] J. Gual, M. Puyuelo,, J. Lloveras, “Universal Design and Visual 
Impairment: Tactile Products for the Heritage Access”. In 18th 
International Conference on Engineering Design (ICED 2011), vol. 5, 
2011, pp 155-164. 
[36] J. Gual, M. Puyuelo,, J. Lloveras, “Three-dimensional Tactile 
Symbols. Relief Maps for the Visually Impaired”. Proc. 4th World 
Conference on Design research, Doctoral Coloquium, 2011. 
[37] H. Aldersey-Williams, J. Bound, and R Coleman. The Methods Lab: 
User Research for Design. UK: Design for Ageing Network (DAN), 
1999. 
[38] B. Laurel, Design Research: Methods and Perspectives, Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2003. 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

