Communicative Capabilities of Agents for the Collaboration in a Human-Agent Team
Mukesh Barange, Alexandre Kabil, Camille De Keukelaere, Pierre Chevaillier
ENIB (UEB), Lab-STICC
Brest, France
{barange, kabil, dekeukelaere, chevaillier}@enib.fr
Abstract—The coordination is an essential ingredient for the
human-agent teamwork. It requires team members to share
knowledge to establish common grounding and mutual awareness
among them. In this paper, we propose a behavioral architecture
C2BDI that allows to enhance the knowledge sharing using
natural language communication between team members. We
deﬁne collaborative conversation protocols that provide proactive
behavior to agents for the coordination between team members.
We have applied this architecture to a real scenario in a col-
laborative virtual environment for training. Our solution enables
users to coordinate with other team members.
Keywords-Human interaction with autonomous agents, Cooper-
ation, Dialogue Management, Decision-Making
I.
INTRODUCTION
In collaborative virtual environments (VE) for training,
human users, namely learners, work together with autonomous
agents to perform a collective activity. The educational objec-
tive is not only to learn the task, but also to acquire social
skills in order to be efﬁcient in the coordination of the activity
with other team members [1]. Effective coordination improves
productivity, and reduces individual and team errors. The
ability to coordinate one’s activity with others relies on two
complementary processes: common grounding [2] and mutual
awareness [3]. Common grounding leads team members to
share a common point about their collective goals, plans and
resources they can use to achieve them [2]. Mutual awareness
means that team members act to get information about others’
activities by direct perception, information seeking or through
dialogues, and to provide information about theirs [3].
The collaboration in a human-agent teamwork poses many
important challenges. First, there exists no global resource that
human team members and virtual agents can rely on to share
their knowledge, whereas, in a team of autonomous agents,
the coordination can be achieved through the means of a
mediator, or blackboard mechanism. Second, the structure of
the coordination between human-agent team members is open
by nature: virtual agents need to adopt the variability of human
behavior, as users may not necessarily strictly follow the rules
of coordination. In contrast, in agent-agent interactions, agents
follow the rigid structure of coordination protocols (e.g., con-
tract net protocol). Thus, the ability to coordinate with human
team members requires to reason about their shared actions,
and situations where team members need the coordination to
progress towards the team goal. Moreover, another important
characteristic of the human-human teamwork is that the team
members pro-actively provide information needed by other
team members based on the anticipation of other’s needs of
information [4]. Thus, in a human-agent team, agents should
allow human team members to adjust their autonomy and help
them to progress in their task.
The paper focuses on the task-oriented, collaborative con-
versational behavior of virtual agents in a mixed human-
agent team. Other aspects of embodied virtual agents, such as
emotions, facial expressions, non-verbal communication, etc.
are out of the scope of this study. As the team members must
have the shared understanding of skills, goals and intentions
of other team members, we proposed a belief-desire-intention
based (BDI-like) agent architecture named as Collaborative-
Conversational BDI agent architecture (C2BDI). On the one
hand, this architecture provides the deliberative behavior for
the realisation of collective activity and, on the other hand, it
provides conversational behavior for the dialogue planning to
exhibit human like natural language communication behavior
for coordination. The contributions of this paper include: (1)
the deﬁnition of collaborative communication protocols to
establish mutual awareness and common grounding among
team members; and (2) a decision-making mechanism where
dialogues and beliefs about other agents are used to guide
the action selection mechanism for agents to collaborate with
their team members. The approach consists in formalizing the
conversational behavior of the agent related to the coordination
of the activity, which reduces the necessity to explicitly deﬁne
communicative actions in the action plan of the agent. It also
makes the human-agent interaction more adaptive.
In section II, we present related work on human-agent
teamwork. Section III presents different components of our
architecture. The conversational behavior is detailed in section
IV. The next section illustrates how the solution fulﬁls the
requirements of real educational scenarios. Finally, section VI
summaries our positioning.
II.
RELATED WORK
Both AI and dialogue literature agree upon the fact that
to coordinate their activities, agents must have the joint-
intention towards the group to achieve collective goal [5] and
must agree upon the common plan of action [6]. The joint-
intention theory speciﬁes that agents have common intentions
towards the group goal [5]. This theory does not guarantee
that agents follow the same action plan. Comparing to this
theory, the shared-plan theory [6] speciﬁes that even agents
share a common action plan to achieve the group goal, it does
not guarantee that agents have the commitment towards the
389
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

group to achieve that goal. Both of these theories are mainly
applied for the coordination among a group of artiﬁcial agents.
The C2BDI architecture takes the advantage of both of these
theories to establish common grounding and mutual awareness
among mixed human-agent team members.
A number of human-agent team models have been pro-
posed in the literature [7], [8]. Collagen agent [7] is built upon
the human discourse theory and can collaborate with a user to
solve domain problems, such as planning a travel itinerary and
user can communicate with agents by selecting the graphical
menus. In [8], collaboration in teams is governed by teamwork
notiﬁcation policies, that is, when an important event occurs,
the agent may notify the user with respect to appropriate
modality and the user’s position. To achieve collaboration
between team members, [9] proposed a four stage model that
includes (i) recognition of the potential for cooperation, (ii)
team formation (iii) plan formation, and (iv) plan execution.
Based on this model, [10] proposed an agent model and
deﬁnes how collective intentions from the team formation stage
are built up from persuasion and information-seeking speech
act based dialogues, using motivational attributes goal and
intention. Moreover, [11] proposed an agent based dialogue
system by providing dialogue acts for collaborative problem
solving between a user and a system. Recently, [12] have
proposed a theoretical framework for proactive information
exchange in agent teamwork to establish shared mental model
using shared-plan [6].
One of the prominent approaches for dialogue modelling
is the information state (IS) approach [13]. The IS deﬁned in
[14] contains contextual information of dialogue that includes
dialogue, semantic, cognitive, perceptual, and social context.
This model includes major aspects to control natural language
dialogues. However, it does not include contextual information
about the shared task. This leads to an incoherence between
dialogue context and shared task in progress. In [15], an IS
based interaction model for Max agent has been proposed that
considers coordination as an implicit characteristic of team
members. Comparing with [15], C2BDI agents exhibit both
reactive and proactive conversational behaviors, and explicitly
handle cooperative situations through communication between
team members. Moreover, [14] proposed a taxonomy of dia-
logue acts (DIT++) based on the dialogue interpretation theory.
The semantics of these dialogue acts are based on the IS
based approach. This taxonomy was built mainly to annotate
natural language dialogues. We are motivated to use it to
understand and interpret conversation between human-agent
team due to its following characteristics: (i) it is mainly used
for dialogue interpretation in human-human conversation; (ii) it
supports task oriented conversation; and (iii) it has become the
ISO 24617-2 international standard for dialogue interpretation
using dialogue acts.
III.
C2BDI AGENT ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we describe components of C2BDI agent
architecture that provide deliberative and conversational be-
haviors for collaboration (see Fig. 1). We consider that C2BDI
agents are situated in an informed VE where agents can
perceive entities and can access speciﬁc properties, such as the
state, position, attribute values etc. of entities within their ﬁeld
Decision 
Making 
Dialogue 
Management 
Belief 
Revision 
Behavior 
Realiser 
Perception 
Information State 
(Context model) 
Semantic 
Knowledge 
Perception 
Memory 
Knowledge Base 
Dialogue 
Semantic 
Cognitive 
Perceptual 
Audio 
/text 
Audio 
/text 
Control Flow 
Data Flow 
Virtual  
World 
Social 
Avatar 
Task 
Figure 1: Components of Agent architecture and data ﬂow
of perception. The agent architecture is based on the theory of
shared-plan [6] and joint-intention [5].
The agent perceives the VE through the perception module.
The current perceived state of the VE is an instantiation
of concepts the agent holds in its semantic knowledge. The
perception (in our case, multi-modal perception through vision
and dialogue) allows agents to enrich their knowledge, and to
monitor the progress of the shared activity. Agents have partial
beliefs about the state of VE as they have limited perception.
The belief revision specialises the classical belief revision
function of BDI approach. Since, the state of the world can
be changed due to an interaction by team members, the belief
revision function periodically updates the knowledge base of
the agent, and maintains the consistency of the knowledge
base. The dialogue manager allows agents to share their
knowledge with other team members using natural language
communication. It supports both reactive and proactive conver-
sation behavior, and ensures the coordination of the activity.
The decision-making uses private beliefs and beliefs about
others from the knowledge base to decide whether to elaborate
the plan, identifying collaborative situations, to react to the
current situation, or to exchange information with other team
members. The behavior realiser module is responsible for the
execution of actions and the turn taking behavior of the agent.
A. Knowledge Organisation
The organisation of knowledge in C2BDI agent allows to
establish the strong coupling between decision making and
the collaborative conversational behavior of the agent. The
knowledge base consists of semantic knowledge, perception
memory and IS. The semantic knowledge contains semantic
information that is known a priori by the agent, such as the
knowledge concerning concepts, and individual and shared
plans. Following the shared-plan theory [6], C2BDI agents
share the same semantic knowledge about the VE and the
group activity. This simpliﬁes the planning process of agents,
as agents need to construct only their local plan. Moreover,
sharing the same semantic knowledge also supports proactive
conversation behavior of the agent as it allows the decision-
making process to identify collaborative situations and infor-
mation needed by other team members. The perception mem-
ory acquires information about the state of the VE perceived
by the perception module, whereas, the IS contains contextual
information about the current activity and dialogues.
390
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Information State
The IS is primarily used in literature to control natural
language dialogues [13], [14]. We extended its usage as the
source of knowledge between the decision-making and conver-
sational behavior of the C2BDI agent to establish coherence
between these two processes. In C2BDI agent, the IS works
as an active memory that contains beliefs and intentions of
the agent. In C2BDI agent, the semantic context of the IS
is instantiated from concepts the agent holds in semantic
knowledge, depending on the progress of the shared task.
It includes the agenda that contains dialogue goals. These
goals are added to the agenda due to communicative intentions
generated by the realisation of the collaborative task and by the
social obligations. To cooperate with other team members, the
agent needs not only the information about the current context
of the collective activity, but also beliefs about team members
to establish common grounding and mutual awareness. To
acquire these information, we extend the IS based context
model of [14] by adding the task context to it (see Fig. 2).
The task context of our IS includes information about
the task that contains intentions task-focus, goals, and desires
of the agent. The C2BDI agent follows the theory of joint-
intention [5] to ensure that each team member has a common
intention towards the team goal, therefore, the task context
also contains cooperative-information, which includes beliefs
about group-goal, group-desire, group-intention, joint-goal,
joint-desire, and joint-intention.
We distinguish between the individual, group and joint
intentions of the agent. The group-goal indicates that the
agent knows that all team members want to achieve the
goal at a time or another. Similarly, group-desire and group-
intention can be deﬁned analogously. For an agent a group-
intention becomes a joint-intention when agents involved in
its realisation expressed their mutual belief in this regard, i.e.,
when the agent knows that this intention is shared by other
team members. To form a joint-intention, a necessary condition
is that the agent must have individual intention to achieve this
goal. Similarly, the semantics of joint-desire and joint-goal
indicates that all team members have the same group-desire
and group-goal respectively, and all team members know it.
Thus, these shared mental attitudes in task context of an agent
towards the group, speciﬁes that each member holds beliefs
about the other team members, and each member mutually
believes that every member has the same mental attitude.
To cooperate with other team members, the joint-intention
is not enough for an agent to engage in the realisation of
collective actions. Rather, it only ensures that each member is
individually committed to acting. The agent must also ensure
the commitment of others to achieve this shared goal. Agents
must communicate with other team members to obtain their
joint-commitments. The agent has a joint-commitment towards
the group, if and only if, each member of the group has the
mutual belief about the same group-goal, the agent has the
joint-intention about to achieve that goal, and each agent of
the group is individually committed to achieve this goal. Thus,
the shared belief of task context also includes the belief about
the joint-commitment towards group to ensure that every team
member has the commitment towards the group to achieve
the shared goal. Hence, the IS not only contains information
about the current context of the dialogue, but also that of
Dialogue Context 
agent-dialogue-acts, addressee-dialogue-acts, dialogue-act-history, next-moves 
Semantic Context 
agenda, qud, communication-plan, beliefs, expected-dialogue-acts 
Cognitive Context 
mutual-belief 
Social Context 
communication-pressure 
Perception Context object-in-focus, agent-in-focus, third-person-in-focus 
Task Context 
 
cooperative-info 
group-goal, group-desire, group-intention 
joint-goal,  joint-desire,  joint-intention,  joint-commitment 
task 
task-focus, goals, desires 
Figure 2: Extended Information State in C2BDI architecture
the collaborative task, i.e., beliefs about other team members
potentially useful for the agent for its decision-making.
IV.
CONVERSATIONAL BEHAVIOR
The conversational behavior allows C2BDI agents to share
their knowledge with other team members using natural lan-
guage communication, and ensures the coordination of the
team activity. The agent interprets and generates the dialogues
based on the semantics of dialogue acts proposed in [14]. To
achieve the coordination among team members, we propose
collaborative conversational protocols for the agent. These
protocols construct the conversational desires for the agent
which, when activated, result in conversational intentions.
A. Collaborative Conversational Protocols
As we want the agent to be proactive and cooperative,
we have deﬁned three collaborative conversational protocols
(CCPs). These protocols ensure the establishment of the col-
laboration among team members to achieve the group-goal,
and its end when the current goal is achieved. Every team
member participating in a collaborative activity enters in the
collaboration at the same time, and remains committed towards
the group until the activity is ﬁnished.
a) CCP-1 : When the agent has a new group-goal to
achieve, it communicates with other team members to establish
joint-commitment, and to ensure that every team member use
the same plan to achieve the group-goal.
When the agent has one or more group-goals to achieve,
and if it has no mutual belief about them, it constructs Set-
Q(what-team-next-goal) dialogue act and addresses it to the
group. By addressing this open question, the agent allows
both users and other agents to actively participate in the
conversation. If the agent receives the choice of the goal from
another team member, it adds a mutual belief about group-goal
and group-intention to its cognitive context, and adds the belief
about joint-goal to the task context. It then conﬁrms this choice
by sending a positive acknowledgement (by constructing Auto-
feedback(positive-ack)) to the sender.
When the agent receives Set-Q(what-team-next-goal) and
has no mutual belief about group-goal, i.e., no other team
member has already replied to the question, it can decide to
reply based on its response time. It chooses one of the available
goals based on its own preference rules, and informs sender
by constructing Inform(team-next-goal) dialogue act. When the
agent receives positive acknowledgement from one of the team
members, it modiﬁes its IS by adding mutual belief about
group-goal and group-intention, and belief about joint-goal.
391
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

If the agent has joint-goal, but not joint-intention to achieve
this goal, the agent needs to ensure that every team member
will follow the same plan to achieve group-goal. If the agent
has more than one plan to achieve this goal, it constructs
Choice-Q(which-plan) act and addresses it to the group, or if
the agent has only one plan for the goal, it constructs Check-
Q(action-plan) act addressing to the group. When the agent
receives a choice of the plan, or the conﬁrmation of the choice
of a plan, it adds joint-intention to its task context. It conﬁrms
this by sending a positive acknowledgement, and constructs
the belief about joint-commitment. When the agent receives
Choice-Q(which-plan) or Check-Q(action-plan), and has no
mutual belief about group-intention, it constructs Inform(plan-
choice) or Conﬁrm dialogue act respectively to inform about
its plan selection. When it receives positive acknowledgement
from one of the team members, it adds individual- and joint-
commitment to achieve the group-goal.
b) CCP-2 : When the agent has performed all its
planned actions of the shared activity, but the activity is not
yet ﬁnished, the agent requests other team members to inform
him when the activity will be ﬁnished.
The
agent
generates
Directive-request(inform-goal-
achieved) to ask other members to inform it when the activity
will be ﬁnished. When the agent receives this dialogue act, it
adds communicative goal Inform(goal-achieved) to its agenda.
c) CCP-3 : The agent who ﬁnished the last action
of the shared activity, informs other team members that the
activity is terminated.
The preconditions for CCP-3 are that the agent believes that
it has performed the last action of the collaborative activity,
and it has the joint-commitment to achieve group-goal. If
these preconditions are satisﬁed, it constructs Inform(activity-
ﬁnished) dialogue act addressing it to the group. When the
agent receives the information that the last action of the
activity has been ﬁnished, and has the belief about joint-
commitment in its task context and has a communicative
goal Inform(goal-achieved) to achieve (due to CCP-2), it
constructs Inform(goal-achieved) dialogue act to inform other
team members that the goal has been achieved. It then adds
the belief about the achievement of the goal, and removes the
corresponding intention from the task context. When the agent
receives the information about goal achievement, it removes
the corresponding intention from the task context, and drops
the communicative goal Inform(goal-achieved) if it has.
The agent waits for certain time (until the threshold of its
reaction time is expired) and if no team member has already
replied, the agent can create an intention to reply. Otherwise,
the agent simply listens to the conversation and updates its
beliefs. Thus, in order to establish mutual awareness and to
coordinate with other team members, the agent participates
in the conversation. Once agents have established the joint-
commitment, they can coordinate with other team members to
achieve the group-goal. These protocols are instantiated when
the decision-making identiﬁes collaborative situations that sat-
isfy necessary conditions to be fulﬁlled. These situations add
expectations of information from other team members, which
need to be satisﬁed. In a human-agent team, the user’s behavior
is uncertain, i.e., a user may not necessarily follow these
protocols. As the agent updates their beliefs using perception
information, which can make expectations to be true from
the observation of actions of user perceived by the agent, or
from the information provided by other team members. This
mechanism makes these protocols robust enough to deal with
uncertainty about user’s behavior. One of the advantages of
these protocols is that the dialogues for the coordination need
not to be scripted in the deﬁnition of action plans.
B. Decision-Making
In C2BDI agent, decision-making is governed by the in-
formation about current goals, the shared activity plan and
knowledge of the agent (IS and semantic knowledge). The
decision-making algorithm is shown in Algo. 1. The algorithm
Algorithm 1 DECISION-MAKING ALGORITHM
Require: IS
1: B = IS.SemanticContext.Belief
2: D = IS.Task-Context.Desire
3: I = IS.Task-Context.Intention
4: agenda= IS.Semantic-context.Agenda
5: while true do
6:
update-perception(ρ) and Compute B, D, I
7:
Π ⇐ Plan(P, I )
8:
while !Π.empty() do
9:
if agenda is not empty or the agent has received an utterance then
10:
Process Conversation-Behavior()
11:
Compute new B, D, I
12:
Π ⇐ Plan(P, I )
13:
if the task-focus contains communicative intention then
14:
Process Conversation-Behavior()
15:
Identify-Cooperative-Situation in the current shared plan Π
16:
if Cooperative-Situation is matched then
17:
Process Conversation-behavior()
18:
α ⇐ Plan-action(Π), execute(α)
veriﬁes whether the agenda in IS is not empty or task focus
contains communicative intentions. If so, control is passed to
the conversational behavior that supports the natural language
communication. Otherwise, the agent chooses the plan to be
realised. If agent identiﬁes some cooperative situations in the
collective activity, where the agent can not progress without
assistance, i.e., if the preconditions for one of the CCPs are
satisﬁed, then the control is passed the to the conversational
behavior. The cooperative situations generate communicative
intentions in the agenda, which causes the agent to interact
with other team members to share their knowledge. The agent
updates its IS if the control is passed to the conversational
behavior, and deliberates the plan to generate the intention.
Once the intention is generated, the agent selects actions to be
realised and, in turn, updates its task focus in IS to maintain
the knowledge about the current context of the task.
V.
IMPLEMENTATION
This section shows how the C2BDI architecture has been
applied to a collaborative VE for learning of a procedure for in-
dustrial maintenance. We illustrate, through a real educational
scenario, how decision-making and dialogues allow an agent
to coordinate its actions with those of the learner.
A. The Educational Scenario
This scenario describes a maintenance procedure in a
plastics manufacturing workshop. The scenario consists in
the replacement of a mould in a plastic injection moulding
392
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

machine (see Fig. 3). This speciﬁc intervention requires a
precise coordination of tasks between two workers: the setter
and the machine operator. The use of autonomous agents
allows the learner to execute the learning procedure.
Figure 3: Collaborative realisation of the maintenance proce-
dure in the virtual environment.
Let’s consider a situation in which both the user (playing
the role of an operator) and the virtual agent (playing the role
of a setter) want to replace the mould (see Fig. 4). Following
sequence of dialogues describe a typical interaction between
them.
A1 : Agent : What should we do now?
[Set-Q(team-next-goal)]
U1 : User : We should replace the mould.
[Inform(team-next-goal)]
A2 : Agent : Ok.
[Auto-feedback(positive-ack)]
A3 : Agent : Should we use the mould replacement plan?
[Check-Q(action-plan)]
U2 : User : Yes.
[Auto-feedback(positive-ack)]
.
.
(Agent executes ”verify-circuit” action.)
A10 : Agent : Inform me when you will ﬁnish the activity.
[Directive-request(inform-
goal-achieved)]
(User executes ”lock-the-door” action.)
U8 : User : What should I do now?
[Set-Q(next-action)]
A11 : Agent : You have to lock the door.
[Answer(next-action)]
U9 : User : I have locked the door.
[Inform(action-done)]
A12 : Agent : We have succeeded to replace the mould.
[Inform(goal-achieved)]
                 
<<Object_Resource>> 
Setter 
Operator 
Maintenance Scenario 
Replace-Mould 
Replace-Mould 
Start-
production 
Verify-
Circuit 
Lock-the-
Door 
<<resource>> 
door:Door 
<<resource>> 
key:Key 
<<Mean_Resource>> 
Figure 4: Partial view of the action plan shared between Setter
and Operator.
At the beginning, both, the user and the virtual agent
TABLE I: SNAPSHOT OF IS FOR AGENT BEFORE AP-
PLICATION OF CCP-1
Role R1 (agent)
Information State
Task-Context(group-goal(”Replace-Mould”))
TABLE II: SNAPSHOT OF IS FOR AGENT AFTER ESTAB-
LISHING JOINT-GOAL
Role R1 (agent)
Information
State
Cognitive-Context(mutual-belief
(group-intention(”Replace-Mould”) group-goal(”Replace-Mould”));
Task-Context(group-goal(”Replace-Mould”)
joint-goal(”Replace-Mould”))
have a goal Replace-Mould. From the semantic knowledge
about the activity, the agent identiﬁes that this goal is shared
between team members (in this case, with the user), the goal
becomes the group-goal. Table I shows a subset of the agent’s
knowledge. The agent has a group-goal as Replace-Mould in
the IS, but does not have the mutual belief about it. The
decision making process identiﬁes this collaborative situation
that fulﬁls conditions of CCP-1 (see Algo. 1, line 15). The
CCP-1 generates Set-Q(team-next-goal) dialogue act, and adds
the communicative intention to the agenda in IS and thus,
generates natural language utterance A1. When the agent re-
ceives utterance U1, it interprets U1 as Inform(team-next-goal)
dialogue act. As the agent has the same group-goal, it generates
positive acknowledgement A2 for the user and creates mutual-
belief about the Replace-Mould (Table II). Now, to ensure that
the user will follow the same action plan, the agent constructs
Check-Q(action-plan) dialogue act considering that the agent
has only one plan to achieve group-goal Replace-Mould, and
generates A3. When the agent receives positive response U2
from the user, it constructs the joint-intention as well as a joint-
commitment to achieve the goal and updates the IS. Now, the
decision making process deliberates the plan and computes the
new intention (Algo. 1, line 18). Let the current intention of
the agent be to Verify-Circuit. The subset of agent’s knowledge
is shown in Table III.
After executing the last action ”Verify-Circuit” by the
agent from its plan, and as the shared activity is not yet
ﬁnished, it utters A10 following CCP-2. The agent interprets
the utterance U8 as an information seeking Set-Q(next-action)
act, which adds an intention Answer(next-action) in its agenda
in IS. The decision making process transfers the control to
the conversational behavior as the agenda is not empty (see
Algo. 1, line 9). By performing the introspection in its shared
plan, the agent ﬁnds the next action of the user and utters A11.
Once, user informs the agent that he has ﬁnished the last action
”lock-the-door” of the shared plan (U9), the agent informs that
the goal is achieved (A12) following CCP-3.
TABLE III: SNAPSHOT OF IS FOR THE AGENT AFTER
ESTABLISHING JOINT-COMMITMENT
Role R1 (agent)
Information
State
Cognitive-context(mutual-belief(
group-intention(”Replace-Mould”); group-goal(”Replace-Mould”));
Task-Context(group-goal(”Replace-Mould”)
joint-goal(”Replace-Mould”) joint-intention(”Replace-Mould”)
joint-commitment(”Replace-Mould”)
taskFocus(Intention(”Verify-Circuit”) Intention(”Replace-Mould”)) )
393
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Integration with Virtual Agent
The C2BDI architecture has been integrated with the in-
teraction model for virtual and real human [16] on the GVT
platform [17]. The behavior realiser module interacts with the
associated virtual agent, and sends requests to it, to perform
actions chosen by the decision-making module or by the
dialogue manager (turn taking behavior). The user interacts
with VE by controlling his avatar thanks to a tracking system
of the body and hands. Furthermore, the platform has also been
enriched by a voice interface system that uses voice recognition
and synthesis of Microsoft (see Fig. 5)].
Figure 5: View of the collaborative scenario with one user.
In C2BDI architecture, the natural language understanding
(NLU) and generation (NLG) is based on the rule based ap-
proach [18]. When the agent receives an utterance, it uses NLU
rules to determine the corresponding dialogue act type, and the
dialogue contents are identiﬁed using the semantic knowledge
and the contextual information from the IS. The dialogue
manager processes these dialogue acts. When the agent has
the communicative intention, it constructs dialogue act moves,
and NLG rules are used to generate natural language utterances
corresponding to the dialogue act.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The proposed behavioral architecture C2BDI endows the
agents in the collaborative VE with the ability to coordinate
their activities using natural language communication. This
capability allows users and agents to share their knowl-
edge with their team members. The architecture ensures the
knowledge sharing between team members by considering the
deliberative and the conversation behaviors, not in isolation,
but as tightly coupled components, which is a necessary
condition for common grounding and mutual awareness to
occur. The collaborative conversational protocols we proposed
enable agents to exhibit human-like proactive conversational
behavior that help users to participate in the collaborative
activity. While the implemented scenario already shows the
beneﬁts of the solution, the behavior of the agents could be
enriched both in terms of collaborative team management and
in terms of natural language dialogue modelling. Particularly,
it would be interesting to endow agents with problem solving
capabilities to select their communicative intentions, or to
engage themselves into information seeking behaviors and
negotiation rounds, as observed in human teamwork [19].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by the ANR (Corvette
project ANR-10-CORD-012).
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Barot, D. Lourdeaux, J.-M. Burkhardt, K. Amokrane, and D. Lenne,
“V3S: A virtual environment for risk-management training based on
human-activity models,” Presence, vol. 22, no. 1, 2013, pp. 1–19.
[2]
H. H. Clark and E. F. Schaefer, “Contributing to discourse,” Cognitive
Science, vol. 13, 1989 , pp. 259–294.
[3]
K. Schmidt, “The problem with ’awareness’: Introductory remarks on
awareness in CSCW,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work, vol. 11,
no. 3, 2002 pp. 285–298.
[4]
X. Fan, J. Yen, and R. A. Volz, “A theoretical framework on proactive
information exchange in agent teamwork,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol.
169, no. 1, Nov. 2005 , pp. 23–97.
[5]
P. R. Cohen and H. J. Levesque, “Conﬁrmations and joint action,” in
Proceedings of IJCAI’91, 1991, pp. 951–957.
[6]
B. J. Grosz and S. Kraus, “Collaborative plans for complex group
action,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 86, no. 2, 1996, pp. 269 – 357.
[7]
C. Rich, C. L. Sidner, and N. Lesh, “Collagen: applying collaborative
discourse theory to human-computer interaction,” AI Mag., vol. 22,
no. 4, Oct. 2001 , pp. 15–25.
[8]
J. Bradshaw, P. Feltovich, M. Johnson, L. Bunch, M. Breedy, T. Es-
kridge, H. Jung, J. Lott, and A. Uszok, “Coordination in human-agent-
robot teamwork,” in Collaborative Technologies and Systems, 2008.
CTS 2008. International Symposium on, 2008, pp. 467–476.
[9]
M. Wooldridge and N. R. Jennings, “The cooperative problem-solving
process,” J. of Logic and Computation, vol. 9, no. 4, 1999, pp. 563–592.
[10]
F. Dignum, Dunin-Keplicz, and R. Vebrugge, “Agent theory for team
formation by dialogue,” in Intelligent Agents VII Agent Theories
Architectures and Languages, ser. LNCS.
Springer Berlin, 2001, pp.
150–166.
[11]
N. Blaylock and J. Allen, “A collaborative problem-solving model of
dialogue,” in In Proceedings of the SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and
Dialog, 2005, pp. 200–211.
[12]
K. Kamali, X. Fan, and J. Yen, “Towards a theory for multiparty
proactive communication in agent teams.” Int. J. Cooperative Inf. Syst.,
vol. 16, no. 2, 2007, pp. 271–298.
[13]
D. Traum and S. Larsson, “The information state approach to dialogue
management,” in Current and New Directions in Discourse and Dia-
logue, ser. Text, Speech and Language Technology, J. Kuppevelt and
R. Smith, Eds.
Springer Netherlands, vol. 22, 2003, pp. 325–353.
[14]
H. Bunt, “The semantics of dialogue acts,” in Proc. of the 9th Int.
Conf. on Computational Semantics, ser. IWCS ’11, Stroudsburg, PA,
USA, 2011, pp. 1–13.
[15]
S. Kopp and N. Pfeiffer-Lessmann, “Functions of speaking and acting:
An interaction model for collaborative construction tasks,” in D. Heylen,
S. Kopp, S. Marsella, C. Pelachaud et H. Vilhj´almsson, editeurs, The
First FML workshop, AAMAS, vol. 8, Portugal, 2008.
[16]
A. Saraos Luna, V. Gouranton, and B. Arnaldi, “Collaborative Virtual
Environments For Training: A Uniﬁed Interaction Model For Real
Humans And Virtual Humans,” in Learning by Playing. Game-based
Education System Design and Development, 2012, pp. 1–12.
[17]
S. Gerbaud, N. Mollet, F. Ganier, B. Arnaldi, and J. Tisseau, “GVT:
a platform to create virtual environments for procedural training,” in
IEEE Virtual Reality, Reno Etats-Unis, 2008, pp. 225–232.
[18]
M. Barange, P. D. Loor, V. Louis, R. Querrec, J. Soler, T.-H. Trinh,
E. Maisel, and P. Chevaillier, “Get involved in an interactive virtual
tour of brest harbour: Follow the guide and participate,” in Proceedings
IVA’11, ser. LNCS, vol. 6895.
Springer, 2011, pp. 93–99.
[19]
W. J. Clancey, “Simulating activities: relating motives, deliberation, and
attentive coordination,” Cognitive Systems Research, vol. 3, 2002, pp.
471–499.
394
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

