“Handreha”: A new Hand and Wrist Haptic Device for Hemiplegic 
Children 
 
 
Mohamed Bouri, Charles Baur, Reymond Clavel 
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 
Laboratoire de Systèmes Robotiques (LSRO) 
CH 1015, Switzerland 
Mohamed.Bouri@epfl.ch, Charles.baur@epfl.ch , 
Reymond.clavel@epfl.ch 
 
Milan Zedka, Christopher John Newman 
Nestlé Hospital CHUV 
Service of Neurology and Pediatric Neurorehabilitation 
CH 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland 
Christopher.Newman@chuv.ch, Milan.zedka@chuv.ch
 
Abstract— This paper presents the development of a new 
haptic device for hand rehabilitation for hemiplegic children. 
“Hanreha” has been developed at the EPFL thanks to the 
interest of the “Neurology and Pediatric NeuroRehabilitation” 
Service of the CHUV (Centre Hospitalier Universitaire du 
Canton de Vaud). The novelty of this device is that it is a 3 
degrees 
of 
freedom 
desktop 
system, 
supporting 
pronation/supination, flexion/extension and grasping hand 
movements and it is totally dedicated, in its current state, to 
children. The kinematics and the construction aspects of this 
desktop device are presented. Its different advantages are 
discussed to point out the benefits of this structure. Control 
and force feedback aspects combined with virtual reality are 
also presented. A prototype of the “Handreha” is realized and 
presented and the performances discussed. The first 
evaluations with hemiplegic children really show that the 
mechanical design of the device fits the targeted specifications 
Keywords- Hand Rehabilitation; wrist; hemiplegic; children; 
force feedback; control; virtual reality. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Rehabilitation therapy for paraplegics, quadriplegics and 
hemiplegics often consists of mobilization exercises of the 
affected limb by a therapist (Figure 1). The exercises may 
have different objectives depending on the pathology. They 
may seek to reduce hypertonia, increase the joint range of 
motion, improve the plasticity behavior of the limb, 
increase muscular strengths, decrease spasms or attain 
various other objectives ‎[1] ‎[2]. This conventional mode of 
therapy gives good results, but it is severely limited by the 
fact that a therapist is needed for each single patient during 
the total period of exercise. Increasingly, the cost of this to 
the health care system is enormous, and the need for 
therapy far exceeds the availability of trained therapists. 
Currently available rehabilitation devices are robot-like 
structures ‎[3]‎[4]‎[5]‎[6]‎[7]. Two examples are illustrated in 
Figure 2 for both lower limbs (the MotionMaker) and upper 
limbs (Armeo). 
   
 
Figure 1. Therapist moving the fingers of a hemiplegic child (Kawahira 
method ‎[8]) 
The robotized devices provide repetitive, precise and 
totally instrumented mobilization of the limbs. 
  
 
Figure 2. Examples of Rehabilitation robots: (Left) The MotionMaker for 
lower limbs ‎[9], (Right) The ARMEO for upper limbs ‎[5]. 
 
Figure 3. Handreha: The developed desktop hand rehabilitation device 
In this paper, we are interested in the task of hand and 
wrist rehabilitation and we will present the developments of 
a 3 degrees of freedom  (DOF) robot:‎ the‎ “Handreha”,‎
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

developed at the EPFL (Figure 3) thanks to the interest and 
at‎ the‎ request‎ of‎ the‎ “Neurology‎ and‎ Pediatric‎ Neuro-
Rehabilitation”‎Service‎of‎the‎CHUV‎hospital.‎The‎novelty‎
of this device is that it is desktop system, supporting 
pronation/supination, flexion/extension and grasping hand 
movements and it is totally dedicated, in its current state, to 
children. 
“Handreha”‎has‎been‎developed‎for‎hand‎rehabilitation‎
of hemiplegic children from 7 to 14 years old. The other 
aspect of this work presented in the section IV-B is the 
development of a virtual labyrinth game with haptic force 
feedback. The objectives of the game are motivating the 
children and keeping them using the rehabilitation 
exercises. 
II. OVERVIEW OF SOME HAND REHABILITATION DEVICES 
Haptic interfaces allowing force feedback are required 
in order to improve interaction through a virtual 
environment. Several devices have been developed. 
However, these interfaces are mostly focused on the 
rehabilitation of the shoulder and the arms, but not the hand. 
There are more hand rehabilitation systems based on 
"gloves" ‎[11] ‎[12] [13]; but, unfortunately, even if they are 
more accurate, they are more complex and expensive 
(Figure 4-Right). 
The 
HWARD 
(Figure 
4-Left) 
focuses 
on 
the 
rehabilitation of the hand only. It is a robot with 3 DOF for 
the movement of the fingers, thumb and flexion / extension 
of the wrist. It can assist the patient in grasping real objects 
without any virtual reality support. This is not a haptic 
system but one of the only hand rehabilitation robots 
developed until now ‎[14]. 
 
  
 
Figure 4. Hand Rehabilitation: (Left) the HWARD, (Mid) The hand glove 
from Panasonic, (Right) Hand glove HandTutor [13] 
The Gentle/G (Figure 5) allows the rehabilitation of the 
arm, shoulder and hand. The movements of reaching and 
grasping are exercised through a 6 active DOF and 3 
passive DOF: 3 DOF for positioning the active arm, 3DOF 
passive positioning of the hand and 3 DOF for the assets 
reaching 
movement. 
This 
robot 
anthropometric 
settings ‎[16].‎Other‎similar‎systems‎are‎the‎“Robotherapist”‎
presented in ‎[17] and ‎[18] and the Armin ‎[5] (Figure 2) 
commercialized under the name of ARMEO by the 
company Hocoma (CH). 
    
 
Figure 5. The Gentle/G system during a rehabilitation exercise 
As we previously noticed, other different devices exist 
and are more dedicated to the rehabilitation of the entire 
upper extremities. 
Here are some examples. 
 The MIME device that is built using a PUMA robot 
for a 6 DOF hand rehabilitation ‎[19]. 
 The MIT-Manus ‎[20] which is now commercialized 
by the company Inmotion. A new variant provides the 
flexion/extension and pronation/supination movements 
and also the radial and ulnar deviations of the wrist. 
 The HENRIE uses the robot Haptic MASTER (3 
DOF) for arm rehabilitation. A supplementary passive 
grasping DOF (spring based) is added. Thus, the 
stiffness of the "virtual object" felt is constant. With the 
Haptic MASTER, the weight of the object is felt on the 
wrist ‎[21]. 
 The SEAT (Figure 6) 
for arm rehabilitation uses 
a steering wheel for the 
measurement 
of 
the 
applied force applied by 
each arm (left and right). 
It is equipped with a 
motor that assists the 
plegic member or makes it 
work longer due to the 
application of a resistant 
torque ‎[22]. 
 
Figure 6. The SEAT System 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The ReHapticKnob 
Another interesting device 
(Figure 
7) 
is 
the 
ReHapticKnob 
developed 
by the RELAB ‎[26]. It is a 
2 
degrees 
of 
freedom 
desktop 
and 
compact 
device that may be used for 
the assessment and therapy 
of grasping. It provides 
both 
pronation/supination 
and grasping movements. 
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. THE MECHANICAL DESIGN OF THE “HANDREHA” 
A. Objectives 
The principal objectives of our development have been 
to develop a light desktop, three DOF hand rehabilitation 
device for hemiplegic children. Each degree of freedom is 
actuated and the device is able to be used for haptic 
purposes and interfaced with virtual reality environments.  
The 3 supported degrees of freedom are as follows (Figure 
8): 
 The rotation of the forearm (Rx) over 180°, namely 
the pronation / supination. 
 The orientation of the hand (Rz) over 180°, namely 
the flexion / extension of the wrist. 
 The grasping motion (Θ) over 60° that allows 
opening and closing of the gripper. 
 
Figure 8. Required degrees of freedom of the HANDREHA device  
This paragraph presents the haptic interface Handreha 
device developed by EPFL Its development has been 
motivated by the availability of a cost-affordable desktop 
device 
designed 
for 
hemiplegic 
children. 
Both 
“rehabilitation” and “assessment” purposes have been 
targeted. The progress in wrist capabilities by increasing the 
motion, force and coordination are the principal objectives 
of‎“HANDREHA”. 
Handreha can be positioned on a table and may be 
configured for the right hand as well as for the left hand.  
All the joints are motorized and instrumented with position 
incremental 
encoder 
sensors 
to 
allow 
controlled 
force/position feedback. 
B. Anthropomorphic requirements 
Prado-Leon et al. ‎[24] surveyed anthropometric data of 
Mexican children. Linghua et al. ‎[25] also measured 
anthropometric data of Chinese children. Table III and 
Table IV, respectively, summarize this data in the Appendix 
A. 
Nevertheless, we also carried out a series of 
anthropomorphic measurements conforming to our required 
objectives which concern the tasks of flexion/extension and 
grasping (Figure 9). These measurements are compiled in 
the (Table I). 9 children were implicated in this series of 
measurement to comfort the literature data. 
 
Figure 9. Anthropomorphic measured parameters 
TABLE I. ANTHROPOMETRIC MEASURED HAND PARAMETERS 
 
 
To develop “Handrea”, our desktop device for hemiplegic 
children from 6-14 yo, we decided to adopt the following 
parameters (Table II). For h and i parameters see Figure 10. 
TABLE II. ANTHROPOMORPHIC HAND REQUIREMENTS 
Dimensions (mm) 
Finger 
Breadth at proximal 
(a) 
50-75 
Breadth at middle 
(b) 
45-70 
Thickness at proximal 
(c) 
18-25 
Thickness at middle 
(d) 
15-20 
Length to DIP from MP 
(e) 
30-45 
Thumb 
Thickness 
(f) 
15-25 
Length to IP from MP 
(g) 
18-30 
Elbow 
Elbow to wrist 
(h) 
150-300 
 
Elbow to ground 
(i) 
450-600 
 
Figure 10. Seating configuration and parameters (Table II) 
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Ergonomic requirements 
The grasping mechanism has been chosen to be closest 
to scissors principle (Figure 11).  
 
Figure 11. Scissors handling 
Scissors are often used in 
occupational therapy (OT) 
and 
they 
provide 
more 
natural grasping movements 
than the use of simple plate 
type grasping. 
D. Mechanical design 
Handreha has been designed as a serial kinematics with 
one motor on the frame ensuring the pronation/supination 
degree of freedom (Rx). The other motors are on the mobile 
part and their movements are combined to carry out the 
flexion/extension and grasping (Figure 12). 
 
6
 
Figure 12. The mechanical structure 
In terms of torques, the joints respectively allow the 
permanent torques of Mxrms = 0.2Nm and Mzrms= Mgrasp_rms= 
0.3Nm (which corresponds to a grasping force of 4N or 400 
gram-forces). 
Children with Hemiplegia may have muscle spasms and 
this leads to the possibility of the presence of radial and 
axial transient forces of up to 25 [N]. 
There is no need for fast motions. The maximal required 
velocity is around 10 rpm (180° per 3 seconds). The 
maximal acceleration is 20 rpm/s/s (assuming that we reach 
the maximal velocity in 0.5s). 
This structure can be divided into two parts. The first is 
the rotation of the forearm and the second is the grabbing 
system composed of the two other movements. As we can 
observe, the grasping motion is coupled to the rotation of 
the wrist around the z-axis. 
 
1) The rotation of the forearm 
The 180° rotation of the forearm is simply realized by 
one active pivot driven by a Maxon EC45 motor with a belt 
transmission assuring a convenient gearing to make 
available the required torque. 
 
Figure 13. The rotation of the forearm      
2) The grabbing system 
The grabbing system (hand orientation and the grabbing 
movement), is composed of two active rotations. The first 
(the hand orientation Rz) is driven by motor number 2 
(Figure 14 and Figure 15). This motor drives the stator of 
motor number 3 through a belt. In order to transmit this 
rotation to the hand of the hemiplegic child, two arms 
forming a gripper are fixed to the stator of motor 3 (stator 
arm) and also to the rotor of motor 3 (rotor arm). Therefore, 
when the hand of the child turns with a fixed angle of 
aperture, both arms move simultaneously. 
 
Figure 14. The grabbing system details with the previous version of 
Handreha 
As for the grabbing 
movement, it is driven 
by motor number 3 
through 
planetary 
gearing. Thus, when 
the child closes or 
opens its hand, only 
the rotor of motor 
number 2 moves. 
 
Figure 15. The grabbing system 
 
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 16. The new grabbing system of Handreha conforming to the 
scissors principle 
IV. REALIZATION AND CONTROL OF HANDREHA 
A. The prototype 
The photos below show the HANDREHA prototype. 
This prototype is intended to be fixed on a table to allow 
mobilization through a force feedback emulation using a 
virtual reality application and different interaction models. 
 
 
Figure 17. The prototype of HANDREHA 
The device has been mounted on a mobile frame to 
allow its use for clinical trials. This also has the advantage 
of having the electronics on the frame. 
This frame allows the 
adjustment of the elbow 
rest to conform to the 
seat height (Figure 18). 
Another 
interesting 
aspect which has been 
considered 
is 
the 
securing of the elbow 
movements by guiding it 
(the elbow) through a 
linear movement in the 
direction of the pronation 
axis. This totally removes 
the elbow compensation 
movements 
in 
flexion/extension of the 
wrist (Figure 20). 
 
Figure 18. Mobile frame and height 
adjustment 
 
 
Figure 19. Elbow rest Height adjustment with a 7 years girl 
 
 
Figure 20. Elbow rest guiding to avoid compensating movements in 
flexion 
B. The controller and the virtual application 
The controller has to impose the values of applied 
torques by each motor at each joint and ensures a desired 
behavior‎ (stiffness,‎ linear‎ or‎ nonlinear‎ viscosity,‎ …)‎ with‎
respect to a chosen environment. 
This is carried out both by the servo-amplifier of the 
motors that are configured in torque mode (the torque mode 
bandwidth is 1 KHz) and an additional virtual application. 
The virtual application sets up the desired force behavior 
which is function of the measured joint positions and 
velocities each 1 ms (Figure 21). More details concerning 
this PC based open controller may be found in ‎[26]. 
To be effectively adapted to manipulation by children 
and motivate them to use the haptic device, a dedicated 
application has been developed. This application is based 
on 
a 
virtual 
labyrinth 
with 
different 
geometric 
configurations. 
This application is associated with force feedback 
implemented 
both 
in 
the 
grasping 
operation 
(by 
implementing different grasping viscoelastic effects) and 
when moving inside the labyrinth (by implementing 
different viscoelastic effects during the motion in the 
labyrinth and by simulating the stiff contacts with the 
walls). 
 
 
 
       
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 21. The haptic force control concept 
The child has to grasp a ball and manipulate it through 
the paths of the labyrinth to reach a target allowing the child 
to increase its score. The configurations correspond to 
different levels of difficulty (Figure 23), allowing different 
corresponding wrist angular positions. 
  
Figure 22. The Virtual Labyrinth 
To manage the grasping effect, the child has to decrease 
the diameter of the ball by tightening (more or less) the 
gripper to pass through the obstacles. 
 
Figure 23. Different labyrinth difficulties 
Figure 24 shows a healthy child manipulating the 
HANDREHA‎by‎playing‎the‎“Labyrinth‎game”.‎ 
 
Figure 24. A 9 years sound children manipulating the Handreha 
 
The ball is manipulated through the paths of the 2D 
labyrinth and a coordinate transformation is carried out to 
transform the rotation movements Rx and Rz into 
translational movements (respectively forward-straight / 
back-straight and forward-right / forward-left). Different 
wall effects are also available to differentiate the sensations 
and make the game more attractive. 
A first clinical trial of the device was carried out with 
three hemiplegic children (7, 10 and 12 years) at the service 
of‎“Unité‎de‎Neurologie‎et‎Neuroréhabilitation‎Pédiatrique,‎
Hôpital‎ Nestlé‎ CHUV,‎ Switzerland”‎ to‎ check‎ the‎
mechanism and the dimension parameters. All the 
manipulated variables (maximum torques, articular angles, 
velocities, scores) have been saved in a database in order to 
carry out a systematic and a quantified progress of the 
capabilities during the exercises. These tests have 
concluded to the improvements proposed in the current 
paper. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper presented the mechanical development of 
“HANDREHA”,‎ a‎ hand‎ and‎ wrist‎ haptic‎ device‎ for‎
hemiplegic children. This device has been particularly 
developed as desktop robotic system and provides three 
degrees of freedom: pronation/supination, flexion/extension 
and grasping. Force feedback aspects have also been 
considered to enlarge the implementation of different 
rehabilitation strategies. 
HANDREHA is an academic prototype developed by 
the Laboratory of Robotic Systems (EPFL). It is an 
affordable device and very flexible in terms of adaptation to 
desktop applications and for hospital clinical therapeutic 
evaluations. It is adapted for children from 7 to 14 years old 
and allows elbow rest height adjustment and configuration 
of hand parameters. The elbow compensation movement is 
totally removed trough guided elbow movement. 
 
Grasping object 
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

It is now at the hospital CHUV of the Canton of Vaud in 
Lausanne and a second series of clinical trials is 
programmed. These tests will use the developed application 
for tests with different hemiplegic children. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Joel DeLisa, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation: Principles and 
Practice, 4th edition, 2100 pages, 2004. 
[2] 
H. Janet Carr, and B. Roberta, Neurological Rehabilitation: 
Optimizing Motor, 364 pages, 2003. 
[3] 
J. Stein, R. Harvey, R. Macko, C. Winstein, and R. Zorowitz, Stroke 
Recovery and Rehabilitation, Ed Demos MEDICAL, 797 pages, 
2009. 
[4] 
P. Métrailler, V. Blanchard, I. Perrin, R. Brodard, R. Frischknecht, 
C. Schmitt, J. Fournier, M. Bouri and R. Clavel, Improvement of 
rehabilitation‎possibilities‎with‎the‎MotionMaker™,‎The‎first‎IEEE‎/‎
RAS-EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and 
Mechatronics, BioRob, Pisa Italy, 2006, 
[5] 
T. Nef, M. Mihelj, and R. Riener, ARMin: A robot for patient-
cooperative arm therapy, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput., Vol. 45, pp. 
887–900, 2007. 
[6] 
C. Schmitt, P. Métrailler, A. Al-Khodairy, R. Brodard, J. Fournier, 
M. Bouri, and R.‎ Clavel,‎ The‎ Motion‎ Maker™:‎ a‎ Rehabilitation 
System Combining an Orthosis with Closed-Loop Electrical Muscle 
Stimulation, 8th International Workshop on Functional Electrical 
Stimulation, pp. 117-120, Vienna Austria, 2004. 
[7] 
G. Charles Burgar, S. Peter Lum, C. Peggy Shor, and H.F. Machiel 
Van der Loos, Development of robots for rehabilitation therapy: The 
Palo Alto VA/Stanford experience, Journal of Rehabilitation 
Research and Development,Vol. 37 No. 6, pp. 663-673, 2000. 
[8] 
K. Kawahira, M. Shimodozono, A. Ogata, and N. Tanaka, Addition 
Of Intensive Repetition Of Facilitation Exercise To Multidisciplinary 
Rehabilitation Promotes Motor Functional Recovery Of The 
Hemiplegic Lower Limb, J Rehabil Med; Vol 36, pp. 159–164, 2004. 
[9] 
Y. Stauffer, Y. Allemand, M. Bouri, J. Fournier, R. Clavel, P. 
Métrailler, and R. Brodard, Clinical trials with the WalkTrainer: 
Preliminary results, Journal of Biomechanics, Volume 41, pp. S136-
S136, 2008. 
[10] Y. Stauffer, M. Bouri, C. Schmitt, Y. Allemand, S. Gnemmi, J. 
Fournier, R. Clavel, P. Métrailler, and R. Brodard, Cyberthèses, Mise 
en‎œuvre‎d’un‎nouveau‎concept‎de‎rééducation‎pour‎paraplégiques‎et‎
hémiplégiques, Journal Européen des systèmes automatisés, vol. 41, 
num. 2, pp. 261-278, 2007. 
[11] P. C. Kung, C. K. Lin, M. S. Ju, Neuro-rehabilitation robot-assisted 
assessments of synergy patterns of forearm, elbow and shoulder 
joints in chronic stroke patients, Clinical Biomechanics, Volume 25, 
Issue 7, pp. 647-654, 2010. 
[12] T. Markow, T., Ramakrishnan, N., Huang, K., Starner, T., Eicholtz, 
M.; Garrett, S., Profita, H., Scarlata, A., Schooler, C., Tarun, A., 
Backus, D., Mobile Music Touch: Vibration stimulus in hand 
rehabilitation,Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare 
(PervasiveHealth), 4th International Conference, Munich, 2010. 
[13] E. Carmeli, J. J. Vatine, S. Peleg, G. Bartur, and E. Elbo, Upper limb 
rehabilitation using augmented feedback: Impairment focused 
augmented feedback with HandTutor, Virtual Rehabilitation 
International Conference, pp 2200-2202, Israel, 2009. 
[14] C. D. Takahashi, L. Der-Yeghiaian, A robotic Device for hand motor 
therapy after stroke. IEEE 9th international conference on 
rehabilitation robotics, pp. 17-20, USA, 2005. 
[15] L. A Malone, P. L Gervaisb, R. S Burnhamc, M. Chanc, L. Millerd 
and R. D. Steadwardb, An assessment of wrist splint and glove use 
on wheeling kinematics, Clinical Biomechanic, Volume 13, Issue 3, 
pp. 234-236, 1998. 
[16] R. C. V. Loureiro, and W. S. Harwin, Reach and grasp therapy: 
Design and control of a 9-DOF robotic neuro-rehabilitation system, 
IEEE 10th international conference on rehabilitation robotics, pp. 
757-763, Netherlands, 2007. 
[17] K. Oda, T. Kikuchi, Y. Ohyama, S. Isozumi, K. Tamida, and J. 
Urusho, Improvement of Mechanism of Upper Extremity Exercise 
Support‎ System‎ “Robotherapist"‎ and‎ Development‎ of‎ Application‎
Software, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Biomimetics (Robio), pp. 2515-2520, China, 2009. 
[18] J. Furusho, N. Shichi, X. Hu, T. Kikuchi, K. Nakayama, C. Li, Y. 
Yamaguchi, A. Inoue and U. Ryu, Development of a 6-DOF Force 
Display System with High Safety and its Application to 
Rehabilitation, Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE International 
Conference on Mechatronics and Automation, pp. 962-967, China, 
2006. 
[19] P. S. Lum, C. G. Burgar, P. C. Shor, M. Majmundar, M. Van Der 
Loos, 
Robot-Assisted 
Movement 
training 
compared 
with 
conventional therapy techniques for the rehabilitation of upper-limb 
motor function after stroke. Arch Phys Med Rehabil; Vol 83, pp. 
952-957 , 2002. 
[20] H. I. Krebs, B. T. Volpe, D. Williams, J. Celestino, S. K. Charles, D. 
Lynch, and N. Hogan, Robot-Aided Neurorehabilitation : A Robot 
For Wrist Rehabilitation, IEEE Trans. On Neural Systems And 
Rehabilitation Engineering, Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 327-335, September 
2007.  
[21] M. Mihelj, J. Podobnik, and M. Munih,. HEnRiE – Haptic 
Environment for reaching and grasping exercise. 2nd IEEE 
International 
conference 
on 
biomedical 
robotics 
and 
biomechatronics, pp. 907-912, USA, 2008.  
[22] M. J. Johnson, H. F. M. Van der Loos, C. G. Burgar, and L. J. Leifer, 
Driver’s‎ SEAT‎ :‎ Simulation‎ environment for arm therapy. ICORR 
international conference on rehabilitation robotics, Stanford, USA, 
1999. 
[23] J. C. Metzger, O. Lambercy, D. Chapuis, and R. Gassert, Design and 
Characterization of the ReHapticKnob, a Robot for Assessment and 
Therapy of Hand Function, in Intelligent Robots and Systems Conf, 
pp. 3074-3080, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2011.. 
[24] L. Prado-Leon, R. Avila-Chaurand, and E. Gonzalez-Munoz, 
Anthropometric study of Mexican primary school children, Applied 
Ergonomics, Vol. 32, pp. 339-345, 2001. 
[25] L. Ran, X. Zhang, C. Chao, T. Liu, and T. Dong, Anthropometric 
Measurement of the Hands of Chinese Children, Digital Human 
Modeling, HCII2009, LNCS5620, pp. 46-54, 2009. 
[26] M. Bouri, and R. Clavel, A Windows PC based robot controller: An 
open architecture. International Symposium on Robotics, Tokyo, 
Japan, 2005. 
VI. APPENDIX 
A. Hand Anthropomorphic data (in mm) 
TABLE III. ANTHROPOMETRIC HAND DATA OF MEXICAN CHILDREN ‎[24]  
 
 
TABLE IV. ANTHROPOMETRIC HAND DATA OF CHINESE CHILDREN ‎[25] 
 
 
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

