Teaching an Alien: Children Recommending What and How to Learn  
Monica Landoni 
Faculty of  Informatics 
Università della Svizzera italiana, USI 
Lugano, Switzerland 
e-mail: monica.landoni@usi.ch 
Emiliana Murgia  
ICS Antonio Stoppani 
Milano, Italy 
emilianamurgia@gmail.com 
Fabrizio Gramuglio 
FOREVER Identity 
New York, USA 
fabrizio.gramuglio@gmail.com 
Giorgio Manfredi 
FOREVER Identity 
New York, USA 
giorgio.manfredi@rumbletumbleweed.com
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we describe how, inspired by fiction 
design, primary school children are helping us to create a 
teachable 3D Tutor, with the appearance and personality of a 
friendly Alien. In line with existing literature, we assume that 
children enjoy learning by teaching, By making the overall 
process more fun, the level of children’s engagement and their 
motivation towards it will increase. In our study, children will 
act as recommenders, as they are asked to prepare the lessons. 
They need to decide and select the material to teach and the 
way it is presented to the 3D Alien, to make sure s/he will have 
a successful learning experience. We will test the validity of 
these recommendations by measuring the level of engagement 
in children of the same age group when offered these lessons.  
Keywords- Teachable tutor; fiction design; collaborative 
design; teaching style. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Technology is used to support teaching and learning in 
many ways. Here, we are working toward the design of a 3D 
Tutor, a friendly Alien, to act as a teachable agent to engage 
primary school children. Teachable agents are defined by 
Biswas et al. [1] as a “…computer agents that students teach, 
and in the process, learn themselves.” Children asked to 
teach them are encouraged to structure their knowledge, take 
responsibility for its delivery and reflect upon it. These are 
all essential steps in the learning process. Both the social and 
emotional dimensions of teachable tutors are still under 
study. Our work contributes to this research by exploring the 
impact of one of its possible manifestations, that in the shape 
of a 3D holographic tutor. 
In the first stage of this project, we involved 154 school 
children, attending primary 2 and aged 7-8 years, in the 
definition of the look and feel of their teaching tutor-agent, a 
friendly Alien, as in Figures 1 and 2, to design one that better 
satisfies their needs. Besides, given that our tutor will learn 
from children, we have revisited the list of qualities proposed 
by Buskin et al. [2] and focused on few of the most highly 
ranked in that study. In a previous study, we found out that 
for our pupils, as for the older students in that study, it is 
crucial that their 3D Tutor should be enthusiastic about 
learning, 
promotes 
critical 
thinking, 
approachable, 
respectful, creative, has realistic expectations [4]. In this 
paper, we explore how children can act as recommenders for 
other children as they are asked to prepare few lessons, i.e., 
decide and select the material to teach and the way it is 
presented to the 3D Alien, to make sure s/he will have a 
successful learning experience.  
 
 
Figure 1. The first meeting 
 
 
Figure 2. The friendly Alien 
This paper starts by quickly descring in Section 2 the 
relevant state of the art in teachable tutors and moves on to 
present in Section 3 the details of our study. In Section 4, we 
describe how we run a focus group with a class of 16 
children aged 8-9 when we examined issues related to 
children's preferences in learning activities. Section 5 is 
where we explain the activities planned for engaging 
children across two schools in the preparation of the lessons; 
to focus initially on geography as part of their school 
curriculum.  Finally, Section 6 provides conclusions and 
open issues. 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
RELATED WORKS 
 We started from the approach defined in [8] on how co-
design can help the production of active digital tutors for 
children and were also inspired by the work described in 
Herberg et al. [3] involving children in the identification of 
qualities for an ideal robot tutor. Particularly suitable for 
young children is fiction design, where “something that 
creates a story world… has something being prototyped 
within that story world, … does so to create a discursive 
space.” [5]. Moving on to consider research on the design of 
teachable tutors [1], Ogan et al. [6] go on to explore their 
social dimension. They report on how having a friendly, 
equal approach, where the tutor and the child align 
themselves to be peers, together with being able to use 
informal interactions, is conducive to successful learning 
experiences. On the contrary, keeping a formal distance hurts 
the overall experience. Tanaka and Matsuzoe [7] describe an 
experience in using a teachable robot with primary school 
children. They explore three different types of teaching style 
such as: direct teaching, step-by-step, hands-on instructions 
given to the robot. Gesturing, with children moving their 
bodies to show a procedure to the robot. Verbal teaching, 
with children giving vocal instructions to the robot. All of 
them provide a significant level of closeness between 
children and robot by mimicking the one between parents 
and child. While most of the available literature reports on 
pro and cons of having robots to play the role of the tutor, we 
set out to explore an alternative, that of a 3D holographic 
entity. Moreover, the impact it can have on the learning by 
teaching process, taking place among peers. 
The 3D Tutor is a 3D character animated in real-time, 
able to interact through different senses (touch, voice, vision) 
and to convey emotions together with information in lessons. 
By using Artificial Intelligence, the 3D Tutor can choose the 
right question/topic. By using Artificial Empathy, the 3D 
Tutor can recognize users’ emotional state and engagement 
to react appropriately. Thus, the content is adapted to both 
the conditions of the student and the specific device used 
(mobile device, web, classroom). With the 3D Tutors, 
teachers can explore new ways to present subjects to 
students, as well as encourage students to find the learning 
preferences that suits them best, by fully exploiting the 
teaching agent paradigm. The concept of a 3D Tutor is based 
on that of Human-like Interaction (HLI) [3]. HLI implies the 
use of all dimensions of human language, not only written or 
verbal communication but also gestures, postures, and facial 
expressions.  
Here we explore how this paradigm can enable children 
to learn from peers that act as recommenders not only of 
suitable, relevant and challenging material but also of fun 
and engaging ways to present and learn it. 
III. 
OUR STUDY  
The work described here is part of a more extensive 
study started one year ago and initially involving 5 (Italian) + 
1 (Swiss-Italian) classes of primary school children 
following the same curriculum in two different schools. 
Children have since moved on the primary three under the 
supervision of the same teachers from the previous year. 
Two of the classes initially involved have opted out our 
study. Thus, we are left with 66 children and four teachers. 
Pupils are now practicing how to study three main subjects: 
history, geography, and science. Teachers have decided to 
focus on geography when planning activities for children to 
produce content for our teachable tutor. The first step we 
took was to run a focus group in one of the classes, to find 
out how aware children are of their different learning 
preferences.  
IV. 
THE FOCUS GROUP  
We have run an initial focus group during school hours, 
involving 16 children and two teachers. These stayed in class 
but did not take part in the discussion to let children free to 
express their opinions. We started the discussion by using the 
same fiction design trigger as in the previous year: our 
friendly Alien wanted to know more about our planet, maybe 
they could teach him. Children reacted enthusiastically, and 
in their discussion, they explored the following themes.  
Learning preferences: Children were asked about their 
favorite subjects, what they liked to learn and how. Each 
came up with his or her favorite subjects but also with the 
preferred place, time and type of activities for learning. Few 
of them reported on the tips they were given by older 
siblings and parents, mostly to overcome problems with 
difficult subjects and in general fear and anxiety about oral 
and 
written 
tests. 
It 
emerged 
that 
sharing 
these 
recommendations in class made them feel more positive 
about their validity. Overall children felt confident about 
recommending what and how to learn to their Alien friend. 
Differences count: two of the children pointed out we are 
all different and react in different ways to learning strategies. 
Not only children have different tastes and inclinations, but 
also their level of interest in the lesson presented can vary, in 
relation to how tired or hungry they are. They recognize that 
their teachers could spot these changes happening as they 
know them very well.  
Teaching styles: not only their teachers knew them well 
enough to understand their level of engagement with a 
lesson, but they also found the best way to have them engage 
in it by changing the teaching style. One of the children 
pointed out how, when she was getting frustrated with a 
math exercise, her teacher turned it into a game to involve 
the rest of the class. Now, when the same child is asked to 
solve a similar exercise, she feels very confident, and this 
helps her to succeed.  
Games for learning: children came up with many 
examples of how to turn an exercise into a fun game. 
Inspired by their favorite board games and television 
quizzes, they started to play with simple grammar rules they 
just learned and gave us a demonstration of how that worked 
out very well. They continued by providing examples from 
topics encountered in geography when describing a compass, 
and history, when they engaged in an impromptu story-
telling session, starting from a “what if I had a dinosaur in 
my back garden.” 
Lack of participation: even if the majority of the children 
was enthusiastically taking part and competing to get 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

attention, they noticed how three of them were not engaging 
at all in the discussion. When asked about signs of 
participation, children started from the eyes: bright, wide 
open, in contact with the speaker. Being focused and not 
fiddling with objects on the desk, not talking with neighbors, 
raising hands to contribute, were all excellent signs of 
engagement. Thus, we proposed two children at a time to 
play inspectors for the lack of these signs while the others 
were trying to make discussion fun.  
Playing inspectors: playing inspectors proved very 
successful with children already engaged with the class, they 
seemed to enjoy that role and were extra careful in spotting 
every signal of disengagement.   
Playing teacher: proved much harder and unfortunately, 
we did not see any change in the level of interest in the three 
children that were not involved from the start; even when the 
other children tried the engagement strategies their teachers 
had successfully used with them.  
The exercise was helpful in revealing how much children 
were aware of the strategies and alternatives available for 
learning and teaching. This awareness will guide them when 
preparing the lessons for the teachable tutor and their peers. 
We interviewed their teachers immediately afterward as 
they had listened to the discussion without taking an active 
role in it. They were impressed by the quality and variety of 
reflections provided by the majority of children, given they 
had just started to learn how to study. Teachers also 
confirmed how two of the three children, who were not 
participating in the discussion, had similar behavior in class, 
due to independent reasons. The third child was merely very 
tired for not having slept the night before. It was agreed that 
for future meetings, when children would prepare the lessons 
for the Alien, two of them, on turns, will act as inspectors. 
V. 
PLANNED ACTIVITIES  
Together with the teachers, we have planned some 
activities to support children in the preparation and delivery 
of geography lessons. Following the fiction design approach, 
the process will start with a request for help sent by their 
Alien friend. In the message, s/he will ask children for 
assistance on how to use maps for finding his/her way on our 
planet. In particular, s/he will ask for the best path to go from 
A to B, using terrestrial maps. In exchange, Alien will teach 
children how to use space maps. Through phases of growing 
complexity, the students will work on a group project about 
how maps are made and used with local examples. Children 
will start focusing on the part of the city where they live, 
analyzing different types of maps, including the historical 
one. This way they will acquire enough expertise to teach the 
Alien how to choose and read the correct map to serve 
different needs. In the second phase, they will put into 
practice what they learned, exploring local places of interest, 
going around and recording everything they feel interesting 
for their Alien friend. They will take notes and pictures to 
draw a personalized map. At this point, based on the material 
produced, they will deliver their first lesson to their Alien 
friend, during a Skype session. In the third phase, they will 
be asked to plan a short tour in their school neighborhood, 
going again on the road. 
Moreover, then create some VR content using VR 
cameras and tablets. Thus, children will set a practical 
activity for the Alien, e.g., draw, on the previously shared 
map, the path of the VR tour. The final phase will bring 
students and Alien to work together on designing a brand-
new map answering the following question: if they were 
kings, how they would change the area they live to make it 
more children-friendly? 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OPEN ISSUES  
Here, we have described the results of a focus group run 
with primary school children to explore their attitude toward 
learning and teaching. The focus group was run in 
preparation for the design of lessons to be prepared by 
children for their teachable 3D tutor, a friendly Alien. By 
following a fiction design approach, we will engage children 
in some curriculum-related activities and get them to produce 
material suitable for their peers. Children will also organize 
this material in lessons to be interesting and fun for the 
friendly Alien and their peers to learn. We will then measure 
the level of engagement these lessons generate in other 
children of the same age group.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. Biswas, K. Leelawong, D. Schwartz, and N. Vye, “The 
Teachable Agents Group at Vanderbilt, Learning by Teaching 
a New Agent Paradigm for Educational Software,” Applied 
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 9, issue 3-4, pp 363-392, 2005. 
[2] W. Buskist, J. Sikorski, T. Buckley, and B. K. Saville,  
Elements of master teaching. In The Teaching of Psychology: 
Essays in Honor of Wilbert J. McKeachie and Charles L. 
Brewer, S. F. Davis and W. Buskist, eds. Mahwah New 
Jersey, Erlbaum, pp 27-39, 2002. 
[3] J. S. Herberg, D. C. Behera, and M. Saerbeck, “Eliciting ideal 
tutor trait perception in robots: pinpointing effective robot 
design space elements for smooth tutor interactions,” HRI '13, 
Proceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE international conference 
on Human-robot interaction, IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, 
USA, pp 137-138, 2013. 
[4] M. Landoni, E. Murgia, F. Gramuglio, and G. Manfredi,  
“Fiction Design of a 3D Tutor for and with School Children,” 
Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, ACHI, pp 94-97, 
2018. 
[5] J. Lindley, “Researching Design Fiction With Design 
Fiction,” Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on 
Creativity and Cognition, C&C15, pp 325-326, 2015. 
[6] A. Ogan, et al. ,  “Oh, dear Stacy!”: social interaction, 
elaboration, and learning with teachable agents,” Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, CHI’12, ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp 39-48, 
2012. 
[7] F. Tanaka and S. Matsuzoe, “Children teach a care-receiving 
robot to promote their learning: field experiments in a 
classroom for vocabulary learning,” Journal of Human-Robot 
Interaction, Vol. 1, issue 1, pp 78-95, 2012. 
[8] G. Walsh, E. Foss, J. Yip, and A. Druin, “FACIT PD: a 
framework for analysis and creation of intergenerational 
techniques for participatory design,” Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, CHI'13, ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp 2893-2902, 
2013.
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

