Line-Drawing Presentation Strategies with an Active-Wheel Mouse
Yoshihiko Nomura, Yoshiaki Kashino, Tokuhiro Sugiura
Graduate School of Engineering
Mie University
Tsu, Japan
e-mail: {nomura, y-kashino, sugiura}@mach.mie-u.ac.jp
Abstract— The objective of
this study is to develop a
presentation method of line-drawings by using a finger-tactile
interface, i.e., an “active-wheel mouse,” which can present
slippages to users via the user’s fingertip skin. The interface
embodies an active wheel being rotatable in any direction, with
any speed and for any duration of time. Through the slippage
stimuli, the interface can present stroke motions with any
direction, velocity and length to users. In this paper, we
proposed two kinds of presentation strategies, called an “after-
recognition go strategy” and a “while-perceiving go strategy” for
some line-drawings being connected with several line-segments,
and their perceptual performance was examined. The former
employed an off-line, open loop scheme, and the latter does an
on-line closed loop control scheme. By evaluating lengths and
directions of subjects’ reproduced line-segments, a feasibility
of the interface and the presentation methods were confirmed.
Keywords-fingerpad; tactile sensation; slippage; interface.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Human beings get a large amount of information via
vision from the surroundings. Therefore, once we lose our
vision, we shall suffer inconveniences in daily life. Many
assistive devices were developed as an alternative. Visually
impaired persons utilize sensations other than the vision
such as skin-sensations and proprioceptive sensations. For
examples, some handy-and-portable devices were proposed
for character presentation and walking route guidance [1]-
[4]. They can present motion information by using tactors,
and, yet, there are some tasks to be solved: ① the number of
physical properties to be presented was restricted in such a
way that only motion direction can be presented, ② the
working area was also restricted to several millimeters.
The objective of this study is to develop an operational
strategy by utilizing our developed tactile-device, i.e., an
Active-Wheel Mouse (AWM) [5][6].”
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The
hardware and software of the system employed in this work
are explained in Sections II and III, respectively. That is,
Section II outlines our developed AWM, and Section III
introduces two line-drawing-stroke presenting strategies to
be compared in this paper: one is an after-recognition go
strategy (ARG-S), and the other a while-perceiving go
strategy (WPG-S). Next, two stages of experiments follow
the system descriptions. Practically, in Section IV, perceptual
characteristics of simple patterns of 1-, 2-, and 3-strokes are
presented as a basic study, and, in Section V, those for
complicated patterns of 5-strokes are presented as an
example of practical applications. The paper closes with a
conclusion and remarks for further developments.
II. ACTIVE-WHEEL MOUSE, A FINGER-TACTILE INTERFACE
A.
Apparatus
In our previous work [5][6], we have developed an
AWM: a specific mouse interface, at the front of which a
finger-tactile interface is attached as shown in Figure 1. The
finger-tactile interface can rotate a wheel around the wheel
central axis in any horizontal direction by two stepping
motors (M15SP-2N and M25SP-6NK (Mitsumi Electric
Co., LTD., Tokyo, Japan) (see Figure 1. ). The former
rotates the wheel, and the latter swivels the wheel rotating
part. The rotation and the swivel result in slippage velocity
and direction, respectively. Here, the velocity together with
the time duration decide the slippage lengths. The diameter
and thickness of the wheel are 20 mm and 6 mm,
respectively (see Figure 1. (b)). Particularly, it is noted that
raised dots are formed on the wheel peripheral surface to
enhance slippage perceptual performance [7][8]: as for the
raised dots, the height is 0.5 mm, and the diameter of the
bottom circle is 1.7 mm. The dot interval was decided as
10.5 mm so that the dots appear one by one on the fingerpad
to make the slippage perception easier [5][6].
(a) Finger-tactile interface is
(b) Raised dots formed on a wheel
attached to a mouse interface:
peripheral surface.
it constitutes an active-wheel
mouse.
Figure 1.
Active-wheel mouse.
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

While holding the mouse body, touching their finger-pad
on the rotating wheel peripheral surface from above, users
can accept slippage stimulus (see Figure 2. ).
Figure 2.
Side view of the finger-tactile interface.
Here, note that the circumference of the wheel is circular,
and the shape of the slippage is physically not a straight line,
but an arc. However, it is not easy for us to perceive the arc-
shaped slippages. Therefore, users are instructed not to
perceive the slippage as arc segment, but as straight line
segments.
III.
LINE-DRAWING-STROKE PRESENTING STRATEGIES
Two control schemes were applied: one control scheme
is off-line and the other is on-line. In terms of the former, we
introduced a line-drawing-stroke presenting strategy, i.e.,
“After-Recognition Go Strategy”, and, in terms of the latter,
“While-Perceiving Go Strategy.” The strategies will be
explained in the following.
A.
After-Recognition Go Strategy
In this section, a presenting strategy for line-drawing-
strokes,
that
is,
the
after-recognition
go
strategy,
is
explained. The strategy is carried out in the following
procedure.
[Step 1] A subject holds the mouse in his right hand. Then,
he touches his index-fingerpad on the wheel from
above.
[Step 2] Finger-tactile interface swivels the rotating unit in
a given direction. Next, it rotates the wheel with a
given velocity and angle (see Figure 3. ①) .
[Step 3] While accepting the slippage stimulus, the subject
recognize the stimulus as a straight line motion. (See
Figure 3. ②.)
[Step 4] The subject drags AWM so as to reproduce his
recognized motion (see Figure 3. ③).
[Step 5] The subject memorizes the drag motion as a stroke
(see Figure 3. ④).
[Step 6] Just after memorizing stroke, the subject sends a
signal by pressing a button in the left hand.
[Step 7] Return to [Step 2] till all the strokes are memorized.
Figure 3.
“After-Recognition Go strategy” for line-drawing-stroke
teaching & learning.
B.
While-Perceiving Go Strategy
In this section, the second presenting strategy for line-
drawing-strokes, that is, the while-perceiving go strategy, is
explained.
[Step 1] A subject holds the mouth in his right hand. Then,
he touches his index-fingerpad on the wheel.
[Step 2] As shown in Figure 4. , the finger-tactile interface
swivels in a specific direction. At a time, the wheel
rotates with another specific velocity under a positional
feedback control scheme: as shown in Figure 4. the
direction is given by the positional difference vector
between the present position and a sub-goal of a
desired stroke. The velocity is given by the desired
velocity at the proximal point on a desired trajectory.
[Step 3] While accepting the slippage stimulus, the subject
recognizes the stimulus as a straight line motion, and
drags AWM along with the recognized motion (see
Figure 5. ① and ②).
[Step 4] The subject memorizes the drag motion as a stroke
(see Figure 5. ③).
[Step 5] Just after memorizing stroke, the subject sends a
signal by pressing a button in his left hand.
[Step 6] Return to [Step 2] till all the strokes are presented.
Figure 4.
Explanation of a positional feedback scheme employed in
“While-Perceiving Go Strategy “ as a stroke presentation method.
The slippage velocity is given as the desired velocity at the proximal
point on a desired trajectory.
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 5.
“While-Perceiving Go Strategy “ for stroke presentation. The
step ② in this figure can be regarded as an on-line integration of the steps
② and ③ in Figure 4, i.e., the “After-Recognition Go Strategy.“
Here, note that the point of the strategy is in a position
feedback control scheme as explained in [Step 2].
IV.
BASIC EXPERIMENT
A.
Experimental Method
1)
Experimental Conditions: In order to confirm a
potential of the “after-recognition go” method as a drawing
presentation, a line-drawing-stroke presenting experiment
was carried out.
Five healthy right handed males in their 20s (22~24, 22.6
(mean) ± 0.9 (SD)) participated in the experiment. The
stroke drawings from single to three strokes were presented
as shown in Figure 6. All the strokes were of the uniform
motion, i.e., constant-velocity straight line motion. The
factors and the factor levels are shown in TABLE I. In the
experiment, the levels for each of the presentation-mode
factor and the stroke-number factor were given by a pseudo-
random order.
Figure 6.
Presented drawings used for a stroke learning experiment.
TABLE I.
FACTORS AND FACTOR LEVELS IN BASIC EXPERIMENT.
Factor
Level
Subject
5 males
Presentation strategy
While-perceiving go, After-recognition go
Presented stroke pattern
6 stroke patterns in total: 2 patterns for each of 1-
stroke, 2-strokes, and 3-strokes
Length
Randomly chosen between 50 - 150 mm
Speed
Randomly chosen between 12 - 50 mm/s
Direction
Randomly chosen between 0 - 359 deg.
2)
Procedures: The experiment was carried out by the
following procedures (see Figure 7. ).
[Step 1] For each of the presentation strategies, ARG-S or
WPG-S as described in Section III, subjects repeat
accepting slippages until they finish recognizing whole
drawing trajectories.
[Step 2] They repeat accepting slippages until they finish
recognizing the whole velocity variation.
[Step 3] They reproduce the memorized stroke trajectory by
using AWM, while the system records the mouse
movements.
Figure 7.
Experimental procedures.
3)
Evaluation Values: We obtained secants from
actual strokes where the word “secant” represents the line
segment connected from start to end point. Next, we defined
evaluation values by the differences of the lengths as well as
the angles between the secants of the actual strokes and the
desired strokes for each of the strokes (see Figure 8. ). That
is,
Δl = lsecant – ldesired
(1)
Δߠ=ߠsecant –ߠdesired
(2)
Figure 8.
Evaluation values: the differences of lengths and angles between
the secants of actual trajectory and the desired trajectory.
In addition to these, a velocity difference of vmean from
vdesired was also employed as an evaluation value:
Δv =
vmean – vdesired
(3)
where vmean is the mean velocity of the time-varying actual
velocity, and vdesired is the desired velocity.
B.
Experimental Results
As
with
some three-stroke
drawings, experimental
results of the ARG-S are shown in Figure 9. Trajectories
and velocities are shown in (a) and (b), respectively.
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

For the errors of the lengths and angles of the
reproduced trajectories, as well as the velocities, means and
standard deviations were calculated and shown in Figure 10.
(a), (b), and (c), respectively. In addition to that, the means
and standard deviations of the per-stroke time duration, i.e.,
the elapsed time, for the recognizing and memorizing steps,
[Step 2] and [Step 3], in Section IV A 2) are shown in
Figure 10. (d). Comparing the two presentation strategies,
i.e., the ARG-S and WPG-S, we found the following results.
1)
A result of t-test on population means of the errors:
There was no significant difference between the ARG-S and
the WPG-S with respect to the reproduced lengths, angles,
and velocities (see Figure 10. (a), (b), and (c), respectively.)
On the other hand, as shown in Figure 10. (d), the ARG-S
was superior to the WPG-S by a significant level of 1 %
with respect to the per-stroke time duration: a test statistic t
of 2.70 > a critical value T29,28
0.01 of 2.00 where T29,28
0.01
represents TDOF1,DOF2
significant level.
2)
A result of F-test on variance ratios of the errors:
the ARG-S was inferior to the WPG-S by a significant level
of 0.1 % with respect to the reproduced lengths and angles:
a test statistic F of 2.94 > a critical value F59,58
0.001of 2.40
with respect to the reproduced lengths; a test statistic F of
3.03 > a critical value F59,58
0.001 of 2.40 with respect to the
reproduced
angles
where
F59,58
0.001
represents
FDOF1,DOF2
significant
level.
Yet,
there
was
no
significant
difference between them with respect to the reproduced
velocities. On the other hand, the ARG-S was, vice versa,
superior to the WPG-S by a significant level of 0.1 % with
respect to the per-stroke time duration: a test statistic F of
5.57 > a critical value F29,28
0.001 of 3.34.
3)
Subjects’ report: In addition, all the subjects
reported that, especially near sub-goals, they felt much more
exhausted in the WPG-S than in the APG-S. They suggest
humans are not able to catch up with the closed-loop
feedback-control scheme: for achieving the closed-loop
feedback-control, it is necessary to respond in a short period
of time, but humans cannot respond so.
(a) Recognized trajectory.
(b) Recognized velocity variation.
Figure 9.
Some examples of the recognition with three-stroke drawings.
(a) Lengths.
(b) Angles.
(c) Velocity
(d) Time duration per stroke.
Figure 10. Root mean squared errors with respect to the recognized length,
angles, and velocities for multi-stroke drawings.
The errors of the lengths, angles, and velocities showed
little differences between the two strategies, but the time
duration showed significant differences. Therefore, the time
duration was considered to carry more significant weight
than the errors of the lengths, angles, and velocities. As a
result, the ARG-S, whose time duration had the advantages
in
terms
of
population
means
and
variances,
was
recommended for further studies.
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V.
PRACTICAL EXPERIMENT
A.
Experimental Method
1)
Experimental Conditions and Procedures: We
carried out a practical experiment in order to confirm the
effectiveness
of
the
above-selected
stroke-presention
strategy, i.e., the ARG-S. In the practical experiment, the
number of strokes was increased to five. The experimental
conditions are shown in TABLE II.
TABLE II.
FACTORS AND FACTOR LEVELS IN PRACTICAL
EXPERIMENT.
Factor
Level
Subject
3 males (around age 23)
Presentation strategy
After-recognition go strategy
Presented stroke pattern
2 patterns of 5-strokes
Length
Randomly chosen between 10 - 150 mm
Speed
Randomly chosen between 12.5 - 70 mm/s
Direction
Randomly chosen between 0 - 359 deg.
The procedures were almost the same as those in Section
IV.A.2) except that each of the strokes was presented only
once, and no repetition was allowed. In addition, the
presented lengths were individually adjusted to each of the
subjects to cancel the foreshortening effect of perceived
lengths as shown in Figure 10.
B.
Experimental Results
Experimental results are shown in Figure 11. In this
figure, presented drawing patterns are shown in the leftmost
cells, and the perceived drawing patters are in the other
cells.
Figure 11. Experimental results of multi-stroke line drawing perception by
using the active-wheel mouse.
Although it leaves much to be improved, the perceived
drawing patterns capture the essential features of such
complicated patterns. It shows a potential of the proposed
finger tactile interface and the stroke presentation strategy.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Two multiple-stroke presenting strategies using a tactile
interface, i.e., AWM were presented: one is an after-
recognition go strategy, and the other is a while-perceiving
go strategy. As a result of multiple-stroke recognition
experiments, the following conclusions were confirmed.
Although the after-recognition go strategy was inferior to
the while-perceiving go strategy in terms of the variance
ratios of the errors with respect to the lengths and angles, the
after-recognition go strategy was, vice versa, superior to the
while-perceiving go strategy in terms of the time duration
from the viewpoints of population means and variance ratios.
In addition to that, all the subjects reported that they were
much more exhausted in the while-perceiving go strategy
than in the after-recognition go strategy. As a result, it can be
said that the while-perceiving go strategy that does employ a
closed-loop on-line positional feedback scheme does not
work well, while the after-recognition go strategy that
employs an open-loop control scheme does work better.
In the future, accuracy and efficiency need to be
improved. Although it is difficult, further extension of
applicable scope, such as curved strokes and accelerated
strokes is expected.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly supported by KAKENHI (Grant-in-
Aid for Challenging Exploratory Research 15H02929 from
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS)
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Tsuda, N. Kato, and Y. Nomura, “Instruction of arm motion for
calligraphy using
vibrotactile
stimulations,”
2011
IEEE/ASME
International Conference in
Advanced
Intelligent Mechatronics
(AIM), pp. 677-682, 2011.
[2]
A. Causo, S. H. Yeo, and I. M. Chen, “Vibrotactile motors on
stationary arm as directional feedback to correct arm posture,” 2012
IEEE/ASME
International
Conference
in
Advanced
Intelligent
Mechatronics (AIM), pp. 202-207, 2012.
[3]
S. L. Norman, A. J. Doxon, B. T. Gleeson, and W. R. Provancher,
“Planar hand motion guidance using fingertip skin-stretch feedback,”
IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 121-130, 2014.
[4]
A. Ion, E. J. Wang, and P. Baudisch, “Skin drag displays: dragging a
physical tactor across the user's skin produces a stronger tactile
stimulus than vibrotactile,” Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2501-
2504, 2015.
[5]
Y. Nomura and S. Oike, “Active-wheel mouse for human-computer
interface:
slippage-perception
characteristics
on
fingerpad,”
Proceedings of 10th International Conference, UAHCI 2016, Part of
HCI International 2016, part II, pp. 54-61, 2016.
[6]
Y. Nomura, Y. Kashino, and S. Oike, “Proposal of active-wheel-
based finger-tactile interface and its slippage-presenting functions,”
Transactions of the JSME, vol. 83, no. 852, pp. 1-17, 2017 (in
Japanese)
[7]
Y. Nomura and K. Iwabu, “Length perceptual characteristics on
raised-dot slippages,” Human-Computer Interfaces and Interactivity:
Emergent Research and Applications, IGI Global, pp. 286-308, 2014.
[8]
Y. Nomura and H. Kato, “Raised-dot slippage perception on
fingerpad using active wheel device,” Recent Advances on Using
Virtual Reality Technologies for Rehabilitation, Nova Science
Publishers, Inc. New York, pp. 165-172, 2015.
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

