Finding Common Ground: Design Cards Supporting Mutual Learning in Co-design 
 
Tina Helene Bunæs, Michelle Husebye, Joakim Karlsen  
Department of Computer Science and Communication,   
Faculty of Computer Science, Engineering and Economics  
Østfold University College  
1757 Halden, Norway  
tina.h.bunas@hiof.no ,  michelle.husebye@hiof.no, joakim.karlsen@hiof.no  
 
 
Abstract—This article explores how design cards can support 
mutual learning between researchers in design and non-
designers in the fuzzy front end of a design process. We present 
a case where we created and used bespoke design cards in a co-
design workshop with educators and students at a medical 
training center in Norway. The goal of the co-design process 
was to design a mixed reality training solution for simulating 
medical procedures. Findings suggest that the cards enabled 
non-designers to have a say in the design process, facilitated 
for mutual learning across disciplines, and broke down 
barriers 
for 
collaboration. 
The 
cards 
enabled 
active 
participation and empowered the medical educators to take a 
first step from consumers to designers of information and 
communication technology (ICT) solutions. The paper 
contributes to the growing body of literature on design cards, 
co-design and participatory design, and we discuss the 
potential of design cards as boundary objects that can facilitate 
co-realization of ICT solutions across professional boundaries.  
Keywords-design cards; co-design; participatory design; 
design games; mutual learning. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Co-design has become an important approach in the 
design of ICT solutions in the past decades, and the methods 
and tools that can be used in the design process has grown 
exponentially [1]. In this strand of design, collective 
creativity between designers and people not trained in design 
practices is a core activity [2]. Designers, developers, end-
users, and stakeholders come together in the various phases 
of a design process.   
To secure active participation, Participatory Design (PD) 
is another design approach where users are invited in as 
partners equal to designers and developers throughout the 
different phases of design [3]. Bratteteig and Wagner [4] 
explain that the power to decide the scope and the shape of a 
technical solution needs to be shared with those who will use 
it. Principles like having a say, decision-making, mutual 
learning, and co-realization lie at the very core of PD. 
Having a say enables users to influence the design process by 
having their voices heard in the design decisions being made 
[5]. With mutual learning, the people involved in a design 
process should learn from each other’s expertise, work 
context and practice. Bratteteig, Bødker, Dittrich, Mogensen 
and Simonsen [5] also explain that involvement, or co-
realization, is important. Here, visualizing possible solutions 
is a priority as it may be difficult for different users to 
imagine design possibilities. While involving users as active 
participants in a project can lead to more conclusive design 
outcomes, there are several issues that can arise when 
researchers, designers and users collaborate. Co-design 
requires creative initiative from the entire collaborative team, 
and a lack of design expertise can make the users feel like 
they can’t contribute meaningfully to a design process [6]. 
One explanation is a lack of familiarity with design 
processes and the terminology used by expert designers. If 
the users are to successfully be part of a design team they 
must be given the right tools. These tools must allow them to 
express themselves without having to adopt specialized 
design languages. To ensure constructive and meaningful 
collaboration, researchers and designers have created various 
methods, tools and techniques that can be brought into the 
design process [7]. These are used to provide inspiration to 
the team and to facilitate collaborative activities. They are 
especially valuable in early design phases where the object 
of design is still unknown and the design problems are still 
being explored.  
One such tool is design cards. Design cards are used for 
fostering creativity in design processes, and have been 
designed for a variety of different purposes, contexts and 
domains [8][9]. Described as tools for generating ideas and 
new design concepts, design cards are reportedly used in 
domains like education, gaming, in exploring social issues 
and design of new ICT solutions [10]–[12]. Design cards can 
support design dialogues and discussions, and can structure 
the design process by making the process visible and less 
abstract [9]. Physical, tangible cards are easy to use and 
manipulate and can act as a common reference between 
participants.  
The aim of the study is to investigate collaboration and 
creative thinking between researchers in design and non-
designers in the early phases of a design process. Together 
with educators at a medical training center in Norway, we 
explore the design of a mixed reality training simulator. By 
mixed reality, we mean combining the physical environment 
with virtual elements to create immersive experiences. The 
center wants to implement virtual simulations that enable 
students and medical practitioners to train on procedures that 
are hard to simulate with the equipment already available at 
the center. To facilitate for active participation and 
meaningful design dialogues, the researchers created the 
MixED design cards and used them in a co-design workshop 
with participants from the medical center. The MixED card 
set contains 46 bespoke cards divided into five categories 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

tailored to the specific context of medical practice and virtual 
simulations supporting that practice. The goal of using these 
cards in a co-design workshop was to investigate how the 
cards 
could 1) enable non-designers to 
contribute 
meaningfully to a design process, and 2) facilitate for 
collaboration and mutual understanding of the design 
problem. Based on this, we ask:  
RQ: why do a deck of bespoke design cards support 
researchers in design and non-designers in finding common 
ground?  
The paper is structured as follows: Section II provides an 
overview of design cards as a tool for co-creativity. In 
Section III, we explore important principles in co-design and 
PD. Section IV shed light on the theoretical concept of 
boundary objects. In Section V, we describe the methods 
used in this study, and Section VI gives a detailed account of 
the co-design workshop. Findings from the study are 
summarized in Section VII. In Section VIII, we discuss what 
our findings mean for the design community. Lastly, Section 
IX will summarize and conclude the study with future works. 
II.
DESIGN CARDS  SUPPORTING CO-CREATIVITY
Researchers have created various tools and techniques to 
successfully bring future users into the design process, 
including probes, mock-ups, prototypes, design games and 
toolkits [1][7][13][14]. Design games are promising 
approaches that can structure design activities [14]. Toolkits 
have been created for PD activities and are considered 
appropriate for engaging and inspiring non-designers [1]. In 
the front end of design, toolkits and design games are used to 
facilitate collaborative activities and support non-designers 
in expressing ideas about how they want to live, work and 
play. In reviewing analogue ideation tools, Peters, Loke and 
Ahmadpour [13] found that card-based tools, like card decks 
and card games, have become popular in collaborative 
ideation with future users. Design cards are accessible, 
analogue and tangible. They are instantly recognizable and 
can therefore serve as shared references between groups of 
diverse people [15]. Previous studies illustrate how design 
cards have been used in many contexts and domains, 
including exertion game design [16], tangible designs [17], 
and for playful experiences [18]. By presenting keywords, 
pictures and questions the cards facilitate for creativity by 
acting as a source of inspiration [17][19]. Cards with these 
types of cues (keywords, pictures, and questions) can lead to 
a more tangible and applicable transformation of theory 
[17][20]. Through these cues, design cards can provoke new 
contextual perspectives that extend beyond personal 
experiences [19].  Additionally, their tangibility can support 
integration with objects such as notes and sketches [21]. 
According to Bornoe, Bruun and Stage [8], design cards can 
be used to ‘rephrase abstract frameworks into something 
more operational’ [ibid, p. 2]. Design cards can help identify 
design opportunities prior to designing the product or service 
in the early phase of design and can either be general or 
tailored to specific contexts and use cases. 
As an endeavor to classify design cards, several reviews 
of design cards have been made [9][13][22]. Reviewing 18 
design cards, Wölfel and Merritt [9] divide the cards into 
three categories constituted by purpose and scope: general 
(used for open-ended inspiration), Participatory Design (used 
to facilitate collaboration) and context specific or agenda 
driven.  Of the 18 decks, six of them were used in PD, but 
with varying degree of customization and rules of use. A 
newer classification was made by Roy and Warren [22]. In 
analyzing 155 design cards they propose six main (but 
overlapping) categories: 1) creative thinking and problem 
solving, 2) domain-specific design, 3) human-centered 
design, 4) systematic design methods and procedures, 5) 
team building and collaborative work, and 6) future thinking. 
The latter three is proportionally smaller than the first three. 
After a validation of the classification, only four decks were 
presented in the category ‘team building and collaborative 
work’, including the Group Works, Totem cards, SILK, and 
Bootleg Method Cards. Further, they explain that within 
participation and collaboration, three subcategories were 
found: 1) direct end-user participation (15,5%), 2) help 
designers identify user’s abilities, needs, and wants (11,6%), 
and 3) facilitate collaboration between professionals and 
experts (34,8%).   
In our search, we have found that design cards are used 
for co-realization and visualizing future design possibilities. 
According to Myers, Piccolo and Collins [10], design cards 
can also democratize knowledge, support collaborative 
design, and can enable more engaging design experiences 
and results. They do, however, report limited studies 
presenting 
methodologies 
for 
collaborative 
design 
cards.  Studies exploring why design cards can facilitate for 
collaboration in early design phases of ICT solutions are 
scarce, 
especially 
regarding 
mutual 
learning 
and 
collaboration across professional boundaries. 
III.
SECURING PARTICIPATION AND CREATIVE INITIATIVE
Over the last decades, commercial businesses and design
and research communities have recognized the importance of 
the user’s needs [6]. User-centric design approaches have 
been applied in design processes to involve future users in 
the design of, e.g., ICT solutions. Two strands of user-
oriented approaches that involve users in a larger degree is 
co-design and PD.  
In co-design, future users are given room to inform, 
ideate and conceptualize design solutions, bringing their 
domain expertise into the design process. Here, researchers, 
designers and non-designers come together, letting collective 
creativity influences the design process. These collaborative 
endeavors are increasingly undertaken early in a design 
process, in what Sanders and Stappers [6] refer to as the 
‘fuzzy’ front end of design due to the ‘[…] ambiguity and 
chaotic nature that characterise it’ (ibid, page 4). As illustrate 
in Figure 1, the design outcome is here often unknown and 
can be informed and explored alongside future users.    
PD evolved as a design approach in Scandinavia in the 
70’s, and centered around joint-decision making in the 
workplace empowering resource weak stakeholders (usually 
local trade unions) [6][23]. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1.  Sanders and Stappers [6] illustrating the co-desing process. 
Researchers engaged in PD want to ensure that future 
users are given more influence and initiative in the design 
and are seen as ‘partner’ in the process. The motivation for 
choosing PD as a design approach varies from being a 
political position, where users have the right to influence a 
design solution, to a more pragmatic view where allowing 
users to inform and participate in the creation of design 
makes it easier to create suitable design outcomes [3]. Over 
the decades, the research community has elevated several 
core principles important for a successful PD process. At the 
heart of PD lies a premise that those affected by a design 
solution should ‘have a say’ in the design process [5][23]. 
This has consequences for how the process is organized and 
which methods and tools are made available to the user 
partaking in the process. Design is about decision-making, 
and the choices we make during a PD process are shared 
with future users [4]. PD opens up for collaborative decision-
making which Bratteteig and Wagner [4] explain are the 
exercise of shared power. This shared power, alongside a 
shared and mutual understanding, regulate the decision-
making process. Mutual learning is another guiding principle 
in PD. Here, mutual respect between two collaborative 
partners is achieved by letting them learn about each other’s 
mindsets and work practices [5]. Researchers and designers 
need to learn about the domain and activities of the 
participants and non-designers in the project, and vice versa. 
The partners need to build trust and share knowledge across 
fields 
of 
practice. 
Through 
mutual 
learning 
and 
interdisciplinary knowledge sharing, the collaborative team 
can generate ideas and visions about new design solutions 
and practices. Another principle in PD is co-realization. 
Here, prototypes, tool and techniques play an important role 
in visualizing possible design solutions [5]. Tangle artifacts 
are used to help the team make appropriate decisions.  
Bringing together stakeholders with potentially diverging 
perspectives can challenge participation [7]. The research 
communities engaged in co-design and PD have shed light 
on various challenges and issues that can arise in settings of 
collaborative decision-making [3]. Sanders and Stappers [6] 
present several issues regarding co-design and society’s 
reluctance to adopt the approach. Firstly, co-design 
principles are in direct opposition of the power structures in 
many business communities; hierarchies and control are 
cornerstones in many manufacturing companies and asking 
them to give up this control have been met with reluctance. 
Secondly, in adopting co-design perspectives one must 
believe that all people are creative. Many people find it 
difficult to think of themselves as creative and are therefore 
reluctant to take a more active role as a co-designer in a 
design project. A successful co-design process requires 
creative initiative from the entire team and the participants 
must fully commit to the role.  
Securing participation and creative initiative through 
design artifacts that can support future users in visualizing 
possible design solutions is therefore important. Enabling 
future users to communicate and discuss design problems 
and outcomes through, e.g., mock-ups and prototypes has 
been important from the very beginning of PD. These design 
tools lessen the need for users to adopt the specialized and 
technical language of designers [3].  
IV.
THEORETICAL CONCEPT
Due to divergent perspectives among stakeholders, 
maintaining coherence across different practices can be 
difficult. In studying these differences, Star and Greisemer 
[24] propose the concept of boundary objects as a key for
enabling cross-disciplinary collaboration. Boundary objects
are objects or artifacts that serve as a means of
communication and translation between interdisciplinary
groups. They describe boundary objects as
…objects which are both plastic enough to adapt to local 
needs and the constraints of the several parties employing 
them, yet robust enough to maintain a common identity 
across site (ibid, p. 8).  
Boundary objects can be both abstract or concrete and 
can have different meaning depending on the social world 
observing or using them. Their structure should, however, be 
common enough to be recognized by multiple worlds.  They 
are external representations of reality which simplifies an 
issue so that it more easily can be communicated [25]. In 
their work on boundary objects, Morris et al., [26], referring 
to the work of Zeitlyn [27], shed light on a three-way 
relationship between 1) what is being represented (reality), 
2) the representation itself (the boundary object) and 3) the
intentions of the maker of the object and the audience. While
boundary objects are created with a specific intention, they
take on a separate identity once produced. A person’s
interpretation of a boundary object reflects their perception
of reality, and the maker of the object can not predict how
the object will be used and interpretated by a user.
Dalsgaard, Halskov and Basballe [28] provide an 
overview of the work on boundary objects done by the 
research community. Here, they explain how Bertelsen [29] 
used the concept of boundary objects to explain how design 
artifacts act as mediators between groups in a design process, 
and how Bechky [30] introduced the concept of 
transformative boundary objects. With transformative 
boundary objects, knowledge is shared between professional 
boundaries and members of one group reaches a new 
understanding of a problem or topic based on the knowledge 
shared by the other group, altering and enriching their world 
view. It expands the understanding of a process or product, 
and this again enhances the person’s understanding of his 
own work, shedding new light on the world.  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Jean et al., [31] explain how serious games (games 
intended for other purposes than entertainment, e.g., for 
education and training) can function as a catalyst for 
boundary crossing where stakeholders with different 
professions, ideologies and perspectives collaborate. Here, 
boundary objects, in the form of artifacts, people or even 
institutions, play an important role in bridging the space 
between actors, and act as a mean to align different 
perspectives. A balance must, however, be found between 
rigidity and flexibility so that the object can unite different 
interests and also encompass the many practices they seek to 
unite. Morris et al., [26] suggest using structured boundary 
objects in the form of a board game to facilitate exposing and 
reconciling trade-offs between stakeholders with different 
incentives, perspectives and values in local agri-food 
systems. They explain how games can both organize 
knowledge and produce comparable visual outputs useful for 
communication.   
V.
RESEARCH METHOD 
In this Section, we give an overview of the research 
method, including research activities like project meetings 
and card-making activities. We describe the methods of data 
collection and analysis, as well as ethical considerations for 
the study.   
A.
Research method
In this study we use qualitative methods when inquiring
into 
how 
and 
why 
design 
cards 
facilitated 
for 
interdisciplinary co-design of ICTs.  
1)
Data collection
Data was collected through various activities including
formal project meetings, direct observation during physical 
simulations, an online workshop, and a pilot workshop using 
a first draft of the design cards. Lastly, a co-design workshop 
using the MixED design cards was held with medical 
educators and students. 
a) Formal project meetings
Three formal project meetings were held between the 17th
of June 2021 and 21st of March 2022 between the researchers 
and three stakeholders from the medical center. The 
stakeholders were a senior lecturer and educator (early 60s), 
a facilitator, student advisor and educator (late 30s), and the 
third was an associate professor (early 50s). The purpose of 
the meetings was to establish a shared understanding of the 
project and the fields of practice as a basis for a project plan 
developed by the first author. Here, note-taking were used to 
record ideas and discussions. In the third meeting, held 
online due to Covid-19, were held with the first and second 
author and the three representatives from the medical center. 
Data was collected through written notes and a screen 
recording which was later transcribed.  
b) Observation during physical simulations
Unstructured direct observation was made of two
physical simulations at the training center. Simulation #1 
was a student-driven simulation held on the 1st of December 
2021. This simulation included eight Bachelor students in 
paramedic, two students in continuing education in 
emergency nursing and two educators facilitating the 
simulation. The first author followed the group of students 
for two hours during three different medical scenarios. Data 
was recorded through field notes, and from informal 
conversations with the facilitators and three students. The 
notes were written into the researcher’s field diary. A follow-
up, semi-structured formal discussion between the first 
author and one of the facilitators were also held.  
Unstructured direct observation was also performed 
during simulation #2 on the 10th of March 2022. Here, the 
first and second author observed a full-scale emergency drill 
involving educators at the medical center, around 100 
paramedic and specialist nurse students, medical workers 
from a Norwegian hospital, emergency services in the 
municipality and Red Cross. The researchers followed the 
drill for two hours, and recorded data in the form of 
individual note-taking and conversations between the 
researchers documented in a memo by the first author.  
The primary goal of observing these activities was to 
understand how the physical simulations were conducted and 
their desired learning outcomes.  
c) Card-making activities
The design cards were made in an iterative design
process using collaborative brainstorming between the first 
and second author. The brainstorming was based on several 
activities including 1) project meetings with the three 
stakeholders in the project, 2) direct observations of 
physical simulations, 3) e-mail correspondence were 
stakeholders expressed what type of scenarios they found 
suitable for a mixed reality simulation, and 4) informal 
conversations and discussions with the participants. The 
first and second author held six design workshops lasting 
between 1 to 4,5 hours. In total, 19 hours were spent 
designing the cards. In addition to the information from the 
activities, the researchers took inspiration from previous 
research on design cards, like the PLEX-cards and the 
Ideation Decks [18][32], and a similar study undertaken by 
the third author in another research context.  In total, 46 
cards divided into five categories were created. The 
categories, as illustrated in Table 1, include 1) simulation, 2) 
medium, 3) interaction, 4) learning outcomes and 5) 
challenges. As illustrated in Figure 2, the layout of the cards 
is simple: each card has a written label and an abstract or 
figurative image meant to spark inspiration and individual 
interpretation. The images were downloaded from royalty 
free services like Unsplash. The researchers also created 
rules for the design cards stipulating how the cards should 
be used in a workshop. These are further explained in 
Section VI.  
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I. 
CATEGORIES AND LABELS IN THE MIXED DESIGN CARDS 
Category  
Cards and labels  
Scenario 
Traffic accident, drowning accident, fire accident, 
home nursing, psychiatry, accident site, prison, 
falling accident, inside the body, overdose, heart 
attack.  
Medium 
2D images (slideshow), 2D video, 3D video, 360-
video, Augment Reality (AR), Virtual Reality 
(VR), Mixed Reality (MR). 
Interaction 
Speech, gesticulating, holding objects, movement, 
looking, feeling, buttons 
Learning outcomes 
Empathy, time management, stress management, 
collaboration, multitasking, communication, 
physical skills, technical skill, confidence, focus, 
problem-solving, critical thinking, adaptivity, 
leadership 
Challenges  
How to perform this individually? How to 
perform in a group? How does an instructor fit in? 
There is too little time. Too small or big space. 
How does teamwork work? How does a marker fit 
in? 
d) Pilot workshop
The three researchers held a pilot test of the design cards
in a workshop with ICT students. The workshop was 
facilitated by the first and second author, with the third 
author joining the students in testing the cards. Here, data 
was collected through note-taking during the workshop and 
in the follow-up discussion with the students.  
a) Co-design workshop with desig cards
A two-hour co-design workshop with five educators and
facilitators from the medical training center, three bachelor 
students and the researchers was held on the 1st of March 
2022.  Data was collected through audio recordings, pictures, 
note-taking, follow-up conversations with participants, and 
Figure 2.  Layout of the design cards. 
the design outcomes from each group in the form of Post-
it notes and paper sketches. The workshop is further 
described in Section VI. The primary goal of this activity 
was to use the design cards as a generative tool to 1) ideate 
and conceptualize content for a mixed reality training room 
and 2) to facilitate collaboration between educators, students, 
and researchers.   
2)
Data analysis
Data from the observations, project meetings and
workshops were analyzed by the first and second author. The 
first author used data from memos, the research diary and 
audio and video recordings to categorize important findings 
that would later be made into the cards.   
The second author used thematic analysis when 
transcribing and analyzing the data.  Thematic analysis is a 
method used for analyzing qualitative data by sorting and 
coding the data, and create relevant themes across datasets 
[33]. The process of analysis is illustrated in Table 2 and 
includes 1) organizing and preparing the data for analysis, 
transcribing the audio and video recording, 2) coding the 
datasets, 3) winnowing the data, 4) reviewing categories, 5) 
generating themes. Themes are data that correlated to each 
other from multiple sources, like a participant’s statements 
and actions in the workshop. This inductive process ensured 
the finding of relevant and related information across 
multiple datasets. 
TABLE II. 
THE PROCESS OF ANALYZING DATA 
Steps 
Activities 
Codes and themes 
Preparing data 
Transcribing audio 
and video recordings.  
Code 
Color-coding all the 
data with wider 
categories.  
Codes: working together, 
explanation, annoyed or angry, 
creative, impressed, struggling, 
amused, decisive, personal 
experience 
Winnowing  
Winnowing the 
already color-coded 
data two times. 
Narrowing and 
choosing important 
finings.  
Reviewing 
categories 
Defining and 
renaming categories, 
combining categories,  
Positive experience: amused, 
intrigues/curious, engaged, 
impressed. 
Negative experience: confused, 
having difficulties, annoyed. 
Collaboration and group 
dynamic: working together, 
creativity, decisive. 
Previous experiences: own 
experiences, working together, 
engagement. 
Generating 
themes 
Themes emerged for 
further analyzing the 
categories  
Creative collaboration, own 
experience, stakeholder 
experience, technology domain 
knowledge, health domain 
knowledge, use of domain-
specific terms, understanding 
the rules [in the workshop], 
feedback.  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B.
Research ethics
This study was conducted following institutional
guidelines for research ethics from Østfold University 
College and the Norwegian Center for Research Data (NSD). 
Data management and consent forms used in the project 
were approved by NSD (NSD number 788872). Participants 
partaking in activities where images, video and audio 
recordings were used for data collection were informed of 
the purpose of the study and how the data would be used. 
Participants gave written approval regarding data collection 
and analysis, permitting information to be used in scientific 
publications and other dissemination work. To ensure the 
confidentiality and privacy of the participants, the data 
collected during the workshops and meetings was stored in a 
secure location not accessible to the public. Only the three 
researchers involved in the study has access to the data, and 
participants were anonymized in the analysis.  
Direct observation of the physical simulations took place 
without informed consent from participants. The purpose of 
this observation was to gain insight into the everyday life of 
medical educators, students, and other partitioners. Data 
collected during these activities are in the form of written 
notes and memos, and no personal or identifiable data were 
collected.  
VI.
USING DESIGN CARDS IN A CO-DESIGN WORKSHOP AT
THE MEDICAL TRAINING CENTER 
This study aims to explore the design of an immersive 
and virtual training simulator for the medical training center. 
The center is currently equipped with manikins, physical 
simulators, welfare technology, and medical equipment. 
Personnel at the center want to investigate how a now empty 
room can function as a virtual training simulator for students 
and medical practitioners. The goal of the project is to 
explore how the training simulator can be designed to 
support learning opportunities by allowing users to practice 
different sequences of medical events in a safe environment. 
Together with medical educators and facilitators at the 
centers, we explore design solutions for this virtual training 
simulator. The MixED design cards and rules for the co-
design workshop were created based on several project 
meetings between participants and researchers, direct 
observation of physical simulations, and collaborative 
brainstorming between the first and second author. The card 
deck consists of 46 cards divided into five categories. Each 
card has a written label and an abstract or figurative image 
meant to spark inspiration and interpretation.  
In this two-hour co-design workshop, nine participants 
were divided into three smaller teams. Two of the teams had 
two medical educators or facilitators (age mid-30s to early 
60s) and one student (in their 20s). In the last group, the third 
author partook as the third member to get equal groups. The 
first author facilitated the workshop, beginning with a 15-
minute introduction to the design cards and the rules of the 
co-design activity. The workshop was divided into four 
phases: individual assignment, group assignment 1, group 
assignment 2, and presentation of scenarios.  
In the individual assignment, each team member selected 
one random card from each category (except a challenge 
card which were introduced later). As illustrated in Figure 3, 
Post-it notes and paper sheets were used to write down ideas 
about possible medical scenarios in a rapid idea generation 
activity. This activity lasted five minutes and was repeated 
three times.  
In the second and third phase, the team got together and 
discussed their ideas, selecting and possible merging the 
ideas into one scenario. In phase three, we introduced the 
challenge cards. The participants first picked one challenge-
card and repeated the processes three times over the course 
of 
15 
minutes. 
This 
challenged 
them 
to 
discuss 
organizational issues with the scenario they were currently 
working on.  
As illustrated in Figure 4, each team presented their 
scenario in front of the other groups at the end of the 
workshop, prompting a discussion among the different 
teams.  
Figure 3.  Participants discussing and generating ideas with design cards 
in the workshop. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4.  Participant presenting the scenario.  
VII. 
FINDINGS 
The findings are presented in two parts. First, we cover 
the insights gained from the initial design phase leading up to 
the creation of the design cards. Here, we identify 
misunderstandings and design opportunities from the fuzzy 
front end of the design process. We then present the findings 
from the co-design workshop using the design cards.  
A.
The fuzzy front end
One of the more evident discoveries from the early
design phase was the language barriers that divided the two 
different practices. We spent a lot of time trying to explain 
different domain-specific concepts. Concepts that we had 
already covered in previous meetings were brought up again 
in the second and third project meeting. One of the 
participants expressed a lack of understanding and 
confusions around terminology in the project plan. There 
were concepts from ICT that medical practitioners found 
hard to understand, as well as concepts from their practice 
field that the researchers used incorrectly. The team strived 
(and failed) to establish the expectations of the collaboration 
early on. There was no clear consensus on what the 
researchers expect from the medical practitioners, and vice 
versa. This was an issue long into the project, where 
misunderstandings about practices played a large role. We 
failed to establish a common ground in initial project 
meetings. The educators at the center alternated between 
different ICT concepts during this early phase, discussing 
different technical and physical solutions and requirement. 
Parallel, the researchers tried to explain that they wanted the 
practitioners to participate in a co-design process where we 
explore requirements together through a series of design 
workshops. Later, in the online project meeting, the 
participants discussed two different projects that they wanted 
to simulate. In the first one, they wished to simulate events 
that are difficult to train on with the equipment they already 
have (e.g., a fire in a tunnel or a highway car accident) using 
projector technology. The other project should simulate 
internal bodily functions, where the student can “stand” 
inside the body and observe blood levels and explore what 
happens inside the body, e.g., during an infectious disease. 
While 
discussing 
these 
two 
ideas, 
one 
participant 
commented that the important thing was to decide what 
technology should be installed in the room, and what type of 
requirements was needed to rig and equip the room, saying: 
…What kind of projectors should we have, what kind of 
PC should we have. In other words, all these physical 
prerequisites, that is what needs to be in place first before 
you start thinking about different technologies. […] But 
in my understanding, the first thing we really have to do 
is figure out how to rig this room. And I’m missing that 
in the project plan. #1 
The participant explained that they wanted the ICT 
solution up and running as soon as possible, and wanted the 
researchers to start investigating possible hardware and 
software applications that could be bought or developed. One 
researcher stressed that the technical requirements would be 
made clearer later in the design process, after we’ve held 
collaborative workshops as described in the project plan. The 
design workshops would clarify what they need this room 
and the training simulation to be, and then we could decide 
on which technology would be best suited to support this. As 
there were disagreements between the participants on what 
they wanted the room to be, the second author asked them 
for clarification, where one of the participants answered ‘[I] 
don’t think we disagree on what we need, but from my 
perspective it’s what we need first’. #1   
As the design process progressed, we also found ample 
opportunities to learn from each other’s different experiences 
and expertise. In the second project meeting, a lot of time 
were spent cleaning up the terminology to find common 
ground and a shared understanding. For example, one 
participant asked what the researchers meant regarding 
‘Mixed Reality’. Explaining and discussing this, we agreed 
upon a definition. Likewise, they explained terms like 
training modules, simulations and simulators, which the 
researcher had used incorrectly in regard to how these were 
use in the context of medical practice. Here, they also 
expressed wanting an adaptable ICT solution that supports 
continuous creation of training simulations. A platform that 
could evolve over time so as not to be insufficient in a year 
or two. During the online workshop, participants partook in 
brainstorming activities with the researchers regarding the 
content of the simulator. We already had a list of different 
scenarios sent in an earlier e-mail correspondence between 
participants and researchers (e.g., home accidents, drowning 
accidents, noisy environments). Early in the online meeting, 
they also expressed wanting state of the art immersive ICT 
solutions, like Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality 
(VR) and reflected on what medium would be best suited for 
different types of content. After discussing logistics and 
organizational challenges with these technologies, they 
further considered more cost-effective solutions, like using 
standard imagery or 360 video in a CAVE-system. We also 
discussed interaction types, management of large groups of 
students, and platform usability.   
After clarifying disagreements about ICT requirements 
and what they wanted from this system, we (to some degree) 
found a common ground. Participants expressed wanting to 
focus on projectors with interactive sensors. They wanted to 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

have scenarios that multiple students from different medical 
fields could use to train on situations that are hard to 
simulate or teach with the equipment they already have. 
They also wanted a solution that mixed the physical and the 
virtual environment. We also agreed upon the need for a 
user-friendly solution as the students are most likely to 
operate the simulation themselves.  
B.
Using design cards in the co-design workshop
Using the MixED design cards in the co-design
workshop prompted both positive and negative feedback. 
Most of the participants were not familiar with design 
workshops using design cards to ideate and generate design 
solutions. Many expressed confusion early in the workshop 
and when we introduced the challenge-cards in the third 
round. It became evident that the concepts had different 
meanings and connotations based on the background of the 
participant, which led many participants to ask the facilitator 
for clarifications. In the audio recordings, one participant that 
did not understand one of the labels are heard saying ‘I don’t 
know the subject. I just have to come up with something’ #3-
3. Some participants expressed annoyance about improper
use of labels. One example being the card suggesting using
Mixed Reality as a medium. Here, the designer used the
abbreviation MR, which in medical practice in Norway
refers to MRI scanning. Another participant said that
…what is the difference between [the label] and the 
practical skills? Yes, [the researchers] does not know the 
concept here. #3-1 
There was confusion about the rules of the card game at 
the beginning of a new round, e.g., when one participant 
drew the same card twice. This was not specified in the rule-
sheet they were given.   
Although there was confusion around the labels and rules 
at the beginning of a new round, many participants quickly 
got comfortable using the cards to generate ideas. Many 
displayed both engagement and enjoyment when creating 
different scenarios. This is seen during the intended five-
minute break, where all groups remained seated, continuing 
to discuss and create content. Multiple participants expressed 
that using the cards in an organized co-design workshop 
provided new perspectives on ICT solutions for simulating 
medical processes. One participant said that:  
…this is the kind [of training simulations] that we can 
actually get to make, isn’t it?”, another adding that “and 
what I think is very good now is that this is a very 
feasible scenario. #1-3 
In the follow-up conversation after the workshop were 
finished, one participant expressed that the workshop was a 
great learning experience, that the design cards “forced” 
them to think creatively and to come up with achievable 
concepts.  
…[Brainstorming with design cards] makes you think 
new and differently, and you are influenced by how 
others think […] and that’s how you come up with new 
ideas. #4 
One participant with extensive experience about learning 
methodologies explained that the workshop showed them 
how to “think backwards” regarding the methods they 
normally would use to achieve specific learning outcomes, 
and that ‘[design cards] challenges us to think in a different 
way, so it was very exciting’. #3 
At the end of the workshop the groups presented their 
ideas for the rest of the participants. They showed excitement 
for each other’s concepts and discussed possibilities and 
challenges with the scenarios.    
VIII. DISCUSSION
In this discussion, we shed light on how the design cards 
worked in supporting collaboration and finding common 
ground between the designers and non-designers. We discuss 
possible explanations for the challenges we faced early in the 
design process, and why the design cards helped ease the 
collaboration in the workshop. We also discuss the design 
cards in regard to the concept of boundary objects. We then 
discuss the role played by the cards in giving the non-
designers a voice and how the cards helped co-realize design 
solutions across disciplines.  
Myers, Piccolo and Collins [10] suggest that design cards 
can democratize knowledge and support co-design process 
by enabling more engaging and playful design experiences. 
We find that this also applies in our study. The layout and 
design of the cards, alongside the rules in the workshop, 
provoked new contextual perspectives regarding design 
problems and possible ICT solutions. This corresponds well 
with the discussions made by Kwiatkowska, Szóstek and 
Lamas [19]. The MixED design cards were suitable as a 
toolkit 
for 
promoting 
collaboration 
between 
an 
interdisciplinary team of researchers in design and non-
designers in the fuzzy front end of a design process. As a 
tangible tool, it helped co-realize and visualizing possible 
design solutions. 
According to Bratteteig, Bødker, Dittrich, Mogensen and 
Simonsen [5], future users should be given the power to 
influence the decisions made during a design process. In 
early projects meetings, the voice the participants had were 
influenced by their understanding of design and development 
processes. They are not accustomed to design practices of 
ICT solutions; the various welfare technologies at the 
training center are developed by companies specializing in 
creating and selling medical simulators. The result of this 
was seen in the early projects meetings; the participants 
disagreed on what they needed this simulator to be and 
divided much attention to what technology to buy, how the 
room should be rigged and how quickly we could get the 
simulator running. This is discussed by Bratteteig and 
Wagner [3] as a challenge when dealing with ‘wicked’ and 
‘ill-defined’ design problems, explain that ‘most design 
processes are open-ended, often exploratory, and highly 
complex' (ibid, p. 5). It is important to make design decisions 
that support the ability to remake design choices and closing 
in on a design solution too early in the process puts 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

unwanted restrictions on the possible design outcome. What 
is interesting, is that although the participants expressed 
wanting a solution that where ’open’ enough to evolve over 
time (which were not possible in the welfare technologies 
they usually bought), they wanted to hasten the design 
process by jumping straight to buying state of the art ICTs. 
We understand this contradiction as their unfamiliarity with 
the practice of design and our role as design researchers (and 
not developers). Explaining what we wanted to accomplish 
when inviting them to partake in the project as co-designers, 
trying to convince them to take a step back from technology 
specifications and be a part of a design process, was passed 
over multiple times. This is a common issue with co-design 
and participatory design. Different practices, unclear roles 
and diverging perspectives often lead to misunderstandings 
and tensions within the design team [3].  
When introducing the design cards in the workshop we 
found that many of these tensions and misunderstanding 
were eased. The educators were given a tool they could use 
to express design decisions and a voice they didn’t know 
they needed. It allowed them to discuss the problem space 
and reflect on what ICT solutions were appropriate to 
implement without being restricted by formal design or 
development languages. These language barriers are one of 
the issues when inviting non-designers into a co-design 
process, and the design cards lessened the need for the users 
to adopt a specialized design language [3]. As we 
understand, the workshop broke down their misconceptions 
about who can design and be creative. As discussed by 
Sanders and Stappers [6], people find it difficult to believe 
themselves creative and is therefore reluctant to take an 
active role in a design team. The cards worked as a tool 
enabling them to make meaningful decisions about design.  
Before introducing the design cards in the workshop, we 
used the project plan created by the first author as our 
primary artifact to convey and discuss important aspect of 
the project and used it to try finding a shared understanding 
between participants. Looking back, this plan did not 
adequately help us establish the common ground that was 
needed to guide the project forward. But in many ways, the 
workshop did. What, then, was it about the workshop that 
did that the plan could not?  
By taking another glance at the concept of boundary 
objects, Star and Greisemer [24] explain that these objects 
need to be plastic enough to adapt to local needs yet ‘robust 
enough to maintain its identity across sites’. Jean et al., [31] 
further explain how there must be a balance between rigidity 
and flexibility if these objects are to unite different interests 
and practices. In the light of this, the project plan that we 
relied on in the project meetings was not suitable for 
establishing a shared understanding of the project. It was too 
rigid and not plastic enough to adapt to our needs.  It does, 
however, seem that we found this balance in the design cards 
and the rules of the design game. The cards abstracted the 
specific language from both the medical and the ICT 
domain. The cards were plastic and flexible enough to adapt 
to local needs and encompassed the practices they sought to 
unite. And in combination with the rules and the context of 
the workshop, they were also rigid enough to unite the 
different interests in the project.  
In their study, Jean et al., [31] also explain how serious 
game simulations have been ‘isolated as a potential boundary 
object’ to bring different stakeholders together. In our 
experience, however, the boundary object (in their case the 
simulations and in ours the design cards) should not be seen 
as an isolated object. It is how the artifact and the context of 
using the artifact came together that determined whether the 
artifact could unite the parties in their endeavor to 
collaborate. We can exemplify this by looking at the last 
activity in the workshop. Here, the different groups presented 
their design ideas and concept using a A3 paper sheet and 
Post-it notes. Using these tangible objects, the groups 
visualized and communicated possible scenarios and 
facilitated a discussion between the different groups. 
According to Morris et al., [26], boundary object can be 
visual representation of reality, like props, concept maps and 
mental models, for catalyzing discussions that can lead to a 
comprehensive exploration of the issues which are 
understood differently or incompletely by different actors. 
These can help reach a common level of understanding. 
However, it was the context of the workshop, the use of 
design cards and the rules of play, that made this discussion 
possible and meaningful.  
The combination of the design cards and rules in the 
workshop also enabled the participants to think like 
designers. The design game expanded the world view of the 
participants, enriching their understanding of a design 
process and the terminology used by the different experts, 
which lies close to the concept of transformative boundary 
objects introduce by Bechky [30]. We observed that the 
design game helped the team challenge previous conceptions 
about each other’s practice fields and found common ground 
regarding possible design solutions. We believe that the 
design cards in themselves did not give us that shared 
understanding; they are what Pennington [25] referred to as 
representations of reality, and they exist independently of 
collaboration and has different meanings for the different 
people using them. But as a design game, were the cards and 
the rules of play came together, they facilitated for 
interpretation and enabled negotiations. This is illustrated in 
the misunderstandings with the MR-card, where the 
designer’s intent was ‘Mixed Reality’ and the participant’s 
interpretation was MRI-scanning. If the researchers hadn’t 
been there to clarify, the participant would have created a 
scenario about using MRI-scanning machines. Which is just 
as relevant for medical practice, it’s just not what the 
designers had in mind when they created the card.   
Facilitating for mutual learning by creating a space where 
designers can learn from non-designers, and vice versa, is 
important in a co-design process. As mentioned, we spent a 
lot of time explaining concepts across disciplines (e.g., 
cleaning up the project plan). The researchers tried to project 
the correct medical terminology explained to us by the 
practitioners onto the cards, but even then we didn’t quite get 
it right; during the workshop, participants express frustration 
about the labels on the cards – both that they didn’t 
understand ICT terms and that we had used medical terms 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

incorrectly. At the same time, however, the erroneous 
terminology also triggered the work to create a shared 
understanding. They felt the need to explain and, in this, 
shared their expertise with the other stakeholders, something 
which again helped in the creative process. Seems like this is 
a positive attribute with design cards – they are “official” 
representations of problems, terms and technologies 
triggering critique, opposition, discussions, and the need for 
clarifications – the groundwork in creating mutual learning 
and shared understanding across disciplines. How the world 
is ordered by a deck of cards can be provocation, to one, 
several or all the stakeholders involved. If handled well, the 
provocations can be a boon to the co-realization of design 
solutions.  
IX.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we found that bespoke design cards 
structured as a design game can support collaboration and in 
finding common ground across disciplines. The design game 
allowed non-designers to discuss the problem space and 
reflect on appropriate ICT solution without having to adopt a 
specialized design language. The language barrier between 
the different practices was an obstacle when trying to move 
the project forward, but it also allowed mutual learning 
opportunities between the stakeholders. This mutual learning 
was not achieved in the early design phase where we relied 
on a project plan to communicate shared goals and 
expectations. Introducing design cards in a co-design 
workshop triggered a more constructive exchange of 
knowledge across practices. Granted that the design cards are 
structured by a design game, space is created for the 
participants to express themselves. The design game acted as 
a mediator between the participants and researchers, and as a 
transformative 
boundary 
object 
by 
extending 
and 
transforming the participants understanding of the different 
practices. The workshop, cards and rules of play were both 
flexible and rigid enough to encompass and unite the 
different practices, facilitating a shared understanding of the 
problem space and project. 
For future work, we suggest further analysis on how 
design games understood as transformative boundary 
objects, can support interdisciplinarity in design processes. 
We also suggest introducing design cards earlier in a co-
design process and see what this can do for the collaborative 
process. This may support the collaborative parties to find 
common ground earlier.   
REFERENCES 
[1]
E. B.-N. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, “Probes, toolkits and
prototypes: three approaches to making in codesigning,”
CoDesign, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 5–14, Jan. 2014, doi:
10.1080/15710882.2014.888183. Accessed: April 5, 2023.
[2]
A. R. Olesen, N. Holdgaard, and A. S. Løvlie, “Co-designing
a co-design tool to strengthen ideation in digital experience
design at museums,” CoDesign, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 227–242,
Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1080/15710882.2020.1812668. Accessed:
Mar. 2, 2023.
[3]
T. Bratteteig and I. Wagner, “Unpacking the Notion of
Participation in Participatory Design,” Comput Supported
Coop Work, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 425–475, Dec. 2016, doi:
10.1007/s10606-016-9259-4. Accessed: April 5, 2023.
[4]
T. Bratteteig and I. Wagner, “Disentangling power and
decision-making in participatory design,” in Proceedings of
the 12th Participatory Design Conference: Research Papers -
Volume 1, Roskilde Denmark: ACM, Aug. 2012, pp. 41–50.
doi: 10.1145/2347635.2347642. Accessed: Mar. 2, 2023.
[5]
T. Bratteteig, K. Bødker, Y. Dittrich, P. H. Mogensen, and J.
Simonsen, “Organising principles and general guidelines for
Participatory Design Projects,” Routledge international
handbook of participatory design, pp. 117–144, 2013.
Accessed: April 5, 2023
[6]
E. B.-N. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, “Co-creation and the new
landscapes of design,” CoDesign, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 5–18,
2008, doi: 10.1080/15710880701875068. Accessed: Apr. 05,
2023.
[7]
E. Brandt, T. Binder, and E. B.-N. Sanders, “Tools and
Techniques: Ways to engage telling, making and enacting,”
in Routledge international handbook of participatory design,
J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, Eds., London: Routledge,
2013, pp. 145–181.
[8]
N. Bornoe, A. Bruun, and J. Stage, “Facilitating redesign with
design cards: experiences with novice designers,” in
Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer-
Human Interaction - OzCHI ’16, Launceston, Tasmania,
Australia: 
ACM 
Press, 
2016, 
pp. 
452–461. 
doi:
10.1145/3010915.3010921. Accessed: Apr. 03, 2023.
[9]
C. Wölfel and T. Merritt, “Method Card Design Dimensions:
A Survey of Card-Based Design Tools,” in Human-Computer
Interaction – INTERACT 2013, P. Kotzé, G. Marsden, G.
Lindgaard, J. Wesson, and M. Winckler, Eds., in Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8117. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 479–486. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-40483-2_34. Accessed: May 25, 2022.
[10] C. Myers, L. S. G. Piccolo, and T. Collins, “Co-designing
cards on social issues for creating educational games,” in
Proceedings of the 32nd International BCS Human Computer
Interaction Conference, in HCI ’18. Swindon, GBR: BCS
Learning & Development Ltd., Jul. 2018, pp. 1–5. doi:
10.14236/ewic/HCI2018.164. Accessed: Aug. 09, 2022.
[11] Y. Deng, A. N. Antle, and C. Neustaedter, “Tango cards: a
card-based design tool for informing the design of tangible
learning games,” in Proceedings of the 2014 conference on
Designing interactive systems, Vancouver BC Canada: ACM,
Jun. 2014, pp. 695–704. doi: 10.1145/2598510.2598601.
Accessed: Sept. 07, 2022.
[12] K. Halskov and P. Dalsgård, “Inspiration card workshops,” in
Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on Designing
Interactive systems  - DIS ’06, University Park, PA, USA:
ACM Press, 2006, p. 2. doi: 10.1145/1142405.1142409.
Accessed: May 25, 2022.
[13] D. Peters, L. Loke, and N. Ahmadpour, “Toolkits, cards and
games – a review of analogue tools for collaborative
ideation,” CoDesign, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 410–434, Oct. 2021,
doi: 10.1080/15710882.2020.1715444. Accessed: Oct. 10,
2022.
[14] E. Brandt and J. Messeter, “Facilitating collaboration through
design games,” in Proceedings of the eighth conference on
Participatory design Artful integration: interweaving media,
materials and practices - PDC 04, Toronto, Ontario, Canada:
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ACM Press, 2004, p. 121. doi: 10.1145/1011870.1011885. 
Accessed: May 20, 2022. 
[15] A. Lucero, P. Dalsgaard, K. Halskov, and J. Buur, “Designing
with Cards,” in Collaboration in Creative Design, P.
Markopoulos, J.-B. Martens, J. Malins, K. Coninx, and A.
Liapis, Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016,
pp. 75–95. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-29155-0_5. Accessed:
Sept. 08, 2022.
[16] F. Mueller, M. R. Gibbs, F. Vetere, and D. Edge, “Supporting
the creative game design process with exertion cards,” in
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, Toronto Ontario Canada: ACM, Apr.
2014, pp. 2211–2220. doi: 10.1145/2556288.2557272.
Accessed: Apr. 05, 2023.
[17] E. Hornecker, “Creative idea exploration within the structure
of a guiding framework: the card brainstorming game,” in
Proceedings of the fourth international conference on
Tangible, embedded, and embodied interaction, in TEI ’10.
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA: 
Association 
for 
Computing
Machinery, 
Jan. 
2010, 
pp. 
101–108. 
doi:
10.1145/1709886.1709905. Accessed: Apr. 05, 2023.
[18] A. Lucero and J. Arrasvuori, “PLEX Cards: a source of
inspiration when designing for playfulness,” in Proceedings
of the 3rd International Conference on Fun and Games - Fun
and Games ’10, Leuven, Belgium: ACM Press, 2010, pp. 28–
37. doi: 10.1145/1823818.1823821. Accessed: Aug. 26, 2022.
[19] J. Kwiatkowska, A. Szóstek, and D. Lamas, “(Un)structured
sources of inspiration: comparing the effects of game-like
cards and design cards on creativity in co-design process,” in
Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference on
Research Papers - PDC ’14, Windhoek, Namibia: ACM
Press, 2014, pp. 31–39. doi: 10.1145/2661435.2661442.
Accessed: Apr. 05, 2023.
[20] T. Bekker and A. N. Antle, “Developmentally situated design
(DSD): making theoretical knowledge accessible to designers
of children’s technology,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
Vancouver BC Canada: ACM, May 2011, pp. 2531–2540.
doi: 10.1145/1978942.1979312. Accessed: Apr. 05, 2023.
[21] J. Buur and A. Soendergaard, “Video card game: an
augmented environment for user centred design discussions,”
in Proceedings of DARE 2000 on Designing augmented
reality environments, Elsinore Denmark: ACM, Apr. 2000,
pp. 63–69. doi: 10.1145/354666.354673. Accessed: Apr. 05,
2023.
[22] R. Roy and J. P. Warren, “Card-based design tools: a review
and analysis of 155 card decks for designers and designing,”
Design Studies, vol. 63, pp. 125–154, Jul. 2019, doi:
10.1016/j.destud.2019.04.002. Accessed: Sept. 08, 2022.
[23] P. Ehn, “Participation in Design Things,” presented at the
Participatory Design Conference (PDC), Bloomington,
Indiana, USA (2008), ACM Digital Library, 2008, pp. 92–
101.
Accessed: Mar. 07, 2023. [Online]. Available:
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:mau:diva-11060
[24] S. L. Star and J. R. Griesemer, “Institutional Ecology,
‘Translations’ and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and
Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology,
1907-39,” Social Studies of Science, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 387–
420, 1989, Accessed: Mar. 07, 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/285080
[25] D. Pennington, “A conceptual model for knowledge
integration in interdisciplinary teams: orchestrating individual
learning and group processes,” J Environ Stud Sci, vol. 6, no. 
2, pp. 300–312, Jun. 2016, doi: 10.1007/s13412-015-0354-5. 
Accessed: Mar. 04, 2023. 
[26] J. Morris et al., “Games as boundary objects: charting trade-
offs in sustainable livestock transformation,” 
International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability, vol. 
19, no. 5–6, pp. 525–548, Nov. 2021, doi: 
10.1080/14735903.2020.1738769. Accessed: Apr. 01, 2023.
[27] D. Zeitlyn, “Representation/Self-representation: A Tale of 
Two 
Portraits; 
or, 
Portraits 
and 
Social 
Science 
Representations,” Visual Anthropology, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 
398–426, Oct. 2010, doi: 10.1080/08949460903472978. 
Accessed: Apr. 04, 2023.
[28] P. Dalsgaard, K. Halskov, and D. A. Basballe, “Emergent 
boundary objects and boundary zones in collaborative 
design research projects,” in Proceedings of the 2014 
conference on Designing interactive systems, Vancouver BC 
Canada: ACM, Jun. 2014, pp. 745–754. doi: 
10.1145/2598510.2600878. Accessed: Mar. 01, 2023.
[29] O. Bertelsen, “Elements of a Theory of Design Artefacts: a 
contribution to critical systems development research. PhD 
Thesis.,” DAIMI Report Series, no. 531, Art. no. 531, Jan. 
1998, doi: 10.7146/dpb.v27i531.7060. Accessed: Mar. 07, 
2023.
[30] B. A. Bechky, “Sharing Meaning Across Occupational 
Communities: The Transformation of Understanding on 
a Production Floor,” Organization Science, vol. 14, no. 3, 
pp. 312–330, Jun. 2003, doi: 10.1287/
orsc.14.3.312.15162. Accessed: Mar. 07, 2023.
[31] S. Jean, W. Medema, J. Adamowski, C. Chew, P. Delaney, 
and A. Wals, “Serious games as a catalyst for boundary 
crossing, collaboration and knowledge co-creation in a 
watershed governance context,” Journal of Environmental 
Management, vol. 223, pp. 1010–1022, Oct. 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.05.021. Accessed: Apr. 04, 2023.
[32] M. Golembewski and M. Selby, “Ideation decks: a card-based 
design ideation tool,” in Proceedings of the 8th ACM 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’10, 
Aarhus, Denmark: ACM Press, 2010, pp. 89–92. doi: 
10.1145/1858171.1858189. Accessed: May 25, 2022.
[33] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in 
psychology,” Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 3, no. 
2, pp. 77–101, Jan. 2006, doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa. 
Accessed: Apr. 05, 2023.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

