Trafﬁc Light Assistant - What the Users Want
Michael Krause, Alexander Rissel, Klaus Bengler
Institute of Ergonomics
Technische Universtit¨at M¨unchen
Garching, Germany
emails:{krause@tum.de, rissel@lfe.mw.tum.de, bengler@tum.de}
Abstract—In a driving simulator experiment, a prototypical
trafﬁc light phase assistant is assessed. The main research issue:
How would a user customize the system? As a sideline, data
is gathered with a special Detection Response Task (DRT), the
Tactile Detection Task (TDT), in conjunction with an auditory
cognitive task as reference. Recorded gaze data, driving behav-
ior, subjective ratings with a System Usability Scale (SUS) and
an AttrakDiff2-questionnaire are also reported. The subjects
were able to customize ten parameters of the trafﬁc light
assistant system. The so personalized system conﬁguration
showed no great enhancement in the subjective ratings; thus,
the later application implementation will include only little
conﬁguration features for the user. However, the test persons
exhibited a willingness to be informed about speeding by a
speed alerting function within the trafﬁc light assistant system.
The performance (reaction time) of the TDT is interpreted as
a measure for the cognitive load while using the interface.
The auditory cognitive task prolonged the reaction times for
a tactile detection task more than the trafﬁc light information
system. The glance times are in line with current guidlines
and the driving behavior shows a potential beneﬁt for safety.
Thus, the reported experiment evaluates an interface for use
while driving with objective metrics regarding distraction and
subjective results related to usability and joy-of-use.
Keywords-in-vehicle information system; IVIS; nomadic de-
vice; tactile detection task; TDT; glance duration
I. INTRODUCTION
In the project KOLIBRI (Kooperative Lichtsignalopti-
mierung – Bayerisches Pilotprojekt; engl: cooperative op-
timization of trafﬁc signal control), the Institute of Er-
gonomics at the Technische Universtit¨at M¨unchen was re-
sponsible for the human factor of a trafﬁc light assistant.
One of the goals of the project was to provide the driver
with information about the state of an upcoming trafﬁc light.
By introducing a trafﬁc light assistant for smart phones,
previously installed 2nd and 3rd generation telecommunica-
tion networks (e.g., Global System for Mobile Communi-
cations, GSM) could be used to transmit the information.
Nowadays smart phones are widely used, so there are no
extra costs to get an additional display into the car. With
a mobile solution, instead of an in-vehicle implementation,
there is also no limitation regarding the make, year or brand
of the car.
In this project, the trafﬁc lights were equipped with
mobile network transponders to send their current state to a
central server. The server estimates how the trafﬁc lights will
probably act the next time. These estimated switching times
can be polled by car systems or smart phones. The devices
have to calculate recommendations, based on human factors,
and show appropriate information to the driver. Because
they are used while driving, special care must be taken for
suitability while driving [1].
The system was implemented in two real test ﬁelds. The
ﬁrst is in the north of Munich. Over a length of about
seven kilometers, seven trafﬁc-light-controlled intersections
on federal road B13 were involved. The second test track
was a rural road near Regensburg. Over a length of about ﬁve
kilometers, eight trafﬁc light controlled intersections shared
the system.
In order to make a judgment about safety issues, the test
track in the north of Munich was modeled for the static
driving simulator at the Institute of Ergonomics and was
used in an initial subject test [2], [4]. The test persons
evaluated ﬁve rapid prototyped Human Machine Interfaces
(HMI) with standardized subjective questionnaires and wore
an eye tracking system. The HMIs were shown on a smart
phone and were coupled with the driving simulator. The
results led to a favorable HMI within the project, and the
gaze behavior showed no critical metrics for this HMI.
In the second driving simulator experiment, reported in
this paper, subjects were told to customize the assistant
to their needs by adjusting some parameters. The main
idea: What aspects must be conﬁgurable (e.g., what are
potential items on a conﬁguration menu in an application).
The test persons also wore an eye tracking system here.
In addition, a special Detection Response Task (DRT), the
Tactile Detection Task (TDT), was operated. DRTs are
currently being standardized and are promising candidates
to get objective data for the mostly invisible cognitive load.
The next section presents related work for this paper in the
ﬁelds of trafﬁc lights assistance and detection response tasks.
The method section holds information about the conduction
of the experiment. The design of the experiment, technical
data of the driving simulator and the trafﬁc light assistant as
well as the details of the cognitive task and tactile detection
task are reported. The method section closes with the task
instruction and demographic data of the participants. The
result section shows how the participants would customize
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the trafﬁc lights assistant and their performance in the tactile
detection task. Subjective data from questionnaires compares
the liking of the individually customized (HMI) with a
default HMI. The section closes with the presentation of
glance durations and driving behavior metrics.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Trafﬁc Light Assistance
Early research in the ﬁeld of in-car trafﬁc light assistance
took place in the ’80s in the project Wolfsburger Welle from
Volkswagen, Germany [5], [6]. At about the same time,
Australian trafﬁc engineers experimented with a roadside
trafﬁc light assistant along a street in Melbourne [7], [8].
These projects evaluated and identiﬁed the beneﬁts for the
informed driver, such as fuel reduction. To provide informa-
tion about the trafﬁc light to the driver, with countdowns, is
common in some countries, mainly in Asia. Many people
have reﬂected about this topic, so different solutions for
trafﬁc light information can be found in patent classes such
as G08G 1/096. The advantage of roadside solutions is
that everyone can use them. The disadvantage, other than
maintenance costs, is an only temporally visibility, or else
several must be placed along the road. Another problem is
reported by [9]: Counting down the remaining green time at
an intersection results in a higher crash risk.
Pauwelussen et al. [10] compared a road side system with
an in-car system and found objective reasons for using an
in-car system and subjective reason for using the roadside
signs. Thoma [11] evaluated various HMIs for an in-car
on-board system and proposed a combination that would
work with the speedometer. Another project dealing with on-
board trafﬁc light guidance is TRAVOLUTION from Audi
AG, Germany [12]. A trafﬁc light phase assistant was also
included in the German car-to-infrastructure project simTD
[13]. The German project AKTIV built a trafﬁc light assistant
on a personal digital assistant (PDA) via WiFi [14], [15].
Another project that used a mobile device for a trafﬁc light
assistant is SignalGuru [16]. This project heavily relies on
the camera of a smart phone on image processing. One
radical idea that also involves trafﬁc light assistance is to
replace the physical trafﬁc lights with in-car information i.e.,
Virtual Trafﬁc Light (VTL) [17].
B. Detection Response Tasks (DRTs)
In detection response tasks, the test persons have to react
to a continuously repeated stimulus. Typically, this detection
task is the ‘probe’ i.e., a measurement tool to asses the
demands of another task or combination of tasks, like inter-
acting with a system while driving a car. The prolongation of
reaction times and a drop in the rate of successfully fulﬁlling
these detection tasks are potential indicators for the cognitive
load. The DRTs are currently being standardized by the ISO
TC22 SC13 WG8. In former work and projects, the detection
tasks had shown the potential to detect cognitive load effects.
The use of a vibration stimulus (tactile detection task, TDT)
overcomes various disadvantages such as the visibility of a
light stimulus under changing lighting conditions and has,
if at all, only a weak competition and distraction effect on
visual resources. A commendable review of the research on
TDT can be found in [18].
III. METHODS
A. Experimental Design & Procedure
Each subject drove for each part of the experiment (within
design). The test persons ﬁrst completed a letter of consent
and a demographic questionnaire. Afterward they get general
explanations about the experiment and the driving simulator.
Once they were seated in the mockup car, the gaze tracking
systems was calibrated for each person. The subjects drove
an acclimatization round without the trafﬁc light assistant
and one round with the system (in conﬁguration complex).
Before and after the core of the experiment, the TDT was
carried out alone (single task) for one minute (TDT base1
and TDT base2). In the core of the experiment, four parts
were completed in randomized order:
• Baseline: Driving the simulator without the trafﬁc light
assistant and with TDT
• COTA: Driving the simulator without the trafﬁc light
assistant, but with a cognitive task (COTA) and with
TDT
• HMI complex: Driving the simulator with the trafﬁc
light assistant in a general, predeﬁned conﬁguration and
with TDT
• HMI individual: Driving the simulator with the trafﬁc
light assistant in a personalized conﬁguration and with
TDT
Before the HMI individual part, the test subject was able to
customize the HMI using ten parameters, and was allowed
to drive and test the interface as long as needed. After
the HMI complex and HMI individual sections, the subjects
ﬁlled in a system usability scale (SUS [21]) and AttrakDiff2
questionnaire [22]. The test track (about 7km) was randomly
driven in a north-south or south-north direction. A session
typically lasted about 90 minutes.
B. Driving Simulator
The simulator track is a model of a real road section of the
federal road B13 in the north of Munich (see [2], [4]) which
is also the test bed for real ﬁeld trials in later experiments.
The experiment used the institute’s static driving simulator.
Three projectors (1400x1050 resolution) show an almost
180-degree front view on 3.4 m x 2.6 m screens. Three other
projectors displayed images on screens behind the BMW
E64 mockup for the car mirrors. The driving simulation
SILAB V3.0 from WIVW GmbH, W¨urzburg was used
together with CarSim V7.11 from Mechanical Simulation,
Ann Arbor, as well as an active steering wheel with software
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

from Simotion, Munich. For the eye tracking, the head-
mounted system Dikablis from Ergoneers, Manching was
used. Gaze analysis was carried out with D-Lab (Ergoneers,
Manching) and Matlab.
C. Trafﬁc Light Assistant - Human Machine Interface, HMI
In an initial simulator experiment [2], [4] an appropriate
HMI was found to communicate a speed recommendation to
the driver via the smart phone (called the velocity carpet; see
Figure 1, left). If the driver has to move to slowly (below
70% of the speed limit) or too fast to get the next trafﬁc
light on green, Figure 1 (middle) is displayed, called red
arrive. Both conditions (too fast, too slow) are intentionally
coded into the same screen, to prevent the misuse of the
system. In addition, some new parts were introduced: A
circle (left upper corner of Figure 1, left) could provide
information about the current cycle state of the next trafﬁc
light (called Heuer trafﬁc light). A distance bar (right border
of the screens in Figure 1) indicates the meters remaining to
the next trafﬁc light. A speed alert (Figure 1, right) provides
a warning in the event of speeding.
Figure 1.
Trafﬁc Light Assistant, Human Machine Interface screens.
left:carpet, middle: ‘Ankunft bei Rot’ = arrival on red, right:speeding
In this experiment, the test persons were able to customize
different parameters of the system and test their customized
systems directly in the simulator (known as HMI individual):
1) the velocity carpet could be switched off (black
screen) [carpet on/off]
2) the velocity carpet could only appear if the distance
to the next trafﬁc light is less than X meters, or it can
be on all the time [carpet distance X meters ./. 100%]
3) either arrival on red could be displayed, or a blank
screen[arrival on red on/off]
4) [speed alert on/off]
5) the speed alert could inform the driver if the car is
going X km/h above the speed limit [speed tolerance
X km/h]
6) the Heuer trafﬁc light could be displayed [Heuer
on/off]
7) the distance bar could be displayed [distance bar
on/off]
8) while waiting at a red light, the residual red light time
could be displayed [residual red on/off]
9) when driving through an intersection, the system
output could be suppressed (Xing symbol) [Xroad
suppression on/off]
10) when intersection suppression is on it should suppress
system output X meters in front and after an intersec-
tion [intersection radius X meters]
The order of the single parameters for the customization
was randomized. The system was also driven in a uniform
conﬁguration by all subjects (known as the HMI complex).
This conﬁguration consisted of the bold options in the
previous enumeration and a speed alert tolerance of 0 km/h.
D. Cognitive Task, COTA
For the cognitive task, the program Cognitive Task 1.0
from Daimler AG (Stefan Mattes) was used with default
settings. The program reads a sequence of three numbers
(one to nine) out loud, and after a short break a fourth
number is announced. The task of the test person is to
consistently state whether the fourth number was included
among the ﬁrst. Two examples: Program: ‘2,6,9...7’. Test
person: ‘No’. Program: ‘7,1,3...1’. Test person: ‘Yes’. So it
is an auditive Sternberg Task. The chosen setting plays a
beginning chime sound (about 1s), reads out three numbers
(one per second), waits 2s, plays a chime sound (about 1s),
announces the forth number (1s), the test person has 3s to
answer and at the end the program plays a short closing
honk signal and wait 2 seconds before beginning the next
sequence. The repeat count was set up to repeat the described
13-second sequence over and over again during the whole 7
km ride on the simulator track (typically about 6 minutes).
The voice of the test person was recorded and evaluated after
the session.
E. Tactile Detection Task, TDT
For the TDT, a self-made device with an Arduino Uno was
used. The device was set to a vibration stimulus randomly
distributed from 3 to 5 seconds. The test person has to react
within 2 seconds after stimulus onset, else it is a miss. The
stimulus lasts one second or until the subject reacts. If the
reaction time (RT) is lower than 200ms it is canceled a cheat.
RTs between 0.2s and 2s are hits. The metric hit rate is
the number of hits divided by the number of stimuli (see
[18], [19]). As proposed by [19], a data set must have a
hit rate of at least 70% to be included for data analysis.
The device was programmed internally to react interrupt
based on subject’s reaction. The standard Arduino Uno clock
resolution of 4 microseconds was estimated to be enough to
measure milliseconds.
The vibration stimulus was applied via a vibration motor
from an old mobile phone (Alcatel One Touch Easy 302) at
an open clamping voltage of 4.2V (2.8V under load) with
22mA. The motor was attached to the right wrist with a
ﬂexible wristband (ﬁgure 2), vibrating at about 125 Hz. For
the reaction, a micro switch was glued to the back side of the
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 2.
Setup of the devices in the driving simulator
steering wheel at the 10 o’clock position (the track included
no sharp curves or overtaking).
F. Instruction
The participants were instructed to give the driving task
the highest priority. Their second priority was the detection
task. Finally, they were to concentrate on using the HMIs
or the COTA.
G. Participants
Twenty-two test subjects took part. One quit due to
simulator sickness, so the data set is not regarded. The
data for one test person revealed that she (healthy young
female) probably did not use the vibration stimulus onset
for the reaction in some experiments, else the automatic
switch-off was interpreted as stimulus signal, unnoticed by
the experimenter. Their data set was ignored for the TDT
calculations.
The age of the test subject was from 20 to 32 years
(M=25.1, SD=3.1). Two females took part. All of the test
persons had normal or corrected to normal visual acuity
(43% used corrective lenses during the experiment). Three
had a color perception deﬁciency. The average annual milage
was 11,486 km (SD 11,825). Ninety percent had driven
an automatic car (like the driving simulation car) before.
Previous experience with a driving simulator was reported by
76%. 19% of the test persons took part in the ﬁrst experiment
for a trafﬁc light assistant at the institute [2], [4].
IV. RESULTS
A. Customization
• Parameters: [carpet on/off] & [carpet distance X meters
./. 100%] All of the test subjects enabled the speed
recommendation. Nineteen of the twenty-one subjects
wanted to be informed about the carpet whenever
possible. One person speciﬁed 300 meters in front of
the trafﬁc light and another person 1000 meters before.
• Parameter [arrival on red on/off]: 57% preferred to be
informed that they would probably arrive at red, instead
of a blank screen.
• Parameter [speed alert on/off] & [speed tolerance X
km/h]: 71% enabled the speed alert at an average speed
tolerance of 17.5 km/h above the allowed speed limit.
• Parameter [Heuer on/off]: 62% of the subjects selected
the Heuer trafﬁc light option for their individual HMI.
• Parameter [distance bar on/off]: 62% wanted the dis-
tance bar in their customized HMI.
• Parameter [residual red on/off]: 91% wanted to be
informed about the remaining red light time while
waiting at the trafﬁc light.
• Parameter [intersection suppression on/off] & inter-
section radius X meters: Three person selected the
suppression of system information at intersections at
radiuses of 100, 150 and 200 meters.
B. Tactile Detection Task, TDT
The TDT results were only included for a person in an
experimental section if the hit rate was above 70% (see [19]).
For COTA, two data sets do not meet this quality criterion,
and one data set for HMI complex. A statistical test reported
no signiﬁcance between the reaction times (Figure 3) of
Baseline, HMI individual, HMI complex and COTA). In the
COTA condition, the COTA-software pronounced on average
26.5 challenges. 99% of these were answered correctly.
This shows that the subjects were all engaged in doing the
cognitive task.
0.33
0.47
0.50
0.50
0.55
0.31
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
TDT_base1
Baseline
HMI
individual
HMI
complex
COTA
TDT_base2
reaction time [s]
TDT Reaction Time 
error bars: 95% CI
Figure 3.
TDT reaction times
Figure 4 shows the hit rates under different conditions
(data sets with a hit rate lower than 70% were also included).
A statistical test reported no signiﬁcance between Baseline,
HMI individual, HMI complex and COTA).
C. System Usability Scale, SUS & AttrakDiff2
The system usability scale (SUS) reported:
• HMI complex 72.6 (SD 12.6)
• HMI individual 73.9 (SD 12.9)
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

1.00
0.96
0.95
0.93
0.92
0.99
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
TDT_base1
Baseline
HMI
individual
HMI
complex
COTA
TDT_base2
hit rate
TDT Hit Rate
error bars: 95% CI
Figure 4.
TDT hit rates
hedonic quality (HQ)
pragmatic quality PQ
HMI
complex
HMI
individual
too self!oriented
self!oriented
desired
task!oriented
neutral
superfluous
too task!oriented
Figure 5.
AttrakDiff2 portfolio diagram with conﬁdence rectangles
The attractiveness dimension (scale from 1 to 7) of the
AttrakDiff2 reported
• HMI complex 4.7 (SD 0.6)
• HMI individual 4.9 (SD 0.9)
The other dimensions of the AttrkDiff2 are shown in a
portfolio diagram (Figure 5).
D. Gaze Behavior
For the ﬁrst analysis the gazes were exported from D-
Lab to Matlab. In Table I and Table II, the gazes of all
test subjects are handled as a whole. Thus, a reported 85th
percentile value (p85) or mean value (avg) is the p85 or
mean value of the number (N) of gazes. The table only
includes values for gazes, while the smart phone showed
a speed recommendation (velocity carpet) and all other
conditions are initially neglected (arrival on red, residual red,
etc.). The average frequency (fq) is the entire duration of the
velocity carpet condition divided by the number of glances
by all subjects. In the baseline run, only 3 gazes toward
the AOI smart phone are recorded, in COTA 8. So no avg
and p85 values are reported. Accordingly, the eyes-off-the
road incidents are mainly speedometer gazes. For the eyes-
off-the-road values, the gaze durations not directed toward
the windscreen are evaluated. In the conditions baseline and
COTA, the display of the smart phone is blanked out (black),
but in order to get segments for comparison, the smart phone
nevertheless reports to the eye tracking system whether a
velocity carpet would have been shown. The percentage of
time (%) is calculated: frequency (fq) multiplied by mean
glance (avg)
TABLE I.
GAZES TOWARD THE SMART PHONE
N
fq [Hz]
avg[s]
p85[s]
%
Baseline
3
0.001
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
HMI individual
1072
0.275
0.64
0.88
17.5%
HMI complex
802
0.259
0.65
0.91
16.9%
COTA
8
0.004
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TABLE II.
EYES OFF THE ROAD
N
fq [Hz]
avg [s]
p85 [s]
%
Baseline
410
0.272
0.69
0.92
18.7%
HMI individual
1580
0.406
0.85
1.20
34.3%
HMI complex
1240
0.400
0.82
1.20
33.0%
COTA
516
0.256
0.68
0.88
17.3%
For the HMI complex run, D-Lab reported a mean gaze
duration of 0.61s and a gaze frequency of 0.20Hz, if the
smart phone showed the arrival on red screen. In addition,
for HMI complex, a mean glance duration of 0.38s can
be derived for the speed alert screen from D-Lab (with
an average frequency of 0.24Hz). In HMI complex (zero
speed level tolerance for speed alert system), the eye tracking
system logged a mean total duration for speed alerts of 80s
per run (mean duration of run: 348s). So the test subjects
drove about 23% of the time with a ‘nag screen’.
E. Driving Behavior
The time that each driver drove above the speed limit
was set in relation to the time the car was moving faster
than 5km/h. The average of these percentage values for each
person’s run can be seen in Figure 6.
54%
30%
29%
48%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Baseline
HMI individual
HMI complex
COTA
above Speed Limit 
error bars: 95% CI
Figure 6.
Average percentage of time (while car moving >5km/h) above
speed limit
For Figure 7, the excess speed beyond the limit was
treated as root mean square value (RMS). Values below the
speed limit were treated as zero. The average speeding RMS
of the test subjects’ single runs is reported.
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

10.0
6.8
6.7
9.9
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Baseline
HMI individual
HMI complex
COTA
RMS km/h
RMS above Allowed Speed (km/h)
error bars: 95% CI
Figure 7.
Average RMS value above allowed speed (km/h)
7.2
3.9
4.1
5.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Baseline
HMI individual
HMI complex
COTA
error bars: 95% CI
Figure 8.
Average number of speed violations
The person’s speed violation counter was triggered if
the speed exceeded the allowed value by >15km/h. After
a detection, the next re-triggering for a rising edge above
15km/h is inhibited for 10s. The average value for the single
test person’s run can be found in Figure 8.
V. DISCUSSION
The customization shows that the test persons wanted the
speed recommendation, not at a ﬁxed distance, but whenever
possible. More than half of the test subjects also wanted to
be informed whether they would arrive on red. About two-
thirds enabled the speed alert. This acceptance is probably
closely coupled with the high average tolerance speed of
17.5 km/h. If one take into consideration, that the square
of speed is included in kinetic energy (crash), the speed
estimation in reality will likely come from a 1Hz GPS
receiver, and German law enforcement on rural roads will
most likely use a tolerance level of about 12-14 km/h; the
value of 17.5 km/h is too high. A tolerance level of 10 km/h,
which might work in reality, was accepted by one-third of
the test subjects and was implemented for later tests on real
roads. The Heuer trafﬁc light sign and the distance bar had a
popularity level of over 50%. A later expert review revealed
that there would be too many moving and animated screen
objects. It was decided to drop the distance bar in order to
get a clearer presentation. The remaining red light time while
waiting was enabled by over 90%. That is positive indicator
for acceptance. The option to suppress system information
in intersection areas was not used by 85%. That is a clear
sign of rejection.
The TDT results from TDT base1 and TDT base2 are
very close. The reactions from TDT base2 are a little bit
faster. So, learning effects and fatigue did not play an im-
portant role or cancel each other out. The standard deviation
(and thus the related conﬁdence interval) for TDT base2 gets
very small. This indicates that at the end of the experiment
there is not much intersubject difference. Reaction times
and hit rates show a plausible order: Baseline imposes the
lowest cognitive load. HMI individual and HMI complex are
about equal, and a little bit more mentally demanding than
Baseline. The cognitive most demanding condition appears
to be COTA.
The SUS values of HMI complex (72.6) and HMI indi-
vidual (73.9) are very close. The individual customization is
not reﬂected by a high gain in the subjective usability scale
rating. According to [20], both of the SUS values reported
here, can be associated with the adjective good. In the ﬁrst
simulator study without the TDT [2], a nearly equal value
of 75.3 was found. The slight drop may be is inﬂuenced by
the TDT. The attractiveness dimension of the AttrakDiff2
(from 1 to 7) also reports only a minor change between
HMI complex (4.7) and HMI individual (4.9). The value
from the ﬁrst experiment [2] was 5.0. The portfolio diagram
shows that the hedonic quality for HMI complex and HMI
individual are at the same level, but the pragmatic quality is
rated a little bit higher for HMI individual.
Often, the 85th percentile value for the glance duration
is calculated using the 85th percentile of the mean values
for the test subjects. The maybe more conservative way,
obtaining the 85th percentile value of all gazes, reports
durations that are still in line with guidelines for single
glances. Results of a later real road experiment show that
the gaze frequency drops in real trafﬁc [3].
The driving behavior shows potential safety beneﬁts in
different dimensions. The total speeding time is reduced,
as well as the RMS velocity of violations and the general
level of illicit behavior. Similar results were found in the
ﬁrst simulator experiment [4], where the smart phone trafﬁc
light assistant reduced the speeding percentage of time from
60% to 25%, the speeding RMS from 12.1km/h to 6.9km/h
and the number of speed violations from 6.8 to 3.6. It is
interesting to note that in the ﬁrst experiment no speed alert
system was implemented. Thus, the main effects for speed
reductions should come from the trafﬁc light assistance and
the compliant behavior of the drivers. The incorporation
of a screen-ﬁlling speed alert on the phone nevertheless
has the advantage that it can be easily detected and read
quickly. Another beneﬁt is that this ‘nag screen’ makes the
system resistant to potential misuse (over speeding). It is also
interesting to note that [8] reported a reduction of speeding
and crashes on a real road segment after installation of a
road side trafﬁc light assistant.
VI. CONCLUSION
The improvements in the subjective usability ratings for
a customized trafﬁc light assistant on a smart phone are so
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

small that the later system was not made highly adaptable
for the user. The later system included items and presets that
are accepted by most of the users, combined with safety-
related ideas. The TDT values show a plausible order for
the cognitive load of the experimental conditions. The trafﬁc
light assistant seems to impose only a minor additional
demand on normal driving. And less cognitive load than
a simple auditive number task. A speed alert would be
accepted by many people, but with a relative high speed
tolerance level. It will be a challenge for a safe real-life
system to ﬁnd the right trade-off. From the simulator results,
there are no safety-related issues that inhibited tests of the
carefully designed system on the road.
VII. OUTLOOK
In the next stage of the KOLIBRI project, the trafﬁc
lights in the test ﬁelds were switched to a coordinated
ﬁxed time scheme (green wave). This was used to test the
trafﬁc light assistance on the road. The switching times
were pre-determined. Thus, a prototype on a smart phone
for experiments could be set up in order to test TDT, gaze
behavior and driving in subject tests under real conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Bayerische Forschungss-
tiftung (Bavarian Research Foundation). The authors would
like to thank the project partners TRANSVER, BMW Group
and the Center for Trafﬁc Management of the Bavarian Road
Administration.
REFERENCES
[1] Commission recommendation of 22 December 2006 on safe
and efﬁcient in-vehicle information and communication sys-
tems: update of the European Statement of Principles on human
machine interface (2007/78/EC).
[2] M. Krause and K. Bengler, “Trafﬁc Light Assistant - Evalua-
tion of Information Presentation”. In G. Salvendy & W. Kar-
wowski (Eds.), Advances in Human Factors and Ergonomics
2012. Proceedings of the 4th Ahfe Conference 21-25 July
2012, CRC Press, pp. 6786-6795.
[3] M. Krause, V. Knott, and K. Bengler, “Trafﬁc Light Assistant
Can Take My Eyes Off of You”. Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Europe Chapter 2013 Annual
Conference (submitted).
[4] M. Krause and K. Bengler, “Trafﬁc Light Assistant - Driven
in a Simulator.” In R. Toledo-Moreo, L. M. Bergasa, & M.
. Sotelo (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2012 International IEEE
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium Workshops.
[5] C. Voy, W. Zimdahl, W. Mainka, and F. Stock, 1983, German
Patent DE3126481C2.
[6] G. Hoffmann, “Up-to-the-minute information as we drive -
how it can help road users and trafﬁc management”. Transport
Reviews, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 41-61, 1991.
[7] R.S. Trayford, B.W. Doughty, and J.W. van der Touw, “Fuel
economy investigation of dynamic advisory speeds from an
experiment in arterial trafﬁc”. Transportation Research Part A:
General, vol. 18, no. 5-6, 1984, pp. 415-419.
[8] R. Trayford and T. Crowle, “The ADVISE trafﬁc information
display system”. In Vehicle Navigation and Information Sys-
tems Conference 1989. Conference Record, 1989, pp. 105-112.
[9] X H. Chen, Zhou Huaguo, and P. Hsu, “What Do We Know
About Signal Countdown Timers?”. ITE Journal on the web,
vol. July 2009, pp. 72-76.
[10] J. Pauwelussen, M. Hoedemaeker, and K. Duivenvoorden,
CVIS Cooperative Vehicle-Infrastructure Systems: Deliverable
D.DEPN.4.1b Assess user acceptance by small scale driving
simulator research. 2008.
[11] S.
Thoma,
Mensch-Maschine-Interaktionskonzepte
f¨ur
Fahrerassistenzsysteme im Kreuzungsbereich”. Dissertation,
TU M¨unchen, 2010.
[12] R. Braun, F. Busch, C. Kemper, R. Hildebrandt, F. We-
ichemeier, C. Menig, I. Paulus, and R. Prelein Lehle, “TRAVO-
LUTION - Netzweite Optimierung der Lichtsignalsteuerung
und LSA-Fahrzeug-Kommunikation, Straenverkehrstechnik”.
vol. 2009, no. 6, pp. 365-374.
[13] simTD, “Sichere Integrierte Mobilit¨at - Testfeld Deutsch-
land”. German C2X project 2008-2013, http://www.simtd.de
[retrieved Dec. 2013].
[14] aktiv, “Adaptive und kooperative Technologien f¨ur den in-
telligenten Verkehr” German Research Initiative 2006-2010,
http://www.aktiv-online.org page [retrieved Dec. 20123].
[15] R.
Hoyer,
“Verkehrliche
Potenziale
des
vorausschauen-
den Fahrens an kooperativen Lichtsignalanlagen”. 5. Tagung
Fahrerassistenz M¨unchen, 2012
[16] E. Koukoumidis, L.-S. Peh, and M. R. Martonosi, “Signal-
Guru: leveraging mobile phones for collaborative trafﬁc signal
schedule advisory”. In Proceedings of the 9th international
conference on Mobile systems, applications, and services, New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 127-140.
[17] C. Olaverri Monreal, P. Gomes, M. Kr¨uger Silv´eria, and M.
Ferreira, “In-Vehicle Virtual Trafﬁc Lights: a Graphical User
Interface”. 7th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and
Technologies, CISTI’2012, Madrid, Spain, pp. 1-6.
[18] J. Engstr¨om, “The Tactile Detection Task as a method for
assessing drivers cognitive load”. In G. Rupp (Ed.) Perfor-
mance Metrics for Assessing Driver Distraction: The Quest
for Improved Road Safety. Warrendale, PA: SAE International.
2010, pp. 90-103.
[19] N. Merat, E. Johansson, J. Engstr¨om, E. Chin, F. Nathan, and
T. Victor “Speciﬁcation of a secondary task to be used in safety
assessment of IVIS”. AIDE Deliverable 2.2.3 IST-1-507674-IP.
2006.
[20] A. Bangor, P. T. Kortum, and J. T. Miller, “An Empirical
Evaluation of the System Usability Scale”. International Jour-
nal of Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 24, no. 6, 2008, pp.
574-594.
[21] J. Brooke, “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale”. In P.
W. Jordan, B. Weerdmeester, A. Thomas, & I. L. Mclelland
(Eds.), Usability evaluation in industry, pp. 189-194 London:
Taylor and Francis, 1996.
[22] M. Hassenzahl, M. Burmester, and F. Koller. “AttrakDiff: Ein
Fragebogen zur Messung wahrgenommener hedonischer und
pragmatischer Qualit¨at”. In: J. Ziegler & G. Szwillus (Hrsg.),
Mensch & Computer 2003. Interaktion in Bewegung, pp. 187-
196, Stuttgart, Leipzig: B.G. Teubner.
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

