Smart Home Techniques for Young People with Functional Disabilities
Daniel Einarson
Department of Computer Science
Kristianstad University
Kristianstad, Sweden
e-mail: daniel.einarson@hkr.se
Marijana Teljega
Department of Computer Science
Kristianstad University
Kristianstad, Sweden
e-mail: marijana.teljega@hkr.se
Abstract—A purpose behind the United Nation’s Agenda 2030
is that no one shall be left behind, which implies that support
for vulnerable people shall be seen as clearly significant. In
that context, assistive technologies serve purposes of improving
disabled individuals’ inclusiveness and overall well-being. This
contribution
covers
ongoing
experiments
on
techniques
developed for Smart Homes, where the outcomes of such
developments
are
targeted
towards
young
people
with
functional
disabilities,
in
order
to
provide
them
with
independence in their own living space.
Keywords
-
Smart
Homes;
IT-based
support
systems;
Sustainable
Development;
Quality
of
Life;
Assistive
technologies.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The expression ‘leave no one behind’ is a cornerstone of
United Nation’s (UN) Agenda 2030, so that even the most
vulnerable people are guaranteed an acceptable level of
quality of life. Matters of leaving no one behind are covered
in a discussion paper of the United Nation Development
Program (UNDP). Here, several key factors and the meaning
behind those are discussed, such as discrimination, based on,
for instance, age, social class and disability [1]. To be even
more precise, the disability aspect is further elaborated on
through
several
of
the
Agenda
2030’s
Sustainable
Development Goals, their targets, and indicators [2]. Here,
for instance, target 4.5 relates to appropriate access to
education, 10.2 relates to reduced inequalities with respect to
income, and 16.7 relates to societal inclusiveness, all with
perspective in the situations of disabled people.
The
Convention
on
the
Rights
of
Persons
with
Disabilities (CRPD) is intended as an instrument to achieve
human rights for disabled people concerning a multitude of
aspects, such as, making their own free decisions in their
lives and being active members of society. To meet that, the
necessity of research on, and development of, assistive
technologies, as well as the availability of those, is
proclaimed [3].
Furthermore, through the program Global
Cooperation on Assistive Technology [4], the World Health
Organization (WHO) points out that not only is assistive
technology a tool to ensure quality of life for disabled
people, but also, such technology shall be a human right. In
that context, Information Technology (IT), as an example of
a technology, has a rather minor role in the context of
sustainable development, and has been more seen as a
complementary tool [5]. Still, IT has also been claimed to be
a driving force in contexts of quality of life [6].
At the Department of Computer Science, Kristianstad
University, Sweden, there have been ongoing experiments
during several years, with specific focus on developing IT-
based support systems for people with functional disabilities.
Especially, focus has been on younger students at specific
secondary schools, with support for an independent living for
those students. Thus, the context of Smart Home-techniques
has been especially emphasized, where the experiments have
been conducted as research projects, as well as served as
examples of project-based teaching and learning Computer
Science courses material. At the core of the work stand the
questions on how to develop techniques, and arrange
techniques to support differently-abled persons in their daily
living. This, in turn, should have consequences on grades of
societal inclusiveness, as pointed out by high level actions,
such as, UN’s Agenda 2030, CRPD, and WHO’s Global
Cooperation on Assistive Technology.
This
contribution
will
cover
IT-based
techniques
experimented on prototype systems. Such systems and
techniques especially address assistance in the daily living of
young people with functional disabilities, and, thus, should
contribute to the quality and the sustainability aspects of life
for those people.
The contribution is outlined as follows: Section II will
provide a description of the case, while Section III will
discuss related work. Section IV will give a brief overview
of the methods of use, and the results of the work will be
presented in Section V, Section VI, Section VII, and Section
VIII. Section IX will provide discussions on the work, and,
finally, Section X will present conclusions and further work.
II.
DESCRIPTION OF THE CASE
Riksgymnasiet is a secondary school in Sweden for
students aged 16 to 19 years old who have different kinds of
functional disabilities. Sweden has four such schools, where
one of those is positioned in Kristianstad, in the very south of
Sweden. The students may come from different parts in
Sweden and have accommodations arranged close to the
school.
In 2012, a study was performed by researchers at
Computer Science, Kristianstad University (CS@HKR), at
Riksgymnasiet
at
Kristianstad,
with
the
purpose
of
investigating possible IT-based support systems to be used
by students in their daily living at that school. In parallel
with that study, a prototype system was developed, where the
end users (i.e., students at Riksgymnasiet) were able to turn
on and off the light of lamps from apps developed for smart
phones in their rooms [7]. The studies showed that the end
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

users (as well as support staff at Riksgymnasiet), were
satisfied with the prototype system, and that they also had
further desires from such a system. For instance, they wanted
to have support for different kinds of practical activities that,
at that time, needed a personal assistant’s cooperation.
Among other things, researchers at CS@HKR observed
that it was impossible for the students to pull down blinds,
and put on fans by themselves to protect themselves from the
sunshine and heat in their rooms. Furthermore, the air quality
was questionable and could gain from being controlled. Such
conclusions formed the basis for further investigations and
technical development of a support system, in order to
increase the degree of independence of the end users’
accommodation. Apps, as well as other user units, should be
developed to control devices in the homes. While several
solutions exist today for Smart Home-techniques for use by
the common public, it should be noticed that it is also
especially important to regard the diversity of the end users’
needs.
III.
RELATED WORK
There exist several examples of academic approaches to
Smart-Home systems for people in home settings (for
instance, the Home Aware Research Initiative at Georgia
Tech, [8], and Washington State University’s initiative,
Integrative
Training
in
Health-Assistive
Smart
Environments, [9]). The work of this specific contribution is
especially
motivated
by,
on
one
hand,
the
possible
applicability of the emerging flora of new techniques, and,
on the other hand, by the end-users’ need for participatory
customization to meet a diversity of needs.
Today, there are several examples of commercialized
Smart Home-systems for the common public, such as to
control lamps and washing machines remotely through the
use of apps. Often, those are not integrated as one in the
same system, even though, for instance, Apple provides large
scale solutions in that direction. Still, in contexts of diversity
in disabilities, requirements of integrating off-the-shelf
components with customized solutions may be hard to
overcome.
The result of the Brundtland’s commission [10] has
provided a view on sustainable development that today is
widely acknowledged. First, that view concerns not only
environmental aspects, but also economic and social aspects.
Second, as a temporal dimension, sustainable development
concerns the sustainability of today, as well as of tomorrow
(or,
more
precisely,
meeting
today’s
needs,
without
compromising the needs of tomorrow).
Seen from a sustainability perspective, commercial
products certainly correspond well to economic aspects.
Projects, as covered in this contribution, developed for Smart
Homes to support people with specific needs, and, thus, in
the context of assistive technologies, typically relate to social
aspects of sustainable development. Research at CS@HKR
indicates experiences from the development of several
systems in the domain of eHealth to provide support for
people with specific needs. Hence, investigations especially
point
out
social
aspects
on
sustainable
development.
Examples of these include:

Internet of Things-based support systems for
parents with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD) and Autism [11], where
prototype systems were developed, for instance,
to remind the parents of things to carry with
them when leaving their home, through tagging
the
things
and
matching
that
against
a
‘remember map’.

Food supply systems for elderly people [12],
where, among other things, a Smart Phone app
was developed to filter in and filter out food
choices of the day, based on e.g., nutrition
aspects and allergies.

Support systems for people with cognitive
disorders [13]. Prototypes were developed to
support children with a communication support
for them to move freely outdoors.
Studies behind these examples have been performed on
the bases of participatory action research [13], tested on
potential end-users [12], and with careful investigations of
the daily living of stakeholders [11]. However, the above
examples are typically time-limited research projects, that is,
with no sustainability in time and with a need for further
follow up strategies.
It can clearly be seen that ‘following up’ needs to take
place at several meetings for feedback-information from the
end users. Especially, disabilities may also mean diversity
and, therefore, a need for customizing solutions. The
question
of what
matters
to
people
is
presented
by
Greenhalgh et al. [14] and, putting that work in the context
of this contribution would mean that ‘following up’ would
put focus on the needs of the end users as a driver for the
technical solutions. In that context, the observation that
science of assisted living is still in its infancy is especially
interesting and certainly needs more attention.
Meurer et al. [5] take a conceptual approach to the
sustainability of the design of IT-based projects for support
for the continuing living for elderly at home. Here, among
other things, sustainability relates to a temporal scale and the
approach problematizes around the typical time limits that
apply to research-related projects. In the context of [5], a
sustainable development shall be seen on the basis of a
multidimensional space, with aspects, such as, outcomes at
levels
of
individuals,
and
implications
at
levels
of
organizations.
Here, it is claimed
that the effect of
developing a research project tends to end when a project is
over, and, thus, will not correspond to a sustainable
development.
IV.
METHODS
While early initiatives were taken to understand the
living situation of the young students at Riksgymnasiet, later
experiments were mainly done at the lab at CS@HKR. Here,
development processes have typically been prototype-based,
which is an efficient way of testing out ideas, reject ideas,
and
build
new
solutions
upon
previous
successful
experimentations.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V.
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
A system overview is captured by Figure 1, illustrating
the main system architectural parts. The User Controlled
Units correspond to the communication from end user’s
point of view (such as apps), while the Home Devices
correspond to devices to be controlled (such as lamps).
Communication
flows
wirelessly
(typically
based
on
techniques such as Bluetooth and Wi-Fi) through a server
and a database with information regarding current user units
and home devices.
Figure 1.
Smart Home system overview.
In the sequel, user units, home devices, and the usability
of those, will be described in more detail. Techniques have
been experimented on, and developed by, researchers and by
students at CS@HKR under the researchers’ supervision.
VI.
USER CONTROLLED UNITS
Different kinds of user units have been developed to be
able to control the system, as outlined in Figure 2. The use of
those will be further described in this section.
Figure 2.
User Unit overview.
A.
Smart Phone Apps
Apps for Smart Phones have been especially developed
based on Google’s Android platform. The apps have been
developed to control Smart Home-devices through pushing
buttons on common user interfaces, such as illustrated in
Figure 3. Their use at Riksgymnasiet, as shown by
experiments done there [7], was regarded as quite ‘cool’ by
the end users. Still, even though the interaction form in itself
is common today, the usability is a challenge that needs to be
addressed. This concerns both the clarity of the details of the
user interface as well as usefulness in cases of different
grades of functional disabilities.
To open up for further possibilities, voice recognition has
also been introduced. For instance, the spoken command
‘Turn on the light’, implies an answer from the Smart Home,
‘I heard you said turn on light’, followed by the light being
turned on. Experiments like this have been performed in
order to provide a variety of forms of communication, based
on a diversity of needs. Yet, another example is based on the
use of sensors of a Smart Phone when shaking and rotating
it.
The
three-axials
accelerometer
of
Android
phones
corresponds to a 3D space, to compute and form different
commands.
Figure 3.
Smart Phone User Interface example.
B.
Camera based interfaces for capturing gestures
Preliminary gesture languages have been developed
where the gestures are captured by a Kinect camera [15] and
interpreted
through
software
especially
developed
to
recognize the different language elements. Even though the
Kinect camera originally was developed for computer
gaming
reasons,
it
can
be
used
generally
to
notice
movements in a 3D space, see Figure 4.
Figure 4.
Detection of skeleton joints (skeleton picture from [16]).
Here, the camera has been used to notice simple up-down
or left-right hand movements to control lights, fans, or a
curtain.
The
technique
records
each
joint
on
the
body/skeleton to represent 3D coordinates (x, y, z), which,
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

then are further converted to commands. There are 20 joints
for one person, can be used to interpret more complex
gesture recognition commands [17].
The joint detection was done with the camera’s depth
image information. To map each one of them is a complex
work, where each one is composed of 3D coordinates; for
example, the right-hand 3D coordinates are: (x1, y1, z1), (x2,
y2, z2), (x3, y3, z3).
C.
The NeuroSky brainwave interface
To meet even harder degrees of disabilities, experiments
have been introduced with NeuroSky brainwave headsets,
see Figure 5. The control of home devices is triggered by
thoughts, emotions and blinking. One experiment was done
with different combinations of specifically chosen thoughts
to form commands that can be used to control the window
curtain. The result was showing that a combination of two
specific thought tasks could be used to form two commands
with 97% accuracy performance, and that three specific
thought tasks could form three commands with 92%
accuracy performance [18].
Figure 5.
The NeuroSky BrainWave Headset.
Figure 6.
A NeuroSky controlled menu.
The experiment showed that the strongest two thought
tasks are when a person is counting backwards, and the
second one is when a person is imagining and focusing on
the point between the ears in the head. It was suggested to
continue with this experiment by using eye blinking to build
several more commands.
Another experiment on the NeuroSky headset was the
use of relaxing modes to move an indicator along the y-axis,
which gets a user into a desired part of a menu. Well inside
the menu, the user can choose to blink once to turn on or off
the chosen device (for example the lamp) or blink twice to
continue moving inside the menu, as illustrated in Figure 6,
and exemplified by students at CS@HKR through a short
video-clip [19].
D.
Web-based interface
Although the previously presented user-side units of a
possible Smart Home can provide good opportunities to
control the home's devices, the information about the state of
the home is rather limited. Through a web-based user
interface, not only more detailed information is provided, but
also additional practical possibilities to control Smart Home
devices. Figure 7 illustrates that devices, such as lamps, fans,
and blinds in several different rooms may be controlled from
a web-based user interface. Furthermore, Figure 7 shows that
additional information about, for example, air quality
(temperature,
humidity,
carbon
dioxide,
etc.)
can
be
summarized by a more complete interface.
Figure 7.
A web-based user interface.
The scale of a web-based user interface is not only
beneficial for additional usability for an end-user (if this is
useful to the user in terms of their capabilities), it also
provides
opportunities
for
supporting
organizations
to
communicate with the Smart Home remotely. That is, a
person with special needs can receive support remotely and,
therefore, this can contribute to being independent of the
physical presence of personal assistants. Such insights also
indicate many additional opportunities in the development of
IT-based support for Smart Homes.
VII.
HOME DEVICES
While
the
previous
section
on
user
units
mainly
presented the ‘left part’ of the system, as outlined in Figure
1, the ‘right part’ corresponds to the devices of the Smart
Home, that is, things to be observed or manipulated. For
experimentation reasons, both for research and for examples
in student projects, real as well as simulated devices have
been used.
The actions of devices are mainly triggered through user
commands, but, in some cases, activities are triggered by
inbuilt intelligence. Examples on this include a fan that is
turned on when the temperature exceeds a certain level.
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A.
Real devices
Real devices correspond to devices that may be used in
common homes, see Figure 8. This includes, for instance,
lamps or fans from IKEA (as is also the case in the
experiments performed). Adapters have been used here to
convert from high- to low level voltages. Furthermore, blinds
have been fitted with a machinery to be able to be lifted up
and down remotely.
At the endpoints of the devices (lamps, fans, etc.),
microprocessors have been attached, which furthermore have
been programmed to fulfill the specific tasks of controlling
the
devices
(turning
on,
pulling
down,
etc.).
The
microprocessors, in turn, carry communication devices for
remote communication based on, e.g., Bluetooth or Wi-Fi.
Figure 8.
Examples on physical devices. Pictures from lab and from [20].
Furthermore, sensors have been used for detection of
quality of air, based on humidity, temperature, and carbon
dioxide. Moreover, sensors based on ultrasonic sound have
been experimented on to catch the number of entrances and
exits in and out of a room.
B.
Simulated devices
For experimentation reasons, a small scaled model of a
house has been used by students, as shown in Figure 9. From
the point of view of techniques for a Smart Home, this house
still has a wide range of functionalities that, in several cases,
may be scaled up into real life contexts. Table 1 provides an
overview of those.
Figure 9.
A small scaled model of a house.
TABLE I. FUNCTIONALITIES IN A SMART HOME
Functionality
Description
1
Automatic fire
alarm
This signal is simulated with a switch
2
Housebreaking
alarm
This input is realized by using a magnetic
switch mounted at the house door
3
Water leakage
alarm
This signal is simulated with a switch
4
Temperature
indoors
This signal is realized using an analog
temperature sensor mounted inside the
house (on the first and the second floor
5
Temperature
outdoors
This signal is realized using a digital
temperature sensor mounted outside the
house
6
Stove On
This signal is simulated with a switch on
the front panel
7
Window open
This signal is simulated with a switch
8
2 Timers
This output signal is simulated with an
LED lamp on the front panel
9
Lighting indoors
This function is realized with a lamp
mounted inside the house
10
Lighting outdoors
This function is realized with a lamp
mounted outside the house
11
Power cut
This input is realized by controlling the
presence of supply voltage
12
Electricity
consumption
This input is realized by measuring the
supply voltage deliver to the house (an
analog signal)
13
Twillight
automatic system
This input is realized by Light-to-Voltage
sensor (outdoors)
14
Fan
This function is realized with a fan
mounted on the house’s loft
15
Radiator
Four power resistors are connected in series
to realize the heating of the house. The
resistors are mounted in pairs, two at each
long side wall
From Table 1, some functionalities are merely simulated
by switches at a processor board (such as, Window open),
while others have potentials to be connected to a prototype
system. For instance, Lighting indoors may be manipulated
through a smart phone-app, and Temperature indoors, may
be used to trigger actions of Fan, and Radiator.
VIII.
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
Several concepts have been experimented on, in addition
to the above-mentioned techniques. Those increase the
potential for a possible full-scaled development of Smart
Home-support systems. Here, system development has
typically been done through student projects, and student
thesis work at CS@HKR. Examples include:

Usability
aspects
of
Smart
Phone
User
Interfaces (UI). The UI not only have to be
attractive in their shape, but, e.g., must also
meet the complexities of a possible growing
number of devices of a Smart Home.

Scheduling Smart Home-functionalities, where
events can be activated through time points set
at, e.g., Google Calendar.

Security aspects of Smart Homes, which, of
course, constitute a fundamental matter to
protect the individuals’ integrity.
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions


Spatial awareness, that is, a system’s awareness
of where the users, as well as devices, are
positioned in a Smart Home

Simulations of devices, such as Media players,
and Microwave ovens.
The core purpose of the techniques presented in this
contribution has a focus on the independence of the living of
the end users, that is, in our case, young people with different
kinds of functional disabilities. Although the projects listed
above and in previous sections show promising results so far,
they
need
to
be
critically
examined
from
several
perspectives.
With a diversity of disabilities, supporting techniques
certainly
must
be
customized
to
suit
specific
needs.
Moreover, the degrees of independence a system contributes
with
must
be
examined,
based
on
a
conceptualized
framework. For instance, a fan may be controlled from a
distance through an app and, therefore, provide a significant
degree of value, while controlling a washing machine from
an app may bring less value, since it still must be loaded with
clothes. Here, concepts should relate to the degree of
independence and the degree of external assistance that is
still needed even with the support of the developed system.
IX.
DISCUSSIONS
High level organizations, such as UN and WHO, have
stated ambitions concerning especially vulnerable people,
where it is pointed out that no one shall be left behind.
Furthermore, actions such as Agenda 2030 and Global
Cooperation on Assistive Technology, addresses the situation
of disabled people, where the quality of life of those people
and their societal inclusiveness are especially emphasized.
As research and development organizations, academia
certainly has a role to play here, where, on one hand, the
situations and specific needs of the disabled people should be
studied and concretized, and, on the other hand, solutions
should be found and developed. Moreover, bridging a gap
between need and solution can probably only be done
through participatory research, that is, research where
representatives of the end-users act cooperatively with
researchers and developers, and only then.
This contribution has had a starting point in observations
of the living situation of young students at Riksgymnasiet in
Kristianstad, Sweden. The technical prototypes that have
been developed from that starting point have yet only been
executed in lab environments. Still, this has brought a level
of maturity of the techniques and skills in handling those,
which may contribute well to possible future participatory
research projects.
Several examples on technical solutions have been tested
out and put into contexts of complete Smart Home prototype
systems. Different kinds of user-controlled units are used
here to observe or manipulate different kinds of home
devices.
Even
though
prototypes
may
be
stable
at
preliminary levels, putting those in real world contexts
certainly will require several exhaustive test cases. Still, so
far, the work seems to show clear potential in serving as an
example of a useful assistive technology.
X.
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
This contribution has presented experiments that have
been ongoing over several years regarding the development
of IT-based solutions to support people (especially young
people) with functional disabilities in their housing, through
technologies for Smart Home. User units for a variety of
disabilities have been developed and prototyped together
with devices related to Smart Homes. The state of the
prototypes is mostly at the level of labs, that is, they need to
be further tested out in contexts they are intended to be used,
that is, the housings of disabled people.
In addition, the development of such prototype systems
has
been
discussed
in
the
context
of
sustainable
development. This has partly been done with respect to
Agenda 2030 and especially on a level of usefulness for the
individuals. For the individuals, sustainability especially
corresponds to how well the outcome of projects may work
over time. Further work needs studies of the core technical
aspects, as well as the usefulness of the end user-related
aspects.
The covered techniques and the systems/subsystems need
in many cases be further investigated for the sake of
achieving a mature and trustworthy level. From a system
perspective, several qualities must be especially studied,
such as, robustness, performance, and security. Still, such
qualities
may
solely
relate
to
sustainability
from
a
perspective of the system in itself.
For the sake of sustainability in use, an iterative process
involving
end
users
and
support
organizations
for
collaboration and participation must be further initiated.
Initiatives for further collaboration between researchers at
CS@HKR and the Riksgymnasiet have been taken, and a
mutual interest in future collaborations has been shown. A
form of such collaborations should also emphasize a
conceptualization of grades of independence that technical
support may provide. Solutions should be useful for purposes
of independence in the daily living, not only motivated by
the functionality of the technique itself.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Acknowledgments
to
the
students
and
staff
at
Riksgymnasiet who were involved in and have contributed to
the first studies behind this contribution. Also, many thanks
to all the students over the years who have contributed with
experiments
and
system
development
in
project-based
courses and thesis work in the study programs in Computer
Science at Kristianstad University.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Renner, L. Bok, N. Igloi and N. Linou, “What does it mean
to leave no one behind?” A UNDP discussion paper and
framework for implementation, 2018.
[2]
United
Nations
Statistics
Division,
“SDG
Indicators”
Availabe
from:
https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/
2020.02.23.
[3]
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, “United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,” 2006, Article
available from:
https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-
on-the-rights-of-persons-with-disabilities.html 2020.02.23.
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[4]
Global Cooperation on Assistive Technology, “Disability and
rehabilitation,”World Health Organization, Available from:
https://www.who.int/disabilities/technology/gate/en/
2020.02.23.
[5]
J. Meurer, C. Müller, C. Simone, I. Wagner and V. Wulf,
“Designing for Sustainability: Key Issues of ICT Projects for
Ageing at Home”, Computer Supported Cooperative Work
(CSCW), 27, pp. 495–537, 2018.
[6]
D. Hornung, C. Müller, I. Shklovski, T. Jakobi and V. Wulf,
“Navigating Relationships and Boundaries: Concerns around
ICT-uptake for Elderly People”, Technology Use Challenges
for Older Adults, CHI-2017, Denver USA, 2017.
[7]
Z. Demant, “Interaktivt hus”, Bachelor Thesis in Computer
Science, Kristianstad University (in Swedish), 2012.
[8]
J. A. Kientz et al., “The Georgia Tech Aware Home”,
Research Landscapes , CHI-2008, Florence, Italy, 2008.
[9]
Washington State University, “Integrative Training in Health-
Assistive
Smart
Environments”, Availabe
from:
http://igert.eecs.wsu.edu/index.html/ 2020.02.23.
[10] G.
H.
Brundtland,
“Our Common
Future:
The World
Commission on Environment and Development”. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1987.
[11] D. Einarson, P. Sommarlund and F. Segerström, “IoT-Support
Systems for Parents with ADHD and Autism”, International
Conference
on
Computational
Systems
&
Information
Technology for sustainable Solution, csitss, 2016.
[12] D. Einarson and D. Saplacan, “The Active Ageing Approach
to Quality of Life for Elderly People through Order and
Distribution
Chains”,
International
Conference
on
Computational
Systems
&
Information
Technology
for
sustainable Solution, csitss2016, 2016.
[13] D. Saplacan and D. Einarson, "A Participatory Action
Research Approach to Developing Assistive Technologies for
People Suffering from Cognitive Disorders," in Living
Knowledge Conference, Copenhagen, 2014.
[14] T. Greenhalgh et al., “What matters to older people with
assisted living needs? A phenomenological analysis of the use
and non-use of telehealth and telecare”, Social Science &
Medicine, 93, pp. 86-94, 2013.
[15] D. Levac, D. Espy, E. Fox, S Pradhan and J. E. Deutch,
“"Kinect-ing" With Clinicians: A Knowledge Translation
Resource to Support Decision Making About Video Game
Use in Rehabilitation”, Innovative Technologies Special
Series, Physical therapy, Volume 95, Number 3, pp. 426-440,
2015.
[16] A. Shingade and A. Ghotkar, “Animation of 3D Human
Model Using Markerless Motion Capture Applied To Sports”,
International Journal of Computer Graphics & Animation
(IJCGA), Vol.4, No.1, pp. 27-39, 2014.
[17] L. Huynh et al. “Robust classification of human actions from
3D data”, 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Signal
Processing and Information Technology, San Juan, PR, USA,
pp. 263-268, 2012.
[18] M. Teljega, “Automatic control of a window blind using EEG
signals”, Master thesis of Science in Computer Science with
specialization in Embedded Systems, Kristianstad University,
2018.
[19] S. Dehghani, E Haol, A. Abdulal and N. Cunha, “The art of
turning on the light with the power of the mind”, Kristianstad
University
News,
in
Swedish,
Available
from:
https://www.hkr.se/nyheter/2020/konsten-att-tanda-en-lampa-
med-tankens-kraft, 2020.02.23.
[20] The Application of PWM Capture (Data Acquisition) and
Ultrasonic
Sensors,
Aimagin
blog,
Available
from
http://aimagin.com/blog/pwm-capture-data-acquisition-and-
ultrasonic-sensor, 2020.03.25.
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

