An Experimental Study on Providing User Control in E-Commerce Recommendation
through Conversational System
Seth Owirodu, Yuchuan Lin, Sheng Tan
Department of Computer Science
Trinity University
San Antonio, Texas, USA
email: {sowirodu, ylin, stan}@trinity.edu
Zhou Tong
Department of Computer Science
Wheaton College
Norton, Massachusetts, USA
email: tong tony@wheatoncollege.edu
Abstract—Recommender Systems(RS) are gaining importance
across different domains, especially in e-commerce. Existing RS
work mainly focuses on improving accuracy while neglecting
other concerns associated with commercial RS, such as lack of
transparency, little or no user control, and absence of diversity.
In this paper, we aim to address those concerns by implementing
a conversational system based e-commerce RS using real-world
product data. We also conducted a month-long user study with
over a hundred participants to investigate how users respond to
the conversational system as a control mechanism to mitigate
the abovementioned problems. Results show that the majority
of the users give positive responses to the conversational system
based control mechanism. The post-study questionnaires indicate
that better control, transparency, and diversity can be achieved
utilizing our system. By considering users’ perspectives, this work
contributes to a better understanding of how we can utilize
the conversational system to mitigate transparency and diversity
issues associated with RS.
Keywords—Recommender
System;
Conversational
System;
Transparency; User Control; E-commerce.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the past decade, the Recommender System (RS) has
played an increasingly important role across different domains
of the online services such as e-commerce, social media,
banking, news, music, and video [1]. The main task of RS is
to help the user navigate through an overload of information
by providing personalized recommendation to particular users
based on explicit or implicit information
[2]. For example,
recommendations account for about 60% of all video clicks
from the home page on Youtube [3], while the recommended
items account for around 35% of the total customer purchase
on Amazon [4]. Thus, the deployment of RS can not only
alleviate the problem of information overload but also make
significant contribution to the overall success of the service [5].
In most of these practical applications, RS has been im-
proving over the years by aiming for better recommendation
accuracy. However, many researchers have become aware that
other than accuracy, existing RS failed to address several other
concerns adequately, such as diversity and transparency. For
example, RS can create ”filter bubbles” that prevent users
from accessing more diverse content and lead to potential
polarization views [6]. Moreover, RS generally keeps the
recommendation process ”behind the scenes” which lacks of
transparency which allow for very little accountability [7].
Additionally, RS rarely offers users any explicit way to di-
rect or participate in the recommending process [8]. Without
providing diversity and transparency, it can greatly diminish
user trust and satisfaction which increase the bias of the RS.
Among all the concerns discussed above, the user control
has the most direct impact compared to others. This is because
by enhancing user control, it is possible to mitigate other
problems, including diversity, transparency, and accountability.
In particular, by allowing users to participate in the recom-
mendation process, the RS can be more responsive and align
with user interests, which leads to better recommendation
accuracy [9]. User control also requires RS to be more trans-
parent and accountable through the process [10]. In addition, it
increases the diversity of recommendation results by providing
user the opportunity to explore beyond default options or
known interests [11].
Much researches has been done to implement different
mechanisms for increasing user control of the RS [12].
PeerChooser enables the user to increase the weight of the
active user represented by nodes in calculating recommenda-
tions [13]. TasteWeights allows the user to adjust the weight
of different parameters to change their importance in the
recommendation process [14]. PARIS achieve user control
by utilizing interactive mechanism like drop-down lists and
checklists [15]. There is also a large body of work leveraging
conversational systems (i.e., chatbots) to help users interact
with the RS [16]. Such mechanism allows users to give feed-
back about the recommendation results through conversational
systems [17].
Conversational systems or dialogue systems are designed
to serve the user through conversation for various purposes
given the context [18]. In recent years, with the significant ad-
vancement in natural language processing, deep learning, and
cloud computing, conversational systems have already been
used in applications across various domains [19]. Compared
to other interactive mechanisms, the conversational system
has several advantages [20]. First, conversational systems are
intuitive and have a much lower learning curve. Second,
conversational systems can be easily customized for various
purposes without affecting the interface. Those advantages
make the conversational system an ideal interactive mechanism
to enable user control for RS.
Although there are existing studies for conversational RS,
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

they mainly focus on how to improve the recommendation
results by refining the user preferences [16]. Moreover, since
those work mainly aim for recommendation accuracy improve-
ment, they fail to address other concerns for the RS, such as
transparency and diversity, especially under the e-commerce
setup. In this study, we try to answer the following research
question: how do people view the conversational system
as the control mechanism for e-commerce RS, which
underlying algorithms do they prefer, does it improve
the diversity and transparency of the RS? We focus on
the e-commerce application since it is among the most used
domains for both RS and conversational system. Also it is
essential to understand user’s perspective on how to improve
the transparency and diversity of RS utilizing conversational
system.
To answer the question, we first build a mockup e-commerce
website that leverages real-world customer data and integrates
both the recommender and conversational systems. Then, we
conduct a month-long user study by allowing participants to
freely explore the website and interact with the RS through
a conversational system. We customize the RS so users
can play around with the underlying recommendation algo-
rithms/parameters and get the updated recommendation results
on the fly. We also collect the user feedback to gain insights
into the user’s perspective on the conversational system as a
control mechanism over RS. This study contributes to a better
understanding of how the conversational system can be utilized
to mitigate the concerns, such as transparency and diversity
associated with RS.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
discusses the related work of E-commerce RS, interactive RS,
and conversational system. Section III describes the design
details of the system. In Section IV and Section V, we describe
the experiment setup and results of the user study. Finally,
Section VI and Section VII discussed the limitations and
summarize the results of this study.
II. RELATED WORK
A. E-commerce Recommendation Systems
Over the last decade, there has been a growing interest
and research effort towards RS for e-commerce websites.
This is because RSs have a tremendous impact on both
users and e-commerce providers. The products are recom-
mended based on various factors, such as popularity, customer
demographics, product rating/comment, and customer’s past
purchase/browsing history [21]. A RS usually includes three
key components: acquire data from customers, compute and
rank the recommendation, then present the recommendation
results [22].
In general, e-commerce RS can be divided into four cate-
gories: content-based filtering, collaborative filtering, hybrid,
and social network-based. Content-based filtering RS recom-
mends items similar or closely related to the items the user
has purchased previously [23]. The techniques used in content-
based filtering approaches include: traditional information
retrieval methods (e.g., TF-IDF, LDA) and advanced machine
learning methods (e.g., Bayesian, decision tree, ANN) [24].
The major limitation of content-based filtering is overspe-
cialization, limited content analysis due to a lack of key-
words [25].
Collaborative filtering RS recommends items based on the
items previously preferred or purchased/browsed by other
users [23]. In particular, most of the systems can be further
sorted into two types: heuristic-based (e.g., KNN, graphy the-
ory, SVM) and model-based (e.g., Bayesian, Clustering, linear-
regression) [26]. This approach also has several drawbacks,
such as sparsity problem, gray sheep problem, and scalability
problem [26].
In order to avoid the shortcomings of above mentioned sys-
tems, hybrid RS has emerged to take advantage from the pre-
vious two approaches. It is done by combining content-based
filtering and collaborative filtering RS together in various
ways, such as weighted, switching, mixed, feature combination
and cascade [27]. Recently, by leveraging the fast-growing
of social network applications, social network-based RS has
been proposed to utilize data from other aspects, such as user
preferences, social connections to improve recommendation
accuracy and overcome major challenges including cold-start
problem and sparsity problem [28].
B. Interactive recommendation systems
Since the first introduction of RS in the mid-1990s, the
majority of the research efforts have been dedicated to im-
prove the system performance and accuracy [29]. Recently,
more and more work has been done to improve the overall
quality of RS in other aspects, such as diversity, novelty,
context, and serendipity [30]. In particular, RS should also
take into consideration of factors including transparency and
controllability [31] to further increase the societal value and
user trust [32]. Thus, research on human factors by developing
interactive RS has gained increasing interest. For the RS, there
are three distinctive phases where the user interaction with the
system could happen: preparation (preference selection), com-
putation (recommendation computation), presentation (results
presentation).
The majority of the existing RS utilize implicit user pref-
erences when generating recommendation results. This means
the user has no control over which preference will be used
or prioritized compared to others. Since user’s preferences
are highly complex, contextual, and even contradictory under
specific scenarios [33], it is crucial to give the user the freedom
to choose and prioritize their preferences in order to improve
controllability. For example, the system proposed by Schaffer
et al. [34] allows user to adjust the weights of different input
parameters to change their corresponding importance in the
recommendation process.
Much work have been proposed to enable user control over
the recommendation computation process by either allowing
the user to adjust the algorithm parameters/weights [14] or
switch between different types of algorithms [35]. Compare
to commonly used one algorithm fit all approach, this type
of user control gives users the ability to select different
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

algorithms that can tailor to different scenarios. For example,
the content-bases filtering approach has the advantage when
there is enough domain knowledge on the feature space while
the collaborative filtering approach works better under the
scenario where there is no overspecialization on user profile
and recommend items. Since the algorithm/parameter change
over the recommendation computation process yields a bigger
impact on the final results, our study will focus on providing
the user interaction with the system during this phase.
The presentation control mechanism allows the user to
reorder or present the recommendation results in various ways
that better fit a specific user and his/her interest under different
scenarios [34]. Specifically, system like TalkExplorer [36] uses
a cluster map to visualize relations between recommender
agents. MusiCube [37] allow the user to rate more items
to refine recommendation directly in the recommendation
results. On the other hand, work proposed by Jin et al. [38]
leverage straightforward post-filtering functionalities to refine
recommendation results and achieve cognitive load reduction.
C. Conversational systems
Conversational systems or conversational user interfaces are
conversational agents that can interact with different users
using natural language [39]. The technology is also known
as chatbots which humans could interact with [40]. With
the rapid development in the area of artificial intelligence,
especially the advancement in natural language processing in
the recent years, chatbots are capable of performing many
labor-intensive task at a much lower cost and has been widely
deployed across a varied range of applications, including
intelligent customer service for e-commerce, virtual personal
assistance, financial dialogue system, physical healthcare, and
pedagogical conversational agent [19].
Based on the specific techniques utilized, typical conversa-
tional system can be divided into the six categories: template-
based, corpus-based, intent-based, RNN-based, RL-based, and
hybrid approaches [19]. Because of the advancement in com-
putational power and deep learning algorithms, more and
more research have tried to combine several techniques to
improve the performance of the chatbots [18]. For example,
it is possible to utilize a ranking algorithm to select the op-
timal response from candidate responses generated by several
chatbots leveraging different techniques [41].
Figure 1. A screenshot of the e-commerce website used for our study.
It is worth noticing that there are existing work attempt to
integrate the conversational system with the recommendation
system to further improve recommendation performance [17].
It is done by eliciting user preferences and further reduce pref-
erence ambiguity through the conversational systems lever-
aging AI techniques [16]. Although there are many research
efforts have been made towards this direction, existing work
mainly focuses on how to improve the response from the
conversational system or better integration of those two sys-
tems [42]. Different from existing work, our study aims to
explore the potential of utilizing conversational RS to improve
the transparency and controllability of the RS, especially under
the e-commerce application scenario.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN
In this section, we describe the details of how we imple-
mented the system. Specifically, we discuss the data set and
frameworks that were chosen as well as how we used them
respectively.
A. E-Commerce website and Data set
We implement the e-commerce website using the open-
source framework Amazona [43]. The website layout shares
high similarities with the popular shopping website Amazon
and has been adopted by most e-commerce websites. This way,
users can quickly get familiar with the layout and explore the
website without much learning curve.
In particular, we made several changes to the website to
accommodate our study. First, we change the website from
category-based to brand-based. This is because we want the
user to focus on the recommendation page without getting
overwhelmed by various product category page information.
Second, we created two different sections on the home page
to display the recommended items based on the underlying
recommendation algorithm and randomly selected items which
mimic the modern e-commerce website. The website’s home
page after user login is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 2. A sample of the Amazon Review Data
To populate the website, we utilized the Amazon prod-
uct review data and product metadata of Amazon Review
Data (2018) [44] for our implementation. This data set is
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the updated version of the Amazon Review Data released
back in 2014 [45], containing product reviews and metadata
from Amazon, including 233.1 million reviews spanning from
May 1996 to Oct 2018. The whole dataset has 29 different
categories of products in total. A sample of the review data is
shown in Figure 2.
In order to reduce excessive information that would distract
users, we only picked the Clothing and Shoes sub-dataset
category with 32.2 million reviews and 2.6 million products.
This is because many of the products from the real-world e-
commerce website are from those categories and users are
more familiar with the brands from those categories. To reduce
the sparsity problem of the review data, we used the 5-core
review data, a dense subset extracted from the original product
review data where each product has at least five reviews.
B. Recommendation system and Chatbot
For this study, we implemented the recommendation engine
using Case Recommender [46], which is an open-source a
Python framework of several popular recommendation algo-
rithms for both implicit and explicit feedback. This framework
aims to provide a rich set of components that allow us to
construct a customized RS based on a set of underlying
algorithms and rating prediction.
It is worth noting that this study does not seek to tackle
the cold start issue in the recommendation system where the
system does not contain prior information about a specific user.
To resolve this issue, during the registration process, each user
is required to enter basic user information (e.g., age, gender)
and select their top favorite brands and products from the list
the website provides.
In order to generate the recommended items, our system
first computes the estimated ratings for all product candidates
with the trained model using the default algorithm or explicitly
selected by that user. Next, the product candidates are sorted
by their estimated ratings. Next, a list containing the top n
products with the highest estimated ratings is sent back as the
recommended items. Here, the number of recommended prod-
ucts, the recommendation algorithm, and rating prediction are
considered parameters controlled by either the user or default
setting. The default number of products being recommended,
recommendation algorithm, and rating prediction is 5, most
popular, and SVD, respectively.
After comparing various chatbot frameworks implemented,
we selected the react-chatbot-kit for building our chatbot [47],
a React-based open source chatbot framework. The default
chatbot framework contains a message parser, a configuration,
and an action provider, which allows us to easily configure the
interactive conversational system for our study and integrate
it with our implementation of the e-commerce website and
underlying RS.
To better handle the user control request for the underly-
ing RS, we first designed and implemented several message
parsers that can detect different keywords and determine what
kind of responses should be returned to the user. Next, we
came up with different keywords related to our user control
Figure 3. A screenshot of the chatbot used for our study.
methods or user control in general. All the control keywords
are implemented as buttons so users can easily choose from the
conversation without typing. After the user clicks the button,
specific actions will be triggered (e.g., switching the algorithm,
changing the number of items to be recommended). An
example of the chatbot implementation is shown in Figure 3.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We studied the user behavior of our system, a conversa-
tional system based interactive RS for e-commerce website,
where the user can interact with the conversational system
to change the underlying algorithms and parameters. The
proposed system supports the switching between multiple
recommending algorithms, which gives the user the control
of the RS and the ability to view the results generated by
various algorithms/parameters on the fly. When a user logged
into the system, he/she will be assigned the baseline algorithm
as his/her initial condition. They will also receive a brief
message from the conversational system to inform them about
the currently running algorithm and potential options they can
switch to.
Our system supports four underlying recommending al-
gorithms. Each algorithm is identified to the user using an
abbreviation derived from the original name. Users can interact
with the conversational system for further information about
each algorithm, such as a simple description of what this
algorithm is and how it is being used in the RS. The supported
algorithms are as follows:
• The Baseline algorithm generates the results by selecting
the top reviewed items from randomly selected cate-
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

gories/brands. This algorithm was called Default and was
used as ”non-personalized” algorithm.
• The Collaborative algorithm generates the results utiliz-
ing collaborative filtering approach. It searches the similar
preference user with the current user to find the similar
users. After finding a similar user, it then presents the
recommendation for the current user according to the
preference of similar ones. The algorithm was called Col-
laborative and was used to improve the user experience
for new user of the system.
• The Content algorithm generates the results leveraging
content-based filtering approach. The item recommended
by such an approach often indicates textual information
where each item is described with the keyword and its
weight. Then the items are recommended based on item
characteristics and the user’s preference. The algorithm
was called Content and was used to recommend items
similar to what the user has liked or purchased in the
past.
• The Hybrid algorithm generates the results by taking
advantage of both content-based filtering and collabo-
rative filtering approaches. It is done by combing the
recommendation results from those two approaches. The
algorithm was called Hybrid and was used to avoid the
disadvantages of content-based filtering and collaborative
filtering approaches.
Once in the system, users could change the underlying
algorithms and rating prediction parameters by interacting with
the website’s conversational system. The change will take
effect immediately after user specification in the conversa-
tional system. After the user types in or selects the desired
algorithms or parameters, the system will reload the list of
recommended items on the current page (if they are on the item
recommendation page) and show the results from the newly
selected algorithm/parameter. The user’s choice will persist
throughout the system and affect all the predictions for item
recommendations.
The summary of the experiment data is listed as follows:
there are 108 users participated in our study over one month
period of time; of all the participants, 45 were female, 52
were male, and the rest declined to reveal that information;
the age range is from 21 to 50; 95 of them make the
algorithm/parameter at least once. We consider switching from
one algorithm/parameter to another as a single change event.
There is a total of 1315 change events recorded during the
experiment.
We also asked all participants to fill in a questionnaire after
the experiment. It is used to assess the participants’ experience
using the proposed system. The questionnaire uses a five-point
Likert scale, ranging from 1 to 5, where 1 represents strong
disagreement, and 5 represents strong agreement. There are
a total of 98 pieces of feedback collected. The questionnaire
statements were as follows:
1) I become familiar with the system very quickly.
2) The information provided by the chatbot was sufficient
Figure 4. User Preferences of Algorithms
for me to change the underlying algorithms/parameters.
3) I would like use this system in the future on e-commerce
website.
4) I like the item recommendation result generated by the
system.
5) I have fun when I am using the system.
6) The recommend results contained a lot of variety when
switch to different algorithms/parameters.
7) The system has no real benefit for me.
8) I have to invest a lot of effort to obtain different
recommendation results.
9) I feel in control of the recommending process.
V. RESULTS
In this section, we describe our findings from this study.
It contains the results for both algorithm/parameter switching
and the questionnaire.
A. User Switch Algorithms
Of the 108 users in our study, 95(87%) changed underlying
algorithms at least once, as mentioned before. This means
13 users only use the default algorithm/parameter during the
process. These activities likely resulted from users’ unaware-
ness of the conversational system on the web page, or the
results generated by the default algorithms has already met
their expectation. The high percentage of users switching
the algorithm/parameter at least once demonstrates that most
users utilize the conversational system to adjust underlying
algorithms. This also shows the user’s willingness to explore
RS through conversational system and desire for transparency
and user control over RS.
B. User Algorithm Preferences
Here, we study the user preferences of the algorithm.
Among the users who tried different algorithms, the collab-
orative was the most favored algorithm, followed by Hybrid,
content, and default algorithms. Figure 4 shows the number of
users who switched algorithms at least once and selected one
of the algorithms as their final choice (i.e., the algorithm user
chose as the active algorithm at the end of the experiment).
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 5. Likelihood to Switch Algorithm
It is easy to observe that users prefer other algorithms over
the default ones. This is because the users knew the default
algorithm was non-personalized and could not generate more
accurate or personalized results. We can also observe that the
user prefers the collaborative filtering-based approach more
than the content-based and hybrid approaches. It is likely
because the users who switched algorithms at least once are
willing to try various options on the parameters. This observa-
tion provides insights to support the idea of users’ desire for
transparency and user control of the recommendation systems.
As we discussed before, most users chose to switch from
non-personalized algorithms and try different ones. Figure 5
shows the probability of users in each algorithm who tried a
different algorithm afterward. As we can see, users who choose
the default algorithm have the highest probability of switching
algorithms, followed by hybrid, content, and collaborative.
This observation also suggests users’ awareness of the non-
personalized results generated by the default algorithm. Com-
bining these results with the users’ final choice, we can infer
that most users are satisfied with the collaborative algorithm.
The content algorithm has the next satisfactory rate, followed
by the hybrid algorithm.
C. Algorithm Switching Behavior
We also study the user switching behavior by measuring
how many times each user switched their algorithms, and the
results are shown in Figure 6. The x-axis shows how many
switches have been made; the y-axis shows the number of
users who made that amount of switches. We only showed
the number of switches less than 10 times, which accounts
for 97% of the users. The vast majority of the users switched
algorithms no more than 6 times. However, there exist users
who logged over 95 switches during the experiments. Most
users switch just several times. For example, only around 20%
of users switched more than 6 times.
The most common pattern for switching was for the user to
switch from the default to another algorithm or try the other
three algorithms and stop the switching. The median number
Figure 6. Events Count for User Switch
of switching is 4; after 6 switches, there is a significant drop-
off in the number of users. This is because 4 to 6 switches are
enough for most users to try other personalized algorithms
and decide which one is their favorite. It is worth noticing
that most users experiment with the switch early in their use
of our system, conduct several switches and then leave the
system alone.
D. Questionnaire Results
Figure 7 summarizes user feedback and perception about
the system and interaction effectiveness. The feedback of
Q1(M=4.00, SD=0.85) and Q8(M=2.45, SD=1.15) show that
the proposed system is relatively easy to use and does not
require much effort for the user to learn. It is worth noting that
among all the users, the younger users (35 years or younger)
gave overall higher ratings on Q1 and lower ratings on Q8.
On the other hand, the older users (40 years or older) gave
overall lower ratings on Q1 and high ratings on Q8. This is
likely because e-commerce websites have widely adopted the
conversational system, and younger users are already taking
advantage of this feature and are familiar with how to interact
with it.
The
quality
of
item
recommendation
Q4(M=3.85,
SD=0.92),
information
variety
Q6(M=3.65,
SD=1.25),
and
information
sufficiency
Q2(M=3.95,
SD=0.82)
all
received positive feedback from the users. This indicates
that the proposed system provides an easily understood
explanation for the user to explore different algorithms.
Meanwhile, it also produces enough transparency and variety
on the generated list of recommended items based on different
algorithms.
The feedback on Q3(M=4.15, SD=0.74), Q7(M=1.68,
SD=0.88), Q9(M=4.08, SD=0.72) show the effectiveness and
usefulness of the proposed system. The overall positive feed-
back of those statements demonstrates that the proposed
system increases the user control and transparency of the
recommendation system and has the potential to improve the
user experience further if adopted by other similar systems. It
is worth noticing that the feedback on Q5 (M=4.12, SD=0.63)
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 7. Results of Post Study Questionnaire
is also overwhelmingly positive. This is because the conversa-
tional system is intuitive and enjoyable to interact with, which
can further facilitate the user’s control over the RS compared
to other interactive mechanisms.
VI. DISCUSSION
The user study and post-study questionnaire show that
integrating the conversational system with RS for e-commerce
websites is very promising for better user control and trans-
parency. However, there are still several limitations of our
study.
First, our study mainly focused on the RS’s user control
and transparency aspects; we did not thoroughly evaluate
other aspects of the RS. For example, we could use RMSE
to evaluate the accuracy of the RS. Besides the accuracy,
many other metrics can be used to further evaluate an RS
in various aspects, including the relevancy metrics like recall
and precision.
Second, our RS cannot correctly handle the cold start issue,
which means our system performs poorly for users with no
information stored in the system. We plan to solve this issue
in future research by using additional data sources, such as
social network data or choosing the most prominent groups of
analogous users [48].
Third, the conversation system could be improved. By only
using partial pattern matching, we have not yet fully utilized
the power of the conversational system. In the future, we
would like to build a more intelligent conversational system by
combining NLP and deep learning techniques. So our system
can better understand the user’s intention and provide a more
appropriate response.
Last, due to the limited time, we could not provide addi-
tional user control options other than underlying algorithms
for the study. For future work, we would like to add other op-
tions, such as different rating predictions (e.g., SVD, SVD++,
ItemKNN, UserKNN), different hyperparameters, and a dif-
ferent number of recommending items. By providing more
user control options, we can gain more insights into the user
perspective on our system.
VII. CONCLUSION
RS plays a vital role across different domains of online
services. Despite the fast accuracy improvement over the
years, modern RS for e-commerce still fails to address issues,
such as lack of transparency and user control. In this paper,
we implement an e-commerce RS using real-world product
data and integrate a conversational system to enable user
control over the recommendation process. We also conduct
a user study and questionnaire to gain more insights into the
question: how do people view the conversational system as the
control mechanism for e-commerce RS. The results show that
a majority of the user consider the conversational system an
excellent interface to achieve user control and transparency for
e-commerce RS. We also find that the collaborative filtering-
based algorithm is the most preferred algorithm, while many
users agree that our system can improve the diversity and
transparency of the RS.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Burke, A. Felfernig, and M. H. G¨oker, “Recommender systems: An
overview,” Ai Magazine, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 13–18, 2011.
[2] J. Bobadilla, F. Ortega, A. Hernando, and A. Guti´errez, “Recommender
systems survey,” Knowledge-based systems, vol. 46, pp. 109–132, 2013.
[3] J. Davidson et al., “The youtube video recommendation system,” in
Proceedings of the fourth ACM conference on Recommender systems,
pp. 293–296, 2010.
[4] I. MacKenzie, C. Meyer, and S. Noble, “How retailers can keep up with
consumers,” McKinsey & Company, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2013.
[5] D. Jannach and M. Jugovac, “Measuring the business value of rec-
ommender systems,” ACM Transactions on Management Information
Systems (TMIS), vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1–23, 2019.
[6] U. Chitra and C. Musco, “Analyzing the impact of filter bubbles on
social network polarization,” in Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 115–123, 2020.
[7] S. Garfinkel, J. Matthews, S. S. Shapiro, and J. M. Smith, “Toward
algorithmic transparency and accountability,” Communications of the
ACM, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5–5, 2017.
[8] J. B. Schafer, “Dynamiclens: A dynamic user-interface for a meta-
recommendation system,” Beyond personalization, pp. 72–76, 2005.
[9] B. P. Knijnenburg, S. Sivakumar, and D. Wilkinson, “Recommender sys-
tems for self-actualization,” in Proceedings of the 10th acm conference
on recommender systems, pp. 11–14, 2016.
[10] J. Harambam, D. Bountouridis, M. Makhortykh, and J. Van Hoboken,
“Designing for the better by taking users into account: A qualitative
evaluation of user control mechanisms in (news) recommender systems,”
in Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems,
pp. 69–77, 2019.
[11] N. Helberger, K. Karppinen, and L. D’acunto, “Exposure diversity as a
design principle for recommender systems,” Information, Communica-
tion & Society, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 191–207, 2018.
[12] D. Jannach, S. Naveed, and M. Jugovac, “User control in recommender
systems: Overview and interaction challenges,” in International Con-
ference on Electronic Commerce and Web Technologies, pp. 21–33,
Springer, 2016.
[13] J. O’Donovan, B. Smyth, B. Gretarsson, S. Bostandjiev, and T. H¨ollerer,
“Peerchooser: visual interactive recommendation,” in Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pp. 1085–1088, 2008.
[14] S. Bostandjiev, J. O’Donovan, and T. H¨ollerer, “Tasteweights: a visual
interactive hybrid recommender system,” in Proceedings of the sixth
ACM conference on Recommender systems, pp. 35–42, 2012.
[15] Y. Jin, K. Seipp, E. Duval, and K. Verbert, “Go with the flow: effects of
transparency and user control on targeted advertising using flow charts,”
in Proceedings of the international working conference on advanced
visual interfaces, pp. 68–75, 2016.
[16] D. Jannach, A. Manzoor, W. Cai, and L. Chen, “A survey on conversa-
tional recommender systems,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54,
no. 5, pp. 1–36, 2021.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[17] Y. Sun and Y. Zhang, “Conversational recommender system,” in The
41st international acm sigir conference on research & development in
information retrieval, pp. 235–244, 2018.
[18] E. Adamopoulou and L. Moussiades, “An overview of chatbot tech-
nology,” in IFIP International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
Applications and Innovations, pp. 373–383, Springer, 2020.
[19] B. Luo, R. Y. Lau, C. Li, and Y.-W. Si, “A critical review of state-of-the-
art chatbot designs and applications,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 12, no. 1, p. e1434, 2022.
[20] S. A. Abdul-Kader and J. C. Woods, “Survey on chatbot design
techniques in speech conversation systems,” International Journal of
Advanced Computer Science and Applications, vol. 6, no. 7, pp. 72–80,
2015.
[21] J. B. Schafer, J. Konstan, and J. Riedl, “Recommender systems in e-
commerce,” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM conference on Electronic
commerce, pp. 158–166, 1999.
[22] K. Wei, J. Huang, and S. Fu, “A survey of e-commerce recommender
systems,” in 2007 international conference on service systems and
service management, pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2007.
[23] G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin, “Toward the next generation of
recommender systems: A survey of the state-of-the-art and possible
extensions,” IEEE transactions on knowledge and data engineering,
vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 734–749, 2005.
[24] B. Xu, M. Zhang, Z. Pan, and H. Yang, “Content-based recommendation
in e-commerce,” in International Conference on Computational Science
and Its Applications, pp. 946–955, Springer, 2005.
[25] F. Karimova, “A survey of e-commerce recommender systems,” Euro-
pean Scientific Journal, vol. 12, no. 34, pp. 75–89, 2016.
[26] J. S. Breese, D. Heckerman, and C. Kadie, “Empirical analysis
of predictive algorithms for collaborative filtering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1301.7363, 2013.
[27] M. Beladev, L. Rokach, and B. Shapira, “Recommender systems for
product bundling,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 111, pp. 193–206,
2016.
[28] T. C.-K. Huang, Y.-L. Chen, and M.-C. Chen, “A novel recommendation
model with google similarity,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 89,
pp. 17–27, 2016.
[29] D. H. Park, H. K. Kim, I. Y. Choi, and J. K. Kim, “A literature review
and classification of recommender systems research,” Expert systems
with applications, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 10059–10072, 2012.
[30] P. Pu, L. Chen, and R. Hu, “A user-centric evaluation framework for
recommender systems,” in Proceedings of the fifth ACM conference on
Recommender systems, pp. 157–164, 2011.
[31] K. Verbert, D. Parra, P. Brusilovsky, and E. Duval, “Visualizing rec-
ommendations to support exploration, transparency and controllability,”
in Proceedings of the 2013 international conference on Intelligent user
interfaces, pp. 351–362, 2013.
[32] N. Tintarev and J. Masthoff, “Explaining recommendations: Design and
evaluation,” in Recommender systems handbook, pp. 353–382, Springer,
2015.
[33] U. Lyngs, R. Binns, M. Van Kleek, and N. Shadbolt, “So, tell me what
users want, what they really, really want!,” in Extended Abstracts of
the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pp. 1–10, 2018.
[34] J. Schaffer, T. Hollerer, and J. O’Donovan, “Hypothetical recommen-
dation: A study of interactive profile manipulation behavior for recom-
mender systems,” in The Twenty-Eighth International Flairs Conference,
pp. 507–512, 2015.
[35] M. D. Ekstrand, D. Kluver, F. M. Harper, and J. A. Konstan, “Letting
users choose recommender algorithms: An experimental study,” in
Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems,
pp. 11–18, 2015.
[36] D. Parra, P. Brusilovsky, and C. Trattner, “See what you want to see:
visual user-driven approach for hybrid recommendation,” in Proceedings
of the 19th international conference on Intelligent User Interfaces,
pp. 235–240, 2014.
[37] Y. Saito and T. Itoh, “Musicube: a visual music recommendation
system featuring interactive evolutionary computing,” in Proceedings of
the 2011 Visual Information Communication-International Symposium,
pp. 1–6, 2011.
[38] Y. Jin, N. Tintarev, and K. Verbert, “Effects of personal characteristics
on music recommender systems with different levels of controllability,”
in Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems,
pp. 13–21, 2018.
[39] T. L. Smestad, “Personality matters! improving the user experience
of chatbot interfaces-personality provides a stable pattern to guide the
design and behaviour of conversational agents,” Master’s thesis, NTNU,
2018.
[40] D. Altinok, “An ontology-based dialogue management system for bank-
ing and finance dialogue systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04838,
2018.
[41] Y. Wu et al., “A sequential matching framework for multi-turn response
selection in retrieval-based chatbots,” Computational Linguistics, vol. 45,
no. 1, pp. 163–197, 2019.
[42] C. Gao, W. Lei, X. He, M. de Rijke, and T.-S. Chua, “Advances and
challenges in conversational recommender systems: A survey,” AI Open,
vol. 2, pp. 100–126, 2021.
[43] “Amazona
ecommerce
website
framework.”
https://github.com/basir/amazona. Accessed: 2023-03-21.
[44] J. Ni, J. Li, and J. McAuley, “Justifying recommendations using
distantly-labeled reviews and fine-grained aspects,” in Proceedings of
the 2019 conference on empirical methods in natural language pro-
cessing and the 9th international joint conference on natural language
processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 188–197, 2019.
[45] R. He and J. McAuley, “Ups and downs: Modeling the visual evolution
of fashion trends with one-class collaborative filtering,” in proceedings
of the 25th international conference on world wide web, pp. 507–517,
2016.
[46] “Case
recommender
-
a
python
framework
for
recsys.”
https://github.com/caserec/CaseRecommender.
Accessed:
2023-03-
21.
[47] “react-chatbot-kit
-
a
react
based
chatbot
development
kit.”
https://github.com/FredrikOseberg/react-chatbot-kit.
Accessed: 2023-
03-21.
[48] L. H. Son, “Dealing with the new user cold-start problem in recom-
mender systems: A comparative review,” Information Systems, vol. 58,
pp. 87–104, 2016.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

