Product Design in the Smart City 
Investigation of priority needs in terms of human interaction in the Smart City 
 
Marina Puyuelo Cazorla, Lola Merino Sanjuán, Mónica Val Fiel 
Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería del Diseño ETSID 
Universitat Politècnica de València, UPV 
Valencia, Spain 
e-mail: mapuca@ega.upv.es, mamesan@ega.upv.es, movalfie@ega.upv.es 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The concept of Smart City refers to a developed city, 
which incorporates the required infrastructures and available 
technology to increase its economic and environmental 
sustainability, as well as the quality of life for its inhabitants. It 
involves a city equipped with the latest communication 
technologies in order to “function” by providing “intelligent” 
solutions to multiple issues. This control of technology in the 
management of resources, services and information in the city 
can increase the risk of threatening the interaction between 
people and the environment. In order to get feedback about 
people’s concerns and priorities as future users of this Smart 
City, a preliminary research has been developed. This paper 
presents the study carried out at the School of Design 
Engineering, whose objective is to look for design concepts for 
the city, which increase the relationship of citizens with 
products and services intended for public use, and the 
“potential benefits" of the “smart city”. The first results reveal 
that it is a priority to work on the urban elements which show 
citizens the contributions of technology to the care and welfare 
of the environment in which they operate. 
Keywords-Smart City; Shared Artefacts; Product Design; 
Smart products; Technology Design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Smart City is an emerging concept with a broad and 
diffuse scope, whose limits have yet to be defined, and where 
many initiatives are in the project phase. We highlight, as an 
essential feature, the implementation of Information and 
Communications Technologies (ICTs) in multiple existing 
products and services, and the connectivity of objects [1]. 
This development will make it possible to manage and 
control energy resources with greater efficiency, and provide 
a faster response to the constant maintenance requirements. 
It is understood that a digital platform will be constructed, 
which will make it possible to improve the society, 
environment and welfare of cities in a sustainable manner, 
and in accordance with the degree of “CONTROL” which 
technology 
allows. 
Everything 
offers 
controllable 
information in real time and, which will foreseeably result in 
a better response to citizens' needs. Public spaces have been 
transformed into more interesting and entertaining sites 
where many topics are shared and where everything is 
recorded [2].  
The public space, which historically has been a meeting 
place open to all citizens, is now undergoing smart, as result 
of the implementation of the new communication 
technologies and their application in personal use devices. 
These devices have transferred part of the interaction that 
took place in the physical space, to a new public domain, 
which is partly physical and virtual, and is modifying many 
social habits and individual behaviours.  
According to the European Smart Cities initiative, the six 
main elements, which constitute a Smart city [3] are: Smart 
Mobility, which gives priority to public transportation and 
“soft” transportation services. Smart people, which includes 
services that have an impact on comfort, health and safety, 
permanent learning and training, care for senior citizens, 
meeting points and leisure, etc. Smart economy, which relies 
on decentralized work areas, mobile offices and teleworking, 
entrepreneurship, development of co-working, etc. 
Smart living, which focuses on the use of intelligent sensors 
that control confort and safety in buildings, sustainability, 
pollution and their remote management. Smart Environment, 
which focuses on optimising the smart grids through 
sustainable electricity production and management systems, 
controlling public and household lighting, integrating home 
automation systems, and through the coexistence of clean 
energy cogeneration processes. Finally Smart Governance, 
which involves communication and participation in the city's 
management, managing its employment, relations with the 
public administration, etc. 
Furthermore, the European Commission has set a 
challenge and priority for these smart cities, to make it viable 
to reduce pollution by 40% in the short term, and thus 
improve the economy and the quality of citizens' lives. This 
approach prioritises investing in buildings, energy and 
transportation [4]. The role of ICTs is also essential for the 
development of these concepts, since they require the 
implementation 
of 
powerful 
infrastructures 
and 
communication systems, which permit data exchange and 
storage, as well as its analysis, in order to improve the 
processes, which have a repercussion on the citizens. Major 
investments are required to carry out this technological 
upgrade of our cities that, in 2020, will have billions of 
devices connected to Internet [5].  
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Faced with this highly technified, automated and virtual 
environment, we must address the need for tangible 
interaction with these concepts proposed and developed in 
the Smart City. We strongly believe in the pertinence of 
designing products for the environment, which have a 
physical presence, and with which, citizens directly become 
users.  
This paper presents in Section II the Smart City as 
context for product design, and the need for interaction with 
users. In Section III, we point out the relevance of the 
augmented city concept and some projects that influence 
people’s demands and expectations. The Research Methods 
and materials used in this local research are presented in 
Section IV, followed, in Section V, by some of the results 
from the research made. These results have allowed us to 
define in Section VI the scope of a design project, and to 
draw some specific proposals for the Smart City.Finally, 
some general conclusions are given.  
 
II. 
PRODUCT DESIGNS FOR THE “USE” OF THE SMART 
CITY 
As claimed in the report Smart City Trends [6], there is 
no doubt that Smart Cities are a fertile sector for innovation, 
an open space where proposals and categories of services 
and products arise. This field opens up opportunities and 
new market challenges for industrial design and for 
companies, and it constitutes an enormous space for 
innovation. Based on the elements of the Smart City listed 
above, this prospective study features some areas of urban 
innovation. We are interested on some of them, such as 
products on a human scale, bicycles first, predictive systems, 
flexible furniture, outdoor offices, sustainable lighting and 
access to energy.  
Coming from the Design Engineering sector, and having 
had experience in the development of projects for the public 
space [7] since 2001, the concept of Smart City has made it 
necessary, to devote a specific line of work to enhance the 
role of design in the development of elements for the users of 
this technological and sustainable city.  The exhibition Smart 
City, Design, Technologies and Services for the Citizens, was 
the first outcome regarding the state of art of this sort of 
product design. Pioneer applications at present time, which 
merit attention to interrelate connectivity, energy efficiency 
with products for public use, power charge and generation 
systems for the citizens and pollution reduction by means of 
innovative devices [8]. 
In the framework of Smart Cities multiple developments 
can be integrated responding the new needs and the 
integration of communication technologies, which provide 
new services and knowledge for citizens. In particular, from 
the design sector dedicated to urban elements, five action 
areas were outline, at the Smart City Expo World Congress. 
These action areas are related to each other, and priority has 
been given to those, which have the greatest potential as 
innovative objects for the public space [9].  
These five areas are planned to be thoroughly permeable 
with each other, and they focus on: 
 
Data processing systems for society, communication 
and 
information 
services 
and 
participation. 
Education, 
welfare, 
commitments, 
ideas, 
entrepreneurship, etc.  
 
Launching technologies and access to platforms and 
urban media.  
 
Sustainability and clean energies, fair water 
consumption, increase of green areas, etc. 
 
Products for welfare and leisure. 
 
Clean 
mobility, 
bicycles, 
car 
sharing 
and 
participation in energy generation. 
 
The goal of our research is planning a practical design 
project for the city of Valencia. Since previous works have 
been realized analysing the urban elements and services, 
technologies to be implemented, materials, and systems of 
energy, we have made a prospective research of the potential 
target of users, attempting to know their needs and 
expectations. The outcome of this ethnographic research is to 
find out new possibilities and values for designing and 
innovation at the contemporary city. 
III. 
THE AUGMENTED CITY  
Closely linked to communication technologies in the 
urban scope and, consequently, to the Smart City, we 
highlight the "augmented city", which involves the new 
physical space, expanded by the supply of graphic formats 
and information generally derived from Internet.  
Augmented Reality (AR) applications in the public space 
are creating a new dimension within the city, an overlapping 
layer consisting of information, which augments the 
experiences in real time of the individuals who interact 
simultaneously in their urban environment [10]. To cite 
several examples of these technologies in dynamic situations, 
we highlight the application for cell phones GeoTravel, the 
project proposed by architect Keiichi Matsuda, in which the 
virtual and the real form a continuum offering amazing 
possibilities, while also controlling the way we understand 
the world (Figure 3). In the same way the famous Google 
Glass proposes a dynamic and constant individual visual 
connection with the on-line information and the environment 
It will be the glue between every interaction and experience 
everywhere [11] -[13]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Some technologies provide individual experiences of 
Augmented Reality outdoors. Google Glass and Domesti/City The 
Dislocated Home in Augmented Space. 
In augmented city, the physical space and the virtual 
space are not separate, but two spaces, which constitute a 
whole. Real is combined with the digital environment, so 
that concepts such as public space, identity, knowledge, 
citizenship, and public participation are inevitably affected 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

by technology, by mobile communication, which modifies 
the enjoyment of the public space and the way in which the 
users relate to the environment and with the activities that 
take place in these environments. With the implementation 
of this technology, surprising and immediate results have 
been obtained within the scope of wayfinding. Orientation 
and location of spaces and places make the urban 
environment more attractive for users because it allows them 
to expand and express their own identity and experiences 
[14]. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODS 
With the aim of getting information of products and 
citizen’s expectations, this research focused four areas:  
A. Urban scenario and field research 
Ethnographic methods were used; walking and visiting 
the city to get information about what already exists, the 
potential lack of aspects or things which could be improved, 
and observe where most people spend their time outside. 
This part leads us to a favourite place in the city of Valencia: 
the Turia Park, a riverbed transformed into an urban park in 
the nineties. 
Nowadays, as it passes through the city of Valencia, the 
old Turia riverbed is a big urban park that allows for 
different leisure activities, consistent with the contemporary 
concept of sustainable city that is active, healthy and 
participative. In this longitudinal space that runs through the 
city, natural elements play a key role in connecting leisure, 
mobility (walking or cycling) and a variety of uses 
(recreational, sportive, cultural, touristic).  
B. Desk research 
This involved information about Valencia’s plan to 
become a Smart City. We made an inventory of street 
furniture elements and classified it in categories pertaining to 
their contribution to this aim. 
C. Interviews 
The survey had the aim of verifying which existing 
facilities were highly valued, and what the interviewees 
found to be lacking in an urban environment very frequented 
by multiple users. These interviews performed 3 times per 
week at different times of the day, in September 2015 and, 
again in May 2016. We choose people randomly, trying to 
cover different user profiles. 
We interviewed a range of 25-30 people from each of the 
four different groups, who are relevant users of this site: 
citizens, young athletes, elderly people and tourists/visitors. 
D. On-line Survey 
Simultaneously, a short public-opinion poll was 
conducted online to complement the previous one, about 
preferences regarding services and design. This online 
survey targeted to people who live in Valencia or have been 
living in the city, such as exchange students or foreign 
workers (short-term residents).  
 
V. 
RESULTS OF THE LOCAL RESEARCH  
The city of Valencia has an action plan to become a 
Smart City and it has a major potential as an urban 
environment, 
due 
to 
its 
socio-demographic 
and 
environmental features. However, the first field research 
realized shows only ten public facilities, currently identified 
as Smart products in the city: 
1) Information panels, with real-time traffic information 
throughout the city. 
2) App-Valencia, car park information, also in real time 
3) QR codes for disabled people, so they can reach 
things, such as a parking meter 
4) E-card, an electronic public transport card (4,000 
passengers per day) 
5) Municipal bicycle rental service (Valenbisi): 2,750 
bikes, 5,500 access points, 75,114 daily bike journeys. 
6) Monitoring Valencia through cameras 
7) Intelligent lights throughout the city 
8) EMT bus service, 100% ecological 
9) Online City Council administration services (100% 
paperless) 
10) 
VLCi Platform for urban information 
 
This list summarizes the answers to the open question: 
“Give an example of the Smart City concept in Valencia” in 
On-line interviews conducted and the inventory made on the 
desk research. 
What we observe overall in terms of participation is that 
both, the interviews and the surveys show, from a sample of 
100 individuals distributed equally as users, that young 
people have been more interested in this research. 
The two graphs (the Figure 2) illustrate the age of the 
participants in the study, and the main areas of changes that 
they perceive as part of the Smart City. The first graph shows 
clearly the prevalence of young people (18-29) over the 
different groups of the answers, while the second one 
describes the value given to the changes perceived at the city 
as context of public life. So the graphs clearly illustrate the 
relation between people age and the tendencies on what they 
expect from the city places nowadays. 
In terms of participation, both the interviews and the 
surveys show, from a sample of 100 individuals distributed 
equally as users, that young people have been more 
interested in the research presented. This result is not 
surprising, as, compared to other groups, young people tend 
to go out more often and furthermore, they find easier to 
participate in on-line applications such as this interview and 
what is more, they prefer this way. Young people like to 
share places outside even when they are using their own 
personal devices. They usually mentioned the quality of the 
environment as place to rest and stay. They ask for urban 
elements and services, which involve spending time (charge 
a mobile phone, to use a computer, information in real time, 
social areas…).  
It’s worth observing that de second group of participants 
more relevant (45-64), represents people situated as 
professionals, workers who have more time in front of the 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

computer and who practice sports and healthy habits. On the 
contrary, the group (30-44) years corresponds to a group 
affected by the economic crisis that shows a more sceptical 
and slightly participative attitude. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Participation by ages.  Activities and changes in the city 
 
What is perhaps more significant for design is that on the 
second graph, how are the places and the facilities provided, 
got more percentage than the access to information and other 
activities that people do outdoors. It is relevant to point out 
that image appreciation raise almost a 50% getting the 
double than the others. 
Research also suggests that people much concentrate 
attention on the place they are. Through the outdoor 
interviews, we found what was missing, and what people 
would like to improve in Valencia, both from the local and 
from the tourist perspective. One complaint was about dim 
lighting at night when using urban elements (which makes 
people feel unsafe and scared). 
Tourists pointed out that there are not enough signs, they 
are often poorly located and only in Spanish. They also ask 
for more areas in the shade with rest elements. Young people 
would like to have Wi-Fi zones in order to recharge or use 
devices comfortably. Elderly citizens would like screens to 
display events or beautiful sites to visit in the city.  
The analysis of these ethnographic data shaped ideas and 
requirements for some new smart products. These elements 
have to include in their features those needs: simplicity, 
interaction, light, be sustainable, provide energy, easy 
information displayed, etc. Design has to provide the city 
with elements with a clean image adapted to the current 
needs. 
Following these considerations, we define the scope of 
this project as the conceptual design of an urban services 
booth, which combines sustainability and communication. 
This urban element has to integrate the principles of the 
Smart City, linking technology with a pleasant interface, 
inviting the citizens to use it and participate in social public 
life.  
The service booths are more or less enclosed structures, 
located in the public space, whose aim is to permit the use of 
different types of installations; electricity, voice and data are 
the most common. These cabins have a direct antecedent in 
phone booths and share with them some characteristics.  
These sort of elements need to have sufficient space for an 
individual to carry out the required actions; lighting that 
facilitates both, their location and use at night; an enclosure 
system, or a partial or total roof to protect the technological 
elements; and specific insulation to create the suitable 
conditions for its possible function as an oral/audio 
communication terminal.  
 
VI. 
DESIGN PROPOSALS FOR THE SMART CITY AND 
FURTHER WORK  
The methodology followed corresponds to the general 
design process, which starts with the definition and 
conceptual design phases. Using creativity, design and the 
principles of the green engineering in an innovative way can 
be a force for positive change, in the cities of the future. 
From the social view of the product, that involves with the 
community and the public space, sustainable design gains 
added interest: The street furniture can be an active support 
in public and political life of the community enabling new 
forms of participation and civic engagement. 
The objectives of this proposal are two: 
- Suggest an ecological solution for an innovative public 
use product, owing to the offered services, which will be 
determining the optimum implementation of materials and 
sustainable processes. 
- Design a product of public use evidencing this 
ecological 
efforts 
contributing 
to 
ecological 
social 
awareness. 
Assuming the range of available technologies allow to 
create truly “ecofriendly” products that actively contribute in 
a responsible and respectful use of the community 
environment. This raises interest in technology, renewable 
energy and design, as key aspects for generating futuristic, 
attractive and fully viable street furniture. 
In this direction this proposal also focus on looking for 
new solutions to be incorporated in elements of collective 
use, making use of current and low cost communication 
technologies, which are materialized in a self-sufficient 
infrastructure that also clearly demonstrate this vocation. 
Following these ideas, ten projects were developed in detail 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

in the workshop Designing Products for Collective Use at the 
Technical School of Design Engineering UPV. 
They propose different ways of using the contemporary 
public space in a sustainable, aware, useful and attractive 
way. It is important to note that, the element/topic proposed, 
involves complex urban elements, which have a direct 
contact with the user and require a specific interactivity to be 
efficient. 
Consequently, 
they 
require 
immediate 
comprehension by the user, and the dimensions of their 
components must ensure the accessibility.  
The two projects presented in this paper, show different 
design solutions based in the 10 principles of Green 
Engineering [14]. In the case of Algui focuses on the 
awareness and communication of its energy system: the 
biomass, and its visual-natural qualities. While in Eco cabin, 
the main values reference to the experience of nature and 
domestic comfort. 
Algy (Figure 3) is an urban booth for services and 
information with a lively and fresh appearance. A self-
sufficient design that employs the developed technology for 
the BIQ house, located in Hamburg. The project inquires into 
the combination of new technologies, like augmented reality 
(AR) and biomass energy, in a product for public use 
designed as an ecological, attractive and functional element. 
This piece of street furniture reduces environmental impact 
and has as further goal: the communication of these values. 
With this aim, the central element in the design is the bio-
reactor itself. In this way the booth is a vertical element of 
simple geometric shapes that works independently or 
accompanied by other strategically located, generating a 
comfortable 
micro-climate 
that 
provides 
certain 
soundproofing and insulation, suitable for some of its 
functions. As a street furniture, at dimensional level this 
universal and ergonomic design incorporates a floating 
screen that adjusts to the height of each individual by means 
of a sensor, without the need for direct tactile contact. Also, 
one can interact with the booth by voice. All of this with all 
the necessary accessories to fulfil the offered services 
satisfactorily, highlighting among them AR applications, and 
supported by intuitive and very accessible interface 
     
Figure 3.  Algy is a service booth inspired in the management of energy 
with biomass processes. Projected by Marta Jiménez. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Eco Cabin Project allows users to work outdoor in a pleasant 
environment. Provides energy and plants are watered. Projected by Greta 
Gulienetti 
 
EcoCabin (Figure 4), provide the city with a 
comprehensive urban design element that offers a pleasant 
place for busy people to stop for a while. 
Two walls and a cover form a stay zone. One of the two 
walls is a vertical garden that takes the water needed for drip 
irrigation from a small container lodged at the top, which 
stores water from the rain. This allows the irrigation of the 
plants in perfect autonomy. As far as lighting is concerned, 
the use of LEDs and its photovoltaic cells installed on the 
cover, reduce by 50% the power consumption. Plants, water 
and sun energy also reduce pollution all around this urban 
element. 
In the interior, this cabin has different facilities, such as a 
table with electrical outlets fed by a few photovoltaic panels 
installed in the cover. The height of both the work surface 
and the seats, are adjustable to adapt to different users, in 
particular to people using wheelchairs. There is a tactile LCD 
screen on the opposite wall, which presents information of 
interest (itineraries, transport, etc.), surveillance camera and 
SOS button.  
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
It is unquestionable that the development of the Smart 
City will result in the improvement of the quality of city life. 
However, it is a true challenge to make people aware of the 
real changes and participate in their benefits. In this sense, 
the contribution of this particular research paper is bridging 
the gap between new concepts and design methods, ideas 
and smart products. 
Coinciding with other authors, the study carried out in 
the city of Valencia also states clearly that the “Smart” 
concept seems rhetorical and overvalued, especially when 
specific products already implemented are observed in 
operation [15]. It can be state, that it is a priority to gather 
more information about the needs and expectations of 
citizens and how they enjoy collective facilities. The parking 
meters, public transportation, ticket machines or the bicycle 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

rental system, are examples of this product concept, 
regardless of how intelligent they are.  
A strong point of public use elements is their availability 
and acceptance by the users. This is a great advantage for 
social communication of new habits at the public space. 
These products are suitable for communicating contents, 
which can reinforce information and training strategies 
linked to the opportunities and improvements of the Smart 
concept itself. The new materials and lighting applications 
based on the design make it possible to offer low 
consumption solutions and greater energy efficiency to face 
the new urban requirements and the growing environmental 
sensitivity. Several urban applications such as digital lighting 
and signage, adds multiple attributes and utilities to the urban 
experience 
by 
combining 
technologies, 
architectural 
integration and design of more interactive contents.” [16] 
The design projects described show the suitability of the 
service booths as first-class elements of interactive urban 
furniture for the Smart City, since they allow integrating 
conventional analogical uses (rest, protection, safety, etc.) 
and 
connectivity 
and 
augmented 
reality 
systems. 
Furthermore, these products promote user interest and 
participation. In addition to communicating the technologies 
applied to the city, they encourage their use by all types of 
audiences who are already familiar with these types of 
interfaces, thanks to the multiple applications in other mobile 
devices. Thanks to the great versatility of technology and its 
progress, creativity and multidisciplinarity, viable projects 
can be developed.  
These projects allow monitoring how well paired is the 
implementation of new technologies and sustainability, 
which may lead to very interesting products with 
applications that today are still unimaginable. Society is 
becoming increasingly receptive to ecological policies; 
therefore, it is of great interest to take the utmost advantage 
of the opportunities that technology can bring to really 
competitive design. 
Future work may include usability analysis and the 
evaluation of these design projects, when used by different 
people and circumstances. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to ETSID for the support given to the Exposition 
Smartcity: Design, Technology, and Services for Public Use. 
This exhibition has shown the interest of the public in these 
proposals, and has encouraged the development in detail of 
some of these projects, as well as their submission to 
different forums. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Vidal, “The smart city: smart cities of the future”, 
Barcelona: Editorial UOC, D.L. 2015, ISBN 9788490649053. 
[2] L. Verweij, “Public Spaces More Public or Private than 
Ever?”, Experimenta, vol. 55, pp. 67-73, April 2006, ISSN: 
1133-9675. 
[3] C. Manville, et al. “Mapping Smart Cities in the EU”, Policy 
Department A Economic and Scientific Policy, pp.21, January 
2014. 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/etudes/join/20
14/507480/IPOL-ITRE_ET(2014)507480_EN.pdf , Accessed: 
November, 2016. 
[4] European 
Initiative 
on 
Smart 
Cities, 
https://setis.ec.europa.eu/set-plan-process. 
Accessed: 
November, 2016. 
[5] N. Vidal, “The smart city: smart cities of the future”, 
Barcelona: Editorial UOC, pp.29–30, October 2015, D.L. 
ISBN 9788490649053. 
[6] M.G. Casado, C. Revert, V. Sales, and S. Veral, “Smart Cities 
Trends: Trends in smart cities and opportunities for sectors 
habitat”, ITC y ADIMA, pp.3–4, March 2015, ISBN: 978-84-
941029-3-6. 
[7] M. 
Puyuelo, 
et 
al. 
“Street 
furniture. 
Design 
and 
Accessibility”, Valencia: Editorial Universitat Politècnica de 
Valéncia, 2010. 
[8] F. Domínguez and U. Fogué, “Technifying Public Space and 
Publicizing Infrastructures: Exploring New Urban Political 
Ecologies through the Square of General Vara del Rey” 
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, vol. 
37, Urban Research Publications Limited, pp.1035-1052, 
April 2013. 
[9] M. Jiménez, M. Puyuelo, and L. Merino “Urban furniture for 
Smartcity. Augmented Reality and sustainability for public 
use” Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), 2014 
9th Iberian Conference on, IEEE, pp. 100-105, June 2014, 
doi:10.1109/CISTI.2014.6876969  
[10] http://www.todoiphone.net/geotravel-un-guia-turistico-en-tu-
iphone-con-realidad-aumentada Accessed: November, 2016. 
[11] K. Matsuda, “DOMESTI/CITY The Dislocated Home in Augmented 
Space”, Keiichi Matsuda / Unit 15 / Year 5 Diploma/March Thesis. 
http://km.cx/projects/domesticity-the-dislocated-home-in-augmented-
space/. Accessed: November, 2016.  
[12] Project Glass of Google develops an augmented reality device 
that allows individual use Internet to interact with information 
via voice. Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia [Wiki a Internet]. 
St. Petersburg (FL): Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. 2001. 
Available from: https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Glass. 
Accessed: November, 2016. 
[13] Smart City Expo World Congress, Fira Barcelona, Noviembre 
2015, http://www.smartcityexpo.com/en/program. Accessed: 
November, 2015. 
[14] P. T. Anastas and J. B. Zimmerman, “Design through the 12 
principles of Green Engineering”, Environmental Science & 
Technology pp. 94A, 2003 
[15] T. 
Paris, 
“Desirable 
intelligence”, 
diid 
disegno 
industriale/industrial design, vol.58, Rdesignpress, pp.124, 
2014. 
[16] G. Flore and A. Pozzoni, “Smart cities, smart lights. Digital 
signage and urban experience”, Elisava Temes de Disseny, 
vol. 
28, 
pp.39, 
2012, 
eISSN: 
2385-7951.
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

