Storytelling at School with a Robot Playmate 
 
Patrizia Marti 
Department of Social Political and Cognitive Science 
University of Siena Siena, Italy 
Department of Industrial Design  
University of Technology Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
e-mail: marti@unisi.it 
Iolanda Iacono 
Glitch Factory s.r.l.  
Via E. Vezzosi, 15  
Arezzo, Italy 
e-mail: iolanda.iacono@glitchfatory.it 
 
 
Abstract— The paper illustrates an exploratory case study on 
the use of a toy robot at school to support storytelling in 
children with cognitive disabilities. Play is a key factor in 
children’s development, yet disabled children are often 
prevented from playing because of their physical or cognitive 
impairments. Robot toys might represent a suitable means of 
favouring learning through play in inclusive activities at 
school. The robot used in this study is designed to support 
play scenarios addressing different educational goals for 
children with specific needs. This paper describes a 
storytelling scenario and the experiment conducted with the 
robot in a primary school over four weeks. The activity 
involved a group of students with typical development and a 
child with a learning delay due to a mild cognitive disability. 
The results of the study show that the performance of the 
child with learning delay improved in terms of memorization 
of the story elements, ability to focus attention and reduction 
of exuberant motility when she played with the robot. The 
results are supported by qualitative and quantitative 
evidence, as well as by the comments of the teacher who 
participated in the study. 
Keywords-Children; Robot; Play; Learning; Disability; 
Storytelling; Primary school. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Play has a crucial role in a child’s development. The 
International Classification of Functioning and Disabilities, 
version for Children and Youth (ICF-CY) [1] published by 
the World Health Organisation defines play as one of the 
most important aspects of a child’s life to be considered 
when assessing children’s quality of life. Through play, 
children experiment and learn about themselves and the 
environment around them. In childhood, skills related to 
moving, exchanging, experimenting and learning mainly 
develop through play [2].  
Several studies demonstrated that the absence of play is 
detrimental to the development of a healthy child, leading 
to impairment in their learning potential. This causes 
isolation and a compromises social life [3]. 
Disabled children are often prevented from playing due 
to their cognitive or physical impairment.  
In recent years, an increasing number of research 
studies have revealed the benefit of using robots as a 
playmate to support the development of different skills in 
children with special needs. Robots support engaging and 
rich interactions while exhibiting a repetitive and 
controllable behaviour. This stimulates the child with a 
disability to try out the activity several times without 
feeling unable or impaired.  
However, in order to effectively use the robot and 
achieve educational objectives, it is important to design 
play scenarios suitable for the child with special needs. 
In what follows, we first provide a literature review on 
robot-assisted play based on storytelling activities, later we 
present the robot and the experiment conducted at a 
primary school with a child with mild cognitive 
impairment and her peers. The case study provides a 
detailed description on how to use the robot to engage 
children with different abilities in playful activities based 
on storytelling. Furthermore, it provides the results 
obtained in terms of learning and understanding of the 
dynamics of a story, and the social interactions enabled by 
the robot.  
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II we 
report a literature review on storytelling robots; in Section 
III we present IROMEC (Interactive RObotic Social 
MEdiator as Companions), the robotic platform used in the 
present study, in Sections V and IV we illustrate the 
methodology and the experimental study carried out with 
IROMEC in a primary school with a child with mild 
cognitive disability and her classmates, in Sections VI and 
VII we report and discuss the results of the study. We 
conclude this work in Section VIII. 
 
II. STORYTELLING  ROBOTS 
 
Developing a narrative competence is for children the 
privileged and primary way to begin to be part of the 
culture [4]. Narrative is also a fundamental aspect of 
meaning construction, which is a negotiation activity that 
develops from early childhood through the whole human 
life [4].  
Narrative has three main functions [5]:  
- 
Cognitive: as a way to learn.  
- 
Social: stories allow us to identify ourselves with 
a social and cultural group. 
- 
Emotional: as a therapy.  
Storytelling is key of children’s development. Through 
it children learn to express themselves and make sense of 
the external world. They develop logical thinking, 
imagination and creativity, but also social skills.  
Remembering and understanding a story, or using a 
proper language are all competences that develop more 
slowly in children with a cognitive disability [6][7]. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

However, researches in schools revealed that if properly 
stimulated, children with a cognitive disability may 
improve in understanding and remembering a story, as well 
as in meaning construction and communication [6].  
Recently, robots and virtual agents have been designed 
to promote interaction and communication through 
storytelling in children’s development [8]. Lizeberg et al. 
[9] found that students have better learning performances if 
the interaction takes place with a physical agent rather than 
with a virtual agent. 
A recent survey conducted by Chen et al. [8] classified 
storytelling robots in three categories based on who is the 
user of the robot, what is the focus of the study, and what is 
the outcome of the study: 
- 
Users: children with typical development [10] and 
children with disabilities [11];  
- 
Focus of the study: robots used in the educational 
context as learning companions, educational 
material, and teaching assistants; 
- 
Outcome of the study: prototype, learning 
environment, 
authoring 
environment, 
and 
pedagogy experience. 
In the context of disability, the robots are used with 
different goals. Plaisant et al. [11] used a storytelling robot 
to stimulate children in carrying out the rehabilitation 
therapy. Probo robot was used to provide assistance during 
the therapy with autistic children [12]. NAO robot was 
used as story reader with expressive verbal and nonverbal 
behaviours [13]. 
Storytelling robots are also used with children with 
normal development. Fridin [14] designed Kindergarten 
Social Assistive Robotics (KindSAR) a social assistive 
technology for kindergarten educational staff which 
provides assistance to the staff by engaging the children in 
educational games.  
 
III. ROBOT PLATFORM 
 
IROMEC  is a robotic platform that addresses play as a 
medium for disabled children’s learning, development and 
enjoyment [15].  
The body displays graphic interface elements related to 
different play scenarios on a 13 inch digital touchscreen. 
For example, the body screen can represent the features of 
an imaginary cartoon-like character, displaying digital fur 
that moves according to the direction of the platform’s 
movement. When the robot stops, fur clumps appear that 
extend when it moves again. The head consists of an 8 inch 
digital screen that displays the robot’s facial expressions.  
 The platform is composed of passive and interactive 
hardware modules and configurable interfaces to enable the 
creation of play scenarios adapted to fit the needs of 
children with different kinds of disabilities 
[16]. 
Furthermore, the platform permits creation of new games 
that can be implemented through the “play script”. 
 “Play scripts” allow implementation of Graphical User 
Interfaces (GUIs) for different play scenarios, so that the 
robot can turn from an imaginary animal covered with fur 
into a creeping snake, an agile tiger or a quiet turtle (Figure 
1). The robot can show facial expressions incorporating the 
mouth, nose, eyes and eyebrows, as well as different levels 
of expressiveness and emotional states. Smooth transitions 
are used to create a life-like impression.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. IROMEC imaginary animal-like character (left), IROMEC Tiger 
(centre), IROMEC Tortoise (right) 
 
The interfaces are enriched by original sounds to 
structure and articulate the play experience. They have 
been designed in collaboration with experts, therapists and 
teachers to give the impression of a living entity without 
any specific human or animal connotations.  
 
IV. CASE STUDY IN A PRIMARY SCHOOL 
 
The study was conducted for about one month at 
“Giovanni Pascoli” elementary school in Siena, Italy.  
The primary target of the study was an 8 year-old girl 
with a generalized cognitive delay associated with 
compromised ability to memorize, with limited verbal and 
communicative skills and motoric hyperactivity.   
Her disorder was linked with difficulties in her life 
following removal from her family of origin at the age of 4. 
The early years of her life had been characterized by the 
presence of an environment providing little cognitive or 
affective stimulation.  
The child’s poor verbal skills had a negative impact on 
her ability to communicate and interact with the rest of the 
class. She was aware of this problem and felt frustrated by 
it. Her teacher considered integration into the class a 
priority goal.  
The child had been included in the same curricular 
program as her classmates, with the addition of 
individualized activities with the support of a small group 
so that she would not be isolated.  
In agreement with the special needs teacher, we 
decided to conduct the experimental sessions in a group, 
using the teaching model normally used in class, with three 
classmates involved in the study. The classmates’ role was 
to facilitate the activity, promoting interaction, inclusion 
and the dynamics of play and learning. 
The key goals of the study were: 
 
to improve the attention; 
 
to improve spontaneous verbalization and 
appropriate use of language; 
 
to improve narrative skills; 
 
to improve body awareness and coordination. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V. METHODOLOGY CASE STUDY IN A PRIMARY SCHOOL 
 
The study was broken down into three sequential 
phases with the primary goal of ensuring understanding, 
learning and recall of the story “The tortoise and the hare” 
(Table 1).  
 
TABLE I.      EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE 
PHASE I 
Reading the story 
"The tortoise and the hare" in the classroom 
PHASE II 
First 
sub 
session: 
learning 
and 
recalling 
of the 
story 
through 
use of 
images 
Second sub 
session: 
learning 
and 
recalling 
the story 
with use of 
the robot 
Third sub 
session: 
learning 
and 
recalling 
the story 
with the use 
of the robot 
 
Forth sub 
session: 
learning 
and 
recalling 
the story 
through 
use of 
images 
PHASE III 
                             Follow up 
assessment of the acquired knowledge (learning, 
understanding and recalling) through a questionnaire 
 
The maximum duration of Phase II was about 20 
minutes, as suggested by the teacher in view of the girl’s 
difficulty focusing her attention for a longer period of time. 
The sessions using IROMEC had an average duration of 
about 18 minutes, while the sessions in which images were 
used as an aid lasted no longer than 12 minutes. The length 
of individual sessions depended on the child’s behaviour 
and response. If she appeared bored or refused to 
participate in the game, she was not forced to do so; the 
session was interrupted.  
A. Experimental phases 
Phase I: Reading the story “The tortoise and the hare” 
in class 
The teacher brings up the story of “The tortoise and the 
hare” and reads it in class.  
 
“Once upon a time there was a hare who, boasting how 
he could run faster than anyone else, was forever teasing 
tortoise for its slowness. Then one day, the irate tortoise 
answered back: “Who do you think you are? even you can 
be beaten!.. Beaten in a race? By whom? Not you, surely! I 
bet, there’s nobody in the world that can win against me, 
I’m so speedy. Now, why don’t you try?....” The hare is so 
confident that it will win that it takes a nap midway 
through the course. But when the hare awakes, he finds 
that his competitor, crawling slowly but steadily, has 
arrived before him.” 
After the reading, the children are asked to tell the story 
together. The teacher pays special attention to the little girl 
in question in order to assess her comprehension and her 
ability to recall the story.    
Phase II: Learning the story with the reinforcement of 
images and with the IROMEC  
The second phase was divided into four sub-sessions 
characterized by use of pictures (in the first and fourth 
sessions) and introduction of the IROMEC (in the second 
and third sessions), each focusing on comprehension, 
learning and recall of the story.  
The sessions were conducted twice a week over a two-
week time span. 
- 
First session: analysis, comprehension and recall 
of the story. 
Images were used to aid comprehension of the story in 
this activity. The teacher used the pictures to guide the 
session and analyse the key character: the tortoise. 
At the beginning of the session the teacher asked the 
little girl a series of questions to judge her ability to recall 
the story read in class. If she had difficulty, her classmates 
were asked to help. Then the teacher asked a series of 
questions about the tortoise that helped the children recall 
specific elements: Where does it live? What does it eat? 
How does it move? When does it hibernate?. The girl could 
answer the questions while looking at the pictures (Figure 
2). 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Images used to guide the session 
 
- 
Second session: learning the story with the robot. 
The interfaces used during the activity transformed the 
robot in the “tortoise” of the story (see  Figure 1). 
In this specific configuration, the robot was intended to 
look and behave like a tortoise. The robot’s mobile 
configuration was used so that it could move about the 
classroom alone or with remote control. The robot’s 
movement simulated that of the tortoise, with rather slow 
movements in follow-me mode. This is a coordination 
game that consists of playing with the robot, which follows 
the child. The other children can compete to attract the 
attention of the robot in order to be followed. The primary 
educational objectives of this scenario are related to energy 
and drive functions and to improve motivation to act and to 
feel in control. The scenario aims to develop the 
understanding of cause and effect connections, and to 
improve attention to mobility.  
The teacher asked the girl the same series of questions 
as in the previous session conducted with the use of 
images: Where does the tortoise live? What does it eat? 
How does it move? When does it hibernate?   
In this session the teacher asked the girl and her 
classmates to answer the questions while paying attention 
to the robot’s behaviour and imitating it. In this session the 
children acted out the story in a way, playing the roles of 
the two characters and mimicking their behaviour.  
- 
Third session: learning and recalling the story 
with the robot 
The third session was identical to the second.  
- 
Fourth session: recalling the story with the use of 
images  
The fourth session was identical to the first. 
Phase III: Follow-up 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Follow-up was performed a week later. Questionnaires 
were given to assess the skills (learning, comprehension 
and recall) acquired by the girl in relation to the story.  
During follow-up the teacher asked the child to recall 
what had been done during the other sessions, both in 
sessions with images and in sessions with IROMEC, in 
order to assess how described below:  
 
 
Cognitive area 
Attention: the child’s ability to pay attention to visual 
and spatial stimuli connected with the play activity, 
expressed in terms of time. This indicator is continuous. 
Recall of verbal and visual content: the child’s ability 
to recall verbal and visual content previously presented and 
use it to help answer questions. Recall also refers to 
content presented in previous sessions. This indicator is 
intended to assess the child’s ability to retain long-term 
memory. It is a spot indicator. 
 
 
Motorial area 
Exuberant motility unrelated to the activity: excessive 
motorial activity of the entire body unrelated to the game 
being played. This is a continuous indicator.  
 
 
Communication area 
Spot naming of an object or action: the child’s ability to 
verbally identify an object or action using precise, 
appropriate language. The indicator refers to spontaneous 
mentions, not repetition 
or completion of 
words 
pronounced by the teacher or by classmates. This is a spot 
indicator.  
Spontaneous verbalization: the child’s ability to clearly 
and comprehensibly spontaneously verbalize statements on 
the activity underway. The indicator does not include cases 
in which the statement is solicited by the teacher’s 
questions or cases in which the spontaneous verbalization 
is unrelated to the context of the activity underway. It is a 
continuous indicator. 
A written questionnaire was given to the children 
during the follow-up phase, and included multiple choice 
questions about the story and the character of the tortoise. 
 
VI. RESULTS 
 
A. 
Phase I: Reading the story “The tortoise and the 
hare” in class 
Observation of Phase I in class session revealed that the 
child had difficulty paying attention to multiple stimuli, 
associated with difficulty in recalling concepts presented 
not long ago.  
For example, when the teacher asked “Do you know the 
story of the tortoise and the hare?”, the child answered 
“No”, but at the end of the reading she picked up the book 
and said, “I know this story, because I have the cartoon at 
home”. The girl spontaneously began telling the story in 
very simple words:  
“In the cartoon, there’s a tortoise and… the other 
one… I don’t remember… what it’s called… and then they 
have a race and … the other one… I can’t remember what 
the other one’s called.....” and when the teacher prompted 
“the hare”, she seemed not to hear her but continued her 
story: “Yes there was a hare and it ran very fast”. 
In response to the teacher’s question, “Who won the 
race, the hare or the tortoise?” the child replied “the 
hare” without hesitation. Though the teacher pointed out 
that her answer was wrong, she continued to claim, “In my 
cartoon it’s the hare that wins”.  
The teacher had to remind her to pay attention 
repeatedly while reading the story. The girl gave the 
impression she was “hearing” and “seeing” what was 
happening around her, but not intentionally “listening” and 
“watching”.  Her attention seemed to be attracted primarily 
by the pictures in the book shown by the teacher, not by the 
story. She could not answer the questions asked of her 
without the teacher’s help and the images. For example, in 
response to the teacher’s question “Is the hare fast or 
slow?” the child hesitated and the teacher had to show her 
a picture of the two animals to elicit an answer.  
The vocabulary she used was simple and very limited. 
The answers she gave often repeated the teacher’s words.  
During the reading, the child sat in a listening position 
with her arms crossed and resting on her desk, but did not 
seem to be at ease, and repeatedly moved her legs. She 
often picked up objects on the table during the reading, 
distracting herself.  
B. 
Phase II: Learning the story “The tortoise and the 
hare” with the aid of images and with the IROMEC  
 The information obtained from video analysis of the 
sessions with the aid of images and with the IROMEC 
reveal the child’s growing ability to pay attention visually 
(cognitive dimension) to the visual and spatial stimuli 
connected with the activity.  
Visual attention was constant and prolonged in the 
sessions with the IROMEC, lasting almost the entire 
session, 18 minutes and 90 seconds out of 19 minutes and 
10 seconds in the first session with the IROMEC and 18 
minutes out of 18 minutes and 20 seconds in the second 
session. In both sessions, the child was only distracted 
from the activity underway for about 20 seconds during the 
first phase. In the sessions involving use of images, the 
duration of her visual attention in relation to the total 
duration of the session was significantly lower. The child 
was distracted from the game for extended periods of time, 
3 minutes and 44 seconds in the first session and 4 minutes 
and 73 seconds in the last session. As noted above, the 
sessions involving use of images did not last as long as 
those involving use of the IROMEC, for the duration of the 
sessions was strictly dependent on the child’s behaviour. 
The total duration of sessions involving use of images was 
11 minutes and 20 seconds for the first session and 13 
minutes and 40 seconds for the second. The Figure 3 shows 
the value in relation to total time, expressed in minutes and 
seconds, of the child's ability to pay visual attention to the 
visual and spatial stimuli presented.  
These results are correlated with the results of 
exuberant movement indicator (motorial dimension), which 
tends to decrease during sessions conducted with the 
IROMEC and increase in sessions using images.  
During sessions conducted with images, this indicator 
has a value of 3 minutes and 2 seconds, as compared to a 
total of 11 minutes and 20 seconds in the first session, and 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

7 minutes compared to a total of 13 minutes and 40 
seconds in the second session. In sessions conducted with 
the IROMEC, her motorial activity was reduced to 0.67 
minutes out of a total of 19 minutes and 10 seconds in the 
first session and 0.38 minutes out of a total duration of 18 
minutes and 20 seconds in the second session. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Results of: visual attention, exuberant motility and 
spontaneous verbalization 
 
Her exuberant motility, which the teacher repeatedly 
had to contain in order to continue with the activity, 
translated into inappropriate behaviour, such as pretending 
to fall, rolling around, repeatedly tying her shoes or leaving 
the scene of the activity (Figure 4).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Session with the use of image 
 
Spontaneous verbalization, as opposed to statements 
solicited by the teacher’s questions but pertinent to the 
activity underway, did not exceed one minute in any of the 
sessions, as shown on the graph in Figure 3. 
Spontaneous verbalization was lower in sessions 
involving use of images, in which the child participated 
verbally only when asked to do so by the teacher. In these 
sessions she made statements primarily linked with 
personal events and aspects unrelated to the activity 
underway, which distracted her from what was at hand. 
This form of communication is typical of her pathology 
and her experience, as noted by the teacher, who explained 
that the child used this technique in class to avoid tasks 
which were difficult for her to perform. 
In the sessions involving use of the IROMEC, 
spontaneous verbalization was higher, though only by a 
few seconds; the child used precise terminology consistent 
with the context, interacted more frequently with the group 
and participated in the discussion, asking questions about 
the IROMEC and pertinent to the activity underway. 
Her ability to recall verbal and visual content presented 
previously (cognitive dimension) improved significantly, 
from 12 items of content recalled after the first session with 
images to 21 items of content recalled in the first session 
with the IROMEC a figure which remained constant in the 
last session. 
In sessions involving use of the IROMEC, the child 
demonstrated a greater ability to use different verbal 
content from that pronounced previously; she was, for 
instance, capable of using synonyms. This did not occur in 
the sessions conducted with images, where the teacher had 
to repeatedly prompt verbal content to complete an 
enunciation.  
In the area of communication, the figures reveal that the 
child acquired a growing ability to name objects and 
actions narrated in the story with precision (Figure 5).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Results of: recall of verbal and visual content, precise 
naming of an object/action. 
  
The figure reveals a progressive increase from 7 items 
of content named with precision in the first session to 17 
items of content in the last session.   
 
C. 
Phase III: Follow-up 
A week after the end of the sessions, the child was 
asked to answer two different sets of questions, about the 
story and the characteristics of the tortoise.   
The questionnaires were constructed according to 
instructions provided by the teacher, who regularly uses 
this type of test to assess acquisition of knowledge, 
normally after two lessons on a specific topic. As the 
teacher pointed out, in this kind of tests the child under 
observation almost always demonstrated difficulty filling 
in the questionnaire independently and needed help 
choosing the right answer. 
In this study, the girl was able to fill in the 
questionnaires alone and answer the questions correctly 
without any help.   
After the questionnaires had been filled in the teacher 
asked the children some questions about what they had 
done. The discussion revealed that the child had less 
difficulty recalling the content of sessions conducted with 
the IROMEC than sessions conducted with images. The 
girl specifically recalled activities involving motorial 
activities, such as imitating the slow movement of the robot 
representing the tortoise, and particularly the feedback on 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

whether or not an activity had been performed correctly. 
This was made explicit in the child’s words. 
Teacher: Now can you tell me what you liked most 
about all these things we did with the pictures and the little 
robot?  
Girl: That the tortoise laughed that I was slow. 
 
VII. DISCUSSION  
 
The data obtained from video analysis reveal that the 
sessions conducted with the IROMEC favoured the child’s 
ability to pay attention and her learning and memorization 
of the story, decreasing the amount of behaviour 
inappropriate to the activity.  
The results were discussed with the teacher, who 
expressed considerable satisfaction, particularly with the 
child’s ability to remember the content between the two 
sessions conducted with the robot, as compared to the 
sessions with images. The teacher emphasised that 
involvement of the motorial sphere in addition to the 
cognitive sphere made a significant contribution to learning 
and memorization of the story.  
The results of the study reveal that the child’s ability to 
concentrate changed depending on the type of aid used 
(images/IROMEC). In sessions conducted with the 
IROMEC she was able to focus her attention constantly for 
a long time, focusing on the robot and on the feedback the 
IROMEC sent, while in the sessions with images her 
attention was attracted to her surroundings rather than 
focused on the activity underway.  
An interesting aspect which emerged in sessions with 
the IROMEC as compared to sessions with images was the 
climate in the group, which was inclusive and social, 
revealing greater interest in the story.   
   
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
 
The paper reports the outcomes of an exploratory study 
on the use of a toy robot at school to support storytelling in 
a girl with a mild cognitive disability. Results show that the 
robot promoted active participation and involvement on the 
part of the girl, reducing the inappropriate behaviour and 
exuberant motility which was normally present when doing 
schoolwork. Active involvement of the motorial sphere in 
the learning process facilitated learning of abstract 
concepts which are difficult to understand. The possibility 
of mimicking the behaviour of the characters of the story 
like the slowness of the tortoise and the speed of the hare 
with her body allowed the child to understand concepts 
which would otherwise have been difficult for her to learn.  
IROMEC’s 
presence 
promoted 
spontaneous 
verbalization and communication among the disabled 
child, the teacher and the other children. The child 
repeatedly asked the teacher questions about the robot’s 
behaviour, such as “What is it doing? Why is it turning 
around?” referring to the robot turning around to face the 
children. 
This interaction with the teacher had not occurred in the 
sessions conducted with images, where, to the contrary, 
there was practically no communication unless solicited by 
the teacher’s questions.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the children and the 
teacher who participated to the study. We would also like to 
thank Sara Giosa for her help in designing the interfaces. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] World Health Organization  International classification of 
functioning, disability, and health: Children & youth version: 
ICF-CY. 
Geneva: 
World 
Health 
Organization. 
ISBN 
9241545429, 2007. 
[2] J. P. Piaget, Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood. Norton, 
New York, 1962. 
[3] W. Winnicott, Playing and Reality. Penguin Books Ltd., 
Middlesex, 1971. 
[4] J. S. Bruner, Acts of meaning. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge MA, 1990. 
[5] M. U. Bers, J. Cassell, “Interactive storytelling systems for 
children: using technology to explore language and identity”. 
Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 9, pp. 183-215, 1998. 
[6] R. Gersten, L. S. Fuchs, J. P. Williams, and S. Baker, 
“Teaching reading comprehension strategies to students with 
learning disabilities: A review of research”. Review of 
Educational Research, 71, pp. 279-320, 2001. 
[7] K. A. Kavale, J. H. Reese, “The character of learning 
disabilities: An Iowa profile”. Learning  Disability  Quarterly,  
15, pp.74–94, 1992. 
[8] G. D. Chen, C. Y. Wang, “A survey on storytelling with 
robots”, pp. 450-456, Springer, 2011. 
[9] D. Leyzberg, S. Spaulding, M. Toneva, and B. Scassellati, 
“The physical presence of a robot tutor increases cognitive 
learning gains”. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of 
the Cognitive Science Society. Austin,TX: Cognitive Science 
Society, 2012. 
[10] K. Ryokai, M. Jongseon Lee, and J. M. Breitbart, 
“Children's 
storytelling 
and 
programming 
with 
robotic 
characters”, In Proceedings of the seventh ACM conference on 
Creativity and cognition, October 26-30, 2009, Berkeley, 
California, USA, 2009.  
[11] C. Plaisant, et al., “A storytelling robot for pediatric 
rehabilitation”. In: Proceedings of the 4th ACM/SIGCAPH 
conference on assistive technologies (ASSETS’00), Washington, 
DC, USA, pp. 50–55, 2000.  
[12] B. Vanderborght, et al., “Using the social robot Probo as a 
social story telling agent for children with ASD”, Interaction 
Studies, 13,  pp. 348-372, 2012. 
[13] C. Pelachaud, R. Gelin, J. C. Martin, and Q. A. Le, 
“Expressive Gestures Displayed by a Humanoid Robot during a 
Storytelling Application”, in Second International Symposium on 
New Frontiers in Human-Robot Interaction, United Kingdom, 
AISB 2010. 
[14] M. Fridin, “Storytelling by a Kindergarten Social Assistive 
Robot: a tool for constructive learning in preschool education”. 
Computers & Education, Vol. 70, pp. 53-64, 2014.  
[15] R. J. Van den Heuvel, M. A. Lexis, R. M. Jansens, P. Marti, 
and L. P. De Witte, “Robots supporting play for children with 
physical 
disabilities: 
exploring 
the 
potential 
of 
IROMEC”. Technol Disabil 29, pp. 109–120, 2017.  
[16] P. Marti, “Bringing playfulness to disability”. In: 
Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction, (NordiCHI 2010) Reykjavik, Iceland, 17-20 October, 
2010, pp. 851-856, 2010.  
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

