Nano Inks for Additive Manufacturing – A Safe-by-Design-Approach 
 
Katja Nau1, Tobias Müller1, Daniel J.B.S. Sampaio2, Steffen G. Scholz1 
 
1Institute for Applied Computer Science 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology  
Karlsruhe, Germany 
e-mail: nau@kit.edu 
 
2School of Engineering – Guaratinguetá 
São Paulo State University (Unesp) 
Guaratinguetá, Brazil 
e-mail: dsampaio@feg.unesp.br 
 
Abstract—Additive manufacturing (AM) enables a new 
manufacturing paradigm, such as the rapid, distributive 
manufacture of complex 3D objects. Nanoparticles are in 
particular suitable for ink formulation of novel PolyJet inks to 
obtain functionalities embedded in the AM process. However, 
the impact and interaction of nanomaterials on environment 
and human health is widely discussed today. This paper deals 
with a safe-by-design-approach that is developed in this 
context. 
Keywords-additive manufacturing; nano safety; safe-by-
design; human-centred industrial technologie. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Additive manufacturing (AM) is a technique for creating 
3D objects by building up material, layer by layer, with the 
control of a digital design. The term 3D printing is often 
used to refer to AM but it is important to keep in mind that 
3D printing is actually one of the several AM processes. 3D 
printing was developed by a Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology team led by Emanuel Sachs in the late 1980s 
[1]. AM processes have some important advantages over 
traditional manufacturing techniques. The design of 
products is more flexible because of its additive approach, 
permitting a range of geometries beyond the capabilities of 
other methods. The development of new products is also 
faster because of the ease of moving from design to 
prototyping and then to production since it takes place 
directly on the basis of digital 3D data. It is possible to 
create functional parts without the requisite for assemblage 
[2].  
Nanotechnology is science, engineering, and technology 
conducted at the nanoscale, which is about one to 100 
nanometers, and involves the ability to see and to control 
individual atoms and molecules [3]. When shrinking the size 
scale from macro to nano, materials can change their 
fundamental properties, exhibiting unique optical, thermal 
or electrochemical properties that differ from the properties 
of the bulk material. These properties strongly depend on 
the size and the shape of nanostructures [4][5]. The 
integration of nanotechnology with AM can complement 
existing techniques and create entirely new nanocomposites 
having unique properties that can lead to expansion of AM 
application areas and reduce some of the AM limitations. 
Investigations have shown that the introduction of inorganic 
nanostructures 
such 
as 
carbon 
nanotubes, 
metal 
nanoparticles, and ceramics can meaningfully affect 
sintering features and final mechanical properties of the 
produced parts [6].  
The addition of metal nanoparticles generally decreases 
sintering temperatures, improves part density, and decreases 
shrinkage and distortion of printed parts in comparison to 
micro-scale fillers [7]. Metal nanoparticles embedded into 
polymer materials can also provide improved electrical 
conductivity in fabricated objects [8]. Incorporation of 
carbon nanotubes in printing media offers a potential route 
to improving mechanical properties of the final parts and to 
increasing electrical and thermal conductivities [9]. The 
addition of carbon nanotubes in bio-scaffolds can yield 
excellent enhancement of cell proliferation. Adding 
semiconductor and ceramic nanoparticles to printing media 
can lead to improvements in mechanical and wear properties 
of the final parts. In addition, ceramic nanoparticles can be 
effectively used for bone tissue engineering. Even with the 
mentioned design, material and environmental advantages, 
the adoption of AM as a means for fabricating end-use 
components has been limited by the narrow choice of 
materials that can be used with this technology and 
challenges in the fabrication like nozzle clogging/wear, 
aggregation within printing media and rough surface finish 
of printed parts. Additionally, differences in built process 
parameters and/or in some AM processes parameters, like 
ambient conditions, can result in variations in properties and 
dimensions between parts built on different machines of the 
same kind. Overcoming these issues will require advances 
in both process control methods and material diversity [10]. 
One of the initiatives that intends to lead to advances in 
AM technologies is a EU-funded project called DIMAP 
(novel nanoparticle enhanced DIgital MAterials for 3D 
Printing) [11] that, based in an idea born among various 
industrial and research centres across Europe, aims to 
develop applications not only limited to rapid prototyping 
but that address production processes, enhancing digital 
materials with novel nanoparticles for 3D printing in order 
to increase design possibilities and handling with needs for 
adapting 
and 
updating 
actual 
printing 
technology 
components.  
Another important point is that DIMAP is also taking in 
account the risks of today's nanoscale technologies [12]. 
These nano related risks cannot be treated the same as the 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

risks of longer-term molecular manufacturing, it would be 
wrong to put them together and make the same policy 
considerations since they offer different problems and 
therefore 
require 
special 
solutions. 
Nanotechnology 
manufacturing can bring unfamiliar risks and new classes of 
problems, consequently the impact and interaction of 
nanomaterials on environment and human health is widely 
discussed today [13]. 
This paper presents work of the EU project DIMAP as 
shown in Section II. Section III shows the safe-by-design 
approach, based on the prior knowledge of the used 
chemicals and nanomaterials that is going to be validated 
using two concrete demonstrators, an additive manufactured 
robotic arm and additive manufactured luminaires. Current 
work on nano safety aspects is presented in Section IV. 
II. 
OVERALL APPROACH OF DIMAP 
The overall objective of the DIMAP project is to enhance 
digital materials with novel nanoparticles for 3D printing in 
order to increase design possibilities. In order to develop 
these two specific innovative demonstrators, four novel 
digital materials, novel multi-material 3D printer and a safe-
by-design approach should be investigated in parallel and 
developed as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Concept for novel nanoparticle enhanced Digital Materials for 
3D Printing 
 
The challenges created by the selected applications 
require the development of novel ink systems with 
incorporated nanoparticles, with four different inks being in 
the scope of the project: electrically conductive inks, 
ceramic inks, high strength polymeric inks and lightweight 
polymeric inks as shown in Figure 2. In order to cope with 
these new material classes, the existing PolyJet technology 
should be further developed and therefore improved. 
 
 
Figure 2. Selected materials to enhancement inside DIMAP 
A safe-by-design and work place safety approach is 
carried out in parallel with the purpose of minimizing the 
risk due to the use of nanoparticles. This is shown in more 
details in the next section. 
III. 
SAFE-BY-DESIGN APPROACH 
The growing of nanotechnology-based products is 
increasing together with the conscience that some 
nanomaterials can bring unsafe effects and in order to try to 
control the risks, safe-by-design approaches are gaining 
attention and importance as tools to develop safer products 
and production processes [14]. It is important to first define 
what is included in the design process and then think about 
the safety aspects. There is no agreement in the literature 
about a clear boundary of the design process [15].  
In this work, a proposed safe by design methodology for 
3D printed nano-based products is presented centred in a 
systematic design analysis that can detect exposure 
scenarios and present the solutions to control the possible 
risks, endorsing possible barriers to reduce or even block 
them. The Figure 3 shows an overview of the proposed 
approach indicating all the elements that are encompassed 
and also the possible exposures for each element, 
emphasizing the importance of a safe-by-design approach.  
The approach starts with the knowledge of all necessary 
chemicals and nanomaterials used during all process steps 
because their properties are used as basis to understand the 
toxicity of each production stage and final nanotechnology-
based product. Each used material is evaluated and for each 
a very detailed Safety Data Sheet (SDS) has to be filled. 
This first step is very important since the SDS is the basis 
for the analysis made inside the methodology.  
 
 
Figure 3. Safe by Design approach based in a systematic design analysis 
 
The next step is the potential risk investigation where 
personal monitoring devices should be used to measure and 
analyse exposure to nanoparticles during the material 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

preparation and printing steps. A life cycle assessment 
should be also carried out to determine the impact of the 
printed product throughout the whole production, usage and 
disposal. Assessment of the exposure rates during 
manufacturing, usage and end of life are then carried out. 
The waste produced starting from the synthesis of each used 
material until the end of life of the final product is also 
analysed and considered in this assessment. As last step, 
solutions are given for the detected exposure scenarios that 
should be applied to reduce or even eliminate the found 
risks and re-evaluated after application. 
IV. 
CURRENT WORK 
Within the DIMAP project various nanomaterials are used 
in inks for 3-D printing. The safe-by-design approach started 
with the determination of the composition of the inks on the 
one hand and the potential exposure hotspots within the 
DIMAP work packages on the other hand. Material safety 
datasheets were analysed or generated for each new or 
modified material. Another aspect of the safe-by-design 
approach is, as mentioned above, the exposure of humans to 
nanoparticles during the whole process of AM. At present, 
little is known about the release of nanomaterials from 3D 
printers. But the potential exposure to airborne nanomaterials 
from these printers needs to be measured in the personal 
breathing zone using nano-specific personal samplers or 
monitors.  
Within DIMAP, such a small and easy to use sampler is 
currently applied to determine the particle release at, in and 
around the printer. Measurements are carried out in ambient 
conditions, as well as with the printer running, being able to 
compare different materials, different printing techniques, 
printer models and, to a limited extent, the dependence of 
exposure on different manufacturing parameters. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The main aim of the DIMAP project is to develop novel 
multi-material systems for PolyJet inks. Therefore, DIMAP 
will improve and advance the current technology by 
widening the range of available materials. However, the 
impact and interaction of nanomaterials on environment and 
human health is widely discussed today. Work is currently 
at an early stage concerning the measurement of 
(nano)particles in the process chain of AM. Different work 
place scenarios will to be analysed. The release of 
(nano)materials during work process, exposure to workers, 
potential hazard and a potential risk have to be assessed.  
As an outcome of the project a safety guideline will be 
established in order to support the industry in applying AM 
in an even wider spectrum. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
The DIMAP project is funded by the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 Program for research and innovation under 
Grant Agreement No. 685937. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E.M. Sachs, J.S. Haggerty, M.J. Cima, and P.A. Williams, 
“Three-dimensional printing techniques”, U.S. Patent No. 
5,204,055. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Patent and Trademark 
Office, 1993 
[2] A.M. Dollar and R. Howe “Joint coupling design of 
underactuated hands for unstructured environments” 30 (9) 
pp. 1157-1169 2013. DOI: 10.1177/0278364911401441 
[3] M.C. Roco, R.S. Williams, and P. Alivisatos, Nanotechnology 
Research Directions: Iwgn Workshop Report. Vision For 
Nanotechnology R&D In The Next Decade. National Science 
And Technology Councilarlington Va, 1999 
[4] Y.W. Jun, S.M. Lee, N.J. Kang, and J. Cheon, “Controlled 
synthesis of multi-armed CdS nanorod architectures using 
monosurfactant system”, Journal of the American Chemical 
Society, 123(21), pp. 5150-5151, 2001. 
[5] C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan, and M.A. El-Sayed, 
“Chemistry and properties of nanocrystals of different 
shapes”, Chemical reviews, 105(4), pp. 1025-1102, 2005. 
[6] S. Chaturvedi and P.N. Dave, “Design process for 
nanomaterials”, Journal of Materials Science, 48(10), pp. 
3605-3622, 2013.  
[7] W. J. Sames, F. A. List, S. Pannala, R. R. Dehoff, and S. S. 
Babu, “The metallurgy and processing science of metal 
additive manufacturing”, International Materials Reviews, 
61:5, 
pp. 
315-360, 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1080/09506608.2015.1116649  
[8] S. Schlabach, R. Ochs and T. Hanemann, and D.V. Szabo, 
“Nanoparticles in polymer-matrix composites”, Microsystem 
Technologies, 2011, 17, pp. 183-193, doi: 10.1007/s00542-
010-1176-8. 
[9] M.F. De Volder, S.H. Tawfick, R.H. Baughman, and A.J. 
Hart, “Carbon nanotubes: present and future commercial 
applications”, science, 339(6119), pp. 535-539, 2013.  
[10] O. Ivanova, C. Williams, and T. Campbell, “Additive 
manufacturing (AM) and nanotechnology: promises and 
challenges”, Rapid Prototyping Journal, v. 19, n. 5, pp. 353-
364, 2013.  
[11] http://www.dimap-project.eu [retrieved Feb 2017] 
[12] S. Scholz, A. Brunet., T. Müller, and A. Fuchsbauer, “Novel 
Nanoparticle Enhanced Digital Materials for 3D Printing and 
their Application Shown for the Robotic and Electronic 
Industry”, proceeding of the CENICS 2016 conference.  
[13] P.C. Ray, H. Yu, and P.P. Fu, “Toxicity and Environmental 
Risks of Nanomaterials: Challenges and Future Needs”, 
Journal of environmental science and health Part C, 
Environmental carcinogenesis & ecotoxicology reviews. 
2009; 27(1): pp. 1-35. doi:10.1080/10590500802708267. 
[14] F. Silva, P.M. Arezes, and P. Swuste, “Systematic design 
analysis and risk management on engineered nanoparticles 
occupational exposure”, Sho2015: International Symposium 
on Occupational Safety and Hygiene, pp. 350-352, 2015 
[15] A. Hale, B. Kirwan, and U. Kjellén, “Safe by design: where 
are we now? Safety science, v. 45, n. 1, pp. 305-327, 2007
 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

