G-IM: An Input Method of Chinese Characters  
for Character Amnesia Prevention 
 
Kazushi Nishimoto 
Research center for innovative lifestyle design 
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
Ishikawa, Japan 
knishi@jaist.ac.jp 
Jianning Wei 
The school of knowledge science 
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
Ishikawa, Japan 
wei_smiling@ezweb.ne.jp
 
 
Abstract— Character amnesia is a recent phenomenon in 
which native Chinese or Japanese speakers forget how to write 
Chinese characters (Kanji in Japanese), but maintain the 
ability to read them. It is generally believed that the constant 
use of computers and mobile phones equipped with 
pronunciation-based Chinese-character input systems is to 
blame. Therefore, particularly in China, several element-based 
input methods that require users to input radicals of the 
Chinese characters have been developed. However, these 
methods are not effective for learning how to write unfamiliar 
characters. This paper proposes a novel pronunciation-based 
input method called G-IM. Unlike conventional methods, G-
IM sometimes outputs incorrect character shapes, which forces 
users to pay close attention to the character shapes and thus 
strengthens retention and recall. Through user studies, we 
confirmed that G-IM significantly strengthens the retention 
and recall of character shapes as compared to conventional 
input methods and writing by hand. 
Keywords-input method of Chinese characters; character 
amnesia; incorrect character shapes; pronunciation-based input 
method; (re)building retention and recall of Chinese characters. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Character amnesia is a recent phenomenon manifested by 
the inability of native Chinese or Japanese speakers to recall 
how to write Chinese characters (Kanji in Japanese), 
although they know these characters well and can still read 
them [1]. According to a poll commissioned by China Youth 
On Line, published on July 12, 2013, 94.1% of the 
respondents 
reported 
experiencing 
problems 
writing 
characters and 26.8% reported always have such difficulties 
[2]. A similar phenomenon has been noted in Japan and is 
considered a significant issue [3]. 
It is generally believed that the constant use of computers 
and mobile phones equipped with alphabet-based Chinese-
character input systems is the cause of character amnesia 
[3][4]. In China, “Pinyin typewriting” is the most popular 
method for inputting Chinese characters. Pinyin is a widely 
used representation method of Chinese pronunciations that 
allows Chinese-character pronunciations to be expressed 
with Latin characters. In Japan, “Kana-kanji conversion 
systems” and “Romaji-kanji conversion systems” are widely 
used, where “Kana” means Japanese phonetic symbols, 
“Romaji” refers to Romanized Japanese words, and “kanji” 
is the Chinese characters. Thus, both in China and in Japan, 
people usually input Chinese characters with personal 
computers (PCs) and mobile phones based on their phonetic 
features, not on their shape features. Therefore, it is not 
necessary to recall how to physically write these characters 
when inputting. As a result, they increasingly lose the ability 
to write Chinese characters. 
It has been argued that it is no longer necessary to be able 
to hand write Chinese characters. Custer [5] asserted that 
some characters are used frequently enough that it’s nearly 
impossible to forget them, and that only when people have 
occasion to write a less common word by hand, they will 
look it up on their phones. Custer [5] therefore concluded 
that character amnesia is actually not a serious concern.  
We, however, cannot agree. We conducted a dictation 
examination of frequently used Chinese characters, the 
details of which are described below in the User Study 
section. The examinees (research participants) were 30 
Chinese postgraduate students. Surprisingly, the average 
accuracy rate for these students was only 22.8%, with the 
best score reaching only 56.3% and the worst actually 0%. 
Thus, even this highly educated group forgot approximately 
80% of frequently used Chinese characters, which is against 
Custer’s assumption. People easily forget even frequently 
used characters. Character amnesia thus appears to be a 
compelling problem. 
This paper proposes a novel Chinese-character input 
method called G-IM, an acronym of “Gestalt Imprinting 
Method,” to address character amnesia. The remainder of 
this paper is organized as follows: We present an overview 
of several related works in Section II. We then describe the 
basic idea of G-IM in Section III and illustrate its system 
setup in Section IV. Finally, we present the results of our 
user studies in Section V and discuss the usefulness of G-IM 
in Section VI. Section VII concludes this paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
A straightforward and naive way to prevent character 
amnesia is to continue Chinese-character education. Both in 
China and Japan, Chinese-character education is provided 
from early elementary school, with pupils in China learning 
approximately 3000 characters and those in Japan 
approximately 2000 characters by the end of junior high 
school. Several online learning systems have been proposed 
[6][7][8]. However, results of a questionnaire we conducted 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

for 135 Chinese people using an on-line questionnaire site 
revealed that only 2.96% respondents (namely, only 4 
respondents) were interested in using such online learning 
systems. Thus, as mentioned in Section I, there are many 
adults in both China and Japan who cannot write Chinese 
characters, demonstrating that education alone is not enough 
to prevent character amnesia.  
Various new approaches have recently been attempted. A 
prominent approach is the use of edutainment and 
gamification. A very popular new Chinese television 
program, “汉字英雄” (translation: “A Hero of Chinese 
Characters”), is a game show where elementary and junior 
high school students are asked to correctly transcribe the 
dictation of Chinese characters. A smart-phone application 
that provides the same dictation game is also gaining in 
popularity and has been downloaded over 800 thousand 
times. In Japan, kanji reading and writing quizzes are very 
popular on many television programs. These entertainment 
programs and game applications provide some remedy for 
character amnesia. However, at least in Japan, the quizzes 
provided in such TV programs often use very difficult 
characters that are seldom seen in everyday life. A method 
inextricably related to everyday writing (or inputting) of 
Chinese characters is required. 
In this sense, developing methods for Chinese characters 
that provide functions not only for inputting, but also for 
learning, 
is 
a 
promising 
solution. 
In 
Japan, 
the 
pronunciation-based Chinese character input systems, i.e., 
the Kana-kanji and Romaji-kanji conversion systems, are 
almost the only current practical methods for inputting 
Chinese characters on most PCs, cell-phones, and smart 
phones. In contrast, in China, not only pronunciation-based 
methods, such as the Pinyin input method, but also element-
based methods are used.  
“Wubi” is an element-based method. With Wubi, users 
input a Chinese character by inputting its radicals [8]. For 
example, to input “枠” (“frame”), the user must input the 
following three radicals: “ 木 ,” “ 九 ,” and “ 十 .” A 
combination of radicals almost uniquely relates to a specific 
Chinese character. Therefore, if the user masters Wubi, 
he/she can input Chinese characters faster than with the 
Pinyin method. However, it is difficult for people to master 
the Wubi method because there are 130 radicals; 5 times that 
of the alphabet. As a result, Wubi is not as widespread as the 
Pinyin method.  
Another element-based Chinese-character input method 
is a stroke-based method that breaks down a Chinese 
character into strokes. There are five basic types of strokes: 
1. 
Horizontal strokes:  “ー,” 
2. 
Vertical strokes: “｜,” 
3. 
Left-falling strokes: “丿,” 
4. 
Right-falling strokes or dot strokes: “丶,” and 
5. 
Turning strokes: “フ.” 
These strokes are usually assigned to numeric keys one to 
five and a user sequentially inputs strokes that constitute a 
Chinese character in its handwriting order. For example, 
“康” (“healthy”) can be input by sequentially inputting the 
basic strokes as follows: 
康：丶ー丿フーー｜丶ー丿丶 
In this case, eleven strokes are required, which is quite 
cumbersome. The six-digit stroke-based Chinese-character 
input method [9] is a refined stroke-based method. With this 
method, only the first three strokes and the last three strokes 
are required to be input. Therefore, in the case of “康,” only 
the following six strokes are necessary: 
康：丶ー丿ー丿丶 
Thus, the total number of strokes is reduced even when 
inputting complicated characters. 
Various element-based and stroke-based methods have 
been proposed that aim at achieving flexibility and simplicity 
[10], investigate mapping of elemental strokes onto the 
keypad of mobile phones [11], and design a special keypad 
layout of a mobile phone’s touch screen for selecting radicals 
to achieve fast and easy input of Chinese characters [12]. 
When a person becomes adept at using such an element-
based method, he/she can overcome character amnesia. 
However, most element-based methods require users to be 
familiar with each character’s shape, including handwriting 
order, in advance. Without this knowledge, users cannot use 
these methods. These methods provide no cure for character 
amnesia, as character amnesia is an obstacle to using these 
methods.     
As a result of considering these conventional attempts, 
we concluded that pronunciation-based Chinese-character 
input methods require additional functions in order to solve 
the character amnesia problem. The pronunciation-based 
methods are most widely used both in China and Japan, and 
can be used without accurate knowledge of how to write 
Chinese characters in detail; even those suffering from 
character amnesia can use them. To the best of our 
knowledge, there have been no attempts to  solve the 
character amnesia problem using a pronunciation-based 
Chinese-character input method. 
III. 
BASIC IDEA OF G-IM 
The basic idea of G-IM is very simple and 
straightforward: a function that compels users to verify 
Chinese-character shapes is added to a pronunciation-based 
Chinese-character input method. G-IM not only outputs 
correctly shaped characters, but also sometimes outputs 
incorrectly shaped ones. In other words, G-IM is an input 
method that sometimes miswrites, which sets it apart from 
conventional input methods. Figure 1 shows an example of 
 
Figure 1.  An example of a correctly shaped (left) and incorrectly 
shaped “歳” character (right). An extra horizontal stroke has been 
added to the example on the right.  
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

correctly and incorrectly shaped characters: the one on the 
right is incorrect (it has an extra horizontal stroke). The 
incorrect characters output by G-IM are slightly different 
from existing correct ones.  
When using a conventional pronunciation-based input 
method of Chinese characters, some homonyms are often 
incorrectly input. For example, the pronunciation of “歳入” 
(“annual income”) is “sai-nyuu” in Japanese, which may be 
incorrectly transcribed as “ 再 入 ” (“re-entrant”), whose 
pronunciation is the same as that of “歳入.” However, when 
correcting “ 再 入 ” to “ 歳 入 ,” the knowledge required 
concerns the combination of the characters (i.e., knowledge 
of idiom) rather than the shapes of the characters (i.e., the 
Gestalt of the characters). If someone noticed that he/she 
incorrectly input “再入,” he/she would re-input “sai-nyuu” 
and correctly convert it to “歳入.” In this correction process, 
he/she pays attention to the difference between “再” and 
“歳,” but not to the detailed shape of “歳.” Therefore, we 
employed incorrect characters that have shapes that differ 
slightly from the correct one in order to compel accurate 
attention to the detailed character shapes and to re-establish 
the correct Gestalt.  
Since the conventional input methods never miswrite and 
always output correctly shaped characters, users exceedingly 
rely on these and never pay full attention to the detailed 
shapes. Eventually, these shapes are forgotten. However, 
because G-IM is not consistently accurate, the user has to 
always pay attention to the shape of each character and, if it 
is wrong, correct it, thus preventing and curing character 
amnesia. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEM 
It is not easy to modify the functions of existing Chinese-
character input methods such as Microsoft Office IME™ 1  
and JustSystems ATOK™ 2. We therefore implemented a 
text editor, described later in this paper, instead of an input 
method to investigate the efficacy of the basic G-IM idea 
described in the previous section. 
We first created a new font file consisting only of 
incorrectly shaped characters, like the one on the right in 
Figure 1, using the TTEdit™ font editor3. It is not necessary 
to create incorrect shapes for all Chinese characters. We 
created only the fonts necessary (shown in Figure 2) for use 
in our experiments. We then implemented a text editor 
equipped with a function that automatically replaces an input 
correct character shape from the existing input method with a 
similar, but incorrectly shaped, character with the same 
character code as the correct one as soon as one of the 
characters in Figure 2 are input. If a user tries to save the text 
file with incorrectly shaped characters, the save operation is 
rejected and a dialog box asking the user to correct all 
incorrectly shaped characters appears. Correction can be 
                                                           
1 http://www.microsoft.com/ja-jp/office/2010/ ime/default. 
aspx 
2 http://www.atok.com/ 
3 http://opentype.jp/ttedit.htm 
done by selecting the incorrect character, inputting its 
pronunciation again, and converting it. As a result, the 
incorrect character is replaced with the correct one. At this 
time, the quick change of the characters between correct and 
incorrect provides a visual animation-type effect and the 
difference in the shapes is emphatically demonstrated. 
Finally, after all characters have been corrected, the text file 
can be saved. By using this editor and font file, we can 
conduct user studies without implementing a completely new 
input method or modifying an existing one. 
V. 
USER STUDY 
We conducted user studies to investigate the efficacy of 
G-IM by comparing it to two Chinese-character input 
methods, specifically, handwriting (HW) and an existing 
input method (IM). We did not ask the research participants 
to use an element-based input method such as Wubi. Most of 
the participants had never used an element-based input 
method and hence would not be able to use it immediately. 
Furthermore, as will be shown later, most of the participants 
could not correctly write many of the Chinese characters that 
were used in the experimental examinations. When using the 
element-based input methods, the examinees could not input 
most of the test characters. Therefore, we did not use an 
element-based input method during our studies. 
A. Procedure 
The participants were 30 postgraduate Chinese students 
from the authors’ institute.  Character amnesia is a more 
significant problem for the Chinese than the Japanese 
because the Japanese can easily substitute Kana (Japanese 
phonetic symbols) for kanji. The Chinese do not have such a 
generally tolerated substitution method.  
The user study consisted of three steps: 
1. 
A pre-examination of Chinese-character dictation, 
2. 
An exercise of inputting or writing Chinese 
characters using one of the input methods, and 
肇 戛 蹶 锲 颐 蘸 缭 赝 
舆 耀 悍 葵 霓 鸩 慰 鹜 
腻 鼎 粱 篡 葺 炙 瘙 祟 
斡 嗦 墨 覆 挛 罄 罹 靡 
纨 绔 戮 寥 迥 箴 率 媲 
粕 瞰 凿 噱 霾 敷 瓮 帷 
幄 醍 醐 寡 揠 捺  
 
Figure 2.  54 Chinese characters prepared for the dictation pre-
examination. 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

3. 
A post-examination of Chinese-character dictation. 
In Step 1, we prepared 54 characters selected from “100 
frequently used Chinese characters that are often miswritten” 
[13] as the problems for the dictation pre-examination. 
Figure 2 shows the selected 54 characters and Figure 3 
shows some of the problems in the pre-examination. The 
participants were required to fill in the blanks with the 
correct characters by hand referring to the adscript 
pronunciations. 
After 
the 
pre-examination, 
all 
the 
participants were not given the correct answers.  
Based on the pre-examination results, we sorted the 54 
characters by the miswritten-ratios and extracted 32 
characters with higher miswritten-ratios. Figure 4 shows the 
extracted 32 characters and their miswritten-ratios. No 
participants were able to correctly write the top two 
characters. These 32 characters were used in the Step 2 tasks 
and in the post-examination of dictation in Step 3. In 
addition, based on the pre-examination results, we divided 
the participants into three groups, each of which included ten 
participants, so as to equalize the distribution of the pre-
examination score of the three groups.  
In Step 2, we assigned three different tasks to the three 
groups as follows: 
 
G-IM group: The participants were required to input 
sentences that included the 32 characters. Whenever 
one of the 32 characters was input, it was replaced 
by the corresponding incorrectly shaped character 
first and the participants then made the necessary 
corrections.   
 
IM group: These participants were required to input 
the same sentences as those provided to the G-IM 
group using a popular Pinyin input method. As 
described previously, with this method, the need for 
replacement of incorrectly shaped characters never 
arose.  
 
HW group: The participants of this group were 
required to write by hand the same sentences as 
those provided to the G-IM group.  
For all groups, the sentences were read aloud. The 
participants listened then input the sentences or wrote them 
down. To avoid any unexpected effects of Step 1 from 
influencing the tasks of Step 2, we waited 15 days between 
Step 1 and Step 2.  
In Step 3, occurring immediately after Step 2, we 
conducted the post-examination using the 32 characters 
shown in Figure 4. The form of the post-examination was 
similar to the pre-examination (Fig. 3): the examinees were 
required to fill in the blanks with correct characters by hand. 
Finally, we asked the participants of the G-IM and IM 
groups to answer a questionnaire on whether they had paid 
attention to the character shapes when inputting the 
sentences in Step 2.  
 
Figure 3. Examples of the problems in the dictation pre-examination. 
Characters 
Miswritten-ratio 
鹜 
100.0 
霾 
100.0 
颐 
97.0 
赝 
90.9 
篡 
90.9 
斡 
90.9 
蘸 
87.9 
祟 
87.9 
霓 
84.8 
敷 
84.8 
腻 
84.8 
舆 
84.8 
噱 
84.8 
锲 
81.8 
悍 
81.8 
靡 
81.8 
蹶 
81.8 
粱 
81.8 
慰 
78.8 
媲 
78.8 
寡 
75.8 
罹 
75.8 
肇 
72.7 
迥 
72.7 
戛 
69.7 
箴 
69.7 
炙 
69.7 
鼎 
69.7 
葵 
63.6 
耀 
60.6 
凿 
57.6 
覆 
57.6 
Figure 4. 32 extracted characters with higher miswritten-ratios based 
on the pre-examination results. 
 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Results 
Table I presents the average scores and standard 
deviations (STDVs) for the pre-examination and post-
examination of the three groups with a perfect score being 32. 
Therefore, the average score 7.3 is, for example, 22.8 points 
on a scale for which 100 is perfection. Table II shows the 
average time required to input the sentences (Step 2) and the 
average time for writing the answers down by hand in the 
post-examination for all groups.  Table III displays the 
percentage number of participants who paid attention to the 
character shapes when inputting the sentences in Step 2.  
To determine whether G-IM could improve the 
performance of the post-examination when compared to the 
other two methods, we performed a two-way ANOVA (three 
input methods and two examinations) on the results shown in 
Table I. The analysis results were: 
 
The main effect of the input methods was 
significant. 
(F(2, 54) = 3.99, p < .05) 
 
The main effect of the examinations was significant. 
(F(1, 54) = 19.41, p < .01) 
 
The interaction effect was significant. 
(F(2, 54) = 5.25, p < .05) 
We performed additional post hoc tests. We first 
conducted Tukey’s HSD (honestly significant difference) 
test on both main effects. The results were as follows: 
 
About the main effect of the input methods: A 
significant difference (p < .05) was found only 
between G-IM and HW. 
 
About the main effect of the examinations: A 
significant difference (p < .01) was found between 
the post-examination and the pre-examination. 
Next, we performed a post hoc test on the interaction 
effect. Figure 5 shows the simple main effect of the input 
methods at each examination and Figure 6 shows the simple 
main effect of the examinations at each input method. Based 
on Figure 5, we can say that 
 
In the pre-examination, no significant difference 
was found among all three groups, but 
 
In the post-examination, significant differences (p 
< . 01) could be found only between G-IM and the 
other two methods. 
From Figure 6, we can also say that 
 
As for the G-IM group, a significant difference (p 
< .01) was found between the pre-examination and 
the post-examination, but 
TABLE I. RESULTS 
OF THE PRE-EXAMINATION 
AND POST-
EXAMINATION FOR THE THREE GROUPS. 
Group 
Pre-exam. 
Post-exam. 
Average 
STDV 
Average 
STDV 
G-IM 
7.3 
5.0 
20.4 
6.2 
IM 
8.4 
4.4 
12.0 
5.7 
HW 
7.7 
4.2 
10.3 
6.3 
TABLE II. AVERAGE REQUIRED TIME IN MINUTES TO INPUT 
SENTENCES IN STEP 2 AND THE POST-EXAMINATION FOR ALL 
GROUPS. 
Group 
Step 2 (min.) 
Post-exam (min.) 
G-IM 
25 
8 
IM 
13 
11 
HW 
33 
7 
TABLE III. PERCENTAGE NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS WHO PAID 
ATTENTION 
TO 
THE CHARACTER 
SHAPES 
WHEN 
INPUTTING 
SENTENCES IN STEP 2. 
Group 
When selecting character 
After selecting character 
G-IM 
40 % 
100 % 
IM 
67 % 
17 % 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
pre-exam
post-exam
G-IM
IM
HW
p < 0.01
p < 0.01
 
Figure 5.  Results of post hoc test on the interaction: simple main effect 
of input methods at each examination.   
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
G-IM
IM
HW
pre-exam
post-exam
p < 0.01
 
Figure 6.  Results of post hoc test on the interaction: simple main effect 
of examinations at each input method. 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
As for the other two groups, no significant 
differences could be found between the pre-
examination and the post-examination. 
From these results of the post hoc test on the interaction 
effect shown in Figures 5 and 6, we can clearly conclude that 
G-IM is superior to both the existing Pinyin input method 
and writing by hand. Although the performances of the 
participants of all three groups were equalized based on the 
pre-examination results, they differed significantly in the 
post-examination and the G-IM group achieved significantly 
higher performances than the other groups (Fig. 5). The G-
IM group members’ performances were significantly 
improved after inputting sentences using the G-IM method 
(Fig. 6).   
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
In order to confirm whether G-IM can actually prevent 
and cure character amnesia, further long-term investigation is 
necessary. However, it became evident that the recall and 
retention of Chinese-character shapes was certainly 
strengthened after using G-IM, which fortifies long-term 
memory of them. Accordingly, G-IM has the potential to 
prevent and cure character amnesia.  
Those who are resistant to information technology often 
argue that we should not use the PC for writing and that 
writing by hand will solve the character amnesia problem. 
However, our experimental results dispute this claim. Even 
when writing characters by hand, the post-examination 
scores did not significantly improve (see the results of HW in 
Fig. 6). This means that writing by hand did not strengthen 
character shape recall. This is not surprising. When writing 
by hand, incorrect memories are not rectified. If someone 
thinks that the correct shape of “歳” is the one shown on the 
right in Figure 1 and always writes it this way, there is no 
chance to correct it. In addition, if he/she does not know how 
to write “歳” at all, he/she of course cannot write it and will 
not remember how to write it correctly. In such cases, those 
who are anti-information and technology believe that we 
should always refer to a dictionary. However, this is too 
cumbersome, time consuming, and impractical. It is also 
impractical that an expert of Chinese characters always 
checks the shapes of the written characters and corrects the 
mistakes. As a result, most people do not have any 
opportunity to develop correct memory of the character 
shapes. It is necessary to “push” the correct answers, not 
“pull” answers, such as referring to a dictionary. 
The existing pronunciation-based input methods “push” 
the correct shapes. Opportunities to build recall and retention 
are provided whenever these methods are used. In this sense, 
pronunciation-based input methods are potentially learning 
support systems. However, we do not actually learn the 
correct shapes when using the existing input methods, which 
is most likely because the ordinary input methods never 
miswrite. We do not doubt the characters that are output by 
these systems and thus completely rely on them. The results 
shown in Table III support this view. When selecting a 
correct character, many of the IM participants paid attention 
to the character shapes. In contrast, most did not pay 
attention to them after selecting them. This suggests that they 
pay attention to the shapes when selecting, for example, 
“歳,” and not “再,” but they do not pay attention to the 
details of the shape of “歳.” Therefore, because the correct 
answers are always provided, recall and retention are not 
reinforced. 
In summary, although writing by hand forces attention on 
the detailed shapes of Chinese characters, it cannot correct 
mistaken memories. It is effective for maintaining existing 
correct knowledge, but is not effective for correcting 
incorrect knowledge or for acquiring familiarity with 
unknown character shapes. In contrast, although the existing 
input methods have the potential to correct mistaken 
memories, they do not force users to pay attention to shape 
details. G-IM provides a balance; it forces users to pay 
attention to detailed character shapes, as well as “pushes” 
correct shapes to correct flawed memories. Therefore, G-IM 
can be an on-the-job training system for writing Chinese 
characters. It is effective for acquiring the shapes of 
unknown characters, as well as maintaining and correcting 
already-learned ones. 
The only disadvantage of G-IM is the extra burden of 
correcting the incorrect characters, which does not occur 
when using the existing input methods. As Table II shows, 
the G-IM group spent more time inputting the sentences in 
Step 2 than the IM group. This is an unavoidable trade-off. 
When we explained the G-IM method to other people at, for 
example, an academic meeting, many responded that they 
did not want to use such a cumbersome system. However, 
we believe that this minor inconvenience is not fatal 
considering the benefits and pay-off, just as foregoing taking 
the car and walking to your destination in order to get some 
fresh air and exercise, when it is not too far away and you are 
not in too much of a hurry, while less convenient, is 
preferable and beneficial to your health.  
Similarly, we should approach the use of G-IM as 
opposed to the ordinary input methods on a case-by-case 
basis. If time is an issue, a conventional input method should 
be used. However, when convenient, G-IM should be used to 
correct and (re)establish knowledge, recall, and retention of 
Chinese characters. G-IM does not require as much time as 
studying educational materials. In addition, with G-IM, 
people can efficiently learn the correct shapes of common 
and frequently used Chinese characters, while educational 
materials require the additional study of characters that are 
seldom used. 
This design policy, which does not just aim at improving 
the performance of inputting Chinese characters, has 
something in common with the Further Benefit of a Kind of 
Inconvenience 
(FUBEN-EKI) 
concept 
proposed 
by 
Kawakami et al. [14][15]. They argued that convenient tools 
hamper skill acquisition and motivation. They propose that 
designing 
tools 
that 
incorporate 
or 
retain 
some 
inconveniences is important. G-IM incorporated the input 
methods of Chinese characters with some inconveniences: 
users are required to maintain constant attention to the 
shapes of the output characters, which provides a different 
benefit from inputting efficiency, that is, the correction and 
(re)establishment of Chinese character memories. Kawakami 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

et al. did not demonstrate any concrete method of 
incorporating such inconveniences. G-IM embeds quizzes in 
the operations of inputting Chinese characters. Thus, 
embedding quizzes (or, more generally speaking, embedding 
some gamifying functions) in everyday activities can be a 
concrete design methodology based on the FUBEN-EKI 
concept.  
Another gamification approach may alleviate the 
cumbersomeness of G-IM. Scoring correctly saved text files 
and sharing scores among G-IM users can lead to enjoyable 
competition among users. We would like to implement such 
additional functions to make G-IM much more useful and 
enjoyable in the near future.     
VII. 
 CONCLUSION 
This paper described a novel pronunciation-based 
Chinese-character input method called G-IM. The primary 
feature of G-IM is that it sometimes outputs incorrectly 
shaped Chinese characters, which the conventional input 
methods never do. G-IM forces users to pay attention to 
detailed character shapes in order to build, correct, and 
strengthen the memory of Chinese characters. We conducted 
user studies that compared G-IM with a conventional 
pronunciation-based input method and writing by hand. As a 
result, we confirmed that G-IM significantly strengthened the 
participants’ memories of Chinese characters compared to 
the other two methods. Accordingly, we can conclude that 
G-IM has the potential to solve character amnesia, which is a 
current and increasing problem in both China and Japan.  
In the near future, we would like to incorporate some 
gamification functions to alleviate the cumbersomeness of 
G-IM. We also would like to conduct more long-term user 
studies to estimate G-IM’s efficacy more accurately. 
Furthermore, we need to conduct experiments in the wild for 
evaluating actual usefulness of G-IM and for confirming 
compatibility of G-IM as an inputting method of Chinese 
characters and as a learning tool of Chinese characters. We 
are now developing a new version of G-IM that can be 
applied to everyday usage to conduct such experiments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors sincerely thank all of the research 
participants who willingly cooperated to our experiments. 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 
26280126. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Character amnesia, Wikipedia,  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Character_amnesia 
[retrieved: 
Dec. 2014] 
[2] http://article.cyol.com/news/content/2013-07/12/content_ 
8708413.htm (in Chinese) [retrieved: Dec. 2014] 
[3] H. Kaiho, “Why does memory slips of Chinese characters 
occur?,” in Psychology of Cognition and Learning, Baifu-kan, 
2007. (in Japanese) 
[4] Wired youth forget how to write in China and Japan, 
http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-
tech/wired-youth-forget-how-to-write-in-china-and-japan-
2065228.html [retrieved: Dec. 2014] 
[5] C. 
Custer, 
“Is 
“Character 
Amnesia” 
a 
Problem?”, 
http://chinageeks.org/2010/07/is-character-amnesia-a-
problem/ [retrieved: Dec. 2014] 
[6] N. Inami, H. Tominaga, Y. Matsubara, and T. Yamasaki, 
“Network based training system for handwriting Japanese 
characters using interactive electric whiteboard,” Technical 
Report of IEICE, ET2002-108, 2003, pp.79-84. (in Japanese) 
[7] J. Tynystanova, and J. Miwa, “An Associative Kanji Learning 
Support System Using Animations with Story for Digital 
Natives,” IEICE Technical Report, ET2009-15, 2009, pp. 7-
12. (in Japanese) 
[8] Q. Li, and W. Wu, “Remote Education Software for "Wubi" 
Typewriting: --for elective course of elementary school,” 
Master 
thesis, 
KTH, 
School 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology (ICT), 2012. 
[9] L. M. Po, and C. K. Wong, “Six-Digit Stroke-based Chinese 
Input Method,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2009, pp.818-823. 
[10] S. C. Hsu, “A Flexible Chinese Character Input Scheme,” 
Proceedings of the 4th annual ACM symposium on User 
interface software and technology (UIST ’91), 1991, pp.195-
200. 
[11] M. Lin, and A. Sears, “Graphics matter: a case study of 
mobile phone keypad design for chinese input,” CHI '05 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
2005, pp. 1593-1596. 
[12] J. Niu, L. Zhu, Q. Yan, Y. Liu, and K. Wang, “Stroke++: A 
hybrid Chinese input method for touch screen mobile 
phones,” Proceedings of the 12th international conference on 
Human computer interaction with mobile devices and services 
(MobileHCI ’10), 2010, pp.381-382. 
[13] http://zhidao.baidu.com/question/192981329.html [retrieved: 
Dec. 2014] 
[14] H. Kawakami, “Inconvenience utilizing Design,” Kagaku-
Dojin Publishing Company INC, 2011. (in Japanese) 
[15] H. Kawakami, and T. Hiraoka, “Incorporation of evolutionary 
computation for implementing the benefit of inconvenience,” 
International Journal of Advancements in Computing 
Technology, Vol.4, No.22, 2012, pp.248-256.  
 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

