Augmented Reality in Minimally Invasive Surgery 
 
 
Lucio Tommaso De Paolis 
Department of Innovation Engineering 
University of Salento 
Lecce, Italy 
lucio.depaolis@unisalento.it 
Giovanni Aloisio 
Department of Innovation Engineering 
University of Salento 
Lecce, Italy 
giovanni.aloisio@unisalento.it 
 
 
 
Abstract—The advantages of the Minimally Invasive Surgery 
are evident for the patients, but these techniques have some 
limitations for the surgeons. In medicine, the Augmented 
Reality (AR) technology allows surgeons to have a sort of “X-
ray” vision of the patient’s body and can help them during the 
surgical procedures. In this paper we present two applications 
of Augmented Reality that could be used as support for a more 
accurate preoperative surgical planning and also for an image-
guided surgery. The first AR application can support the 
surgeon during the needle insertion for the Radiofrequency 
Ablation of the liver tumours in order to guide the needle and 
to have a precise placement of the instrument within the lesion. 
The augmented visualization can avoid as much as possible to 
destroy healthy cells of the liver. The second AR application 
can support the surgeon in the preoperative surgical planning 
by means of the visualization of the 3D models of the organs 
built from patient’s medical images and in the choice of the 
best insertion points of the trocars in the patient’s body. 
 
Keywords - Augmented Reality, medical images, minimally 
invasive surgery, laparoscopic pediatric surgery, RF ablation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One trend in surgery is the transition from open 
procedures to minimally invasive interventions, where 
visual feedback to the surgeon is only possible through the 
laparoscope camera and direct palpation of organs is not 
possible. Minimally Invasive Surgery (MIS), such as 
laparoscopy or endoscopy, has changed the way to practice 
the surgery and, as a promising technique, the use of this 
surgical approah is nowadays widely accepted and adopted 
as an alternative to classical procedures.  
These techniques offer the possibility to surgeons of 
reaching the patient’s internal anatomy in a less invasive 
way and causing only a minimal trauma. The diseased area 
is reached by means of small incisions in the body and 
specific instruments and a camera are inserted through these 
ports; during the operation a monitor shows what is going 
on inside the body.  
Shorter hospitalizations, faster bowel function return, 
fewer wound-related complications and a more rapid return 
to normal activities have contributed to accept these surgical 
procedures and, if the advantages of this surgical method are 
evident on the patients, these techniques involve some 
limitations for the surgeons. In particular, the imagery is in 
2D and the surgeon needs to develop new skills and 
dexterity in order to estimate the distance from the 
anatomical structures and work in a very limited workspace.  
The acquisition of medical images (CT or MRI) 
associated to the latest medical image processing provides 
an accurate knowledge of the patient’s anatomy and 
pathologies and could lead to an improvement in patient 
care by guiding of the surgeons during the surgical 
procedure. 
The emerging Augmented Reality (AR) technology has 
the potential to bring the direct visualization advantages of 
open surgery back to minimally invasive surgery and can 
increase the physician’s view with information gathered 
from the patient’s medical images.  
AR technology refers to a perception of a physical real 
environment whose elements are merged with virtual 
computer-generated objects in order to create a mixed 
reality. In addition to a mixture of real and virtual 
information, an AR application has to run in real time and 
its virtual objects have to be aligned (registered) with real 
world structures. Both of these requirements guarantee that 
the dynamics of real world environments remain after 
virtual data has been added [1]. 
In medicine the AR technology makes it possible to 
overlay virtual medical images of the organs on the real 
patient and it allows the surgeon to have a sort of “X-ray 
vision” of the patient’s internal anatomy. In order to register 
the data and fuse virtual and real imagery in real time, 
special devices are used in the AR platform. 
An advantage of using AR in surgery could be found in 
a better spatial perception and in the duration of the surgical 
procedure that could be shorter than in conventional way. 
The aim of this paper is to present two AR applications 
that could be used as support for a more accurate surgical 
preoperative planning and also for an image-guided surgery. 
The first application can support the surgeon during the 
needle insertion in the radiofrequency ablation of the liver 
tumours; the second one allows the surgeon to choose the 
more appropriate points for the insertion of the trocars a 
pediatric laparoscopic procedure. 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORKS 
Motivated by the benefits that MIS can bring to 
patients, many research groups are now focusing on the 
273
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

development of systems in order to assist the surgeons 
during the minimally invasive surgical procedures.  
Furtado and Gersak [1] present some examples of how 
AR can be used to overcome the difficulties inherent to MIS 
in the cardiac surgery. 
Samset et al. [3] present some decision support tools 
based on concepts in visualization, robotics and haptics and 
provide tailored solutions for a range of clinical 
applications. 
Bichlmeier et al. [4] focus on the problem of misleading 
perception of depth and spatial layout in medical AR and 
present a new method for medical in-situ visualization.  
Navab et al. [5], [6] present a new solution for using 3D 
virtual data in many AR medical applications and introduce 
the concept of a laparoscopic virtual mirror, a virtual 
reflection plane within the live laparoscopic video.  
De Paolis et al. [7] present an AR system that can guide 
the surgeon in the operating phase in order to prevent 
erroneous disruption of some organs during surgical 
procedures. They provide distance information between the 
surgical tool and the organs and they use a sliding window 
in order to obtain a more realistic impression that the virtual 
organs are inside the patient’s body.  
Nicolau et al. [9] present a real-time superimposition of 
virtual models over the patient’s abdomen in order to have a 
three dimensional view of the internal anatomy. The authors 
have used the developed system in an operating room and to 
reduce the influence of the liver breathing motion they have 
tried to simulate the patient’s breathing cycle.  
LiverPlanner [10], [11] is a virtual liver surgery 
planning system developed at Graz University of 
Technology that combines image analysis and computer 
graphics in order to simplify the clinical process of planning 
liver tumor resections. The treatment planning stage enables 
the surgeon to elaborate a detailed strategy for the surgical 
intervention  and the outcome of pre-operative planning can 
then be used directly for the surgical intervention.  
Maier-Hein et al. [12] present a system developed for 
computer-assisted needle placement that uses a set of 
fiducial needles to compensate for organ motion in real 
time; the purpose of this study was to assess the accuracy of 
the system in vivo. 
Stüdeli et al. [13] present a system that provides 
surgeon, during placement and insertion of RFA needle, 
with information from pre-operative CT images and real-
time tracking data. 
III. 
THE USED TECHNOLOGIES 
A reconstruction of the 3D model of the anatomical and 
pathological structures of the patient is required in order to 
improve the standard slice view. An efficient 3D 
reconstruction of the patient’s organs is generated by 
applying some segmentation and classification algorithms to 
medical images (CT or MRI) of the patient. The grey levels 
in the medical images are replaced by colours that are 
associated to the different organs [14]. 
Nowadays there are different software used in medicine 
for the visualization and the analysis of scientific images 
and the 3D modelling of human organs; Mimics [15], 3D 
Slicer [16], ParaView [17], and OsiriX [18] play an 
important role among these tools. 
In our application we have used 3D Slicer for the 
building of the 3D model of the patient’s organ; 3D Slicer is 
a 
multi-platform 
open-source 
software 
package 
for 
visualization and image analysis and in Fig. 1 is shown a 3D 
model built from CT images of a two-year-old child with a 
benign tumour of the right kidney. 
 
Figure 1.  3D model from the CT dataset 
In the developed AR platform it is also necessary to use 
an optical tracker that is able to detect some intentionally 
introduced retro-reflective spheres (fiducials) placed on the 
surgical tools. In this way it is possible to know the right 
position and the orientation of the surgical instruments used 
during the surgical procedure. The tracking system is also 
used in order to permit the overlapping of the virtual organs 
on the real ones providing an augmented visualization of the 
scene. This registration phase is one of the most delicate 
step in an AR  system for surgery.  
We have used the Polaris Vicra optical tracker that 
provides precise and real-time spatial measurements of the 
location and orientation of an object or tool within a defined 
coordinate system [19]. 
For the visualization the Image-Guided Software Toolkit 
(IGSTK) that is a set of high-level components integrated 
with low-level open source software libraries and application 
programming interfaces has been used. IGSTK builds on the 
InsightToolkit (ITK) and the Visualization Toolkit (VTK) 
[20]. 
IV. 
AR FOR THE RF ABLATION OF THE LIVER TUMOUR 
A. The Liver Tumour 
Hepatic cancer is one of the most common solid 
cancers in the world. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 
most common primary hepatic cancer. Unless primary 
hepatic cancer is quite rare, liver is second only to lymph 
nodes as a common site of metastasis from other solid 
cancers [21]. The liver is often the site of metastatic disease, 
particularly in patients with colorectal adenocarcinoma. 
274
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The use of chemotherapy for malignant form of liver 
cancer rarely led to good results in long-term survival rate. 
We have also to consider that chemotherapy produces 
negative effects in the lifestyle of the patient.  
Today surgery is the best approach to avoid the death of 
the 
patient 
and 
the 
reversion 
of 
hepatic 
cancer. 
Unfortunately only from 5 to 15 per cent of HCC or hepatic 
metastasis patients diagnosed again undergo a potentially 
curative resection of the liver cancer [22], [23]. 
Patients with confined disease of the liver could not be 
candidates to resection because of multifocal disease, 
proximity of tumor to key vascular or biliary structures that 
preclude 
a 
margin-negative 
resection 
potentially 
unfavourable in case of presence of multiple liver 
metastases. Very often the tumor is also associated to a pre-
existent cirrhosis that can reduce resection margins. 
Liver transplant is the only radical therapy that 
eliminates the risk of recurrence but it can’t be always used. 
So, since most of patients with primary or malignancies 
confined metastatic at the liver are not candidates for 
surgical resection, we should use different approaches to 
control and potentially cure liver diseases. 
The Liver Radiofrequency Ablation (RFA) is a 
technique used since 1980’s and consists in the placement of 
a needle inside the liver parenchyma in order to reach the 
centre of the tumor lesion. When the lesion is reached, an 
array of electrodes is extracted from the tip of the needle ant 
it is that expanded in the tumor tissue. From these electrodes 
is injected for a certain time a radiofrequency current in the 
tumor 
tissue 
that 
causes 
tumor 
cell 
necrosis 
for 
hyperthermia (the local temperature is higher than 60 °C 
and cancer cells are more sensitive to heat than normal 
cells). 
One problem in using radiofrequency tumor ablation 
technique is the correct placement of the needle that should 
reach the tumor lesion. Today surgeons use ultrasound, CT 
or MNR acquired during the needle placement in order to 
correctly direct the needle to the tumor. The use of these 
two-dimensional images makes the procedure very difficult 
and requires sometimes more than one insertion. 
There is a need of enhancing the prognosis by a better 
control of the area interested by the RFA and the accuracy 
of the needle insertion in order to avoid some areas 
(important vessels) during the intervention.  
A sort of guidance of the needle in tumour ablation 
procedures can be obtained using Augmented Reality 
technology. With the superimposition of the virtual models 
of the patient’s anatomy (liver, cancer, etc) exactly where 
are the real ones, it is possible to make the needle placement 
less difficult. 
B. AR in RF Ablation of the Liver Tumours 
The purpose of this AR application is to provide a 
guidance system that can help the surgeon during the needle 
insertion in liver RFA. 
To overlap the virtual tool over the real one we track 
the position and the orientation of the real tool using some 
reflective spheres detected by means of an optical tracker. In 
this way the position and the orientation of the real tool are 
measured and used in IGSTK to set the position and the 
orientation of the virtual tool. 
To achieve a correct augmentation it is necessary to 
have a correspondence between the virtual organs and the 
real ones. This task is very difficult in an image-guided 
surgery application because a very small error in the 
registration phase can cause a serious consequence on the 
patient. 
The registration process is carried out just before 
starting the surgical procedure and the applied method is 
based on the placement of fiducial points on the patient’s 
body before the CT scanning and the detection of these in 
the 3D model built from the acquired medical images.  
The optical tracker by means of a tool placed on the 
patient’s body detects some possible movements of the 
patient over the operating table.  
The application is provided of an user interface 
designed to be simple and functional at the same time. In the 
left side of that interface we have put the application control 
bottons; in the right-top window we show the 3D model and 
the augmented reality scene and in the right-bottom the 
three smaller windows where are placed the axial, coronal 
and sagittal views of CT dataset.  
 
Figure 2.  Clipping visualization applied to the liver and thoracic cage 
There is the possibility to apply the clipping modality 
that permits the surgeon to dissect the model and to study its 
internal structure changing the opacity of the organs (Figure 
2). The dissection could be made along the three principal 
axes.  
The application features described till now are part of 
what we consider the pre-operative planning task. During 
this task the surgeon can use the application to study the 
pathology in a more simple and natural way than that 
provided by simple CT slice visualization. 
For the navigation and augmentation task the surgeon 
needs to use the optical tracker and to carry out the 
registration task. When the registration process is complete, 
the virtual tool is shown in 3D view and is coupled with the 
275
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

real one so it follows the movements that real tool makes.  
In Figure 3 is shown the augmented visualization of the 
3D virtual model over the patient’s body (a dummy). This 
visualization can guide the surgeon during the needle 
insertion in the radiofrequency ablation of the liver tumour.  
 
Figure 3.  Augmented visualization in the RF ablation of the liver tumour 
The application has been tested previously on a dummy 
and afterwards a first test has been carried out in the 
operating room in order to evaluate the system accuracy.  
We are taking into account the possibility to include in 
the system also the simulation of the virtual model 
deformations due to the breathing of the patient. 
V. 
AR FOR PEDIATRIC LAPAROSCOPY SURGERY 
This application has the aim to provide support to the 
surgeons in a pediatric surgical procedure and, in particular, 
in the choice of the trocar entry points and the simulation of 
the interaction of the surgical instruments inside the 
patient’s body. 
Sometimes, using the standard insertion points for the 
surgical tools, also a simple surgical procedure can be very 
difficult due the difficulty to reach the organs. In this case 
the surgeon has to choose another insertion point in order to 
be able to carry out the surgical procedure in the most 
suitable way. Our aim is to avoid the occurrence of this 
situation and to provide a platform that allows to plan the 
insertion of the surgical tools on the virtual model of the 
patient’s organs. 
In this application we use the AR technology in order to 
visualize on the patient’s body the precise location of the 
insertion points selected on the virtual model of the patient. 
Using the augmented visualization, the chosen entry points 
of the trocars are visualized on the patient’s body in order to 
support the physician in the real trocar insertion phase.  
For the augmented visualization, in order to have a 
correct and accurate overlapping of the virtual organs on the 
real ones, a registration phase is carried out; this phase is 
based on some fiducial points. 
Figure 4 shows the specific section of the user interface 
for the choice of the trocar insertion points. 
 
Figure 4.  Interface for the choice of the trocar insertion points 
Figure 5 shows the augmented visualization of the 
trocar’s insertion points on the patient’s body (a dummy). 
The platform has been tested on two study cases (a two-
year-old child with a benign tumor of the right kidney and a 
twelve-year-old child with a tumor of the peripheral nervous 
system) already operated by the surgeon; the future work 
will be the validation of the developed application on new 
real study cases. 
 
Figure 5.  Augmented visualization of the trocar’s insertion points  
276
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we present a guidance system for needle 
placement in radiofrequency ablation of the liver  tumour 
and an AR platform for laparoscopic pediatric surgery.  
The application for the RFA of the liver tumours has 
been tested in the laboratory on a specific testbed and, in 
order to start the validation of the system, a first test has 
been carried out in the operating room during an open 
surgery procedure for the liver tumour resection.  
Operating rooms are overloaded of systems and devices 
and an efficient use of space is mandatory. In this first test 
the correct position of the devices close to the operating 
table has been chosen and a precise definition of the more 
appropriate fiducial points used for the registration phase 
has been decided. In Figure 6 is shown a phase of the first 
test in operating room. 
As future work we are planning to add some 
improvements in the visualization of the organs taking into 
account the latest suggestions of the surgeons and to 
measure the precision of the image-guided application on a 
pig liver. 
 
Figure 6.  First test in operating room of the RF ablation application  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Maad, “Augmented Reality. The Horizon of Virtual And 
Augmented Reality: The Reality of the Global Digital Age”, Intech, 
January 2010, ISBN 978-953-7619-69-5. 
[2] 
H. Furtado and B. Gersak, “Minimally Invasive Surgery and 
Augmented Reality. New Technology Frontiers in Minimally 
Invasive Therapies”, 2007, pp. 195-201. 
[3] 
E. Samset, D. Schmalstieg , J. Vander Sloten, A. Freudenthal, J. 
Declerck, S. Casciaro, Ø. Rideng, and B. Gersak, “Augmented 
Reality in Surgical Procedures”,  SPIE Human Vision and Electronic 
Imaging XIII, 2008. 
[4] 
C. Bichlmeier, F. Wimmer, H. S. Michael, and N. Nassir, “Contextual 
Anatomic Mimesis: Hybrid In-Situ Visualization Method for 
Improving Multi-Sensory Depth Perception in Medical Augmented 
Reality”, Proc. Sixth IEEE and ACM Int. Symposium on Mixed and 
Augmented Reality (ISMAR ‘07), Nara, Japan, 2007, pp. 129-138. 
[5] 
N. Navab, M. Feuerstein, and C.Bichlmeier, “Laparoscopic Virtual 
Mirror - New Interaction Paradigm for Monitor Based Augmented 
Reality”, Proc. IEEE Virtual Reality Conf. 2007 (VR 2007), 
Charlotte, North Carolina, USA, 2007, pp. 10-14. 
[6] 
C. Bichlmeie, S. M. Heining, M. Rustaee, and N. Navab, 
“Laparoscopic Virtual Mirror for Understanding Vessel Structure: 
Evaluation Study by Twelve Surgeons”, Proc. 6th IEEE International 
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Nara, Japan, 2007, pp. 
1-4. 
[7] 
L. T. De Paolis, M. Pulimeno, M. Lapresa, A. Perrone, and G. 
Aloisio, “Advanced Visualization System Based on Distance 
Measurement for an Accurate Laparoscopy Surgery”, Proc. Joint 
Virtual Reality Conf. of EGVE - ICAT - EuroVR, Lyon, France, 
2009, pp. 17-18. 
[8] 
C. Bichlmeie, F. Wimmer, S. M. Heining, and N. Navab, “Contextual 
Anatomic Mimesis: Hybrid In-Situ Visualization Method for 
Improving Multi-Sensory Depth Perception in Medical Augmented 
Reality”, IEEE Proc. Int. Symposium on Mixed and Augmented 
Reality, Nara, Japan, 2007. 
[9] 
S. Nicolau, A. Garcia, X. Pennec, L. Soler, X. Buy, A. Gangi, . N. 
Ayache, and J. Marescaux, “An augmented reality system for liver 
thermal ablation: Design and evaluation on clinical cases”, Elsevier, 
2009. 
[10] LiverPlanner, http://liverplanner.icg.tu-graz.ac.at 
[11] B. Reitinger, A. Bornik, R. Beichel, G. Werkgartner, and E. Sorantin, 
“Tools for augmented reality based liver resection planning”, 
Proceedings of the SPIE Medical Imaging 2004: Visualization, 
Image-Guided Procedures, and Display, pages 88-99, San Diego, 
February 2004. 
[12] L. Maier-Hein, A. Tekbas, A. Seitel, et al., “In vivo accuracy 
assessment of a needlebased navigation system for CT-guided 
radiofrequency ablation of the liver”, Medical Physics, 2008, Vol. 35, 
No. 12, 5385-5396, 0094-2405. 
[13] T. Stüdeli, D. Kalkofen, P. Risholm, et al., “Visualization tool for 
improved accuracy in needle placement during percutaneous radio-
frequency ablation of liver tumors”, Medical Imaging 2008: 
Visualization, Image-Guided Procedures, and Modeling, Pts 1 and 2, 
Vol. 6918, B9180-B9180, 0277-786X. 
[14] T. S. Yoo, “Insight into Images: Principles and Practice for 
Segmentation, Registration, and Image Analysis”, A K Peters, Ltd, 
2004. 
[15] Mimics 
Medical 
Imaging 
Software, 
Materialise 
Group, 
http://www.materialise.com/ 
[16] 3D Slicer, http://www.slicer.org 
[17] ParaView, http://www.paraview.org 
[18] OsiriX Imaging Software, http://www.osirix-viewer.com 
[19] NDI Polaris Vicra, http://www.ndigital.com 
[20] K. Clearya, L. Ibanez, and S. Ranjan, “IGSTK: a software toolkit for 
image-guided surgery applications”, Conference on Computer Aided 
Radiology and Surgery, Chicago, USA, 2004. 
[21] L. Weiss, E. Grundmann, J. Torhorst, et al., “ZIB Structure Prediction 
Pipeline: Hematogenous metastatic patterns incolonic carcinoma: an 
analysis of 1541 necropsies”, Journal of Pathology, vol. 150, pp. 195-
-203, (1986) 
[22] Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan, “Primary liver cancer in Japan: 
clinicopathologic features and results of surgical treatment”, Ann 
Surg, 211, (1990) 
[23] D. Nagorney, J. Van Heerden, D. Ilstrup, et al., “Primary hepatic 
malignancy: surgical management and determinants of survival”,  
Surgery, 1989, vol. 106, pp. 740-.748. 
 
 
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

