A Conversational System to Assist the User when Accessing Web Sources in the 
Medical Domain 
 
Marta Gatius, Tsetsegkhand Namsrai 
 Software Department 
 Technical University of Catalonia  
 Barcelona, Spain 
 e-mail: {gatius,tsena}@lsi.upc.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract— The aim of our research is to develop a framework 
of personal conversational assistants, adapted to different types 
of tasks and users. In particular, we have focused on how a 
conversational assistant can help the users in several situations 
related to the medical domain, and thus can help people take 
care of their health. In this paper we describe how the cultural 
assistant could help the user in four situations: finding a new 
specialist, finding the closest pharmacy, consulting a specific 
drug prescription and making an appointment to see the 
doctor. Our proposal is based on the integration of language, 
dialogue and ontologies to assist the user when accessing 
different types of web sources: informational and transactional 
services, dictionaries, maps.  We have focused in a set of 
selected scenarios were a conversational assistant can be useful 
and the conceptual and linguistic resources needed are limited. 
Keywords-conversational web assistant systems;  ontologies; 
medical domain.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The improvement of language technologies has made 
possible the development of conversational assistants that 
help users when accessing the web. The main advantage of 
language modes of interaction (text and speech) is that they 
are friendly and easy to use. Natural language modes support 
different types of web interaction: menus (the system asks 
the user to choose between a set of options), form filling (the 
system asks for a very specific information) and commands   
(the user can express an order, e. g. to perform a transaction). 
For this reason, the use of language is specially appropriate 
for devices not allowing easy internet browsing as well as for 
users who are not used to access the web.  
The use of language also facilitates the development of 
intelligent 
web 
systems 
because 
language 
supports 
phenomena not supported by other modes, such as references 
to previous entities and descriptions of complex concepts. 
Besides, speech and text can be integrated with other modes 
of communication.  
However, the use of language also present several 
disadvantages compared to other modes of communication.  
On one hand, the usability of conversational assistants 
(henceforth, CA) is limited because they present more 
mistakes and misunderstandings than interfaces using other 
modes of communication. As a result, tasks efficiency and 
user satisfaction in CA presents problems to be studied. On 
the other hand,  CA are expensive to develop and difficult to 
reuse. 
In order to solve these problems, most commercial CA 
restrict the communication to dialogues in which the system 
asks the user the specific information needed by the 
application. Those systems can be efficient and easy to use 
for simple applications: mistakes and misunderstandings are 
limited because the linguistic and dialogue resources used 
are adapted to the application. Besides, the cost of the 
development of the CA is reduced because the language and 
dialogue resources needed are limited. Those CAs are, 
however, difficult to reuse.  
Limiting language and dialogue resources to the 
application has proven appropriate for application that 
require simple data from the user. Efficient and friendly CA 
for applications that need more complex information 
involves advanced conceptual, linguistic and dialogues 
resources. 
Information 
retrieval 
systems 
are 
examples 
of 
applications requiring limited language and dialogue 
resources are. Dialogues needed by those systems are 
usually simple, as those in the web retrieval system for 
mobiles described in [1]. Systems performing complex 
tasks, such as the Medication Adviser (described in [2]) 
usually 
require 
more 
complex 
language 
interfaces, 
supporting mixed-initiative dialogues and incorporating 
domain knowledge. The development of those complex 
language systems still presents several challenges and it is 
an active research area. 
An approach followed in intelligent systems using 
language to assist the user in complex tasks (or domains) is 
based on the use of conceptual ontologies.  Ontologies 
facilitate reasoning about the application domain and can 
also be used to improve communication in different forms: to 
infer default information, to provide descriptions of domain 
concepts, to enrich lexical resources, etc.  
The use of ontologies also favors the integration and 
reusability of the different type of knowledge involved in 
complex language systems: conceptual, linguistic and 
dialogue. In order to achieve efficient and friendly 
communication, complex CA are usually developed for a 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

specific type of application and their adaptation to a different 
type of application is not easy. The main problem is that the 
adaptation of the CA to a new application implies the 
modification 
of 
conceptual, 
linguistic 
and 
dialogue 
knowledge, usually represented in heterogeneous sources. 
Ontologies representing the application domain can be 
shared by the system knowledge bases, thus facilitating their 
integration as well as their adaptation to new applications. 
The integration of advanced techniques on language 
processing and generation, dialogue and knowledge 
representation is a complex problem that presents several 
challenges to be solved. There are different approaches to 
this problem and most research works on the area are 
focused on a specific aspect of the problem. Examples of 
relevant systems integrating language, dialogue and 
ontologies to assist the user in different tasks are the 
multimodal SmartWeb system [3], the Active platform [4] 
and several works done in the framework of the TALK 
project [5].  
Smartweb is a multimodal multilingual dialogue system 
that provides access to a selection of web-based information 
services (for example, those giving data related to a specific 
event, such as world football coup). Smartweb is focused on 
the integration of several communication modes and 
languages of communication and semantic web techniques. 
Active platform is an intelligent system to assist the user 
in several daily tasks. It is focused on the integration of 
language, ontologies and advance techniques on artificial 
intelligence, such as active recognition techniques. 
Several prototypes of multilingual dialogue systems 
using ontologies have also been developed for different 
applications in the framework of the TALK project. Most of 
these works are focused on the use of advanced dialogues 
strategies. 
The work we present in this paper is also about the 
integration of language, dialogue and ontologies to assist the 
user in several situations, as the relevant works already 
described.  The main difference of our work and those 
already mentioned is that we have focused on how to assist 
the users when accessing different types of web sources in a 
complex domain: the medical domain. For this purpose, we 
have studied several common situations in which different 
types of users may find difficulties when accessing web 
medical sources.  We have focused on those situations where 
using a CA would be useful and the linguistic and conceptual 
resources required were limited. 
 Our proposal is based on a previous work on dialogue 
systems to guide the user when accessing informational and 
transactional web services (described in [6]). In [6], a 
prototype was developed that simulated access to two web 
services of different type: an informational service on 
cultural events and a transactional service on large objects 
collection.  The results of the evaluation of the prototype 
showed the usability of the system was high (most of the 
users had a good impression of the system: 3,58 over 5), but 
could be improved.  In order to improve the system usability, 
we have studied the use of domain ontologies for fostering 
the collaborative ability of the system ([7]). In particular, the 
use of ontologies was studied in two critical situations that 
can take place when assisting the user to find information:  
no results are found and too many results were found (and 
thus,  it is difficult to present them in a clear form). In the 
first situation, domain ontologies can facilitate the 
reformulation of the user’s query, while in the second 
situation, the ontology can be used to organize (or 
summarize) the results. 
In this paper, we describe our study on how [6] could be 
adapted and extended to assist the user in several common 
scenarios related to the medical domain. The scenarios 
described are the following: finding a new specialist, finding 
the closest open pharmacy, consulting a specific drug 
prescription and stating an appointment to see the doctor.  In 
these scenarios, the user needs to access web sources of 
different type: informational and transactional services, 
dictionaries, maps, etc.  
In order to study the main challenges when assisting the 
user in several scenarios in the medical domain, we have 
implemented a prototype that provides textual access in 
Spanish to the several web sources selected for each 
scenario.   
 The next section gives an overview of the conversational 
assistant we developed, including a description of the 
scenarios considered and the prototype implemented. Then, 
last section draws some conclusions and future work.  
 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF THE SYSTEM 
 
This section describes several of the scenarios we have 
considered for a web assistant in the medical domain as well 
as the prototype we designed to study how to approach main 
challenges those scenarios present.  
 
A. Studied Scenarios 
 
We have studied a selected set of those scenarios, where 
several users can  have some problems when accessing web 
medical sources and a CA using limited linguistic, dialogue 
and conceptual knowledge sources could be useful. Those 
cases of study were used  to study how to approach main 
challenges when assisting the user to access web sources 
related to the medical domain. 
The scenarios described are the following: the user wants 
to visit a new specialist, find an open pharmacy, consulting a 
medical prescription and making a reservation for an 
appointment to a primary health care center. Our main goal 
when describing these scenarios was presenting the 
advantages of using a conversational assistant. For this 
reason, the situations are simplified, in real situations much 
more choices could be presented to the users.  
 
1) Searching for a Specialist 
We have considered the case of a user that pays for a 
private medical insurance having an informative web page, 
containing all clinic and hospitals which are covered by this 
insurance. Most of these pages are filled with drop down 
menus as that on Figure 1.  
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 1. Searching for a Specialist in a web insurance page 
 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLE OF DIALOGUE  WHEN SEARCHING FOR A 
SPECIALIST 
 
S1: Hello. This is the automatic health service 
 
information system. How can I help you? 
 U1: Hi. I need to find a doctor. 
S2: Which specialist do you need? You can say the 
 
common name. 
U2: Ear doctor please.  
S3: Would you like to search in a big hospital or would 
 
you prefer to search in smaller equipments? 
U3: A big hospital.  
S4: There are otolaryngology departments in Teknon, 
 
Dexeus and Hospital Clinic. Which one would you 
 
prefer? 
U4: Teknon.  
S5: Dr. Ear is visiting at Teknon Tuesdays from 4 to 6 in 
 
the afternoon. Is it OK? 
U5: Yes. 
S6:  Would you like me to find an itinerary there?  
U6: Yes please. 
S7: Would you prefer going  by car or by public 
 
transportation 
U7: By public transportation, from Pl. Catalunya.  
S8: Take FGC L7 from Pl.Catalunya and get out at 
 
Sarria.  
U8. Thank you. 
S9: Thank you for calling.  
 
In insurance web pages, specialists are usually associated 
with the formal names of the specialization, which can 
present a difficulty for people without medical knowledge. In 
order to solve this problem the CA would allow the user to 
provide a common name for doctor specialization, for 
example nose doctor, heart doctor. To implement this 
functionality, we have parsed the Physician Specialist 
Glossary on the WebMD site ([8]) and build a knowledge 
source in the XML format.  
An example of dialogue in this scenario supported by our 
system is given in Dialogue 1.  
In order to improve the collaborative ability of the CA, 
the information on the specialists presented to the user would 
include information on how to go to the specific address or 
equipment where the she/he works. In particular, the system 
could guide the user about how to reach an address in three 
different ways: by public transportation (itinerary is retrieved 
by accessing Barcelona city web page on public 
transportation,[9]), by car and  walking (using the 
information provided by Google Maps).  
 
 
2) Searching for practical drug information 
 
 
Practical information about a particular drug is usually 
available, either on the prescription information sheet or 
online. However, this information is not easy to read for all 
patients. The paper sheet that comes inside the drug box can 
be lost or printed in small fonts that can result difficult to 
read for elderly people. There are already online resources 
giving information on medical prescription of most drugs, 
but computer skills are needed to access them. A CA could 
be useful for answering most common questions included in 
drugs prescriptions, and the linguistic and conceptual 
resources required by the CA for this task are limited.  
Prescriptions in many countries follow the same official 
structure. This structure favors answering most common 
questions related to drug prescriptions. In many countries 
there are online databases prescriptions of the drugs allowed 
in the country and those prescriptions  follow the official 
structure. Those databases are usually accessible in the 
country language (for example, the Spanish database related 
to Spanish drugs, [10], accessible in Spanish language).  
 
The sections in the drugs prescriptions in Spain are the 
following:  
 
1. What is DrugName? 
2. Before using DrugName 
3. How should you take DrugName?  
3.1 What happens if you  miss a dose? .  
3.2 What happens if you overdose?   
             4. What I should avoid while taking DrugName? 
             5. Conservation of the DrugName 
    The typical drug prescription is structured in sections that 
are associated with most common questions. For this reason,  
most users questions can be just matched to those in the 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

prescription and information answering it can be easily 
extracted.  For example, a typical question the user can ask 
the system would be: “I missed a dose of tardyferon. What 
should I do now?”. Since there is a subsection associated 
with the question “What happens if you  miss a dose? “, the 
system will just have to extract and present the fragment of 
text associated with this question. 
 
 
3) 
Searching 
for 
an 
Open 
Pharmacy 
in 
the 
Neighbourhood 
 
    Finding an open pharmacy in the neighborhood is a quite 
common situation. Barcelona city hall's web page provides 
lot of relevant information about public health care ([11]), 
including all city pharmacies (together with their address, 
business hours and telephone numbers). In order to help the 
user in such scenario our system would just ask him the time 
and the place, parse the information about the pharmacies in 
the web page and present specific details of the pharmacies 
close to the user's location, indicating those that are open at 
that time. The system would use information about the 
addresses in the same zone (also available in the city hall’s 
web page).  
 
4) 
Stating a Date to Visit your Doctor 
 
    We have also considered a CA could be useful not only to 
help the user to find web information but also to perform 
other tasks, such as that of using a transactional web service  
to help the user when stating a date to see a doctor. 
 
Figure 2.  Making an appointment to see your doctor 
    In this scenario, the system will assist the user to give the 
data the service needs. The main challenge in this scenario, 
as in may other using transactional services, is that mistakes 
could have negative consequences. For this reason, 
clarification and confirmation dialogues are needed.  
    In particular, we have adapted our system to assist the user 
when using the web site of the public health care provider in 
Catalonia (”CatSalut'' ), that allows the user to make a 
reservation for an appointment to a primary health care 
centre (CAP) by introducing the user's personal health care 
card number, as shown on Figure 2. Once the user has     
introduced this number, then a calendar showing possible 
dates is shown. Finally, when a correct date has been 
selected a drop down menu displaying  time for the selected 
day is shown. 
    The CA would facilitate the reservation of a date and time 
by allowing the user to introduce NL sentences expressing 
time, what can result friendlier for several users For 
example, the user can introduce “Please program for me a 
visit to my doctor on Monday or Wednesday, but I am free 
only after 18:00.'' and  the system will parse the sentence and 
will automatically select the day and the time within the user 
specified choices.  
 
 
B. The Prototype 
 
In order to study the main challenges the described 
scenarios present, we have developed a prototype using 
limited linguistic and dialogue resources. The prototype only 
supports text-based communication in Spanish. The 
prototype consists of three modules: the input/output 
module, the Dialogue Manager and the Task Manager.  The 
system also includes a conceptual knowledge base (CK)  that 
represents the application domain knowledge involved in 
communication. The CK is shared among all the system 
modules. These modules are described next 
The input/output module processes user interventions and 
presents system messages. In the current implementation, 
this module consists of a Chabot that uses pattern matching 
templates for parsing the input request. Those patterns are 
stored in a XML file. The input is matched against those 
patterns and, if the match is found, the right command is 
forwarded to the Dialogue Manager.  
The Dialogue Manager determines the content of the  
system intervention. It controls the information the Task 
Manager needs from the user to access the web and also how 
the information obtained from the web has to be presented to 
the user. In current implementation, this module is quite 
simple.  
 
  
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 3. The Domain Conceptual Knowledge 
The Task Manager controls the web access. Once the 
content of the user intervention has been passed to the Task 
Manager, it chooses which web site to automatically interact 
with. For accessing the web sources automatically, we have 
chosen HtmlUnit ([12]) because it is an open source Java 
library that creates HTTP calls which imitate the browser 
functionality. To extract the information from these web 
sources we developed a template based algorithm. This 
algorithm uses most common tags in simple html pages 
(such as those defining tables and lists) to extract the 
information.  
One of the main challenges of our work consists of the 
representing the information obtained from the several web 
sources involved in a conversation with the user in an 
efficient form. For this reason, the CK, where information 
from several web sources is integrated plays a central role in 
our system. The CK involved in the specific studied 
scenarios (described above) has been represented in an 
ontology, shown on Figure 3. 
As mentioned in the introduction, the use of ontologies 
can also be used to improve the collaborative abilities of our 
system when presenting the results of a web search in two 
different situations: when there were no results and when 
there were too many results. These two situations are critical 
in several of the scenarios we have considered, in particular, 
when searching a new specialist and when finding a specific 
equipment. 
When assisting the user to search for specific 
information, in case the CA finds no results, concepts in the 
query can be substituted by their upper classes (to relax 
query constraints). For example, the system can replace a 
specific address in a query by the more general concept zone. 
In case too many objects satisfying the user's goal are found, 
the resulting set can be classified considering domain 
knowledge, as done in Dialogue 1 when the system propose 
the user to search for specialist in big hospitals (equipments 
are classified considering their size). 
III. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have described an intelligent CA to 
guide the user when accessing several types of web sources 
in the medical domain. We have studied several scenarios 
where the user needs access to web medical resources of 
different type: glossaries, informational and transactional 
services. We have also considered scenarios where the 
combination of several web resources is needed.  
We have implemented a prototype of the conversational 
assistant in form of a Chabot guiding the user in Spanish in 
the  scenarios described: searching information (an specialist, 
an open pharmacy, a drug prescription), as well as  
performing a transaction (stating a date to see the doctor in a 
primary health care centre). In several of these scenarios, the 
system could, additionally, guide the user to go to a specific 
address (or equipment) presenting three alternative ways: 
using public transportation, a car or walking. The prototype 
incorporates an algorithm we implemented that extracts the 
information needed from the set of predefined web pages. 
Future work will include extending the system to deal 
with new scenarios, even complex scenarios implying the 
integration of information obtained from several web sites 
using automatic web service composition solutions. We are 
also planning to extent the linguistic and dialogue system 
resources to support more complex communication 
phenomena in several languages. Additionally, we want to 
study how to adapt the system to different types of users.  
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Okoye, J. Mahmud, T. Lau, and J. Cerruti, ”Find this for me: 
Mobile information retrieval on the open web,” in International 
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (2011), 2011, pp. 3–12. 
[2] J. Allen, G. Ferguson, N. Blaylock, D. Byron, N. Chambers,M. 
Dzikovska, L. Galescu, and M. Swift, ”Chester: Towards a personal 
medical advisor,” J.Biomedical Informatics, pp. 500–513, 2006.  
[3] D. Sonntag, R. Engel, G. Herzog, A. Pfalzgraf, N. Pfleger, M. 
Romanelli, and N. Reithinger, “Handheld Multimodal Interaction 
with Ontological Knowledge Bases and Semantic Web Services”. 
Springer, Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 272–295.  
[4] D. Guzzoni, C. Baur, and A. Cheyer, ”Active : A unified platform for 
building intelligent web interaction assistants,” in Proceedings of the 
2006 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence 
and Intelligent Agent Technology (WI-IAT 2006 Workshops), pp. 
417-420. 
[5] Talk project. 
http://cordis.europa.eu/search/index.cfm?fuseaction=proj.document&
PJ_RCN=6527011, <retrieved: December, 2011>. 
[6] M. Gatius and M. Gonzalez, ”A flexible dialogue system for 
enhancing web usability,” in Proceedings of the 18th international 
conference on World Wide Web. Madrid: ACM, 2009, pp. 1167–
1168.  
[7] M. Gatius and M. Gonzalez. “Using Domain Knowledge for 
Fostering the Collaborative Ability of a Web Dialogue System,” 
NWeSP'2011.Salamanca, 2011. 
[8] http://doctor.webmd.com/physician_finder,  <retrieved: December, 
2011>. 
[9] http://w110.bcn.cat/portal/site/Mobilitat, 
<retrieved: 
December, 
2011>. 
[10] http://www.prospectos.net, <retrieved: December, 2011>. 
[11] http://w3.bcn.cat/sanitat/, <retrieved: December, 2011>. 
[12] http://htmlunit.sourceforge.net/,  <retrieved: december, 2011>. 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

