The Utility of Controlled Vocabularies within 
Bookmark Management Tasks 
 
Siu-Tsen Shen 
Department of Multimedia Design 
National Formosa University 
Hu-Wei 63208, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
stshen@nfu.edu.tw  
Stephen D. Prior 
School of Engineering and Information Sciences 
Middlesex University 
London N14 4YZ, UK 
s.prior@mdx.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—This research investigates the utility of adopting a 
controlled vocabulary approach to bookmark management. An 
initial user survey conducted for this research has shown that 
just over half the population use bookmarks to save important 
websites and that 75% of these people use up to three sub-
levels only. The bookmark facility within all current web 
browsers is therefore underutilized and the argument that 
users need and want greater freedom and flexibility to create 
their own unique file structure is disputed. We conclude that 
users need a simple, logical and contextual system of bookmark 
management which complements their daily lives. 
Keywords - controlled vocabulary; bookmark management; web 
browser; information search; information retrieval. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Personal file management has become significantly more 
important as the daily amount of digital data we view and 
store on our computers, smart mobile devices and web 
browsers increases. The familiar concept of the hierarchical 
file system allows us to group our important information in 
an organized tree structure, i.e., the use of folders, referred to 
as directories within folders. Folders (directories) normally 
include other possible sets of files or sub-folders 
(subdirectories). This is useful for desktop organization and 
bookmark management in relation to relevant topics and 
information.  
Nevertheless, the usefulness and efficiency of the 
hierarchical file system has been debated over the last few 
decades [1-3]. Bloehdorn and Volkel (2006) stated that 
current file systems are problematic (with their single 
location ascribe) to browse to maximum specificity (retrieval 
needs the exact directory), miss-orthogonality (all orthogonal 
dimensions being forced into one access path), path order 
dependence (contrast to the directories seen as independent 
attributes), have no query refinement (no list of relevant 
directories to search), and have no navigational aid (no 
indication of the content of subfolders) [4]. 
In Section II, we will discuss the related work with 
particular references to controlled vocabularies. Following 
this section will be data on a preliminary user study. A 
discussion of the initial findings, analysis, and conclusions 
follows on from this. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Tags, also known as metadata, have been widely used 
within Web 2.0, and serve as labels to be easily-identified in 
information retrieval tasks. Successful examples include 
del.icio.us [5] , the social bookmarking website, Flickr [6] 
for image collection and YouTube for video collection. 
Compared to the inflexible, one-way system of the 
hierarchical file system, a tagging system gives the user a 
great deal of freedom to mark their wanted items, which 
could be multiply-tagged. Especially popular, is the social 
and collaborative sharing of information, also known as 
Folksonomy [7]. Websites with a large collection of text 
listed tags in alphabetical order (normally) shown as tag 
clouds are helpful for browsing and searching by their 
various fonts, size and colour. A successful social tagging 
website like ‘43 Things’ is an example. Nevertheless, users 
may create thousands of tagged items and end up spending 
more effort on sorting and finding the tags that are needed. 
  
A. Controlled Vocabularies Applied to IT 
In contrast to the concept of Folksonomy, which is an 
informal and liberal collaborative tagging system, a 
controlled vocabulary is a restricted system of textual tags 
normally used for large datasets. Examples include the 
Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) [8], the 
European Patent database [9] and the Yellow Page 
phonebook. 
For 
example, 
the 
International 
Patent 
Classification 
(IPC), 
established 
by 
the Strasbourg 
Agreement 1971 [10], provides for a hierarchical system of 
language independent symbols for the classification of 
patents and utility models, according to the different areas of 
technology to which they pertain. In total, this consists of 
eight main subject headings under which every patent 
application has to be categorized [11]. These are listed below: 
 
Section A — Human Necessities 
Section B — Performing Operations, etc 
Section C — Chemistry; Metallurgy 
Section D — Textiles; Paper 
Section E — Fixed Constructions 
Section F — Mechanical Engineering, etc 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Section G — Physics 
Section H — Electricity 
 
The purpose of controlled vocabularies is to classify the 
terms such as words or phrases defined by experts or 
authorities in order to make retrieval performance more 
efficient. However, it requires a certain level of preciseness 
in the interpretation of the terms. It is common that users 
experience a familiar situation, whereby they conduct an 
online search by typing in keywords which may have a more 
general and broad meaning, and might therefore come up 
with a long list of irrelevant or unwanted information. A 
successful performance when using a search engine normally 
relies on the individual user’s capability as to whether he or 
she could select the appropriate keywords or not. Controlled 
vocabularies are thus generally applied to thesauri, 
taxonomies and ontology [12]. 
Several researchers concluded that people’s capability of 
categorizing information is cognitively difficult [13-16]. It 
has been stated that human’s ability to categorize is hard to 
identify and is definitely not in a strict hierarchical structure, 
but shall be assumed to be more fluid and flexible [17, 18]. 
File systems, rigorous hierarchical mechanisms, such as ‘My 
Documents’ and ‘My Favorites/Bookmarks’ have been 
shown to have the usability problems of usefulness and 
appropriateness, including filing management, document 
organization, and document retrieval [2, 19-22]. 
Several attempts to use different approaches to replace 
the standardized hierarchical system have provided solid 
results in previous research. Barreau and Nardi (1995) found 
that people prefer to use location-based search and visual 
grouping, rather than complex data structures [1]. Gifford, 
Jouvelot, Sheldon, and O’Toole (1991) employed an 
associative attribute-based approach to access files and 
directories by semantic indexing, and proved to be more 
effective than the hierarchical structure [23]. Dourish et al. 
(2000) implemented a property-based approach to amend the 
traditional file system’s problem with a uniform framework 
[2]. 
III. 
PRELIMINARY USER STUDY 
In order to gain an understanding of user behavior, with 
regards to the use of current file systems and browsing 
patterns, a preliminary study was conducted online via an 
academic-based social blog in August 2011. The recruitment 
of participants aimed for experienced computer users, in that 
they could provide more insightful views according to their 
intensive usage on task performances such as searching, 
browsing and organizing information. There were a total of 
60 participants, consisting of 37 females (62%) and 23 males 
(38%). Their age was between 18 to 25 years old, with 50% 
of them being aged 20 years old (see Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1.  Age range of participants. 
The group consisted of 88% of the participants who were 
University students, 10% from graduate schools, and 2% 
with a senior high school degree. In terms of computer 
experience, 33% of the participants had 10-12 years of 
experience, 22% with 8-10 years, 17% with 14-16 years of 
experience, and 12% with 12-14 years of experience (see 
Figure2).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Computer experience of participants. 
In terms of their Internet usage, 28% of the participants 
spent 6-8 hours, a further 23% of the participants spent 4-6 
hours and 8-10 hours, and 12% participants who spent more 
than 12 hours a day online (see Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3.  Daily internet use of participants. 
The majority of the participants (93%) did search for 
information from their Bookmark folders, whilst only 7% of 
the participants did not. There were 83% of Bookmark 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

folders who had less than 50, 13% who had 50-100 folders, 
and 3% who had 100-150 folders (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4.  Bookmark folder use. 
With regards to the type of computers used, there were 
83% PC users, 7% Mac users, and 10% users who used both 
PC and MAC. 73% of participants use Google Chrome as 
their default browser, 15% with IE, and 12% with Firefox. 
Most of the participants had installed the latest versions of 
their browsers: 60% with Google Chrome 13, 12% with 
Firefox 5, 10% with IE 8 and 9. Nevertheless, there were 
18% of the participants who did not know the version of 
their browser.  
In terms of the use of Bookmark sub-folders, it was 
found that 53% of the participants did use them, and 47% 
who did not use them at all. 
With regards to the maintenance of folder levels, 20% of 
the participants used 3 levels, 13% used 2 levels, 10% used 4 
levels, 7% used only one level, and 3% used 5 levels (see 
Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5.  Levels of bookmark sub-folders in use. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION OF INITIAL FINDINGS 
From the outset, it was a desirable goal to have even 
numbers of male and female participants. However, the 
study was conducted online and therefore the researchers 
could not foresee or manipulate the numbers from the 
participants, since it was freely available 24-7. The vast 
majority of the participants were university students. 
Although 10% of the participants were from graduate 
schools, they were studying related digital media subjects. It 
is important to note that they are dependent on computers, in 
that computers are the essential tools for their future career 
prospects. It is surprising to note that even in a group of 
young people such as these; one third of the participants had 
10-12 years of computer experience which corresponds to 
the prevalence of Internet boom back in late nineties. It was 
found that about 75% of the participants spent between 4-10 
hours/day using the Internet, which indicates the strong need 
for information and communication tools. It is not surprising 
that the PC is still dominating the market. However, with the 
latest popularity of multi touch devices like the iPad, it is still 
hard to tell when these will filter down to common use. With 
the recent trend for using smart phones, it was not surprising 
that 30% of our survey used one; there were 20% of the 
participants who used the HTC android platform, compared 
to 7% for iPhone users and 3% for Blackberry users. 
 
A surprisingly high number of participants (70%), used 
Google Chrome as their default browser (even the Mac 
users); this indicates the advantage for web browser which 
are integrated within powerful search engines. Most of the 
participants kept up-to-date with the latest versions of their 
browsers, which also reflect their fast adaptation to the 
newest technology available. The frequency of using file 
systems under Bookmarks to search for information and files 
proved that the vast majority of the participants were indeed 
making efforts to organize their data. However, a majority of 
the participants managed their files into less than 50 folders. 
  
It is interesting to note that 47% of the participants did 
not use sub-folders to organize their Bookmark files into 
more refined levels even though they created main folders to 
store information. Furthermore, 75% of the participants who 
used sub-folders managed to organize their personal 
information using 3 levels or less. This suggests that the 
current file systems that give almost unlimited creation of 
folders and sub-folders are perhaps unnecessary, because 
they are not well utilized by users who may either not want 
to make much effort on sorting their database, or may be 
aware that they might not be able to retrieve their desired 
information efficiently. Even high tech users find it difficult 
to manage the overwhelming data tsunami which hits us all 
on a daily basis; resorting to either not bookmarking or 
bookmarking without using folders and sub-folders. 
 
A. Limitations of the study 
This study can be criticized for only having a small 
number of homogenous participants and an uneven balance 
of genders represented. However, it is important to note that 
all the participants were studying multimedia design relevant 
subjects which require professional skills within several 
advanced software, as the aim of this study was focused on 
the experienced computer user.  
Furthermore, this study was conducted via an online 
process and offered no cash in return for participation; 
therefore it was hard to manipulate the exact even numbers 
of both males and females compared to a lab-controlled 
setting environment. It is interesting to note that the majority 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

of participants were aware of the traditional hierarchical file 
system and did use them. However, nearly half of the 
participants did not create any sub-folders. Either they did 
not have a habit of organizing information or they thought 
that the traditional file system structure might not be helpful.  
Traditional file system structures (developed by IT 
specialists) have existed for several decades and provide 
unlimited freedom for creating files and folders for users to 
organize their personal information. Based on our findings, 
three quarter of the participants used files and directories 
only up to 3 levels. This suggests that the current 
bookmarking system with 255 levels may be overly complex 
levels. This could be made simpler and more intuitive in 
terms of categorization via controlled vocabularies. 
The purpose of getting online is mainly for searching, 
socializing and communication. Users may not appreciate 
the hierarchical filing system as others do. Moreover, it 
requires a lot of time and effort in organization information 
and does not guarantee users could successfully retrieve their 
required data when needed. Therefore, if we take this notion 
further, it would be a better idea to find an adequate 
approach to make the existing file systems into a simplified 
and deductive knowledge repository. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on our literature review, together with the results 
of the preliminary study listed above, several usability 
problems have been identified. The elements in need of 
improvement are: categorization, optimum levels of sub-
folders, ambiguity of the use of vocabulary and contextual 
user mental models. 
 
It is anticipated that if we could make the filing system 
less complicated and less strict, it would encourage users to 
be more willing to organize their information under such 
architecture. It is not our intention to replace the existing file 
system, but rather to offer a fresh perspective in visualization 
and user interface design. 
 
The use of controlled vocabularies to assist in structured 
information storage and retrieval tasks looks to be promising, 
yet due to the natural ambiguity of descriptions of any 
specific term or object, it may appear not sufficient enough 
to achieve adequate understanding of precise meaning. 
 
From an analysis of people’s daily lives, further work is 
proposed to use a controlled vocabulary, which is divided 
into four primary facets, i.e. Work, Home, Travel, and 
Health. These could each further be broken down into a 
secondary level of say ten sub-categories. The use of these 
primary and secondary facets could help users reduce 
confusion and simplify the procedure when they organize 
their web information using bookmarks. 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Barreau, D. and B. Nardi (1995) Finding and 
Remembering File Organization from the Desktop 
SIGCHI Bulletin. 27(3): pp. 39-43. 
2. 
Dourish, P., W. Edward, A. LaMarca, J. Lamping, 
K. Petersen, M. Salisbury, D. Terry, and J. 
Thornton, 
Extending 
Document 
Management 
Systems with User-Specific Active Properties. 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 2000. 
18(2): pp. 140-170. 
3. 
Sullivan, K. The Windows 95 User Interface: A 
Case Study in Usability Engineering. Proceedings 
SIGCHI. 1996: ACM: pp. 473-480. 
4. 
Bloehdorn, S. and M. Völkel. TagFS - Tag 
Semantics 
for 
Hierarchical 
File 
Systems. 
WWW2006. 2006. Edinburgh, UK. 
5. 
AVOS. Delicious.  2011 [retrieved: December, 
2011]; Available from: www.del.icio.us. 
6. 
Yahoo. Flickr.  2011  [retrieved: December, 2011]; 
Available from: www.flickr.com. 
7. 
Lamere, P., Social Tagging and Music Information 
Retrieval. Journal of New Music Research 2008. 
37(2): pp. 101-114. 
8. 
Library of Congress, Library of Congress Subject 
Headings.  2011 [retrieved: December, 2011]; 
Available from: http://www.loc.gov/aba/. 
9. 
European 
Patent 
Office, 
European 
Patent 
Database. 2011. 
10. 
WIPO, Strasbourg Agreement Concerning the 
International Patent Classification, WIPO, Editor. 
1971, World Intellectual Property Organization. 
11. 
WIPO, International Patent Classification (IPC), 
WIPO, Editor. 2011, World Intellectual Property 
Organization. 
12. 
NISO, Guidelines for the Construction, Format, 
and Management of Monolingual Controlled 
Vocabularies. 2010, Bethesda, Maryland, U.S.A.: 
National Information Standards Organization Press. 
13. 
Malone, T. How do people organize their desks? 
Implications for the design of office information 
systems. 
ACM 
Transactions 
on 
Information 
Systems (TOIS). ACM Press, 1983. 1(1): pp. 99-
112. 
14. 
Lansdale, M., The psychology of personal 
information management. Applied Ergonomics, 
1988. 19(1): pp. 55-66. 
15. 
Kidd, A. The Marks are on the Knowledge Worker. 
Proceedings of CHI on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. 1994. Boston, USA: ACM: pp. 
186-191. 
16. 
Whittaker, S. and C. Sidner. Email overload: 
exploring personal information management of 
email. Proceedings of CHI'96. 1996. Vancouver, 
Canada: ACM: pp. 276-283. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

17. 
Eysenck, M.W. and M.T. Keane, Cognitive 
psychology: a student's handbook. 5th Edition. 
2005, Hove: Psychology.  
18. 
Oren, E. An Overview of Information Management 
and Knowledge Work Studies. Proceedings of the 
ISWC Workshop on the Semantic Desktop. 2006. 
19. 
Bowker, G.C. and S.L. Star, Building Information 
Infrastructures for Social Worlds - The Role of 
Classifications 
and 
Standards. 
Community 
Computing and Support Systems, 1998: pp. 231-
248. 
20. 
Hearst, 
M.A., 
Clustering 
versus 
Faceted 
Categories 
for 
Information 
Exploration. 
Communications of the ACM 2006. 49(4): pp. 59-
61. 
21. 
Bondarenko, O. and R. Janssen. Documents at 
hand: Learning from paper to improve digital 
technologies. Proceedings of CHI2005. 2005. 
Portland, Oregon, USA: ACM: pp. 121-130. 
22. 
Marsden, G. and D.E. Cairns. Improving the 
Usability of the Hierarchical File System. 
Proceedings of the 2003 Annual Research 
Conference of the South African Institute of 
Computer Scientists and Information Technologists 
on Enablement through Technology. 2003. South 
African Institute for Computer Scientists and 
Information Technologists, Republic of South 
Africa: pp. 122-129. 
23. 
Gifford, D., P. Jouvelot, M. Sheldon, and J. 
O'Toole. Semantic File Systems. Proceedings of the 
13th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems 
Principles. 1991: ACM Press: 25(5): pp. 16-25. 
 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

