Visualizing Workload and Emotion Data in Air Trafﬁc Control -
An Approach Informed by the Supervisors Decision Making Process
Linda Pfeiffer, Tabea Sims
Institute for Media Studies
Chemnitz University of Technology
Email: <firstName>.<familyName>@phil.tu-chemnitz.de
Paul Rosenthal
Institute of Computer Science
University of Rostock
Email: research@paul-rosenthal.de
Abstract—The work of a supervisor, working in an area control
center in air trafﬁc control, seems to be rarely addressed by
research. Within this paper, we present a preliminary study
that deals with the supervisors decision making process, current
practices and interfaces. Based on this study, we derived design
guidelines to the development of a visualization, displaying the air
trafﬁc controllers’ workload and emotional state, thus supporting
the supervisors decision making.
Keywords–air trafﬁc control supervisor; visualization, workload
data, emotional data, decision making
I.
INTRODUCTION
Usually known for having one of the most stressful jobs
or causing huge delays when being on a strike, air trafﬁc
controllers provide a safe, orderly and ﬂuent handling of the air
trafﬁc. Not only do tower controllers coordinate departing and
landing aircraft on airports, but also while being airborne, air
trafﬁc is constantly monitored, managed, and sustained by area
center controllers. In order to overview the whole air space,
it is divided into sectors, where each one is overseen by two
controllers. In fact this job can be very demanding, so someone
is needed to keep an overview of what is going on across
sectors and prevent them and the assigned controllers from
getting overwhelmed.
This task goes to the air trafﬁc controllers’ supervisors, who
administer air trafﬁc on a bigger scale, mostly by supporting
and directing controllers. Especially since the controller’s job
is taxing and emotions can have a big impact on ones condi-
tion, it might help supervisors to know about their controllers’
mental states, in order to balance out their workload and to
offer better support to them.
Within this paper, we present preliminary studies, that
analyze the supervisor’s work and point out the usefulness
of an emotion data display. We end up with the design
requirements for such a visualization.
We start in Section II by introducing the StayCentered
project that frames this piece of work. In Section III, a brief
description of air trafﬁc control supervisors’ work is presented,
followed by some related work in Section IV. The methodol-
ogy and the results are presented in Sections V and VI. Finally,
we give our interpretation regarding the emotion display in
Section VII and ﬁnish with the conclusion and aims for future
work in Section VIII.
II.
THE STAYCENTERED PROJECT
The main goal in air trafﬁc control is to assure safe, orderly
and ﬂuent handling of the air trafﬁc. This is a highly demand-
ing task. Thus, the project ”‘StayCentered - Methodenbasis
eines Assistenzsystems f¨ur Fluglotsen (MACeLot)”’ at the
university of technology Chemnitz aims for giving support
to air trafﬁc controllers in stressful situations. The resulting
system should be capable of identifying the emotional and
cognitive state of the air trafﬁc controllers and simulating
their state with regard to upcoming air trafﬁc some hours in
advance. Galvanic skin response, facial action coding, body
posture, vocal properties, eye movements and pupil dilation
are recorded and used to infer an emotion valence, arousal
level, and cognitive load. The assistance of the air trafﬁc
controllers will be realized by self-adapting interfaces [1] and
by providing this information to their supervisors. Such a
visualization of the controller’s emotional and cognitive state
may support the supervisors decision upon the opening of a
sector, in order to reduce the controller’s workload. This paper
presents preliminary studies of the supervisors work and the
resulting design requirements.
III.
THE AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL SUPERVISOR
Before going into detail of our studies, we want to give a
short description of what an air trafﬁc control supervisor does
and what tools and general environment he is provided with.
As a superior and shift leader of air trafﬁc controllers, the
main work of a supervisor is to manage assignments and shift-
structures of controllers, while regulating their workload by
handling air trafﬁc ﬂow across sectors.
The regulation of trafﬁc ﬂow is done by splitting or
merging sectors, permitting or forbidding special maneuvers
(like, e.g., skydiving or air force trainings) and in extreme
cases even regulating sectors by setting a maximum number
of allowed planes and rejecting any exceeding trafﬁc, which
usually leads to delay. However, the amount of trafﬁc that can
be handled is limited by the number of present controllers
and the Supervisor’s job is to assign them in such a way that
simultaneously no employee is overexerted and air trafﬁc can
ﬂow undisturbed.
We experienced that supervisors do not work alone but
divide their work by region, where each one can operate
independently but still help each other if necessary.
The actual work place is located within the area air trafﬁc
control center, often in the middle of the operations room or a
little elevated, providing a good overview. Other non-controller
positions can be found alongside. These include technical
surveillance, data assistants, ﬂight data agents/operators, ﬂow
management position, and the technical supervisor.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Each supervisor’s workplace comes with a computer,
equipped with two monitors, serving as their main working
tool. Among other work speciﬁc software, the most important
one is a shift management program, where active sectors
are scheduled, air trafﬁc controller’s shifts are organized and
controllers can be notiﬁed by publishing the current plan on a
separate screen.
In addition supervisors have several information systems,
speciﬁc to each center, as well as communication devices, such
as an email program, a land-line telephone and a direct-dial
telephone.
IV.
RELATED WORK
This section presents literature related to various aspects
of the topics tackled in this paper.
A. Supervisors
In order to assess the supervisor’s work, research in this
ﬁeld should be taken into consideration. Broach et al. [2]
showed the importance of the supervisor’s position. They
found a correlation between the supervisor-controller-ratio and
the number of errors made by air trafﬁc controllers. Unfor-
tunately we did not ﬁnd any further literature on air trafﬁc
control supervisors, suggesting we might be ﬁrst to focus on
this group.
However, research shows that the general supervisor-
employee relationship has a direct impact on the employees
work motivation, organizational identiﬁcation, and perceived
career relevance [3]. Furthermore, emotional intelligence on
both, a personal and a group level, has been proven to improve
collaboration and communication, while emotional contagion
can increase efﬁciency and decrease conﬂict potential [4][5].
B. Decision Support System Design
As the emotion visualization should support the supervisors
decision making, some general work about decision support
systems and design implications is introduced here.
The design process of decision support systems should
always go from the “inside” to the “outside”, meaning desired
functions should get identiﬁed ﬁrst and then restrictions of the
outside world should be taken into account. Ariav et al. [6]
propose to start with analyzing task characteristics and making
a decision on the intended level of support.
Different implications for a visualization can be derived
from the task. Well-structured problems, are best supported
by showing possible outcomes and eventually the underlying
model. Whereas a lot of visualization techniques can help
to explore and evaluate available data, when a person is
required to base a decision on this data. Sometimes conclusions
are based on previous experience, domain knowledge, and
situation awareness, where the last two could get enhanced
visually [7].
Researchers keep stressing the importance of adequately
including users during the whole process. As Miah et al. [8]
report many projects fail because of different goals of users and
designers as well as insufﬁcient involvement of stakeholders.
And when the systems do not get used in the intended way,
the reason often is a mismatch of requirements between users
and designers or unfamiliarity with the provided functions [9].
Benbasat also recommends to consider cognitive styles of
users. As for example analytic decision makers might trust
mathematically or quantitatively supported reports easily, while
heuristic decision makers usually like to explore and analyze,
Figure 1. A visualization of the value and amount of emotional connections
to a movie as a heat map on a valence-arousal-coordinate system [10].
suggesting the implementation of the possibility to switch
between different levels of detail.
C. Emotion Visualizations
A lot of work has already be done in the ﬁeld of visualizing
emotions, especially in the context of social media.
For example Ha et al. [10] visualize sentiments connected
to movies with their focus on easy recognition of clusters
and intricate network structure. The visualization in Figure 1
is a detail view for one node within that structure, showing
emotions connected to a single movie as a heat map on the
valence-arousal-coordinate system. Additionally some points
in the coordinate system are labeled with the common name
of that emotion.
Steed et al. [11] constructed a similar view, shown in Figure
2a, within their visual application to dynamically analyze
twitter sentiment. Their coordinate system uses arousal and
dominance as axes while showing valence in color (orange for
negative and blue for positive). However, this again is just an
additional display, next to a geographical depiction of tweets,
while the main view is a visualization of the amount of tweets
(divided in binary valence) over time, shown in Figure 2b. This
view is designed interactive to select time intervals for further
inspection in the other images.
Working on the same problem, of analyzing twitter senti-
ments over time, Wang et al. [12] came up with a solution inte-
grating valence, arousal and time into a single visualization, as
shown in Figure 3. Each ring in the circle represents a different
step in time (designed to resemble the view in a tunnel) while
the amplitude within the ring is deﬁned by the valence-arousal-
coordinate-system. Since the curve is additionally color coded
by valence and arousal, the rings could also be displayed as
straight lines, which might be a little less disorienting for some
users. Thus, the amount of tweets, currently shown by the bar
on the left, could also be aligned.
A completely different application is that of Cernea et
al [13], who designed an emotion visualization on touch
displays, giving users direct feedback in the color and shape
of the selection highlighting. However, they also created a
separate view, showing the different emotions of the touch
events over time, in order to let users reﬂect and compare
themselves with other users (Figure 4). They displayed time
on the horizontal axis while valence is shown in direction and
size of the bars and arousal is color coded (blue is little and
red is much).
The program in Figure 5 [14] was developed to directly
track user emotions while they are watching or listening to
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a)
(b)
Figure 2. A sentiment visualization concerning a speciﬁc topic on twitter
[11]. (a) The emotion is shown as arousal and dominance on the axes, the
valence is color coded and its amount is shown as the size of each dot. (b)
The number of positive and negative posts is shown over time.
Figure 3. Another twitter-sentiment visualization [12]. Each ring is a step in
time, while the curve depicts the valence and arousal.
Figure 4. An emotion visualization over time for individual users by Cernea
et al. [13].
Figure 5. An emotion input interface concerning a video [14]. The bottom
bar shows collected emotions on a time line, while the color shows the value
of each step.
some kind of media playing. Thus the media player box
on the left. On the triangle to the right the recipient is
supposed to report current emotions by accordingly placing his
mouse within that triangle. Thus, valence and uncertainty are
measured. The input gets tracked and displayed in the bottom
bar as visual feedback of the opinion development. Time is the
horizontal axis in the bar while the color gets computed as the
distance to each corner of the triangle mapped on the opacity
of one of the base colors in RGB. It is also possible to render
the results of multiple users on top of each other, showing the
mean opinion of all of them.
Yet another approach is to use some kind of emoticon, like
the manikins in Figure 6, designed for visual feedback, e.g.,
in questionnaires. Sonderegger et al. [15] even found in a user
study, comparing different pictographs, that the ones shown
in Figure 6 could be further enhanced by using an animated
heart as arousal indicator instead of the rather abstract shape
depicted here. This might be the most intuitive way for emotion
visualization. However, research shows that the bigger the set
size and complexity of the icons, the harder they are to identify,
even more so when they are rather similar [16][17].
Finally, there is also the work of McDuff et al. [18], who
created a very detailed visualization of emotions connected to
work. Their goal was to use the device for personal reﬂection
over longer periods of time. The result is shown in Figure 7.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 6. An emotion visualization in manikins [15]. The facial expression
shows valence while the shape on his chest depicts arousal.
Figure 7. A visualization of emotion during a work day for personal
reﬂection [18].
They encoded emotions in the bubbles with color showing
valence (pink is positive, purple neutral and blue negative),
shape showing arousal (calm is round and aroused is pointy)
and opacity showing engagement. Work related information is
given by the height and size of the bubbles (desktop activity),
by little icons at the top and bottom of each bar (meetings)
and text (further work related information).
The summary in Table I gives an overview of the just
described visualizations and how different variables are pre-
sented.
V.
METHODOLOGY
Main goal of the preliminary studies was the identiﬁcation
of design requirements such that the intended visualization
serves the supervisors needs best. This implies ﬁrst establishing
an understanding about the supervisors tasks and their way of
decision making. Furthermore, we wanted to ﬁnd about the
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF ENCODINGS OF DIFFERENT VARIABLES
IN THE GIVEN EMOTION VISUALIZATIONS.
Vis.
Valence
Arousal
Time
No of
Persons
1
horizontal
axis
vertical axis
-
multiple
2a
color
vertical axis
-
multiple
2b
direction +
color
-
horizontal
axis
multiple
3
horizontal
amplitude +
color
vertical
amplitude +
color
rings (tunnel
view)
multiple
4
size +
direction
color
horizontal
axis
single
5 Triangle
horizontal
axis
-
-
single
5 Bar
color
-
h. axis
single
6
facial
expression
shape
-
single
7
color
shape
horizontal
axis
single
qualities of stress and emotion data needed by the supervisors
and we wanted to learn from the use of the current interfaces
and from its positive and problematic impact on the supervisors
work.
We did two full-day observations at the end of Septem-
ber 2016 of the supervisors working place in the Munich
area control center. The researchers had the chance to ask
clarifying questions during the observation and collected the
data by handwritten notes. Furthermore, we interviewed seven
supervisors, each interview lasting 18 - 51 minutes on their
decision-making process, their information needs, as well as on
the role of the air trafﬁc controller’s workload and emotional
situation in their decision-making process and the data’s level
of detail favored by the supervisors. During the interview, we
invited the supervisors, to sketch their decision process and
the considered information, this was done to make them reﬂect
their decisions structured and not forgetting anything. The data
was audio recorded during the interviews and transliterated.
For analysis, the data was coded and categorized. We did not
use a standardized coding scheme, because of the exploratory
nature of the research questions.
VI.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Our ﬁrst step in preparation of designing a well suited stress
and emotion visualization, was to understand the supervisors
tasks. The supervisors task area includes tasks concerning
ongoing operations and tasks beyond. Beyond ongoing opera-
tions, the supervisors have to fulﬁll tasks in human resources
management. Each supervisor is responsible for 15 to 20 air
trafﬁc controllers. Additionally they may have optional special
tasks like the participation in research projects or committees.
As our visualization is most beneﬁcial in ongoing operations
we concentrated on this part of the supervisors work.
The principal task of a supervisor is to keep ongoing
operations ﬂuently going. This means, doing everything, so
that the circumstances allow the air trafﬁc controllers safe,
orderly and ﬂuent handling of the air trafﬁc. The supervisors
called themselves well-paid secretaries, in order to express
that they are responsible for every concern in the operation
room. The principal task can be divided into sub tasks. At
the one hand there are somehow formalized tasks and at the
other hand more informal tasks. Even the formalized tasks are
rarely provided with clear instructions, allowing for a multitude
of alternatives. The only task with clear instructions is the
documentation of events, that happened during the supervisors
shift. This task is not very favored by the supervisors, accord-
ing to them they are spending too much time documenting
insigniﬁcant events. This may be a task that is very suitable
for automation. Each day, there are two brieﬁngs scheduled,
wherein the supervisor updates the controllers. Most of their
time the supervisors spend on planning the day’s shift schedule
and solving occurring bottlenecks and problems. We observed
two ways of planning: some supervisors prefer planning of
the whole shift and changing the schedule if necessary. Others
avoid this strategy, because of the numerous changes and prefer
a piecewise planning. On the other hand, there is the solving
of bottlenecks and problems, that may put the safety of aircraft
in risk. This is a very creative task, because of the numerous
possible solutions. Sometimes supervisors even consult their
colleagues and the air trafﬁc controllers on this behalf.
The informal tasks are rather some kind of good practice
and skills. Their implementation depends on the individual
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

supervisor. Over the entire shift, even if the supervisor seems
to relax a while, he is observing the current situation at the
operation control room and looking for abnormal situations.
Each abnormality may induce safety problems. A controller
speaking to the technician holding his interaction device in his
hand, may be an indicator for a malfunction of equipment.
Especially if a controller switches his status on the status
display to a warning level, the supervisor will go to the
controllers working position to asses the situation. In order
to assure the controller’s ability to work under pressure, the
supervisor is trying to determine their daily emotional state and
basic stress level, thus he can consider this in the shift schedule
or, in extreme cases, advising a controller to rest. Generally,
the supervisor tries to prevent controllers from stress by using
formal means, like splitting up a sector or by regulating the
number of aircraft that are allowed to enter the sector, or
by using more informal means like warning the controllers
of a short high trafﬁc peak. Usually the supervisor complies
with ﬂat hierarchies. This has practical effects, like asking the
controllers for their opinion about suggested solutions or by
considering the controllers wishes in the shift schedule. They
are also trying to support the air trafﬁc controllers on their
issues, even if they are not in their ﬁeld of responsibility,
e.g., they check for the location of a meeting. Altogether, a
supervisor needs interpersonal skills, he should be sensible to
individual communication patterns. It is a well known issue
in leadership studies, that the political skills of a supervisor,
including social asturence, may have a positive impact on
the team performance [19][20]. The ability to identify the
others needs by observation and to attune to divers social
situations allows for better communication and improvements
in supporting the controllers.
However, the supervisor is not just concerned about the
controllers issues, but he also tries to support his colleague. He
stands in for his colleague during breaks and he reminds him
of important tasks. This is appreciated by the other supervisor.
There are some typical decisions a supervisor has to face
in his daily work. Besides the decision of the brieﬁng topics,
the most critical decisions are made in the tasks of planning
the day’s shift schedule and preventing and solving bottlenecks
and problems. The planning task includes the decision which
controller has to work at which position. This decision is
guided by several constraints. The solution should be safe
as well as cost effective. That means that safety rules need
to be met, e.g., considering breaks, two controllers should
be responsible for one sector, assuring that no controller is
overstrained. Simultaneously every controller should be busy,
taking special tasks, trainings and so on into consideration.
Potential bottlenecks and problems may be caused by external
demands or extraordinary circumstances. The supervisor has
to decide whether to allow for external demands, like photo
ﬂights, gliding ﬂight areas, or planned detonations. Other
external demands are obligatory (e.g., activation of special air
spaces or military trainings) and the supervisor has to decide
on a suitable reaction to this. The decision on the reaction
to extraordinary circumstances includes malfunction of the
technical equipment, potential overloads in trafﬁc quantity,
which may result in splitting up a sector or a regulation of the
number of aircraft. In addition there may occur staff concerns,
like illness or spontaneous meetings, that force the supervisor
to alternative solutions or looking for someone replacing the
missing controller, and there other troubles may occur, e.g., ﬁre
alarms. None of these decisions can be seen separated. each
decision on one variable of the system has impact on another
and may result in new decisions to be made. For instance, the
decision on splitting up a sector entails a change in the shift
schedule or regulating the number of aircraft in one sector
increases the number of aircraft in other sectors.
Based on their experience, the supervisors identiﬁed vari-
ables, that are affecting the capacity of a sector or constraining
their scope of action. Information upon these variables should
be available to the supervisors. They should know about the
standard sector plan, that tells which sectors should be open.
It is based on statistics of the past years and is the basis for
the shift schedule. The available staff is a framing variable
for the scope of action, this includes the air trafﬁc controllers
on duty as well as controllers, who are around but fulﬁlling
other tasks (paperwork, trainings, meetings, and so on). The
latter may be consulted in the case of stafﬁng shortage, but
usual the information is hardly available. Also, the staffs
condition is a factor to the capacity of a sector: their daily
performance, fatigue, their satisfaction. To keep satisfaction
high the supervisors, try to assure that the controllers are
facing variable demands, that they are sharing a position with
someone with whom they accord, and that some of their
preferences will be met. The information about alternative
tasks a controller has to do is necessary in order to assure
cost efﬁciency, but it is often incomplete. The main factors
on a sectors capacity are the expected trafﬁc load and the
weather conditions. The weather forecast is needed 2 hours
in advance, but up to this day, weather predictions are not
always reliable. The quantity of the expected trafﬁc is also
automatically predicted, by considering the aircraft’s ﬂight
plans. A 2 hours forecast is highly unreliable, but with each
minute this estimation is getting more precise. In contrast, to
the quantity predicting the trafﬁc quality is even challenging
for an expert. 15 aircraft ﬂying straight in a line may be
less demanding than 7 aircraft climbing and descending with
a different headings. Extraordinary circumstances as safety
issues in the area control center (e.g., ﬁre alarms) and technical
concerns (malfunction of equipment or the use of backup
systems) may reduce the capacity of a sector extremely. Also,
visual clutter on the radar screen, coming from a lot of aircraft
below or above the sector, is limiting the sectors capacity.
A variable that is consulted rather unconscious, is the own
constitution, it has some effect on the consideration of external
demands or controllers wishes. When a supervisor has not
the full overview on the current situation he is not willing to
generate any additional workload to his controllers or himself.
This listing of variables is an attempt to get a structured view
on the variables needed by the supervisors and is not complete,
as every situation is unique and may require other information.
Altogether the supervisors are facing complex problems
[21][22]. They have to address many variables that are in-
terrelated, the time for decision making is limited, and some
events occur unexpected (illness, external demands, emergen-
cies, etc.). They have to outweigh different goals (safety, cost
efﬁciency, controllers satisfaction) and the information needed
is incomplete and sometimes not reliable. They make decisions
for the future based on current data, personal heuristics and
unreliable predictions. The heuristics they use for problem
solving are based on their experience. They are able to
anticipate the effect of the variables on the sectors capacity
and they know how to weigh the inﬂuence of a variable to a
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

speciﬁc type of problems.
As we are interested in designing a stress and emotion
visualization, we wanted to have a further look on the role
of stress, workload and emotion data. As stated above, the
supervisors already take the controllers basic stress level and
severe emotional states into consideration. By now they have
to look for this information during conversations with the
controllers. The information on the controllers workload, stress
and boredom is considered as useful in two terms: A prediction
of the workload in a speciﬁc sector, is seen as alternative
approach to current trafﬁc quantity predictions and may thus
help with the planning of the shift schedule. Moreover, an
information upon the controllers former and current stress level
may help in assigning suitable tasks to the controller. The
relevance of detecting stress seems to be much more important
than boredom. During periods of boredom, controllers lean
back and start chatting. Thus, the supervisors stated, that they
can easily observe boredom. In contrast, stress is sometimes
not even recognized by the controllers themselves. The use of
emotion data is seen much more diverging than the workload
data. On the one hand the emotion data may be useful
when the controllers emotional state in extremely emotional
situations hinders him from doing his job. On the other hand
they refuse using this data. This arises from the expected
professionalism, from the fear of treating other controllers
unfair, when someone is pretending to be in a bad mood, and
from concerns about privacy. Both, showing the data linked
to an individual controller and showing it linked to a sector,
may be useful. Sector related data is similar to current trafﬁc
quantity predictions, whereas individual data may help by
assigning each controller a suitable task. There are ethical
concerns about showing the data person related.
As already mentioned in Section III, the supervisors work-
ing place offers a multitude of tools and information systems
to support their decision making. The three main tools are the
shift management program, an overview of the planned con-
trollers and a notepad. This physical notepad, is an important
tool since it allows for quick note taking and thus remembering
important tasks and lines of thought. This is necessary because
the supervisors thoughts are often interrupted by incoming
demands and information. These main tools are complemented
by a multitude of information and communication systems,
where information can be retrieved and is pushed through.
Conspicuous about the interfaces was the importance of clear
arrangement. Consistency of representations and data between
systems and tools are as important as unambiguous interac-
tion strategies [23][24][25]. Using different time zones and
coding same meanings differently led to misunderstandings
and cognitive resources were occupied. The supervisors had
to transfer data from one tool to another manually, this took
time and cognitive resources. Further more several similar
interaction devices, each of them belonging to another system,
were confounded, thus slowing the progress down.
VII.
IMPLICATIONS TO A WORKLOAD AND EMOTION
VISUALIZATION
As workload and emotion data turned out to be relevant
to the supervisors task, an automation of the detection of
the controllers workload and emotional state seems to be
promising. However, this data is useless without an effective
visualization of the data.
Based on the ﬁndings of this preliminary study and com-
pleted by general visualization guidelines, we developed a set
of design requirements to a workload and emotion visualiza-
tion for supervisors working at an area control center:
R1
In order to consider the controllers state during
scheduling, the workload data needs to be accessible
in an overview over a period of time ranging from 2
hours in the past to 2 hours in the future.
R2
Emotion data will be restricted to extreme situations,
in order to address ethical issues.
R3
Extreme situations should be visible at a glance.
Extreme stress, extreme boredom, as well as extreme
negative emotions may hinder the air trafﬁc con-
trollers work, so that intervention of the supervisor
may be appropriate.
R4
The visualization should support the supervisors no-
tional categories. Thus, the data should be available
related to the individual controller as well as to the
working positions.
R5
The visualization must concentrate on a minimal set
of primitives to produce an expressive and effective
visualization [26] with minimal disturbance of the
work ﬂow. All important features should be easily
identiﬁable and all visual elements should have an
important meaning. Color should only be used when
really needed to highlight very important features and
taking into account human visual perception [27].
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented a preliminary study on the work process of
air trafﬁc control supervisors. We investigated the supervisors
tasks and decision making process as well as their current
interfaces and ended up with design requirements for the
development of a workload and emotion visualization.
Next steps in our project will be the design of the intended
visualization within a human centered iterative process. It will
be integrated into the StayCentered system and evaluated.
Beyond that, further investigation of the application area and
the design of a complete decision support system seem to
be promising, as the application area is rarely addressed by
research so far.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the German Federal Min-
istry of Education and Research in the project StayCen-
tered - Methodenbasis eines Assistenzsystems f¨ur Centerlotsen
(MACeLot). Furthermore, we thank the German air navigation
service provider DFS Deutsche Flugsicherung GmbH and the
participating supervisors for their support.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Pfeiffer, G. Valtin, N. H. M¨uller, and P. Rosenthal, “The mental
organization of air trafﬁc and its implications to an emotion sensitive
assistance system,” International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences,
vol. 8, 2016, pp. 164–174.
[2]
D. Broach and C. S. Dollar, “Relationship of employee attitudes and
supervisor-controller ratio to en route operational error rates,” US
Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Ofﬁce
of Aerospace Medicine, Tech. Rep., 2002.
[3]
M. Sollitto, M. M. Martin, S. Dusic, K. E. Gibbons, and A. Wa-
genhouser, “Assessing the supervisor-subordinate relationship involving
part-time employees,” International Journal of Business Communica-
tion, vol. 53, no. 1, 2016, pp. 74–96.
[4]
V. U. Druskat and S. B. Wolff, “Building the emotional intelligence of
groups,” Harvard business review, vol. 79, no. 3, 2001, pp. 80–91.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[5]
S. G. Barsade and A. P. Knight, “Group Affect,” Annual Review of
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, vol. 2, no. 1,
Apr. 2015, pp. 21–46.
[6]
G. Ariav and M. J. Ginzberg, “DSS design: a systemic view of decision
support,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 28, no. 10, 1985, pp. 1045–
1052.
[7]
B. Zhu and H. Chen, “Information visualization for decision support,”
in Handbook on Decision Support Systems 2: Variations.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 699–722.
[8]
S. J. Miah and J. McKay, “A New Conceptualisation of Design
Science Research for DSS Development Research,” in Proceedings of
the Paciﬁc Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS) 2016,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://aisel.aisnet.org/pacis2016/384
[9]
I. Benbasat, “Cognitive style considerations in DSS design,” ACM
SIGMIS Database, vol. 8, no. 3, 1977, pp. 37–38.
[10]
H. Ha, G.-n. Kim, W. Hwang, H. Choi, and K. Lee, “CosMovis:
Analyzing semantic network of sentiment words in movie reviews,”
in Large Data Analysis and Visualization (LDAV), 2014 IEEE 4th
Symposium on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 113–114.
[11]
C. A. Steed, M. Drouhard, J. Beaver, J. Pyle, and P. L. Bogen, “Matisse:
A visual analytics system for exploring emotion trends in social
media text streams,” in Big Data (Big Data), 2015 IEEE International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 807–814.
[12]
F. Y. Wang, A. Sallaberry, K. Klein, M. Takatsuka, and M. Roche,
“SentiCompass: Interactive visualization for exploring and comparing
the sentiments of time-varying twitter data,” in Visualization Sympo-
sium (PaciﬁcVis), 2015 IEEE Paciﬁc.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 129–133.
[13]
D. Cernea, C. Weber, A. Ebert, and A. Kerren, “Emotion-prints:
interaction-driven emotion visualization on multi-touch interfaces,” in
Proc. SPIE 9397, Visualization and Data Analysis 2015, D. L. Kao,
M. C. Hao, M. A. Livingston, and T. Wischgoll, Eds., Feb. 2015, pp.
93 970A–93 970A–15.
[14]
J. Ohene-Djan, A. Sammon, and R. Shipsey, “Colour Spectrum’s
of Opinion: An Information Visualisation Interface for Representing
Degrees of Emotion in Real Time,” in Tenth International Conference
on Information Visualization.
IEEE, July 2006, pp. 80–88.
[15]
A. Sonderegger, K. Heyden, A. Chavaillaz, and J. Sauer, “Anisam &
aniavatar: Animated visualizations of affective states,” in Proceedings
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
ser. CHI ’16.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 4828–4837.
[16]
M. D. Byrne, “Using icons to ﬁnd documents: simplicity is critical,” in
Proceedings of the INTERACT’93 and CHI’93 conference on Human
factors in computing systems.
ACM, 1993, pp. 446–453.
[17]
L. Nowell, R. Schulman, and D. Hix, “Graphical encoding for infor-
mation visualization: an empirical study,” in Information Visualization,
2002. INFOVIS 2002. IEEE Symposium on.
IEEE, 2002, pp. 43–50.
[18]
D. McDuff, A. Karlson, A. Kapoor, A. Roseway, and M. Czerwinski,
“AffectAura: an intelligent system for emotional memory,” in Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.
ACM, 2012, pp. 849–858.
[19]
J. Liu, W. Wang, and K. Cao, “Leader political skill and team per-
formance: a moderated mediation model,” Nankai Business Review
International, vol. 2, no. 1, 2011, pp. 5–22.
[20]
R. L. Brouer, C.-Y. C. Chiu, and L. Wang, “Political skill dimensions
and transformational leadership in china,” Journal of Managerial Psy-
chology, vol. 31, no. 6, 2016, pp. 1040–1056.
[21]
J. Funke, “Complex problem solving: a case for complex cognition?”
Cognitive Processing, vol. 11, no. 2, 2010, pp. 133–142.
[22]
J. Quesada, W. Kintsch, and E. Gomez, “Complex problem-solving:
a ﬁeld in search of a deﬁnition?” Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics
Science, vol. 6, no. 1, 2005, pp. 5–33.
[23]
J. Nielsen, Coordinating User Interfaces for Consistency.
Morgan
Kaufmann, 1989.
[24]
C. Ware, Information visualization: perception for design.
Morgan
Kaufmann, 2013.
[25]
W. Lidwell, K. Holden, and J. Butler, Universal Principles of Design,
Revised and Updated: 125 Ways to Enhance Usability, Inﬂuence Per-
ception, Increase Appeal, Make Better Design Decisions, and Teach
Through Design.
Rockport Publishers, 2010.
[26]
A. Sears and J. A. Jacko, Eds., The Human-Computer Interaction
Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies, and Emerging Ap-
plications.
Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc Inc, 2007.
[27]
E. Tufte, Envisioning Information.
Graphics Press, 1990.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

