Interactive System for Medical Interventions Based on Magnetic Resonance 
Targeting 
Sylvain Martel and Manuel Vonthron 
NanoRobotics Laboratory, Dept, of Computer and Software Engineering, and institute of Biomedical Engineering 
École Polytechnique de Montréal (EPM), Campus of the Université de Montréal 
Montréal, Canada 
e-mail: sylvain.martel@polymtl.ca 
 
 
Abstract—Magnetic Resonance Targeting (MRT) is a new 
approach that aims at navigating untethered therapeutic or 
diagnostic micro-entities through the vascular network until a 
specific targeted location is reached. The platform used for 
such intervention is referred to as a Magnetic Resonance 
Navigation (MRN) system and it typically takes the form of a 
clinical Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanner upgraded 
with special software and hardware modules to allow such 
platform to perform MRN in an effective manner. Considering 
the complexity of MRN operations and the speed at which real-
time operations are being performed, an interactive system 
capable of providing a proper interface to allow an 
interventional radiologist or the like to properly interact and 
use such platform becomes an essential, yet a critical 
component for the success of this new medical interventional 
approach. Here, this paper presents for the first time an 
overview of a new interactive system for MRN operations 
suitable to conduct preliminary interventions. 
Keywords-magnetic; Magnetic resonance imaging; targeted 
interventions; cancer  therapy; user interface 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Magnetic Nanoparticles (MNP) are often used to disrupt 
the high intensity magnetic field of a clinical Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanner by creating a net field 
inhomogeneity that can be picked up and then processed 
using MRI techniques. Such MNP-based contrast agents are 
then typically used for imaging purposes such as to produce 
MR-images of blood vessels. Similarly, the same MNP 
when embedded in an untethered microscale entity can be 
used to track the displacement of the same micro-entity in 
the human body using a clinical MRI scanner. The field 
inhomogeneity created by these embedded MNP can then be 
used as a tracking signal that can then be fed back to an 
external computer as positioning data to be processed to 
perform closed-loop navigation or trajectory control to 
navigate such micro-entity along a path previously plotted 
in a portion of the vascular network that link the injection 
site to a pre-determined targeted location. Propelling and 
steering such magnetic micro-entities can be done by a 
technique referred to as Magnetic Resonance Propulsion 
(MRP) where magnetic gradients are generated to induce 
propelling force on the embedded MNP fully saturated by 
the high intensity homogeneous field of the MRI scanner, to 
propel and/or steer the micro-entities along a planned 
trajectory. Unlike the use of an external magnet, the 
technique is efficient even in deep locations in the body 
since it is independent of the distance between the source of 
magnetization and the object being navigated. Hence, MRN 
allows targeting efficacy at any depths in the human body 
and not just when operating close to the skin surface as it is 
the case when using a simple magnet positioned outside the 
patient. 
MRN 
has 
been 
demonstrated 
and 
validated 
experimentally for the first time by navigating a 1.5 mm 
ferromagnetic bead in the carotid artery of a living swine 
(Martel et al., 2007). As a first target medical application of 
MRN, cancer therapy is particularly suited. As such, special 
MR-navigable entities capable of carrying therapeutic 
agents for tumor chemoembolization and referred to as 
Therapeutic Magnetic Micro Carriers (TMMC) have been 
synthesized successfully (Pouponneau et al., 2009). By 
navigating and targeting TMMC allows a significant 
reduction of the presence of highly toxic therapeutic agents 
in the systemic blood circulation. Such decrease in 
secondary toxicity reduces the negative health related 
effects for the patients while improving therapeutic efficacy 
with a lower dosage of drug. But for reaching a suitable 
embolization site deep enough in the vasculature to release 
the therapeutics sufficiently close to the tumor for improved 
therapeutic efficacy, the overall size of these TMMC must 
be reduced significantly to allow efficient MRN in smaller 
diameter vessels. Since the MR-based propelling force 
reduces significantly with a reduction of the effective 
quantity of MNP in the TMMC, the magnetic gradients 
required for adequate MRN operations must be increased 
beyond what is possible using the orthogonal imaging coils 
typically available in clinical MRI scanners.  As an 
example, the initial version of TMMC has an overall 
diameter of approximately 40 micrometers (µm), requiring 
special propulsion coils capable of generating up to 
approximately 400 mT/m of 3D gradients compared to 
approximately 40 mT/m from the imaging coils of 
conventional clinical MRI scanners (Martel et al., 2009). 
Hence, not only physiological data, but the characteristics of 
the MR-navigable micro-entities and the specifications 
(capabilities) of the MRN system must be taken into account 
197
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

when attempting to perform medical interventions requiring 
Magnetic Resonance Targeting (MRT), i.e. targeting using 
MRN. Hence, due to the level of complexity involved, an 
interactive system providing an interface between this 
technology and the medical specialists becomes highly 
desirable. 
In Section II, our interactive display and an overview of 
the principles behind MRN operations will be described 
prior to describe the fundamental requirement for such 
interactive system. To better understand the problematic, a 
typical interactive flow for MRN operations will be given in 
Section IV. In Section V, the new interactive system still 
under development is described in more details before to 
conclude.   
II. 
ACTUAL INTERACTIVE DISPLAY 
 
An example of the actual computer interface dedicated to 
MRN operations is depicted in Fig. 1. First, an image of the 
blood vessel that will be used during MRN is first acquired 
using contrast agents. Then this image is filtered to remove 
any artifacts that could confuse MRN operations and it is 
then displayed as shown on the upper left corner of Fig. 1 
showing in this particular case, the carotid artery of a living 
swine. Following this initial step, the interactive display 
allows a medical specialist to indicate to the computer 
system where the navigable micro-entities must pass to 
reach the desired target from the catheter release site. As 
such, the interactive display allows the user to plot 
waypoints over the image of the blood vessels to indicate 
the desired trajectory. 
 
Example of the actual user Interface (frames 1 to 6)
Waypoints to indicate the trajectory inside an artery
Entity being navigated and displayed in real-time
 
Fig. 1 – Preliminary computer interface used for MRN 
operations. 
 
But there are many unknowns not indicated in this 
interactive system that shall be considered in order to 
guarantee safe and reliable MRN operations. The propulsive 
force induced to the magnetic micro-entity and generally 
described in Eq. 1 is one example.  
(
)
FM
R V M
B
=
⋅
⋅∇
r
r
r . 
(1) 
Eq. 1 states that the induced magnetic force (N) 
produced by the magnetic gradients (T m-1) generated by the 
MRN system and acting on a ferromagnetic core or an 
ensemble of MNP with an effective volume V (m3), depends 
on the duty cycle R, i.e. the percentage of time per MRN 
closed-loop 
cycle 
being 
dedicated 
to 
propulsion 
(dimensionless), which can be reduced due to longer MRI-
tracking acquisition time and/or in some particular cases to 
allow time for cooling of the coils used for MRP, and M 
being the volume magnetization of the core material (A m-
1). When such magnetization reaches a saturation level 
(MSAT), the highest induced propulsion force per unit volume 
can be reached for a given soft magnetic material (being 
typically the case when placed in a high intensity magnetic 
field such as in the bore or tunnel of a standard 1.5T or 
higher field clinical MRI scanner). 
As indicated in Eq. 1, the propulsive force induced on 
the embedded MNP and required to navigate the micro-
entities taking into account physiological conditions, 
depends not only on the characteristics of the objects being 
navigated, but also on the specifications of the MRN 
system. As such, the interface depicted in Fig. 1 is not 
adequate to conduct MRN operations without a deep 
knowledge of all required physiological, navigable entities, 
and MRN system specifications. Frames 1 to 3 in Fig. 1 for 
instance are MR-images of the physiological environment 
where various measurements (e.g. angles of the blood 
vessels, width, etc.) were taken manually by engineers to 
evaluate the requirements and to adjust the MRN parameters 
for successful navigation. It becomes then obvious that the 
interactive system must ease the use of such technology by 
medical practitioners without the need for the participation 
of a well trained and knowledgeable engineering team. 
Indeed, in this example, engineers entered from the various 
measurements and a prior knowledge of the platform, the 
adequate parameters for safe and reliable MRN operations 
(as depicted in frame 6 and in the lower left corner in Fig. 1) 
in special windows such as the ones depicted in frames 4 
and 5 in Fig. 1. 
III. 
FUNDAMENTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ADEQUATE 
MRN INTERACTIVE SYSTEM 
 
A simplified diagram 
showing the fundamental 
architecture of a MRN interactive system is depicted in Fig. 
2. The diagram shows three main categories of data required 
by the MRN core to perform adequate MRN operations. 
The first category is the physiological data. These data 
describe the static and dynamic physiological information 
pertinent to MRN operations. These include mainly data 
information about the blood vessels (e.g. diameter, length, 
branches or bifurcations, angles, etc.) that will be used to 
reach the targeted location. Static data are extracted from 
the image of the blood vessels gathered and filtered as 
198
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

described earlier and shown in the upper left corner of Fig. 
1. Dynamic physiological data include blood flows and 
artifacts created by the movement of the patient such as 
during respiration. Indeed, MRN becomes more sensitive to 
the amplitude of body-related movements when operating in 
smaller diameter vessels where the distance between 
successive bifurcations becomes typically smaller than the 
amplitude of the movement of the patient. Hence, real-time 
image registration becomes essential. Since the acquisition 
of an MR-image is too long to be executed during real-time 
MRN operations, pre-acquired images taken at different 
physiological conditions that can be encountered during the 
intervention must be available to the MRN core for proper 
retrieval. Feedback information of the position of the micro-
entities from known physiological features can be 
superposed on a selected pre-acquired multi-modality image 
and displayed by the interactive system. Other variables 
include heart rate that causes pulsatile flow that must also be 
taken into account. As such, pre-measured blood flow and 
real-time synchronization with the heart rate becomes 
additional data that when fed to the MRN core may improve 
MRT efficacy. 
 
Physiological
Data
Navigable
Entity
Data
MRN System
Data
MRN Core
 
Fig. 2 – Simplified diagram of the architecture of the MRN 
interactive system 
 
Data on the navigable entities are also critical for proper 
MRN operations. For instance, each type of navigable 
micro-entities may have different size, weight, and/or 
different volume of magnetic material with also different 
magnetization saturation that will lead to different 
displacement responses from the same applied directional 
gradients. The reasons are that synthesis with a different 
drug may pose constraints on the quantity of MNP being 
embedded, and/or one may opt for a larger dose of 
therapeutics per TMMC by lowering the quantity of MNP, 
etc. This is to say that the same therapeutic agent could be 
encapsulated 
in 
micro-carriers 
having 
different 
magnetophoretic velocities when subject to the same 
magnetic gradients. Hence, each type of TMMC in this 
particular case must be characterized and the data 
influencing MRN operations, stored in a database accessible 
to the MRN core. 
Finally, several technical data of the MRN system and 
especially the ones related to MR-imaging/tracking and 
propulsion gradients that could impact MRN operations 
must be available to the MRN core.  
IV. 
TYPICAL INTERACTIVE FLOW 
 
The typical interactive flow required between the MRN 
system and the user is divided into three phases, namely the 
planning or MRN pre-operative phase, the MRN operative 
phase, and the MRN post-operative phase. 
The first part of the pre-operative phase consists in 
gathering the required physiological data and to import it in 
the MRN interactive system. Then after some image and 
data processing, an image representation of the blood vessel 
network is displayed on the computer screen with the 
relevant physiological data. At this time, the MRN 
Interactive System (MRNIS) allows the user to perform 
several functions such as zooming, shifting, rotating, etc., to 
have a better perspective of the routing network available 
for MRT. Then on another window, the user is then allowed 
to enter MRT-related information starting by identifying the 
targeted region and the amount and type of therapeutic 
agents to be delivered if chemoembolization has been 
selected from the menu dedicated to the type of intervention 
to be performed. Then based on these information entered 
and the measured physiological data, the MRN core (Fig. 2) 
identifies one type of TMMC having the most appropriate 
characteristics from the ones available in the database. 
Then, the MRNIS displays the identification code of the 
selected TMMC with the dosage which would typically 
differ and be greater than the therapeutic dosage entered by 
the medical specialist. Once the respective TMMC dose has 
been put in a special automatic injection system, the MRNIS 
highlights the possible regions for catheter-release of the 
TMMC. Once the surgeon has selected the catheter-release 
site by clicking on a location within the region being 
highlighted, the MRN core calculates the best path that 
appears as a proposed trajectory being plotted along the 
image of the blood vessel being displayed. At this time, 
waypoints determined by the MRN core identifying 
directional changes required to achieve the requested MRT 
also appear on the computer display. Once the surgeon has 
approved the trajectory, the MRNIS is ready to proceed to 
the operative phase. 
At this moment, once the operative phase has been 
initiated, the tip of the catheter is placed by the surgeon with 
the help of the MRNIS. Once the tip is positioned to the pre-
approved release site, the injection phase is ready to be 
initiated. Prior to the injection, the MRNIS displays the 
number of injections with the respective doses and the time 
between successive injections for approval by the surgeon. 
In many cases, more than one injection may be required to 
199
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

achieve the therapeutic dosage specified in the MRNIS by 
the medical specialist. This injection procedure is 
determined by the MRN core based on many parameters 
including but not limited to the size and the orientation of 
the long axis of the aggregates. More specifically, several 
TMMC will form an aggregate due to dipole-dipole 
interactive forces between neighbored TMMC. Each 
aggregate has a needle-like shape with the longer axes 
oriented toward z-axis, i.e. along the longitudinal axis of the 
MRI or MRN bore or tunnel where the patient has been 
placed. Depending on the orientation of the blood vessel’s 
segment being navigated and the orientation of the next 
bifurcation with regards to the z-axis, a too large quantity of 
TMMC may cause problem such as pre-embolization or 
others, especially when the length of the aggregate is close 
to the diameter of the blood vessel being navigated and 
perpendicular or near perpendicular to the z-axis. In such 
case, the MRN core will tend to recommend several smaller 
injections instead of one or a few larger injections. 
After each injection, the MRN core controls the 
generation of gradients and the whole MRN operations 
being performed in real-time. At this time, there is typically 
no interventions by the surgeons since the required rate of 
making decisions based on several parameters is beyond 
human’s capabilities. The position of the TMMC is plotted 
and displayed in real-time by the MRNIS to be monitored 
by the medical specialist. Once the dose of therapeutic 
agents has reached the targeted chemoembolization site, the 
post-operative phase is initiated. In this phase, typical MRI 
interface is used by the interventional radiologist to image 
and to assess the success of the intervention. 
 
V. 
NEW MRNIS IMPLEMENTATION 
The interface shown in Fig. 1 has been used initially 
without any functionality aimed at assisting the user. During 
the preliminary tests with this interface, the user needed to 
have a high technical knowledge about not only the MRN 
platforms but also be able to make the right decisions for 
successful MRN operations. As such, the interventional 
radiologist was initially working with several engineers well 
familiarized with MRN-related issues. Although future work 
aimed at improving the look of the user interface to enhance 
and facilitate the interactions with the medical staffs, the 
actual interface takes the form of windows that can be 
displayed and moved to obtain the same interface shown in 
Fig. 1 with additional windows dedicated to assist the user 
in setting up the MRN platform for proper operations. The 
ultimate goal for this MRNIS is to ensure that the users will 
not need to enter complex technical data or specifications 
that require a deep understanding of MRN operations. 
An important part of the software architecture concerns 
the “surrounding software environment”. This includes all 
software components not embedded in the MRI system nor 
imaging, control or propulsion units: roadmap planning, 3D 
visualization tools or live feedback. In order to build such a 
user 
environment 
with 
a 
great 
extensibility 
and 
maintainability, we use well-established open-source tools 
and protocols. The proposed approach is to embed 
algorithms developed earlier inside the 3DSlicer software 
(Pieper et al., 2006). This medical imaging tool is already 
used by other interventional imaging projects. It offers a 
great stability as well as excellent way to embed our own 
algorithm while providing numerous ready-to-use modules 
such as fiducials, OpenIGTLink (Tokuda et al., 2009), or 
vessel segmentation support. Because of the modularity of 
this solution, we are able to add without modifications to the 
basis of the architecture, vessel segmentation or haptic 
interface to our system. 
Another important step is the roadmap planning which is 
managed by the the fiducials module of the 3DSlicer 
software. The user can insert such points along the vessels 
during a similar procedure. In addition to the manual path 
planning 
protocol, 
vessel 
segmentation-assisted 
path 
planning is a very promising procedure. Indeed, 3DSlicer 
provides segmentation modules such as the Vascular 
Modeling Toolkit. This allows us to implement a multi-
objective best path discovery algorithm that would allow an 
automatic computation of the best roadmap from the 
injection point to the drug release target. Such an algorithm 
takes into account parameters like vessel diameter, blood 
pressure, intersection complexity, steering power of the 
magnetic gradient with respect to the net magnetization of 
the device. 
Another important aspect of the new MRNIS is live 
vizualization where the user is given real-time feedback of 
the operations being conducted. Indeed, the tracking 
algorithm can send the estimated position of the device to 
the 
host 
software, 
also 
through 
an 
OpenIGTLink 
connection. Our preliminary tests show no noticeable delay 
between the actual move of a device and the display on a 
3DSlicer scene. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
A short description of an interactive system dedicated to 
MRN operations has been provided to show to the readers 
the importance of providing an adequate interface to allow 
the medical specialist to not only be able to use such system 
but also to be able to mange the complexity of this new 
technique. Indeed, the interactive system must be designed 
to allow the surgeon to enter specifications related to the 
medical protocol while being able to assess the progress of 
the intervention. Here, a basic interactive system have been 
described since more advanced operations making use of a 
combination of different types of navigable micro-entity for 
enhanced therapeutic and/or diagnostic target interventions 
could also be envisioned. Nonetheless, it is still difficult at 
this point to determine the best format for such interactive 
system since our group is the pioneer of MRN and the first 
one to attempt such interactive software. It is by observing 
practitioners and taking notes of theirs feedbacks that such 
200
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

interactive system coped with a proper user interface will be 
optimized.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project is supported in part by the Canada Research 
Chair 
(CRC) 
in 
Micro/Nanosystem 
Development, 
Fabrication and Validation and grants from the National 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada 
(NSERC), the Province of Québec, and the Canada 
Foundation for Innovation (CFI). 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Martel, J.-B. Mathieu, O. Felfoul, A. Chanu, É. Aboussouan., S. 
Tamaz, P. Pouponneau, G. Beaudoin, G. Soulez L’H. Yahia, and M. 
Mankiewicz, “Automatic navigation of an untethered device in the 
artery of a living animal using a conventional clinical magnetic 
resonance imaging system,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 90, 114105, 
March 12, 2007 
[2] S. Martel, O. Felfoul, J.B. Mathieu, A. Chanu, S. Tamaz, M. 
Mohammadi, M. Mankiewicz, and N. Tabatabaei, “MRI-based 
nanorobotic platform for the control of magnetic nanoparticles and 
flagellated bacteria for target interventions in human capillaries,” 
International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR), Special Issue on 
Medical Robotics, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1169-1182, Aug. 2009 
[3] P. Pouponneau, J-C. Leroux, and S. Martel, “Magnetic nanoparticles 
encapsulated into biodegradable microparticles steered with an 
upgraded 
magnetic 
resonance 
imaging 
system 
for 
tumor 
chemoembolization,” Biomaterials, 30(31), pp. 6327-6332, 2009 
 
[4] 
S. Pieper, B. Lorensen, W. Schroeder, and R. Kikinis, “The na-mic 
kit: Itk, vtk, pipelines, grids and 3DSlicer as an open platform for 
the medical image computing community,” in 3rd IEEE 
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: Nano to Macro, 
2006, pp. 698–701, 2006 
[5] 
J. Tokuda, G. Fischer, X. Papademetris, Z. Yaniv, L. Ibanez,. Cheng, 
H. Liu, J. Blevins, J. Arata, A. Golby, et al., “OpenIGTLink: an 
open network protocol for image-guided therapy environment,” The 
International Journal of Medical Robotics and Computer Assisted 
Surgery, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 423–434, 2009 
 
 
201
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

