Intelligent Shop Window 
Producing Dynamic Situated Augmented Reality using a Large See-through Screen  
Reo Suzuki 
Graduate School of Science and Technology 
Seikei University 
Tokyo, Japan 
dm146207@cc.seikei.ac.jp 
Yutaka Takase, Yukiko I. Nakano 
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Seikei University 
Tokyo, Japan 
{yutaka-takase, y.nakano}@st.seikei.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— The purpose of shop windows is to attract people’s 
attention and increase the consumers’ desire to buy the 
merchandise. This paper proposes an “intelligent shop 
window” that can display merchandise information and 
advertisements on a large see-through display overlaid on real 
items or people in the shop. The system decides the target item 
to be advertised based on the position of the customers/shop 
clerks and the color of the clothes that a clerk is wearing. Then, 
it displays the information about the item on a window-like 
see-through screen through which passers-by can see the 
information overlaid on the situation inside the shop. As 
compared to the mannequins in a shop window, our system can 
present information dynamically. Therefore, it is expected to 
attract greater interest from passers-by and increase the 
number of customers visiting the shop. 
Keywords - augmented reality; shop window, overlaid display, 
Kinect sensor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Pedestrians on a street look at the shop windows of the 
small shops and department stores. Shop windows attract 
people’s attention and have the effect of increasing the 
consumers’ desire to buy. Through the shop window, people 
would like to see whether the shop sells items matched with 
their preference, and who the customers are (age, status, 
sense of fashion). Then, if the shop looks good, they step into 
the shop. Therefore, the information inside the shop is very 
important for the customers to decide whether they go into 
the shop or not.  
By virtue of the development of larger displays, 
production technologies, and human sensing technologies, 
many studies on interactive displays have been conducted. 
These display systems can recognize the environment of 
public places and change the displayed information 
accordingly in real time. For example, such systems were 
used in exhibitions at museums [1][2]. Other systems can 
project information onto the facade of buildings [3][4].  
When designing information display systems for shop 
window interfaces, the essential roles of a shop window 
should be considered. Doorn et al. [5] suggested that the 
shop window has three roles as a marketing tool.  
1. It expresses the style of the shop; 
2. It creates the appropriate atmosphere and attracts people; 
3. It informs people about the available products and their 
function. 
 The objective of many of the previous systems was to 
attract pedestrians and allow them to interact with the system. 
The Dynamically Transparent Windows system [6] utilizes 
foil that becomes transparent when energized. By making a 
specific small area transparent according to the movement of 
the pedestrians, the system changes the displayed products 
and areas in the shop that are visible to the pedestrians. With 
the goal of providing an ambient response to the users’ input, 
in the Persuasive Interactive Mannequin system [7], 
mannequins displayed in the shop window gaze at the 
customer looking into the window. Moreover, Müller et al. 
[8] reported that the users’ degree of interest differed 
according to the method of giving feedback via an interactive 
display that can interact with passers-by in public places.  
However, many previous systems were more interested 
in recognizing the presence and motions of passers-by, but 
not in recognizing the situation inside the shop. Our study, 
on the other hand, focuses more on the environment inside 
the shop because the information inside the shop is useful for 
the users to decide whether to step in the shop or not. Thus, 
our “intelligent shop window” attracts the attention of 
passers-by by changing the display information according to 
the environment inside the shop. The passers-by are able to 
observe the situation inside the shop through the window. In 
addition, they can see overlaid information related to the 
people and items inside the shop. When no people are close 
to the window, the shop window displays promotion 
materials that represent the style of the merchandise inside 
the shop. The system can also show the details of the items 
when people are close to the window. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
describes in detail our proposed system. Section 3 describes 
the implementation of the system. Following this, Section 4  
presents an example of application. And finally, Section 5 
summarizes this paper and mentions future work. 
 
II. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
We propose a display system that resembles a 
conventional large shop window adjacent to the sidewalk 
through which users can see enhanced information about 
inside a clothes shop. Basing its decision on the clothes that 
the customers and shop clerks are wearing and their position 
in the shop, the system selects an item that is popular or 
recommended and overlays the advertisement information 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

related to the item on the shop window. The advantage of 
this system is that the advertisement information is 
automatically generated by recognizing the shop clerks, and 
it is not needed to be manually changed/registered every day.  
Moreover, this system enables the passers-by to observe that 
many customers are gathered around a popular item and see 
the information about it, which is overlaid on the window. 
They can also see recommended items by looking at 
information overlaid near a shop clerk who is wearing the 
item. This function allows the passers-by to get better idea 
about inside the shop as well as the information about 
popular items.  
Our proposed system consists of a popular item 
detection module, recommended item decision module, item 
information database, and item information display module. 
The system architecture is shown in Figure 1. A detailed 
explanation of each module is presented below.  
A. Popular Item Detection Module 
We define a “popular item” as an item around which 
many people gather or which they stop to pick up and 
examine. In order to detect a popular item according to this 
definition, the people and the item close to which people are 
standing must be recognized. It is also necessary to 
determine whether a person is only passing by or examining 
the item. If the person is examining the item, the system 
retrieves the item data by searching the product database 
and sends the information to the display module. However, 
when many people are present in the shop, the information 
overlaid on all the customers can be a source of irritation. In 
such a situation, our system identifies crowded locations 
based on the recognition of the position and movement of 
people and prioritizes the most crowded location when 
displaying the overlaid information. For people recognition, 
depth information sensed by a Kinect sensor is used.  
B. Recommended Item Decision Module 
As an advertisement of the shop, the system displays the 
information about special items that characterize the sense 
of fashion of the shop. For this purpose, our shop window 
system recognizes special items that shop clerks are wearing 
(we assume that the shop clerks wear the special items as 
advertisement), and displays the information about the 
special item when a clerk passes near the shop window. The 
item information is displayed according to the position and 
movement of the shop clerk. To achieve this, the module 
recognizes a person inside the shop passing by the window 
and recognizes the item that he/she is wearing using RGB 
color information and a simple pattern matching technique. 
Then, using these data as keys, the module searches the item 
information database, and sends the results to the 
information display module. Note that this function 
enhances the information inside the shop, and make the 
special items attract the attention from the passers-by.  
C. Item Information Database 
This database is used for detecting popular items and 
recommended items. For both these purposes, the item name 
and its RGB image must be registered. In addition, for 
detecting popular items, the layout of the shop, that is, the 
display location of each item, is required. The system 
measures the depth image around the locations where the 
popular items are displayed in order to recognize a crowd. 
For detecting recommended items, the RGB values are 
required so that the clothes that the shop clerks are wearing 
can be recognized.  
D. Item Information Display Module 
When the target items have been determined using the 
popular item detection module and the recommended item 
decision module, and information about the items has been 
obtained from the database, the item information is sent to 
the item information display module, which displays the 
information on the window. 
The information should be appropriately overlaid so that 
the advantage of window interfaces that passers-by can see 
inside the shop is not impaired. The system satisfies this 
requirement using the following two methods. 
KinectA
KinectB
Person-
recognition
Target-item-
decision
Depth&
information
Person-
recognition
Clothes-
recognition
Target-item-
decision
GRB
Skelton
Item&
information
Overlaying-position-
calculation
Drawing
Overlaid&
graphics
Item&
Information&
Database
Popular&Item&
Detection&Module
Recommended&Item&
Decision&Module
Item&
information
Item&Information&
Display&Module
 
Figure 1. System architecture 
See#through*
screen
Kinect*A
Kinect*B
 
Figure 2. Environment 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

- It determines the overlaid display by considering the 
number and position of target items; 
- It prioritizes the items around which many people gather 
and those which a shop clerk is wearing. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION  
A. Environment and Equipment 
We described the implementation of the proposed 
system in the previous section. The environment and the 
equipment are shown in Figure 2. We set up a 4 m × 4.25 m 
area as a shop. In this area, a 100-inch see-through screen 
(2.0 m × 1.5 m) was located on one side of the area as a 
shop window. Since real glass is not suitable for projection 
purposes, we used a see-through screen glued onto a large 
thick acrylic board.  For person and clothes recognition, we 
used a Kinect for Windows v2 open Beta (hereinafter, 
referred to as the Kinect sensor) and a Kinect SDK 2.0. For 
person recognition, we set up a Kinect sensor on the ceiling 
(2.9 m in height) and obtained the depth image as viewed 
from the top (Kinect B in Figure 2). For clothes recognition, 
a second Kinect sensor (Kinect A) was set behind the screen.  
B. Person Recognition 
In order to implement the popular item detection module, 
the people gathered around an item must be recognized. We 
used a Kinect sensor attached to the ceiling to obtain the 
depth image as viewed from the top. The depth image 
resolution is 512 × 424 pixels, and the pixel data are 
processed by OpenCV library. Figure 3 shows an example 
of the depth image.  There is a person at the center of the 
picture. We can recognize him/her with the depth 
information. For detecting crowded locations, a sensing area 
is predefined for each item, and the system monitors the 
depth data in this area. Before the system is initiated, that is, 
when no person is present in the area, the depth image of 
each sensing area is measured in order to calibrate the 
sensor. When the system has been initiated, if a certain 
amount of change from the initial depth information is 
detected, we count a sequence of the pixels, the depth data 
of which changed from the original values. If the number of 
pixels in a given sequence is larger than a threshold, the 
system recognizes that a person has entered the area. If the 
number of pixels is smaller than the threshold, the result is 
discarded as noise. It sometimes occurs that a person only 
passes by the item and stays inside the area for a very short 
time. In this case, the number of frames during which the 
person stays inside the area is counted. If the number of 
frames is larger than a threshold, i.e., the person stays inside 
the area longer than the threshold, the system recognizes 
that this person is examining the item.  
When the variation in the depth data is sufficiently large, 
the system assumes that many people are remaining in the 
area and the item is popular. As the popular items should be 
prioritized over other items in the overlaid display, in 
addition to the position of the target item, the system 
measures the size of the area where the depth image 
variation is large and sends the information to the item 
information display module.   
C. Clothes Recognition 
In the recommended item decision module, a function 
for recognizing the clothes that a shop clerk walking near 
the shop window is wearing is required. In the current 
implementation, we used RGB color data sampled from 
several points on the clothes and applied them in a simple 
pattern matching technique.  
First, using the Kinect SDK, the system obtains the 
skeleton (position) and RGB color information for 25 joints. 
As shown in Figure 4,  we used RGB information for six 
joints: SpineMid, ShoulderLeft, ElbowLeft, ShoulderRight, 
ElbowRightand SpineShoulder. The sensing area of the 
Kinect sensor is restricted such that persons outside the shop 
window are not recognized as being inside the shop. When a 
person is detected and tracked, the RGB values of the six 
joints are measured. Then, using a Sum of Squared 
Difference (SSD) method, these values are compared with 
the RGB value for each item in the database. If the SSD 
value is smaller than a threshold for more than two data 
points among the six, the system determines that the input 
data match the candidate item. Then, to obtain the position 
of the person who is wearing the recognized clothes, the 
position of the SpineMid joint is obtained, and its distance 
from the Kinect sensor is calculated based on the position 
data. Finally, the information about the item and the 
distance between the Kinect sensor and the clerk are sent to 
the item information display module.  
D. Overlaid Display 
 In the item information display module, the results of the 
person and clothes recognition are processed, and the item 
information is then displayed. To avoid obstructing the view 
Figure 4. Positions of six joints for Clothes Recognition  
Figure 3. Depth image for the person recognition 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

of the passers-by into the shop, only three items, which were 
selected as the advertisement targets in the previous 30 sec, 
are displayed.  
For displaying the item information that is sent from the 
popular item detection module, the information is overlaid 
on the real target item in the shop. Thus, the display position 
is determined based on the position of the item. For 
displaying information about the recommended items, the 
information must be overlaid such that the passers-by can 
easily identify who is wearing the recommended item. We 
use the position of the clerk wearing the clothes for 
determining the display position.  
IV. 
EXAMPLE  
This section shows how the implemented mockup 
system works using a simple example. Figures 5 and 6 show 
snapshots of our intelligent shop window. There are five 
items in the shop. At the bottom of the window, the graphics 
of all items are displayed repeatedly.  
Figure 5 shows that the system detects a person who is 
examining an item, and overlays the advertisement about the 
item. In this example, the graphics of a shirt and an 
advertisement phrase “ON SALE” are overlaid close to the 
person.  
Figure 6 shows an example of a recommendation. The 
system recognizes a shop clerk and his clothes, and then, it 
displays the advertisement of the item by overlaying it on 
the clerk. In this example, a yellow arrow is drawn to clearly 
identify the person wearing the recommended clothes.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, an intelligent shop window that can 
display information and advertisements of items sold in the 
shop was proposed. The system decides the target item to be 
advertised based on the position of customers/clerks and the 
color of the clothes that the clerk is wearing. Then, the 
system displays the information about the item on a 
window-like see-through screen through which people 
passing by the window can see the information overlaid on 
the situation inside the shop. Since this system can produce 
a more dynamic display than mannequins in a shop window, 
it is expected to attract more interest from the passers-by 
and increase the number of customers visiting the shop.  
In future work, the capability of the system to 
distinguish between shop clerks and customers should be 
improved since, in the current implementation, the system 
cannot achieve this. This capability is important, since in the 
popular item detection module, only customers should be 
counted as members of a crowd, and in the recommended 
item decision module, only a clerk should be tracked. In 
addition, the clothes recognition function does not allow the 
current system to recognize clothes with a complex design, 
since we applied a simple pattern matching method that uses 
RGB values. To improve the clothes recognition function, it 
is necessary to employ more sophisticated computer vision 
technologies. Finally, our ultimate goal is to use this system 
as a real shop window and test whether the system can 
attract more passer-by attention.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study is partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI 
Grant Number 25280076.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
U. Hinrichs, H. Schmidt, and S. Carpendale, “EMDialog: 
bringing information visualization into the museum,” IEEE 
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., vol. 14, no. 6, 2008, pp. 1181–8. 
[2] 
E. Hornecker, “Interactions around a contextually embedded 
system,” in Proceedings of the Fourth International 
Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied 
Interaction - TEI ’10, 2010, p. 169. 
[3] 
P. Dalsgaard and K. Halskov, “Designing urban media 
façades,” 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
28th 
International 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - 
CHI ’10, 2010, p. 2277. 
[4] 
 P. Peltonen, et al, “It’s Mine, Don't Touch!,” Proceeding of                        
the twenty-sixth annual CHI conference on Human  factors 
in computing systems - CHI ’08, 2008, p.1285.  
[5] 
M. van Doorn, E. van Loenen, and A. P. de Vries, 
“Deconstructing 
ambient 
intelligence 
into 
ambient 
narratives: the intelligent shop window,” Proceedings of the 
1st international conference on Ambient media and systems, 
2008, pp. 1–8. 
[6] 
L. Mailund and K. Halskov, “Designing marketing 
experiences,” in Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on 
Designing Interactive Systems - DIS ’08, 2008, pp. 222–229. 
[7] 
W. Reitberger, et al, “A persuasive interactive mannequin for 
shop windows,” in Proceedings of the 4th International 
Conference on Persuasive Technology - Persuasive ’09, 2009, 
p. 1. 
[8] 
J. Müller, R. Walter, G. Bailly, M. Nischt, and F. Alt, 
“Looking glass: A field study on noticing interactivity of a 
shop window,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Annual 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - 
CHI ’12, 2012, p. 297.  
Figure 5. A person examining an item 
Figure 6. A shop clerk wearing a recommended 
item 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

