ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015. ISBN: 978-1-61208-382-7
49
Perspective and Use of Empathy in Design Thinking 
Andrea Alessandro Gasparini 
Department of Informatics  
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
a.a.gasparini@ub.uio.no 
 
Abstract—The paper takes a closer look into one of the main 
attributes of Design Thinking: Empathy. The motivation for 
doing so has its roots in the post Design Thinking period, 
which we are entering now, following a rich decade of the use 
of this approach to innovation. Approaching a Designerly 
Thinking perspective of what the designer does in practice, five 
different epistemological paths will give an understanding of 
the effects empathy has in the design process. Empathy is 
addressed by exploring two main aspects, the emotional and 
the cognitive. The theoretical perspective of Design Thinking, 
seen as a reflexive practice, or as a creator of meaning, or even 
as a problem solving activity, is used to understand how 
empathy can be used in a design context. This aspect is then 
further analyzed using the results of a large workshop where 
Design Thinking was used. 
Keywords-Empathy; Design Thinking; Designerly Thinking; 
Service Design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
During the last decade, Design Thinking was considered 
by many to be one of the best ways to foster innovation and 
creativity in companies and organizations, to attempt to solve 
complex problems, also named wicked problems [1], and to 
innovate products and services. Nowadays the future of 
Design Thinking is unsure. From the management research 
field, some of the previously strongest supporters are 
confident the era of Design Thinking is over [2-5].  
Others from the field of design research argue that more 
ownership of relevant parts of the method should be taken 
[6], and abandon those that do not work. This situation has 
many reasons, but risking oversimplification, we can say that 
the two fields, business management and design research, 
have been pulling design thinking in two very different 
directions.  
On the one hand, the field of management adopted 
Design Thinking on their terms, as best explained by 
Nussbaum [4]: “Companies absorbed the process of Design 
Thinking all too well, turning it into a linear, gated, by-the-
book methodology that delivered, at best, incremental 
change and innovation.” On the other hand, the design 
research developed a different approach. For the latter, 
thinking as a designer is not exactly a new savoir-faire, and 
therefore possibly, some of the relevant attributes of Design 
Thinking have been overlooked [6].  
The strength of Design Thinking is the ability this 
approach has to combine the desirability a human can 
experience, and the economic viability and the technical 
feasibility of an innovative idea (see Fig.1). 
As elaborative forces, Design Thinking uses rapid 
prototyping, abductive reasoning and empathy to enact 
innovative results. Although all three are of interest, the 
focus will be on the latter. Empathy will be addressed in this 
paper using two main aspects, the emotional and the 
cognitive.   
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Overview of Design Thinking.  
 
In order to emphasize the effect empathy may have in a 
design process we need to define different discourses 
explaining what designers really do in practice. Approaching 
a Designerly Thinking perspective on designer’s activity, 
five different epistemological discourses will be used [6] to 
explain the role the two aforementioned aspects of empathy 
havw in each discourse. 
As a case study, to address the aforementioned 
intersection between Design Thinking and empathy, the 
paper will present results from a workshop organized by a 
Norwegian University Library addressing Open Access 
services. The methodologies used in this research are photo-
ethnography and annotations in vivo. A longer discussion 
group meeting was done the day after, to collect additional 
data and perspectives.  
The article is structured as follows: In Section 2, an 
introduction to Design Thinking is followed by Section 3 
where the Designerly Thinking perspective is presented. 
Section 4 is an introduction to empathy. Section 5 will 
present the role empathy has in five different perspectives of 
Designerly Thinking. Section 6 highlights the results from 
the workshop, while Section 7 is the discussion, and Section 
8 concludes the paper. 

ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015. ISBN: 978-1-61208-382-7
50
II. 
DESIGN THINKING 
As an approach, Design Thinking may help to innovate 
services and products. Using a combination of immersive 
understanding of users need, rapid prototyping, and 
abductive reasoning, this approach may result in the best 
possible solution [7][8]. The rapid prototyping act in the 
Design Thinking process, provokes small advancement 
based on partially known information [2], and the outcome 
is a high quantity of results one can further analyze. Sorting 
the outcome in the end, the result of a Design Thinking 
process, gives a handful viable ideas. A negative and 
interesting side effect is the problem with the “recreation” of 
all the steps of the rapid prototyping process [9]. This will 
leave out some learning issues for the participants where 
this approach is used, and obviously probing a repetition of 
the process with the same outcome. The empathy ensures a 
broad representation of knowledge in the process [10], while 
abductive reasoning explains why the result is adequate, 
given the context. Overall, the process of Design Thinking 
allows the result to be a technical viable solution, a desirable 
output for users and an economical feasible project [7] (see 
Fig. 1). Another strength Design Thinking has, is the 
possibility to tackle complex and ill-defined problems [8], 
ranging from business to societal context [11]. These types 
of problem, often coined ”wicked” [1], have been debated in 
the design milieu for an extended period of time, as they can 
be an entry port for designers into new areas [9],  bringing 
new understanding to complex issues.  
III. 
DESIGNERLY THNIKING  
To emphasize the effect empathy may have in a design 
process, we need to define different discourses explaining 
what designers really do in practice. Designerly Thinking 
addresses how the practice of being a designer, and the 
theories trying to explain and understand the act of 
designing, coexist in the same sphere, and how we can 
understand the two from an academic perspective [6].  
Approaching a Designerly Thinking perspective on 
designer’s activity, five different epistemological discourses 
will be used [6] to explain the role the two aforementioned 
aspects of empathy has in each discourse: 
 
Design and Designerly Thinking as the creation of 
artefacts. The core concept is the science of the 
artificial [6]. 
 
Design and Designerly Thinking as a reflexive 
practice. The core concept is the reflection after the 
creation process, helping the cyclic process of 
designing with added new competence and 
understanding. 
 
Design and Designerly Thinking as a problem-
solving activity. The core concept is a methodology 
to solve complex and wicked problems [1]. 
 
Design and Designerly Thinking as a way of 
reasoning and making sense of things, and is based 
on the practical activity done by designers. 
 
Design and Designerly Thinking as creation of 
meaning. The core concept is relevant as it links 
theory and practice.  
Each of the five discourses has their own theoretical 
foundation and background [6], and also describes the 
concepts they address.  
The relation between empathy and the aforementioned 
theoretical discourse of Design Thinking will be discussed in 
Section 7, where this pluralistic perspective will try to point 
out what empathy contributes to the “designerly” part of the 
process.  
IV. 
EMAPTHY 
It is possible to divide reflections around empathy into 
two main dimensions. The first may be seen as an emotional 
empathy, being an instinctive, affective, shared and mirrored 
experience [12]. More specifically, as a person, one feels 
what other people experience. The other dimension of 
empathy is cognitive, where one understands how others 
may experience the world from their point of view [12][13].  
Since this is a state that is not actually experienced by a 
person, it may lead to misunderstandings and subjectivity. 
The lack of a degree (how much of empathy one 
experiences) may reinforce this problem [14].    
In a design process, we can address and use empathy in 
different ways. Firstly as a tool to design with, requiring the 
transformation of this emotional feeling in an attribute [15]. 
Secondly designers can use empathy to acquire insight into 
users’ needs and in doing so, inform the design process [7]. 
For instance, in a Design Thinking process all the 
participants in a design team need to be empathic with the 
users they are designing for in order to create relevant 
solutions. Using an approach toward cognitive empathy, 
designers apply different methods to build up that 
competence and insight, enabling them to prioritize the needs 
of the users and make the results of the process more 
desirable [7].  
Designers may use a variety of approaches to gain a 
cognitive empathic insight. The following two examples 
illustrate how this can be done. First, designers can use 
“experience prototype”. Using a medical wearable device 
[15][16], like a small remote heart monitoring device, over a 
period of time, would inform a design team of how a person 
wearing the device feels in everyday situations. This would 
be very difficult to understand otherwise. For example, 
driving to work, taking a bus or eating, are easy tasks that, 
for a person with special needs, may be extremely hard to 
perform. Then, the design team may get insight into how 
difficult it is to perform these simple tasks and can gain 
emapthy by understanding. The second example is related to 
how a group of interaction design students solved their 
project task. The task was to design a rescue boat. In order to 
gain an understanding of the experience and feeling of 
getting rescued at sea, they rescued each other in a 
swimming pool, and the empathic insight helped them to 
develop a very interesting and relevant prototype. Both 
examples show how to acquire a cognitive empathic 
understanding and insight, in this case, the designers did not 
need to feel what the real experience was.   

ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015. ISBN: 978-1-61208-382-7
51
Design Thinking invites participants in a design process 
to share their own empathic insights related to the task at 
hand. In fact, this is one of the strengths of the approach: all 
participants bring empathy into the process.  
Cognitive empathy has also an effect on the way 
participants of a design team work together. It is observed in  
[17] that differences in competence and knowledge between 
members of a design team do not affect the overall team 
performance, since the empathy for others participants points 
of view, expressed as a cognitive based “social sensitivity”, 
functions as an equalizer [18].  
In the design process, the participants contribute to the 
process through different roles: as themselves, as designers, 
librarians, managers, IT people and so on [8], bringing with 
them the cognitive empathy represented by the roles they 
hold. In addition, they may also have empathy for the role of 
a user they argue for or against in a given context of the 
project. 
V. 
DESIGNERLY THINKING AND EMPATHY 
Mapping the pluralistic perspective of the theoretical 
discourse of Design Thinking, also the Designelry Thinking 
aspect, and how we can use empathy in the design process, 
we can tentatively produce the following overview presented 
on Table 1. This will be further analyzed in Section 7. 
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW OF DESIGNERLY THINKING AND EMPATHY 
Theoretical Perspective 
Core Concept 
Empathy 
Design and Designerly Thinking as the 
Creation of Artefacts 
The science 
of the 
artificial 
Emotional 
Design and Designerly Thinking as a 
Reflexive Practice 
Reflection in 
action 
Cognitive and 
Emotional 
Design and Designerly Thinking as a 
Problem-Solving Activity 
Wicked 
problems 
Cognitive  
(Holistic) 
 
Design and Designerly Thinking as a 
Practice-Based Activity and Way of 
Making Sense of Things 
 
Designerly 
ways of 
knowing 
Cognitive 
(Constrained) 
Design and Designerly Thinking as a 
Creation of meaning 
 
Creating 
meaning 
Cognitive 
(Interpretation 
of context) 
 
VI. 
THE CASE 
The analysis of empathy in regards to Designerly 
Thinking in this paper is compared with findings from a day 
long workshop organized by the University of Oslo Library 
to address Open Access services provided by the University 
of Oslo. 
The problem was a lack of cooperation and coordinated 
strategies by all the departments involved in helping 
researchers use Open Access as a channel for publications. 
To envision and map how the journey for a researcher 
would looks like when approaching all the different steps to, 
at the end, publish an Open Access article, the workshop 
used a specific method belonging to the Design Thinking 
sphere. “User journey” and “touch points” [19] are widely 
used to address services. User journey is the representation 
of all the steps a customer need to perform to achieve the 
final goal of the service. An easy example is a trip using a 
plane. The journey starts usually online where the ticket is 
bought and then printed. The next stage is arriving at the 
airport using train, bus or car, and then the trip goes further 
until the customer lands at the destination. Each situation 
where the user is in direct contact with the service provider 
is called a touch point. Using Service Design Cards [20][21] 
(see Fig. 2) one can make the aforementioned journey, 
where each card is a touch point.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Representation of a User Journey from one of the workshops 
groups. 
 
For instance in Fig. 2, the user journey in the picture is 
from one of the groups in the Open Access workshop. The 
journey represents a researcher that has finished a research 
project, and then realizing that the contract done with the 
research project fund provider requires publications in an 
Open Access journal or make available the papers in an 
Open Access repository.  
As represented in Fig. 3, the researcher then may use 
different touch points to achieve that goal. Those touch 
points are well suited to be redesigned in the spirit of 
Design Thinking method. One can, for instance, combine 
them or replace them with new technologies that improve 
the service experience.   
The methodologies used in this study are photo-
ethnography and annotations in vivo. Eighteen participants 
were invited. Two participants were interaction designers, 

ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015. ISBN: 978-1-61208-382-7
52
four participants were from the library working with Open 
Access, and four participants from the library working 
directly with researchers. Finally, eight participants from 
different department of the University working as research 
consultants, in regard to different types of research projects. 
After an hour with an introduction to Design Thinking, all 
the participants were then formally divided in three groups. 
Each group had a unique exercise consisting of different 
user journey researchers may have had when publishing 
Open Access. A longer discussion group meeting the day 
after with three of the library staff that had organized the 
workshop, gave the possibility to collect additional data and 
perspectives. Analysis of pictures, annotations and results 
from the discussion group meeting, was performed in regard 
to empathy.   
 
 
 
Figure 3. Excerpt from Figure 2, showing a very complex group of touch 
points. 
 
Observations, among others, concluded that all three 
groups managed to develop good user journey. Discussions 
about issues researchers had in their work and research 
situations were contextualized and represented well by the 
Service Design cards. On the other hand the participants 
discussion about the issues the research faced were not 
unanimous. The researcher needs were not equally 
supported. Different department had different methods to 
approach 
and 
help 
the 
researchers, 
resulting 
in 
misunderstandings about the users perspective. 
VII. 
DISCUSSION 
Table 1 shows some interesting points to be discussed. In 
the first row, the Designerly Thinking perspective, invites 
understanding the making of an artifact as the core result. In 
the Design Thinking process, when creating artifacts, one of 
the generative drives is the making of various prototypes in a 
rapid way. 
An instinctive and affective experience, as in emotional 
empathy, can be necessary to foster creativity and innovation 
[22] when a designer is prototyping in a rapid way. The use 
of tactile, visual and audio inputs in the creation process, can 
explain the necessity of the designer not using cognitive 
empathy.  
Also the “quantity” and “quality” of empathy applied 
probably cannot be equal in all the prototypes. In this case a 
graduation of empathy can be used as an extra indicator to 
help designers choose the most relevant prototype.  
The next phase of a design process can be the selection of 
the best prototypes. The type of empathy used in this 
situation seems not to be cognitive, therefore it can be more 
relevant to focus on emotional empathy. To sort out all the 
prototypes, an instinctive, emotional, affective experience 
can be a valuable first insight and can make the design 
process more effective. For instance, trying a new model of a 
bike, gives naturally a better insight then imagining how a 
user experiences the ride.  
The second row has also some points worth to mention. 
The reflexive practice based on Schöns [23]   approach, 
implies a reflection-upon-the-creation effort from the 
designer. As a result, the practical competence can have an 
incremental learning boost [23]. Cognitive empathy may 
explain partly how the designer embodied the improved new 
competence gained from the practice and their tacit 
knowledge. Using emotional empathy, on the other hand, we 
may explain what the effects of instinctive, affective and 
emotional new experiences, are in relation to their own 
abilities as designers, creativity and theirs learning processes. 
A possible use of this relation between reflection-upon-the-
creation and empathy can be in the context of the educational 
curriculum to form design practitioners [24].   
The third row is straightforward when it comes to 
empathy. Large complex problems, also known as wicked 
[1], can only be solved if the design process takes in 
accounts a holistic view of the user needs. Point eight in the 
definition of the properties of a wicked problem states the 
necessity to take in account that “solving a wicked problem 
is one shot operation with no room for trial and error.”[1]. 
This definition requires from the designer a deep insight of 
the problem area and the user perspective. Cognitive 
empathy can, in this regard, be a valuable source of 
information.       
Row four addresses partly the reflective tradition of [23] 
and the experience-centered design [25], nevertheless it has a 
scope more focused on how practitioners elaborate 
knowledge grounded in practical experience. Cognitive 
empathy may have a role since the result of making an 
artefact must be grounded in knowledge on prior usage. For 
instance, the designer of an Alessi coffee maker, must base 

ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015. ISBN: 978-1-61208-382-7
53
the new idea on prior knowledge of how such an artifact 
works. At the same time, a cognitive empathy is needed to 
understand how the new design can change the experience 
when making a coup of Italian coffee.  
Finally row five advocates for a Designerly Thinking 
approach to the act of creating meaning. In this case the 
artifact is only a medium to articulate and transmit the result 
of the creation [6]. The Design Thinking process already 
from the first immersive stages of discovery and 
interpretation process [7][8], seems to gain substantial 
support from cognitive empathy, giving insight of user needs 
and the context. 
The analysis of data from the workshop and the 
discussion group meeting was done in regards to how 
empathy works and gives additional support for the 
aforementioned understanding. The main findings suggest a 
need to better include the cognitive empathy of the 
participants, and also understand how the interpretation of 
different contexts may contribute on the process of including 
empathy. This is in line with the Designerly Thinking 
understanding in row 5 in Table1, the Design and Designerly 
Thinking as a creation of meaning.  
Related to the aforementioned workshop, to help the 
outcome of a design process where the results are better 
services, the participants need to experience how the 
situation of a researcher is when publishing a paper. What 
we learned from the workshop, was the unique role the cards 
had. In fact they helped bringing out problems and 
misunderstanding, while the empathy was changing in the 
discussions from a cognitive perspective, where the 
experience gained over the years when in touch with 
researchers was relevant, to an emotional one, where first-
hand experience in the process of participating with the 
researchers in the process of publishing Open Access was an 
emotional new experience.   
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The paper has presented an overview where the use of 
different types of empathy in the pluralistic perspective of 
the design process seems fruitful. Firstly, it gives an 
overview of this attribute in regards to the theoretical 
discourse of Designerly Thinking, secondly it address also 
the necessity to understand how different types of empathy 
work during different design effort. The table used in the 
paper, can be a valuable tool when addressing the correct 
type of empathy used in different design situations. 
The use of emotional and cognitive empathy in the 
design process needs to be addressed by the research 
community to better understand how it can be used to gain a 
more adequate user insight. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are indebted to all workshop participants, 
and the University of Oslo Library for initiating the project.   
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Buchanan, “Wicked Problems in Design Thinking,” 
Design Issues, vol. 8, no. 2, 1992, pp. 5-21. 
[2] H. Collins, “Can Design Thinking Still Add Value?,” Design 
Management Review, vol. 24, no. 2, 2013, pp. 35-39. 
[3] K. McCullagh, “Stepping Up: Beyond Design Thinking,” 
Design Management Review, vol. 24, no. 2, 2013, pp. 32-34. 
[4] B. Nussbaum, Design Thinking is a Failed Experiment. So 
What’s Next? 2011. 
http://www.fastcodesign.com/1663558/design-thinking-is-a-
failed-experiment-so-whats-next (last access 10. February 
2015). 
[5] J. Woudhuysen, “The Next Trend in Design,” Design 
Management Journal, vol. 6, no. 1, 2011, pp. 27-39. 
[6] U. Johansson-Sköldberg, J. Woodilla, M. Çetinkaya, “Design 
Thinking: Past, Present and Possible Futures,” Creativity and 
Innovation Management, vol. 22, no. 2, 2013, pp. 121-146.  
[7] T. Brown, Change by design: how design thinking transforms 
organizations and inspires innovation. Harper Business, New 
York, USA, 2009. 
[8] T. Brown, and J. Wyatt, “Design Thinking for Social 
Innovation (SSIR),” Stanford Social Innovation Review, vol. 
30, no. 5, 2010, pp. 29-53. 
[9] R. L. Martin and K. Christensen, Rotman on design: the best 
on design thinking from Rotman magazine. Toronto [Ont.]: 
Rotman-UTP Publishing, 2013.  
[10] A. Gasparini, “The Value of Emapthy in Desing Thinking,” in 
Innovation in HCI: What can we learn from Design Thinking? 
Workshop. In conjunction with NORDICHI 2014, Helsinki, 
Finland, 2014. 
[11] E. Stolterman, “The Nature of Design Practice and 
Implications for Interaction Design Research,” Int. J. Dsign, 
vol. 2, no. 1, 2008, pp. 55-65. 
[12] E. Spencer, The principles of psychology. Williams and 
Norgate, London, UK, 1881. 
[13] S. New, and L. Kimbell, “Chimps, Designers, Consultants and 
Empathy: A “Theory of Mind” for Service Design,” Proc. 
Cambridge Academic Design Management Conference 
(CADMC 2013). 
[14] R. Hogan, “Development of an empathy scale,” Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, vol. 33, no. 3, 1969. 
[15] I. Koskinen, K. Battarbee, T. Mattelmäki, Empathic design: 
user experience in product design. IT Press, Finland, 2003.  
[16] M. Peeters, C. Megems, C. Hummels, A. Brombacher,   
“Experiential Probes: probing for emerging behavior patterns 
in everyday life,” Proc. International Congress of the 
International Association of Societies of Design Research 
(IASDR 2013).  
[17] A. W. Woolley, C. F. Chabris, A. Pentland, N. Hashmi, T.W. 
Malone, . Evidence for a Collective Intelligence Factor in the 
Performance of Human Groups. Science, vol. 330.6004, 2010, 
pp. 686-688.   
[18] G. L. Kress, and M. Schar, “The Art and Science of Design 
Team Formation,” in Design Thinking Research, H. Plattner, 
C. Meinel,  L. Leifer, Eds. Berlin: Springer Heidelberg, pp. 
189-209, 2012. 
[19] A. Polaine, L. Løvlie, B. Reason, Service design: From 
insight to implementation. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Rosenfeld Media, 
2013. 
[20] A. Culén and A. A. Gasparini, “Find a Book! Unpacking 
Customer Journeys at Academic Library,” in, The Seventh 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, (ACHI 2014) IARIA, feb. 2014, pp. 89-95. 
[21] A. L. Culén and A. A. Gasparini, “Student Driven Innovation: 
Designing University Library Services,” presented at the 
CENTRIC 2013, The Sixth International Conference on 
Advances in Human oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, 
Technologies, and Services, 2013, pp. 12-17. 

ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015. ISBN: 978-1-61208-382-7
54
[22] N. Cross, Design thinking: understanding how designers think 
and work. Berg, Oxford, UK, 2011.  
[23] D. A. Schön, The reflective practitioner: how professionals 
think and work in action. Basic Books, New York, USA, 
1983. 
[24] S. Finken, A. Culén, A. Gasparini, “Nurturing Creativity: 
Assemblages in HCI Design Practices,” Proc. Design 
Research Society, Umeå, Sweden (DRS 2014) pp. 1204-1217. 
[25] P. Wright and J. McCarthy, “Empathy and Experience in 
HCI,” Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2008, pp. 637-
646. 
  
 

