Design Practice in Human Computer Interaction Design Education  
 
Alma L. Culén  
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
almira@ifi.uio.no 
 
Henry N. Mainsah 
Centre for Design Research 
School of Architecture and Design 
Oslo, Norway 
Henry.Mainsah@aho.no 
Sisse Finken 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
finken@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—As the need for Human Computer Interaction 
(HCI) designers increases so does the need for courses that best 
prepare students for their future work life. Multidisciplinary 
teamwork is what very frequently meets the graduates in their 
new 
work 
situations. 
Preparing 
students 
for 
such 
multidisciplinary work through education is not easy to 
achieve. In this paper, we investigate ways to engage computer 
science students, majoring in design, use, and interaction (with 
technology), in design practices through an advanced graduate 
course in interaction design. Here, we take a closer look at how 
prior embodied and explicit knowledge of HCI that all of the 
students have, combined with understanding of design practice 
through the course, 
shape them as human-computer 
interaction designers. We evaluate the results of the effort in 
terms of increase in creativity, novelty of ideas, body language 
when engaged in design activities, and in terms of perceptions 
of how well this course prepared the students for the work 
practice outside of the university.  
 
Keywords—HCI education; interaction design; studio; 
design education; multidisciplinary teamwork. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There is an increased movement towards informing and 
embedding education practices from other disciplines into 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI). This is especially true 
when it comes to design practice and design pedagogy [1].  
Many authors have stressed a need for considering new 
pedagogical approaches to HCI education that creatively 
synthesize HCI theory and methods with design thinking-in-
action (see, for example, [2]–[5]). Faiola has argued for 
development of pedagogical models intended for teaching 
HCI that “provide students with knowledge domains that 
can account for understanding design, social context, and 
business strategies in addition to computing”, [6, p. 30]. 
Winograd and Klemmer, discussing the reasoning 
behind opening the now famous d.school at Stanford, an 
innovation hub with a core in human computer interaction 
design, state:  “The basic premise of the d.school is that 
students need two complementary kinds of training. The 
disciplinary training provided by conventional departments 
provides them with depth in the concepts and experience of 
a specific field. This gives them intellectual tools, but often 
misses the larger context of relevance and integration with 
other kinds of knowledge, which are required to innovate 
effectively in the ‘real world’”, [7, p. 1]. Such 
multidisciplinary and effective learning arenas are not easy 
to create. They represent innovative thinking and innovative 
education, which has not yet been able to prove itself 
worthy over time. Thus, embedding innovative educations 
into traditional educational institutions is difficult. However, 
the evidence is there that the multidisciplinary approach, 
such as d.school, has its merits. In line with how Bannon 
argues why HCI needs to change in the 21st century [8], we 
argue that the HCI educations needs to change in order to 
accommodate for new technologies, new interaction forms, 
new practices, and new areas of research. One practice 
outside the traditional HCI field, which has a strong 
influence on changes taking place within HCI, is the design 
practice. Many scholars have explored the relation between 
HCI and design. Some of the notable results of these 
explorations are: a proposition to consider HCI as research 
through design, see [9]–[14], a proposition to consider 
Human Computer Interaction Design (HCID) as a radically 
interdisciplinary dialogue [15], convergent - divergent 
questioning [16], models, theories and frameworks toward a 
multidisciplinary science [17].  
Two of the authors, of this paper, work within 
department of informatics, teaching traditional HCI and 
qualitative research methods. The third author works at a 
traditional design institution, the school of architecture and 
design. Over the past few years, the two schools have 
cooperated and run a graduate course in interaction design 
together. The course took place at the school of architecture 
and students from both institutions worked on design 
projects in multidisciplinary teams. The cooperation came to 
an end this year, as the design school faculty felt that the 
differences in traditions and practices between the two 
schools were too far away from each other. This situation 
was the immediate motivator for exploring different venues 
and different approaches to teaching design practice and 
design thinking within the department of informatics. 
In this paper, we present the teaching approach that we 
have chosen and the results of applying the design pedagogy 
in the context of an advanced HCID course in the 
department of informatics. Our goal was not to educate 
designers, but to teach HCI students about design practice 
through direct experience and reflection. Similar approaches 
have been advocated by other scholars, e.g., [3], [10], [18]. 
Our intention with the course was to prepare HCID students 
for better collaboration in multidisciplinary teams, to bridge 
some of the differences in the traditions, to learn, inspired 
300
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

by the d.school, about design thinking, design practice, and 
to understand a reflexive practice. In order to evaluate the 
success of our approach we have chosen the following 
criteria: emergence of creativity, novelty of generated ideas, 
body language when engaged in design activities and 
perception of how well the course prepared students for the 
work practice outside the university.  
The paper is structured as follows: in Section II, we 
briefly describe the HCI pedagogical models that the 
students were familiar with, and then a design model used 
by the school of architecture to teach interaction design. We 
proceed to explaining, in Section III, our case, where the 
new pedagogical model was applied to teach a course in 
HCID. In Section IV, we discuss our findings, and sum up 
the paper in the concluding Section V. 
II. 
PEDAGOGICAL MODELS: HCI AND DESIGN 
A. HCI model 
Many HCI pedagogical approaches include a mix of 
user-centered requirement analysis, design, implementation 
and evaluation [19]. This mix is exactly what our students 
have received through three HCI courses, which they had 
taken prior to the graduate class described here. Their first 
course covers material from the book [20]. In the second 
course, students gain theoretical and practical knowledge on 
how to study situated use of technology and how such 
studies can inform design of technology.  Reimer and 
Douglas [21] point out that such study program often falls 
short of teaching students good design of real-world 
artifacts, while engaging in real-world design processes. In 
order to address the real-world settings, the third course in 
HCI, using [22] as a course book, defines projects based on 
the needs of local companies and organizations. All three 
HCI courses are project-based courses. However, they use a 
classical teaching model consisting of two hour-long 
lectures, in a lecture hall, and two hour-long sessions in 
smaller groups. The later provides help with exercises from 
the book, questions around the material covered during the 
lectures, or issues related to the project work. The third 
course in HCI also offers an hour-long design feedback 
session with the instructor and a representative of a 
company for which the students are designing. The projects 
are carried out in project teams of 3-4 students. Although 
the third HCI course addresses the issue of real-life 
problems, there is still a gap between multidisciplinary 
teamwork in professional circles and what students can 
experience in terms of teamwork in the context of this HCI 
course. 
Another important aspect of learning, present in some 
design disciplines and often lacking within HCI, is related to 
approaches that emphasize speculative and inductive ethos. 
Lewis argues in [23] that technology education nowadays 
needs to promote more than simply knowledge of materials, 
mastery of special technical skills and techniques, or correct 
use of tools or instruments. It should move beyond these to 
pursue “more subjective and elusive goals”, [23, p. 35]. 
Among these goals he includes creative insight. According 
to Lewis, the teaching of design is ideally suited to uncover 
students’ creative potentials, because design allows open-
endedness [23, p. 45]. Design problems are ill-structured, 
solutions are not defined in advance, and pathways to the 
solution are open. Cropley [24] identifies these issues as 
precisely the conditions that promote creativity. Creativity 
can be nurtured through a pedagogical framework that 
builds on open-ended problem solving, using design 
processes for real-life contexts [25]. 
  While “HCI specialists still focus on the issues that 
gave birth to the field: Are technologies learnable, usable, 
useful, reliable, comprehensible, ethical? We are still 
concerned with assessing whether technologies serve, 
engage, and satisfy people and extend their capabilities, or 
frustrate, thwart, and confound them”, as the authors state 
in [26, p. 44], so does most of HCI education as well. In 
order to answer questions about users and technology, the 
focus is, naturally on users and what they do with the 
technology. The students of HCI are thus also trained in 
seeking the input from users, whether it is for research or 
design purposes.  However, as Bødker [27] points out, the 
so-called third wave of HCI includes broader consideration 
of cultural and historical embeddedness of technology, also 
in non-work contexts, where emotion and aesthetics play a 
much larger role. The third wave of HCI has, therefore, 
comes closer to traditional design disciplines, not only 
through aesthetics, but also focus on solving real-life 
problems through design of technological solutions.  
B. Design model 
Hoadley and Cox state: Design is an important class of 
human activity because it links theory and practice, 
bridging scientific activities with creative ones in order to 
deal with ill-structured, open-ended problems, [28, p. 20]. 
To solve problems for real-life contexts, designing 
combines formal knowledge, experience, practice and 
judgment, both through and in action. Schön proposes an 
“epistemology of practice implicit in the artistic, intuitive 
processes which some practitioners bring to situations of 
uncertainty, instability, uniqueness, and value conflict,” that 
he characterized as “reflective practice” [29]. Design 
pedagogy can be understood through a socio-cultural 
perspective on learning that is centered on developmental 
aspects occurring between cultural and socially mediated 
actions in contemporary and legacy contexts [30].  
Design studio learning and teaching relies on the 
integration between people. Schadewitz and Zamenopoulos 
say: “The studio model has fostered the type of 
enculturation into practice that modern schemes for 
distributed 
situated 
learning 
are 
just 
coming 
to 
understand,” [31, p. 1]. Shaffer [32] presents the academic 
design studio as a coherent system where surface structures, 
pedagogy, and epistemology interact to create a unique 
learning community. Surface structures refer to components 
of the learning environment such as the space, furniture, 
assignments and so forth. Pedagogical activities include 
activities such as iterative design cycles, field research, and 
group discussions of work in progress. Epistemological 
understanding describes the beliefs and the nature of design 
knowledge and how it is constructed [3]. Brandt and 
301
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

colleagues draw upon Lave and Wenger’s concept [33] of 
“communities 
of 
practice” 
that 
describes 
learning 
communities where novices are first introduced as 
legitimate peripheral participants and integrated more 
centrally into the community through their participation in 
increasingly more complex tasks. Learning-in-practice is 
contextual and situated in time and space and is shaped by 
the historical dimensions of institutions and participants’ 
own life experiences which contribute to shape the manner 
in which the learning environment is enacted. In this way, it 
is similar to an “ecological approach” to understanding 
learning in a more holistic way that brings together a focus 
on practice, tools, learning environments, and social 
context; see [3, p. 336]. The teaching rarely involves 
research articles, books to teach from, or regular formal 
lectures. 
We are now in a position to present our case and 
describe challenges and lessons learned from introduction of 
design studio practices into teaching an advanced HCI class. 
III. 
THE CASE: DESIGN PRACTICES IN HCI TEACHING 
In implementing a design practice in the context of the 
class we chose to work in the lab, where it was possible to 
implement practice-based learning. The students had access 
to materials such as scissors, paint, fabric, paper, tools like 
sawing machine, hammers, pliers and like, as well as 
electronic components, such as Lilypads, GPS sensors, LED 
lights, wires, welding station, etc.  The number of students 
was restricted to ten. They were all advanced graduate 
students with three prior courses in HCI, as described in the 
previous section, including experience with user-centered 
and participatory design approaches. The teaching team 
consisted of the two in-house teachers and one teacher from 
the school of architecture and design. The later attended the 
class approximately every third week, providing feedback 
on the students’ design projects.  The authors of this article 
are the three teachers who have an insatiable curiosity about 
creativity and how it emerges.  Specifically, we are curious 
about what happens when HCI practitioners cannot rely on 
the usual ways of thinking and working – that is, when they 
do not have the support of users in the design process. It is 
commonly considered that HCI designers should design 
interactive 
products 
“to 
support 
the 
way 
people 
communicate and interact in their everyday and working 
lives”, [20, p. 9]. In order to design such products, HCI 
designers rely on user participation and user studies. These 
studies inform the design, but also split the responsibility for 
“good” design between designers and users who informed it. 
It could be said that users are a great support to HCI 
designers in, at least, the following ways: helping in testing 
products and prototypes, informing design processes, 
participating in them, allowing designers to observe them 
interacting with technology and last but not least, by making 
HCI designers feel that designs processes are not dependent 
on the mystery of creativity and creative processes.   
Throughout the course, the in-house teachers have 
uploaded literature of relevance to a dropbox. This literature 
covered a range of different subject matters such as: design 
thinking, 
design 
anthropology, 
differences 
between 
interaction design practices within design and HCI, service 
design, participatory service design, design research, and an 
article concerning design of wearable technology.  Some of 
the papers were chosen in response to students’ project ideas 
and others aimed at explaining the differences between 
practices of Interaction Design (ID) and HCID.  
Instead of having the traditional lectures, the model 
described earlier which the students are used to, the shared 
time between the teachers and the students was spend on 
discussing various topics, design ideas, and on providing 
feedback on designs in progress. Some, perhaps unusual 
forms of stimulating students to be more open and creative 
were used. For example, in order to increase the energy 
level and engagement, we would form a circle, and in turn, 
everyone had to “design” a move that the whole circle then 
repeated for a while, and then proceeded to another person 
(see Fig. 1). Other times, we encouraged new ways of 
exploring the world [34]. For example, we brought artists 
with interesting ideas and products into the classroom; see 
Fig. 2. Altering the ‘lecture set-up’ in this manner was a part 
of the pedagogical aim of introducing new ways of 
conducting HCI teaching, with intention to increase the 
D(esign). In doing this, we aimed at making the students 
step outside their comfort zone, as well as encourage bodily 
engagement and hands-on design practices. 
 
 
Figure 1. Students and a faculty member standing in a circle and “creating” 
new body movements. 
In order to further support the bodily engagement and 
hands on practices, the students were asked to complete two 
projects during the semester. The aim of the first project was 
to design an exhibit addressing the activities and research 
interest of the group for design. The exhibit was shown at a 
faire, (which is held annually at the department of 
informatics), presenting the work of different research 
groups. The faire also featured representatives from many 
local IT companies. The second project was to design an 
installation for the library. The interactive installation had as 
a goal to bring forward those resources and services, 
available through the department’s library, which usually 
remain hidden or under-used. 
During the first eleven weeks of the course, we carefully 
documented the students’ work on their first design projects.   
302
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 2. Amanda Steggell, an artist who made the energy bank, a charging 
station for mobile phones, showed her product (in the red square, [35]). 
In documenting the process we took photographs and 
collected Post-it notes, which we used to quickly note input 
(aim, what, how, do-ability) during a feedback session. 
Further, we took notes during conversations with students, 
or when they presented their work.  Additionally, we handed 
out briefs with targeted questions concerning creativity, 
work effort in class, expectancies of outcomes from the 
course, and addressed the issues around multidisciplinary 
work. These targeted questions were answered either orally 
or in writing. 
Both in-house teachers and students have taken 
photographs, amounting to over 300 images, and have 
shared them in the aforementioned dropbox. The dropbox 
was made specifically for this class to share photos, 
presentations of the design projects, and other class related 
material, such as the literature. The photographs, used in 
this paper, are from the shared pool in the dropbox.  From a 
teacher’s perspective the photographs have been a way of 
documenting [36] the process from the first drafting of ideas 
to the materialization of the designs. In addition, the 
photographs have served as information, beyond mere 
documentation, and have been used as entrances to gain 
understandings about increase in creativity, novelty of ideas, 
and body language when students engaged in design 
activities; see Fig. 2 and Fig. 4 – Fig. 7. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
From our experience of cooperating with the school of 
architecture 
and 
design 
and 
projects 
based 
on 
multidisciplinary teamwork, we have learned that the 
building of “communities of practice” did not work for us. 
The HCID students were not considered to be “real” part of 
the design team, but rather programmers waiting around for 
the time to come when technology is embedded into the 
product, and thus, they were never really integrated into the 
community of practice. This is, in part, natural, as they 
never experienced studio work before and needed time to 
understand surface structures, pedagogical activities and 
epistemological beliefs. The HCID students’ work was 
never publically criticized before, nor was it ever exhibited 
for others to see. In addition, they have little practice in 
speaking about their work.  The experience with shifting 
from humbleness underway to pride in ownership of the 
work they did and the ideas that led to the final product, was 
also new. 
In our case, as suggested in [3], the students could not be 
introduced as novices and gradually integrated more 
centrally into the community of design practice through 
their participation in increasingly more complex tasks. We 
had to find a way to bring them closer to understanding and 
experiencing of that practice on our own. The start of this 
process; see Fig. 3, was not easy. It was clear that the 
students used “re-cycled” ideas, and simply changed the 
domain to which they applied them. For example, finding 
the faces in places (finding things that resemble faces, Fig. 3 
upper right corner) was suggested as an extra activity during 
the exhibit. Never mind the fact that none of us, faculty or 
students, could find faces in the building, making the task 
really hard and little fun as an activity on the day of the 
exhibit, the idea itself was not novel and neither was a way 
of using it [34]. 
 
 
Figure 3. Among the initial ideas one can see recycled ones, such as the 
“faces in places”, mixed in new ones, such as heated bicycle gloves for 
those who harsh nordic winters do not hinder from using the bike. 
 
Figure 4. The body language of those present during the first feedback 
session shows little excitement or passion. 
Students’ (and faculty’s, far right and far left on Fig. 4) 
body language also shows that there was little entusiasm for 
those ideas and concepts, most of which were based on pure 
entertainment. 
303
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 5. The process of making things for the exhibit. 
Critiques, especially in the beginning, were often taken 
personally. However, making things, such as the skirts or 
cushions for the “iConfession booth”, slowly placed smiles 
on students faces; Fig. 5. It really helped to start unfolding 
some of internal processes leading to increased creativity and 
willingness to learn new skills or use the existing ones in 
order to further the processes that the group was engaged in. 
We have reported on the emergence of creativity in this 
context, and used assemblages of skills as a framework to 
analyze it [37].   
 
 
Figure 6. The students working on the exhibit site, the exhibits 
representative of research on sustainable design, privacy and wearables.  
After the first six weeks, there was a breakthrough. The 
first project was organized as exhibit consisting of three 
parts. The first part built on the idea of sustainability, 
producing the energy while biking, to power blinkers built 
into the glove, as well as to heat gloves, light up the wheels, 
etc. The presentations now included sketches, material 
choices, hand knitted gloves; see Fig.7. 
 
 
Figure 7. Sketches of the prototype on the left, palette of material choices, 
as well as very handmade gloves, connected to a small dynamo. 
The second part was related to design group’s research 
projects regarding design for people with dementia. The skirt 
for dement ladies was the result, as as a counter-balance a 
“bliky” party skirt that lights up when the proximity sensor is 
activated; see Fig. 8 and [38], [39]. 
 
 
Figure 8. On the left, the skirt with a proximity sensor. Remaining images 
are of the skirt for dementia: comfort balls, the GPS and a QR code. 
The third part was an iConfession booth, a tool for 
exploring the anonymity and willingness of people to 
disclose a secret; see Fig. 6 and [40], [41]. 
Finally, all three parts were put together; Fig. 6 and Fig. 9 
show making of the exhibit and the final result, respectivelly.  
The ideas implemented, although inspired by one thing or 
another, were novel. The audience received the exhibit very 
well, and students have expereinced the sense of pride and 
satisfaction with the result. 
In order to get feedback directly from students around 
their perception of readiness to partake in multidisciplinary 
teams, we have designed a short questionnaire. Asked about 
the difference between the usual HCI classes and this one, 
they said: The course focused more on design thinking, and 
to get a finished product to exhibit. It was less literature, 
testing, and report writing than other HCI courses. All 
students expressed that they have better understanding of the 
design practice. In a short survey after the course we asked 
them if they thought that articles were helpful; half of the 
students answered that they thought so, while the other half 
thought that for this course the articles were not so 
important. When asked if they thought that design oriented 
practices (making things), have given them new skills, as 
HCID designers, six students agreed strongly, one did not 
reply and three were neutral. As for the perception of how 
well they are prepared after the course for work with 
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

designers, six students answered that they strongly feel that 
they are better positioned for such cooperation, and four did 
not have strong opinion about the issue, but were not 
negative. 
Our understanding is that the experience they gained may 
help them discover who they are as HCID designers [42, 43], 
both by understanding the difference between the HCI 
practice and the design practice, and by direct experience of 
the design practice. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The lessons learned and discussed in this paper show that 
HCID students could adopt and understand design practices, 
in spite of a rather long experience and a strong sense of 
being rooted in the HCI tradition. The teachers, the students, 
and the audience at the exhibit have all been satisfied with 
the exhibit in terms of adequateness of concepts in relation to 
design task, prototypes developed and organization of those 
into an exhibit. The students’ body language has changed 
from indifferent and closed to engaged and open. They all 
perceive this piece of learning to prepare them for the work 
as professional interaction designers better than the HCI 
courses alone could do. Thus, we conclude that this approach 
warrants further exploration. As future work, we would like 
to follow these students into their work life and see if this 
experience had an impact when working in teams with 
designers in real-life projects. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks go to all of our students: Andrea Gasparini, 
Henrik Kjersem, Lena Risvik, Paria Tahaee, Anja Simonsen, 
Sylvia Saxlund, Rita Johnsen, Ingrid Arnesen, Agnethe 
Heggelund and Rebekka Castro, and our guest lecturers Tom 
Igoe, Amanda Steggell and Lavrans Løvlie. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Koutsabasis and S. Vosinakis, “Rethinking HCI education 
for design: problem-based learning and virtual worlds at an 
HCI design studio,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction, vol. 28, no. 8, 2012, pp. 485–499. 
[2] E. Blevis, “Design challenge based learning (DCBL) and 
Sustainable Pedagogical Practice,” interactions, vol. 17, no. 3, 
2010, pp. 64–69. 
[3] C. B. Brandt, K. Cennamo, S. Douglas, M. Vernon, M. 
McGrath, and Y. Reimer, “A theoretical framework for the 
studio as a learning environment,” Int. Journal of Technology 
Design Education, vol. 23, no. 2, 2013, pp. 329–348. 
[4] J. Kolko, Thoughts on Interaction Design, 1st edition. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2010. 
[5] S. E. Lundgren, O. Torgersson, L. Hallnäs, P. Ljungstrand, 
and E. Erikson, “Teaching interaction design: matters, 
materials and means”, DRS Wonderground International 
conference, IADE, 2006, pp. 1–4. 
[6] A. Faiola, “The design enterprise: rethinking the HCI 
education paradigm,” Design Issues, vol. 23, no. 3, 2007, pp. 
30–45. 
[7] T. Winograd and S. Klemmer, “HCI at Stanford University,” 
Interactions, vol. 12, no. 5, 2005, pp. 30–31. 
[8] L. Bannon, “Reimagining HCI: toward a more human-
centered perspective,” Interactions, vol. 18, no. 4, 2011, pp. 
50–57.  
[9] D. Fallman, “Design-oriented human-computer interaction,” 
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors 
in computing systems, 2003, pp. 225–232. 
[10] N. True, J. Peeters, and D. Fallman, “Confabulation in the 
time of transdisciplinarity: reflection on HCI education and a 
call for conversation,” in Human-Computer Interaction. 
Human-Centred Design Approaches, Methods, Tools, and 
Environments, M. Kurosu, Ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2013, pp. 128–136. 
[11] J. Forlizzi, J. Zimmerman, and S. Evenson, “Crafting a place 
for interaction design research in HCI,” Design Issues, vol. 
24, no. 3, 2008, pp. 19–29. 
[12] J. Zimmerman, J. Forlizzi, and S. Evenson, “Research through 
design as a method for interaction design research in HCI”, 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems, 2007, pp. 493–502. 
[13] J. Zimmerman, E. Stolterman, and J. Forlizzi, “An analysis 
and critique of research through design: towards a 
formalization of a research approach,” in Proceedings of the 
8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, 
2010, pp. 310–319. 
[14] E. Goodman, E. Stolterman, and R. Wakkary, “Understanding 
interaction design practices,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2011, 
pp. 1061–1070. 
[15] P. Wright, M. Blythe, and J. McCarthy, “User experience and 
the idea of design in HCI,” in Interactive Systems. Design, 
Specification, and Verification, S. W. Gilroy and M. D. 
Harrison, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 1–14. 
[16] C. L. Dym, A. M. Agogino, O. Eris, D. D. Frey, and L. J. 
Leifer, “Engineering design thinking, teaching, and learning,” 
Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 94, no. 1, 2005, pp. 
103–120. 
[17] J. M. Carroll, HCI models, theories, and frameworks: toward 
a multidisciplinary science. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. 
[18] K. Cennamo, S. A. Douglas, M. Vernon, C. Brandt, B. Scott, 
Y. Reimer, and M. McGrath, “Promoting creativity in the 
design studio,” Proceedings of the 42nd ACM technical 
symposium on Computer science education, 2011, pp. 649–
654. 
[19] S. Greenberg, “Embedding a design studio course in a 
conventional computer science program,” in Creativity and 
HCI: From Experience to Design in Education, P. Kotzé, W. 
Wong, J. Jorge, A. Dix, and P. A. Silva, Eds. Springer US, 
2009, pp. 23–41. 
[20] H. Sharp, Y. Rogers, and J. Preece, Interaction Design: 
beyond human-computer interaction, 2nd ed. Wiley, 2007. 
[21]  Y. J. Reimer and S. A. Douglas, “Teaching HCI design with 
the studio approach,” Computer science education, vol. 13, 
no. 3, pp. 191–205, 2003. 
[22] D. J. Lazar, D. J. H. Feng, and D. H. Hochheiser, Research 
methods in human-computer interaction. John Wiley & Sons, 
2010. 
[23] T. Lewis, “Coming to terms with engineering design as 
content,” Journal of Technology Education, vol. 16, no. 2, 
2005, pp. 34–51. 
[24] D. Cropley and A. Cropley, Engineering creativity: a systems 
concept 
of 
functional 
creativity. 
Lawrence 
Erlbaum 
Associates Publishers, 2005. 
[25] A. M. Hill, “Problem solving in real-life contexts: an 
alternative for design in technology education,” International 
journal of technology and design education, vol. 8, no. 3, 
1998, pp. 203–220. 
[26] E. F. Churchill, A. Bowser, and J. Preece, “Teaching and 
learning human-computer interaction: past, present, and 
future,” Interactions, vol. 20, no. 2, 2013, pp. 44–53. 
305
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[27] S. Bødker, “When second wave HCI meets third wave 
challenges,” Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on 
Human-computer interaction: Changing roles, 2006, pp. 1–8. 
[28] C. Hoadley and C. Cox, “What is design knowledge and how 
do we teach it?” Educating learning technology designers: 
Guiding and inspiring creators of innovative educational 
tools, 2009, pp. 19–35. 
[29] D. A. Schön, The reflective practitioner: How professionals 
think in action, vol. 5126. Basic books, 1983. 
[30] J. V. Wertsch, Mind as action. Oxford University Press, 1998. 
[31] N. Schadewitz and T. Zamenopoulos, “Towards an online 
design studio: a study of social networking in design distance 
learning,” International Association of Societies of Design 
Research Conference, IASDR, 2009, pp. 1–11. 
[32] D. W. Shaffer, “Learning in design,” in Foundations for the 
Future in Mathematic Education, R. A. Lesh, E. Hamilton and 
J. Kaput, Eds. Routledge, 2007. 
[33] J. Lave and E. Wenger, Situated learning: Legitimate 
peripheral participation. Cambridge university press, 1991. 
[34] K. Smith, How to be an explorer of the world: portable life 
museum. New York: Perigee, 2008. 
[35] “Energy Bank.” http://www.energy-bank.org/. Accessed: 
January 15, 2014. 
[36] M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing ethnographies. Los Angeles; 
London: SAGE, 2007. 
[37] S. Finken, A. Culén and A. Gasparini, “Nurturing creativity: 
assemblages in HCI design practices”, in Proceedings of DRS 
2014, The Big Debates, in press.  
[38] R. Johnsen, S. Saxlund, and A. Simonsen, “Skirts with 
meaning,” skirtswithmeaning, 2013. http://skirtswithmeaning. 
wordpress.com/. Accessed:  January 15, 2014. 
[39] A. L. Culén and S. Finken, “A Skirt for Well Aged Ladies 
with Cognitive Loss,” in Proceedings of HCII 2014, in press. 
[40] A. Gasparini, R. Castro, L. Risvik, and A. Heggelund, 
“iConfess 
at 
dagen@ifi,” 
2013. 
http://folk.uio.no 
/andrega/iConfess/. Accessed:  January 15, 2014. 
[41] A. L. Culén, S. Finken, and A. A. Gasparini, “iCONFESS: 
Mirroring Digital Self-Disclosure in a Physical Booth,” in 
HCII 2014, in press. 
[42] A. L. Culén, S. Joshi, and A. Atif, “HCID: who is an 
interaction designer?” Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference for Design Education Researchers, Oslo, Norway, 
2013, vol. 4, pp. 1924–1937.  
[43]  A. L. Culén and M. Kriger, “HCI in IT-facilitated Business 
Innovation: a Design Thinking Perspective,” in Proceedings 
of HCII 2014, in press. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. The exhibit addresses sustainable design, anonymity and meaningful wearables. Students recruited participants for the part of the exhibit wearing 
Guy Fowler masks, a symbol of anonymity, as part of the exhibit activity. 
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

