Augmenting Remote Trading Card Play with Virtual Characters  
used in Animation and Game Stories 
- Towards Persuasive and Ambient Transmedia Storytelling - 
Mizuki Sakamoto, Todorka Alexandrova, Tatsuo Nakajima  
Department of Computer Science and Enginnering 
Waseda University, JAPAN 
{mizuki, toty, tatsuo}@dcl.cs.waseda.ac.jp
Abstract—Using well-known virtual characters is a promising 
approach to enhance information services, since such 
characters provoke people’s empathetic feelings easily, and it is 
also easy for people to recall the leitmotif of the character’s 
fictional stories. In Japan, recently, it has become a popular 
culture to use famous virtual characters of animations and 
games in various services, and this has even become ! main 
business activity for some companies. In the real world, our 
daily life consists of various social activities, and virtual 
characters offer the possibility to enhance these activities.  For 
example, our current social activities might be gamified by 
replacing unknown people with our favorite virtual characters 
or might be augmented by the characters’ stories. 
   In this paper, we present Augmented Trading Card Game that 
enhances remote trading card game play with virtual 
characters used in the fictional stories of popular animations 
and games. We show our observations about the way players 
use the system, realizing the game, and what their feelings and 
impressions about the game are. We believe the obtained 
results would be useful to consider how to use empathetic 
virtual characters and the fictional story that the characters 
are used in, in the real world activities for future information 
services. We also discuss how our approach can be extended to 
design a new type of transmedia storytelling by considering 
Augmented Trading Card Game as one form of transmedia 
storytelling. 
Keywords - Empathetic virtual characters; Game design; 
Augmented reality; Trading card game; Ideological metaphor; 
Animation and game stories; Physical tangibility; Transmedia 
storytelling 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
   Virtual characters are widely used in our daily life, 
recently. For example, famous Disney characters like 
Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck provoke our empathetic 
feelings easily anytime and anywhere, and Kitty and 
Pokémon are now found all over the world [1]. In 
animations and games, each virtual character has its own 
personality and story, which can be used as a medium to 
convey special information and messages to people. If 
people are familiar with the fictional story of an animation 
or a game, then the story’s characters are able to recall the 
leitmotif of the story easily without much additional 
information but by just performing some action/interaction 
with the story’s character. Specifically, many Japanese 
animation and game stories contain serious ideological 
messages that are important to make our daily life more 
desirable. We believe that this observation is very important 
when considering how to use virtual characters in various 
future information services in the real world. Recently, our 
daily life is becoming more and more complex, and we need 
to process a lot of information everyday. In our modern 
society, there are many real social problems that need to be 
solved urgently. However, it is hard to convey important 
ideological messages to people without presenting a large 
amount of additional information to them. For example, 
education is a traditional heavy-weighted method to teach 
the importance of ideological messages without long 
learning time.  
   In the contemporary Japanese society, several posters for 
public service announcements have adopted the idea to use 
virtual characters from recent popular animation stories. For 
example, K-ON! has been used for promoting a national 
survey in Japan [24]. In the story of K-ON!, high school 
girls try to realize their dreams with cooperative efforts 
among them. This becomes a persuasive message conveying 
the idea that everyone’s participation is important for the 
national survey. Also, NFGD that promotes guide dogs’ 
training has created two posters using popular characters 
from Puella Magi Madoka Magica [26]. The girl that has 
been used in one of the posters is rebellious, but very 
considerate to her friends. The girl used in the other poster 
is very close to her friend and keeps thinking and caring of 
her friend even when they are far from each other. Many 
young girls admire these two girls, nowadays. If people 
want to imitate these magic girls, then the posters contain 
the implicit, strong persuasive message that becoming a 
puppy walker is one of the ways to become like them. These 
examples show the effectiveness of using virtual characters 
that have their background stories to attract people. 
Moreover, they are a good evidence that virtual characters 
could be used to convey ideological messages that might 
play significant role in changing people’s current attitude. In 
Japan, the majority of young people have been enjoying 
animation and game stories for a long time and they know 
the popular animation and game characters and their stories 
very well.  This we believe is a good prerequisite for using 
virtual characters to enhance emotional feelings and 
successfully convey ideological messages through the 
characters’ stories. 
   This paper presents Augmented Trading Card Game 
(Augmented TCG) for playing the Yu-Gi-Oh! Trading Card 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Game (Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG) between two players who are 
located in different places. The system, realizing the game, 
supports the remote trading card game play with virtual 
characters. We consider two possibilities to use virtual 
characters in the game. The first one is to show a virtual 
character representing the opponent player, where the 
movement of this character is synchronized with the current 
real movement of the opponent player. We believe that this 
movement synchronization gives the character more reality, 
which allows us to easily remind the players the leitmotif of 
the characters’ stories containing some ideological messages. 
The second idea is to include another virtual character, 
which is actually the virtual character of the character 
depicted on one of the player’s cards.  This character would 
encourage the player to win during the game. Some Yu-Gi-
Oh! TCG players are very keen on collecting cards and they 
feel strong empathy with their cards. Moreover, they even 
feel the characters illustrated on their cards as their close 
friends. Therefore, the communication with the characters 
during the play would have a very strong influence on the 
players. 
   In Augmented TCG, we use popular virtual characters that 
have been used in Japanese animations and games. 
Specifically, the Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG has been originally 
introduced in the Yu-Gi-Oh! comic and animation. One of 
the reasons why Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG is popular in Japan is the 
fact that almost all young people have first enjoyed the 
comic and the animation story and then learnt how to play 
the game from that story. The story also teaches some 
important ideological concepts such as the importance of 
justice, friendship, bravery, positivity, and thoughtfulness. 
That is why we believe that the characters of the Yu-Gi-Oh! 
animation story can be used to enhance the playing style of 
the game through the stories they carry and recall. In this 
research we are interested in investigating the impact of the 
presence and behavior of the 3D virtual characters on the 
players’ emotions and feelings, and the play style of the 
game. For that purpose we conducted a user study in which 
we observed the participants’ attitude during the play, and 
interviewed them after that. Furthermore, we discuss that 
Augmented TCG is considered as one form of transmedia 
storytelling. Transmedia storytelling is the technique of 
telling a single story or story experience across multiple 
platforms and formats using current digital technologies [4]. 
Our approach enhances an original fictional story in 
corporation with a real world game or social information 
service to create a new story that a player of the game or a 
user of the social information service participates in. We 
also extract the basic concepts from Augmented TCG, and 
present a design framework for designing a new form of 
transmedia storytelling, and as a next step we would like to 
investigate the effect of using virtual characters from 
animation and game stories in our daily activities.  
   The remaining sections are structured as follows. Section 
II shows an overview of Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG. Section III 
presents some issues for designing remote trading card play. 
In Section IV, we present Augmented TCG and describe its 
experiments. Section V discusses that Augmented TCG is 
considered as a new form of transmedia storytelling and our 
design framework for designing a new form of transmedia 
storytelling. In Section VI, we show some related work of 
Augmented TCG. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. 
II. 
YU-GI-OH! TRADING CARD GAME 
   The Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG [29] is a trading card game based on 
the Duel Monsters game that is portrayed in the popular Yu-
Gi-Oh! comic. Yu-Gi-Oh! cards are categorized into three 
types: Monster, Spell and Trap cards. A Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG’s 
player structures his/her own original deck by selecting 
his/her favorite cards from the several thousands Yu-Gi-Oh! 
cards, currently released. This leads to each user having 
his/her own unique and original deck that reflects his/her 
own personality and taste.  
 
Figure 1. Playing Trading Card Game. 
   Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG is a turn-based game, which is played in a 
one-to- one or two-to-two manner as shown in Fig. 1. We 
call the battle with Yu-Gi-Oh! cards a duel. Each player 
starts the game with a certain number of points called life 
points and performs the duel by summoning his/her 
monsters, battling against the opponent with his/her 
monsters or using spells and traps. Depending on the action 
taken and the outcome of it, the life points decrease or 
increase. If the life points of one of the players become zero 
or he/she cannot draw cards from his/her own deck, then 
that player loses the duel and the game ends. 
   The Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG involves various sources of 
enjoyment, besides just playing the game, such as 
completing 
collections 
of 
cards, 
structuring 
decks, 
communicating with the opponent players, trading, battling, 
as well as establishing different links to Yu-Gi-Oh! TV 
animations and Yu-Gi-Oh! comics. Moreover, although 
computerization has advanced a lot currently, the traditional 
version of Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG that does not use a computer but 
paper cards is still very popular among players. 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
REMOTE TRADING CARD PLAY 
   In Japan, as already described, trading card games like Yu-
Gi-Oh! TCG are very popular among children, but most of 
them stop playing the games when they become adults since 
they have no time to meet and play with other people any 
more. However, because of the complicated rules and 
interesting strategies, trading card games are still very 
attractive and popular among adults. That is why playing a 
trading card game with a remote opponent player has 
become a typical play style in the busy modern society. In 
many other games like Go, Chess, Poker and Mah-jong, the 
remote play style becomes more and more popular as well. 
In this section we describe some problems and limitations 
related to the existing remote trading card play. 
   There are already several systems that support remote 
trading card play. Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG on Nintendo DS uses Wi-
Fi to connect remote players. However, in this version, the 
trading cards are digitally represented and thus, players do 
not have the sense of the physical tangibility of the cards, 
which decreases significantly the pleasure and enjoyment of 
the game for some of them [16]. Specifically, the physical 
tangibility of the cards is essential to make players feel 
empathy with their cards. Yu-Gi-Oh! Online also offers a 
similar play style on personal computers, and suffers from 
the same flaw. Therefore in order to improve the described 
limitation of the existing systems, in Augmented TCG, we 
allow players to use their own, already collected physical 
paper cards.  
   As described in [16], we have found that some players 
would feel uncomfortable communicating directly with a 
real opponent player when the opponent player is a stranger 
for them. However, using just an avatar to represent the 
opponent player, as in the existing online trading card 
games, does not offer enough reality for the opponent player. 
We believe that using virtual characters from animation and 
game stories to represent the opponent players, whose 
behavior is synchronized with the behavior of the opponent 
player, would offer more reality than the avatars used in the 
current online trading card games. Also, trading card games 
in Japan are very closely related to comic, animation and 
game stories, in which the trading card games are part of the 
stories. That is why players usually relate to these stories 
and their characters while playing the game, which makes 
the game even more enjoyable for them. 
   In the current online trading card games, some players 
tend to disconnect from the game if they are going to lose. 
Specifically, it is a typical behavior of players whose only 
goal is winning the game. Such players feel pleasure and 
satisfaction only when winning the game and do not just 
enjoy the gaming process. This “unfair play” becomes one 
of the reasons for many trading card game players to dislike 
playing the online versions of the trading card games [16]. 
However, even unfair players know the comic, animation 
and game stories well. As described before, the characters in 
these stories convey ideological messages like the 
importance of friendship and the pleasure of honest and fair 
play. Involving these characters in the game would remind 
the players these ideological messages and encourage their 
desirable fair play style. 
   Many Japanese young adults admire animation and game 
stories and this strong worship has started and developed 
since they were children. If some of the hurdles to use 
remote trading card play vanish by solving the problems 
described in this section, many people will continue playing 
the game even when they become adults. If young adults 
keep their passion on the Japanese modern culture, this will 
become a power to successfully change our current 
undesirable social situations. 
IV. 
AUGMENTED TRADING CARD GAME 
A. 
Overview of Augmented Trading Card Game and 
its Experiment 
   Augmented TCG enhances the remote trading card play 
performed by two persons. The basic design approach is 
similar to the one of the augmented reality games introduced 
in [19], which integrates physical items and virtual items. 
As shown in Fig. 2, the two players are located in different 
places. Each player’s cards, in his/her duel field on the table 
in front of him/her, are captured by a camera and projected 
on the opponent player’s table.  
   Also, each player is represented by the 3D model of a 
virtual character used in popular animations and games, and 
this character is shown to the opponent player. In the current 
implementation, MikuMikuDance [25] is used to show the 
3D models of the virtual characters. MikuMikuDance is free 
software for creating 3D movies by using virtual characters. 
The virtual character is controlled using MS Kinect and its 
movement is synchronized with the movement of the 
opponent player. In the current Augmented TCG, a player 
can choose one of three virtual characters that are Yugi and 
Kaiba from the Yu-Gi-Oh! animation story, and Link from 
The Legend of Zelda [27]. In the Yu-Gi-Oh! animation story, 
Yugi is always surrounded by many friends and his winning 
success is a result of his strong bonds with his friends who 
love the trading card game. Kaiba is a lonely hero and he 
always seeks the strength in the game, but he does not 
accept other people’s help even if he is in a critical situation. 
However, in the story he also finally understands the 
importance of friendship. Most young boys want to follow 
either of these two characters because of their typical, very 
attractive and ideal personalities. The reason to choose Link 
as the third character in our experiment is that we would like 
to investigate how a popular character from another 
unrelated to TCG story affects the attitude of a player.  
   Furthermore, while playing the game, another virtual 
character, that has been depicted on one of the player’s 
cards in advance, appears on a small display near the player 
once that card is drawn out of the deck, and supports and 
encourages him/her to win the game until the end of the 
game.  
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

   Moreover, the two players can communicate with each 
other via Skype if desired, and thus it is possible for them to 
introduce each other directly instead of using virtual 
characters. This option will allow us to compare the case of 
direct communication and the case of communication 
through virtual characters between the players.  
 
Figure 2. Augmented Trading Card Game System. 
   For the experiments, described in the paper, the rules of 
the game have been simplified for making the duels shorter 
and special predefined decks of cards have been used. The 
decks have been prepared by one of the authors who has 
more than 10 years experience in Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG and has 
more than few thousands Yu-Gi-Oh! trading cards. She is 
very familiar with the TCG animation story, and knows well 
how each character structures the deck and uses the cards in 
the animation. Therefore, for each possible virtual character 
to be chosen by a participant to represent him/her in the 
game, a suitable deck consistent with the animation story 
situation has been prepared. In the current version of 
Augmented TCG, the virtual character’s behavior does not 
reflect the real behavior of the player precisely, but the 
behavior is exaggerated and overreacted according to the 
current play situation. One of the reasons for this is the fact 
that our system’s functionality implementation is not 
currently completely finished. That is why in the current 
system another person exaggerates and overreacts the 
behavior of the player and the movement of the virtual 
character, representing the player is synchronized with that 
behavior using MS Kinect. This is also done in order to 
make the movement and behavior of the virtual character 
closer to the actual character’s behavior in the animation. 
   Fig. 3 shows the current prototype configuration for a 
participant. On a large display, a virtual character, which 
movement is synchronized with the movement of the person 
who imitates the opponent player, is shown. A camera is 
setup behind the small display near the participant, and 
captures the image of the cards. The opponent player’s cards 
are projected on the table by a projector. A small display 
shows the other virtual character that is depicted on one of 
the player’s cards, which in this case is one of the most 
powerful cards in the participant’s deck.  
   We recruited five participants for our experiments, and 
they all performed the duels in the experiments against one 
of the authors of the paper, who has deep knowledge about 
the TCG and could lead and control the experiment so that 
all participants play the game under the same conditions. 
Most of the participants had more than three years 
experience in Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG and they knew the characters 
in the animation stories very well. Before the experiments 
players could not talk to each other and none of them knew 
about Augmented TCG. Also, they were told how the rules 
were simplified right before the experiment. During the 
experiments, we observed each participant’s play and 
conducted interviews with him/her after the play based on 
the contextual inquiry method [3]. The experiments are 
described in details in the following two subsections. 
 
Figure 3. Current Prototype Configuration. 
B. Playing against a Virtual Character 
   We did two experiments for playing Augmented TCG 
against a virtual character representing the opponent player.  
   In the first experiment, participants could choose either 
Yugi or Kaiba for their own character according to their 
preferences. After the play, we interviewed the participants 
about their impressions about the virtual character 
representing their opponent. One of them said: “I could feel 
I am playing against Yugi, but Yugi used in the experiment 
does not offer enough reality”. Especially, the movement of 
the character was sometimes not like the real movement of 
Yugi as in the animation story. He also said: “I will 
definitely enjoy more the game against Yugi, and would like 
to win the game if the movement is more realistic”. Another 
participant said: “The face expression of the character is 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

poor and it is a very important issue while playing a game 
against a real person”. Also, one of the players told us: 
“The voice should be the same as the actor’s voice of the 
character in the animation story”. Moreover, if the 
opponent player was a female, some participants felt strange 
since both Yugi and Kaiba were male characters.  
   In the animation story, players usually play Yu-Gi-Oh! 
TCG standing, that is why we chose that the characters were 
always standing during the play, but in the real situation, 
players usually play sitting. Some participants felt the 
unreality on the behavior of the characters, but if the 
characters just sat down all the time, the participants also 
felt the inconsistency with the Yugi and Kaiba’s personality. 
 
Figure 4. Encouraging a Player by a Virtual Character. 
   In the second experiment, Link from The Legend of Zelda 
was used as a character representing the opponent player. 
The results in this case were completely different depending 
on whether the participants liked this character or not. If the 
participants were not interested in Link, they usually did not 
care about the presence of Link, but if Link was their 
favorite character, then they found playing the game against 
Link more enjoyable. One of the male participants also told 
us: “If the character is a pretty girl, I may be more excited 
to play the game”. Also, a female participant told us: “I feel 
that Link is my boy friend, so playing against him increases 
my pleasure and positivity”. 
C. Encouraging a Player by a Virtual Character 
   In this experiment, a small display on the table showed the 
virtual character depicted in advance on one of the cards 
used by the participant, as shown in Fig. 4. We have 
selected Dead Master from Black!Rock Shooter [20] as a 
character to be depicted on the card because we feel that the 
character does not contradict with or violate the atmosphere 
of Yu-Gi-Oh!. Black!Rock Shooter has two worlds. Dead 
Master is an enemy of Black!Rock Shooter in another 
dimension world, but in the daily world, they are very close 
friends. This becomes a persuasive message conveying the 
meaning that players need to keep and develop their 
friendship even if they fight seriously in a game.  
   As already described, in this experiment a special deck 
was structured in advance for each participant depending on 
the character he/she chose to play with. Then, in the duel, 
the participant always drew out of the deck the card 
depicting Dead Master at the beginning of the game. Once 
that card had been drawn out, a small display next to the 
player kept showing Dead Master until the end of the duel. 
Dead Master supported and encouraged the player during 
the game by using encouraging body gestures and its 
movement was controlled by a person who operated MS 
Kinect. 
   After the experiment one of the participants said: “It is 
desirable that the card depicting Dead Master does not lose 
from the attack of the opponent player”. However, another 
player who was not interested in the character told us: “It is 
more enjoyable if the participant’s favorite character 
encourages him”. One of the other participants said: “I feel 
that the character does not encourage me enough using only 
gestures. It is better that the character talks or advises me”. 
He also told us: “It is desirable that the character behaves 
like a cheerleader”. Dead Master is a serious character, so 
if that character just behaves as a cheerleader, some players 
who know the animation story of Dead Master may feel the 
unreality due to the loss of the consistency with the story. 
Also, another participant told us: “The encouragement 
should be like the one in the animation story”. Most 
participants said:  “The presence of the character increases 
the pleasure, but it is hard to consider winning the game 
just from that encouragement”. The participants’ comments 
showed that they were aware that exactly the character 
depicted on one of their cards appeared on the small display 
without them being informed in advance about this feature 
of the system. 
D. Discussions 
   The experiments described in the previous subsections 
have shown that using virtual characters affects positively 
the play style and enjoyment of the game. However, they 
also show that reality is an important issue in order to 
successfully include virtual characters and as a byproduct to 
recall the leitmotif of their stories in the play. In this 
subsection we give a discussion on some observations 
obtained from the Augmented TCG experiments.  
   As already mentioned, most of the participants, who have 
watched the Yu-Gi-Oh! animation story, feel that adding 
popular virtual characters from the animation to the game 
makes it more enjoyable and exciting. The desire to follow 
these characters becomes also an incentive for the users to 
change their behavior. A negative feedback may be used to 
achieve moral play, but changing a user’s attitude in general 
is not easy [13]. The most important insight is that there is a 
possibility to use a virtual character as a metaphor that 
recalls the story of the character in the player’s mind while 
gaming, and in this way the story may convey the leitmotif 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

containing ideological concepts like the importance of 
friendship, honesty, thoughtfulness and so on. This 
approach would have the power to change the player’s 
attitude. 
   During the experiments most of the participants enjoyed 
playing a game against a virtual character, and being 
encouraged by a virtual character. However, as already 
mentioned from the experiments and the interviews with the 
participants we have found that the reality of the characters, 
such as facial expressions, movement and behavior, is 
essential to increase the enjoyment of the game. Reality is 
an important criterion to evaluate a design [15]. In our case, 
the virtual character’s behavior should be consistent with 
the character’s behavior in the animation story and this is 
important to feel the reality in the game. For example, cards 
that are not used by the character in the animation should 
not be used in the game as well, and the movement of the 
virtual character should be consistent with its typical 
movement in the animation. The number of cards owned by 
the character should be consistent with the real game 
situation as well. A gap between the reality and the 
virtuality may cause the uncanny valley problem [10]. In the 
second experiment described in Section IV.C, the 
participants are not very familiar with the chosen virtual 
character but it may cause a feeling of incongruity in the 
players while playing Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG if they are aware that 
the character appears in another animation story that is 
unrelated to TCG.  
The story behind the characters gives some influence on 
players’ attitude as well. Since the influence of the story 
behind the character is especially interesting in our research, 
we discuss the issue in more details below. 
   All participants in the experiments could easily recall the 
Yu-Gi-Oh! animation story during their plays. The Yu-Gi-
Oh! animation story contains some ideological ideas, such 
as the importance of the competition and cooperation among 
friends for their growth, but the current story may not be 
enough powerful to remind its ideological idea to players 
during their play because the growth of the main hero due to 
the competition and cooperation among friends is rather 
implicit in the story. However, the story is able to increase 
the positive attitude while playing the game, and to increase 
the self-efficacy to win the game. We believe that this factor 
is important to enhance our approach. In our daily life, 
people may not feel self-efficacy to change undesirable 
attitude and behavior because our daily life becomes more 
and more complicated, and we do not have enough time to 
consider the importance of the desirable behavior. We also 
need to consider how the representation form of the stories 
affects the conveying of ideological idea in the near future. 
In Japan, the same story is represented in different forms 
such as animation, manga, game, and novel.  
   In [13], several persuasive services have been reported to 
change people’s undesirable behavior. Although these 
services successfully change people’s undesirable behavior 
temporally, it is not easy to change their attitude to maintain 
their desirable behavior for a long time. Using virtual 
characters and their stories offers a new possibility to 
enhance the previous approaches by enhancing the human 
positivity.  
   Most people, especially Japanese, like fictional stories that 
bring them positive feelings with the fact that people feel 
able to do whatever they want in the fictional stories by 
using hidden magic abilities in the fictional world. If a game 
becomes more pervasive into our daily life, the boundary 
between the real world and the fictional world would 
become more blurred. Therefore, fictional stories can be 
used to enhance our daily activities. Using the stories 
increases the human positivity in the real world, and 
enhances people’s self-efficacy to do what they want 
because through the games they can have the illusion of 
having special extraordinary abilities that exist in the 
fictional world. This is really true for all Japanese young 
people who have grown up with fictional stories like game, 
animation and fictional stories that use special effects. 
Positivity is an important fact to increase people’s self-
efficacy as proved in the positive psychology research [8]. 
The positivity is very useful to make our life more 
meaningful [11], and the positivity is essential for the 
success in our life. Our approach is one possible powerful 
way to enhance people’s positivity. 
   Specificlly, many Japanese animation and game stories 
emphasize on the importance of positivity. Thus, the 
characters in the stories can be used as metaphors to 
increase human’s positivity while playing a game. It will 
become one of the most important roles of a game to teach 
solutions to typical serious problems in life. 
   Another worth mentioning observation is that in the 
current experiment players could not see their own virtual 
character during the play, but only the opponent player’s 
character. We consider that adding this feature to the game 
would increase the pleasure and the reality of the play since 
users will be able to control naturally the behavior of their 
own virtual characters. 
V. 
TOWARDS PERSUASIVE AND AMBIENT 
TRANSMEDIA STORYTELLING 
A. Augmented TCG as Transmedia Storytelling 
   Enhancing games played in the real world like TCG with 
fictional stories is a promising direction to design a new 
form of transmedia. In this section, we discuss some design 
implications of Augmented TCG that will be considered as 
one form of future transmedia storytelling [4]. 
   In the current Augmented TCG, its animation and game 
story is explicitly not shown during the play. A player needs 
to recall the story during his/her play. More tight integration 
of the game play, and the animation and game story offers a 
new possibility to design transmedia. The movement of a 
virtual character from the virtual world to the real world 
offers a tight integration between the fictional story and the 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TCG game play. Transversal interfaces [2] offer a way to 
move between the worlds seamlessly. The approach offers a 
stronger association between a fictional story in the virtual 
world and the real world through a virtual character than the 
current approaches, and the boundary between the two 
worlds becomes more blurred. 
   We believe that a participant would be more excited to 
play the game if a character drawn on a card from his/her 
favorite deck is shown to encourage him/her. Cards are 
considered as one piece of transmedia to construct a 
fictional story. However, the preferences for that character 
are different according to the player’s gender. A female 
player usually likes a card depicting a pretty girl. In this 
case, encouraging cheerfully the player with gestures by that 
character would be natural and meaningful. On the other 
hand, a male player usually likes a powerful card that may 
depict a strong monster. In such a case, the encouragement 
by the character should be more powerful and adding 
special effects to show the superior ability of the character 
would be more suitable and more effective to motivate the 
player. Thus, if the character is one of the player’s favorite 
characters, then the encouragement would be a powerful 
tool to increase the player’s motivation and excitement of 
the game. 
   When playing with a virtual character from animation and 
game story, the player also tries to mimic the character’s 
behavior in the animation story. This can be a very useful 
and successful approach to teach players how to improve 
their gaming skills. If players follow the skillful character’s 
way of playing in the story, then they can learn new skills 
and techniques from that character’s experience in the 
animation.  Of course, a skillful friend is a good coach for 
improving a player’s skills, but if there is no good coach 
available around the player, then he/she needs to learn by 
himself/herself and doing it following the experience of the 
character would be a promising and exciting approach to 
exploit future transmedia storytelling.  
   In our experiments, we could not find the rigorous 
evidence that the stories of the virtual characters could 
always strongly affect the attitude of the players. One of the 
reasons is that in our current research we focus on a game. 
For most people, the purpose of a game is just for fun. Of 
course, the duel against Yugi and Kaiba makes players play 
the game more seriously, but it is hard to make players 
braver when Link is shown as an opponent player. Link is a 
character in an RPG game, and a male player considers that 
the character is just like his avatar in the game, so his story 
does not have strong ideological messages in the game. Also, 
the presence of Dead Master does not have a strong impact 
on a player, since the character itself is very popular, but its 
story is not so well known yet. This means that well known 
stories that contain strong ideological messages and 
characters that have powerful and distinctive personalities 
are important to make virtual characters be used as 
metaphors. We also consider that the music used in the 
popular stories could also become a metaphor for the stories 
because in Japanese animations, their music sometimes 
becomes more popular than their characters. We believe that 
designing metaphors that use the popular stories in 
animations and games is a promising future direction to 
convey complex ideological messages to people without 
presenting a large amount of information to them. 
   One of the problems in using virtual characters is their 
copyright. 
There 
are 
many 
free 
3D 
models 
for 
MikuMikuDance, but some of them are deleted on the Web 
due to the copyright issues. However, freely available 
models offer new possibilities to enhance games because the 
models can be easily customized. In Japan, it is a popular 
culture to create new characters and stories from existing 
ones. Using a customizable virtual character in Augmented 
TCG may create a new playing style of TCG, and the new 
stories of the character can be used to enhance its role as a 
metaphor.  
   As already described, virtual characters used in animations 
and game stories are widely used in multiple media channels. 
In Pokémon, a synergy among games, movies, and TV 
programs is used to make the Pokémon story more popular, 
and make the story pervasive in its fan’s daily life. Also, in 
the Yu-Gi-Oh! animation story, the animation story teaches 
its game players how to play the TCG game and why the 
game is attractive while they are watching the animation 
story. Using multiple channels to communicate messages 
among people is a very effective way to convey the 
messages among people because each channel can convey 
the message in a special partial way. This is also a typical 
approach in the current advertisement because only one 
medium cannot deliver the advertisement to a large 
audience of people.  
B. Value-Based Design Framework 
   Fig. 5 shows a framework for designing persuasive and 
ambient transmedia storytelling. In [15, 17], we extracted 
the values that are useful to design attractive services and 
products from our previous case studies. The classification 
of the values is extended for designing persuasive and 
ambient trasmedia. Our framework consists of two 
components. The first component is a fictional story, and 
the second component is a pervasive game or social 
information service. It offers its own goal for a player. For 
example, in Augmented TCG, the goal is to win a duel, to 
collect TCG cards, or to enjoy a duel with friends [16]. The 
four values depicted in Fig. 5, informative value, empathetic 
value, economic value and aesthetic value are used to 
increase both extrinsic and intrinsic motivation to achieve 
the goal of the pervasive game. The fictional story also 
offers the four values that are the same as in the pervasive 
game, but it also offers two more values, a positive value 
and ideological value. The positive value in the fictional 
story offers people a feeling that increases their positivity. 
This finally increases the self-efficacy to aim the 
achievement of the goal identified in the ideological value. 
Many Japanese game and animation stories depict the 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

heroes’ or heroines’ final success. In the stories, they never 
give up until achieving their goals, so it increases human 
positivity. The ideological value offers the important 
insights to consider people’s life. For example, Japanese 
games and animation stories like to teach us various 
ideological concepts such as justice, human growth and 
development, co-existence with human and nature, love, and 
friendship. Incorporating the ideological value in the stories 
makes it possible to educate people to understand the 
importance to sympathize the stories’ goals, and motivate 
them to try to achieve the goal. 
 
Figure 5. Value-Based Design Framework for Designing  Persuasive and 
Ambient Transmedia Storytelling. 
   In our framework, we are considering two types of 
storytelling. In the first type, the ideological value in the 
fictional story becomes a main issue in the storytelling. For 
example, Augmented TCG adopted this type’s storytelling. 
The pervasive TCG game offers four values to make a user 
achieve the goal of the game by increasing his/her intrinsic 
and extrinsic motivation. As describe above, a fictional 
story offers the positive value and the ideological value. 
While a player is playing a game, the game offers some 
metaphors of the fictional story to remind the story to the 
player. In Augmented TCG, using Yugi and Kaiba as an 
opponent player reminds the player the Yu-Gi-Oh fictional 
story. The virtual characters create associations between the 
four values offered by the pervasive TCG game and the 
fictional story. The association makes a player feel the 
fictional story as a more realistic story in the real world. 
Thus, he/she considers that the positive value and the 
ideological value in the fictional story also exist in our real 
world. The ideological value that is tangible in the real 
world helps a player to recall the importance of the 
ideological concept presented in the fictional story, and 
motivates him/her to achieve the goal identified in the story. 
For example, in Augmented TCG, a player recalls the 
importance of justice and friendship, and then he/she 
considers playing the TCG game more fairly, and growing 
as a noble person. Also, the tangible positive value in the 
real world makes a player increase his/her self-efficacy to 
have enough confidence for achieving the goal of 
understanding the importance of the ideological concept. 
This approach offers possibilities to solve complicated 
social problems and to implement various public policies 
[30]. 
   In the second type of storytelling, the goal defined in the 
pervasive game or social information service is more 
important. The most important aspect of this type is to 
define the goal that is not related to the ideological values 
incorporated in the fictional story. For example, we can 
establish the goal of the pervasive game or social 
information service to be to encourage people to visit a 
certain restaurant more frequently. In this case, the four 
values offered by the pervasive game or social information 
service become extrinsic motivation to achieve the goal. We 
can use some metaphors of the fictional story, such as a 
virtual character from it, as an association to remind the 
story to the player while playing the game. Then, the 
positive value in the fictional story would make a player feel 
self-efficacy to achieve the goal in the pervasive game or 
social information service. Finally, the ideological value 
makes people feel that the goal is more desirable and 
increase the priority to achieve the goal in their daily life.  
VI. 
RELATED WORK 
   There are several other systems that support remote TCG 
play. Duel Accelerator [22] is an online-based Yu-Gi-Oh! 
TCG where each player chooses his/her avatar and virtual 
trading cards with special effects shown on them during the 
duel, are used. The special effects become emotional 
stimulus for the player and thus the pleasure of the play is 
increased. However, virtual cards loose the sense of the 
physical tangibility of the cards, and it is hard to motivate a 
player to enjoy collecting cards. The Eye of Judgment [23] 
uses augmented reality technologies to show special effects 
on the real trading cards. It allows players to use real 
physical cards and special effects can be shown on them. In 
Augmented TCG, it is easy to add special effects to the cards 
projected on the table in front of a player. Also, the Skype 
duel uses Skype to show each player’s cards on the opposite 
player’s display and the voice communication between the 
two players is possible as well. Augmented TCG uses 3D 
virtual characters that are shown to the players and the 
characters move according to the opponent player’s current 
behavior.  
   In CyberOne [21], which is a new TCG,  each paper card 
has a sequence number. When the number is input in the 
system, the corresponding virtual card appears in the online 
TCG. The player can exploit the tangibility of the cards, but 
he/she can also enjoy additional special effects, which is an 
example of the advantages of the virtual cards. Once the set 
of cards in the player’s deck are input in the system, the duel 
is performed automatically without the player doing 
anything and the final result of the duel is returned to the 
player, showing the strength of his/her deck selection.  
However, the enjoyment of constructing an original deck 
still remains for the player. Moreover, the two players do 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

not need to play the game at the same time because they just 
need to construct their decks.  
   Augmented reality techniques may be used to enhance 
existing games. For example, in [19], several augmented 
reality games, that enhance traditional games to integrate 
physical items and virtual items, are reported. Augmented 
Go is an example of a promising approach to maintain the 
advantages of the physicality, but to add virtuality to the Go 
board game. Also, in [6], a card game is enhanced by 
embedding RFIDs in the cards to identify which card is 
currently used, and offer appropriate information to players. 
   Designing a user’s experience [7] is related to the value 
based design framework. In the current approach, we 
extracted and analyzed values from a newly designed 
artifact, but it may be desirable to investigate how the values 
are emerged by analyzing a user’s activities. Since 
designing values strongly depends on a user’s experience, in 
the next step, it is an important research question to explore 
how values affect the user’s experience, and how the values 
designed in the artifacts interact with the values emerged in 
the user’s experience. 
   Popular Japanese role playing games such as the Legend 
of Zelda and Kid Icarus offer rich fictional stories 
incorporating the positive and ideological value. However, 
the games cannot make the values tangible in the real world 
because the games do not offer associations between the real 
world and the virtual world.  
   The Alternative Reality Game (ARG) [12, 18] is a 
promising approach to convey messages to people using 
multiple channels. Fictional stories are embedded into a 
pervasive game that can use  multiple channels. The 
channels offered in the game are used to exploit the game’s 
fictional story. For example, in Perplex City [28], trading 
cards are used to introduce its characters and story. Web 
sites, emails, phone calls, and SMS messages are 
cooperatively used to solve riddles in the mystery story. Our 
approach is also a useful way to design the transmedia story 
telling [4]. Especially, the form to represent a story affects 
how an ideological message is conveyed to a user. The 
transmedia storytelling divides a story across multiple 
media so that it is a possibility to choose the most suitable 
form to attract a user and to convey a message to a user.  
   "Seichi Junrei" is a typical geek culture in Japan, 
especially related to Japanese animation, manga and game, 
in which people tend to visit famous locations from 
animation, manga and game. "Seichi" means "Holy Land", 
"Junrei" means "Pilgrimage". Anime fans arrive at that 
location, and take pictures with the same screen/angle of the 
animation, and upload them to their blogs. The most 
important aspect of "Seichi Junrei" is to bring something 
from the fictional story to the real world. The fans create 
new stories with these pictures and the virtual characters 
appearing in the fictional stories, and co-construct the 
stories to share them within their communities. This is a 
very interesting phenomenon to harmonize the real world 
and the fictional world. We believe that interactive 
pervasive games or social information services based on 
fictional stories are very promising tools to increase the 
reality of the fictional world, and the tools enhance the 
"Seichi Junrei" phenomena by realizing more tight 
integration between the fictional world and the real world. 
The experiences described in the paper will offer useful 
insights to design tools that will realize new types of 
transmedia storytelling. 
   There are several psychological theories that are useful to 
design attractive persuasive and ambient transmedia 
storytelling that influences a user’s behavior and attitude 
[14]. Burrhus F. Skinner’s behavior science makes it 
possible to change people’s behavior and attitude 
unconsciously. Operant conditioning is a form of learning 
during which an individual modifies the occurrence and 
form of its own behavior due to the reinforcement of 
consequences of the behavior. Positive reinforcements and 
negative reinforcements construct a feedback loop to control 
human behavior and attitude systematically. Most games 
use the approach to fascinate people to play games. The 
elaboration likelihood model explains the importance for the 
dual routes to persuasion. The central route offers heavily 
cognitive information to change the user’s attitude, and the 
peripheral route enables the user to change his/her attitude 
through 
emotionally 
influential 
information. 
The 
transtheoretical model proposes five stages as a process 
involving the progress to change the user’s undesirable 
behavior. In earlier stages, the user prefers emotional 
reinforcement not to give up his current efforts. On the other 
hand, for the user who is in a near final stage, enough 
information for making a better decision through rational 
thinking is more suitable. The feeling as information theory 
is useful to consider how information technologies evoke 
the user’s emotion. The theory indicates that it is difficult to 
think rationally during a positive feeling. On the other hand, 
the user tends to think rationally when she feels to be in a 
negative situation. The results indicate that positive stimuli 
are effective in early stages, but in latter stages, negative 
stimuli are desirable under the transtheoretical model. A 
theory of unconscious thought shows that heuristic thinking 
is not always bad. Giving more information may lead a 
wrong decision. When we become conscious, our heuristics 
is biased according to the current frame. However, as 
described in the theory, when our thought is unconscious, 
heuristic thinking may lead to a right decision.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
   This paper presents some observations on the usage and 
the design of Augmented TCG that enhances remote trading 
card game play with virtual characters used in animation 
and game stories. We have shown some experiments of 
Augmented TCG, and presented its design implications. 
   Currently, we are considering the following three future 
research directions. The first one is related to the physical 
tangibility. In Augmented TCG, the physicality of cards is 
one of the  most important design decision, since virtual 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

cards lead to the loss of the reality in Yu-Gi-Oh! TCG. Also, 
physical tangibility is important to offer more pleasure to a 
player [5]. However, virtual cards have some advantages 
over real paper cards such as the possibility to easily add 
special effects to the card. In the current Augmented TCG, a 
player needs to manually teach the system which cards 
he/she would like to use. If the system could automatically 
detect the player’s cards, the usability of the system would 
be dramatically improved. The automatic detection of cards 
can be easily realized by inserting RFID in each card 
similarly to the approach described in [6]. In our current 
system it is sometimes hard to see clearly the opponent 
player’s card and in such case a player needs to explain 
which card he/she is using and what effect the card has. If 
the detailed information about the card is automatically 
shown on the duel field, players do not need such extra 
communication by using a voice communication system or a 
chat system. Also in Augmented TCG, it is easy to detect 
that a player mistakes the usage of a card, which is very 
helpful since sometimes it is hard to understand the complex 
rules of a game even for a semi-expert player. The tangible 
interaction approach is very promising for improving the 
disadvantages of the virtuality [9], and makes it possible to 
combine successfully the advantages of virtual cards with 
the advantages of the real paper cards. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Anne Allison, “Millennial Monsters: Japanese Toys and the 
Global Imagination”, University of California Press, 2006. 
[2] Elisabeth Andre, Klaus Dorfmuller-Ulhaas and Matthias 
Rehm, 
“Engaging in a Conversation with Synthetic 
Characters Along the Virtual Continuum”, In Proceedings of 
5th International Conference on Smart Graphics, pp.1-12, 2005. 
[3] Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt, “Contextual Design”, 
Morgan Kaufmann, 1999. 
[4] Christy Dena, “Transmedia Practice: Theorising the Practice 
of Expressing a Fictional World across Distinct Media and 
Environments”, Dissertation Thesis, University Sydney, 2009. 
[5] Hiroshi Ishii, and Brygg Ullmer, “Tangible bits: towards 
seamless interfaces between people, bits and atoms”, In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pp.234-241, 1997. 
[6] Christian Floerkemeier and Friedemann Mattern,, “Smart 
Playing Cards – Enhancing the Gaming Experience with 
RFID”, In Proceeding of the 3rd Int. Workshop on Pervasive 
Gaming Applications, , pp.79-88, 2006. 
[7] Jodi Forlizzi and Katja Battarbee, “Understanding Experience 
in Interactive Systems”, In Proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, pp.261-268, 
2004. 
[8] Barbara L. Fredrikson, ``Positivity: Top-Notch Research 
Reveals the 3 to 1 Ratio That Will Change Your Life”, Three 
Rivers Press, 2009. 
[9] Patrick W. Jordan, “Designing pleasurable products: An 
introduction to the new human factors”, Routledge, 2002. 
[10] Masahiro Mori, “On the Uncanny Valley”, In Proceedings of 
the Humanoids-2005 Workshop, 2005. 
[11] Jane McGonigal, "ENGAGEMENT ECONOMY: the future of 
massively scaled collaboration and participation", September 
2008 | SR-1183, INSTITUTE FOR THE FUTURE, 2008. 
[12] Jane McGonigal, “Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us 
Better and How They Can Change the World”, Penguin Press, 
2011. 
[13] Tatsuo 
Nakajima 
and 
Vili 
Lehdonvirta, 
”Designing 
Motivation in Persuasive Ambient Mirrors”, Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp.107-126, 2013. 
[14] Tatsuo Nakajima, Tetsuo Yamabe and Mizuki Sakamoto, 
“Proactive Ambient Social Media for Supporting Human 
Decision Making”, In Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing, pp.25-
39, 2011. 
[15] Mizuki 
Sakamoto, 
Tatsuo 
Nakajima 
and 
Todorka 
Alexandrova, ”Digital-Physical Hybrid Design: Harmonizing 
the Real World and the Virtual World”, In Proceedings of the 
7th International Conference on the Design & Semantics of 
Form & Movement, pp.211-222, 2012.  
[16] Mizuki 
Sakamoto, 
Todorka 
Alexandrova 
and 
Tatsuo 
Nakajima “Analyzing the Effects of Virtualizing and 
Augmenting Trading Card Game based on a Player’s 
Personality”, In Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interaction, 
2013. 
[17] Mizuki Sakamoto and Tatsuo Nakajima, “Value-based Design 
for Gamifying Daily Activities”, In Proceeding of the 11th 
International Conference on Entertainment Computing, 
pp.241-244, 2012. 
[18] Dave Szulborski, "This Is Not a Game: A Guide to Alternate 
Reality Gaming", Lulu.Com 2005. 
[19] Tetsuo Yamabe and Tatsuo Nakajima, “Playful Training with 
Augmented Reality Games: Case Studies towards Reality-
Oriented System Design”, Multimedia Tools and Applications, 
Vol. 62, No. 1, pp.259-286, 2013. 
[20] Black!Rock 
Shooter, 
http://blackrockshooter.wikia.com/. 
(Octorber 12 2012) 
[21] CyberOne 
TCG, 
http://www.c-
1cyberone.com/official_top/official_top.html. (Octorber 12 
2012) 
[22] Duel 
Accelerator, 
http://www.yugioh-
online.net/v3/newvisitors/. (Octorber 12 2012) 
[23] The 
Eye 
of 
Judgment, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Eye_of_Judgment. 
(Octorber 12 2012) 
[24] Kyoto Prefecture and Ministry of Internal Affairs, “National 
Survey 
Promotion 
Video”
，
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdAkKZKEfGU. (Octorber 
12 2012) 
[25] MikuMikuDance, 
http://www.geocities.jp/higuchuu4. 
(Octorber 12 2012) 
[26] NFGD, “Guide Dogs Help Spread the Original Poster”, 
http://www.nkoku.jp/pos. (Octorber 12 2012) 
[27] The Legend of Zelda, http://zelda.com/. (Octorber 12 2012) 
[28] Perplex City, http://perplexcitywiki.com/wiki/Main_Page 
[29] Yu-Gi-Oh! 
Trading 
Card 
Game, 
http://www.yugioh-
card.com/en/ 
[30] Institute 
of 
Government, 
“MINDSPACE: 
Influencing 
Behavior through Public Policy”, CabinetOffice, 2010. 
 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

