Comparison of Nursing Personnel’s User Experiences of Four Types of Assistive
Robots: Challenges Include Knowledge and Safety Issues
Iina Aaltonen
VTT Technical Research
Centre of Finland Ltd
Espoo, Finland
e-mail: iina.aaltonen@vtt.fi
Tuuli Turja
Faculty of Social Sciences
University of Tampere
Tampere, Finland
e-mail: tuuli.turja@staff.uta.fi
Marketta Niemelä
VTT Technical Research
Centre of Finland Ltd
Tampere, Finland
e-mail: marketta.niemela@vtt.fi
Abstract— The interest to employ service robots in the care
context is increasing due to the aging population. Many studies
have examined robot acceptance from various angles, but
reports of actual robot usage and the user experiences of
professional personnel are scarce. Via an online user
experience 
questionnaire, 
this 
study 
targeted 
nursing
personnel who have used assistive robots in their work. Ten
statements, 
modified 
after 
the 
Almere 
questionnaire,
concerned the respondents’ acceptance of robots which they
had used. Four different types of robots (robotic therapy
animal; rehabilitation/recreational robot; telepresence robot;
and patient lifting robot) were each covered separately. Most
of the reported robot usage was with the seal robot Paro, and
regular use of any robot was rare. The intentions to use and
the attitudes towards each type of robot were generally
positive. The patient lifting robots were most positively
received regarding their usefulness, whereas the interaction
with the robotic therapy animals was rated pleasant. Fewer
respondents had used the rehabilitation/recreational robots
and telepresence robots, which received lower scores than the
others regarding many of the studied user experience aspects.
In general, more knowledge is needed to make good use of the
robots. Furthermore, it seems there are some concerns of the
safety of using them. These results show that the initial steps
towards employing robots in care work have been taken. There
is a lot of underexplored ground between the simple-to-use
therapy animal robots and functional patient lifting robots,
and  the  potential  and  acceptance  of  those  robots  is  yet  to  be
seen. These results give a baseline for monitoring the service
robot acceptance of nursing personnel based on actual robot
usage.
Keywords-human-robot 
interaction; 
service 
robots;
acceptance; user experience; nursing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Robots have been suggested as a partial solution to tackle
the challenge of aging population and the increased need for
care services. For instance, it has been estimated that there
will be a shortage of 380 000 caregivers by 2025 in Japan
[1], and in Finland, the demand for care labor will increase
by more than 100 000 persons by 2030 [2]. Robots could
relieve  the  physical  burden  of  care  tasks  (e.g.,  lifting  and
transfer of patients), increase the efficiency of care work
(e.g., by improving rehabilitation of persons, or taking
secondary care tasks, such as fetch and delivery tasks, from
care workers) and increase the quality of life of the elderly
themselves (e.g., by increasing their mobility or helping to
keep in contact with their social networks) so that they would
need less help from care workers.
The public opinion of robots has been studied
consistently in Europe for several years. The Eurobarometer
2017 [3] shows that 61% of Europeans have a positive view
of robots and artificial intelligence, and 30% a negative view
(in Finland, the respective figures were 71% and 23%). On
the other hand, the opinions are less positive for “having a
robot to provide them services and companionship when
infirm or elderly,” and a comparison between the last two
Eurobarometers (years 2014–2017) shows that exceedingly
more people feel uncomfortable having robots perform these
tasks [3]. Regarding gender differences, men have typically
more positive attitudes towards robots than women [3][4]
although the opposite has been reported for the seal robot
Paro [5].
In the care context, the attitudes of elderly people
towards service robots have been studied extensively (see,
e.g., reviews [6][7]), and a lot of technical development is
done towards assisting the elderly people at their homes (see
e.g., reviews [8][9]). Although the views of the elderly and
their relatives provide good input to the research and
technical development of assistive technology, Saborowski
& Kollak raised the importance of taking into account the
care professionals’ needs [10]. Specifically, they pointed out
that new technology and robotics have started to change the
relation between care workers and technology, and already
the care workers need to have the knowledge to help people
use assistive technology. Their interviews revealed that the
care staff had encountered several technology-related issues,
such as malfunctioning devices and lack of competence and
training [10]. In rehabilitation context, barriers to adopt new
technologies were similar [11]. On the other hand, in the
rehabilitation context, the acceptance and use of new
technologies was most strongly affected by the perceived
usefulness of the technologies, while the effort to use them
or social pressure were not significant factors. Current use of
new technologies was affected by behavioral intention and
facilitating conditions, such as institutional support [11].
The care personnel’s general opinion towards robotics
has been studied to some extent. Compared with the opinion
of the general population, healthcare professionals had more
negative attitudes towards robots [12]. However, the
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

healthcare professionals would be comfortable with robots
aiding in moving heavy materials, patients or other items,
and in sorting and shelving [12]. In addition to those, other
tasks that have been suggested for robots in the care context
include laundry, food and medicine distribution, patient
monitoring, help with forgetfulness and falling, motivation
and activation, and companionship [13]–[15].
A literature review showed that the concerns the health
professionals have regarding robots include the fear of the
robot's unreliability in clinical situation, privacy of patients,
unemployment, and decrease of face-to-face contact with
patients [13]. In the same article, 39% of surveyed nurses
thought they may need service robots at work. The reasons
for needing robots was not affected by perceived high
physical workload; however, aspects such as making the
work lighter, increasing the meaningfulness and quality of
work, and time savings affected the need for robots [13].
There are relatively few studies that have reported of the
care personnel’s experiences of actual robot usage at work.
Focus group discussions about professional caregivers’
experiences with the seal robot Paro showed that the
emotional and social impact of the robot were perceived as
positive, while there were difficulties in taking the full
advantage of the robot due to the lack of information and
availability of the robot, and the caregivers were worried
about the robot’s hygiene and about breaking the robot [16].
A bathtub robot was initially rejected by nursing staff due
to temporal and financial investments, but it was later
accepted, because it supported the staff’s values on patient
well-being and integrity, even though the robot did not bring
significant ergonomic benefits nor save labour [17].
 In the context of a mobile self-navigating greeting robot
in a care-hospital, the personnel raised issues, such as the
fear of making mistakes with the robot, the fear of being
replaced by robots, the inability of robots to replace human
care, and irritation caused by the robot’s presence. On the
other hand, the robot was seen as a source of support for staff
and it elicited a positive atmosphere [18].
With telepresence robots, the personnel’s primary
concern of the elderly users’ negative reactions was not
realized in practice. The personnel approved that the robot
enabled the residents to interact with their families remotely,
and despite technical problems, the personnel believed that
with adequate training and assistance, the use of the
telepresence robot would be feasible in the future [19]. In
two other telepresence studies, care workers experienced
robot trials positively although issues, such as the privacy
and integrity of the patients, and the need for common rules,
were raised [20][21].
To summarize the studies related to robots in the care
context, the elderly perspective is well represented in the
literature, but it seems the studies on professional
personnel’s attitudes, needs and concerns remain on a
general level and are based on expectations rather than on
actual robot usage. Therefore, there is a research gap
between expectations of robots and the actual usage
experiences among the professionals in the healthcare sector,
especially when different robots and larger user groups are
considered. The aim of this paper is to compare the nursing
Figure 1.
The four types of robots that were in the focus of this research.
personnel’s user experiences of four different kinds of robots
which they have actually used in their work (Figure 1).
These results give a baseline for monitoring the acceptance
of service robots by professional nurses and help us identify
needs for future development, which is important if robots
are to be the future co-workers of the care personnel.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the methods. Section III reports the results and
Section 
IV 
discusses 
them. 
Section 
V 
and 
the
acknowledgements conclude the paper.
II.
METHODS
As part of a research project concerning the use of
robotics in welfare services, Finnish nursing personnel were
asked to participate in an online questionnaire concerning
their attitudes towards robots and their robot usage at work
[12]. In addition to user experience questions, the online
questionnaire included 127 general multiple-choice questions
concerning demographics, occupational details, and attitudes
towards technology and robotics. The online questionnaire
was distributed between October and December 2016
through two major trade unions, The Union of Health and
Social Care Professionals in Finland and The Finnish Union
of Practical Nurses (most of the Finnish nurses are unionized
[22]). The final aggregate data included the responses of
3 800 respondents who had completed at least the first page
of socio-demographic information and a question concerning
their interest in technology (reported elsewhere [12]). The
average response time was 19 minutes. 458 respondents
(12% of total) had had first-hand experience with robots, and
their responses are reported in this paper.
The respondents with first-hand experience with robots
(n=458) were prompted to answer a user experience (UX)
questionnaire regarding each of the types of robots they had
used. They were aged 19–70 (mean 46.8; standard deviation
11.46), and 95% of them were native Finnish speakers. By
profession, 62% were practical nurses, 34% registered
nurses, and 4% were physiotherapists, instructors, and
assistants.
The UX questionnaire covered the robot usage of four
different types of robots, which were introduced using
generic terms and example photos as follows:
•
Robotic therapy animal (image of the seal robot Paro)
•
Rehabilitation/recreational 
robot 
(image 
of 
the
humanoid robot Nao)
•
Telepresence robot (image of Double)
•
Patient lifting and transfer robot (images of RoboticBed
and Riba bear).
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The respondents with first-hand usage experience with
any of the types of robots listed above were prompted for
more questions regarding the frequency they had used the
type of robot in question (used once or twice; a few sporadic
times; in regular use for less than one month; in regular use
for one or two months; in regular use for several months);
followed by ten items concerning their user experience
(5-point Likert scale, totally disagree – totally agree),
adapted from the Almere questionnaire [23]. The Almere
model is an extension of the Unified Theory of Acceptance
and Use of Technology (UTAUT)[24], and it was developed
to test the acceptance of social robots. The Almere model
uses constructs (e.g., anxiety, trust, perceived ease of use) to
predict the user’s intention to use a robot. In the Almere
questionnaire, each of the constructs is represented by 2-5
statements evaluated using the Likert scale [23].
The questionnaire items are listed in Table 1 (translated
from Finnish; order reorganized to facilitate reporting). In
the UX questionnaire, the questions were answered
separately for each type of robot the respondents were
experienced with. Compared with the Almere questionnaire,
the items #1, #6 and #10 deviate most from the original
items whereas the other items are mainly about re-phrasings
of the original ones to suit all four types of robots and to
reflect the literal translations from the Finnish language. The
Almere model has two items for Trust, but they reflect trust
for the robot’s advice (the studied robots do not generally
give advice), and therefore item #6 was generated
to measure the overall perceived reliability of the robot and
its safety.
Regarding the non-social robots, item #10 measures
“Perceived operating friendliness” instead of “Perceived
sociability” to reflect the smoothness of interaction instead of
social characteristics. Moreover, the Almere item for
Perceived sociability in the context of telepresence robots
could have been misinterpreted to mean the interaction
between two humans communicating through the robot. The
UX 
composite 
variables 
showed 
good 
inter-item
consistency: Rehabilitation/recreational robot (α = .787),
robotic therapy animal (α = .846), telepresence robot (α =
.819), and patient lifting robot (α = .781).
The participants were instructed to answer the
questionnaire as follows: “Please answer the following
questions thinking that the same robot that you are already
experienced with would be taken into use at your workplace
by the personnel.”
There were several reasons for adapting the set of
questions from the Almere questionnaire. Firstly, the number
of questions had to be limited to keep the overall answering
time manageable: using the whole Almere questionnaire
would have made the whole online questionnaire [12] too
burdensome, and therefore only ten items were included.
Secondly, to the best of our knowledge, there are no human-
robot interaction questionnaires available that would suit all
four kind of robots. For example, many available
questionnaires are targeted at the social characteristics of
robots (e.g., [27]), which would not make sense in the
context of telepresence or mechanoid lifting robots. The
Almere construct “Social presence” was dropped for a
TABLE I.
UX QUESTIONNAIRE FOR THE FOUR TYPES OF ROBOTS.
EXCLUDING ITEM #10, THE PHRASES WERE THE SAME FOR ALL FOUR TYPES
OF ROBOTS, WITH THE [ROBOT] REPLACED BY EACH TYPE OF ROBOT. THE
RESPECTIVE ITEMS AND CONSTRUCTS IN THE ALMERE QUESTIONNAIRE [23]
ARE SHOWN ON THE RIGHT.
#
Questionnaire item
Respective item
in Almere
Construct in
Almere
1
If the [robot] 
was
available,  I  would  use
ita
I’m  certain  to  use  the
robot during the next
few days
Intention 
to
use
2
I think it’s a good idea
to use the [robot]
I think it’s a good idea
to use the robot
Attitude
towards
technology
3
I think the [robot]
would be useful in my
jobb
I think the robot is
useful to me
Perceived
usefulness
4
I think I can use the
[robot] without any
help
I think I can use the
robot without any help
Perceived
ease of use
5
Working 
with 
the
[robot] 
would 
be
pleasant
I enjoy doing things
with the robot
Perceived
enjoyment
6
I  would  be  worried
about the safety of
using the [robot] c
—
Trust
7
I think the [robot] can
be adapted to what I
need
I think the robot can
be adaptive to what I
need
Perceived
adaptivity
8
I know enough of the
[robot] to make good
use of it
I know enough of the
robot to make good
use of it
Facilitating
conditions
9
I would be afraid to
make mistakes with
the [robot].
If I should use the
robot, 
I 
would 
be
afraid 
to 
make
mistakes with it
Anxiety
10
I find the {Robotic
therapy 
animal;
Rehabilitation/recreati
onal robot} pleasant to
interact with
In 
my 
experience,
controlling 
the
{Telepresence 
robot;
Patient lifting robot}
goes smoothlyd
I 
find 
the 
robot
pleasant 
to 
interact
with
Perceived
sociability
(Perceived
operating
friendliness)d
a. “If the robot was available, I would use it.” was used in [25].
b.  “I would find [.....] useful in my job” was used originally in [24][26].
c. The item reflects the Almere definition of Trust “The belief that the system performs with personal
integrity and reliability”.
d. Perceived sociability was replaced by “Perceived operating friendliness” for the non-social robots.
similar reason. Thirdly, we wanted to use constructs that are
compatible with technology acceptance models (e.g.,
[24][26]),  but  would  reflect  at  least  some  of  the
characteristics related to robots specifically (e.g., safety and
interaction). The Almere constructs have also been used in a
review [7] and as a part of a study focusing on telepresence
robots [28].
The data were fitted into the Almere model to see if the
nine questionnaire items (items #2–9 in Table 1) could
predict the Intention to use (item #1 in Table 1) according to
the model [23]. However, the small sample size did not
produce statistically significant results among all the robot
types and explanatory factors. Wanting to present results
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

separately for every robot type, we therefore focus on a
descriptive analysis of the UX. Additionally, the general
opinion towards robots among these respondents was asked
using the same phrase as in the Eurobarometer survey
(“Generally speaking, do you have a ‘very positive’ (4);
‘fairly positive’ (3); ‘fairly negative’ (2); or ‘very negative’
(1) view of robots?”).
III.
RESULTS
The number of respondents having used robots was a)
201 (44%) for a robotic therapy animal; b) 59 (13%) for a
rehabilitation/recreational robot; c) 63 (14%) for a
telepresence robot; and d) 79 (17%) for a patient lifting
robot; the total number of respondents reporting of first-hand
robot usage was 458 (some participants chose not to answer
all questions). Figure 2 shows that most respondents had
used the robots only once or twice whereas regular use was
much less common.
The effect of the frequency of usage on the questionnaire
items was not significant. Looking at all the robot types
combined, Intention to use correlated the most with Attitude
(r=.695; p<.001) and Perceived enjoyment (r=.626; p<.001).
Regarding opinions towards robots in general, 61% of
respondents had a positive and 26% a negative opinion
towards robots, and the rest were indecisive (mean = 2.73;
SD .68; scale 1–4). The user experience viewed as an
aggregate variable of average questionnaire items did not
correlate with age or working years of the respondent.
Regarding the experiences of the robotic therapy animal,
women had more positive views than men (F(1) 4.546; p
<.05). The other robot types did not show gender differences.
Earlier experiences of care technologies correlated positively
with the questionnaire items, yet only with the users of
telepresence robots (r = .362; p < .01) and the robotic therapy
animal (r = .242; p < .05).
There were big differences between the UX questionnaire
data for the different types of robots (see the error bars
indicating the standard error of the mean in Figures 3–5).
The UX questionnaire for each robot was answered only by
nursing personnel with actual user experience of the robot in
question. On average, the questionnaire items (Figures 4–
5) were towards the positive end of the scale except for the
items for the Facilitating conditions (sufficient knowledge
about the robot) and Trust (worrying about the safety) for
which three types of robots received lower ratings. Overall,
looking at the average of all 10 questionnaire items, the
Figure 2.
Number of nurses with experience of robot usage for each robot
type. The legend indicates the frequency of usage.
Figure 3.
Average of the ten questionnaire items by robot type. Higher
values indicate a more positive attitude towards robot usage (5=totally
agree, 1=totally disagree).
robotic therapy animal (open field answers indicated most
respondents  had  used  the  Paro  seal)  was  most  positively
received, followed by the patient lifting robot (Figure 3). On
the other hand, Intention to use, Attitude, and Perceived
usefulness of patient lifting robots were higher than those for
the robotic therapy animal (Figure 4). With the robotic
therapy animal, interaction and work were rated pleasant, the
robot was easy to use, and the respondents were not afraid to
make mistakes with it.
The rehabilitation/recreational robot (open field answers
indicated most respondents had used the Zora robot) and the
telepresence robot received more cautious ratings. The
respondents had less experience with these robots and they
did not have enough knowledge of them. The pleasantness
and smoothness of interacting and working with them was
rated close to neutral, but lower than with the other two
robots, and they were not considered as useful. Nevertheless,
Intention to use and Attitude were positive. The responses
did not identify robot brands for telepresence and patient
lifting robots.
IV. DISCUSSION
The Finnish nursing personnel with actual experience of
robot usage at work had a more positive attitude towards
robots than the Finnish nursing personnel in general (cf.
[12]). However, their attitude remains slightly more negative
than the opinion of the general population in Finland
(Eurobarometer data)[12]. On the other hand, the general
acceptance of robots is higher in Finland than in many other
European countries [3], and the Finnish nursing personnel’s
acceptance comes close to the recent European average.
Robot acceptance at work (as opposed to the general
acceptance) has been found stronger among those healthcare
professionals who have used robots in their work [12], and
therefore first-hand experiences with robots at work are
important in molding the ground for robots in care work.
Regarding gender issues, whereas men are typically more
positive towards robots than women [3][4], these results
indicated higher acceptance of the robotic therapy animal
among women in the care context, which is consistent with
an earlier evaluation of the same robot by exhibition visitors
from different countries [5].
Most of the robot usage was with a robot therapy animal,
or the Paro seal. The Paro seal is easy to use, and it can help
in creating a positive atmosphere toward care robots, and
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4.
Mean responses to the questionnaire items #1–5. Higher values indicate a more positive attitude towards robot usage (5=totally agree, 1=totally
disagree).
Figure 5.
Mean responses to the questionnaire items #6–10. Higher values indicate a more positive attitude towards robot usage (5=totally agree, 1=totally
disagree; the items marked with an asterisk * are inverted; see Table 1 for the used phrases).
therefore facilitate the adoption of other robots as well [16].
Assistive robots, however, include many more possibilities
than just the social, companionship types of characteristics.
A minority of the respondents had used any robot
regularly (Figure 2). Therefore, the answers may be based on
projected expectations of how robots could aid the care work
in the future. On the other hand, there was no significant
difference between the responses of those with very little and
those with regular experience of robot usage. Earlier research
has shown that even meeting a robot may result in more
favorable attitudes [29], although direct experiences with
robots have not always affected acceptance ratings [25].
Repetitive testing for determining acceptance has been
suggested [7][23], and therefore the robot UX of the nursing
personnel should be monitored repetitively.
The lack of knowledge of the robots (Facilitating
conditions) was clearly the aspect that needs most
improvement although the evaluations for each type of robot
can reflect different things. For example, using the Paro seal
requires understanding of the therapeutic possibilities of the
robot (see also [16]) whereas operating the Nao (or Zora)
robot requires also some technical skills. Others have also
raised the knowledge of how to use and adapt the technology
as an important topic [10]. In this study, most of the
respondents believed the robots could be adapted to their
needs, but a future question is whether it is the nursing
personnel or specialized persons who do the adapting, or if
the robot is self-adaptive. Furthermore, the users may also
have to adapt to the needs of the robots [30]. In the
rehabilitation context, training needs have been identified as
a barrier for using new technology, and similarly, Facilitating
condition (institutional support and knowledge) has been
found to be the strongest construct for current use of new
technologies by rehabilitation professionals [11], and
therefore the issue of knowledge should be emphasized in
the future.
The nurses’ low level of trust in the safety of the robots is
slightly alarming, because the robots the nurses had used are
presumably commercial products. On the other hand, the
ratings were near the middle of the Likert scale, which can
also mean that the respondents were indecisive or had mixed
feelings towards the questionnaire item. Furthermore, as with
the knowledge issues, safety can take different meanings
with different robots, which should be examined further. For
example, telepresence robots may seem wobbly and pose
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

security and privacy issues [20], and patients may be harmed
if an extremity is squeezed by the robot’s joints.
The attitudes were most positive for the patient lifting
robots. Additionally, the intention to use and perceived
usefulness for the patient lifting robots were also higher than
for other robots, which can reflect that their purpose of use
can be easier to see than for the other robots. A weakness to
the study design is that the respondents did not have to
specify which kind of lifting robots they had used.
The UX questionnaire worked as a basis for a descriptive
analysis of the different robot types. With especially the
rehabilitation/recreational robots, however, the questionnaire
leaves some ambiguity regarding the interaction with the
robot (e.g., pleasantness of interaction, ease of use, fear of
making mistakes). The questionnaire did not specifically
state whether the interaction was only about the social
interaction, or was the programming of the robot also
considered a form of interaction. In a similar vein, the robot
classification in questionnaire item #10 was done based on
the presumption that the interaction with robots with social
characteristics would be more natural and that they would
not need “controlling” as the more mechanical robots do.
Categories  of  physical  or  social  assistance  [31],  or
companion or service type of assistance [23] could facilitate
in assigning the constructs. The question of who will be
programming and controlling the robots, and adapting their
behavior, is a relevant issue for the future working practices
and education of nursing personnel on a larger scale.
The limitations of the study include the small number of
the UX questionnaire items and the previously discussed
ambiguity related to the questionnaire, the low frequency of
use, and the uncertainty related to the extent to which the
respondents had interacted with the robots. Moreover, the
exact versions of the robots and the ways the robots had been
used are not known, and therefore the results should not be
considered as user experience evaluations of specific robot
models or interfaces.
In addition to the four types of assistive robots
considered in this study, there are also other robots that can
support care work, such as exoskeletons, indoor logistics,
and surgical robots. Compared to the robots’ future tasks that
have been conceived by care personnel [12]–[15], none of
the latter kind of robots fulfil those needs, and neither do the
robots included in this study meet those needs in full.
Currently, there is little or no experiences of actual robot
usage of robots that can perform those tasks, and it will be
interesting to see how the acceptance of that kind of
autonomous and possibly multitasking robots relate to the
types of robots reported in this paper.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study provides a baseline for monitoring the
acceptance of different types of service robots by
professional nurses. Because service robots are still scarce in
the health sector, these results are novel in that they show the
comparison of four different types of robots and they are
based on actual robot usage instead of expectations. The
results showed that Finnish nursing personnel have a
relatively positive attitude towards using robots in general
and the robots they are most experienced with, but more
effort is needed to improve the personnel’s knowledge of
robots, the understanding of the robots’ potential use
applications, and the trust towards the safety of using the
robots.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Sincere thanks to all questionnaire respondents. This
research is a part of the project Robots and the Future of
Welfare Services 2015–2020, which is funded by the
Strategic Research Council at the Academy of Finland.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Matsumoto, “Development and introduction of robotic
devices for elderly care in Japan,” Invited talk in IEEE ICRA
2018 Workshop on Elderly Care Robotics - Technology and
Ethics (WELCARO), 2018. [Online]. Available from:
https://docs.google.com/viewer?a=v&pid=sites&srcid=ZGV
mYXVsdGRvbWFpbnxpY3JhMjAxOHdlbGNhcm98Z3g6M
zU5ZGUxYTI0MjIyYjYxMQ [retrieved: 1, 2019].
[2] E.-L. Koponen, “Sosiaali- ja terveysalan työvoiman riittävyys
nyt ja tulevaisuudessa [The sufficiency of the social and
health sector workforce now and in the future],” TEM
raportteja 13/2015, pp. 1–28. [Online]. Available from:
https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/750
78/TEMraportti_13_2015_web_27022015.pdf?sequence=1
[retrieved: 1, 2019].
[3] European Commission, “Special Eurobarometer 460 – March
2017 ‘Attitudes towards the impact of digitisation and
automation on daily life,’” 2017.
[4]  M.  M.  A.  de  Graaf  and  S.  Ben  Allouch,  “Exploring
influencing variables for the acceptance of social robots,”
Rob. Auton. Syst., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1476–1486, 2013.
[5]  T.  Shibata,  K.  Wada,  Y.  Ikeda,  and  S.  Sabanovic,  “Cross-
Cultural Studies on Subjective Evaluation of a Seal Robot,”
Adv. Robot., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 443–458, 2009.
[6] K. M. Goher, N. Mansouri, and S. O. Fadlallah, “Assessment
of personal care and medical robots from older adults’
perspective,” Robot. Biomimetics, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 1–7,
2017.
[7] S. Whelan, et al., “Factors Affecting the Acceptability of
Social Robots by Older Adults Including People with
Dementia or Cognitive Impairment: A Literature Review,”
Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 10, no. 5, pp 643–668, 2018.
[8] S. Bedaf, G. J. Gelderblom, and L. De Witte, “Overview and
categorization of robots supporting independent living of
elderly people: what activities do they support and how far
have they developed,” Assist. Technol., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 88–
100, 2015.
[9] P. Khosravi and A. H. Ghapanchi, “Investigating the
effectiveness of technologies applied to assist seniors: A
systematic literature review,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 85, no.
1, pp. 17–26, 2015.
[10] M. Saborowski and I. Kollak, “‘How do you care for
technology?’ - Care professionals’ experiences with assistive
technology in care of the elderly,” Technol. Forecast. Soc.
Change, vol. 93, pp. 133–140, 2015.
[11] L. Liu, et al., “What factors determine therapists’ acceptance
of new technologies for rehabilitation – a study using the
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology
(UTAUT),” Disabil. Rehabil., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 447–455,
2015.
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[12]  T.  Turja,  L.  Van  Aerschot,  T.  Särkikoski,  and  A.  Oksanen,
“Finnish healthcare professionals’ attitudes towards robots:
Reflections on a population sample,” Nurs. Open, vol. 5, no.
3, pp. 300–309, 2018.
[13]  K.  J.  Vänni  and  S.  E.  Salin,  “A  Need  for  Service  Robots
Among Health Care Professionals in Hospitals and Housing
Services,” LNCS (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell.
Lect. Notes Bioinformatics), vol. 10652 LNAI, pp. 178–187,
2017.
[14] D. Facal, L. Pigini, M. Mast, L. Blasi, and F. I. Cavallaro,
“SRS Multi-Role Shadow Robotic System for Independent
Living. Deliverable D1.1. Detailed user requirements,
environment definition, general guidelines on ethical concerns
and SRS scenario report.,” 2011. [Online]. Available from:
http://srs-project.eu/sites/default/files/SRS%20247772%20DE
LIVERABLE%201.1.pdf [retrieved: 1, 2019].
[15] E. Broadbent et al., “Attitudes towards health-care robots in a
retirement village,” Australas. J. Ageing, vol. 31, no. 2, pp.
115–120, 2012.
[16] M. Niemelä, H. Määttä, and M. Ylikauppila, “Expectations
and experiences of adopting robots in elderly care in Finland:
perspectives of caregivers and decision-makers,” ICServ
Special Session: Meaningful Technologies for Seniors, Sept.
2016, pp. 1–8.
[17] K. Beedholm, K. Frederiksen, A. M. S. Frederiksen, and K.
Lomborg, “Attitudes to a robot bathtub in Danish elder care:
A hermeneutic interview study,” Nurs. Heal. Sci., vol. 17, no.
3, pp. 280–286, 2015.
[18] D. Hebesberger, T. Koertner, C. Gisinger, and J. Pripfl, “A
Long-Term Autonomous Robot at a Care Hospital: A Mixed
Methods Study on Social Acceptance and Experiences of
Staff and Older Adults,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 9, pp. 417–
429, 2017.
[19] W. Moyle, et al., “Connecting the person with dementia and
family: a feasibility study of a telepresence robot,” BMC
Geriatr., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1–11, 2014.
[20] M. Niemelä, L. van Aerschot, A. Tammela, and I. Aaltonen,
“A Telepresence Robot in Residential Care: Family
Increasingly Present, Personnel Worried About Privacy,” in
The 9th International Conference on Social Robotics, ICSR
2017. Part of LNCS (including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif.
Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics ), 2017, vol. 10652 LNAI,
pp. 85–94.
[21] I.-L. Boman and A. Bartfai, “The first step in using a robot in
brain 
injury 
rehabilitation: 
patients’ 
and 
health-care
professionals’ 
perspective,” 
Disabil. 
Rehabil. 
Assist.
Technol., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 365–370, 2015.
[22] T. Kilpeläinen, “Foreign nurses’ guide to Finnish working
life,” Satakunta University of Applied Sciences. European
Social Fund (ESF), 2010.
[23] M. Heerink, B. Kröse, V. Evers, and B. Wielinga, “Assessing
acceptance of assistive social agent technology by older
adults: The Almere model,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 2, no. 4,
pp. 361–375, 2010.
[24] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis,
“User acceptance of information technology: Toward a
unified view,” MIS Q., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 425–478, 2003.
[25] Y. H. Wu, et al., “Acceptance of an assistive robot in older
adults : a mixed-method study of human-robot interaction
over a 1-month period in the Living Lab setting,” Clin. Interv.
Aging, vol. 9, pp. 801–811, 2015.
[26] F. D. Davis, “User acceptance of information technology:
system characteristics, user perceptions and behavioral
impacts,” Int. J. Man. Mach. Stud., vol. 38, pp. 475–487,
1993.
[27] C. Bartneck, D. Kulić, E. Croft, and S. Zoghbi, “Measurement
instruments for the anthropomorphism, animacy, likeability,
perceived intelligence, and perceived safety of robots,” Int. J.
Soc. Robot., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 71–81, 2009.
[28] A. Cesta, G. Cortellessa, A. Orlandini, and L. Tiberio, “Long-
Term Evaluation of a Telepresence Robot for the Elderly:
Methodology and Ecological Case Study,” Int. J. Soc. Robot.,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 421–441, 2016.
[29] R. Q. Stafford et al., “Improved robot attitudes and emotions
at a retirement home after meeting a robot,” Proc. IEEE
International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication, Sept. 2010, pp. 82–87.
[30] J. Forlizzi and C. DiSalvo, “Service robots in the domestic
environment,”
 Proc.The
 1st
 ACM
 SIGCHI/SIGART
conference on Human-robot interaction - HRI ’06, March
2006, pp. 258–265.
[31] S. Leminen, M. Westerlund, and M. Rajahonka, “Innovating
with service robots in health and welfare living labs,” Int. J.
Innov. Manag., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 1–24, 2017.
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

