Towards the Tangible Hyperlink
Alfredo P´erez Fern´andez
Department of Software
Engineering,
Norwegian University
of Science and Technology,
NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway
Email: perezfer@idi.ntnu.no
Abstract—Thanks to the persistent decrease in cost and size
of electronics, this century is experiencing an important scale
up in number of devices surrounding us, with a subsequent
increment on the complexity of the user interaction with such
devices. The proposed interaction concept - the tangible hyperlink
- demonstrates that it is possible to apply the capacitive cou-
pling communication technology to simplify the interaction with
embedded devices without preventing users from maintaining
control on their privacy.
Keywords-CHI; Personal Area Network; Tangible User Inter-
face; Privacy.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Abowd et al. [1], following Weiser’s [2] vision, identiﬁed
the requirement of “addressing some notion of scale [...] in the
number and type of devices, the physical space of distributed
computing and the number of people using a system”. Thanks
to the persistent decrease in cost and size of electronics, this
century is experiencing an important scale up in number of
devices surrounding us, with a subsequent increment on the
complexity of the user interaction with such devices. Abowd
et al. also proposed the request of providing “natural interfaces
that facilitate a richer variety of communications capabilities
between humans and computation”.
Figure 1 illustrates the proposed concept: a tangible hyper-
link that can be opened by physically “tapping” it. Information
is transmitted bidirectionally to the wearable device through
the skin of the user due to its capacitive property. This
bidirectional transfer of information among devices through the
recognition of the touch gesture entails both advantages and
disadvantages. On one hand, it gives the freedom to develop
such natural interfaces identiﬁed by [1], making it simpler to
exchange information among embedded and wearable devices.
On the other hand, a scenario where “devices and environments
reveal not only personal information but also location and
context information” [3] can make it incredibly complex for
users to control their privacy. In this work, a novel concept of
tangible hyperlink is presented as a mechanism to balance the
usability of personal area networks (PAN) and the control that
users maintain over their privacy. To achieve this balance, the
key aspect is to use a metaphor (the hyperlink) to help users
mimic the way they exchange tangible information to the way
they exchange information on the web.
Figure 1: Concept of tangible hyperlink
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section,
current related work is described. Section 3 describes the
conditions in which the experiment was carried out. Section
4 provides the different results obtained from the experimen-
tal evaluation. The paper concludes with Section 5 with a
summary and an outline of different possibilities for future
research.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
The ﬁrst work presenting and demonstrating a device
capable of communicating using an electrostatic capacitive
coupled PAN is [4]. Based on this work, other authors such as
Shinagawa et al. [5] propose different alternatives to improve
the communication by means of using “electric-ﬁeld sensor
implemented with an electro-optic crystal and laser light”.
Hyoung et al. [6] study how different factors such as voltage,
frequency and physical level codiﬁcation affect communication
performance. In contrast to most studies, Duck et al. [7]
focus more on analyzing higher layers of the protocol stack
communication. Hachisuka et al. [8] present a mechanism
for simpliﬁcation of modeling and fabrication of intrabody
communication devices. They also analyze the impact on
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

cost/performance of such devices when using four electrodes
instead of two. Ishii et al. [9] introduce their vision of tangible
bit and emphasize the need of allowing users to grasp and
manipulate the information in their surrounding as a form of
tangible user interfaces, claiming that the goal is to “bridge the
gaps between both cyberspace and the physical environment”.
Based on this vision, Parkes et al. [10] introduce a prototype
consisting of a “modular scalable building system with the
physical immediacy of a soft and malleable material”. Glumes
are able to communicate to each other and exchange informa-
tion using electrostatic capacitive coupling and are designed
to be responsive to human touch.
III.
EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS
In this section, we describe an experiment carried out, in
which a total of 19 participants were asked to use different de-
vices designed to communicate to each other using electrostatic
capacitive coupling and, afterwards, ﬁll in a questionnaire.
From the 19 participants, 12 were male and 7 female. 15 of
the participants had some form of education on a technological
ﬁeld. The mean age was 25 years with a range from 20
to 42 years. The experiment was divided into two different
phases and all the participants were involved in both of them.
The ﬁrst phase of the experiment consisted of an evaluation
Figure 2: The Tangible Greeting Application
of a very basic application, the tangible greeting (Figure 2).
This ﬁrst application had as a main target to capture the
opinion of different users about the exchange of information
through the touch gesture. The second phase of the experiment
was the result of a redesign of the prototype based on the
feedback obtained from the participants during the ﬁrst phase.
Due to the lack of control users had on the information they
were providing to the system, a new concept was introduced:
the tangible hyperlink. The tangible hyperlink served as a
mechanism to acquire a compromise between usability and
privacy by means of implementing a metaphor of something
the participant was already familiar with, the web hyperlink.
1) First Phase: Tangible Greeting: The ﬁrst phase of the
evaluation consisted of a basic application displaying a person-
alized greeting message to the participants on a screen display.
Figure 3: The UTnP Bracelet
Each participant was asked individually to wear a Universal
Touch and Play (UTnP) bracelet (Figure 3) to later touch a
small metal surface connected to a PC. The UTnP Bracelet
Figure 4: Implementation of the UTnP Bracelet
is implemented with an Arduino Pro Mini [11] (Figure 4)
connected to a pair of electrodes. The electrodes are a pair
of copper plates of 5.25 square centimeters, lying in parallel
and separated from each other through a layer of a plastic
insulator material (silicon and ethylene-vinyl acetate have been
used without any noticeable performance decrease). The signal
electrode is in contact to the skin of the participant, while
the ground electrode is only in contact to the air. A ceramic
capacitor of 1nF is used, connected in parallel, both to the
signal and the ground electrodes, as proposed by [4]. The
same conﬁguration is applied on the signal receiver. Each
Figure 5: Frequency representation of received signal in percentage of
magnitude
UTnP Bracelet generates a ﬁxed frequency-division multiplex-
ing (FDM) signal [12] that is decoded on the PC, after being
transformed into the frequency domain. Figure 5 shows the
received signal pattern, which ranges from 0.9Khz to 1.1Khz.
The square wave generated from the ATmega produces a
number of harmonic components after the base frequency. This
redundancy is used as a mechanism to reduce the rate of false
positives.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

2) Second Phase: The Tangible Hyperlink: For the second
phase of the evaluation, a change on the design was made.
Instead of being the device of the participant the responsible
for sending the information, it becomes a passive receiver,
allowing the participant to decide on the amount of information
that will be given away. For the implementation of the second
Figure 6: Name plate of a ﬁctional person that encodes a tangible hyperlink
phase, an Android Smartphone located in an arm band was
used in combination with the electrodes (Figure 1). The
Android Smartphone was used to receive and process the signal
generated from an Arduino Fio [13] embedded on a name
plate (Figure 6). The participants were asked, invididually,
to send a personalized greeting to a ﬁctional person called
Øyvind Lager. This task was performed by clicking on his
tangible link (represented by a plate with his name). Clicking
on the tangible link requests the participant to provide some
personal information, including name, language and a greeting
message. Participants were aware of the possibility of faking
their identity or even cancelling the process at any time, which
was a major difference comparing to the experiment of the ﬁrst
phase.
IV.
EVALUATION RESULTS
After allowing the participants to familiarize and “play”
within the scenario of each phase, they were given a question-
naire to ﬁll in.
Figure 7: Results from questionnaires of ﬁrst evaluation
First, it is possible to observe in Figure 7 that the prototype
on the ﬁrst phase behaved robustly, presenting little or no
false positives or false negatives. 84.21% of participants stated
that the computer was able to identify them. Something that
can be interpreted as a paradox, from the second and third
questions, is that 47.7% of participants disagreed with the
statement that capacitive coupling can become a hazard to
their privacy, while 57.89% agreed or strongly agreed that
they could get in trouble if someone discovered that they had
“touched something/someone they were not supposed to”. This
apparent paradox has its origin in the relative importance that
participants give to this particular technology to their privacy.
Participants stated that they were even more concerned with
their privacy when using other technologies, including GPS,
web browsing and social networks, because of their massive
use.
Figure 8: Results from questionnaires of second evaluation
The feedback obtained from the questionnaires of the ﬁrst
phase triggered a redesign of the prototype used in the second
phase (Figure 8). Participants perception of the accuracy of the
prototype was maintained, compared to the ﬁrst phase. 68.42%
of the participants claimed to have a better control on their
privacy or the information they were providing with the second
prototype. When asked which prototype they preferred, all the
participants but three assured they preferred the last version,
while the rest remained neutral. The results from the second
phase suggest a qualitative improvement on the acceptance of
the participants for those changes.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Electrostatic capacitive coupling is an extremely powerful
mechanism to share information among low powered embed-
ded and wearable devices. It can enrich the touch gesture
and make it become a much more meaningful component for
many pervasive applications, but it can also become a hazard
to privacy. The tangible hyperlink has been proposed as an
approach to let the user have more control on the information
that is provided to the system. It becomes highly important
to incorporate metaphors to existing concepts, when designing
new applications, so that it becomes easier for the user to have
an understanding of the information ﬂow. Arduino and Android
devices have been used to implement a functional prototype for
information exchange using electrostatic capacitive coupling.
This setting is not optimal to achieve a high performance of
data bandwidth and low power consumption but, instead, it
offers a way to rapidly develop applications that need to adapt
to very different and varying scenarios.
This study was carried out in the frame of a very basic
application. The interest of the research will surely grow as the
complexity of the scenario is increased. Further investigation
is required to identify possible challenges and future ﬁndings.
Part of this further investigation will consist of comparing this
technology with other mechanisms of information exchange.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank for all the support received
from the department of the software engineering group at
NTNU.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. D. Abowd and E. D. Mynatt, “Charting past, present, and future
research in ubiquitous computing,” ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction (TOCHI), vol. 7, pp. 29–58, Mar. 2000. ACM ID:
344988.
[2]
M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21st century,” Scientiﬁc American,
vol. 265, no. 3, pp. 94–104, 1991.
[3]
D. Anthony, T. Henderson, and D. Kotz, “Privacy in location-aware
computing environments,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 64–72, 2007.
[4]
T. G. Zimmerman, “Personal area networks: near-ﬁeld intrabody com-
munication,” IBM systems Journal, vol. 35, no. 3.4, pp. 609–617, 1996.
[5]
M. Shinagawa, M. Fukumoto, K. Ochiai, and H. Kyuragi, “A near-ﬁeld-
sensing transceiver for intrabody communication based on the electroop-
tic effect,” Instrumentation and Measurement, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1533–1538, 2004.
[6]
C. H. Hyoung, J. B. Sung, J. H. Hwang, J. K. Kim, D. G. Park, and
S. W. Kang, “A novel system for intrabody communication: touch-and-
play,” in Circuits and Systems, 2006. ISCAS 2006. Proceedings. 2006
IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 1343–1346, 2006.
[7]
D. G. Park, J. K. Kim, J. B. Sung, J. H. Hwang, C. H. Hyung, and S. W.
Kang, “TAP: touch-and-play,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human Factors in computing systems, pp. 677–680, 2006.
[8]
K. Hachisuka et al., “Simpliﬁed circuit modeling and fabrication of
intrabody communication devices,” Sensors and actuators A: physical,
vol. 130, pp. 322–330, 2006.
[9]
H. Ishii and B. Ullmer, “Tangible bits: towards seamless interfaces
between people, bits and atoms,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI
Conference on Human factors in computing systems, pp. 234–241, 1997.
[10]
A. Parkes, V. LeClerc, and H. Ishii, “Glume: exploring materiality
in a soft augmented modular modeling system,” in CHI’06 extended
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, pp. 1211–1216,
2006.
[11]
“Arduino
Webpage-
ArduinoBoardProMini.”
[Online].
Available:
http://arduino.cc/en/Main/ArduinoBoardProMini
[retrieved
February,
2014]
[12]
J. F. Kurose and K. W. Ross, Computer networking. Pearson Education,
2012.
[13]
“Arduino
Webpage-
ArduinoBoardFio.”
[Online].
Available:
http://arduino.cc/en/Main/ArduinoBoardFio
[retrieved
February,
2014]
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

