Orientation Aids for Mobile Maps 
 
Jussi P. P. Jokinen and Pertti Saariluoma 
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems 
University of Jyväskylä, 
Jyväskylä, Finland 
jussi.p.p.jokinen@jyu.fi, pertti.saariluoma@jyu.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Using mobile maps to represent urban, work, or 
entertainment environments offers new possibilities to plan 
and carry out tasks. One potentially critical problem in mobile 
map usage is the misalignment between the user's frame of 
reference and the frame of reference of the map. In the 
experiment reported here, three different ‘orientation aids’ 
were tested in the context of restricted space, such as a large 
factory hall. The aim of the study was to find out how user 
interface design can help the user mentally align misaligned 
frames of reference for efficient mobile map use. The results of 
the experiment (N = 12) suggest using a ‘you are here’ marker 
and landmark highlighting, while canonical direction symbols 
proved to be less plausible. Further, a maximum number of 
seven targets on the map is suggested. 
Keywords- mental spatial orientation; mental rotation; 
mobile maps; orientation aids; reference-frame misalignment. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
It is common to consider people using the concepts of 
psychology. If the focus is on a developing child, the branch 
of psychology is called development psychology; if it is on 
car drivers, it is common to speak about traffic psychology. 
Therefore, when we consider people as users of technology, 
it makes sense to speak about user psychology [1][2][3]. The 
leading idea of modern user psychology is explanatory 
coherence, which means that researchers of human-
technology interaction consider how consistent the outcomes 
of their research are with what we in general know about 
human mind, that is, cognitions, emotions, motive, and 
personality [2]. Here, the focus is on the possible explanatory 
roles of human visuo-spatial memory in analysing users 
working with maps. 
People acquire knowledge from the environment by 
directly experiencing and interacting with it. However, in 
many tasks, information beyond direct spatial experience is 
required. A map is one widely used tool to provide such 
information. Inherent in the map usage, however, is the 
problem of combining environmental information from two 
sources, direct spatial experience and the map. A map 
provides an objective spatial representation of the 
environment with a world-oriented, that is, exocentric (or 
allocentric) frame of reference [4][5]. On the other hand, 
people themselves represent environment with respect to 
their own position, that is, egocentrically [4][5]. This 
difference in the frames of reference may lead to problems 
during a map use due to a phenomenon called reference-
frame misalignment [4][6]. When the frames of reference are 
misaligned, a lot of evidence suggests that map-based 
decision times increase and become more error prone [4]-[9]. 
The use of small mobile displays in work and 
entertainment contexts has increased, and hence the problem 
of reference-frame misalignment has become relevant in 
mobile map design [7][10][11]. If such problems are to be 
solved efficiently, scientific knowledge concerning the 
domain of map use and reference-frame misalignment should 
be provided for the designers of mobile maps. As mentioned, 
the practice of combining useful psychological knowledge 
with practical solutions is called user psychology [2][3]. In 
our case, this means generating experiment-based insights 
for both cognitive and practical understanding of mobile map 
use using psychological theories, methodology, and 
concepts. This is the aim of the present article, which will 
operate in the domain of designing mobile interfaces for 
large enclosed spaces, such as factory halls. An example of a 
mobile map useful in such a context is a map-based 
controller for crane automation. In the design of map-based 
mobile interfaces for operating with complex systems, such 
as port or industry cranes, any errors from reference-frame 
misalignment need to be minimised due to safety and 
efficiency concerns. 
In tasks requiring map-based and experience-based 
environmental information, task times and error rates seem 
to increase in a proportion to the misalignment between the 
user’s and the map’s reference-frames. This effect is due to 
the mental rotation required to combine information from the 
two misaligned sources [6][8][9][12][13]. The cognitive 
demand of mentally rotating maps may also be associated 
with the complexity of the stimuli especially if the 
environment is new to the user [6][14]. The amount and 
complexity of stimuli on the map is especially critical in the 
case of mobile maps, as the screens are usually small and the 
interface must be designed frugally [15]. Additionally, as the 
number of objects on a small display increase, the visual 
search time increases [16]. It seems that the limited amount 
of short-term capacity limits the efficiency of map use due to 
the increased demand in both visual search and mental 
rotation [9][17]. 
Different user interface modifications for maps have been 
proposed to reduce the cognitive demand caused by the 
misaligned reference-frames. Rotating the map automatically 
is one obvious proposal, but its effect on the efficiency of the 
map use is not clear [18], cf. [11]. Letting the user choose 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

between exocentric and egocentric perspectives, depending 
on the use situation, would often be preferable [19], but this 
effect may be difficult to accomplish with small displays and 
would be solving a problem by including new design 
problems. Further, automating the map rotation completely 
may be confusing to the user. However, there exists a variety 
of less intrusive ways to aid the map user in both mental 
rotation and visual search required in efficient map use. 
For the experiment reported here, three map aids were 
designed to help the user mentally rotate a stationary, non-
rotating mobile map. These ‘orientation aids’ were used to 
investigate the problem of misalignment in mobile maps and 
provide suggestions for the design of mobile map interfaces. 
The amount of objects on the map (map complexity) and 
reference-frame misalignment were manipulated to find out 
how different orientation aids would help the map user in 
making inferences based on the combined information from 
a map and an environment. 
The first aid, a ‘You are here’ marker, familiar to the 
users of GPS navigators and stationary shopping mall maps, 
shows the location of the user on the map [15][19][20]. Maps 
with ‘you are here’ marker are not always as useful as one 
might imagine, especially if the marker is not accurate [21]. 
However, locating the user accurately on the screen has 
become technologically easier. For example, the studies of 
‘you are here’ markers conducted in virtual worlds show that 
they are relatively easy and effective map aid, e.g., [19][20]. 
‘You are here’ markers seem to aid processing of spatial 
information by offering cues to one’s location and its relation 
to the environment, but only if the location is salient and 
asymmetrical [22]. 
The second aid, landmark highlighting, makes a salient 
environmental object or feature visible on the map by 
making it distinct among the other map elements [23][24]. 
Conceptually and perceptually distinct locations (i.e. 
landmarks), have been shown to be effective aids in 
pedestrian navigation, for example [24]. Especially, if the 
map is complex, hierarchical, and has many objects, 
highlighting one of the more salient features provides for 
faster visual search [23]. Highlighted landmark also helps in 
mental rotation, as the user can discard other, less salient 
objects from the process and focus on visually salient 
features [24]. 
Third, direction symbols, such as the compass pointing to 
the north of the map, are often used to refer to the cardinal 
directions used in the map [4]. In a closed space, such as a 
factory hall or a shopping mall, it is possible to associate 
cardinal directions of the environment with the map. For 
example, associating the north wall of a factory with a 
certain symbol, and adding the same symbol to the map of 
the factory, may help the map user to align the two reference 
frames. Direction symbols associating the map directions 
with environmental directions may be especially effective 
when the environment is known to the map user [6][14]. 
Following hypotheses were formulated and tested in a 
laboratory experiment. The first two hypotheses were 
included to confirm that there indeed would be such effects 
as mental rotation and visual search associated with map use. 
Hypotheses H3–H5 were derived from the three orientation 
aids. 
H1. As the misalignment between the referential frames 
of the map and the environment increases, map based 
decision times increase. 
H2. Adding more objects increases map based decision 
times. 
H3. Adding a ‘you are here’ marker to indicate the 
location of the user in the environment decreases map based 
decision times. 
H4. Adding a landmark highlighting to represent a salient 
environmental feature decreases map based decision times. 
H5. Adding direction symbols, referencing to the 
environmental directions decreases map based decision 
times. 
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 
describes the laboratory experiment designed for testing the 
hypotheses above. The results of the experiment are reported 
in Section 3 and discussed in Section 4. The final Section 5 
contextualises these results. 
II. 
METHOD 
Twelve (N = 12) participants were recruited for the first 
experiment. Their mean age was 23.8 years, SD = 3.3, and 
six of them were male and six female. All of the participants 
were right-handed, and had at least some experience with 
maps: when asked to estimate their own map using skills on 
a scale from 1 (‘no skills’) to 5 (‘expert’), seven of the 
participants gave the scale midpoint, ‘average skills’, and 
five reported having ‘advanced skills’ (scale value 4). This 
self-rating was not found to correlate with performance in 
the experiment. 
Two sets of pictures were made, one for environments, 
and one for maps representing those environments. The goal 
was to create an abstract closed space with salient objects, 
such as one could find in a large factory hall. The 
environment pictures were photographs of wooden cubes, 
which were placed on a white canvas in an otherwise empty 
space with grey walls (Fig. 1). Multiple environment pictures 
were taken with following modifications. First, the number 
of the wooden cubes was four, seven, or ten. Second, camera 
was placed either at the front of the canvas (0°), the corner of 
the canvas (45° counter-clockwise), or the right side of the 
canvas (90° counter-clockwise; shown in Fig. 1). As the third 
modification, in some environments, one of the white 
wooden cubes was changed to a red, otherwise identical, 
cube, as shown in Fig. 1. For a number of different 
environments, two symbols, a triangle and a circle, were 
added to the wall. All cubes were identified with a letter. 
The map pictures were constructed to accurately 
represent the configuration of the wooden cubes in the 
environment as black ‘target’ icons (Fig. 2). When the 
environment contained a red cube or direction symbols, 
corresponding orientation aids were added to the map: a red 
target instead of a black one to highlight a landmark, and 
direction symbols at the sides of the map to match the 
symbols on a wall. In order to test ‘you are here’ markers, a 
red dot was added to the map to indicate where the 
environment picture was taken, that is, where the participant 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

was ‘standing’ in the environment. Half of the maps were 
rotated 180° to increase the variation in misalignment 
between the environment and the map picture. This brought 
the total number of possible misalignments to five: 0°, 45°, 
90°, 180°, and 135°. Due to environment rotations, some of 
the cubes were partly or almost fully occluded (e.g., Fig. 1, 
behind the A block). However, this did not benefit any single 
orientation aid, as the map templates were same for all tested 
aid. 
One task consisted of an environment picture, a 
corresponding map picture, and a statement in the form of 
matching letter and number. (e.g., ‘A = 5’). The task of the 
participant was to judge whether the statement was correct or 
incorrect by pressing either green (correct) or red (incorrect) 
button in front of them. Half of the statements were correct, 
and half incorrect. Each participant was presented 72 tasks (3 
different number of cubes, 2 map rotations, 3 environment 
rotations and 4 orientation aids including a no aid -baseline). 
The order of the tasks was randomised for each participant. 
Before the tasks, the participants were given four easy tasks 
to practice the procedure. 
The participants were seated in a quiet laboratory room 
alone with the experimenter. In front of them, they had a 40- 
inch computer screen for the environment pictures, and to the 
left of it a 17-inch computer screen for the map pictures. The 
environment picture was scaled to take the whole 40 inch of 
the larger screen, but the map picture took less than half of 
the smaller screen and was therefore closer to a real mobile 
map size. A keyboard with one green and one red button was 
placed in front of the large screen. For half of the 
participants, the green button was on the left-hand side, and 
for the other half, on the right-hand side. The participants 
were instructed to have the index fingers of their both hands 
at the buttons. The participants completed a task by pressing 
either green or red button to indicate their agreement with the 
statement concerning the relation of the environment and the 
map. The reaction time (RT) was written into a log file, and 
the next task given after a brief pause. RTs have been often 
used in experimental studies of cognitive processing, also in 
studies of mental rotation and orientation [8][13]. Shorter 
RTs indicate that the processes associating stimuli with 
actions are less mentally demanding. 
The data analysis was conducted using multilevel 
modelling (‘Generalised linear mixed model’ procedure in 
IBM SPSS 20), which is suitable for analysing nested 
longitudinal data, such as repeated RT measures within 
different experimental manipulations [25]. Contrasted, for 
example, with repeated measures analysis of variance, 
multilevel models are better suited to analyse nuanced 
effects, such as the size of individual intraclass correlation 
(i.e. how much RTs of a single participant correlate with 
 
Figure 1.  An example of the environment picture used in the experiment with landmark highlighting and 90° camera positioning. Corresponding map 
picture is seen in Fig. 2. 
is seen in Fig. 
 2 
 
Figure 2.  An example map picture, corresponding to the environment 
picture in Fig. 1. Red cube (target 3) is highlighted. 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

each other) and learning during the tasks. The problem of 
individual differences in RTs (some participants tend to be 
faster than others in overall performance) has previously 
been solved with data normalisation [8], but multilevel 
models take this effect better into account. 
In the multilevel model, RTs were predicted as gamma 
distribution with a log link, because the target distribution 
had only positive values and a positive skew (as is often the 
case with RT distributions; the gamma assumption was 
supported with a Q-Q plot) [25]. Because of the log link 
function, the coefficients of the resulting model can be 
interpreted as parameters in an exponential function. Fixed 
predictors in the model were the number of cubes in the task, 
the misalignment between the environment and map 
pictures, the included orientation aid (with baseline as a 
reference group), and the task number (to indicate learning as 
the experiment progresses). 
III. 
RESULTS 
On average, the participants made less than three 
incorrect responses in the 72 tasks. Incorrect responses were 
deleted from the dataset, which resulted in 832 individual RT 
responses from the 12 participants. The mean of the mean 
RTs of the participants was 11.8 seconds, SD = 7.7. The 
mean of the fastest participant was 7.4 seconds per task, and 
the slowest participant took on average 22.3 seconds to 
complete a task. This difference in individual abilities (some 
are generally faster than others) was expected and taken into 
account in the multilevel model. The intraclass correlation 
coefficient was .37, indicating that there was, on average, a 
moderate correlation between the RTs of a single participant. 
All of the fixed effects included in the multilevel model 
were statistically significant as seen in Table 1, which 
displays the model coefficients. These coefficients indicate 
the effect as a comparison to the first term of the effect 
variable. For example, the negative coefficient of landmark 
aid means that compared to the ‘no aid’ reference group the 
orientation aid reduced the RTs. The predicted RTs can be 
calculated as an exponential function of the terms. The 
predicted average RT (in milliseconds) for the first task with 
four cubes, no misalignment, and no orientation aid, would 
be calculated using only the intercept (because the reference 
groups are zero), and would hence be e9.4 = 12209.9 
milliseconds (12.2 seconds). For ‘you are here’ aid, for 
example, the average RT would be e9.4-0.358 = 8450 (8.5 
seconds) with four cubes, and e9.4-0.358+0.345 = 11932 (12.0 
seconds) with ten cubes. 
The results indicate that compared to no aid, all of the 
orientation aids decreased RTs statistically significantly, 
when controlling for other effects in the model. The effect of 
‘you are here’ marker was the largest of the three, and the 
effect of the direction symbols the smallest. The change in 
RTs when adding a ‘you are here marker’ for example, in an 
otherwise similar task, is 
 
                
 
 
(1) 
In other words, while holding other effects fixed, adding 
a ‘you are here’ marker to a baseline map (no orientation 
aids) decreases RTs by 1–0.699 ≈ 30%. The corresponding 
number for landmark highlighting is 26%, and for direction 
symbols 16%. ‘You are here’ marker and landmark 
highlighting decrease map based judgment times more than 
the direction symbols. 
Using the same formula, it is possible to calculate that an 
increase from four to seven cubes causes RTs to increase 
4.8%, while increasing the number of cubes from four to ten 
causes an increase of 42%. Increasing misalignment to 45° 
increases RTs by only 7%, but a misalignment of 180° 
predicts 
24% 
longer 
RTs 
when 
compared 
to 
0° 
misalignment. These results indicate a clear linear effect of 
misalignment on map based judgments. 
Mean normalised RTs by orientation aid, by the number 
of cubes, are also displayed in Fig. 3, but it should be noted 
that the multilevel model calculations offer more precise 
measure of the effect of orientation than the normalised RTs. 
However, the visual representation of the RTs restates the 
results of the multilevel model. What Fig. 3 adds to the 
multilevel model interpretation, is that it seems that with ten 
blocks, the helpful effect of symbols vanishes. 
TABLE I.  
COEFFICIENTS OF THE FIXED EFFECTS IN 
PREDICTING RTS IN MAP BASED JUDGMENTS. 
Fixed effect 
Coefficient (s.e.)a 
Intercept 
9.410** (0.12) 
Task number 
–.002** (0.001) 
Aid: landmark 
–.297** (0.047) 
Aid: symbols 
–.173** (0.048) 
Aid: ‘you are here’ 
–.358** (0.047) 
Aid: none 
 
Misalignment:  190 
.219** (0.061) 
Misalignment:  135 
.206** (0.058) 
Misalignment: 90 
.101* (0.050) 
Misalignment: 45 
.068 (0.058) 
Misalignment: 0 
 
Number of cubes: 10 
.345** (0.041) 
Number of cubes: 7 
.074 (0.041) 
Number of cubes: 4 
 
a. s.e. = standard error. *p < .05. **p < .01. N = 12, cases included = 832. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The multilevel model supported all five hypotheses (H1–
H5) of the study. The increase in RTs as the function of the 
increase of misalignment (H1) was observed to be relatively 
linear, suggesting linearity of the mental rotations required to 
align the map with the environment, a result which is in line 
with previous results concerning mental rotation and 
orientation [8][12]. It is possible that the linearity assumption 
can be replaced with more precise estimates, such as Fitt’s 
law, which has  been shown to hold for mental rotation  [26], 
but this investigation would require different a kind of 
analysis. Further, it is possible that data on non-prototypical 
angles, would prove interesting, as it has been shown that 
there is a bias towards perceiving non-prototypical angles as 
prototypical [27]. Regardless, the effect size of the 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

misalignment was smaller than the effect size of the number 
of cubes. This result is somewhat different from earlier 
similar experiments with reference-frame misaligned maps, 
e.g., [4]. One possibility is that the orientation was relatively 
easy, as both the environment and the map had clear, 
rectangular borders. Future experiments should consider this 
geometrical detail. 
The effect size of the number of blocks (H2) was large, 
but it seems that the relationship between the number of 
blocks and RTs is not linear. In fact, almost no increase was 
observed in RTs when increasing the number of blocks from 
four to seven. It seems the tasks become more difficult only 
after seven items. This finding is in line with similar findings 
concerning search in interrupted visual search tasks [16], and 
may be at least partly explained by the capacity of the visual 
short-term memory [9][17]. When a map user is combining 
information 
from 
two 
sources (the 
map 
and the 
environment), information needs to be rehearsed in visual 
short-term memory in order to make successful alignment of 
the differing reference frames [9]. 
All three orientation aids were confirmed to decrease 
RTs, giving support to H3–H5. Hence, the laboratory 
experiment supports the use of the proposed solutions for 
decreasing judgment times, and possibly errors, when using 
mobile maps in restricted spaces. Comparing the effect sizes, 
it seems that landmark highlighting and a ‘you are here’ 
marker provided better support for map based judgments 
than direction symbols, especially with larger number of 
targets. The difference between ‘you are here’ marker and 
landmark highlighting, on the other hand, was small. Further 
experimentation should be planned to investigate interaction 
effects between the orientation aids and the number of items 
in the small display. Another suggested interaction study 
should focus on combining different orientation aids 
together. 
The results reported here are also limited to a controlled 
laboratory setting, which is useful in studying cognitive 
mechanisms, but not for technology use in the real world. 
Hence, next steps for ascertaining ecological validity of the 
results would be to implement the orientation aids on an 
actual mobile map. Further, users with real-life goals should 
be utilised in testing the aids. In the laboratory experiment 
reported here, the participants did not have real-life goal. 
Both cognitive aspects, studied with experiments, and real-
life, goal-oriented action, are necessary for successful 
designs. 
While both ‘you are here’ marker and landmark 
highlighting have been proposed as orientation aids before, 
e.g., [7][19][20], the experiment reported here was first to 
compare these aids, and do so in the context of small 
displays. The results confirm the usefulness of the aids with 
varying number of environmental and map items, and 
varying degrees of reference-frame misalignment. The main 
results cohere with two important cognitive paradigms, 
visual rotation [12][13], and a number of important memory 
and stimulus set size effects such as visual short-term 
memory and Sternberg-paradigm [17][28][29]. This is in line 
with the user psychological research strategy of explaining or 
supporting laboratory user experiments and subsequent 
design by means of coherence between them and traditional 
findings of basic research [3]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In the design process of orientation aids for mobile maps, 
three orientation aids for improving map-based decisions 
were evaluated. A laboratory study suggested that having 
either a ‘you are here’ marker, a landmark highlighting, or 
canonical direction symbols as an orientation aid decreases 
RTs in map-based judgments. Another finding suggested that 
an increase in the number of items on the map quickly 
increases map based judgment times. Further, there seems to 
be an interaction effect between the orientation aid and the 
number of targets on the map: with ten targets, the direction 
symbols were not as efficient as the other two orientation 
aids. These findings can be used to design map-based mobile 
displays for efficient operation within relatively confined 
spaces, with relatively small number of important 
environment targets. 
The central result of the study reported here is therefore 
that having either ‘you are here’ marker or landmark 
highlighting on the map is enough to allow for efficient map 
use, at least in a confined environment. These markers are 
not, however, a feasible option if their accuracy is 
questionable [21], and hence they are recommended only for 
situations, in which the accuracy can be guaranteed. 
Compared to ‘you are here’ marker, landmark highlighting 
offers technologically easier and stable way to aid in map 
based judgments, and should be considered as a viable 
alternative. On the other hand, landmark highlighting may 
not always be possible due to the dynamic nature of 
environments, such as factory halls. Therefore, while both 
orientation aids have been proven useful, the context of the 
use will need to be taken into account when choosing 
between orientation aids. Further, as individual differences 
between spatial cognition have been found [30], it is 
suggested that the choice of orientation aids may at some 
cases be left to the user. 
 
Figure 3.  Mean normalised RTs between the orientation aids, by the 
number of cubes. 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Increasing the complexity of interaction in already 
complex environments poses problems for interface design. 
New features, such as orientation aids in mobile maps may 
make work tasks more efficient, but may also introduce 
additional usability problems, interferences, and sources for 
anxiety to the users. In order to facilitate the use of more 
complex automated features, new, smart interface solutions 
need to be conceptualised. The experiment presented in this 
article demonstrates how the understanding on human 
cognitive processes can give experimental insight into the 
evaluation of new design concepts. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We thank research assistants Piia Perälä and Maija 
Kaibijainen for their help in constructing and conducting the 
experiment reported here. This research has been supported 
by the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and 
Innovation (TEKES) and the Finnish Metals and Engineering 
Competence Cluster (FIMECC) programme UXUS (User 
experience and usability in complex systems). 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. P. Moran, “An applied psychology of the user,” ACM Computing 
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 13(1), pp. 1–11, 1981. 
[2] P. Saariluoma, “Explanatory frameworks in interaction design,” In 
Future interaction design, A. Pirhonen, H. Isomäki, P. Roast, P. 
Saariluoma, Eds. London: Springer, 2004. 
[3] P. Saariluoma and A. Oulasvirta, ”User psychology: Re-assessing the 
boundaries of a discipline,” Psychology, vol. 1(5), pp. 317–328, 2010. 
[4] L. Gugerty and J. Brooks, “Reference-frame misalignment and 
cardinal direction judgments: Group differences and strategies,” 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, vol. 10(2), pp. 75–88, 
2004. 
[5] R. Klatzky, “Allocentric and egocentric spatial representations: 
Definitions, distinctions, and interconnections,” In Spatial cognition, 
C. Freksa, C. Habel, K. F. Wender, Eds. Berlin: Springer, 1998. 
[6] A. J. Aretz and C. D. Wickens, “The mental rotation of map 
displays,” Human Performance, vol. 5(4), pp. 303–328, 1992. 
[7] P. Fröhlich, R. Simon, and L. Baillie, “Mobile spatial interaction,” 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 13(4), pp. 251–253, 2009. 
[8] D. L. Hintzman, C. S O’Dell, and D. R. Arndt, “Orientation in 
cognitive maps,” Cognitive Psychology, vol 13, pp. 149–206, 1981. 
[9] L. Gugerty and W. Rodes, “A  cognitive model of strategies for 
cardinal direction judgments,” Spatial Cognition and Computation, 
vol. 7(2), pp. 179–212, 2007. 
[10] A. Oulasvirta, S. Estlander, and A. Nurminen, “Embodied interaction 
with a 3D versus 2D mobile map,” Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, vol. 14(4), pp. 303–320, 2009. 
[11] W. Seager and D. S. Fraser, “Comparing physical, automatic and 
manual map rotation for pedestrian navigation,” Proceedings of CHI, 
pp. 767–776, 2007. 
[12] L. Cooper and R. N. Shepard, “Chronometric studies of the rotation 
of mental images,” In Visual information processing, W. G. Chase, 
Ed. New York: Academic Press, 1973. 
[13] R. N. Shepard and J. Metzler, “Mental rotation of three-dimensional 
objects,” Science, vol 171, pp. 701–703, 1971. 
[14] C. E. Bethell-Fox and R. N. Shepard, “Mental rotation: Effects of 
stimulus complexity and familiarity,” Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Human  Perception and Performance, vol. 14(1), pp. 12–
23, 1971. 
[15] L. Kärkkäinen and J. Laarni, “Designing for small display screens,” 
Proceedings of NordicCHI, pp. 227–230, 2002. 
[16] T. Kujala and P. Saariluoma, “Effects of menu structure and touch 
screen scrolling style on the variability of glance durations during in-
vehicle visual search tasks,” Ergonomics, vol. 54(8), pp. 716–732, 
2011. 
[17] N. Cowan, “The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A 
consideration of mental strorage capacity,” Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, vol. 24(1), pp. 87–175, 2000. 
[18] F. Hermann, G. Bieber, and A. Duesterhoeft, “Egocentric maps on 
mobile devices,” In Proceedings of Workshop on Mobile Computing, 
2003. 
[19] R. P. Darken and H. Cevik, “Map usage in virtual environments: 
Orientation issues,” In Proceedings of IEEE Virtual Reality, pp. 133–
140, 1999. 
[20] R. P. Darken and B. Peterson, “Spatial orientation, wayfinding, and 
representation,” In Handbook of virtual environments design, 
implementation, and applications, K. M. Stanney, Ed. New Jersey: 
Lawrence Erblaum, 2002. 
[21] M. Levine, I. Marchon, and G. Hanley, “The placement and 
misplacement of you-are-here maps,” Environment and Behavior, 
vol. 16(2), pp. 139–157, 1984. 
[22] M. Levine, “You-are-here maps: Psychological considerations,” 
Environment and Behavior, vol. 16(2), pp. 139–157, 1982. 
[23] S. C. Hirtle and J. Jonides, “Evidence of hierarchies in cognitive 
maps,” Memory & Cognition, vol. 13(3), pp. 208–217, 1985. 
[24] A. May, T. Ross, S. Bayer, and M. Tarkiainen, “Pedestrian navigation 
aids: Information reqirements and design implications,” Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 7(6), pp. 331–338, 2003. 
[25] G. Verbeke and M. Molenberghs, Linear mixed models for 
longitudinal data, New York: Springer, 2000. 
[26] A. P. Georgopoulos and G. Pellizzer, “The mental and the neural: 
Psychological and neural studies of mental rotation and memory 
scanning,” Neuropsychologia, vol. 33(11), pp. 1531–1547, 1995. 
[27] N. S. Newcombe and J. Huttenlocher, Making space: The 
development of spatial representation and reasoning, Cambridge, 
Mass.: The MIT Press, 2000. 
[28] S. Stenberg, “Memory-scanning: Mental processes revealed by 
reaction-time experiments,” American Scientist, vol. 54, pp. 421–457, 
1969. 
[29] W. Schneider and R. M. Shiffrin, “Controlled and automatic human 
information processing: I. Detection, search, and attention,” 
Psychological Review, vol. 84(1), pp. 1–66, 1977. 
[30] D. Waller, “Individual differences in spatial learning from computer-
simulated environments,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Applied, vol. 6(4), pp. 307–321, 2000. 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

