A Modular Interface Design to 
Indicate a Robot’s Social Capabilities
Frank Hegel
Applied Informatics Group (AGAI)
Bielefeld University, Universitätsstraße 21–23 
33615 Bielefeld, Germany
e-mail: fhegel@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract – This paper presents an intersection of human-like 
appearance, product design, and information design in order 
to systematically manipulate a robot’s conceptual user interface 
design. The social robot ‘Flobi’ appears as an iconic cartoon-like 
character to mediate between users and application scenarios. 
Flobi’s interface design consist of three visual dimensions to 
choreograph user expectations of the robot’s capabilities, traits, 
and competences. First, the robot has dynamic facial features 
to display various emotional expressions. Second, the structural 
head design consist of exchangeable modular parts which are 
magnetically connected. Through the modular design the visual 
features of Flobi (e.g., hairstyle, facial features) can be altered 
easily in order to create various characters. Third, different 
clothing will prospectively be used to trigger the robot’s social 
roles. All three dimensions of visual features are highly likely to 
have an effect on the evaluation of Flobi’s traits and capabilities.
Keywords – Social Robots, Industrial Design, Human Factors
I. INTRODUCTION
To date, social robots are mainly designed to engage in social 
scenarios which are familiar to users. Specifically, robots mainly 
have to provide a social communicative functionality that the 
interaction feels natural and intuitive to those who interact with 
the robot. In this respect, a social robot is generally a specific 
kind of interface metaphor in order to provide human-like 
interaction patterns [1]. 
Roboticists usually design robots to appear lifelike in order 
to represent natural (i.e., familiar) behaviors. On the one hand, 
some social robots strongly appear human-like, because the 
goal is to create android surrogates of existing persons. On 
the other hand, many social robots appear rather zoomorphic, 
caricatured, or technical [2]. But even if social robots vary 
greatly in terms of appearance their aesthetic form is primary 
intended to follow a specific familiar function, because this 
likely enhances the machines’ comprehensibility to guarantee an 
intuitive usage. To illustrate, a social robot acting in a kitchen 
might be designed like a kitchen aid whereby a robotic learning 
aid might rather be shaped to appear like a teacher in order to 
mediate a certain degree of expertise. 
One possibility of displaying different functionalities by a 
robot’s appearance is to consider exchangeable visual features 
which represent aspects of a specific expertise. Regarding the 
industrial design of the robot Flobi, exchangeable visual features 
have been conceptualized and implemented [3]. As depicted in 
Figure 1, Flobi generally appears human-like due to its facial 
features. These features were implemented because previous 
research has demonstrated that a certain degree of human-
likeness in appearance is necessary to produce facial expressions 
that are intuitively understandable. In addition, human-like 
appearance increases likely a robot’s predictability in terms of 
human-like behaviors. 
Taken together, the design of Flobi consists of three 
dimensions: First, the implementation of unambiguously 
recognizable facial expressions. Second, a modular surface-
design makes it possible to quickly alter Flobi’s visual character. 
Third, dress codes are considered to signify the robot’s social 
roles in order to increase the predictability of the its expertise.
After outlining related research in Section II, I present the 
key aspects of Flobi’s visual conceptualization in Section III. 
Section IV discuess the visual conceptualization and concludes 
this article.
II. RELATED WORK
In this chapter, I introduce into research on the appearance of 
social robots and related effects of such visual representations. 
Moreover, I give a short introduction into relevant principles of 
iconic communication with regard to information design. These 
principles illustrate how specific information can visually be 
implement into objects as well as interfaces.
Figure 1: The social robot Flobi
426
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

2.1 Appearance of Social Robots
Originally, the meaning of the term ‘automaton’ implies 
autonomous beings having the ability to move on their own. 
For instance, Vausanson’s flute and tabor player and Wolfgang 
von Kemepelen’s famous chess player, ‘The Turk’, designed 
in the mid 1700s, are early encounters between lifelike forms 
and machines. Both machines invoked on people’s projections 
and expectations due to the behavior displayed by their lifelike 
form. Even today, social roboticists connect form and function 
in an attempt to develop lifelike social robots [4]. Thus, one 
general objective of social robotics research is to create robots 
that engage in social scenarios which are familiar to users. Given 
this objective, robots have to provide a social communicative 
functionality that is natural and intuitive to those who interact 
with the robot.
Social robots vary greatly in terms of appearance to indicate 
specific behaviors or applications. Some social robots appear 
highly anthropomorphic while others appear rather zoomorphic, 
caricatured, or functional. According to [2] an anthropomorphic 
appearance is recommended to support meaningful interactions 
[5] with users because many aspects of nonverbal communication 
are only understandable if expressed in similarity to a human-
like body. For instance, emotional displays are highly iconic 
to emotional displays of human beings. Zoomorphic robots 
are intended to look like their animal counterparts to support 
the idea that an observer expects the robot to behave like an 
animal. In some cases this might be helpful to communicate the 
functional limitations of a social robot. To illustrate, a dog only 
partially understands human speech, but maybe this represents 
today’s recognition rates of current speech recognition software 
[6]. Robots with a caricatured appearance are mainly designed 
both to not elicit any expectations based on familiarity and to 
focus on specific attributes like mouth (i.e., speeking) or eyes 
(i.e., seeing). Finally, functional shaped robots are designed in a 
technical manner to illustrate their ultimate technical functions. 
This functional approach corresponds in a certain respect to the 
claim by Sullivan [7] that ‘form ever follows function’. In this 
case, the robot-designer expects that the user is able to understand 
capabilities of the robot by looking at its technical features.
Nevertheless, an human-like appearance matches probably 
best with the idea to implement artificial human-like behaviors 
to support intuitive interaction patterns. But in how far does an 
anthropomorphic appearance of robots affect the assessment 
of them? Specifically, recent research has shown that human-
likeness of agents relates highly to  the phenomenon of 
anthropomorphism.
2.1.1 Anthropomorphism
Anthropomorphism entails attributing human-like characteristics, 
properties, or mental states to real as well as imagined non-human 
agents and objects [8]. According to the familiarity hypothesis 
[9], people draw anthropomorphic inferences, because it allows 
us to explain things we do not understand in terms that we do 
understand – and we best understand ourselves as human beings.
However, the ‘Three-Factor Theory of Anthropomorphism’ 
[8] claims that the extent to which people anthropomorphize 
is determined by three general factors: First, Effectance 
Motivation describes the need to interact effectively with one’s 
environment. Attributing human characteristics and motivations 
to non-human agents increases the ability to make sense of an 
agent’s actions and consequently reduces uncertainty. Second, 
Sociality Motivation describes the need and desire to establish 
social connections. To illsutrate, when people feel lack of social 
connection they anthropomorphize objects more strongly. They 
do so to satisfy their need for affiliation. Finally, Elicited Agent 
Knowledge serves as a basis for induction primarily because 
such knowledge is acquired earlier and is more detailed than 
knowledge about non-human agents or objects. As a result, the 
more human-like an object appears, the more do people probably 
use themselves as a source of induction when judging non-
human agents.
The key role of human-likeness in appearance has been 
demonstrated in an experiment by [10]. These authors conducted 
an fMRI study with three different robot targets which differed 
in their degree of human-like appearance. Participants’ brain 
activity was measured during playing an interactive game (.i.e., 
Prisoners' Dilemma) with these robots. The results showed that 
the degree of human-likeness had significant effects on the 
participants’ cortical activities associated with Theory of Mind 
(ToM) and their judgments of the different robots. Summing up, 
the more human-like an interaction partner appears, the more 
do participants speculate implicitly about the robot’s intentions.
Moreover, it has been shown that the quantity of facial features 
implemented in a robot affect perceptions of human-likeness 
[11]. But in addition, faces imply various qualities which have 
effects on judgements. Specifically, due to the fact that a face 
continuously conveys information especially poor designed 
faces may cause negative attitudes towards an artificial agent or 
a robot [12]. 
2.1.2 Qualities of Facial Appearance
A vast body of research has shown that people attribute more 
positive traits to attractive people than to unattractive ones. 
[13-16]. To illustrate, attractive humans are commonly judged 
as warmer, kinder, stronger, more sensitive, interesting, poised, 
modest, sociable, and outgoing [13]. Moreoever, even babies 
prefer playing with attractive puppets [17]. Importantly, [18] 
suggested that an attractiveness bias is also applicable to objects. 
Further, there is evidence that unattractive objects can elicit 
uneaseness. This phenomenon is wellknown as the ‘uncanny 
valley’ hypothesis [19]. Such attributions are particularly true for 
faces with abnormal facial features (e.g., with regard to a bigger 
eye size of 150%). This suggests that the human visual system 
is particularly sensitive to cues indicating human-likeness [20].
However, not only does attractiveness or human-
likeness of a face influence social perceptions. This is also 
true for babyfacedness. People with babyfaced facial features 
(e.g., curved forehead, large eyes, small nose and chin) are 
characterized as warmer, more naive, submissive, less dominant, 
and less competent than mature-faced counterparts [21]. 
Regarding Flobi’s appearance, we designed the head babyfaced 
in order to both facilitate human-robot interactions and display 
the limitations regarding the robot’s limited skills. Additionally, 
a modular design has been realized in order to modify the users’ 
427
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

evaluations of the robot’s capabilities. The concept of how to 
systematically implement modular parts was mainly inspired by 
principles of information design and iconic communication. 
2.2. Iconic Communication
To date, iconic communication systems often become valuable as 
new information systems call for designs that cut across language 
barriers. Therefore, iconic communication is an interesting 
source of inspiration when designing novel electronic interfaces 
such as social robots. Principles of iconic communication are 
universal and they are almost not tied to unique features of a 
particular language or culture [22].
Generally, any information is mediated by signs and the 
concept of signs is essential to understand iconic communication: 
“A sign... [in the form of a representamen] is something which 
stands to somebody for something in some respect or capacity. 
It addresses somebody, that is, creates in the mind of that person 
an equivalent sign, or perhaps a more developed sign. That 
sign which it creates I call the interpretant of the first sign. The 
sign stands for something, its object. It stands for that object, 
not in all respects, but in reference to a sort of idea, which I 
have sometimes called the ground of the representamen” [23] 
(see Figure 2). Furthermore, Peirce distinguished three general 
types of representamen: First, indexical signs denote their 
objects by virtue of an actual (physical) connection involving 
them (e.g., footsteps are connected to a living creature, smoke is 
connected to fire). Second, symbolic signs are connected to the 
represented objects by convention (e.g., words or language in 
general). Third, iconic signs represent objects by their similarity 
(e.g., photograph, natural drawing). Furthermore, Peirce then 
again divided icons into three subtypes: images, diagrams, 
and metaphors. Evidently, icons are naturally related to visual 
communication.
By using the term ‘iconic communication system’ I refer 
to a systematical combination of several icons to derive more 
specific meanings. To illustrate, I introduce into one specific 
aspect of the ‘International System Of TYpographic Picture 
Education (ISOTYPE). 
ISOTYPE [24] was basically invented in the 1920s by 
the sociologist Otto Neurath and the designer Gerd Arntz to 
visualize social and economical facts particularly with regard to 
facilitate the understanding of complex data for less educated 
people. Beyond that, ISOTYPE was intended to support foreign 
people having intuitively access to specific knowledge. To 
illustrate, icons at airports are richly implemented to help foreign 
people finding luggage, toilets, exits etc. With the invention 
of ISOTYPE there has been established new standards for 
presenting data and it fundamentally influenced several topics 
in the field of information design and interface design as well.
Neurath and Arntz created a limited number of icons for 
international use that should be readable without using further 
descriptions. At a first glance, an icon created ISOTYPE displays 
only the most important details of the represented object – in a 
way that it is just identifiable. At a second glance, visual attributes 
are used to elicit specific meanings of the object. To demonstrate, 
in Figure 3 there are circles representing human heads and, most 
importantly, different hats representing ethnic groups.
Such combined icons can be used to signify their relations 
in order to initiate more specific meanings. To illustrate, in 
Figure 4 a visual combination of ‘shoe’ and ‘factory’ simply 
is a ‘shoe factory’. Such combined icons are frequently used 
in the field of interface design. For instance, Susan Kare, 
who created the interface of the Macintosh Operating System 
[25], differentiated on a first dimension between a general 
icon representing ‘documents’ and a prictograph representing 
‘applications’ (see Figure 5). On another second dimension she 
connected additional ‘task-icons’ (e.g., text, draw, paint) to the 
documents and applications to categorize specific types of them. 
This schema supports users to quickly recognize the interface’s 
objects. According to these concepts of combined icons, three 
dimensions of exchangeable visual parts were implemented to 
implicitly choreograph the users’ perceived capabilities of the 
robot.
III. VISUALIZATION OF FLOBI
According to previous research [11], the extent to which a face is 
perceived human-like depends on the quantity of facial features. 
To realize a high degree of human-likeness, Flobi’s facial features 
include eyes, eyelids, lips, ears, eyebrows. However, with regard 
to qualities of these features, Flobi appears cartoon-like with 
a certain similarity to humans to trigger natural interactions. 
Additionally, the robot appears babyfaced that people potentially 
Figure 3: In ISOTYPE ethnic groups are demonstrated 
systematically by various iconic head types
Figure 4: In ISOTYPE a combination of the visual items 
‘shoe’ and ‘factory’ means a ‘shoe factory’
+
Figure 2: Sign relations according to Peirce. The  dotted line
 means that there does not have to be any direct 
relation between the form of the sign and what it stands for
OBJECT
(what the sign represents)
INTERPRETANT
(the sense made of the sign)
REPRESENTAMEN
(the sign vehicle)
Figure 5: Icons of the first Apple Macintosh System  
program icons
document icons
principal
text
draw
paint
dimension 1
dimension 2
428
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

judge the robot to be submissive, more naive, and social warmer. 
Consequently, Flobi has relatively large eyes, a small chin, 
small lips, a small nose, and a round head shape similar to a 
baby’s head [21]. Moreover, no technical junctions are visible 
in order to have a consistent character design and to avoid the 
aforementioned ‘uncanny valley’ [20].
Additionally, the size of the facial features is meant to signify 
a match between form and the product’s actual function: The 
user shall infer Flobi’s capabilities from its appearance. To give 
a visual indication of the robot’s functional capabilities, Flobi 
has emphasized large eyes due to comparatively good visual 
capabilities, normal ears due to available hearing capabilities, 
and a small nose to indicate that Flobi does not have any olfactory 
capabilities. Furthermore, characters in computer games often 
have large eyes to improve the readability of attention – the 
direction of large eyes compared to small eyes is more likely to 
be recognized [26].
One of the signifi cant issues that arises when we want 
to match the users’ expectations with regard to different 
application scenarios is the conceptualization of exchangeable 
visual cues which can be altered dynamically. Specifi cally, 
Flobi has principally been developed to engage within various 
scenarios. Currently the robot is used in an emotional scenario 
[27] and in a sports scenario to support astronauts performing 
their daily physical training [28]. In order to use the robot in 
further scenarios, an iconic system of three dimensions was 
conceptualized (see Figure 6): First, the robot has the capability 
to dynamically display various facial expressions. Second, all 
perceivable parts of Flobi’s head design are easily exchangeable. 
Finally, visual cues of dress codes will be used to initiate 
schemata of expertise.
3.1 Dimension 1: Displaying Facial Expressions
Altogether, Flobi has 18 degrees of freedom to display facial 
expressions, such as basic emotions like happiness, sadness, fear, 
surprise, and anger. Four actuators move the upper and lower 
eyelids, two actuators rotate the eyebrows, three actuators move 
the eyes, three actuators move the neck, and fi nally, six actuators 
were implemented to animate the robot’s lips. Furthermore, by 
means of four LEDs, red or white light can be projected onto 
Flobi’s cheek surfaces in order to prospectively indicate either 
shame or healthiness. Displaying shame is an interesting feature, 
because it signifi es a uniquely human emotion and has not yet 
been investigated deeply in robotics.
Because product design requires covering technical 
conjunctions, we developed a ‘hole-free’ robot head. It was 
particularly challenging to meet this requirement with regard to 
Flobi’s lip movements. In few robots LED technology is used to 
project lips onto the face. Nevertheless, we decided against LED 
technology to display the robot’s lips because of the unnatural 
appeal of LEDs. Instead, Flobi’s upper and lower lips consist of 
neodymium magnets that can be actuated separately. Behind the 
robot’s mask, coupled magnets are actuated on sliding axes, with 
the motion range overlapping between upper and lower lips. The 
large and overlapping motion range makes it possible to realize 
a relatively natural facial expression, because the corners of 
Flobi’s mouth are not fi xed. Flobi differs from some prominent 
social robots in this regard (e.g., the Philips iCat [29]), because 
in these robots, the corners of the mouth are commonly fi xed. 
Flobi’s lip actuators can lift the corners of the mouth to form 
natural smile without exposing holes or hardware. 
In a fi rst study regarding the readability of emotional 
displays, it has been shown that participants are able to 
distinguish a set of signifi ed facial expressions. The face with 
its actuated features makes it possible to display basic emotions 
as happiness, sadness, fear, surprise and anger (see Figure 7). 
However, are users able to classify these distinct emotional states 
correctly? This was tested in an online survey [31] with 259 
participants (160 female, 90 male) who evaluated the emotional 
  
 
Dynamic facial expressions 
6 actuators 
upper and lower lips up and down
3 actuators 
moving neck
2 actuators 
rotating eyebrows
3 actuators 
eyes left/right &eyes up/down
4 actuators 
move 4 eyelids each up and down
2 LEDs  
blushing cheeks
 
 
Structural head design
hair 
 
male/female types in 5 different colors
skin 
 
5 different tones
eyebrows 
3 types of eyebrows in 5 different colors
lips 
 
4 types in 5 different colors
... 
 
...
 
 
Clothing
collar 
 
female/male type
dress codes 
indicating expertise
... 
 
...
}
}
}
expressions
characters
social roles
Figure 6: Iconic Communication with three dimensions of dynamic features
1
2
3
Dimension
Figure 7: Emotional displays of Flobi. From left to right: 
neutral, happiness, sadness, anger, surprise, and fear
429
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

displays of Flobi. The participants were ranging in age from 17 
to 67 years, with a mean age of 27.7. Conceptually replicating 
[30], participants were presented with five images of the robot 
in a randomized order. The images depicted five basic emotions 
displayed by the robot. Subsequently, participants had to indicate 
which of the emotions would be portrayed by the robots. 
The results demonstrated that Flobi’s displays were almost 
readable: The participants were able to classify displays of 
sadness (99,2%), happiness (83,3%), anger (81,2%) and surprise 
(54,5%) relatively correct. The display of fear (33,5%), however, 
was recognized less well, because obviously, many participants 
mistook surprise for fear (51,2%). Moreover, it is likely that 
these displays will be even more readable when they are 
presented in a certain context. Taken together, by means of this 
18 mechanically actuated features Flobi is capable of displaying 
a variety of meaningful expressions that represent the product's 
communicative states and intentions.
3.2 Dimension 2: Modular Head Features
Psychological research has shown that even subtle visual cues 
can lead to a target’s categorization, for example, in terms of 
the person’s age, race, or gender. This categorization occurs 
automatically within individuals and activates knowledge 
structures such as stereotypes or social roles. Specifically, 
stereotypes and social roles imply certain sets of behaviors that 
are expected of a person [32]. For this reason, Flobi’s consist of 
exchangeable modular parts (see Figure 8). Because the modular 
approach makes it possible to alter Flobi’s appearance quickly 
and flexibly, this robot can theoretically be used as research 
platform to study HRI in a wide range of different contexts.
By means of the modular conceptualization of Flobi’s 
head, it is possible select specific features to manipulate users’ 
expectations and perceptions of the robot. Practically, all 
modules of the robot head can be combined as needed. This is 
possible because most of the head’s features are attached to the 
core by means of neodymium magnets. To build one specific 
character a set of ten parts in total is required. 
Two main parts, a front head and a front neck, are screwed 
onto the technical core (see Figure 8-6). The face and the back 
part of the head are connected to the front head part using 
neodymium magnets. Flobi’s back neck is connected to its front 
neck part using magnets as well. All these parts are available in 
human-like skin tones of varying shades (see Figure 8-2). The 
hair parts as well as the upper and lower lips are connected to the 
head using magnets, too. Flobi’s eyebrows can be plugged into 
an actuator behind the face mask. 
In a preliminary study [33] regarding the variable modules, 
we found that different hair types affect stereotypically knowledge 
structures in subjects. 60 participants were tested, ranging in age 
from 19 to 38 years. We used two different hair modules to create a 
long-haired ‘feminine robot’ and a short-haired ‘masculine robot’ 
(see Figure 9). As predicted, the long-haired ‘female’ version 
of Flobi was perceived as more feminine than the short-haired 
one. The participants were then asked to evaluate the ‘gendered’ 
robots in terms of gender-stereotypical traits and the robot’s 
suitability for typically female vs. male tasks. In this manner, the 
participants rated the robot on a 7-point Likert scale with regard 
to six stereotypically female traits (e.g., friendly, trusting, polite) 
and six stereotypically male traits (e.g., authoritative, aggressive, 
dominant). The results showed that the male robot was perceived 
as possessing more stereotypically masculine traits than the 
female robot whereas the female robot was perceived as slightly 
warmer than the male robot. 
Furthermore, the participants evaluated the robots’ suitability 
for pretested typically female tasks (childcare, household 
maintenance, after-school tutoring, patient care, preparing meals 
and elderly care ) and typically male tasks (transporting goods, 
repairing technical equiptment, guarding a house, steering 
machines, handcrafting and servicing equiptment). The results 
show that typically female tasks were perceived as more suitable 
for the feminine robot relative to the masculine target – and 
vice versa. Participants perceived the female robot as being 
more suitable for stereotypically ‘female tasks’ than the male 
robot. Vice versa, the male robot was perceived as being more 
suitable for ‘male tasks’ [more detailed information regarding 
this experiment in 33]. Taken together, due to the modular design 
(in this case a hair module), we are able to create distinct robot 
characters whose gendered appearance affect the participants’ 
expectations about the robots’ personality and expertise.
3.3 Dimension 3: Dress Codes
According to Goffman [34] life in society is a sort of ‘theater’. 
That is, there is a connection between the kinds of acts that 
people put on in their daily life and theatrical performances. 
In daily interactions as well as in theatrical performances the 
‘actors’ (individuals) are on ‘stage’ in front of their audiences. 
However, people display their social roles not only behavioral, 
in addition they automatically use cues such as dress codes by 
which other people (audiences) are able to identify their specific 
Figure 8: Exchangeanble parts of the robot’s head: 
(1) female Flobi combined with red hair, (2) skin tones,  
(3) a set of different head parts, (4) technical corpus
1
3
2
Figure 9: Flobi with female (1) and male (2) hair module
1
2
4
430
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

social roles. Commonly, people wear a certain set of clothes that 
signify their social role. This has been evolved due to different 
requirements of specific domains. To illustrate, most sports 
and physical activities are practiced wearing specific clothing, 
for practical, for comfort, or for safety reasons. In addition, 
clothing performs a range of social and cultural functions, 
such as individual, occupational and sexual differentiation, 
and social status. Probably, in almost all societies, dress codes 
reflect standards of modesty, religion, gender, and social status. 
Dress codes may additionally function as a sort of adornment 
and an expression of personal taste or style. However, triggering 
role-specific information is likely possible by considering role-
specific dress codes. 
Role specific information such as clothing codes have 
already been applied to virtual agents in order to alter a user’s 
expectations. Virtual agents wearing role-specific clothing 
were expected to behave appropriate in terms of that roles [35]. 
Therefore, it is highly likely that context-specific dresses in social 
robotics also have an effect regarding the assessment of robots as 
well. To investigate effects of dress codes in robotics, we drew 
a set of sketches (examples in Figure 10) which will be tested 
experimentally in order to have knowledge how to choreograph 
the perceived expertise of a robot by using such codes. 
IV. DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
Flobi is a cartoon-like social robot with a certain degree of 
human-likeness. In order to activate natural interaction patterns, 
one essential feature of Flobi is that it is capable of displaying 
distinctive meaningful facial expressions. Participants in a pilot 
study were intuitively able to almost distinguish among five 
displays of basic emotions. Furthermore, according to principles 
of information design Flobi’s head consists of exchangeable 
modular parts to instantly arrange different characters. This 
set of characters was conceptualized to initiate expectations 
in terms of stereotypes. Regarding the modularity, it has been 
shown by means of statistical analysis that even minimal hair 
cues led people to judge the robot differently. An expansion of 
another head parts including additional visual attributes is work 
in progress. In addition to exchangeable modules, different 
clothings are conceptualized to indicate Flobi’s social role with 
regard to the its expertise. 
Taken together, there currently exist three visual dimensions 
of dynamic features to modify Flobi’s appearance: (a) movable 
facial expressions, (b) modular head parts, and (c) exchangeable 
clothings. 
Fundamentally, this concept of exchangeable visuals is not 
a novel one since it has successfully been implemented in many 
products such as cell phones (e.g., different skins of preference), 
cars, and toys (e.g., Playmobil® figures consist of different 
clothings as well as facial features to indicate specific scenarios 
of play). In contrast to today´s commercial products, this concept 
has never been applied to robotic products with the ability of 
social interaction before – even though it is an interesting feature 
due to the fact that there is probably an open field of various 
unknown application scenarios.
The option to exchange visual features enables us to 
systematically do research on the appearance of robots. Most 
of today’s social robots have a fixed appearance that allows 
researchers only to investigate explicitly one specific character. 
By contrast, the modular design makes it possible to investigate 
dozens of differently created characters in order to understand 
the effects of appearance in this field of robotics.
Moreover, a modular robotic design involves potential users 
into the process of design and enables them to arange their own 
characters of aesthetical preference. It is likely that people have 
a bias towards specific characters. To illustrate, some people 
generally prefer to have female agents while others might prefer 
male ones. This way, the method of modularity is a first step 
towards giving the people the ability to build their own enjoyable 
robotic characters. 
The conceptualization of the modular design was mainly 
realized to indicate familiar knowledge structures in order to 
choreograph people’s mental models with regard to the robot’s 
apparently capabilities. To illustrate, a social robot whose job 
is to support technical maintenance will probably be perceived 
as having more expertise if the robot has typically a male 
appearance wearing a repairman’s clothing. This suggestion is 
supported by our first findings that even the exchange of minimal 
hair cues affect the user’s perception. However, regarding the 
modular concept there are three open questions: First, the results 
of our experiment are currently limited to first impressions of 
the robot. Accordingly, it might be possible that individuals 
change their attitudes toward robots due to iterative interactions. 
Additionally, we are not able to predict how the robot’s actual 
behavior affects the expectations people have due to their first 
impressions. Second, with regard to dress codes we first have 
to conduct experiments whether people ascribe or not specific 
capabilities due to such codes. Third, the presented studies in 
this article are limited to the evaluation of images displaying 
robots. The embodiment of a product might have an effect on the 
perception and the judgement of social robots as well.
Unfortunately, from an engineering point of view, Flobi 
is currently far away from being a commercial product. Up to 
now, two hardware prototypes have been realized mainly to test 
the functional issues in terms of technical capabilities – a third 
prototype is work in progress. Therefore, it has not been tested 
to which extent the aesthetical modularity of robots might be 
effective in the field of commercial entertainment robots as well. 
Therefore, a vast body of additional research is needed to draw 
further conclusions with regard to the engineering, aesthetical, 
and practical aspects of the modularity concept. 
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I gratefully acknowledge partial support by the German 
Aerospace Center (DLR) with funds from the Federal Ministry 
Figure 10: Examples of dress codes applied to Flobi
431
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

of Economics and Technology (BMBF) due to resolution 
50RA1023 of the German Bundestag.
VI. REFERENCES
[1] 
F. Hegel, C. Muhl, B. Wrede, M. Hielscher-Fastabend, 
and G. Sagerer (2009). ‘Understanding Social Robots’, in 
the Proceedings of the Second International Conferences 
on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI), 
Cancun, Mexico. 
[2]  
T. W. Fong, I. Nourbakhsh, and K. Dautenhahn (2002). ‘A 
Survey of Socially Interactive Robots: Concepts, Design, and 
Applications’, Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 42 (3–4), 
142–166.
[3] 
F. Hegel, F. Eyssel, and B. Wrede (2010). ‘The Social Robot 
Flobi: Key Concepts of Industrial Design’. In 19th IEEE 
International Symposium in Robot and Human Interactive 
Communication (RO-MAN). Viareggio, Italy
[4] 
Duffy BR, Joue G (2004). ‘I, robot being’. In proceedings of 
the Intelligent Autonomous Systems Conference (IAS8) 10-
13 March, Amsterdam, NL.
[5] 
C. Breazeal (2002). ‘Designing Sociable Robots’. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
[6] 
C. Bartneck (2003), ‘Interacting with and embodied emoti- 
onal Character’. Proceedings of the DPPI2003 Conference, 
Pittsburgh, 55-60.
[7] 
L. Sullivan (1896). ‘The Tall Office Building Artistically 
Considered’. Published in Lippincott's Magazine.
[8] 
N. Epley, A. Waytz, and J. T. Cacioppo (2007). ‘On Seeing 
Human: A Three-Factor Theory of Anthropomorphism’. 
Psychological Review 114, 864–886.
[9]  
S. E. Guthrie (1997). ‘Anthropomorphism: A Definition and 
a Theory’. In: R. W. Mitchell et al., ‘Anthropomorphism, an-
ecdotes, and animals’. Albany: State University of New York 
Press., USA.
[10] S. Krach, F. Hegel, B. Wrede, G. Sagerer, F. Binkofski, and 
T. Kircher (2008). ‘Can machines think? Interaction and 
perspective taking with robots investigated via fMRI’. In 
PLoS ONE, 3(7),  2008. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002597.
[11]  C.F. DiSalvo, F. Gemperle, J. Forlizzi, and S. Kiesler (2002). 
‘All robots are not created equal: the design and perception 
of humanoid robot heads’, in DIS ’02: Proceedings of the 
Conference on Designing interactive systems, 321-326, New 
York, NY, USA.
[12] J.S. Donath (2001). ‘Mediated Faces’, in the Proceedings of 
the 4th International Conference on Cognitive Technology, 
373-390.
[13] K. Dion, E. Berscheid, and E. Walster (1972). ‘What 
is beautiful is good’. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, Vol. 24 (3), 285-290.
[14] N. Ambady and R. Rosenthal (1993). ‘Half a minute: 
Predicting teacher evaluations from thin slices of nonverbal 
behavior and physical attractiveness’. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 64, 431-441.
[15] K. Dion (1973). ‘Young children’s stereotyping of facial at-
tractiveness’. Developmental Psychology, 9, 183-188.
[16] R.L. Dipboye, R.D. Arvey, and D.E. Terpstra (1977). ‘Sex 
and physical attractiveness of raters and applicants as 
determinants of resume´ evaluations’. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 4, 288-294.
[17] J.H. Langlois, L.A. Roggman, and L.A. Ricser-Danner, 
(1990). ‘Infants‘ Differential Social Responses to Attractive 
and Unattractive Faces’. Developmental Psychology, 26, 153-
159.
[18] D.A. Norman (2004). ‘Emotional Design: Why We Love (Or 
Hate) Everyday Things’. New York: Basic Books.
[19] M. Mori (1997). ‘The Buddha in the Robot’. Charles E. Tuttle 
Co.
[20] J. Seyama and R.S. Nagayama (2007). ‘The uncanny valley: 
Effect of realism on the impression of artificial human faces’. 
Presence. Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 16(4), 
337-351.
[21] L.A. Zebrowitz (1997). ‘Reading faces: Window to the 
soul?’, Boulder, CO: Westview Press, USA.
[22] E. R. Tufte (2001). ‘Envisioning Information’. Cheshire, CT, 
Graphics Press.
[23] Peirce, Charles Sander: Collected Papers of Charles Sanders 
Peirce (Volumes I-VI ed. by Charles Hartshorne and Paul 
Weiss, 1931-1935). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard 
University Press.
[24] O. Neurath (2010). ‘From Hieroglyphics to Isotype: A Visual 
Autobiography’. Princeton Architectural Press.
[25] http://www.kare.com (06/2011).
[26] K. Isbister (2006). ‘Better game characters by design: A 
psychological approach’. The Morgan Kaufmann Publishers 
Inc., San Francisco, USA.
[27] http://www.sfb673.org/projects/C2/ (12/2012).
[28] http://ekvv.uni-bielefeld.de/blog/uninews/entry/robots_as_
fitness_coaches_for (12/2012).
[29] http://www.hitech-projects.com/icat/ (12/2012)
[30] P. Ekman, W.V. Friesen, M. O‘Sullivan, I. Diacoyanni-
Tarlatzis, R. Krause, T. Piticairn, K. Scherer, A. Chan, K. 
Heider, W.A. LeCompte P.E. Ricci-Bitti, M. Tomita, and A. 
Tzavaras (1987). ‘Universal and cultural differences in the 
judgement of facial expressions of emotion’. In the Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology 53 (4), 712-717. 
[31] F. Hegel (2010). ‘Gestalterische Konstruktion eines sozialen 
Roboters’, Dissertation, Faculty of Technology, Bielefeld 
University, Germany.
[32] S.T. Fiske and S.E. Taylor (1991). ‘Social cognition’. Second 
Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, USA.
[33] F. Eyssel and F. Hegel (2012). ‘(S)he’s got the look: Gender 
stereotyping of social robots’. Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology 42 (9).
[34] E. Goffman (1959). ‘The presentation of self in everyday 
life’. Anchor Books, New York, USA.
[35] B. Hayes-Roth, H. Maldonado, and M. Moraes (2002). ‘De-
signing for diversity: Multi-cultural characters for a multi-
cultural world’. In Proceedings of IMAGINA 2000, Monte 
Carlo, Monaco, 207-225.
432
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

