Haptic Mouse 
Enabling Near Surface Haptics in Pointing Interfaces  
 
Kasun Karunanayaka, Sanath Siriwardana, Chamari 
Edirisinghe, Ryohei Nakatsu 
KEIO NUS Cute Center, Interactive and Digital Media 
Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore 
e-mail: {g0800474,sanath,chamari,elenr}@nus.edu.sg 
Ponnampalam Gopalakrishnakone 
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore  
e-mail: antgopal@nus.edu.sg
 
 
Abstract— In this study, we are introducing an innovative 
pointing interface for computers, which provides mouse 
functionalities with near surface haptic. It could also be 
configured as a haptic display, where users can feel the basic 
geometrical shapes in the GUI by moving the finger on top of 
the device surface. These functionalities are attained by 
tracking 3D position of a neodymium magnet, using Hall Effect 
sensors grid and generating like polarity haptic feedback using 
an electromagnet array. Where previously haptic sensations 
are felt only on top of the buttons of the haptic mouse 
implementations, this interface brings the haptic sensations to 
the 3D space.  
Keywords- pointing interface; near surface haptic feedback; 
tactile display; tangible user interface. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Ordinarily, Pointing devices are used to control and 
provide data to the graphical user interfaces (GUI) using 
physical gestures [1].  Movements and commands sent by 
pointing devices are echoed on the screen through 
movements of the mouse pointer (or cursor) and other visual 
changes. Mouse is the most common and popular pointing 
device in use nowadays. Pointing interfaces have been in the 
use along with computers for almost four decades [9]. They 
were continuously improved by adding new features like 
dragging, scrolling, multi-touch and recently, attempts were 
made to include haptic feedback sensations. It was argued 
that the addition of haptic sensations will create excitement, 
realism, and an added natural feel for the users [10]. 
Haptic Mouse (Fig. 1) is introduced as a new type of 
pointing interface which will provide mouse interactions, 
haptic feedback and additional enhanced features. The key 
advantage of this system over other haptic pointing interfaces 
is that users are able to control the mouse cursor and feel 
haptic sensations from 4cm above the device surface. This 
will enable the haptic sensations in 3D space which will be a 
novel experience. Varied haptic sensations provided by this 
system can be felt like attraction, repulsion, and various 
patterns of vibrations.  Those sensations can be easily 
configurable as feedbacks for different mouse commands 
using the driver software that we have developed. 
The system provides attraction and repulsion sensations 
by changing the polarity of the electromagnets. Polarity of an 
electromagnet can be changed by swapping the positive and 
negative voltage supply to electromagnet using a controller 
circuit. When the neodymium magnet worn on the finger tips 
and the electromagnet array underneath the device positioned 
in the opposite polarity, (N – S or S - N) users feel an 
attraction towards the device surface. When those magnets 
are in like polarity (S - S or N-N) positions users feel the 
repulsion sensation.  
Vibration sensations are initiated by setting up 
neodymium magnet and magnetic array in a like polarity 
position and then rapidly switching on and off the 
electromagnets in the array in certain frequencies. This rapid 
switching on and off dynamically changes the magnetic field 
it produces and affects the static magnetic flux developed by 
the neodymium magnet worn on the finger tips. While 
electromagnet is switched off, neodymium magnet drop 
towards the device surface, but when the electromagnet is 
switched on, the neodymium magnet rises due to the 
repulsion force felt as a vibration.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Haptic mouse system : User can move the neodymium magnet 
worn on the finger tip above the device surface and interact with the 
computer & sense haptic feedback for their inputs. 
Haptic Mouse allows users to both control and interacts 
with the graphical user interfaces as similar to other pointing 
interfaces.  Figure 2, shows the related gestures of 2D cursor 
movements and Commands of the system. Users can easily 
move the neodymium magnet attached to the finger tip on 
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

top of the device surface and control the GUIs. This can be 
visualized as a movement of an invisible mouse on the 
mouse pad.  
 
    
 
 
2a. Haptic Mouse cursor movement gestures while North Pole is positioned 
downwards 
 
 2b. Haptic Mouse commands while South Pole is positioned downwards 
Figure 2.  movement and Command gestures of the Haptic Mouse 
Furthermore, this interface can be configured as a low 
resolution haptic display. It is possible for a user to move 
his/her finger on top of the surface and sense the basic 
shapes of the objects on the screen. This is achieved by 
providing one vibration pattern once the user moves the 
cursor on top of the interested object and then change to a 
different vibration patterns when the cursor crosses the 
border of that object. Simple geometrical shapes which are 
bigger than 200 pixels * 200 pixels can be sensed and 
identified. As further developments, if there is an application 
which is restricting the user to a particular window, this 
device can use the haptic feedback and let the user know 
about the virtual boundary.  The sensing of simple gestures 
will be helpful for users to increase their interaction with 
computers. 
This paper will discuss the prior research and 
publications as related work, where the limitations and 
research gaps will be highlighted. The implementation 
details of the Haptic Mouse will be discussed extensively in 
the system description section while the results section will 
be presenting two technical experiments. The Conclusion & 
Future Work section presents the end users perspectives and 
the potential directions for further research. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
This section will discuss prior research with which the 
authors are arguing for the novelty value of the Haptic 
Mouse.   
Liquid Interface [2] is a previous work of the authors 
which has provided the base technologies for the current 
pointing interface. It is an organic user interface that utilizes 
ferrofluid as an output display and input buttons embodied 
with musical notes. Using a matrix of Hall Effect sensors, 
magnetic fields generated by neodymium magnets worn on 
the fingertips are measured and then converted into signals 
that provide input capability. This input actuates an array of 
electromagnets and generates ferrofluid bubbles. By 
matching like polarities between the electromagnets and the 
neodymium magnet, haptic force feedback can be achieved. 
This system is limited to detect switch on and switch off type 
of interactions and used to develop a ferrofluid based piano.  
FingerFlux [4] is an output technique which generates 
near-surface haptic feedback on interactive tabletops. It 
combines electromagnetic actuation with a permanent 
magnet attached to the user’s hand. FingerFlux provides 
enhanced features like, feel the interface before touching, 
attraction and repulsion, development of applications such as 
reducing drifting, adding physical constraints to virtual 
controls, and guiding the user without visual output. They 
have achieved the vibration sensations up to 35mm above the 
table. As limitations, Fingerflux could only works with table 
top computers. It uses camera tracking based sensing and the 
maximum vibration feeling height is comparatively lower 
than our system. 
Tactile Explorer [5] is a device which provides access to 
computer information for the visually disabled based on a 
tactile mouse. The tactile mouse resembles a regular 
computer mouse, but differs in having two tactile pads on top 
that have pins that move up and down. These translate the 
data on the screen to tactile sensation. Tactile Explorer 
provides possibilities to find and select desirable on-screen 
information and study it with different options.  
Microsoft tactile mouse [6] is a commercially available 
mouse implementation which combines haptic sensation and 
will be developed to support rich features of their latest 
operating system. This mouse has a touch sensitive strip 
which contains two buttons, one on each end. Haptic-
feedback, in the form of vibration through the touch-
sensitive strip, indicates which one of the three scrolling 
speeds has been selected. Both Tactile Explorer and 
Microsoft tactile mouse are mouse implementations 
combined with Haptic. It supports enhanced haptic 
interactions. However, operations and sensations are limited 
to the device surface. Furthermore, the haptic actuation is 
limited to a small area of the device surface. 
III. 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
Haptic Mouse contains three modules. They are 
Neodymium Magnet attached to the finger and Hall Effect 
sensors Grid, Software Interface Driver and Electromagnetic 
Array with Controller Circuit. These three parts are 
described in the following sections. 
A. Neodymium Magnet and Hall Effect sensors Grid 
The neodymium magnet attached to the finger tip allows 
users to actuate the Hall Effect sensors grid which is placed 
bellow the acrylic surface. Polarity of the neodymium 
Double Click  
Scroll Up 
Left Click 
Right 
Scroll Down 
Up 
Right 
Down 
Left 
337
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

magnet and various gestures made by the user are identified 
with the help of Hall Effect sensors grid. Neodymium 
magnet could generate higher density of magnetic flux 
compared to other permanent magnets. Therefore, the size 
and weight of the permanent magnet is important for this 
system to become smaller in order to fit it on the fingertip of 
the user.  
We have used an Arduino [3] based microcontroller for 
processing the Hall Effect sensor readings. Analogue voltage 
readings of the sensors then converted to digital values using 
the built-in analog to digital converters and fed in to interface 
driver software to identify the gestures and commands. Hall 
Effect sensor grid used in this device is a 4*3 array (4 
sensors along the X axis and 3 sensors along the Y axis). The 
space between two Hall Effect sensors were allocated 100 
pixels. In physically, distance bettween two sensors is 2cm 
for X axis and 1.36cm for Y axis. All the sensor values 
recorded are represented as X,Y coordinates (0-300 in X axis 
and 0 to 132 in Y axis).    
B. Software Interface Driver 
 
 
Figure 3.  Based on the distance to the neodymium magnet from each 
sensor the position of the neodymium magnet is determined. 
For the precise operation of the pointing device, there has 
to be a device driver which can integrate with the operating 
system. Therefore, using the Windows API we have 
developed a software driver for this device. This driver 
accepts the digital sensor readings from the microcontroller 
of the Hall Effects sensors grid as the input. When the North 
Pole of the neodymium magnet is positioned downward, 
sensor values are fluctuating in between 512 -1024 range and 
when the South Pole is downward, sensor values are 
changing between 0 and 512 of range. These sensor values 
are sorted in the descending order and if the magnet is North 
Pole downwards, software searches for the sensors in the 
grid where it received the maximum readings. Sensors which 
are nearest to the neodymium magnet, output the maximum 
values in this case. Based on those intensity values, relative 
distance to the neodymium magnet from the nearest three 
sensors is calculated.  
The localization algorithm of the neodymium magnet is 
derived from the 2D trilateration technique. Trilateration is 
the process of determination absolute or relative locations of 
points by measurement of distances using the geometry of 
circles, spheres or triangles [13]. It is widely used for 
localization algorithms which can be found in GPS, RF 
based indoor positioning, navigation, and survey systems. As 
illustrated in Figure 3, the distances to the neodymium 
magnet is calculated from the expressions found in the table 
1. These distances can form circles and based on their 
intersection position of the sensor can be located. To increase 
the probability for intersections we have multiplied the 
distances by a constant factor (which is greater than one) and 
made the three circles intersect most of the times. This forms 
a circular triangle [(x12, y12), (x13, y13), (x23, y23)] and by 
finding the center the position of the neodymium magnet can 
be obtained. The mathematical method we derived is 
explained bellow. 
Let us assume that all there circles formed by the 
readings are intersect with the each other. Therefore, the 
conditions for the circles to intersect are as follows.  
 
 (1) 
              (2) 
  
(3) 
By following Fewell’s [12] method to calculate area of 
circular triangles, we can calculate the coordinates of the 
intersection points, (x12, y12), (x13, y13) and (x23, y23) as 
follows.  By defining the origin of the coordinate system is 
placed at circle 1 and X axis is passed through the center of 
the circle 2,  
 
 
 (4) 
(5) 
By assuming origin of the (x’,y’) system is located at the 
center of the circle 1 and x’ axis passes through center of 
circle 3,  
    
(6) 
(7) 
By transform back to the (x,y) coordinates system and 
obtaining (x13, y13),  
             (8) 
            (9) 
                    (10) 
                 (11) 
338
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

By assuming origin of the (x’’,y’’) system is located at 
the center of the circle 2 and x’’ axis passes through center of 
circle 3,  
 
 
 (12) 
(13) 
By transform back to the (x,y) coordinates system and 
obtaining (x23, y23),  
 
 (14) 
           (15)  
                         (16) 
                      17) 
and 
are the angles between the x axis and respective 
abscissas of the two additional coordinate systems. After 
calculating the intersections of the circular traingle we can 
obtain the center of the traingle where the position of the 
neodymium magnet exsists is as follows.  
 
 
(18) 
 
 
(19) 
By finding the position of the neodymium magnet and 
comparing it with the next position, relative X,Y 
displacement can be calculated.  Then these relative 
displacements are mapped to the last coordinates of the 
mouse curser position and moves the cursor to a new X,Y 
location.  
In the case of identifying mouse commands, firstly, 
driver identifies the neodymium magnet which is placed 
South Pole downwards by reading the digitally converted 
values.  If the magnet is South Pole downwards, software 
driver searches for the three minimum sensor reading values 
and determines the coordinates of those sensors. Then, the 
distance to the neodymium magnet from each sensor is 
calculated and its position is determined. The movement path 
of the neodymium magnet is tracked and if the path follows 
the gestures defined for the mouse commands, the driver 
activates the appropriate commands. As the final step, it 
updates Electromagnet controller circuit about the necessary 
vibration pattern which would eventually provide the user 
with the vibration feeling. 
In the case of sensing the shapes, the driver software 
keeps a selected vibration pattern until the user move the 
mouse cursor on top of the interested object in the screen. 
Once the cursor is moved away from the object boundary, 
driver sends commands to the microcontroller of the 
electromagnet controller circuit to change the output 
frequency. 
The sensors were capable to detect the the position 
accuratly more than 90% of points. Mouse curser position is 
only when there are two ajecent accurate neodymium magnet 
position readings exsists and then added the difference of the 
X,Y displacement to the previous cursor position. Therefore, 
the accuracy of the movement of the mouse cursor was 
improved. When the neodymium magnet is placed from 2 
cm above the device surface, sensors were only capable to 
track position about 60% of the movements. In 4cm of hight 
above the device surface, the sensor array only able to track 
the position of the neodymium magnet less than 40% of the 
movements.  In this hight, the curser movement became  
fairly difficult. Because interface driver have to cancell out 
inaccurate localization data and use only the accurate data to 
move the mouse pointer 
C. Electromagnetic Array and Controller Circuit  
This part of the system is made with six electromagnets, 
Magnet controller circuit and Arduino based microcontroller. 
As the current required by the six electromagnets is 13A [7], 
it becomes necessary to control the power supplied to the 
electromagnets via a relay circuit. This is because the voltage 
and current from the microcontroller pins amounts is only 
5V, and 40mA respectively [3], which is insufficient to drive 
the electromagnet. To address this, the relay circuit acts as a 
mechanism that is able to switch on a much larger power to 
drive the electromagnets. For this power up electromagnets, 
six N-Type MOSFET [8] were used, one for each 
electromagnet. The connections to the MOSFET are 
configured such that the MOSFET will enter linear region 
and produce a drain current ID, of approximately 1.9A when 
the Arduino outputs a 5V signal to turn on the electromagnet. 
When the Arduino outputs 0V signal and the MOSFET turns 
off, the drain current drops to 0A which turns off the 
electromagnet as illustrated in the figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  MOSFET based magnet driver circuit 
By programming the Arduino to switch continuously 
from high to low and vice versa in rapid succession, a PWM 
output wave is produced which in turn causes the MOSFET 
to continuously turn on and off the main power supply like a 
relay, generating another PWM output signal with enough 
current to drive the electromagnet. A diode connected in 
parallel to the electromagnet to prevent the damage to 
MOSFET by the backflow of current. A resistor is connected 
in parallel to the Arduino Pin and acts as a safety turn off 
mechanism. This design was replicated 6 times to drive the 6 
electromagnets. 
The electromagnets require PWM to run. The purpose of 
PWM is to simulate an analog voltage by rapidly toggling a 
339
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

digital pin between on and off. Software Interface Driver 
sends a 20 character length data frame for every 10ms via the 
serial connection to the microcontroller to activate the 
required electromagnets. These data frames are interpreted as 
commands to turn on the electromagnets that correspond to 
the haptic feedback sensations felt by the user. Due to the 
limitations of the electromagnet, the maximum frequency 
that can be achieved is 100 Hz.  Therefore, different 
frequencies between 5 Hz to 100Hz were used to provide 
different Haptic sensations to the users. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Two technical experiments were carried out to measure 
the capabilities and limitations of the system.   
A. Hall Effect sensor reading versus horizontal and 
perpendicular distances to the neodymium magnet 
 
Figure 5.  Plot of Sensor Output vs. perpendicular distance to the 
neodymium magnet 
TABLE I.  
EXPRISSIONS TO  DETERMINE THE DISTANCE BETWEEN THE 
HALL EFFECT SENSOR AND NEODYMIUM MAGNET BASED ON THE HALL 
EFFECT READINGS 
Distance 
(mm) 
Deriving distance calculation expressions 
M 
C 
Expression 
0 - 2.5 
-12 
963 
Y = -12X + 963 
2.5 – 5 
-15.2 
973 
Y = -15X + 971 
5 – 7.5 
-22 
1005 
Y = -22X + 1005 
7.5 – 10 
-30 
1065 
Y = -30 + 1065 
10 – 12.5 
-37.2 
1137 
Y = -37.2X + 1137 
12.5 – 15 
-14.8 
857 
Y = -14X + 857 
15 – 17.5 
-15.2 
863 
Y = -15.2X + 863 
17.5 – 20 
-13.6 
835 
Y = -13.6 + 835 
10 – 22.5 
-8 
723 
Y = -8X + 723 
22.5 – 25 
-6 
678 
Y = -6X + 678 
25 – 27.5 
-3.6 
618 
Y = -3.6X + 618 
Distance 
(mm) 
Deriving distance calculation expressions 
M 
C 
Expression 
27.5 30 
-2.4 
585 
Y = -2.4X + 585 
  
The objective of this experiment is to investigate the 
variation in the magnetic field strength vs. the distance of all 
thee axis and determine the strength of the magnetic field 
needed to be produced by the neodymium magnet to achieve 
the desired tracking ability. The experiment was conducted 
by positioning the neodymium magnet on top of the Hall 
Effect sensor and measure output readings at various 
distances in all three axis and results are shown in the figure 
5. According to the results shown in figure 5, it is clear that 
sensor reading values are following nonlinear curves but 
along the X and Y axis the readings are approximately the 
same. Therefore based on the X and Y axis sensor readings 
we have derived set of equations to calculate the distance 
between the sensor and the neodymium magnet which is 
presented in the Table1. As a result these expressions 
provide the distance values needed by 2D trilateration based 
localization algorithm to obtain the position of the 
neodymium magnet.  
B. Height of Haptic sensation is felt  vs. Pulse Width 
Modulation for different voltage levels 
The purpose of the experiment is to evaluate the 
relationship between the PWM and the maximum height that 
haptic sensations can be sensed above the device surface by 
running ellectromagnets in three different voltage levels. 
With the results, the PWM values and voltage levels that 
correspond to achieve haptic sensations in certain heights can 
be determined. In addition, the optimal PWM values that 
need to be set during actuation can be verified.  
 
Figure 6.  Plot of the maximum haptic sensation height achieved vs. PWM 
values. 
As shown in Figure 6, the relationship between the PWM 
and the maximum height that haptic sensation can be sensed 
follows an increasing linear trend in all three different 
voltage levels, suggesting that the system is linearly 
340
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

controllable. However, it is noted that the haptic sensations 
were started to feel from PWM running on 11% for 6v and 
9v mode but when electromagnets operate on 12v haptic 
sensations can be felt in 0.6 cm. Further, when the PWM 
values are between 90% and 100%, it is hard to notice the 
maximum difference of the actuation for 9v and 12 v. With 
these results we were able to provide haptic sensations up to 
6.1cm above the device surface. However, by changing the 
type of the electromagnets, it may be posible to increase the 
height that heptic sensations can be felt. 
V. 
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 
To conclude, in this paper we have presented a new type 
of computer interface which provides basic pointing 
interface functionalities with near surface haptic feedback up 
to 6 cm of height. The advantages and limitations of the 
system were also discussed with the related works.  Using 
two technical studies we were able to show that system can 
perform in an adequate manner and has strong potentials to 
be improved.  Haptic Mouse provides the base tools to 
combine magnetic field based devices with computers.  
The haptic feedback resolution of the interface can be 
improved by using smaller electromagnets in larger numbers. 
When the device is used as a haptic display, an increased 
resolution would offer a better accuracy and representation 
of the virtual objects in the computer screen. Moreover, 
implementing variable friction for haptic interface using this 
technology will be an interesting research topic in future 
since variable friction has not been implented for touch 
sensitive haptic feedback systems.TeslaTouch [11] is the 
closests execusion of such haptic display .  
This device has great potentials to be improved as an 
interface for visually handicapped who rely mostly on touch 
sensation.  In orderto improve to this level of proficiency, 
this system is required to minimize the size of the 
electromagnets and increase the density of electromagnets 
packed in the electromagnets array which will provide a 
better resolution. This device could also be improved as an 
easy learning tool for children, which can be used to draw 
some basic shapes or characters that will enhance the 
interactive enjoyment.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is carried out under CUTE Project No. 
WBS R-7050000-100-279 partially funded by a grant from 
the National Research Foundation (NRF) administered by 
the Media Development Authority (MDA) of Singapore. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Maria Virvou and Katerina Kabassi. 2002. Reasoning about 
users'actions in a graphical user interface. Hum.-Comput. 
Interact. 17, 4 (December 2002), 369-398. 
[2] Kasun Karunanayaka, Jerey Tzu Kwan Valino Koh, Eishem 
Bilal Naik, and Adrian David Cheok, "Hall Effect Sensing 
Input and Like Polarity Haptic Feedback in the Liquid 
Interface System",  in Proceedings of the international joint 
conference on Ambient Intelligence, AmI ’11. Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, 2011. 
[3] Arduino. Arduino. [Online]. http://www.arduino.cc/en/  
[4] Weiss, M., Wacharamanotham, C., Voelker, S., and Borchers, 
J. 2011. FingerFlux: near-surface haptic feedback on 
tabletops. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM 
Symposium on User interface Software and Technology 
(Santa Barbara, California, USA, October 16 - 19, 2011). 
UIST '11. ACM, New York, NY, 615-620. 
[5] Tactile Explorer, [Online]. http://www.tactile-world.com/  
[6] El Saddik, A., Orozco, M., Eid, M., Cha, J., Haptics 
Technologies Bringing Touch to Multimedia, Series: Springer 
Series on Touch and Haptic Systems, 2011. 
[7] Magnetech Corporation. Magnetech Corporation. [Online]. 
http://www.magnetechcorp.com/Opposite_Pole.htm 
[8] MOSFETs, 
[Online]. 
http://www.falstad.com/circuit/e-
nmosfet.html 
[9] Engelbart, D. C. et al. (1968). A Research Center for 
Augmenting Human Intellect. (demonstration) Stanford 
Research 
Institute, 
Menlo 
Park, 
CA. 
http://sloan.stanford.edu/MouseSite/1968Demo.html  
[10] A. El Saddik, “The potential of haptics technologies,” IEEE 
Instrumentation & Measurement Magn.,vol. 10, pp. 10-17, 
Feb. 2007. 
[11] Bau, O., Poupyrev, I., Israr, A, Harrison, C. TeslaTouch: 
Electrovibration for Touch Surfaces. Proceedings of UIST 
2010: ACM: pp. 283-292. 
[12] Fewell, M. "Area of Common Overlap of Three Circles." 
Australian 
Dept. 
Defense. 
Oct. 
2006. 
http://www.dsto.defence.gov.au/publications/4815/DSTO-
TN-0722.pdf. Retrived January 10, 2013 
[13] D.E. Manolakis, “Efficient Solution and Performance 
Analysis of 3-D Position Estimation by Trilateration, ” IEEE 
Trans. on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Vol. 32, No. 4, 
October 1996, pp. 1239-1248. 
 
 
341
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

