Needs and Usability Assessment of a New User Interface 
for Lower Extremity Medical Exoskeleton Robots 
 
     Yoon Jung Jeong                    Euiyoung Kim                 Homayoon Kazerooni 
yjeong@me.berkeley.edu   euiyoungkim@berkeley.edu   kazerooni@berkeley.edu 
 
 Mechanical Engineering 
University of California at Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA USA 
 
 
Abstract— 
This 
paper 
presents 
an 
evaluation 
and 
recommendations for the improvement of the user interface 
(UI) of medical exoskeleton robots for people with mobility 
disorders.  Existing UIs of currently available medical 
exoskeletons lack the flexibility to serve a diverse user group 
who require more customization. A UI prototype consisting of 
a glove with buttons attached on fingertips, and a display 
module for user feedback and/or instruction was developed 
and evaluated. For the evaluation of this UI prototype, 
multiple usability tests, guerrilla tests, interviews, and surveys 
were conducted with several crutch and manual wheelchair 
users. Finally, a set of final Glove UI design recommendations 
is illustrated based on the test subjects and interviewees’ 
feedback; finger glove, two buttons, singleton walking method, 
and adjustable display position. A more thorough evaluation 
on this improved UI with more potential users of medical 
exoskeletons with various physical abilities remains as future 
work.  
Keywords-Design for people with disabilities; User interface 
design; Exoskeleton; Glove Interface 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
By the numbers, there are 700,000 new stroke patients 
every year, and 265,000 individuals suffering from spinal 
cord injuries in the United States [1]. These factors are the 
leading causes of mobility disabilities, which lead thousands 
of patients to use a wheelchair as their main mobility aid for 
the rest of their lives.  However, due to the nature of a human 
body, the long-term usage of a wheelchair with prolonged 
sitting and immobilization of the limbs brings secondary 
diseases. Common examples of these secondary injuries are 
urinary 
tract 
infections, 
blood 
clots, 
reduction 
in 
cardiovascular functioning, decreased bone mineral density, 
and osteoporosis [2]. It is widely accepted in the field that 
postponing the use of wheelchairs will delay the onset of 
secondary injuries and diseases [3], [4], [5], [6]. It has been 
also shown that being upright and ambulatory has significant 
benefits to the human body, such as increased circulation, 
improved bladder and bowel functioning, and an overall 
feeling of well-being [2], [7]. 
Lower extremity medical exoskeleton technology can be 
beneficial for many wheelchair users. Through its ability to 
enable walking and standing upright, this technology can 
prevent secondary injuries as well as provide independence 
in the daily lives of those patients. 
This paper presents the background of medical 
exoskeleton technologies, operating schemes, development 
and evaluation of UI prototype, result and recommendation 
for future work.   
II. BACKGROUND OF MEDICAL EXOSKELTEON  
TECHNOLOGIES AND OVERVIEW OF THEIR UIS 
A. State-of-the-art medical exoskeletons       
Powered medical exoskeleton devices that enable a user to 
stand and walk are available on the market with the price 
range of $100,000 - $150,000. There are Rex from Rex 
Bionics in New Zealand, ReWalkTM by Argo Medical 
Technologies in Israel, and EksoTM, developed by Ekso 
Bionics. These mobile, powered medical exoskeletons are 
made for rehabilitation or for walking outside the clinic. 
They have 4 to 10 powered joints aligned to the patient’s 
biological joints. These powered joints are pre-programmed 
to mimic the human gait, which ambulate the wearer in a 
similar manner of natural walking when the user commands. 
Rex has a joystick-type UI located on the arm rest. Rex does 
not require crutches or a walker since it has self-balancing 
structure with powered ankles, knees, and hips [8]. 
ReWalkTM has powered knees and hips, and executes steps 
by sensing the tilt of the user’s torso [9]. EksoTM also has 
powered knees and hips, and has an operating method, 
which determines user intent using multiple sensors on the 
pilot's arms and crutches to estimate the user's pose and 
executes steps, as well as manual actuating via buttons on 
the crutches or walker for initial trainings [10]. AUSTIN, 
developed in Robotics and Human Engineering Lab in 
University of California at Berkeley, has a hip-knee coupled 
gait generation mechanism derived by powered hip joints, 
operated by a button-integrated UI on the crutch or walker 
handle [11].   
 
B. User interface of medical exoskeletons 
      These state-of-art exoskeleton robots for patients with 
mobility disorders have two kinds of user input receiving 
systems; 1) sensing user intent from the wearer’s posture, 2) 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

getting explicit commands from the wearer via joysticks or 
buttons. The first method has an advantage of requiring 
minimal effort from the user to issue commands. However, 
due to the limited mobility and muscle control of this user 
segment, this implicit UI has the potential risk of 
misinterpreting the operator’s posture, which may cause 
falling. Studies have shown that the implicit UI of 
ReWalkTM results in a unique pattern of control for walking 
in individuals with spinal cord injuries, while patients with 
lower level injuries have better walking performances and 
also progress rapidly [12]. Having explicit UIs such as the 
systems used in Rex and AUSTIN requires more user effort 
in commanding steps via joysticks or buttons. However, this 
appears to minimize the risk of mistriggering due to the 
pilot’s incomplete motor control due to the injuries. 
However, their device-coupled UI design (see Fig. 1) results 
in limited usability when used among different users with 
different hand/finger sizes. 
 
In this paper, a glove type user-coupled human-machine 
interface prototype with tactile and visual feedback is 
discussed for a next generation explicit UI for medical 
exoskeletons. We present an evaluation of this UI prototype, 
including interviews, guerilla tests, surveys, and usability 
testing on people with mobility disorder. The evaluation 
preparation, methodologies, and results are discussed.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. An example of device-coupled UI attached on a walker. The user 
can trigger the button upward or downward for two different commands. 
The comfort of this UI is highly dependent on the users’ hand size. 
III. SCHEMATICS OF EXPLICIT USER INTERFACE FOR 
MEDICAL EXOSKELETONS 
      The explicit UI of medical exoskeletons switches the 
state of the machine from one state to the other when the user 
issues commands via buttons. There are four different states 
of the medical exoskeleton; left leg forward, right leg 
forward, feet together (standing up), and seated down.  
 
With the walking scheme shown in Fig. 2, it is clear that 
at least two buttons - the simplest way of giving two 
different signals - are required for the user to switch from a 
state to the other state. For example, when the user is 
wearing an exoskeleton with his feet together, he/she can 
either press button #1 to start walking by moving his/her left 
leg forward, or click button #2 to sit down. Here, it is 
assumed that the user can sit down only when his/her feet are 
together, and the user only goes to “feet together” state from 
“seated down” state, not to left or right leg forward state. 
Obviously, there is more than just one way of mapping these 
button functions, and more than one implementation for the 
number of buttons the UI can have. One of the goals of this 
study is to find out the potential users’ most preferred 
mapping which will contribute to the decision on long-term 
adoption of the device along with the hardware design of the 
UI.  
 
For this study, two different walking operation schemes, 
i.e., methods of mapping buttons are suggested and evaluated: 
Singleton and Alternating. In the Singleton method (see Fig. 
3 (a)), the user presses the same button for each step; for 
example, the user presses button A for the first step → user 
presses button A again to make the second step → (continue) 
→ user presses button B to stand up (feet together) → user 
presses button B again to sit down.  
The alternating method (see Fig. 3 (b)) designates 
different buttons for stepping forward with different legs. For 
example, in an alternating scheme, the user presses button A 
for the left step 
 
 
Figure 2. An example of a walking scheme. In this scheme above, the user 
stands up and starts walking by pressing button 1, and ends operation by 
pressing button 2. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 3.  Two different walking schemes. (a) The Singleton method uses 
the same button for steping forward (b) The Alternating method maps two 
different buttons for stepping each leg forward.  
 
→ presses button B to make the right step → button A to 
make the left step again → (continue) → user presses both 
buttons two times in a row to bring the feet together and sit 
down.  
 
IV. PROTOTYPING 
Several versions of prototypes have been developed to 
simulate the UI and elicit feedback from potential users 
during this testing phase. A “glove UI” featuring a glove 
with buttons attached on fingertips and an LED display 
mounted on the inside of the wrist (See Fig. 4) was 
prototyped as a suggested next generation UI design for 
medical exoskeletons.  
 
Fig. 5 shows a wheelchair user wearing the refined 
prototype after pre-testing. 
This new UI concept is designed to overcome the 
shortcomings of the other user interfaces of the state-of-art 
medical exoskeletons, including accommodating different 
users’ hand sizes and gripping preferences, and providing 
visual feedback to the user via a monitoring display.  
 
Figure 5. A subject wearing the prototype.  
Information shown on the monitor includes On/Off status, 
battery life, and quick instructions for the exoskeleton 
operation. 
V. RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES 
A. Summary of Research Methodologies 
Our data are collected from pre-testing, interviews, 
guerilla testing, surveys, and usability tests with eight 
subjects on our target user segment.  
B. Pre-testing 
The first prototype of the glove UI was tested at Berkeley 
Robotics and Human Engineering Lab by their medical 
exoskeleton test pilots. This pre-testing was used to revise 
our interview and usability test strategies according to the 
feedback from actual exoskeleton test pilots prior to testing 
the prototype with potential users who have never been 
exposed to this technology. While conducting a pre-testing, 
we found several improvements from our design. Given the 
distinctiveness of the potential user group, feedback from 
actual test pilots from Robotics and Human Engineering Lab 
was immensely valuable. 
 
1) The UI prototype Improvement 
While testing the prototype, we realized that is difficult to 
discern the hand position of a user who was wearing a black 
glove, and since a big part of our testing was determining the 
user’s hand position, this was an important oversight. As a 
result, we taped white stripes to the back of each finger to 
make them more visible. We added Velcro to the back of the 
monitoring display so users could reposition the display. 
Letting the user determine their own ideal location was better 
than just asking if the display was readable. 
2) The Interview/User Test Setup Improvment 
Interviews with microphone and camera setups were 
conducted. We added a set of questionnaires to obtain the 
demographic data of test participants. We added a high-
resolution camera (DSLR) to get detailed close-ups of 
Figure 4. The three components of the glove user interface 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

motions while the subjects were testing out our prototype. 
We also used a microphone to closely record their voice and 
filter out the background noise. 
 Throughout the pre-testing, the subjects provided 
valuable feedback about our test environment and test 
questions/protocols, which ultimately helped the research 
preparations in the next steps. 
C. Interviews/Guerilla Testing/Surveys 
In order to collect information from our potential user 
segments, we conducted interviews at several locations 
where people with mobility disorders frequently visit. One of 
these places is the Ed Roberts Campus and the Center for 
Independent living located in Berkeley, California. Both 
guerilla and scheduled interviews were conducted on a wider 
variety of potential users at this center. A short list of survey 
questionnaires 
was 
also 
prepared 
to 
obtain 
basic 
demographic data from the participants before the 
interviews. Given the relatively small sample size, it was 
critical to coordinate in-depth interviews immediately 
followed by the usability test to thoroughly explore opinions 
on the glove UI prototype.   
D. Usability Test 
Usability tests were performed on three test subjects with 
mobility disorder – two crutch users (referred as Subject 1 
and 3), and one manual wheelchair user (referred as Subject 
2). The goal of this usability test is to find their preferences 
on the types of glove, the number of buttons, the location of 
the display, and walking scheme. A brief profile of the test 
subjects follow:  
Subject 1: 30-year-old male, a relatively new crutch user 
due to his recent injury on his ankle.  
Subject 2: 24-year-old male, paralyzed in his lower torso 
and legs due to car accident five years ago. He has been a 
manual wheelchair user for last five years.   
Subject 3: 34-year-old female, a lifetime cane or single 
crutch user due to congenital leg abnormalities.  
 
For usability testing, the subjects were given a glove UI 
prototype shown in Fig. 4, and asked to demonstrate how 
they would walk with their mobility aid while wearing the 
glove UI.  
 
1) Grip, Buttons, and Glove Preference 
The way patients hold their crutches or walker grips 
varies widely with hand size, type of mobility aid, and type 
of grip. Depending on these factors, the user’s preference for 
button locations may differ for ease of use and mistrigger 
prevention. In testing preferences, subjects were asked to 
hold the grip of their mobility aid while wearing the glove UI 
prototype, and find the preferred buttons among the ones 
attached on fingertips of the glove UI prototype. The subjects 
were also asked for their opinions on the number and types 
of buttons. They were asked to choose at least two buttons 
for the simplest operation, and more buttons for other 
possible functions or more elaborated exoskeleton maneuver, 
if desired. 
 
2) Type of Glove 
A glove used for a prototype shown in Fig. 4 was 
provided in this usability test. The subjects were asked for 
their opinions on the type of glove in terms of the glove 
material; whether the fabric is too thick or thin, and whether 
the coverage of the glove over the hand is too much or too 
little.  
 
3) Display Module Position 
 The display module has an LED screen, which is capable 
of displaying various types of information such as the system 
status, battery life, wireless connectivity, and error 
diagnostics when applicable. The subjects were asked to find 
the position of the display module where they could get 
information at a glance while they operate the exoskeleton. 
Our assumption here was that the preferred location of the 
display module would differ according to the type of 
mobility aid and its grip.  
 
4) UI Scheme, or Walking Method Preference 
Two different UI schemes described in section III were 
explained to the subjects, and the subjects were asked to 
simulate walking with the two different schemes, using their 
button preferences from the previous part of usability testing. 
The subjects were asked to follow each walking schemes in 
Fig. 4 for three times. After this simulation, the subjects were 
asked to describe their preferences and opinions on the two 
different schemes.  
 
VI. RESULTS AND DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS 
Overall, the results of the interviews and usability test 
appear to reveal the potential user’s general preferences on 
medical exoskeleton UIs. Based on the feedback from the 
user research participants, design suggestions on four 
different components of the next generation glove type UI 
are summarized:  
A. Type of Gloves 
According to the preferences of usability test subjects 
and interviewees, adopting a single type of full glove for this 
application in meeting different kinds of user needs appears 
to be challenging due to the conflicting preferences among 
potential users. Manual wheelchair users responded that they 
generally prefer thick and durable gloves to protect their 
hands when they use a wheelchair. While a medical 
exoskeleton is to provide an alternative mobility aid, a 
wheelchair is still frequently used with medical exoskeleton 
during trainings and their daily life for easy maneuver and/or 
long travel. Therefore it appears that providing durable 
gloves for hand protection in wheelchair use as the glove UI 
platform would ease the don and doff of exoskeleton use. 
However, it appears that a full glove itself, even with thin 
material is not favored by other user groups since it provides 
unnecessary coverage, which might cause unpleasant heating 
on the user’s hand. Therefore, a finger glove is 
recommended instead of a full glove. A finger glove satisfies 
the needs of non-wheelchair users, requires minimal 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

hardware, and offers the option of wearing the glove UI on 
top of wheelchair users’ thick gloves.  
B. Number of Buttons 
All the subjects responded that they liked the tactile 
feedback of the momentary switches on the prototype. Given 
the number of states of the machine and the users’ desired 
operation, at least two buttons are required as stated in 
section III.  For more elaborate maneuvering of the machine, 
using three buttons can be considered. However, it appears 
that having two buttons is preferred by the potential users 
due to its simplicity. 
C. Walking Operation Scheme 
The Singleton method is the preferred walking operation 
scheme due to its simplicity in operation. A majority of test 
subjects perceived the Singleton method as more intuitive 
and easier to operate. The Alternating method was deemed 
complicated for beginners even though it provides more 
flexibility. An argument remains to keep the Alternating 
method as an option for more experienced users. Key 
quotations from the subjects on these two walking schemes 
are following; 
“I’m thinking about a computer game. Some people 
prefer using fewer but more intuitive commands, but I like to 
use more granular ones. But for right now, I like the 
Singleton option since I am new to this system.”  
“After a while if it was something that I had to do 
regularly, like, say, drive a car, it would probably just 
become second nature because I would train myself to click 
only one.”  
D. Display Module Position 
Subjects showed different preferences regarding the 
display module’s angle and position. Walker, crutch, and 
wheelchair users view the display from different angles due 
to their different grips. Therefore, it is recommended that the 
display module position stays adjustable with easy 
attachment methods such as the use of Velcro, for example.  
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The goal of our research is to evaluate a new glove type 
UI for medical exoskeletons. A conceptual prototype that 
contains key components for evaluation was created and 
evaluated by potential users. Four research methods are used 
in this research; interviews, guerilla tests, surveys, and 
usability tests.  
 
Finger glove, two buttons, singleton walking method, and 
adjustable 
display 
position 
are 
the 
final 
design 
recommendation based on our research.  
 
 
“Finger glove” instead of a whole glove  
This type of glove better facilitates users’ different 
hand sizes, grip preferences, and the glove material. 
 
Adjustable display position 
Users with different types of walking aid have 
different preferences on the display module position.  
 
Two buttons rather than more buttons 
At least two buttons are required for an exoskeleton 
to provide a simple walking function. Having more 
buttons would provide more functions. However, 
potential users would prefer to start learning how to 
walk with exoskeletons with a minimal and simple 
interface.  
 
Singleton walking operation (see Fig. 3 (a)) 
Mapping button functions related to the exoskeleton 
operation rather than the stepping leg appears to 
more simple and intuitive to use.  
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF GLOVE UI DESIGN RECOMMENDATION 
Components 
Design choices provided to test subjects 
1. Type of 
Glove 
 
Vs. 
 
Finger Glovea 
 
Whole Glove 
2. Number of 
Buttons 
 
 
Vs 
 
       
Two 
Buttonsa 
 
Three Buttons      One Button 
3. Walking 
Method 
Singletona 
Vs 
Alternating 
4. Display 
Position 
 
 
 
Vs 
 
 
 
 
Adjustablea 
 
Fixed 
a. 
Highlighted features are the final design decisions 
Final design recommendations are illustrated in Table I. 
 
VIII. DISCUSSION/FUTURE WORK 
This study addresses the next generation UI design for 
medical exoskeletons that can potentially improve their 
usability and ability to learn. However, current state of the 
art medical exoskeleton technologies, as well as the outcome 
of this study, are limited to people who retain a certain level 
of upper body control, or can use crutches or a walker. 
Identifying the primary target user groups based on the level 
of their mobility and physical strength is critical regarding 
this user group that has a broad range of physical abilities 
that may affect various aspects of conceptual UI design. 
Exploring more customizable features to satisfy the needs of 
a broader range of users, for example, patients with higher-
level injuries, remains as future work, along with testing with 
more test subjects.   
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

We hope that the broader range of users with mobility 
disorders, other researchers, and practitioners in this field of 
research can benefit from our recommendations in the near 
future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude 
to the test subjects who participated this usability testing and 
provided invaluable feedback. The authors also would like to 
thank interviewees from guerilla interviews from the Ed 
Roberts Campus and the Center for Independent Living, 
Berkeley, CA. Finally, the authors would like to 
acknowledge the Berkeley Robotics and Human Engineering 
Lab in the Mechanical Engineering department at UC 
Berkeley for providing opportunity to prototype and test the 
new UI design with their test subjects.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
“National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center: Annual Statistical 
Report 
2012,” 
2012. 
[Online, 
retrieved: 
January, 
2014] 
https://www.nscisc.uab.edu/.  
[2] 
D. Sabo, S. Blaich, W. Wenz, M. Hohmann, M. Loew, and H. J. 
Gerner, “Osteoporosis in patients with paralysis after spinal cord 
injury,” Archives of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, vol. 121, no. 
1–2, Jan. 2001, pp. 75–78. 
[3] 
DHHS –Office of Disability, Aging and Long Term Care Policy 
[Online, 
retrived; 
January, 
2014] 
http://aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/reports.htm 
[4] 
Disability Statistics Center: University of California at San Francisco. 
[Online, retriveed: January, 2014]  http://dsc.ucsf.edu/  
[5] 
B. Kemp, “Quality of Life While Aging with a Disability”, Assistive 
Technology, vol. 11, Feb. 1999, RESNA Publication.  
[6] 
National Council on the Aging [Online, retrieved: January, 2014] 
www.ncoa.org/  
[7] 
J. J. Eng, S. M. Levins, A. F. Townson, D. Mah-Jones, J. Bremner, 
and G. Huston, “Use of prolonged standing for individuals with spinal 
cord injuries.,” Physical therapy, vol. 81, no. 8, Aug. 2001, pp. 1392–
9.  
[8] 
R. Little and R. Irving, “MOBILITY AID,” U.S. Patent 
WO/2009/08224903-Jul-2009. 
[9] 
A. Goffer, “Gait-locomotor apparatus,” U.S. Patent EP126020119-
Feb-2002. 
[10] K. A. Strausser, T. A. Swift, A. B. Zoss, H. Kazerooni, and B. C. 
Bennett, “Mobile Exoskeleton for Spinal Cord Injury: Development 
and Testing,” ASME Conference Proceedings, vol. 2011, no. 54761, 
Oct. 2011, pp. 419–425. 
[11] H. Kazerooni et al., “Orthesis system and methods for control of 
exoskeletons”, U.S. Patent US20130158445 
[12] G. Zeilig, H. Weingarden, M. Zwecker, I. Dudkiewicz, A. Bloch, and 
A. Esquenazi, “Safety and tolerance of the Rewalk exoskeleton suit 
for ambulation by people with complete spinal cord injury: A pilot 
study,” J Spinal Cord Med, vol. 35, no. 2, Mar. 2012, pp. 96–101. 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

