Potentials and Challenges of Using Mixed Reality in Mining Education 
A Europe-Wide Interview Study 
 
Lea M. Daling, Christopher Eck, Anas Abdelrazeq, and Frank Hees 
Chair of Information Management in Mechanical Engineering (IMA) 
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
email: {lea.daling, christopher.eck, anas.abdelrazeq, frank.hees}@ima-ifu.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
Abstract—Mining engineering and its educational sector are 
continuously affected by different transformations. In this 
regard, the number of students is constantly declining. 
Universities and educational institutions are struggling for 
financial resources to maintain the attractiveness of mining 
education. In particular, real-life experience gained through 
excursions is indispensable for the success of mining education, 
but also expensive to offer. A possible solution to meet these 
challenges is the usage of Mixed Reality based tools in 
teaching. This technology allows otherwise hardly accessible or 
dangerous scenarios to be experienced directly in the 
classroom. This paper presents the results of a European-wide 
interview study, in which the potential, chances and risks of 
the technology for the field of mining education are questioned. 
From the results, first indications for the use of Mixed Reality 
tools and further demands for research are derived. 
Keywords-Mixed Reality; mining education; digital teaching; 
interview study;  MiReBooks project. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the recent past, there have been major changes in the 
industry, which had a significant impact on the mining sector 
[1]. In the context of declining the economic importance of 
mining in many countries, unprofitable mining operations 
are closed down and state-controlled mining operations are 
increasingly being privatized. Moreover, the declining social 
acceptance of the raw materials industries deteriorates the 
public image of the mining industry, as it is seen as “a 
dangerous and environmentally damaging low technology 
industry”[1].  
Despite the steadily increasing demand in the sand, 
gravel and quarry industry and the growth in minerals 
production, mining is becoming less and less attractive for 
students [2]. Although the mining sector continues to offer 
attractive job prospects, study numbers continue to decline. 
In addition, it is evident that the main focus of public 
investment is on growing and economically promising 
courses of study, which is why mining departments are 
suffering from severe financial cutbacks [1].  
To prevent further decline and make mining engineering 
more attractive, industry and research have to cooperate 
closely and develop concrete measures [2]. Shields and 
colleagues emphasize, that especially in the education of 
mining engineers, we have to face the challenges of a new 
world in order to meet both present and unforeseen 
challenges [3]. Subsequently, engineering education has to 
enable new and broader perspectives “by incorporating the 
complexities of environmental, economic and social realities 
along with systems engineering, enabling technologies and 
physical constraints” [3]-[5]. In addition, knowledge should 
be provided in a holistic and transdisciplinary manner, and 
thus also transnationally [6].  
This holistic knowledge also includes the acquisition of 
interdisciplinary skills beyond technical knowledge [7]. 
Allenby states in 2011: “while most engineers are technically 
competent, they lack communications ability and they do not 
understand the context within which they are expected to 
perform professionally” [8]. Moreover, mining engineering 
graduates often have little understanding of how to transfer 
their theoretical knowledge into practice [9].  
Taking these requirements into consideration, the 
MiReBooks (Mixed Reality Books) project was launched in 
2018 [10]. MiReBooks is a project funded by the European 
Institute of Innovation & Technology (EIT) Raw Materials 
that consists of a pan-European consortium with over 14 
partners. The project addresses the current problems in the 
field of mining education. In particular, the focus is on 
increasing the attractiveness of mining engineering as a field 
of study. To this end, measures to increase the quality of 
studies are being developed. Within the project, the transfer 
of theoretical knowledge into practice is of particular 
importance. In a situation in which mines are hardly 
accessible and excursions are very expensive and time-
consuming, teaching institutions have to find new methods to 
facilitate the transfer of knowledge. Thus, MiReBooks 
produces a series of Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented 
Reality (AR) based interactive mining handbooks as a new 
digital standard for higher mining education across Europe. 
The project aims to change the way students are taught by 
empowering teachers to engage their students more 
effectively and provide them with a wider repertoire of 
content and better understanding.  
This paper gives an overview of the potentials and threats 
of using Mixed Reality (MR) based technologies in mining 
education. For this purpose, an interview study with 39 
participants (teachers and students) was conducted to assess 
the need, possible application scenarios and the opportunities 
and risks of MR in teaching. Section 2 presents the current 
state of MR tools in education. In Section 3, the method and 
framework of the interview study is presented. The results 
are presented in Section 4. Subsequently, a discussion of the 
main findings and an outlook can be found in Section 5.  
486
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
II. 
MIXED REALITY IN EDUCATION 
After more than twenty-five years of educational 
research, MR tools are increasingly finding their way into 
education [11]. Describing a continuum between reality and 
virtuality, MR enables to merge physical and digital worlds 
[12]. Thus, technologies such as AR or VR can be subsumed 
under the framework of MR. Within the context of teaching, 
AR augments the real world by placing virtual content (such 
as 3D models) into the field of view or provides further 
digitally displayed information (e.g., through annotations) to 
a real setting [13]. VR enables the user to experience the 
feeling of presence in a fully modelled, virtual environment 
[12].   
According to Dede and colleagues, these media offer new 
“opportunities for enhancing both motivation and learning 
across a range of subject areas, student developmental levels, 
and educational settings” [11]. In addition, they state that 
MR experiences enable situated learning, which is widely 
acknowledged as a powerful didactic concept [14]. Thus, 
MR offers to experience and learn how to deal with 
problems or situations that are similar to the real world. 
Especially in mining education, students could experience 
important procedures and processes that are usually hardly 
accessible in the real world. Other promising fields of 
application are, for instance, in the education of engineers 
[15] and medical specialists [16]. 
By providing these opportunities, MR is able to further 
address the crucial factor of knowledge transfer [17][18]. 
Students can build a strong connection between their 
theoretical knowledge and a practical task or workflow. 
Thus, a replication of real processes in simulated 
environments can support the training of relevant behavior 
for performance in work or personal life [15]-[19]. In 
addition to that, collaborative forms of MR can foster 
communication and problem-solving skills by enforcing 
interaction with other students to jointly perform a task [20]. 
This can even be offered time and place independent. As a 
result, MR is expected to be able to address current 
challenges in mining education, such as: 
 
1. offering experiences in otherwise hardly accessible 
settings [11][21], 
2. enhancing motivation and learning and thus making 
mining more attractive for students [11][14][21], 
3. fostering knowledge transfer and enhancing the 
development of professional skills [17][18], 
4. allowing students to control their learning processes 
more actively [22], 
5. and enabling a lasting learning-effect through game-
based formats and the possibility of immediate 
feedback for actions and decisions [23]. 
 
The positive effects of MR in education were also 
confirmed by lecturers, who considered the use of the 
technology to be helpful [24].  
However, there is still little knowledge on how and when 
to use these media in mining courses [10]. Questions relating 
to which applications are particularly suitable to be presented 
in MR or which positive and negative effects can be 
expected from their use remain unclear.  
Based on twelve MR-based test lectures at different 
partner universities of the MiReBooks project (four on open 
pit bench blasting, three on hard rock underground drift 
development, two on hauling in mining, and another three on 
continuous surface mining), a broad qualitative interview 
study was conducted. Within these lectures, different sets of 
hardware components were presented (standalone and 
computer-connected VR headsets; such as HTC Vive (virtual 
reality headset developed by HTC and Valve), Oculus Go 
and Oculus Quest, AR-enabled smartphones and a local-
network-based solution for connecting different VR 
headsets). During the test lectures, classical teaching 
materials were used (presentation slides, whiteboards, 
blackboard) and combined with small breakout sessions to 
provide MR-based experiences. Within the interview study, 
we addressed teachers and students with or without 
experiences 
with 
MR. 
Thus, 
we 
assessed 
general 
requirements in mining courses and aimed to find out which 
strengths and threats are associated with using MR based 
technologies in mining education. 
III. 
METHOD 
A. Study Design  
Within the interviews, different perspectives of both 
teachers and students were considered. Furthermore, the aim 
was to interview not only those who already had experience 
with MR in the course of the test lectures. The majority of 
students and teachers in the field of mining have no previous 
experience with MR. Therefore, this target group was also 
considered in the present study. In summary, we interviewed 
four different target groups. We aimed at collecting feedback 
from experienced teachers, who conducted the test lectures, 
as well as inexperienced teachers, who did not use MR 
technologies in any lecture before. Furthermore, experienced 
students who took part in the test lectures, as well as 
inexperienced students were interviewed. 
The experienced group of teachers and students, who 
conducted or took part in a MR-based test lecture, were 
asked in particular about their experiences with MR. The 
interviews with the experienced teachers were especially 
focused on their reflection of the test lecture, with special 
emphasis on the necessary preparation and optimal teaching 
conditions. The questions to experienced students served 
primarily to obtain feedback on how they perceive the use of 
MR in comparison to classical lectures. Furthermore, they 
were asked about perceived advantages, disadvantages and 
possible difficulties using MR. Inexperienced teachers were 
asked which media they currently use, whether they would 
be interested in using MR and what would be necessary to 
enable them to give their own lectures with such 
technologies. Inexperienced students were asked about their 
experiences with current teaching methods. Subsequently, 
they were asked whether it is possible to provide more 
realistic insights in mining processes through the use of MR. 
Additionally, 
we 
asked 
about 
potential 
meaningful 
487
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

application areas and student’s general expectations with 
regard to benefits or threats using MR. All interview 
guidelines 
included 
questions 
on 
the 
effective 
communication of learning content, areas of application and 
opinions on problems. 
The interview guidelines and number of questions varied 
between experienced teachers (10 questions), inexperienced 
teachers (12 questions), experienced students (8 questions) 
and inexperienced students (11 questions). The interviews 
were conducted either face to face or in written form. The 
average duration of an interview lasted between 15 to 30 
minutes, where the written answers were often rather brief. 
The interviews were then anonymized and transcribed in 
order to analyze the entire data in a qualitative content 
analysis using software.  
B. Participants 
In total, 39 participants took part in the study. Overall, 
three experienced and three inexperienced teachers, as well 
as 21 experienced and twelve inexperienced students from 
five different universities all over Europe (Germany, Austria, 
Estonia, and Sweden) were interviewed for the study. The 
participants were recruited via project partners and posters of 
the project. Participation in the interviews was voluntary. 
Participation in test lectures was also voluntary. All students 
were from different semesters and study courses. The 
requirement for students to participate in the interviews was 
that they were currently enrolled in a mining-related subject. 
The teachers should also have experience in mining-related 
teaching. 
C. Qualitative content analysis  
The purpose of content analysis is to analyze 
communication that has been recorded for example in texts, 
images or other symbolic material. For this, a systematic, 
rule-guided and theory-based approach is used, which allows 
to draw conclusion about specific aspects of the 
communication [25]. The key to this is the definition of 
precise categories that capture the substance of the 
investigated content. 
There are deductive methods in which a-priori categories 
are defined, according to which the contents are later sorted 
and analyzed. Other methods proceed inductively and extract 
the categories completely from the data itself. In general 
research practice, the existing categories from the interview 
guidelines are used first. Second, further subcategories are 
derived inductively on the basis of the data [26].  
Since the aim was to generate new hypotheses about the 
potential and risks of using MR in mining education through 
the qualitative research approach and to open up new fields 
of research by dealing with pre-structured interviews in an 
interpretative way, the deductive-inductive categorization 
approach described by Kuckartz was chosen [26].  
After reading the material carefully, the interview 
statements were coded for the first time according to 
categories that corresponded to the direction of the questions 
in the guidelines. As a result, irrelevant information could be 
excluded and longer answers could be subdivided into 
different units of meaning, whereby multiple coding of a 
sentence was possible. Subsequently, the coded statements 
within the categories were grouped by meaning, divided into 
different subject areas and described with the use of short 
summaries. These summaries served as a basis to define 
specific and clearly distinguishable criteria by which all data 
should be re-coded and finally analyzed. 
Some of the categories were reorganized in order to make 
them more suitable to grasp the substance of the statements 
made. This form of revision of categories is intended, since 
the development of categories can be seen as a continuing 
iterative process in which, the categories are reflected upon 
and rearranged. 
Because the answers, especially in the written interviews, 
were very short, covered very different questions and 
therefore did not form a coherent narrative, we refrained 
from preparing case-related thematic summaries suggested 
by Kuckartz [26]. Instead, the different categories and sub-
categories of each interviewed group were summarized and 
examined. 
The following section provides an overview of the 
derived categories and sub-categories and summarizes the 
related statements. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A total of four main categories were defined. First, an 
overview of (1) media currently used in teaching is given. 
Secondly, the (2) changes in the learning experience 
resulting from using MR are presented. Three subcategories 
were formed in this section, which can be seen in Table I. 
Another main category describes (3) possible use cases for 
the use of MR. Three further subcategories summarize for 
which target group the use of MR is particularly suitable, in 
which use cases benefit can be expected from the use of MR 
and when the use of MR appears to be particularly helpful. 
The fourth main category summarizes the (4) Lessons 
Learned resulting from the Test Lectures. The derived 
subcategories can be found in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW OF DERIVED CATEGORIES 
Categories 
Sub-categories 
Currently used media 
Classical methods and media 
Changes in the learning 
experience 
General benefits of MR 
Guidance through the lecture 
Individual learning needs 
Application scenarios 
Target group 
Use cases 
Alternative to field trips 
Lessons learned from test 
lectures 
Preparation for conducting MR 
lectures 
Technical aspects 
Integration of MR in the lecture 
Financial aspects 
Availability of MR content 
A. Currently used media 
In the course of the interviews with inexperienced 
students and teachers, questions were asked about the media 
488
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

currently used during lessons. The possible responses were 
semi-structured, as respondents could either choose from 
existing categories or add additional information. Students 
stated to use pictures and graphs, followed by texts and 
manuals (9), excursions and visits to mines (8) and videos 
and films (8). Only half of them stated to use 3D animations. 
Similar statements were also made by the inexperienced 
professors, who used all media except for 3D animations, 
which were rarely used. The teachers were also asked about 
the use of haptic objects like equipment, which all of them 
affirmed. 
B. Changes in the learning experience 
One of the aims of the study was to find out in what way 
the learning and teaching experience changes through the use 
of MR. Aspects included to what extent the technology 
helped to provide a more practical knowledge, what is 
perceived as more or less helpful during the test lecture and 
at which point potential problems arise. 
1) General benefits of MR 
A large majority of 18 students who had previously 
attended the lectures agreed that the MR technology used 
was of immense benefit for practical understanding, or at 
least has great potential. The reasons given for this were that 
the used technology conveyed a feeling of reality and of 
actually being present in the situation, which led to a much 
better imagination of the machines and processes presented. 
According to the respondents, the 360° videos, e.g., from 
the perspective of a machine operator, provide a more 
practical perspective and a potentially faster transfer from 
theory to practice. This experience of a more practical 
understanding through the use of the technology in the test 
lectures largely met the expectations of the inexperienced 
students (8) and teachers. 
More skeptical points of three experienced students 
referred to the fact that they already had knowledge about the 
presented content. Thus, they stated that real experiences 
cannot be replaced by MR and that the shown examples had 
little or no advantages over videos. 
2) Guidance through the lecture 
When asked about the test lecture, three teachers and nine 
students found it difficult to ensure that all students follow 
and understand the lessons equally while using MR. 
These statements mainly refer to the VR glasses used, 
which restricted the eye contact between teacher and student. 
Whenever the teacher was unable to track the student’s 
position within the virtually displayed environment, they 
reported that it was difficult to ensure that students pay 
attention to the relevant aspects of the content presented. 
For this reason, and since the impressions and amount of 
information can be “overwhelming” (as one experienced 
student and one inexperienced teacher put it), it was 
considered very important by many respondents that some 
form of helpful guidance through the situations is provided. 
One of the teachers observed during the test lectures, that 
the material is not always self-explanatory and therefore 
“students still need guidance during their VR experience”. 
Other reasons why students might be “lost” are that they 
want to play around with the technology and try out 
everything first, rather than deal with the actual content.  
3) Individual learning needs 
Three experienced students said that students first need 
some time to get used to the new technology. Otherwise, it 
may be difficult to listen to the lecturer at the same time. 
An experienced teacher pointed out that everyone has 
their own pace and type of learning. What he liked about MR 
was that it opens up different “paths” of teaching. 
“Therefore, virtuality offers a more individual learning 
environment”, in which things can be learned independently 
at their own pace. 
The freedom to discover and learn new things through 
their own actions seemed to be particularly exciting and 
important for some of the experienced students (5). For 
them, the interaction with the virtual environment could have 
been even more extensive, e.g., through the possibility of 
movement or additional tasks. 
C. Application scenarios 
The following section summarizes feedback on possible 
application scenarios. Moreover, it is presented for whom 
and in which contexts the use of MR is perceived as most 
beneficial. 
1) Target group 
In terms of the optimal target group, a large proportion of 
respondents (two experienced and one inexperienced 
teacher, ten experienced and three inexperienced students) 
agreed that the greatest benefit from the use of the 
technologies exists among students who have not yet had any 
real practical experience, for example, have never been in a 
mine.  
According to students who took part in the test lecture, the 
learning effect might be significantly lower for students in 
higher semesters who have already visited mines several 
times during internships and excursions. This in turn 
corresponds to a teacher's impression that it was difficult to 
convey the content in an understandable and interesting way 
despite the differences in knowledge between the students. 
Another experienced teacher said that the benefits of MR 
highly depend on the content, which probably differs 
between bachelor and master students. Nevertheless, it was 
stated that both can still benefit from MR due to improved 
visualization. 
2) Use Cases 
There were many different answers to the question, which 
application areas for MR the interviewees could imagine. 
Safety trainings or demonstrations for a public target 
audience were named as use cases outside of a lecture. With 
regard to lecture content, different forms of visualizations 
and simulated scenarios were listed: e.g., underground 
mining, open pit mining or blasting, but also smaller 
practical processes, such as displaying the functioning or 
operation of machines. 
489
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In general, particularly from the statements of the 
respondents from the test lectures, it can be derived that the 
teaching methods to be chosen and the technology used will 
depend strongly on the content to be taught. Although all 
experienced professors shared the opinion that MR provides 
added value by creating a feeling of reality, they emphasized 
that classical lectures, laboratory experiments or field 
demonstrations will still be essential in teaching students. 
According to the experienced professors (2), classical 
methods like calculations on a blackboard or the use 
presentation slides remain a better choice when it comes to 
teach scientific basics and principles or theoretical subjects, 
such as algorithms. 
An inexperienced professor has particularly stressed that it 
would not be appropriate to teach content digitally, when a 
real use of instruments (such as measuring equipment) is 
needed. Both experienced and inexperienced respondents see 
the benefit of MR more in use cases, in which it can fulfil its 
illustrative function for otherwise hard to imagine processes. 
Compared to presentation slides or videos, MR might lead to 
a more in-depth understanding of the matter. 
3) Alternative to field trips 
A possible advantage of MR is that it could replace 
classical excursions to a certain extent through its realistic 
representation. However, both professors and students made 
contradictory statements in this regard, since real excursions 
are still considered an important part of education. Fields of 
application are therefore rather as a “virtual add-on” prior or 
after excursions enabling students “to have a feel of the 
process even before visiting”, for example underground 
mines or providing additional information about a situation 
through an overlay of an already known situation. Since 
some sites for excursions are perceived as very expensive, 
far away or dangerous, the technology could also be used to 
introduce such rather special subjects. 
D. Lessons learned from test lectures 
The test lectures and the interviews with the different 
groups also contributed to clarify under which conditions 
MR can be used optimally and beneficially for teaching and 
what is necessary achieving this. 
1) Preparation for conduction MR lectures 
The teacher’s preparation for the test lectures was mainly 
about familiarizing oneself with the technique in order to 
“foresee mistakes that students could do while being in VR”. 
According to their own statements, all three inexperienced 
teachers would depend on external support in the preliminary 
stages of conducting their own MR lectures. This could be 
personal workshop trainings, or online offers like web 
platforms, because they need someone to show them “how to 
use the media”. 
In response to the question of how to prepare for the test 
lecture in comparison to a classical lecture, the professors 
said that they needed time to familiarize themselves with the 
technology used and the new teaching materials, e.g., 360° 
videos. One teacher stated that he received help from a PhD 
student for this. 
2) Technical assistance during the lecture 
The experienced (3) and inexperienced teacher (1) shared 
the opinion that some technical assistance is required to take 
care of the devices before, during and after the lecture. That 
means, “setting up the systems, bringing the systems to a 
classroom, putting them away, charging them”, as well as 
solving technical issues currently still occur during the 
lecture. These personnel do not necessarily need to know 
anything about the content itself, but taking the responsibility 
for the technical functioning would ensure that the professor 
can focus completely on teaching of the content. 
Possible technical issues, such as lack of synchronization 
or 
unstable 
Wi-Fi 
connection, 
were 
perceived 
as 
problematic, especially if students cannot have the same 
learning experience as others. One student therefore 
suggested to have a backup plan, such as following the 
experience on a screen or to provide material as a follow-up 
at home. 
3) Amount of time 
Based on their experience, the teachers said that in a 90-
minute lecture, the MR experience should not exceed 30 
minutes, otherwise it could bore the students or overwhelm 
them: “Too much VR might distract students from the 
considered topics. They need time to reconsider received 
portions of information, make appropriate notes, have 
contact with the lecturer, and ask questions.” One 
suggestion, for example, was to show four to six 360° videos 
with a length of two to four minutes. A single five-minute 
video would be of little use and the technical effort would be 
considered too high. Another aspect worth considering, 
regarding the duration of MR use, is that (4) experienced 
students and (1) inexperienced students may find dizziness or 
cyber sickness a problem, especially if they are not yet used 
to the technology. 
Some students also perceived switching between the 
presentation slides and the MR glasses as somewhat 
disruptive during the test lecture.  
4) Frequency of use 
The experienced professors expressed that the frequency 
of using MR depends very much on the respective contents 
and should therefore be decided flexibly and on a case-by-
case basis. 
After the test lectures, some students (6) shared the 
opinion that the use of MR can significantly improve 
teaching, but can also reduce the quality of the lectures if the 
technology is not integrated into the structure in a 
meaningful and purposeful way, for example, by reducing 
“the time you can talk with the students”. In contrast, the 
prior explanation of the theory, in order to subsequently 
provide an immersive insight through MR, was a positively 
perceived example of the test lectures. 
5) Amount of devices 
As stated by one of the experienced teachers, the number 
of devices “depends on the media used and how many is 
490
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

available”. Two of the three professors and two students said 
that each student should have his own device at his disposal, 
otherwise the rest would get bored and the constant change 
would be seen as inconvenient. An alternative approach 
would be to use “one HTC Vive per 10 students for a 90-
minutes lecture” and to mirror the experience on a screen. 
6) Financial aspects 
The cost of purchasing and maintaining equipment was 
considered as possible problem, which was estimated to be 
quite high.  Directly related to this was the for now 
unanswered question of whether the university or the 
students themselves would purchase the equipment and thus 
be responsible for ensuring that the equipment would be 
available in a functional state for the lectures. 
7) Availability of MR content 
An experienced professor stated that the use of MR 
mainly depends on how quickly he can create his own MR 
content for the lecture. One experienced student stated that a 
prerequisite for its benefits was easy access to MR teaching 
materials. This was justified with the argument that the use 
of MR technologies in a virtual excursion could otherwise 
become too expensive.  
The results of the qualitative content analysis are 
summarized and discussed in the following section. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The aim of the interview study was to identify possible 
potentials and obstacles for the use of MR in mining 
education. For this purpose, 39 persons with and without 
experience with MR were interviewed about their 
experiences and expectations. The aim was to determine 
whether MR-based education can be considered a possible 
approach for meeting the current challenges in the mining 
sector. The results of the interviews provide first indications 
for the design and use of MR in mining education and point 
out further research gaps.  
By interviewing different target groups, it was possible to 
ensure that relevant perspectives on the topic were covered. 
In further surveys, experts from mining operations should be 
involved in order to obtain their opinion on the 
transferability of MR-based content. 
The findings are presented and discussed below, starting 
with the students’ perspective and then for the teachers’ 
perspective. Overall, the potential of MR-based teaching was 
seen by students and teachers. The learning advantages of 
MR can be clearly seen in the statements of experienced 
students. The students had the impression to get a more 
practical and deeper understanding of the content through the 
use of MR technologies. It was emphasized that the better 
visualization of objects, processes and the feeling of 
presence in virtual environments was perceived as beneficial 
in comparison to classical teaching materials. In current 
teaching, 3D simulations are only used in a few cases so far, 
but are considered helpful by students and teachers.  
At this point, it was emphasized that inexperienced 
students are most likely to benefit from MR-based 
experience, e.g., to get an overview of the structure of a mine 
or to estimate the real size of machines. The advice of 
experienced students suggests that the use of MR in, e.g., 
master’s programs is more likely to be used for advanced 
processes - for example, to be able to observe blasting in 
slow motion. Another relevant aspect relates to the 
possibility of individualized learning. Thus, different levels 
could be realized by the mentioned possibilities to go 
through learning experiences at individual pace and with 
individual prerequisites. 
With regard to the teachers’ perspective, it should be 
ensured during the lecture that there are opportunities for 
interaction with the students. Otherwise, there might be the 
danger of a loss of control over the lecture or the challenge to 
direct student’s attention to the relevant aspects of the 
content. Interaction can either directly be integrated in the 
MR experience using arrows, annotations or external control 
of the headsets. Alternatively, it is possible to offer the 
teacher a control mode on the PC screen so that he/she does 
not have to wear a head mounted display.  
Various aspects should be ensured when preparing an 
MR-based learning experience. The teachers pointed out that 
the technologies should be used in a very content-oriented 
way and be integrated in existing teaching concepts. The 
inexperienced professors agreed that the benefits of MR 
technologies depend on what content and how it is used. 
They rather saw it as a meaningful virtual extension to 
classical teaching concepts, such as lectures, experiments or 
excursions. For the creation of MR-based learning 
experiences, guidance should be offered on choosing the 
appropriate medium for a respective learning goal.  
Furthermore, a need for some technical assistance was 
pointed out, in order to be able to fully concentrate on the 
students and the lecture. In any case, both students and 
teachers should be given the opportunity to get used to the 
technology. This can avoid that someone feels insecure and 
cannot concentrate on the content. 
The selection of devices and time slots in which MR is 
used depends highly on the content. However, many teachers 
emphasize 
that 
uncontrolled 
use 
of 
MR 
can 
be 
overwhelming:  Therefore, before using MR, teachers should 
always reflect on the learning goal to be achieved. This is 
supported by the statements of the experienced students, 
expecting MR to be beneficial only if it is well integrated 
into teaching. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The aim of this work is to derive possible advantages and 
disadvantages of using MR technologies in mining 
education. In summary, the following implications can be 
derived for the challenges mentioned above. Especially 
experienced teachers saw the potential of MR in offering 
experiences in otherwise hardly accessible settings. This 
means for the further elaboration of the topic and future 
research that transparency about the possibilities of MR 
technologies should be established. Especially in case of 
491
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

teachers or students who had already experienced MR in 
class, they were able to imagine further scenarios. 
Regarding the possibility of enhancing motivation, 
providing better learning experiences and thus making 
mining more attractive for students, MR and its application 
in mining education shows great opportunities, but must 
definitely be further investigated. Only if MR is accepted by 
teachers and used efficiently, it can contribute to the 
achievement of learning goals and thus be attractive for 
students. An important step is to guarantee low-threshold 
tools and platforms in order to use MR for teaching 
purposes. Prototypical applications should be publicly 
available and accessible throughout Europe. 
The interview result shows that MR seems to offer new 
ways of fostering knowledge transfer. Concerning the 
development of professional skills, there should be more 
research on collaborative solutions and scenarios in MR to 
enforce communication between students. Nevertheless, this 
approach should be discussed and validated by involving 
experts from industry. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is part of the project “Mixed Reality Books 
(MiReBooks)” and was funded by the EIT RAW Materials. 
The author is responsible for the contents of this publication. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Wagner, “How to address the crisis of mining engineering 
education in the western world?,” Min. Res. Eng., vol. 8(04), 
1999, pp. 471–481. 
[2] J. M. Galvin and F. F. Roxborough, “Mining engineering 
education in the 21st century — Will universities still be 
relevant?,” The AusIMM Annual Conf. Ballarat, March 1997. 
[3] D. Shields, F. Verga, and G. A. Blengini, “Incorporating 
sustainability in engineering education,” Int. J. of Sus. in 
Higher Ed., vol. 15(4), 2014, pp. 390–403. 
[4] S. Costa and M. Scoble, “An interdisciplinary approach to 
integrating sustainability into mining engineering education 
and research,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 14 Nos 3/4, 
2006, pp. 366-373. 
[5] R. LaSar, K. C. Chen, and D. Apelian, “Teaching sustainable 
development in materials science and engineering,” Materials 
Research Society Bulletin, vol. 37 no. 4, 2012, pp. 449-454. 
[6] B. Nicolescu, Transdisciplinarity - Theory and Practice, 
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 2008. 
[7] E. DeGraaff and W. Ravesteijn, “Training complete 
engineers: global enterprise and engineering education,” 
European Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 26 No. 4, 
2001, pp. 419-427. 
[8] B. Allenby, The Theory and Practice of Sustainable 
Engineering, Upper Saddle River, NJ : Pearson Prentice Hall, 
2012. 
[9] M. Scoble and D. Laurence, “Future mining engineers – 
educational development strategy,” Proceedings of the First 
International Future Mining Conference, Sydney, 19-21 
November 2008, pp. 237-242. 
[10] H. Bertignoll, M. L. Ortega, and S. Feiel,  “MiReBooks – 
Mixed 
Reality 
Lehrbücher 
für 
das 
Bergbau-Studium 
(MiReBooks—Mixed 
Reality 
Handbooks 
for 
Mining 
Education)”, Berg Huettenmaenn Monatsh vol. 164, 2019, pp. 
178-182.  
[11] C. J. Dede, J. Jacobson, and J. Richards, “Introduction: 
Virtual, augmented, and Mixed Realities in Education,” In D. 
Liu, C. J. Dede, R. Huang, and J. Richards (Eds.) Virtual, 
Augmented, and Mixed Realities in Education. Singapore: 
Springer, 2017, pp. 1–19. 
[12] P. Milgram and H. Colquhoun, “A taxonomy of real and 
virtual world display integration,” In Y. Ohta and H. Tamura 
(Eds.) Mixed reality: Merging real and virtual worlds, Berlin: 
Springer, 1999, pp. 5–30.  
[13] R. Azuma et al., “Recent Advances in Augmented Reality,” 
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications vol. 21(6), 2001, 
pp. 34–47. 
[14] L. Dawley and C. Dede “Situated learning in virtual worlds 
and immersive simulations,” In J. M. Spector, M. D. Merrill, 
J. Elen,  and M. J. Bishop (Eds.), Handbook of research for 
educational communications and technology, 4th ed., New 
York, NY: Springer, 2013, pp. 723-734. 
[15] N. Schiffeler, A. Abdelrazeq, V. Stehling, I. Isenhardt, and A. 
Richert, „How AR-e your Seminars?! Collaborative learning 
with 
augmented 
reality 
in 
engineering 
education,” 
INTED2018 Proceedings, Valencia, Spain, 2018, pp. 8912-
8920. 
[16] J. Birt, Z. Stromberga, M. Cowling, and C. Moro, “Mobile 
Mixed Reality for Experiential Learning and Simulation in 
Medical and Health Sciences Education,” Information, vol. 9 
(2), 2018. 
[17] G. Norman, K. Dore, K., and L. Grierson, “The minimal 
relationship between simulation fidelity and transfer of 
learning”, Medical Education, vol. 46(7), 2012, pp. 636–647. 
[18] B. W. Mayer, K. M. Dale, K. A. Fraccastoro, and G, Moss, 
“Improving transfer of learning:Relationship to methods of 
using business simulation”, Simulation & Gaming, vol. 42(1), 
2011, pp. 64–84. 
[19] K. Fraser et al., “Emotion, cognitive load and learning 
outcomes during simulation training”, Medical Education, 
vol. 46(11), 2012, pp. 1055–1062. 
[20] N. Schiffeler, V. Stehling, M. Haberstroh, and I. Isenhardt, 
“Collaborative 
Augmented 
Reality 
in 
Engineering 
Education”, In M. Auer and B. K. Ram (Eds.), Cyber-physical 
Systems and Digital Twins, Cham: Springer, 2020, pp. 719-
732. 
[21] A. Abdelrazeq, L. Daling, R. Suppes, Y. Feldmann, and F. 
Hees, “A Virtual Reality Educational Tool in the Context of 
Mining Engineering - The Virtual Reality Mine,” 13th annual 
International Technology, Education and Development 
Conference (INTED2019), Spain, 11-13 March 2019, pp. 
8067-8073. 
[22] Q. Guo, "Learning in a Mixed Reality System in the Context 
of “Industrie 4.0”," Journal of Technical Education, vol. 3, no. 
2, pp. 91-115, 2015. 
[23] Hochschulforum Digitalisierung, „The Digital Turn – 
Hochschulbildung im digitalen Zeitalter, (The Digital Turn – 
Higher Education in the digital age),“ Arbeitspapier Nr. 28. 
Berlin: Hochschulforum Digitalisierung, 2016. 
[24] L. Daling, C. Kommetter; A. Abdelrazeq, and M. Ebner, 
”Mixed Reality Books: Applying Augmented and Virtual 
Reality in Mining Engineering Education,” In V. Geroimenko  
(Ed.), Augmented Reality In Education: A New Technology 
for Teaching and Learning. Springer, 2020, in print (ISBN 
978-3-030-42155-7). 
[25] P. Mayring, Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse. Grundlagen und 
Techniken (Qualitative content analysis. Foundations and 
techniques), 12th. Ed., Weinheim: Beltz, 2015. 
[26] U. Kuckartz, Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse: Methoden, Praxis, 
Computerunterstützung 
(Qualitative 
content 
analysis: 
methods, practice, computer support), 3. Ed., Weinheim, 
Basel: Beltz Juventa, 2016. 
492
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

