Towards a 3D User Interface in a Touch Screen Device Context 
An Iterative Design and Evaluation Process 
Leena Arhippainen, Minna Pakanen, Seamus Hickey 
Intel and Nokia Joint Innovation Center/ Center for Internet Excellence 
 P.O. Box 1001, FI-90014 University of Oulu, Finland 
leena.arhippainen@cie.fi, minna.pakanen@cie.fi, seamus.hickey@cie.fi
 
Abstract— This paper presents a design and evaluation process 
in the early design phase towards a three dimensional user 
interface on a touch screen mobile device with service 
multitasking use cases. Our Service Fusion concept is an 
outcome of this iterative concept design and evaluation 
process. In this paper, we present briefly four 3D user interface 
concepts, evaluated with users and experts. Two of these 
concepts are also implemented on a touch screen mobile device. 
We also present user experience findings and how they have 
supported our early phase design process. The Service Fusion 
demonstration of 3D multitasking shows multiple services 
running in a 3D city model, which allows users to purchase 
movie tickets, listen to music and find local bars and stores by 
drag and drop gestural controls. Evaluation findings indicate 
that people are interested in service multitasking and dragging 
and dropping interaction model in 3D user interfaces in the 
tablet device context. However, the 3D space context will affect 
how important and useful users perceive services to them. 
Keywords-3D UI; concept design; user experience; touch 
screen mobile device; tablet. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Research in three dimensional (3D) user interfaces (UIs) 
has a long history  ranging  from various areas such as 
Augmented 
Reality 
(AR), 
Cave 
Automatic 
Virtual 
Environment (CAVE), Virtual Environments (VEs), 3D 
Authoring 
tools, 
simulation 
and 
entertainment 
[4][12][15][20]. Even though 3D UIs have been studied for 
many decades, they are still actively researched [3][7][14] 
[18]. There has been a resurgence of interest in 3D 
technology in general, especially among stereoscopic 3D 
movies 
and 
commercially 
available 
devices 
with 
autostereoscopic displays (e.g., LG Optimus 3D phone and 
Nintendo 3DS game console). Similarly, the introduction of 
commercially available 3D input sensors over the last few 
years (e.g., the Wii remote, EyeToy and MS Kinect) have 
put 3D UI technology into everyday use. Furthermore, 
'touching the 3rd dimension' technologies have seen a host of 
new research based on the above devices [13].  
3D is a hot topic nowadays. Even though there is a lot of 
hype around the 3D topic, there still exists a big question: 
'What benefit 3Dness can provide?' Our hypothesis is that a 
3D UI could be beneficial provided that it can enhance the 
user's tasks; therefore, we have investigated 3D UIs in tablet 
device contexts from the multitasking point of view. In our 
case, multitasking means that in the same virtual 3D 
environment, a user can use several services or applications 
at the same time by dragging and dropping gestural controls. 
Currently, in tablet devices, users need to switch between 
applications in such a way that they can view only one 
application at a time.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes an iterative design and evaluation process towards 
a 3D UI on a touch screen mobile device. Also the user 
experiences of our 3D UI concepts and prototypes are briefly 
presented. Then, the findings are summarized and discussed 
in Section III, whereas Section IV concludes the paper and 
provides ideas for future work. 
II. 
EARLY PHASE CONCEPT DESIGN AND EVALUATIONS 
ISO 9241-110:2010 standard defines user experience 
(UX) as: a person's perceptions and responses that results 
from the use and/or anticipated use of a product, system or 
service [11]. According to the UX professionals, users’ 
experiences should be evaluated before, during and after the 
use [21] with different types of design examples. In the 
human-computer interaction (HCI) research field, there is a 
need for systematic (low-cost) methods and guidelines for 
UX evaluation [21], especially in the early phase of the 
development process [22]. In iterative and agile development 
processes, time- and cost-effective UX studies give 
important UX feedback for the design [22]. In our 3D UI UX 
research, we have utilized the early phase design and 
evaluation approach and conducted various studies, which 
are briefly described in the in this paper. Finally, we present 
our Service Fusion concept which we implemented and 
tested with users.  
A. 3D Desktop UI Concept with a File Sharing Use Case 
We designed a 3D Desktop UI concept with an abstract 
virtual environment, which included similar activities that 
one can have with mobile phones (calls, clock, calendar). We 
created an example concept of a 'Call handling' scenario, 
where a user is sharing a file during the conference call as 
shown in Fig. 1. The virtual participants of the conference 
call were represented as avatars and the normal call handling 
functionality occurred by interacting with the avatars. 
Additionally, as 3D is often cited as means to provide a 
better visualization of information to the user, additional 
applications, blogs, web links and certain files are organized 
and viewable.  
After the concept was created, we downloaded sets of 
example images (20 images in total) into a tablet device and 
presented the scenario to the participants as a low-fidelity 
virtual prototype. Participants hold the tablet on their hands 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and explained how they would use the UI (e.g., tap or drag 
an icon) (Fig. 2). We evaluated this concept with four users. 
The concept evaluation gave information about how users 
perceive 3D UIs and what benefits such UIs could provide to 
them. Also issues of avatars (what they are for?), privacy 
(can everyone see my objects in the 3D space?) and 
multitasking possibilities were raised. Users were interested 
in the idea that the system could show several services, for 
example calendar and news feeds, simultaneously with the 
conference call and users could easily find and allocate 
meeting times and share files. User experiences from this 
small scale user study are reported in [5] and 3D visual 
indications aspects are presented in [16].   
 
Figure 1.  An example image of the 3D Desktop UI concept: a person is 
sharing a PDF file during a conference call. 
 
Figure 2.  A user is explaining how he would use the 3D UI. 
B. 3D Office UI Concept with Chat & Calendar Use Case  
In the early phase of the project, we designed various 3D 
UI concepts with different virtual environments, e.g., music 
and office (meeting room) environments. Fig. 3 illustrates 
one example of our 3D UI, where a user is communicating in 
the collaborative 3D Office environment, and services (e.g., 
a clock and calendar) are shared with other meeting 
members. In this example, users were able to drag calendar 
events to that chat for proposing events and meetings (Fig. 
3). The other person was then able to accept the event by a 
touch gesture (e.g., rotate the event block in the chat text by 
swiping it up and down on the y-axis).  
This 3D Office UI concept was studied as a part of a 
larger concept evaluation procedure [2][17] with a total of 40 
subjects (Fig. 4). Findings indicated that the visual design of  
 
Figure 3.  An example image of the collaborative virtual 3D Office UI 
concept with Chat and Calendar use case: dragging a calendar event to the 
chat discussion.  
 
Figure 4.  A moderator (left) introduces to the participants the 3D Office 
UI concept with visually high quality images printed on a paper. A user is 
commenting the concept (right) in a pair evaluation session. 
the VE has a strong impact on how users perceive the whole 
3D UI. Changing the 3D virtual environment changes also 
the users' expectations about a concept or a system, for 
instance, what kind of behaviour and content they expect 
from the system. The visual appearance of the 3D virtual 
environment should be designed for supporting the use 
context, for example, home, work, leisure, game or map [1]. 
The use context shown in the 3D VE influences on how 
important users perceive the service for them, for instance, 
participants wondered how this 3D Office UI support their 
work activities (e.g., booking meetings, updating calendar, 
share files, manage contacts). Therefore, for the next 
concept, we selected a 3D map as a space context and 
designed different service multitasking use cases. 
C. A Context-Aware Map Based 3D UI Prototype 
Based on our previous concept studies, we found out that 
the visual appearance of the 3D virtual environment can set 
the context of use for the user. In this study, we wanted to 
exploit this fact as part of our context-aware map based 3D 
UI prototype implementation. While there are many potential 
environments to use, a geographical based virtual 
environment was chosen as the space context. One rationale 
for this is that geographical based map services are well 
known, there are many services which have a map aspect and 
there are a large number of services which include GPS data, 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

which should make it easy to integrate new context- aware 
services. 
This prototype was implemented on Android OS 
platform on a tablet device. The scenario of the prototype 
presents a use case whereby a user wants to understand the 
geographical context of a story in order to get a better 
understanding of the issues involved. The start view of the 
UI is shown in Fig. 5A.  
 
Figure 5.  A) 3D UI screen with a map with a number of embedded 3D 
objects. B) A map of Fukushima with local news. 
The UI shows a geographical space, news feeds, calendar 
functions, contact cards, weather and time. Scenario includes 
the following steps: 
1. The user reads a short news feed about the Fukushima 
power plant accident. Important data in the news feed is 
represented as objects. 
2. Not knowing where Fukushima is, or what the impact 
on the local surrounding area is, the user selects the 
'Fukushima word' from the news feed by long pressing it 
and then dragging it to the main map area. 
3. When the Fukushima text is dropped on the map 
environment, the camera transition to the Fukushima 
virtual environments starts (Fig. 5B). 
4. The local weather at Fukushima is shown. 
5. Additional news events, pulled from Google news 
service, are automatically displayed. 
This prototype implementation showed the general idea 
of using a geographical context as a virtual environment. 
One benefit in this 3D UI example for a user is that he/she 
can use a map as a search engine easily by dragging and 
dropping the interesting news items. With tablet devices, 
typing can be slow and error prone; therefore, we can assume 
that 'drag and drop' action could speed the use of 3D UI.    
However, as the prototype implementation was very limited, 
we tested it only by an expert evaluation (Fig. 6). To prepare 
the prototype for actual user testing, we developed a new 
version of the 3D Map UI with and several services. 
 
Figure 6.  In a contex-aware map based 3D UI prototype, a user is able to 
select words (e.g., Fukushima) from news feed and then drag and drop it 
onto the map environment for getting more information about that news.  
D. 3D Map UI with Service Fusion Prototype 
After our first Fukushima scenario, we decided to create 
another use cases relating to context-aware services that 
citizens could use with their tablets. One idea of our Service 
Fusion concept is that a user can use several services in the 
same 3D environment view without a need to switch 
between application windows. Our aim is to ease the user's 
tasks 
by 
automating 
some 
actions 
with 
service 
communications and decreasing a user's typing effort. 
Therefore, we implemented the following features into the 
Service Fusion prototype with the 3D city model (Fig. 7): 
 
Cinema service: A user can view the daily timetable 
of cinema and drag the movie from the list to the 
personal shopping cart and book and pay for the 
movie ticket by dragging their credit card object to 
the payment field (the real payment function not 
implemented) (Fig. 8). 
 
City event Live: Users can view live events from 
the local city live calendar. 
 
Local News Feeds: Users can view local news feeds 
on the embedded board objects. 
 
Music service: Users can view the current song list 
of a bar and then drag the song name to a radio icon. 
When the song is dropped on the radio icon, it 
launches a search for the song from Grooveshark [8]. 
Users can also drag a song from the list and drop it 
onto the map to find music stores in the city (a map 
as a search engine). 
This concept was implemented on the realXtend [19] 
Tundra platform running on Linux Ubuntu on 12 inch touch 
screen laptop computer. The 3D city model is a high fidelity 
model  and currently covers nine city blocks. The technical 
implementation is illustrated in the [6][10].  
This Service Fusion prototype was tested with ten users. 
In the evaluation, we were particularly interested in users' 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

subjective experiences of the 3D UI and services. We studied 
the following topics: 
 
how users perceive and understand different types of 
icons. For instance, personal overlaid icons 
(calendar, shopping cart, radio) are fixed to the 
camera position and they have a different visual style 
than in 16 icons (e.g., bars, cinema, theatre, 
restaurants), which are embedded on the top of the 
3D city model and are publicly shown to all users. 
Also two news tables were embedded in the 3D city 
map. 
 
how users experience the dragging and dropping 
controls with a touch screen mobile device. These 
results are presented in more detail in [9]. 
 
how users experience the service fusion idea, where 
a user is able to use several services (e.g., cinema 
purchase, music listening, music search) in the same 
3D virtual environment. In current tablet devices, 
users have to switch between different applications 
(e.g., YouTube, Web browser, calendar). These 
results are presented in more detail in [9]. 
 
Figure 7.  A Service Fusion 3D UI in a 3D city map: personal calendar, e-
commerce services and live information from local bars, cinema and 
newspapers.  
After a short familiarization with a visual appearance of 
the 3D UI, the users were asked to perform the following 
tasks: 
1. Buy a movie ticket for today:  
a. 
Find cinema information (cinema icon and movie) 
b. Book movie (drag movie to a shopping cart) 
c. 
Fill ID info (drag an ID card to a form) 
d. Select a seat (tap the seat)  
e. 
Pay the ticket (drag a visa card to a form). (Fig. 8) 
2. Listen to a music:  
a. 
Find the bar: Otto K. (icon on the top of the map) 
b. Look at its information board (playing list).  
c. 
Find out how to listen to it (drag on a radio icon). 
3. Search music stores: 
a. 
Select the song  from the playing list (info board) 
b. Find out how to locate a music store which sells 
CDs and merchandises from that band. (Fig. 9-10). 
User tests with this prototype gave us a lot of important 
feedback about icons design, virtual environment design and  
 
Figure 8.  A user is dragging a Visa card onto the payment area. 
 
Figure 9.  A user presses a song item on the bar's playing list, when the 
song text (band's and song's name) pop-up as a 3D box, then the users 
holds the song box and and starts to drag it onto the 3D map for searching a 
music store (User task 3). 
 
Figure 10.  When the song is dropped on the map, the song box disappear 
and the 'Music store' icon on the top of the map growns and its  information 
board opens, which shows the song information (e.g., price). 
service multitasking activities. Findings from this study 
elicited that the users understood the difference between 
overlaid icons and icons on top of the 3D city. Especially 
icons on the top of the 3D city were perceived to belong to 
the city, a.k.a. are services or stores of the city in real life. 
Some users understood that an overlaid calendar icon is a 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

public event calendar of the local city. This perception can 
be a consequence of the test device and setup, because some 
users may think that the device could not be his/her own 
device and own personal calendar.  
Fig. 11 presents the Likert Scale answers about the icon 
design (1='totally disagree', 3='cannot say', 5='totally agree'). 
The participants understood a meaning of the icons (4.3) on 
 the top of the 3D city. They did not think that there are too 
many icons in the scene (1.3). When a 3D virtual 
environment includes interactive objects and icons, it is 
important to design them so that they distinguish enough 
from the background (e.g., 3D city model) and a user can 
understand how he/she can interact with them. According to 
the questionnaire, users thought that icons distinct enough 
from the background space (3.8). However, the average 3.8 
shows 
that 
icons 
could 
be 
decided 
even 
more 
distinguishable. Also results relating to appearance of 
interactive icons (3.4) indicate that embedded icons should 
be designed so that a user can understand how he/she can 
interact with them. However, users thought that the visual 
appearance of icons was consistent (3.9).  
 
Figure 11.  Users' perceptions on icons on the top of the 3D city (embedded 
icons) gathered by a Likert Scale questionnaire. 
The users' experiences on the cinema service were very 
positive. They liked the idea that they can easily drag and 
drop items on the 3D UI. The users regarded buying a movie 
ticket by dragging it on the shopping cart as interesting, easy, 
fast, useful and natural [9]. Even though the users liked the 
idea of buying tickets by dragging and dropping ID and 
credit cards, security issues should be designed so that users 
can feel the payment system as reliable and secure. 
In the music service task, a dragging a song item on the 
radio icon was natural to users. Instead, dragging the same 
icon on the 3D city map was not natural at all [9]. Users did 
not find this feature by themselves. They found it only by 
accident or after the moderator's tip. However, after users 
knew this action, half of them liked the idea of using a map 
as a search engine. The use of a 3D virtual environment, in 
our case the 3D city map, as a search engine or other 
interactive platform is a very important topic to study more 
from the user experience point of view. 
III. 
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION 
In this paper, we have shown how we have used different 
concept designs in an iterative design and evaluation process. 
In all of these examples, we have investigated how a 3D UI 
could be useful for users, a.k.a. what additional value the 3D 
UI could provide to users. Our hypothesis was that service 
multitasking in one 3D scene (virtual environment) could be 
useful for users. In the 3D Desktop UI concept, we studied 
how users can use a 3D environment for sharing files in a 
conference call setting. In this study, the users liked the idea 
that they can easily share files by dragging and dropping 
them onto the friend's avatar or some marked area. They 
were also willing to share social media and calendar 
information with persons in the conference call. Also in this 
example, we noticed that because the visual style of the 
virtual environment was very abstract, users did not associate 
the context of use very strongly to certain situations; instead, 
they perceived the concept example relating to the 
communication situation. 
Next, we designed different virtual environment contexts, 
e.g., music and office, and studied those examples with 
users. In the evaluations, users strongly tied examples 
relating to the certain usage situations, e.g., in leisure or 
professional activities. The virtual background of the 3D UI 
had a strong influence on how users perceived the whole 
concept and its purpose. In this study we also investigated 
how the users perceive the use of shared services in a 
collaborative situation. 
Based on the findings from these both studies, we started 
to design how we could utilize a geographical background as 
a part of the 3D UI and how users would perceive service 
multitasking in this context. The user study elicited that a 
geographical based 3D UI with context-aware service 
multitasking can have benefits for users by making the use of 
services easier and faster in a 3D virtual environment in the 
tablet device context. Users liked the idea of dragging and 
dropping objects to the services. Also users’ perceptions on 
icons elicited visual design directions for interactive icons 
embedded in the 3D environment. We will study these topics 
more with functional prototypes with different 3D 
environments, with different sets of services.      
 This iterative design and evaluation process has 
provided us valuable user feedback that we will use for 
future designs. One interesting future topic is how we can 
utilize parts of a 3D environment as interactive platforms 
(e.g., search engines, shared and public areas). In addition, in 
the future studies, we will implement and test a prototype, 
where a user can switch between different 3D virtual 
environments through teleporting points (e.g., doors or 
holes). In this study, we will investigate the user experience 
of the different 3D virtual environments and transitions 
between them. Also, we will study the visual indication of 
3D icons. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented our iterative design and 
evaluation process for the studying the user experience of 
different 3D UI examples from the service multitasking point 
of view. As an outcome of this process, we present our 
Service Fusion concept and prototype implementations. In 
UX evaluations, we have investigated how the users perceive 
different 3D UI design examples and what benefits they 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

could provide to the users. In our 3D UI concepts, the value 
for users would be the multitasking approach which supports 
a simultaneous and parallel use of different applications in 
one screen view in the touch screen mobile device context. 
In the future, we will conduct more user studies for 3D UIs 
with different sets of virtual environments and services. The 
reason for providing this early phase design and UX 
evaluation information to 3D UI and HCI research fields is to 
increase the knowledge of conducting UX studies before, 
during and after the functional prototype. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank our funders: Intel, Nokia and Tekes. We would 
also like to thank Julianna Hemmoranta, Jukka Kaartinen, 
Erno Kuusela, Antti Karhu and Ludocraft Ldt. for their 
assistance. We want to express our gratitude to Grooveshark 
and Kutalab Ltd. for providing us with access to their 
services. Warm thanks to all test users as well. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Arhippainen, M. Pakanen, and S. Hickey. "Preliminary 
Design Guidelines for Tablet's 3D GUIs Based on the Five 
UX Studies," Proc. Designing Interactive Systems (DIS 
2012), Poster no. 136., New Castle, UK, June 23-15.2012. 
[2] L. Arhippainen, M. Pakanen, and S. Hickey. "Studying User 
Experiences on Depth in 3D User Interface by a Paper 
Prototype as a Part of the Mixed Methods Evaluation 
Procedure," Proc. ACHI' 13, 2 February 24 - March 1, 2013 - 
Nice, France. 
[3] D.A. Bowman, J. Chen, C.A. Wingrave, J. Lucas, A. Ray, 
N.F. Polys, Q. Li, Y. Haciahmetoglu, J. Kim, S. Kim, R. 
Boehringer, and T. Ni. "New Directions in 3D User 
Interfaces," The International Journal of Virtual Reality, 
2006, vol 5 (2), pp. 3-14. 
[4] F.P. Brooks. "What's Real About Virtual Reality?" IEEE 
Computer Graphics and Applications, 1999, vol 19, 6, pp. 16-
27. 
[5] Chiru blog: Studying UX of Call handling with 3D UI in 
tablet. 
http://chirublog.org/2011/05/20/studying-ux-of-call-
handling-with-3d-ui-in-tablet/. 20.5.2011. 
[6] Chiru 
blog: 
Service 
Fusion 
at 
MUM 
2012. 
http://chirublog.org/2012/12/20/service-fusion-at-mum-2012/. 
20.12.2012. 
[7] A. Gotchev, G.B. Akar, T. Capin, D. Strohmeier, and A. 
Boev, Three-Dimensional Media for Mobile Devices. IEEE 
99, 4 (2011), pp. 708-741. 
[8] Grooveshark: http://grooveshark.com/. 30.10.2012. 
[9] S. Hickey, M. Pakanen, and L. Arhippainen. "A 3D UI for 
Service Multitasking in a 3D City Map," Proc. OZCHI 2012, 
26-30 November 2012, Melbourne, Australia, pp. 208-211. 
[10] S. Hickey, M. Pakanen, L. Arhippainen, E. Kuusela, and A. 
Karhu. "Service Fusion: An Interactive 3D User Interface," 
Proc. MUM 2012. Article No. 53. 4-6. December 2012. Ulm, 
Germany. doi>10.1145/2406367.2406432 
[11] ISO DIS 9241-210:2010. Ergonomics of human system 
interaction - Part 210: Human-centred design for interactive 
systems. International Standardization Organization (ISO). 
Switzerland.  
[12] G. Kurtenbach, G. Fitzmaurice, T. Baudel, and B. Buxton. 
"The design of a GUI paradigm based on tablets, two-hands, 
and transparency," Proc. CHI'97, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 
March 22-27, 1997. ACM New York, NY, USA, pp. 35-42.  
[13] J. LaViola, and D. Keefe, "3D spatial interaction: applications 
for art, design, and science," In ACM SIGGRAPH 2011 
Courses, Article No. 1. Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada, August 7-11th. New York, NY, USA. ACM Press 
(2011). doi>10.1145/2037636.2037637 
[14] A. Leal, C.A. Wingrave, and J.J. LaViola. "Initial 
Explorations into the User Experience of 3D File Browsing," 
Proc. BCS-HCI'09, ACM Press (2009), pp. 339-344. 
[15] J. Light, and J.D. Miller. "Miramar: a 3D workplace," Proc. 
IPCC 2002, IEEE Press (2002), pp. 271-282. 
[16] M. Pakanen, L. Arhippainen, and S. Hickey. "UX Based 
Design Recommendations for Interactive 3D Objects in 3D 
UI on Tablet Devices," In: Anderson, K., Arhippainen, L., 
Benko, H., de la Rivière, J-B., Häkkilä, J., Krüger, A., Keefe, 
D., Pakanen, M., and Steinicke, F. Proc. ACM CHI Workshop 
on The 3rd Dimension of CHI: Touching and Designing 3D 
User Interfaces (3DCHI), Austin, Texas, USA. May 5-10, 
2012. pp. 91-94. http://www.cie.fi/chi-workshop.html 
[17] M. Pakanen, L. Arhippainen, and S. Hickey. "Studying Four 
3D GUI Metaphors in Virtual Environment in Tablet Context. 
Visual Design and Early Phase User Experience Evaluation," 
Proc. ACHI' 13, 2 February 24 - March 1, 2013 - Nice, 
France. 
[18] D. Patterson. "3D SPACE: Using Depth and Movement for 
Selection Tasks," Proc. Web3D 2007, ACM Press (2007), pp. 
147-155. doi>10.1145/1229390.1229416. 
[19] realXtend: http://realxtend.org. 30.8.2012. 
[20] S. Reifinger, F. Laquai, and G. Rigoll. "Translation and 
rotation of virtual objects in Augmented Reality: A 
comparison of interaction devices," In IEEE SMC, 2008, pp. 
2448-2453.   
[21] A. Vermeeren, E. Law, V. Roto, M. Obrist, J. Hoonhout, and 
K. Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila. "User Experience Evaluation 
Methods: Current State and Development Needs," Proc. 
NordiCHI 2010. ACM  Press (2010), pp. 521-530. 
[22] K. Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, and M. Wäljas. "Developing an 
expert evaluation method for user eXperience of cross-
platform web services," Proc. MindTrek 2009. ACM Press 
(2009), pp. 162-169. doi>10.1145/1621841.1621871. 
 
 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

