Fiction Design of a 3D Tutor for and with School Children 
Monica Landoni 
Faculty of  Informatics,  
Università della Svizzera italiana, USI 
Lugano, Switzerland 
e-mail: monica.landoni@usi.ch 
Emiliana Murgia  
ICS Antonio Stoppani 
Milano, Italy 
e-mail: emilianamurgia@gmail.com 
 
 
Fabrizio Gramuglio 
FOREVER Identity 
New York, USA 
e-mail: fabrizio.gramuglio@gmail.com 
 
Giorgio Manfredi 
FOREVER Identity 
New York, USA 
e-mail: giorgio.manfredi@rumbletumbleweed.com 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we describe the fiction design approach 
we are using in collaboration with school children and teachers 
in order to produce a 3D Tutor. We introduce the actors and 
procedure we are following with particular emphasis on the 
activities devised to engage children in the various stages of 
design and produce the necessary output for each of the facets 
of the 3D Tutor. Our assumption is that making learning more 
fun will increase the overall level of children’s engagement and 
their motivation towards it. Thus, we describe how children are 
helping us to design a 3D Tutor able to cater for individual 
learning styles as well as being fun to work with. Finally, we 
discuss how this ongoing experience with collaborative fiction 
design is providing us with directions towards the first 
prototype of our 3D Tutor. 
Keyword-E-learning Interaction; 3D Tutor; Collaborative 
Design; User Requirements; Fiction Design. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Technology is used to support teaching and learning in 
many ways. Here, we are exploring the design of a 3D Tutor 
to act as a teachable agent to engage primary school children. 
Teachable agents are defined by Biswas et al. [1] as a 
“…computer agents that students teach, and in the process, 
learn themselves”. Children asked to teach them are forced to 
structure their knowledge, take responsibility for its delivery 
and reflect upon it. All essential steps in the learning process. 
Both the social and emotional dimensions of teachable tutors 
are still under study, and our work contributes to this research 
by exploring the impact of one of its possible manifestations, 
that in the shape of 3D holographic tutor. 
Our assumption is that, by involving children in the 
definition of the look and feel of their teaching tutor-agent, 
they could help us design one that better satisfies their needs. 
Besides, given that our tutor will learn from children, we 
would start our exploration by revisiting the list of qualities 
proposed by Buskin et al. [2] and focusing on few of the most 
highly ranked in that study. Thus, we wanted to find out 
whether for our pupils, as for the older students in that study, 
it is important that their 3D Tutor should be enthusiastic about 
learning, 
promotes 
crucial 
thinking, 
approachable, 
respectful, creative, has realistic expectations. By engaging 
children and teachers as co-designers, we came up with the 
first set of user requirements for a prototype of a 3D Tutor 
together with a list of desirable qualities for making it an ideal 
teaching agent. We start by providing a very brief account of 
previous works on co-design with children and explorations 
of the social and emotional dimensions of teachable agents. 
We then provide a description of our study, and finally draw 
some initial conclusions based on the evidence gathered.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In the literature describing how co-design can help the 
design of effective digital tutors for children, we found 
inspiration from the work by Herberg et al. [3] involving 
children in the identification of qualities for an ideal robot 
tutor. Among the many approaches to collaborative design, 
particularly suitable for young children is fiction design, 
where “something that creates a story world… has something 
being prototyped within that story world, … does so in order 
to create a discursive space.” [4]. 
Moving on to consider research on the design of teachable 
tutors [1], Ogan et al. [5] go on to explore the social dimension 
of teachable agents and report on how having a friendly, equal 
approach, where the tutor and the child align themselves to be 
peers, together with being able to use informal interactions, 
including mutual teasing, is conducive to successful learning 
experiences. On the contrary, keeping a formal distance has a 
negative effect on the overall experience. While most of the 
available literature reports on pro and cons of having robots to 
play the role of the tutor, we set out to explore an alternative, 
that of a 3D holographic entity. 
The 3D Tutor is a 3D character animated in real-time, able 
to interact through different senses (touch, voice, vision) and 
to convey dialog, emotions and lessons. It is responsive and 
adaptive: it can diagnose end users’ conditions (e.g., he/she 
may be tired), preferences, needs and peculiarities/ 
environment conditions (e.g., preferred language, currently 
available bandwidth, etc.) in real time. In this way, we 
separate the content of the lesson to be taught (Knowledge) 
from the means used to convey this content (Teaching 
methodology) and interact with students. Using Artificial 
Intelligence, the 3D Tutor can choose the right question/topic; 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

using Artificial Empathy, the 3D Tutor has the ability to 
recognise users’ emotional state and engagement to react in 
the proper way. Thus, the content is adapted to both the 
conditions of the student and the particular device used 
(mobile device, web, classroom). With the 3D Tutors, 
teachers can explore new ways to present subjects to students, 
as well as encourage students to find the learning style that 
suits them including the adoption of the teaching agent 
paradigm. The concept of a 3D Tutor is based on that of 
Human-like Interaction (HLI) [3]. HLI implies the use of all 
dimensions of human language, not only written or verbal 
communication but also gestures, postures and expressions. 
Starting from the concept that transmitted messages between 
humans contain both an informative (rational) value and an 
emotional value, the human form is the best way to synthesize 
them.  
III. 
OUR STUDY 
Here, we describe our experience in involving children in 
the design of a 3D Tutor to assist them in their learning as 
teaching agent. We included in our study 154 children in 
primary 2, aged 7 to 8, from two schools, one in Italy and one 
in the Italian speaking part of Switzerland, and 9 teachers. One 
of them, playing the role of digital creative, worked very 
closely with the researchers when proposing procedures and 
protocols for engaging the children. We applied a make-
believe approach, where we created a fictional world 
supported by narrative and acting. This helped to generate 
intrinsic motivation in pupils to take part in the various 
activities necessary to inform our design process, and provide 
us with the necessary insights to define the look and feel of 
our 3D Tutor. While the design process is still ongoing, by 
having completed the first two phases: the meeting the Alien 
and the Looking and Feeling like a Human Being, both 
described below, we have gathered a wealth of data and 
experience to share with our community. 
The use of an alien in anthropomorphic form has made it 
easier to encode a series of messages that, otherwise would 
have been very complex to transmit to our co-designers. For 
example, the message of non-aggression was conveyed to the 
children in an intuitive way by having the alien assume the 
posture of a timid person: it often looked down at its feet, 
rocking slightly on its heels.  
IV. 
FICTION DESIGN WITH CHILDREN 
Our design scenario includes an unusually large number 
of children, more than 150. Teachers behaved as co-designers 
and proposed, adapted and conducted the various design 
related activities. Researchers acted as facilitators and made 
sure teachers had all the technological support for the make-
believe approach. Head-teachers and parents in both schools 
were informed and asked to keep up with the fictional setting, 
without revealing what was really happening. Our main 
assumption was that children as young as 7 to 8 had the 
necessary flexibility towards reality, yet still had the ability to 
embrace mystery and magic.  
V. 
MEETING THE ALIEN 
The first meeting was staged in a theatre (Fig. 1) and 
resulted in a memorable event for children, as reflected in the 
quality and quantity of their comments.  Children had received 
an email via their school head-teacher, wherein a group of 
scientists was asking for their help to make sense of a 
mysterious message from space. On reading it, children 
immediately accepted to take part in the adventure. They had 
also been invited by their teachers to prepare questions 
beforehand to ask the alien, in the assumption the children 
could understand the answers. This was the beginning of the 
make-believe narrative adopted in the study.  
 
 
Figure 1. Meeting the Alien 
The second step was the encounter with Olo-Disk, as the 
name of the alien was finally revealed ("discolo" is an Italian 
old fashioned term for naughty child).  
The event was carefully staged, with a couple of 
researchers playing the role of lab scientists, wearing white 
coats in a dark room. Finally, in a surreal silence, Olo-Disk 
appeared, remote, and different but intentionally never 
dangerous, (see Fig. 2). Looking often down to his/her feet, 
with a subdued attitude and using a never heard concoction of 
Italian, Finnish and Cantonese with a prevalence of “ɑ:” 
sounds, s/he had clearly a non-threatening appearance. 
 
 
Figure 2. Our friendly Alien 
 
S/he started to explain that, while travelling in space s/he 
was attracted by a blue planet (Earth), but s/he was aware that 
his/her physical features were not adequate to come and visit 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

it. That was why s/he was trying to communicate with 
scientists: s/he needed their help to know how to transform 
her/himself to be like humans. Immediately after the meeting, 
children were asked to engage with some simple exercises, 
individually and in groups, in order to explore how they felt 
and reflect on their experience.  They were invited to select 
one single word that, summarised the experience of meeting 
Olo-Disk and then, as group, to put forward some more 
words linked with the event. These were then copied on a 
poster size paper, to be shared with others. 
Pupils were asked to make a drawing, to represent the most 
important element of the day (Fig. 3).  The purpose of these 
exercises was to make children reflect and fix their memories 
of the day.  
Their artifacts were then analysed by teachers and 
researchers, 
looking 
for 
signs 
of 
engagement 
and 
participation. We searched for expressions of surprise, 
curiosity, fear and excitement, between those used in the two 
word based exercises. 
 
 
Figure 3: The experience in one drawing – English for “In un disegno” 
For drawings as in Fig. 3 we adopted and adapted a coding 
scheme from Xu at al [2], see Table 1. 
 TABLE 1: CODING SCHEME FOR DRAWINGS 
Element 
Evidence 
Score 
Participation 
Children, self 
portraits 
Score:  
Absent (0) or  
Present (1) 
Visual 
Magic 
Portrait of the 
Alien: size, color, 
appearance, lights 
Not evident (0), 
Possibly Evident (1) 
Evident (2)      
Highly Evident (3) 
Interactive 
Magic 
Questions and 
answers, 
communication, 
sound, gestures 
Not Evident (0) 
Possibly Evident (1) 
Evident(2) 
Highly Evident (3) 
VI. 
ACTIVITIES 
It is worth noticing how all activities were designed to be 
in line with existing curriculum. Even if the stimulus was 
coming from a request issued by Olo-Disk, it was up to the 
teachers to interpret it and guide the children in a process of 
problematisation of the request to result in a stronger form of 
engagement with the new learning activity.  After the first 
meeting, a new message came directly to the children. Olo-
Disk needed their help to look and behave like a human being.  
A. Looking and Feeling like a Human Being 
In order to answer this new request, a series of activities 
were elaborated by the different teachers and proposed to the 
children.  
The teachers and children from the Italian Swiss school 
devised a variety of multidisciplinary exercises. As there was 
only one class engaged in the process, all children were 
involved in all activities that spanned across disciplines. 
Children worked on emotions and prepared drawings 
portraying those they felt stronger, as in Fig. 4 (“I am Leone, 
and I am happy”; “I am Valeria and I am happy” is written in 
Italian in the picture). These drawings were analysed in terms 
of dominant emotions, and assisted in the definition of the 
look and feel of the interface for our 3D Tutor. During their 
art class, they also prepared outfits for Olo-Disk to look like a 
human being, different ones in case Olo-Disk were a female 
or a male being. These artifacts contributed to define the 
appearance of our 3D Tutor. 
 
 
Figure 4: Emotions 
The English teachers wanted to contribute to the project, 
by discussing with children what kind of information would 
be useful to Olo-Disk. They decided to share with Olo-Disk 
their knowledge of the solar system in English, given that they 
had to use the universal translator to communicate anyway. In 
order to make it more fun and engaging for Olo-Disk, children 
and teachers decided to organize a play where each pair of 
pupils would act as one planet and describe it to Olo-Disk, by 
using a mixture of words and gestures. Teachers reported on 
how committed children were, as they felt this task would help 
Olo-Disk in his/her quest. In particular, knowing that their 
play was being recorded and sent to Olo-Disk, made them 
learn their lines faster and each put as much effort as possible 
in order to share their newly acquired knowledge with their 
friend. 
In Italy, the six classes were teamed in pairs. In order to 
answer the main question, about what makes us human, each 
pair fully explored one of the three facets of our 3D Tutor: 
corpus (physical facet), indoles (emotional facet) and societas 
(social facet). Children in every class worked first in small 
groups, each focusing on a specific sub-facet. All 
contributions were then combined. To give Olo-Disk enough 
information for becoming similar to a human being. The 
indoles team worked to sort out which emotions Olo-Disk had 
to learn, detailing in which conditions they are generated. 
Finally, the classes who worked on societas, identified 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

conventional relationships and related behaviours among 
people. 
 
During the activities, the teachers let children free and 
encouraged them to consider every possible solution. Thus, 
few members of the “corpus” team- wrote an email to Olo-
Disk asking if he/she really wanted agree to transform 
him/herself, explaining that they didn’t mind if he/she was so 
peculiar, adding also that they were available to help her/him 
to travel the world without transforming him/herself. 
All the 154 children, across the two schools, were invited 
to work using the same tools: drawings, content tables and 
text, to organize and summarize in writing the conclusions 
reached and their achievements for each activity. Desktop 
computers and interactive whiteboard where part of the 
resources available to them, when helping their friend Olo-
Disk. 
VII. NEXT STEPS 
In the immediate future, we will complete the analyses of 
all data gathered and use that output to inform the production 
of the first prototype of our 3D Tutor. This will be presented 
to the children by the end of the current school year, 2017-
2018, when they will meet Olo-Disk with his/her new look 
and behavior. Children will also be sent a message from the 
scientists, thanking them for all the work done and showing 
them how, this was used to help Olo-disk to answer his/her 
quest on how to become human. In the new autumn semester, 
2018-2019, we will then involve the same children as 
assessors in its evaluation and proceed toward the production 
of incremental prototypes. These will expand the 3D Tutor in 
three directions: 
- 
by providing an authoring tool for teachers and 
children to add educational material; 
- 
by expanding on the sensorial experience with Olo-
disk, acquiring the ability to see and touch. 
- 
by enhancing Olo-disk’s ability to master the use of 
language and rhetoric. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS  
The introduction of artificial tutors in education is still 
under debate and presents many open issues. We believe that 
by following an appropriate design approach, we can deliver 
a 3D Tutor to enhance the learning experience, starting from 
primary school. We tested our hypothesis by involving seven 
classes of primary school 2nd grade children and their teachers 
across two countries, in a collaborative fiction driven design 
process. Even if the process is still ongoing, its outlook is 
encouraging. Usually, the introduction of new technology in 
educational activities brings high levels of engagement. Thus, 
it was not a surprise that children reacted with vibrant 
enthusiasm from the very beginning of the project. Guided by 
an effective make-believe narrative, the children immediately 
adopted the tutor as one of them. By analyzing the discourse 
in class and interviewing the teachers, it was clear that Olo-
Disk was never perceived as a “teacher” but a companion or a 
friend, a truly approachable teachable agent. One of the 
teachers commented on the fact that Olo-Disk had become 
such an important member of the class, so much so that 
children were asking her to find more time during the day for 
activities linked to him/her, as these stimulated their 
creativity. Children felt Olo-Disk was enthusiastic about 
learning as s/he valued and respected them. They never felt 
under pressure for his/her requests, as these responded to 
realistic expectations, while at the same time, promoted 
crucial thinking, as when children pondered whether the 
transformation was really necessary. 
Besides, the combination of the HLI approach with fiction 
design, in a collaborative setting involving children, has 
proved successful in keeping a high level of motivation and 
producing a large number of artifacts. These will serve as 
input for the user requirement phase of our project. The 
analysis and interpretation of all the heterogeneous data 
gathered from drawings to acting, from word chains to 
discussions in focus groups and teachers’ interviews is 
proving to be a stimulating activity too. Our 2nd grade children 
have fully engaged with all the proposed activities and we are 
looking forward to them moving on to next step, and acting as 
evaluators for our project. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank the schools, teachers, parents and above all the 
children who brought enthusiasm and magic to the study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Biswas, K. Leelawong, D. Schwartz, N. Vye and The Teachable 
Agents Group at Vanderbilt,  “Learning by Teaching a New Agent 
Paradigm for Educational Software”, Applied Artificial Intelligence, 
vol. 9, issue 3-4, pp. 363-392, 2005.  
[2] 
W. Buskist, J. Sikorski, T. Buckley and B. K. Saville, “Elements of 
masterteaching”  in The Teaching of Psychology: Essays in Honor of 
Wilbert J. McKeachie and Charles L. Brewer. , S. F. Davis and W. 
Buskist, eds. Mahwah New Jersey: Erlbaum, pp. 27-39, 2002.  
[3] 
J. S. Herberg, D. C. Behera, and M. Saerbeck, “Eliciting ideal tutor trait 
perception in robots: pinpointing effective robot design space elements 
for smooth tutor interactions”, HRI '13: Proc. of the 8th ACM/IEEE 
international conference on Human-robot interaction, IEEE Press, 
Piscataway, NJ, USA, pp. 137-138. 2013. 
[4] 
J. Lindley, “Researching Design Fiction With Design Fiction”, C&C 
’15: Proc. of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity and 
Cognition, pp. 325-326, 2015. 
[5] 
A. Ogan, S. Finkelstein, E. Mayfield, C. D'Adamo, N. Matsuda, and J. 
Cassell, “"Oh dear Stacy!": social interaction, elaboration, and learning 
with teachable agents”, CHI 2012: Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
pp. 39-48, 2012. 
[6] 
D. Xu, J. C. Read, G. Sim and B. McManus, “Experience it, draw it, 
rate it: capture children's experiences with their drawings”, IDC ’09: 
Proc. of the 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and 
Children, pp. 266-270, 2009. 
[7] 
J. van Oijen and F. Dignum, “Agent communication for believable 
human-like interactions between virtual characters”, Proc. of the 11th 
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-agent 
System, vol. 3, pp. 1181-1182 , 2012. 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

