Interpreting Psychophysiological States Using Unobtrusive Wearable Sensors
in Virtual Reality
Alberto Betella, Daniel Pacheco, Riccardo Zucca, Xerxes D. Arsiwalla, Pedro Omedas
SPECS, NRAS, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
Email: alberto.betella@upf.edu
Antonio Lanat`a, Daniele Mazzei, Alessandro Tognetti, Alberto Greco, Nicola Carbonaro
Research Centre “E. Piaggio”, University of Pisa
Pisa, Italy
Johannes Wagner, Florian Lingenfelser
Human Centered Multimedia, University of Augsburg
Augsburg, Germany
Elisabeth Andr´e
Human Centered Multimedia, University of Augsburg
Augsburg, Germany
Danilo De Rossi
Research Centre “E. Piaggio”, University of Pisa
Information Engineering Department, University of Pisa
Pisa, Italy
Paul F.M.J. Verschure
SPECS, NRAS, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
ICREA, Instituci´o Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avanc¸ats
Barcelona, Spain
Abstract—One of the main challenges in the study of human be-
havior is to quantitatively assess the participants’ affective states
by measuring their psychophysiological signals in ecologically
valid conditions. The quality of the acquired data, in fact, is often
poor due to artifacts generated by natural interactions such as full
body movements and gestures. We created a technology to address
this problem. We enhanced the eXperience Induction Machine
(XIM), an immersive space we built to conduct experiments on
human behavior, with unobtrusive wearable sensors that measure
electrocardiogram, breathing rate and electrodermal response.
We conducted an empirical validation where participants wearing
these sensors were free to move in the XIM space while exposed to
a series of visual stimuli taken from the International Affective
Picture System (IAPS). Our main result consists in the quan-
titative estimation of the arousal range of the affective stimuli
through the analysis of participants’ psychophysiological states.
Taken together, our ﬁndings show that the XIM constitutes a
novel tool to study human behavior in life-like conditions.
Keywords-Affect analysis, affective states, ecological validity,
EDR, HRV, wearable sensors, XIM
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the last two decades, the advances in virtual reality
techniques led to their application to a wide range of scien-
tiﬁc ﬁelds. In particular, virtual reality has been generating
important contributions to scientiﬁc research related to the
understanding of human behavior [1]. Virtual reality systems,
in fact, allow to setup ecologically valid environments where
user can act and behave in life-like conditions. At the same
time, researchers can have a systematic control of the stimuli
presented.
The empirical validation of users’ subjective experience
in such environments is commonly conducted through the
administration of self-assessment questionnaires. Besides this,
the users’ behavioral patterns (e.g., spatial location, gaze, etc.)
can be recorded and analyzed, thus offering useful insights on
users’ explicit and implicit behavior.
In recent years, due to the improvements in hardware
portability, an important addition to the study of human
behavior is the measure of psychophysiological signals such as
electrodermal response (EDR) and electrocardiogram (ECG).
Past literature has shown that these measures are directly
related to the Autonomic Nervous System (ANS) and provide
means to quantitatively assess a number of human affective
states [2], [3], [4].
However, one of the common issues when recording these
measures in ecologically valid conditions, is the quality of
the signal. As a matter of fact, full body movement and
331
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

embodied interaction (e.g., natural gestures) often result in a
series of artifacts in the signal that don’t allow the extraction
of features that assess the users’ psychophysiological state. For
this reason, there is still a tendency to measure these signals
only in conventional lab conditions where the user is sitting
or has a limited range of movements and interaction.
To address this problem, we enhanced the eXperience
Induction Machine (XIM), an immersive space we constructed
to conduct experiments on human behavior, with unobtrusive
wearable sensors capable of measuring users’ psychophysio-
logical signals [5]. Through this latest addition, we obtained
a general-purpose infrastructure to support a broad range of
behavioral studies that include human affective states.
We validated our new infrastructure by conducting an
experiment where participants were free to move or perform
gestures in XIM and, at the same time, were exposed to a series
of visual stimuli taken from the International Affective Picture
System (IAPS) [6], while recording their ECG and EDR in
real-time.
Our results show that we are able to distinguish the arousal
range of the stimuli presented to the participants by measuring
their psychophysiological signals.
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. The eXperience Induction Machine
The XIM (Figure 2) is an immersive space constructed to
conduct empirical studies on human behavior in ecologically
valid situations that involve full body interaction [7].
The XIM covers an area of about 25 square meters and
is equipped with a number of effectors that include 8 projec-
tors, 4 projection screens, a luminous interactive ﬂoor and a
soniﬁcation system.
Along with the effectors, the XIM features a pool of sensors
to measure users’ explicit and implicit behavior, including a
marker-free multi-modal tracking system, ﬂoor-based pressure
sensors and microphones. Next to these, we added wireless
and wearable devices capable of measuring body posture, arm
orientation, hand position and ﬁngers movements in real-time,
as well as the following psychophysiological signals: ECG,
EDR and breathing rate (BR).
In the design of the system, these implicit signals were
speciﬁcally selected because of their reliability in terms of
inference of affective states and because the hardware require-
ments allowed to mount the sensors on tiny wearable devices.
To provide an ecological form of interaction, the wearable
devices were integrated into two main interfaces: a) a sensing
glove for the simultaneous acquisition of hand gestures and
EDR and b) a sensing shirt for the acquisition of ECG and
respiration.
1) The sensing shirt and glove: On the one hand, the sens-
ing shirt (Smartex srl, Italy) is used in the XIM to acquire ECG,
BR and triaxial accelerometric data [8]. This device has been
adopted in previous studies on long-term monitoring of chronic
patients, focusing on the early prevention of cardiovascular
diseases [9]. The sensing shirt features a front pocket that
contains a tiny electronic battery-powered unit that streams
the acquired data through a bluetooth connection.
Inertial measurement unit (IMU) 
Fingertip electrodes to measure
electrodermal response (EDR)
Acquisition and control unit
Textile deformation sensors
Figure 1.
The sensing glove and its main components. See text for further
explanation.
On the other hand, the multi-parameter sensing glove (Fig-
ure 1) was speciﬁcally designed for the XIM space. It measures
both explicit and implicit signals (forearm orientation, ﬁngers
position and EDR) on a single hand.
In previous work, we demonstrated that textile electrodes
are comparable in terms of bio-electric properties to standard
Ag/AgCl electrodes [10]. For this reason, in our sensing glove
we integrated textile electrodes placed at the ﬁngertips to
measure EDR.
In addition, the use of a textile system presents a series
of advantages in terms of portability and usability for long-
term monitoring, and provides minimal constraints in terms of
natural movements and gestures.
Finger motion tracking is obtained through ﬁve textile
deformation sensors that have been speciﬁcally designed and
located on the metacarpo-phalangeal hand joints (Figure 1).
These sensors, previously used for respiration monitoring in
[11], are made of knitted piezoresistive fabric (KPF) material
(Smartex srl, Italy). Finger movements produce local deforma-
tions in the fabric thus modifying the electrical resistance of
the sensors. This resistance is highly correlated with the single
ﬁnger degree of ﬂexion. The sensor signal is characterized by a
slow baseline drift due to the intrinsic characteristics of textile
substrate, for this reason a custom-built algorithm for hand
gesture recognition was developed [12].
Both EDR and deformation signals are acquired and elab-
orated in real-time by using a dedicated wearable and wireless
electronic unit. Moreover, forearm orientation is measured by
an Inertial Measurement Unit (HMC6343, Honeywell, MN,
USA) embedded in the glove’s electronics and placed on the
dorsal area of the forearm, close to the wrist.
2) The sensing platform: The data coming from the wear-
able devices is sent to the XIM sensing platform which is
responsible for capturing and processing in real-time raw
sensor data [5]. This platform is implemented using the Social
Signal Interpretation (SSI) framework [13].
The data stream of each sensor is transmitted through a
332
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

dedicated channel and preprocessed (e.g., forearm orientation,
ﬁngers position and EDR from the sensing glove are assigned
to separate channels).
The sensing platform synchronizes the incoming streams
by establishing a stable connection with all the sensors and by
eventually starting to buffer the data streams. Each buffer is
compared upon regular time intervals according to an internal
timestamp and synchronized if necessary. After the synchro-
nization, each one of the signals is processed individually to
separate meaningful information from artifacts.
B. Empirical Validation
1) Selection of the stimuli: 12 visual stimuli were chosen
from the pictures of the IAPS collection [6], each of which was
representing a different rating value of arousal, thus covering
the entire scale of arousal from a minimum rating of 1.72 to
a maximum of 7.34, as shown in Table I.
2) Sample and Protocol: A total of 7 Subjects (4 females,
mean age 29.7, SD±3.9) participated in the empirical valida-
tion.
Prior to the exposure, the participants were helped to wear
the sensing shirt and the glove to measure ECG and EDR
respectively. A short phase of connection testing followed.
Sensing shirt
(ECG)
Sensing glove
(EDR)
Figure 2.
Schematic illustration showing the experimental setting in the
eXperience Induction Machine (XIM).
The participants were then instructed to enter the XIM and
place themselves at the designated starting point in the center
of the room.
A 5-minutes baseline recording phase followed where the
participants were asked to maintain a natural standing position
and relax as much as possible.
After the baseline recording, the ﬁrst affective stimulus was
displayed on the main screen of the XIM. The order of pre-
sentation of the stimuli was randomized for each experimental
session.
Each one of the 12 stimuli was displayed for at least 20
seconds, after which a “beep” sound followed to notify the user
about the possibility to switch to the following stimulus. To do
so, the user was instructed to close all the ﬁngers of the hand
wearing the glove, hence generating a “grabbing” event. This
event was sent to the sensing platform to provide an accurate
Baseline Recording (5min)
Stimulus 1
End
Start
12 Stimuli Presentation (~8min)
>20Sec
20Sec
Black Screen
Stimulus 12
>20Sec
20Sec
Black Screen
Black Screen
Figure 3.
Schematic timeline of a single experimental session.
time marker for each stimulus. A 20-seconds black screen was
presented in-between each stimulus (Figure 3).
During the entire experimental session, participants were
asked to maintain a standing posture and were free to move
when exposed to the visual stimuli (pictures from the IAPS
collection) displayed on the main XIM screen (Figure 2).
C. Acquired Signals
1) Electrocardiogram: The ECG signal was used to extract
the Heart Rate Variability (HRV) [14], which indicates the time
variation between two consecutive R-peaks. Previous research
has shown that HRV is directly related to sympatho-vagal
balance [2]. To extract HRV, the ECG was pre-ﬁltered using
a Moving Average Filter (MAF) to extract and subtract the
baseline.
The Heart Rate (HR) is HR =
60
tR−R , where tR−R is the
time interval between two successive R-peaks: consequently,
we treated the ECG signal by detecting the QRS complexes
through the automatic QRS detection algorithm proposed by
Pan-Tompkins [15] and by extracting R-peaks. The obtained
HR resulted in a time series sequence of non-uniform RR
intervals, hence it was re-sampled in accordance to the rec-
ommendations of Berger et al. [16].
2) Electrodermal Response: EDR is obtained as the ratio
between an imposed continuous voltage of 0.5 V applied to
two ﬁngers and ﬂowing current.
EDR is related to variations in the electrical conductance
of the skin, due to the changes in the sweat gland activity [17]
after a sympathetic stimulation. For this reason hereinafter we
refer to EDR as Skin Conductance (SC).
Since sweat gland activity is controlled by the Sympathetic
Nerve Activity (SNA) [3], [4], SC constitutes a good measure
to monitor changes in the Autonomic Nervous System (ANS).
This has been validated in previous studies showing that
electrodermal changes are associated to the arousal of the
stimuli [18], [19].
The SC signal is characterized by a tonic and a phasic
component: the Skin Conductance Level (SCL) and the Skin
Conductance Response (SCR) respectively.
On the one hand, SCL is the slowly varying baseline level
of skin conductance, related to an overall state of the body.
On the other hand, SCR arises within a predeﬁned response
window of 1−5 seconds after a given stimulus and is directly
related to it [20].
Consecutive SCRs can result in an overlap when the inter-
stimulus time interval is shorter than SCR recovery time. To
address this issue, in this study we adopted a deconvolution
model that allows the direct estimation of the SudoMotor
333
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.
SELECTION OF THE 12 STIMULI FROM THE INTERNATIONAL AFFECTIVE PICTURE SYSTEM (IAPS) DATABASE [6].
ID
IAPS Catalog ID
Description
Arousal mean(SD)
Subset α
Subset β
Subset γ
1
7175
Lamp
1.72(±1.26)
A1
A1
A1
2
7020
Fan
2.17(±1.71)
A1
A1
A1
3
5030
Flower
2.74(±2.13)
A1
A1
A1
4
7547
Bridge
3.18(±2.01)
A1
-
A1
5
7512
Chess
3.72(±2.07)
A1
-
A2
6
9280
Smoke
4.26(±2.44)
-
-
A2
7
9171
Fisherman
4.72(±2.17)
-
-
A2
8
9582
Dental Exam
5.29(±2.21)
A2
-
A2
9
9611
Plane Crash
5.75(±2.44)
A2
-
A3
10
9622
Jet
6.26(±1.98)
A2
A2
A3
11
9412
Dead Man
6.72(±2.07)
A2
A2
A3
12
3000
Mutilation
7.34(±2.27)
A2
A2
A3
Nerve Activity (SMNA) which is the controller of the eccrine
sweat glands activity [21]. The SMNA shows an inter-stimulus
time interval shorter than the SCR signal thus avoids the
overlapping problem. Speciﬁcally, the SCR is the result of a
convolution model between SMNA and the following biex-
ponential Impulse Response Function (IRF), which is called
Bateman function [22]:
IRF(t) = (e− t
τ1 − e− t
τ2 ) · u(t)
(1)
where u(t) is the step function. This function is characterized
by a rapid increase and a slower recovery. More speciﬁcally,
τ1 is a time constant that describes the rapid slope, taking
information on time course of the evacuation of sweat from
the compartment model, while τ2 is the related slow recovery
slope.
D. Physiological features
1) Heart Rate Variability: HRV is related to the time
intervals between heartbeats [14].
A number of features were extracted in both the time
and the frequency domains. In the time domain, we extracted
statistical parameters and morphological indices. We ﬁxed a
time window (NN) and extracted the following features: a)
simple MNN and SDNN, which correspond to the mean value
and to the standard deviation of the NN intervals, respectively,
b) the root mean square of successive differences of intervals
(RMSSD) and c) the number of successive differences of in-
tervals which differ by more than 50 ms (pNN50 % expressed
as a percentage of the total number of heartbeats analyzed).
In the HRV frequency domain analysis, three main spec-
tral components were distinguished in a spectrum calculated
from short-term recordings: Very Low Frequency (VLF), Low
Frequency (LF), and High Frequency (HF) components. Short
terms recordings are intended as the time duration of HRV
signal segments. In this work HRV segments were in agree-
ment with picture presentation time. Current HRV research
in the frequency domain analysis suggests that even though
the frequency band division represents a unique, non-invasive
tool to achieve an assessment of autonomic function, the use
of HF and LF components does not allow to precisely assess
the state of sympathetic activation. Therefore, along with the
estimation of the Power Spectral Density in the VLF, LF, and
HF band, we also calculated the LF/HF PSD Ratio which
provides information about the Sympatho-Vagal balance [23]
(Table II).
2) Skin Conductance: SC decomposition to its components
was performed using Ledalab software package in MATLAB
[24]. The signal was ﬁltered by means of a low pass zero-phase
forward and reverse digital ﬁlter [25] with a cutoff frequency
of 2 Hz.
The phasic features were calculated within a time window
(response window) of 5 seconds length after stimulus onset.
We extracted the number of SCRs within the response window
(nSCR), the latency of the ﬁrst SCR (Lat), the Amplitude-Sum
of SCRs (reconvolved from phasic driver-peaks) (AmpSum),
the average phasic driver activity (Mean.SCR) (time integral
over response window by size of response window), the
variance of the phasic driver signal (Var.SCR), the Phasic
driver area under curve (AUC.SCR) and the max phasic driver
amplitude (Max.SCR).
From the tonic driver signal we extracted the following
features: average level of (decomposed) tonic component
(Mean.Tonic), variance of the tonic driver signal (Var.Tonic)
and number of the non-speciﬁc response (i.e., the spontaneous
skin conductance response unrelated to a speciﬁc stimulus)
(NSR) (Table II).
TABLE II.
FEATURES EXTRACTED FROM HRV AND SC.
Feature set
Signals
MNN, SDNN, RMSSD, pNN50,
HRV
VLF, LF, HF, LF/HF
Lat, nSCR, Mean.SCR, Var.SCR, Max.SCR
SC
AmpSum, AUC.SCR, Mean.Tonic, Var.Tonic, NSR
E. Data Analysis
A number of ﬁxed windows were used to segment the sig-
nals (EDR, HRV) in accordance to the experimental protocol
(Section II-B2). On the one hand, to compute each feature of
the phasic component, the EDR signal was segmented using a
5 seconds window starting after the presentation of each black
screen that anticipates the IAPS image. On the other hand,
longer windows of 20 seconds length (i.e., the entire duration
of each one of the 12 stimuli) were used to compute the HRV
parameters.
The extracted features (Table II) were normalized in accor-
dance to the baseline recording. Subsequently, the dataset was
divided into 3 different subsets as follows:
•
α: A1 refers to arousal intervals 1-3, A2 refers to
arousal intervals 5-7. Each class comprises 5 stimuli.
334
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

•
β: A1 refers to arousal intervals 1-2, A2 refers to
arousal intervals 6-7. Each class comprises 3 stimuli.
•
γ: A1 refers to arousal intervals 1-3, A2 refers to
arousal intervals 3-5, A3 refers to arousal intervals
5-7. Each class comprises 4 stimuli.
As a result, the subsets α and β represent a 2-class problem,
while subset γ represents a 3-class problem (Table I).
A statistical inference analysis was conducted by means
of non-parametric tests due to the non-gaussianity of the
sample set to verify the null-hypothesis of having no statistical
difference between the classes for both the 2-class (datasets α
and β) and the 3-class (dataset γ) problems.
The α and the β datasets were submitted to a Mann-
Whitney test. Instead, the γ dataset was submitted to a Kruskal-
Wallis (KW) test, and a subsequent pairwise comparison
among A1, A2 and A3, was performed by means of Mann-
Whitney tests with a Bonferroni correction.
F. Pattern Recognition
The pattern recognition process aimed to investigate
whether the arousal sessions could be distinguished in both
the 2-class and the 3-class recognition problems.
Taking into account the entire dataset of features, the
dimension of the features space was reduced through the
application of the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) where
we consider the number of PCs that explain 90% of the total
variance.
In this work, the classiﬁcation stage was performed in order
to classify each sample of the dataset according to the set of
classes reported in Section II-E.
We tested the following classiﬁers: Linear Discriminant
Classiﬁer (LDC), Quadratic Discriminant Classiﬁer (QDC),
Mixture Of Gaussian (MOG), k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN),
Kohonen Self Organizing Map (KSOM), Multilayer Percep-
tron (MLP) and Nearest Mean Classiﬁer (NMC) [26], [27],
[28].
Among the aforementioned classiﬁers, the LCD [29]
showed the highest recognition accuracy and consistency in
arousal discrimination. For this reason, and for the sake of
brevity, here we limit the report and discussion of our results
to the LCD. The performance of the classiﬁcation process
was examined using the confusion matrix, which represents
the capacity of the algorithm to recognize each sample as
belonging to one of the predeﬁned classes. In details, a more
diagonal confusion matrix corresponds to a higher degree of
classiﬁcation.
Here, we used a training set of 80% of the whole fea-
tures dataset while the remaining 20% was used as testing
set. The validity of the classiﬁcation model was evaluated
using computational techniques and, in particular, the cross-
validation method. More speciﬁcally, we performed 40-fold
cross-validation steps in order to obtain unbiased results. The
ﬁnal results were expressed as the mean and the standard
deviation of the 40 computed confusion matrices.
TABLE III.
CONFUSION MATRIX OF THE LDC CLASSIFIER FOR THE
2-CLASS PROBLEM FOR α AND β DATASETS. THE RESULTS WERE
OBTAINED AFTER 40 CROSS-FOLD VALIDATIONS.
Dataset α
Dataset β
LDC
A1
A2
A1
A2
A1
87.27±6.19
7.72±15.12
95.36±6.77
0.00±0.00
A2
12.72±6.19
92.27±15.12
4.64±6.77
100.0±0.00
TABLE IV.
CONFUSION MATRIX OF THE LDC CLASSIFIER FOR THE
3-CLASS PROBLEM FOR γ DATASET. THE RESULTS WERE OBTAINED AFTER
40 CROSS-FOLD VALIDATIONS.
LDC
A1
A2
A3
A1
88.89±10.19
2.78±6.11
5.56±10.44
A2
7.72.56±7.45
85.56±12.01
21.11±13.74
A3
3.89±5.43
11.67±11.09
73.33±11.29
III.
RESULTS
An intra-subject analysis was performed for all the subjects
and all the extracted features.
No statistically signiﬁcant features were found in the α
dataset, while for the β dataset we found a signiﬁcant differ-
ence in the LF feature (p < .05) between the two classes A1
and A2. The Kruskal-Wallis (KW) test (Section II-E) indicated
a statistical difference among the three classes A1, A2 and A3
of the γ dataset. The pairwise comparison showed that both
the features RMSSD and HF were signiﬁcantly different in the
three classes (p < .01).
As a result of the pattern recognition phase (Section
II-F), the LDC classiﬁer accounted for a high accuracy in
the recognition of both the 2-class and the 3-class problems
(Tables III and IV respectively).
IV.
CONCLUSION
To address the question of how known emotional responses
that have been established under standard laboratory conditions
generalize to ecologically valid environments, we enhanced
the eXperience Induction Machine (XIM) with unobtrusive
wearable sensors: the sensing shirt and the sensing glove.
These devices allow to measure human behavioral patterns
(e.g., body posture, ﬁnger movements, etc.) as well as a
number of psychophysiological signals (ECG, BR, EDR).
To validate our augmented infrastructure, we conducted
an experiment in the XIM where participants were exposed
to a series of visual stimuli taken from the IAPS collection,
while wearing the sensing shirt and glove without any physical
constraint (i.e., they were able to move freely in the space and
to perform gestures).
Our results show that a number of HRV-extracted features
(LF, RMSSD, HF) were coherent with the arousal ratings
of the stimuli. Although the statistical signiﬁcance obtained
was limited to a small set of features, accuracy was high. A
multivariate analysis with a LDC considering the entire dataset
accounted for an accuracy between 73.3% and 88.9% in the
3-class problem, and exceeding 87% in the 2-class problem.
An implication of our ﬁndings is the possibility to recognize
users’ level of arousal in the XIM with a high accuracy.
The addition of tailored-made solutions (e.g., the sensing
glove) to the XIM infrastructure constitutes a novel approach
335
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

when compared to similar devices to measure psychophysio-
logical states, such as the Q Curve by Affectiva Inc. [30]. Our
system as a whole offers a higher number of parameters that
can be measured, as well as a higher level of integration and
future extensibility.
Taken together, our results show that XIM constitutes
an ideal tool to study human behavior in ecologically valid
conditions by acquiring both explicit and implicit measures.
Future improvements will consist in empirical validations
of our system in more complex life-like conditions (e.g., fast
walking, elaborate gestures and body postures, etc.).
V.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Community’s Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme (FP7-ICT-2009-5) under grant agreement n. 258749
[CEEDS]. The Generalitat de Catalunya (CUR, DIUE) and the
European Social Fund are supporting this research.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. J. Bohil, B. Alicea, and F. a. Biocca, “Virtual reality in neuroscience
research and therapy,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 12, no.
December, Nov. 2011.
[2]
P. Stein, M. Bosner, R. Kleiger, and B. Conger, “Heart rate variability:
a measure of cardiac autonomic tone,” American Heart Journal, vol.
127, no. 5, 1994, pp. 1376–1381.
[3]
D. Fowles, M. Christie, R. Edelberg, W. Grings, D. Lykken, and P. Ven-
ables, “Publication recommendations for electrodermal measurements,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 18, no. 3, 1981, pp. 232–239.
[4]
W. Boucsein, Electrodermal activity.
Springer Verlag, 2011.
[5]
J. Wagner, F. Lingenfelser, E. Andr´e, D. Mazzei, A. Tognetti, A. Lanat`a,
D. De Rossi, A. Betella, R. Zucca, P. Omedas, and P. F. M. J. Verschure,
“A sensing architecture for empathetic data systems,” in Proceedings of
the 4th Augmented Human International Conference, ser. AH ’13. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 96–99.
[6]
P. J. Lang, M. M. Bradley, and B. N. Cuthbert, “International affective
picture system (IAPS): Affective ratings of pictures and instruction
manual,” The Center for Research in Psychophysiology, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL, Tech. Rep. A-8, 2008.
[7]
U. Bernardet, A. V¨aljam¨ae, M. Inderbitzin, S. Wierenga, A. Mura,
and P. F. M. J. Verschure, “Quantifying human subjective experience
and social interaction using the eXperience Induction Machine.” Brain
research bulletin, vol. 85, Nov. 2010, pp. 305– 312.
[8]
R. Paradiso, G. Loriga, and N. Taccini, “A wearable health care
system based on knitted integrated sensors,” Information Technology
in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 9, no. 3, 2005, pp. 337–
344.
[9]
E. Scilingo, A. Gemignani, R. Paradiso, N. Taccini, B. Ghelarducci, and
D. De Rossi, “Performance evaluation of sensing fabrics for monitoring
physiological and biomechanical variables,” Information Technology in
Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 9, no. 3, 2005, pp. 345–352.
[10]
A. Lanat`a, G. Valenza, and E. Scilingo, “A novel EDA glove based
on textile-integrated electrodes for affective computing,” Medical &
Biological Engineering & Computing, vol. 50, no. 11, 2012, pp. 1163–
1172.
[11]
R. Paradiso and L. Caldani, “Electronic textile platforms for monitoring
in a natural environment,” Research Journal of Textile and Apparel,
vol. 14, no. 4, 2010.
[12]
N. Carbonaro, A. Greco, G. Anania, G. Dalle Mura, A. Tognetti,
E. P. Scilingo, D. De Rossi, and A. Lanat`a, “Unobtrusive Physiological
and Gesture Wearable Acquisition System: A Preliminary Study on
Behavioral and Emotional Correlations,” in GLOBAL HEALTH 2012,
The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges, 2012,
pp. 88–92.
[13]
J. Wagner, F. Lingenfelser, T. Baur, I. Damian, F. Kistler, and E. Andr´e,
“The Social Signal Interpretation (SSI) Framework: Multimodal Signal
Processing and Recognition in Real-time,” in Proceedings of the
21st ACM International Conference on Multimedia, ser. MM ’13.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 831–834. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2502081.2502223
[14]
U. Rajendra Acharya, K. Paul Joseph, N. Kannathal, C. Lim, and J. Suri,
“Heart rate variability: a review,” Medical and Biological Engineering
and Computing, vol. 44, no. 12, 2006, pp. 1031–1051.
[15]
J. Pan and W. Tompkins, “A real-time QRS detection algorithm,” IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 1985, pp. 230–236.
[16]
R. Berger, S. Akselrod, D. Gordon, and R. Cohen, “An efﬁcient
algorithm for spectral analysis of heart rate variability,” Biomedical
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, no. 9, 2007, pp. 900–904.
[17]
W. Winton, L. Putnam, and R. Krauss, “Facial and autonomic manifesta-
tions of the dimensional structure of emotion,” Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, vol. 20, no. 3, 1984, pp. 195–216.
[18]
P. Lang, M. Greenwald, M. Bradley, and A. Hamm, “Looking at
pictures: Affective, facial, visceral, and behavioral reactions,” Psy-
chophysiology, vol. 30, no. 3, 1993, pp. 261–273.
[19]
P. Lang, “The emotion probe,” American Psychologist, vol. 50, no. 5,
1995, pp. 372–385.
[20]
D. Levinson and R. Edelberg, “Scoring criteria for response latency and
habituation in electrodermal research: a critique,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 22, no. 4, 1985, pp. 417–426.
[21]
M. Benedek and C. Kaernbach, “A continuous measure of phasic
electrodermal activity,” Journal of neuroscience methods, vol. 190,
no. 1, 2010, pp. 80–91.
[22]
E. Garrett, “The bateman function revisited: a critical reevaluation
of the quantitative expressions to characterize concentrations in the
one compartment body model as a function of time with ﬁrst-order
invasion and ﬁrst-order elimination,” Journal of Pharmacokinetics and
Pharmacodynamics, vol. 22, no. 2, 1994, pp. 103–128.
[23]
A. Camm, M. Malik, J. Bigger, G. Breithardt, S. Cerutti, R. Cohen,
P. Coumel, E. Fallen, H. Kennedy, R. Kleiger et al., “Heart rate
variability: standards of measurement, physiological interpretation, and
clinical use,” Circulation, vol. 93, no. 5, 1996, pp. 1043–1065.
[24]
M. Benedek and C. Kaernbach, “Decomposition of skin conduc-
tance data by means of nonnegative deconvolution,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 47, no. 4, 2010, pp. 647–658.
[25]
S. Mitra, “Digital signal processing. a computer-based approach. 2001.”
[26]
F. Heijden, R. Duin, D. Ridder, and D. Tax, Classiﬁcation, Parameter
Estimation and State Estimation.
John Wiley, 2004.
[27]
R. Duda, P. Hart, and D. Stork, Pattern classiﬁcation.
2nd edition,
John Wiley and Sons, 2001.
[28]
J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, “Additive logistic regression:
A statistical view of boosting,” The Annals of Statistics, vol. 38, no. 2,
2000, p. 337 374.
[29]
W. Hrdle and L. Simar, Applied multivariate statistical analysis.
Springer, 2007.
[30]
Affectiva Inc., “Liberate yourself from the lab : Q Sensor measures
EDA in the wild (White Paper),” 2012.
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

