Customized Gamiﬁcation Design in Augmented Reality Training
for Manual Assembly Task
Diep Nguyen
UniTyLab
Heilbronn University
Max-Planck-Str. 39
74081 Heilbronn, Germany
Email: diep.nguyen@hs-heilbronn.de
Gerrit Meixner
UniTyLab
Heilbronn University
Max-Planck-Str. 39
74081 Heilbronn, Germany
Email: gerrit.meixner@hs-heilbronn.de
Keywords–Gamiﬁcation; Augmented Reality; Gamiﬁed Aug-
mented Reality; Gamiﬁed Training; Human-Computer Interaction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Augmented Reality (AR) is the technology that can provide
signiﬁcant beneﬁts for manual assembly and maintenance
training by providing real hands-on experience on the task. AR
allows the user to experience the physical world in combination
with virtual content in real-time [1]. Whether it is examining
a defect machine part or replacing a component, manual
assembly and maintenance work that require the manipulation
of objects have always been the key interest in the use of AR
application. There are numerous examples both in industrial
and academic settings that have provided sufﬁcient evidence
for this claim. The ﬁrst and foremost is the pioneer industrial
AR application from Boeing in 1992. The application aims
were to assist and increase worker efﬁciency in the assembling
aircraft wire bundles [2]. Another example is the ARVIKA
project funded by the German Ministry of Education and
Research. The project puts AR technologies in the center for
research and developing several head-worn AR-based solutions
in various ﬁelds like design, production, and maintenance
operations [3].
On the other side, user engagement in training has always
been a concern of organizations. There are many techniques in
training design and user experience design to create a captivat-
ing environment for the trainees. One of those is gamiﬁcation.
Gamiﬁcation is deﬁned as ”the use of game design elements
in non-game contexts” [4]. Although this is the most common
and widely accepted deﬁnition amongst academia, the debate
over a consensus is still open. In the context of this work, we
limit ourselves to the above term from Sebastian Deterding.
To make it more clear, gamiﬁcation is different from another
similar context such as ”serious games” or ”exergames”. While
the ﬁrst describes an end product as a game with an ultimate
purpose which is higher than pure entertainment; the latter
stands for exercise-game, which is self-explaining, in which
one does exercise while plays the game.
The combination of these two concepts, AR and gami-
ﬁcation, is believed to optimizing the user’s efﬁciency and
experience. While has been some research into this direction,
the work is still nascent and there is much left to be explored.
Most systems provide a single design approach to the user with
no customization, which is not inclusive or optimal for the user.
The users may have to go through the same procedural training,
but their experience does not have to be the same. Therefore,
our main contribution in this paper is the gamiﬁcation design
for different user types. However, in this paper, we do not
propose a new general design for customized gamiﬁcation in
AR training systems since it would diminish the users and
their individual needs. We rather want to experiment with a
new approach that considers various user groups. Although
our system demonstrates on a computer assembly use case,
it could be used as an example for all other manual tasks
which share similar characteristics: being procedural, having
pre-designed content, requiring the manipulation of physical
objects and tools.
The paper is organized as following: motivation is pre-
sented in Section II. Section III provides an overview of
existing works. Section IV and V respectively describe the ap-
plication design and gamiﬁcation design. Section VI concludes
the paper with a brief conclusion and future work.
II.
MOTIVATION
Apart from fancy promising effectiveness of changing
people’s behaviors by good motivation and engagement, the
use of gamiﬁcation in industrial production is far from ma-
tured or beyond the lab-based trial. Despite all its beneﬁts,
Abstract—User engagement in training has always been a concern
of organizations, especially in manual assembly and maintenance
works. There are many techniques in training design and user
experience design to create a captivating environment for the
trainees. One of those is to use game mechanisms to stimulate
playful experience. On the other hand, Augmented Reality is
the technology that can provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts for manual
assembly and maintenance training by providing real hands-
on experience, the ability to manipulate 3D objects which are
superimposed into the real world in a real-time manner. The
combination of these two concepts is believed to optimizing the
user’s efﬁciency and experience. While there has been some
research into this direction, the work is still nascent and the
consideration for individual differences has not yet emerged to
the picture. In this paper, we propose a gamiﬁed design for
manual assembly training that takes different types of the user
into account. However, we do not propose a new general design
but rather want to experiment with a new approach that considers
various user groups.
443
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

gamiﬁcation is predicted to fail to live up to its expectations
[5]. Gamiﬁcation is all about design for people’s motivation
and engagement. Thus, gamiﬁcation can be and should be
personalized, tailored based on one’s preferences for the best
results.
However, all the existing works dismiss the role of the in-
dividual in designing gamiﬁed training. The common practice
is a stereotype. It assumes that all users are treated as one
group instead of individuals with different characteristics and
approaches. For example, when the rewarding mechanism is
deliberately used for the wrong users it could lead to ”over-
justiﬁcation”. ”Over-justiﬁcation” is a term in psychology to
describe the situation where a high intrinsic motivated person
gets demotivated by extrinsic recognition [6]. Once the user
gets used to received rewards, the absence of it potentially
may promote negative effects.
Figure 1. Bartle taxonomy of player types [7].
Game academic Richard Bartle proposed a classiﬁcation of
player types named after himself - the Bartle taxonomy [7].
These categories are the Achiever, the Explorer, the Socializer,
and the Killer. Although it’s tempted to ﬁx a player into
a speciﬁc category, it’s more than one type that ignites the
player’s motivation. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the Achiever
and the Killer types are somewhat similar in their competitive
nature while the remained two focus on interacting with the
surrounding world and people. It is important to understand
the players to meet their needs, instead of stereotypes.
III.
RELATED WORKS
AR for manual assembly tasks and maintenance training
is ﬁnding its way into daily practices. It is because of the
tremendous beneﬁt of hands-on or on-the-job training expe-
rience. AR enables the possibility of manipulating assembly
components, which are superimposed into the real world, in
a real-time manner altogether with additional 3D instructional
information. In designing AR training applications, it is not
uncommon to borrow concepts or design guidelines from other
well-established disciplines such as education and training
design. That is to say, gamiﬁcation is one of those.
The use of game-like design ﬁrst was intended to engage
and motivate students to learn. Taking an example from the
historic role playing AR game ”Re-living the Revolution” from
Schrier [8]. A player is pre-assigned to a speciﬁc historic role
Another work that combines AR and industrial gamiﬁca-
tion is a manual assembly training, procedural guidance for
changing a robot arm batteries, from Nguyen [12]. The design
of gamiﬁcation is represented by a points system, progress
bar, and signposting element. Each action that the user has to
perform worth’s a point while a training step, which consists
of one or many actions, is visualized through the progress bar.
While the target users of the system are novices, signposting
provides an in-situ hint over which components should be
targeted. In this experiment, the participants were separated
into two groups who underwent an identical training process
except one with the gamiﬁcation design while the other did
not. The participants performed the training task with a Head
Worn Display (HWD), the Microsoft HoloLens, in a controlled
environment to ensure everybody was exposed to (nearly) the
same environmental conditions. The results showed a more
homogeneous effect in user engagement through the task when
the game design is present.
Brauer et al. recently presented an application that com-
bined Gamiﬁcation and AR to support the warehouse process
with order picking [13]. Even though it is not an assembly
task, this work is a very rare investigation about isolated
individual game design elements’ effectiveness. For order
picking, the user must navigate through the warehouse in
the speciﬁcally designed path and follows a ﬁxed sequence
of actions. Therefore, to some extent, it shares the nature
of procedural work such as assembly. The design elements
which are under investigation are leader-board and badge.
The participants use also the Microsoft HoloLens to pick
up 10 orders in the warehouse. After each picking, the user
will receive performance feedback either displaying on a
leader-board, receiving a badge, or nothing (no gamiﬁcation
Despite its fame, gamiﬁcation is still a new trend in the
context of industrial training. The unique characteristic of this
ﬁeld is that the employee’s concentration on the task at hand
is non-negotiable. Neglecting this requirement may result in
injuries, damages to the equipment, and products themselves.
One pioneer work on industrial gamiﬁcation in the particular
domain of assembly tasks is the Industrial Playground from
Oliver Korn [9]. Korn and his research team transformed a
traditional assistive system for the impaired worker at a manual
assembly station into a gameful design one. And instead of a
stationary monitor, projectors were used to project the design
interfaced into users’ working surface, which is directly in the
users’ ﬁeld of view. The assembly process was animated as a
Tetris game. Each brick, which was color-coded from green to
red to indicate one’s performance, represented for a work step.
Basing on this base project, further studies were conducted and
indicated promising results [10] [11].  Not  only the workers
showed openness and acceptance for the new design, but their
performance was also improved.
and spot, after that, a GPS-enabled handheld device will guide
the participants to the real site through a real site map with
augmented information about the historic event related to their
roles. A completed action results in items about the role and
spot. Her results showed that students had developed better
skills in problem-solving, collaboration via working together
with other students to accomplish the given quest. Reports
have been continuously stated the positive and promising
results that businesses, and organizations learn from applying
gamiﬁcation.
444
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

support). Results revealed that the gamiﬁcation is signiﬁcantly
improved user performance and motivation in opposition to
non-gamiﬁcation design.
IV.
APPLICATION DESIGN
The proposed training system is a mobile AR application
that runs on Android platform. The test application is run on
Samsung Galaxy S9 [14], which supports ARCore [15] and
allows using the phone’s camera for AR applications .
The application is used for training users on how to perform
an entire assembly and disassembly of a computer which
includes a motherboard, power supply, the Central Processing
Unit (CPU), the Random-access Memory (RAM), Hard Disk
Drive, Video Card, Optical Drives. The application contains
three main modules: Assembly, Disassembly for procedural
training, and Component Learning.
A. Procedural Training
The assembly and disassembly training is procedural train-
ing in nature. The assembly/disassembly module is a complete
step-by-step instruction for AR training. The application could
later be used in various areas, both private and business sectors,
for example, to support IT specialists in their training and to
teach them how to completely assemble and disassemble a
computer. There are 47 assembly steps and 32 disassembly
steps. There are three main actions throughout the process:
removing a component, putting a component in the right
position, pushing /pressing a component. At the beginning of
the training, short guidance is displayed to show the user the
meaning of the symbol:
•
The blue hand with index ﬁnger pointing out: push-
ing/pressing on the component.
•
The red hand: showcase the direction that the corre-
sponding action should be performed.
•
A screw driver/screw: indicating the needed tools.
Figure 2. Training step display with multiple instruction components.
A step instruction as in Figure 2 includes ﬁve main compo-
nents: text description of what needs to be done, a CAD model
of the assembly components, a 3D model of the required tool,
a hologram of the target destination, and the in-situ guidance
of the corresponding action.
To navigate directly to a speciﬁc step in the assembly or
disassembly, one can use the ”Steps Selection” function. This
function allows the user to directly start a speciﬁc assembly
step without having to click through all previous steps. This
is useful, for example, when one wants to practice a speciﬁc
assembly/disassembly step directly.
To simplify the navigation between the screens and be-
tween the training steps, voice control is integrated into the
system. So there are two possibilities to navigate within
the application. On the one hand via the navigation buttons
contained in the individual screens, and the other via various
speciﬁc voice commands, such as ”Exit”. This voice command
would take you back to the main menu.
B. Component Learning
The ”Learning” function of this system is particularly
interesting for this area. This function offers the user the
possibility to get to know the individual hardware components
of the computer. The learning module is built using the object
recognition function. Whenever a component is placed into the
ﬁeld of view of the mobile camera, a detailed description of
the component is displayed. It describes the elements in the
detail of what it is and what are the functionalities. A 3D
model database of all the computer components was built in
advance for extracting the learning content.
V.
PROPOSED GAMIFICATION DESIGN
A. Points System
The points system works in such a way that a certain
number of points (50, 100, or 200) are awarded per assembly
step. The number of points depends on how quickly an
assembly step has been carried out. The faster it is carried
out, the higher the score. A certain amount of time is given
for each assembly step, which is the pre-recorded average time
of 5 novice users who are the target users of the system.
This recorded time corresponds to the best time (200 points).
Whenever the user ﬁnishes a step, the corresponding score
will be added up to the trophy which reﬂects the overall
performance. For example, if the user performs slower than
the best time but faster than twice the best time, 100 points are
awarded for the step, anything slower than twice the best time
will score 50 points. After each step, the score is animated
to the big cup and added to the previous score. The lower
progress bar is color-coded to indicate the user performance at
each step and the time left to reach the corresponding score.
In the upper part of the screen, there is a timer, which shows
the currently required time per assembly step (restarted after
each step). The second is a trophy, which represents the total
number of points and which changes to a silver or gold trophy
the higher it is.
B. Badges
Besides, it is possible to preserve unique achievements.
These are awards when a certain goal has been achieved. Such
a goal can be for example the achievement of a Gold Cup or
the completion of a certain number of assembly steps. Once
a goal has been reached, the corresponding achievement as in
Figure 3 is displayed for two seconds.
C. Leader Board
As soon as the whole assembly or disassembly process is
ﬁnished and thus the total number of points, as well as the
ﬁnal cup, is deﬁned, they are placed on the high-score screen.
445
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 3. User achieves different badges when a certain goal has been
achieved.
D. Competitive mode vs Non-competitive mode
As discussed in section
II and
III, we bring the player
types into consideration for providing customized user expe-
riences. A user can select either the ”Competitive Mode” or
the ”Normal Mode” for his training session depending on his
characteristics. By allowing the freedom of choice, the hypoth-
esis is that the user will experience the most suitable gamiﬁed
design for his dominant characteristic. The application offers
a choice between two modes each time the assembly and
disassembly instructions are started.
The ”Competitive Mode” (Figure 4) is designed for users
who are highly competitive, predominantly Achiever and
Killer. In this mode, the user will experience the points system,
badges, and also leader board. Regarding the competitive
nature of a user, he can set a user name at the beginning of the
training in order to compete with others on the leader-board.
The training then is designed with time pressure. Each step is
pre-set with a time limitation to get either a gold, silver, or
bronze trophy as described in the points system section. This
will provide a sense of competition with others which suits the
player type.
Figure 4. Competitive Mode
Figure 5. Non-competitive Mode .
In ”Normal Mode” (Figure 5), there are no time limits and
therefore no points or leader board. This mode is intended
for users who are not looking for competition. The badges are
available in this mode also. This allows us to simulate the sense
of achievement without pressing users into the competitive
mode.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we addressed the problem of considering
individual differences in gamiﬁcation design for AR manual
assembly training. We introduce an approach to gamifying the
training process with the integration of player types concept.
It provides the ability to select a play mode that allows the
training to be modiﬁed, visualized to ﬁt one’s predominant
nature. The ultimate goal is to embolden motivation and user
engagement.
The proposed design approach will be tested in the next
step. We will evaluate its effectiveness as well as its impact on
the user’s performance. It is interesting to ﬁgure out if there is
a difference in user experience when the users are left aware
and unaware of the choices.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. T. Azuma, “A survey of augmented reality,” Presence: Teleoperators
and Virtual Environments, vol. 6, no. 4, 1997, pp. 355–385.
[2]
P. Thomas and W. David, “Augmented reality: An application of heads-
up display technology to manual manufacturing processes,” in Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, 1992, pp. 659–669.
[3]
W. Friedrich and W. Friedrich, “ARVIKA: Augmented Reality for De-
velopment, Production and Service,” The 1st International Symposium
on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2002, pp. 3–4.
[4]
S. Deterding, “Gamiﬁcation: Designing for motivation,” Interactions,
vol. 19, no. 4, Jul. 2012, p. 14–17.
[5]
B. Burke, “The Gamiﬁcation of Business,” Gartner Inc., Tech. Rep.,
2013.
[6]
F. Groh, “Gamiﬁcation: State of the art deﬁnition and utilization,”
in Proceedings of the 4th seminar on Research Trends in Media
Informatics, 2012, pp. 39–46.
[7]
R. Bartle, “Hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades: Players who suit muds,”
Journal of MUD Research, 06 1996.
[8]
K. Schrier, “Revolutionizing history education : using augmented reality
games to teach histories.” Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA., 2009.
[9]
O. Korn, “Industrial playgrounds: How gamiﬁcation helps to enrich
work for elderly or impaired persons in production,” in EICS’12 -
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM SIGCHI Symposium on Engineering
Interactive Computing Systems, 2012, pp. 313–316.
[10]
O. Korn, M. Funk, S. Abele, T. H¨orz, and A. Schmidt, “Context-
aware assistive systems at the workplace,” in Proceedings of the
7th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to
Assistive Environments - PETRA ’14.
New York, New York, USA:
ACM Press, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[11]
O. Korn, M. Funk, and A. Schmidt, “Design approaches for the gam-
iﬁcation of production environments: a study focusing on acceptance,”
in the 8th ACM International Conference, 07 2015, pp. 1–7.
[12]
D. Nguyen and G. Meixner, “Gamiﬁed Augmented Reality Training for
An Assembly Task: A Study About User Engagement,” in Proceedings
of the 2019 Federated Conference on Computer Science and Informa-
tion Systems, 2019, pp. 901–904.
[13]
P. Brauer and A. Mazarakis, “AR in order-picking – experimen-
tal evidence with Microsoft HoloLens,” Mensch und Computer, no.
September, 2018.
[14]
G. Gottsegen, “Your galaxy s9 just unlocked a new kind of app:
Arcore,” May 2018, URL: https://www.cnet.com/news/samsung-galaxy-
s9-google-arcore-support/ [accessed: 2020-10-19].
[15]
“Build new augmented reality experiences that seamlessly blend the
digital and physical worlds,” URL: https://developers.google.com/ar
[accessed: 2020-10-19].
446
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

