 
The Effect of Touch-key Size and Shape on the Usability of Flight Deck MCDU 
 
Lijing Wang, Qiyan Cao, Jiaming Chang 
School of Aeronautic Science and Engineering 
Beihang University 
Beijing, China 
wanglijing505@126.com, caoqiyan@foxmail.com, 
michael1044518077@gmail.com 
 
 
Chaoyi Zhao 
Human Factors Laboratory 
China National Institute of Standardization 
Beijing, China 
zhaochy@cnis.gov.cn 
 
 
Abstract—This paper focuses on the effect of touch-key size 
and shape on the usability of the multifunction control display 
unit (MCDU) of the flight deck. A total of thirty subjects 
participated in the trials on the touchscreen-MCDU to perform 
the task of preflight preparation. The sizes of the touch-key 
were 7mm, 10mm, 13mm, 16mm, 19mm and 22mm; the touch-
keys were divided into two shapes: rectangle and square ones. 
The completion time of the task, the error rate and 
participants’ subjective ratings were collected as the indicators 
of the usability, and Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was done 
to test the data. Results showed that both touch-key size and 
shape affected the usability. The usability of the touchscreen-
MCDU increased as the touch-key size increased up to a 
certain size (19 mm in this study), at which they reached 
asymptotes. The square touch-keys provided a better usability 
than the rectangle ones when the width was the same. However, 
when the width reached 19mm, the usability stayed the same 
for both shapes. 
Keywords-touch screen; flight deck; MCDU; touch-key size; 
interface. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Touch screen has been widely used in mobile phones, 
tablets, laptops, etc., all due to its intuition, convenience and 
adjustability. People are used to using touch screen instead of 
traditional keyboard as the input method in their daily life. 
Despite its spreading use in the daily life, touch screen can 
also be introduced into other fields. 
As the function of the flight deck grows with the need of 
airlines, the complexity of the operating environment and 
avionics systems also advances at a rapid pace. The 
complexity of the flight deck brings more workload for the 
pilots and raises the risk of pilots’ operations. The idea of 
introducing touch screen into the flight deck might simplify 
the flight deck interface and help pilots perform better [1]. 
Rockwell Collins has unveiled its touch-control single 
primary flight display [2]. Garmin G3000 also implemented 
the touch screen technology on the flight deck [3]. The USA 
Joint Strike Fighter F-35 used two touch screen displays to 
replace the traditional displays on the flight deck [4]. At the 
2011 Pairs Air Show, Thales first exhibited its next 
generation touch-screen cockpit concept [1]. The implement 
of touch screen into the flight deck might be a trend for the 
next generation flight deck. MCDU is one of the most 
important input devices on the flight deck. The traditional 
keyboard of MCDU has always been made up of buttons and 
switches ever since its first implement into the flight deck. 
However, touch screen has earned its way into the design of 
MCDU. Thales [1] and Barco [5] both brought the 
inspiration of touch screen into their new concept of the 
MCDU. Though the concept of bringing touch-screen 
MCDU into the flight deck has come up, few studies focused 
on the human factors issue. This paper will focus on the 
human factors study of the touch-screen MCDU on the flight 
deck. 
With the widely use of touch screen, quite a number of 
researchers studied touch screen interfaces. The studies about 
touch screen included: target sizes [6][7], gestures [8][9], 
extra muscle fatigue [10][11], touch screen for older or 
disabled users [12], etc. Touch screen target size is one of the 
most important element of the interface. Among the studies, 
touch screen target size has always been popular, but the 
appropriate sizes for different touch screen devices varied. 
Colle & Hiszem [13] found that the 20 mm was an 
appropriate key size for touch screen numeric keypad. Kim 
[14] suggested in his study that the appropriated touch-key 
size of the In-Vehicle Information System should be 17.5mm. 
Parhi [6] recommend that the target size should be at least 
9.2 mm for single-target tasks and 9.6 mm for multi-target 
tasks for one-handed thumb use of mobile handheld devices 
equipped with a touch-sensitive screen. Schedlbauer [15] did 
further study based on the experiment of Colle & Hiszem 
[13], and ended with the conclusion of 12mm to be the 
appropriate size. Though, studies about touch screen have 
been researched for almost two decades, nevertheless, there 
were few studies about the target size of the MCDU on the 
flight deck. 
This paper will describe an experiment about the target 
size of the MCDU on the flight deck, investigate the 
difference of the usability for different sizes and propose an 
appropriate target size for the touch screen MCDU on the 
flight deck. In Section 2, the method of how to perform the 
experiment will be discussed. Section 3 shows the usability 
results of the experiment from three perspectives: time, error 
rate and subjective ratings. The issue to be considered in the 
experiment and the conclusion of the experiment is described 
in Section 4 and 5, respectively. 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
II. 
METHOD 
A. Subjects 
A total of thirty subjects participated in the human factors 
experiment. They were selected from the Flying College of 
Beihang University, male, who had learnt flying skills for at 
least one and a half years and understood how to use the real 
MCDU on the flight deck. All of them were willingly to 
participate in this experiment. Their ages ranged from 18 to 
24 years old (mean = 21.3, SD =2.76). They had normal 
vision and no motor impairments. 
B. Apparatus 
According to the procedure of Crane [16] proposed in her 
study, a PC experiment was carried out before the final 
experiment on the flight deck. The experiment of this paper 
was conducted on a laptop and the further experiment would 
be planted in a flight deck simulation. 
The experiment was conducted with a Lenovo Flex 2 
laptop, which was equipped with the Windows 8 operation 
system and a touch screen. The size of the touch screen was 
145×310mm, and the resolution was 1366×768 pixels.  
The simulated MCDU software was projected onto the 
Lenovo laptop. The simulated MCDU software was similar 
to the real A320 MCDU and can perform the “initial A” 
function of the preflight preparations (see Figure 1). The soft 
keys to be pressed on the MCDU contained two different 
types: 1) the alphabet and digit keys of square sizes and 2) 
the “R*” and “L*” keys of rectangle sizes. The width of the 
keys was the same. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The simulated touch screen MCDU software 
C. Experiment Design 
The independent variables of this experiment are the 
touch-key size and shape of the MCDU. Two kinds of touch-
keys  with the same width were used in the interface: square 
ones and rectangle ones. The ratio of width/height of the 
rectangle keys designed here was 1.5. The width started at 
7mm, and was incremented by 3mm. A preliminary research 
was conducted to determine the largest touch-key size. As 
said in the introduction, the appropriate target size suggested 
by other researchers ranged from 10mm to 20mm 
[6][7][13][14][15]. Taking the previous studies and their 
conclusions into account, the largest size of the simulated 
MCDU was determined to be 22mm. The final set of the 
touch-key size included: 7mm, 10mm, 13mm, 16mm, 19mm 
and 22mm. Figure 2 is part of the interface. It showed the six 
set of square touch-key sizes for the touch screen MCDU. 
Figure 3 showed the comparison of the square and rectangle 
touch-keys on the same interface. 
D. Experiment Tasks 
The task of preflight preparation was chosen to be the 
experiment task, which consisted of eight sub-tasks. First, 
subjects pressed the key of “INI” to start the task. As soon as 
the key of “INI” was pressed, the software started to record 
the time. Second, enter the ICAO code of the airport of 
departure and landing (ZYTL/ZBTJ), press “R1” and then 
“L6” to return.  Third, the ICAO code of the alternate airport 
(ZBSH) should be entered, and press “L2” to confirm the 
entry. Fourth, flight number “CSN6125” should be entered 
and press “L3” to confirm that. Fifth, cost index “35” would 
be entered, and “L5” would confirm the entry. Then, enter 
cruise altitude “FL310” and press “L6” to confirm it. After 
this, subjects pressed “R3” to confirm the status. In the end, 
the key of “F-PLN” was pressed to finish the trial, 
meanwhile, the time record stopped. In addition, the key 
turned blue whenever the key was pressed. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Six set of square touch-key sizes on the touch screen MCDU 
 
Figure 3.  Comparision of the square and rectangle touch-key sizes on 
same interface 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
Figure 4.  The positon of subjects performing the experiment 
 
Figure 5.  Subject performing the task on the touch screen MCDU 
When performing the tasks, the laptop was put on the 
right side of the subjects to imitate the positon of the real 
MCDU on the flight deck (see Figure 4). Figure 5 showed 
the situation of one subject performing the task on the touch 
screen MCDU. 
E. Experiment Procedures 
The experiment consisted of four steps. First, the 
demographic information, such as age, eyesight and flying 
skills experience, was collected. Second, experimenters 
explained the purpose and procedures of this experiment to 
each subject. Written instructions of the experimental 
objectives and procedures were also given to help them 
understand. Third, after the subjects fully understood the 
experiment, they practiced on the touch-screen MCDU to 
become familiar with the interface and memorize the 
operation tasks. Fourth, in the main experiment, the subjects 
were asked to operate the given tasks. The subjects were told 
to finish the task as quickly and accurately as possible. There 
was no rule on which finger they used, however only one 
hand can be used. Subjects completed the operation task, 
which was already described in Section D. Experiment tasks. 
For each of the 6 different sizes, the same operation would 
be performed. To avoid the influence of fatigue and 
familiarity with the operation tasks, the order of the sizes 
randomly showed up. After each of the six tasks, the subjects 
were asked to fill a usability questionnaire to evaluate the 
usability of the interface. A Likert scale questionnaire was 
used, ranging from 1-9, where 1 meant the interface was too 
hard to operate and 9 meant the interface was perfect. In the 
end, the subjects were asked to give comments on sizes of 
the touch-key. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The results of this experiment included two kinds of data, 
the objective one and the subjective one. The objective data 
collected in this study included TIME and ERROR. TIME 
means the time it took to finish the task, i.e., the time from 
the point of pressing the “INI” key to the point of pressing 
the “F-PLN” key. ERROR means the number of errors 
occurred during the task. The subjective data was the ease of 
use and satisfactory of the subjects for each size. 
The interface we designed had keys of two different 
shapes: rectangle and square. The error rate for both two 
shapes was also calculated. 
A. Time 
For completion time, one trial with extremely abnormal 
data was eliminated from the data set. The trail data was 
eliminated because it showed a completely different trend 
with the other data. The time for operating the task on the 
interface with the largest size was almost two times longer 
than the smallest size. The interview after experiment 
showed that the subject who performed this data was 
disturbed when he completed the task. Then, the largest size  
and the mean of the remaining trials were calculated for each 
size. The mean completion time of all the subjects was 
calculated first, and the ANOVA test was performed. The 
result of the ANOVA showed that Time was significantly 
affected(F(5,84)=5.925, p<0.002). No surprisingly, as the 
size grew, participants were able to finish the task within a 
shorter time period. However, except for the smallest size, 
the completion time slowly decreased in comparison with the 
increase of the key size (see Figure 3). There is no significant 
difference between the size of 19mm and 22mm (F (1, 18) = 
0.075, p>0.5). 
 
 
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 6.  Mean compeltion time of different touch-key sizes 
 
Figure 7.  Mean error rate of different touch-key sizes 
B. Error Rate 
Error rate was the ratio of the number of errors occurred 
during the task to the total number of operations of the task. 
The mean error rate of all the subjects was calculated first, 
and the ANOVA test was performed. The error rate of the 
task is shown in Figure 8. Error rate was significantly 
affected by size (F(5,84)= 17.94, p<0.001). Errors declined 
as size increased. The smallest size (7mm) made an 
extremely high error rate which was three times compared to 
the 10mm size. The error rate of next three sizes showed a 
slow decline as the size increased. And there was no 
significant difference between the size of 19mm and 22mm 
(F (5, 84)= 1.119, p>0.1). 
 
Figure 8.  Mean subjective ratings of different touch-key sizes 
C. Subjective Ratings 
The mean subjective ratings of all the subjects was 
calculated first, and the ANOVA test was performed. The 
subjective ratings of the task are shown in Figure 9. The 
subjective ratings was also significantly affected by size 
(F(5,84)=29.18,p<0.001). The subjective ratings increased as 
the size increased. The bigger the key was, the better 
subjective ratings were given by the subjects. There was no 
significant difference between the size of 19mm and 22mm. 
D. Error Rate Comparision between the Retangle and 
Square 
The error rate of the rectangle and the square keys was 
also calculated. The error rate of the two shapes is shown in 
Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Error rate comparison between two different touch-key 
shapes(retangle and square touch-keys) 
The ratio of height/width for the rectangle  keys used in 
the experiment was less than 1. Under these circumstances, 
the error rate of the rectangle keys was higher than the 
square ones when the width was smaller than 16mm. 
However, with the larger size, 19mm and 22mm, subjects 
seldomly made mistakes. So the trend of the two lines 
coincided.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Overall, the usability of MCDU of the flight deck 
increased as the touch-key size increased. When the touch-
key size was larger than 19mm, the completion time, error 
rate and subjective ratings did not differ much. 
From the data we obtained from the experiment, some 
subjects gave higher values to the size of 19mm than the size 
of 22mm. For the ones who rated this way, an interview was 
done to determine the reason. Some subjects assumed the 
reason for this was that the spacing between the touch-keys 
decreased as the width of the touch-keys increased, which 
caused a cluster in the interface. As a result of the cluster, 
subject had a feeling that they would accidently tap on the 
adjacent touch-keys. Others claimed that the 22mm touch-
keys were too large to perform for them under the 
circumstance. Studies about these questions would be done 
in the future. 
Meanwhile, the error rate of the two different touch-key 
shapes was also examined. The result showed that error rate 
differed between different touch-key shapes. The error rate 
of the square keys was lower than the rectangle ones. 
However, the error rate reached an asymptote at the width of 
19mm. The reason for this might be the difference in the 
tapping area. The square keys had larger area when the width 
was the same, correspondingly, the error rate was lower.  
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
In this study, we focused on the factors of the key size 
and shape related to usability; in addition, other design 
factors, such as the key spacing and the location of the keys, 
should be investigated. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, the effect of touch-key sizes and shapes on 
the usability of MCDU of the flight deck was examined. The 
usability of the MCUD on the flight deck increased with 
increased touch-key sizes. However, the usability reached an 
asymptote beyond certain touch-key sizes. When the ratio of 
the height/width was less than 1, the usability of the square 
touch-keys was better than the rectangle ones with the same 
width. However, the usability reached an asymptote when 
the width reached 19mm. Moreover, the touch-key sizes 
proposed by this study cannot be directly applied to the 
design of MCDU touch-key sizes because the experiment 
was only a PC simulated experiment. Therefore, a number of 
further studies should be performed to determine the size of 
the real MCDU of the flight deck. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] THALES, “The cockpit of the future by Thales Innovation for future 
civil and military avionics platforms”, Le Bourget, June 20-26, 2011. 
[2] Rockwell Collins Press, Rockwell Collins unveils touch-control flight 
displays to enable natural, eyes-forward operation, [Online]. 
Available from: 
http://www.rockwellcollins.com/sitecore/content/Data/News/2011_C
al_Yr/CS/FY11CSNR50-touchcontrolled-flight-display.aspx, July 24, 
2011[retrieved: July, 2014]. 
[3] S. Pope, Garmin G3000 brings touch screen tech to flight deck, 
Avionics Magazine, October 20, 2009. 
[4] F-35 Cockpit, [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.darkgovernment.com/news/f-35-cockpit/[retrieved: May, 
2012]. 
[5] Barco, “Touch the future: concept of a multi-touch cockpit”. July 
20,2011. 
[6] P. Parhi, A. K. Karlson, and B. B. Benderson, “Target size study for 
one-handed thumb use on small touchscreen devices,” Proceedings of 
8th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with 
Mobile Devices and Services, Espoo, Finland, 2006, pp. 203-210. 
[7] Y. Park, S. H. Han, J. Park, and Y. Cho,  “Touch key design for target 
selection on a mobile phone,” In: the Proceedings of the 10th Mobile 
HCI conference.Amsterdam, Netherland. 2008, pp. 423 – 426. 
[8] E. Choi, S. Kwon, D. Lee, and M. K. Chung, “Towards successful 
user interaction with systems: Focusing on user-derived gestures for 
smart home systems,” Applied Ergonomics, 45(4): 2014, pp. 1196-
1207. 
[9] R. Leitao and P. A. Silva, “Target and spacing sizes for smartphone 
user interfaces for older aldults: design patterns based on an 
evaluation with users,” In: Proceedings of the 19th Conference on 
Pattern Languages of Programs (PLoP 2012), 2012. 
[10] K. B. Chen, A. B. Savage, and A. O. Chourasia, D. A. Wiegmann, M. 
E. Sesto, “Touch screen performance by individuals with and without 
motor control disabilities,” 2013, pp. 297-302. 
[11] C. Irwin and M. Sesto, “Performance and touch characteristics of 
disabled and non-disabled participants during a reciprocal tapping 
task using touch screen technology,” Appl. Ergon. 43, 2012, pp. 
1038-1043. 
[12] J. Zhao, T. Plocher, and L. Kiff, “Touch screen user interfaces for 
older adults: button size and spacing.” Universal Acess in Human 
Computer Interaction. Coping with Diversity. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 933-941. 
[13] H. A. Colle and K. J. Hiszem, “Standing at a kiosk: Effects of key 
size and spacing on touch screen numberic keypad performance and 
user preference,” Ergonomics, vol. 47, no. 13, 2004, pp. 1406-1423. 
[14] H. Kim, S. Kwon, J. Heo, H. Lee, and M. K. Chung, “The effect of 
touch-key size on the usability of In-Vehicle Information Systems 
and driving safety during simulated driving,” Applied Ergonomics, 
vol. 
45, 
May. 
2014, 
pp. 
379-388, 
doi: 
org/10.1016/j.apergo.2013.05.006. 
[15] M. Schedlbauer, “Effects of key size and sapcing on the completion 
time and accuracy of input tasks on soft keypads using trackball and 
touch input,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society Annual Meeting. SAGE Publications, 2007, pp. 429-433. 
[16] J. M. Crane, E. S. Bang, and M. C.Hartel, "Standardizing interactive 
display functions on the 777 flight deck," R. SAE Technical Paper, 
1994. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The work presented in this paper has been carried out as 
part of the Chinese project the National Key Technology 
R&D Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology 
(2014BAK01B03 ), led by China National Institute of 
Standardization. 
 
 
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

