Evaluation of a 3D Human System Interface for Air Traffic Control 
 
Andreas Baier 
Altran AG 
Zurich, Switzerland 
Email: andreas.baier@altran.com 
Alf Zimmer 
Engineering Psychology Unit 
University of Regensburg 
Regensburg, Germany 
Email: alf.zimmer@ur.de
 
 
Abstract - In air traffic control, events in 3D space have to be 
managed with the dual goal of safety and efficiency. Due to the 
fact, that these events have to be constructed from a 2D 
airspace representation and numerical information, the 
resulting mental workload for air traffic controllers is very 
high. An experimental working model of an air traffic control 
workspace with a 3D airspace representation is evaluated and 
shown to be a possible means to reduce mental workload and 
to improve efficiency and learnability while maintaining the 
present level of safety. 
Keywords - Air Traffic Control; Situation Awareness; Mental 
Workload; User Centered Design; 3D; Stereoscopy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 1943, Craik introduced the concept of mental models 
[1], namely that people interact with their environment not 
directly, but by means of simplified models of the 
environment, which consist of sufficiently large sets of 
knowledge about what is known to be true about the world 
and of assumptions about the dynamics of processes. This 
conceptualization of the interaction of individuals with their 
environment [2][3] has helped to understand and explain, for 
instance, why people are able to act successfully in a three-
dimensional (3D) space while controlling the motion of 
objects in parallel which, in essence, is the core task in air 
traffic control (ATC). Mental models furthermore have 
strongly influenced the field of cognitive ergonomics, 
especially in the design of human system interfaces, e.g. the 
mental model is central for Endsley’s model of situation 
awareness [4], as well as in the construction of aptitude tests 
for the selection and instruction of operators for human 
machine systems.  
What is often overlooked, however, is that mental models 
can lead to failures because they are too domain specific, too 
much simplified (e.g. due to the erroneous assumption of 
linearity), or that they rely on erroneous analogies or over-
generalizations (e.g. in the field of naïve physics). 
Furthermore, mental models are usually elicited by means of 
verbal protocols. Such protocols, however, are necessarily 
sequential and cannot properly represent events which 
happen in parallel and in a 3D space.  
For the purpose of designing human system interfaces, 
this means that the presented information has to be congruent 
with the tacit knowledge of time and space, and that the 
mental model that is used leads to a correct understanding of 
the presented situations. Existing ATC workstations use a 
two-dimensional (2D) top-view to represent the airspace. 
Numerical values indicate the elevation of objects. On this 
basis, the air traffic controller (ATCO) needs to mentally 
construct an abstract 3D representation of the airspace. Such 
a mental construction process does not allow to grasping the 
ongoing events directly which results in a high mental 
workload and, therefore, is safety relevant. In contrast, an 
adequate 3D representation that contains all relevant spatial 
information allows what Gibson calls the direct perception of 
events [5], which relies on an embodied tacit knowledge of 
space and time. Especially the advances in 3D visual 
displays provide the preconditions required for such a direct 
event perception and therefore allow human machine 
interactions to go beyond traditional modes of interaction. 
In  Section II, the importance of situational awareness for 
ATC is described and it is explained, how it is linked to 
safety and efficiency. Section III outlines how airspace 
information is processed using the existing 2D human 
system interface. In Section IV, results are presented that 
demonstrate how appropriate stereoscopic 3D visualizations 
allow for an immediate perception of the dynamic events in 
the airspace, therewith making the ATCOs task easier to 
learn, more effective, and lead to a higher efficiency by 
combining the traditional mental models of ATC with tacit 
spatial knowledge. In Section V, the impact of stereoscopic 
3D airspace visualizations on safety, efficiency, and learning 
is discussed. Section VI provides suggestions for applying 
stereoscopic 3D airspace visualizations to ATC. 
II. 
THE AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS’ TASK AND THE 
TRADE-OFF BETWEEN SAFETY AND EFFICIENCY 
The task of the ATCO is to guide aircraft safely and 
efficiently through the airspace. This requires a high degree 
of situational awareness, namely to build up and maintain an 
accurate understanding of the current situation and of how it 
is likely to develop in the near future. Especially in domains 
such as ATC, where the mental workload of the operator 
tends to be high, and poor decisions may lead to serious 
consequences, lacking situation awareness has been 
identified as a main factor for accidents that are attributed to 
human error [6]. Because there is a trade-off between safety 
and efficiency in ATC, safety, for obvious reasons, has a 
higher priority than efficiency. Therefore, an imminent loss 
of situational awareness is likely to result in less efficient 
decisions. Uncertainty about the development of a critical 
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

approximation between two or more aircrafts, for instance, 
leads ATCOs to immediately implement preventive actions 
rather than continuing their assessment of the situation in 
order to reduce the amount of uncertainty and then decide if 
a more resource intensive intervention is necessary [6]. 
III. 
 THE EXISTING HUMAN SYSTEM INTERFACE FOR AIR 
TRAFFIC CONTROL 
The existing human system interface uses a 2D airspace 
representation combined with alpha-numerical information 
by means of paper-based or digital strips and verbal 
communications between ATCOs and pilots. It fails the 
above described principles for direct event perception 
insofar, as the aircraft positions are given in two different 
formats instead of one integrated format. The lateral aircraft 
positions are shown analogically by a top view onto the 
airspace on a 2D plane, whereas the vertical aircraft positions 
are presented numerically. The ATCOs, therefore, cannot 
perceive the airspace situation directly, but have to mentally 
construct a 3D representation. In order to understand the 
critical events in the airspace, additional information about 
the aircraft is displayed numerically, such as speed, heading, 
and call-signs. This information is provided within tags 
attached to the position signifiers of each aircraft. This 
means that the ATCOs need to combine information that is 
presented in different formats in order to understand the 
actual situation and how it evolves in time – a task that 
requires time and complex mental operations, this  can cause 
a very high mental workload, which may lead to inefficient 
decisions as a result of uncertainty. 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF 3D HUMAN SYSTEM INTERFACES 
FOR AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL 
In the line of research presented here, two goals have been 
pursued; (1) the integration of the spatial information into 
one 3D representation and (2) the development of a cohesive 
interaction design tailored to what the 3D representation 
affords to ATCOs. 
 In this study three different 3D representations have been 
compared with a 2D representation similar to the existing 2D 
human system interface for ATC (see Figure 1) on the basis 
of safety critical situations involving two aircraft [7]; the 
existing 2D representation (2D), a 3D view from above 
(3Da), a 3D side-wise view with vertical drop-lines to the 
position over ground (3Ddl), and a 3D visualization that is 
the same as 3Ddl but without the drop-line (3D). All 3D 
visualizations used stereoscopy combined with a motion 
tracking system that allowed the adaptation of the airspace 
visualization to the ATCOs viewing-position in real-time. 
The situations were systematically created and presented 
in 50% of the times conflicts, in 25% of the times vertical 
separations, and in 25% lateral separations. All situations 
would have either resulted in a conflict or reached the closest 
point of approximation after 45s. However, each situation 
was only shown for 10s before the airspace representation 
was masked by a six-point rating scale that allowed the 
participants to indicate how certain or uncertain they were 
about the outcome of the situation. The rating scale ranged 
from ‘certainly conflict’ to ‘certainly no conflict’ with other 
categories in between. When the situation showed a conflict, 
‘certainly conflict’ was interpreted as 100% certain (‘hit’) 
and ‘certainly no conflict’ as 0% certain (‘miss’) (vice versa 
if the situation showed a separation). Responses in between 
these two extremes were assigned with 80%, 60%, 40% and 
20% judgment certainty. 48 participants divided into four 
groups with an equal number of participants (ATCOs, pilots, 
trained laypeople and untrained laypeople) participated in 
this study. The trained laypeople underwent a conflict 
assessment training that was based on the procedure ATCOs 
use with the existing 2D human system interface.  
This study has demonstrated that the integration of the 
spatial information into one integral 3D representation can 
reduce the uncertainty about objects’ vertical positions 
compared with the existing 2D representation, see Figure 2. 
This advantage of 3D becomes especially apparent under 
high mental workload conditions. However, due to the 
training with 2D as well as due to ambiguities along the line 
of sight which are implicit in all 3D representations, 2D 
resulted in higher judgment certainty about lateral object 
positions. By the selection of an appropriate elevation angle  
 
Figure 1.  Representations that were compared with each other. 
 
Figure 2.  Judgement certainty of ATCOs under high mental workload. 
With values adjusted to zero 2D serves as baseline. 
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 3.  Judgement certainty of trained and untrained participants under 
high mental workload. With values adjusted to zero 2D serves as baseline. 
and the provision of depth cues such as vertical drop-lines 
connecting the objects and the ground, grid-lines on the base 
area, and stereoscopy together with motion parallax effects, 
the disadvantage of 3D representations can be counteracted 
and its advantage, namely a direct event perception, further 
augmented. 
Furthermore, the performance results show that the 3D 
representations allow the ATCOs’ to assess such situations 
and discriminate with similar certainty (see Figure 2 and 
Figure 3) and effectiveness (see Figure 4) between separation 
and conflict as with 2D, because this assessment always 
requires processing both lateral and vertical positions. In 
addition to this, the training of ATCOs for assessing ATC 
situations with 2D apparently causes a negative effect on 
judgment certainty with 3D representations, as can be seen in 
Figure 3, that shows a comparison of the judgment certainty 
of trained (ATCOs and trained laypeople) and untrained 
(pilots and untrained laypeople) participants under high 
mental workload.  
 Because 3D resulted in an initially higher performance in 
the group of pilots (who are not trained in assessing ATC 
conflicts), it is assumed that an appropriate 3D representation 
allows for a direct perception of events and allows the 
correct use of existing mental models, see Figure 5. 3D 
representations such as 3Ddl or 3Da allow the ATCOs’ to 
achieve similar performance as with the 2D representation 
even after little training [8], see Figure 4. Across 36 
situations that were equally divided into three measuring 
times (MT), the ATCOs’ performance rose from 71.2% in 
MT 1 to 87.9% in MT3 with 3DdL, and from 78.8% in MT 1 
to 86.8% in MT 3 with 2D.  
Overall, the higher judgment certainty concerning vertical 
positions promises a higher efficiency of the ATCOs’ 
because today uncertainty about vertical positions lead more 
often to unnecessary preventive actions than uncertainty 
about lateral positions [9]. In fact, the predictions (based on 
the receiver operating characteristics of the ATCOs) made in 
this study show that with the 2D representation, 75.7% of the 
interventions would be unnecessary, which is in line with 
findings from other studies [9][10]. With 3DdL, on the other 
hand, 62.9% of the interventions are expected to be 
unnecessary [8], see Figure 6.  
Because of these promising results, a cohesive interaction 
design tailored to what the 3D representation affords to the 
ATCOs was developed over three iterative development 
cycles [11]. First, an interactive 3D representation which was 
a combination of all 3D representations shown in Figure 1 
was used to identify the requirements of ATCOs on a 3D 
Human system interface for ATC.  
A total of eight ATCOs with an average of 11 years of 
practical experience as approach controller participated in 
this first development cycle in which at any one time one 
(active) ATCO completed a scenario using a simulator of the 
existing human system interface while the other (passive) 
ATCO observed the scenario using the interactive 3D 
representation. 
Because 
of 
the 
previously 
identified 
advantage of 3D representations regarding the assessment of 
vertical positions and distances, the ATCOs were asked to 
complete two different types of scenarios; a holding scenario 
that required to vertically stack several aircraft within a 
specified area and an approach scenario that required to 
guide several aircraft onto parallel approach routes and 
coordinate them tightly towards a single hand-off point 
(merge-point) for landing. Both types of scenarios impose 
particularly high requirements on processing vertical aircraft 
information. With an average score of 55 (where 0 indicates 
the lowest and 100 is the highest possible subjective 
 
Figure 4.  Performance of pilots over three measurement times (MT). 
 
Figure 5.  Performance of ATCOs over three measurement times (MT). 
294
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

workload) on the NASA task load index [12], the holding 
scenario was perceived as less demanding compared with the 
approach scenario that received an average score of 81. 
Whereas the subjective workload ratings of the active and 
the passive ATCOs showed no differences between the 2D 
and the 3D representation in the case of the holding scenario, 
the passive ATCOs rated the workload less high with the 3D 
representation (score 72) compared to the active ATCOs 
(score 89) who used the 2D representation. The passive 
ATCOs appreciated the possibility of observing the airspace 
depending on the situation both from the top-view as well as 
from the side-view.  
An exaggerated representation of the vertical dimension 
by the factor 7 compared to the lateral dimension was the 
preferred option of the ATCOs and, according to them, 
allows obtaining an ideal representation for completing both 
the holding and the merge-point scenario. Regarding the 
lateral size of the represented airspace, 80 nautical miles was 
the preferred lateral airspace size with 3D. In addition to 
these findings, specific requirements for improving both the 
visualization and the interaction were derived. One of the 
most important of a total of 12 requirements that were 
gathered with respect to the visualization was to keep the 
font size and the size of aircraft tags constant, independently 
from how close or far they are represented in the 3D airspace 
compared to the view-point of the ATCO. Amongst the eight 
different requirements that were gathered with respect to the 
interaction with the system was the possibility for the 
ATCOs to individually adjust their preferred view on the 3D 
airspace and to save and quickly access multiple views. This 
function allows to use the full potential of 3D, e.g. by 
switching quickly from a top-view that allows for the most 
precise judgment of lateral distances to a side-view in order 
to determine the best point in time for guiding the lowest 
aircraft out of a holding stack. Furthermore, the ATCOs 
mentioned the need to access further and more detailed 
information on an aircraft whenever required, e.g. its 
heading, next waypoint on a route, and, if applicable, 
velocity and altitude that has been advised by the ATCO. 
In the second development cycle, a cohesive visualization 
and interaction concept was developed as static mockups that 
were based on the requirements that were gathered in the 
first development cycle. These mock-ups were presented to 
four ATCOs in order to review the quality of the concept, to 
gather further ideas for improvement, and to prioritize the 
functionalities that were to be implemented in the next 
development cycle. Amongst the total of 11 suggestions for a 
further improvement the concept was, for instance, to 
automatically display further information of aircraft that are 
indicated by the automatic conflict detection system by 
flipping up the aircraft-tag which, in the concept, usually is 
manually triggered by moving the mouse-pointer onto it.  
In the third development cycle that was based on the two 
previous development cycles, the improved visualization and 
interaction concept was realized as an interactive working 
model with a stereoscopic 3D representation of the airspace 
for real-time ATC. Figure 7 shows the 3D airspace 
representation that was used for demonstrating a merge-point 
approach scenario. 
After the ATCOs received a brief introduction into the 
functionalities and logic of interaction in the 3D interactive 
working model, a previously recorded merge-point approach 
ATC scenario was shown to the ATCOs who were asked to 
explore the working model and to provide feedback. A 
structured interview procedure was applied during and after 
the exploration phase in order to evaluate the quality of the 
working model and to gather further ideas for improvement. 
The ATCOs highlighted the usability of the user-interface 
including the head-tracking system which allows the 
representation to automatically and continuously adapt to the 
ATCO’s viewing position. Therewith, the ATCOs can 
resolve occlusions of aircraft identifiers or tags by slight 
head-movements instead of using the computer mouse as 
with the current system. Furthermore, the orientation of the 
aircraft-tags is automatically adjusted to the current viewing 
position of the ATCO in order to ensure best legibility of 
their content at all times.  
To further improve the interactive working model, the 
ATCOs suggested using a separate touch-screen instead of a 
standard computer keyboard to interact with the system to 
facilitate the selection of the most important functions. 
Furthermore, the following features were mentioned as 
desireable: 3D representations of relevant airspace borders, 
the current weather situation as well as the predicted weather 
situation, the color-coding for distinguishing in- and out-
bound routes, and the display of detailed maps and specific 
altitude ranges. On the basis of these suggestions, the 
ATCOs deemed the 3D human system interface ready to be 
tested in real-time air traffic control. 
 
Figure 6.  Predicted false alarm rates of ATCOs. 
 
tzung  
rangegangenen Evaluationssitzungen EV1 und EV2 wurde ein funktio-
ungs- und Interaktionskonzeptes umgesetzt und im Rahmen der drit-
r Bewertung durch Fluglotsen unterzogen. Zur Veranschaulichung des 
nt-Merge-Szenarien abgespielt, das im Rahmen von EV1 am Simulator 
ezeichnet wurde. Das Point-Merge-Szenario wurde aufgrund der ho-
ie es an die Fluglotsen stellt (vgl. EV1). Da es sich um eine Aufzeich-
nehmer nicht aktiv in das Szenario eingreifen, jedoch mit dem über-
Interaktionskonzept interagieren und es so beurteilen. 
zung des Visualisierungs- und Interaktionskonzeptes 
s überarbeitete Visualisierungs- und Interaktionskonzept und zeigt die 
separationsanzeige sowie einen beispielhaften Ausschnitt aus einem 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  3D airspace representation for demonstrating a merge-point 
approach scenario on the interactive working model. 
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V. 
DISCUSSION 
The experimental as well as the evaluation results reveal 
that an adequate 3D airspace representation leads to a higher 
judgment certainty with less mental workload. Of special 
importance is that this quality of judgment can be achieved 
after only a short training period. It is plausible to assume 
that the utilization of an adequate 3D airspace representation 
from the very beginning of ATCO training might lead to an 
even more pronounced positive effect of the 3D human 
system interface. 
The singular result that pilots immediately grasp the 
advantages of the 3D representation indicates the potential 
for establishing a better shared situation awareness of pilots 
and ATCOs thereby overcoming possible misunderstandings 
in their communication because the reference of verbal 
utterances can be directly linked to spatial positions. Future 
landing procedures, for instance, which give the pilots more 
responsibility would profit from this better shared ground in 
communication. 
Immediate effects are to be expected for a better trade-off 
between safety and efficiency because of the marked 
decrease in false alarms. In comparison with published data 
about the given conflict detection and false alarm rates, it has 
been shown that an adequate 3D airspace representation 
results in less false alarms while achieving the same level of 
safety. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The experimental data, the qualitative evaluation of the 
usability including the resulting mental workload, and the 
evaluation of the working model for visualization and 
interaction all support the conclusion that an adequate 3D 
airspace representation for air traffic control allows an 
immediate perception of danger and urgency in a given 
situation. Furthermore, according to the air traffic control 
experts the final version of the 3D human system interface 
has the full functionality of the existing interface while 
allowing a more intuitive interaction which apparently leads 
to a higher efficiency, a lower level of mental workload, and 
a better learnability. For supervisory tasks, a quick 
implementation of the system seems to be possible. For 
subsequent tests it is planned to investigate the potential 
functionality of the developed version of the 3D human 
system interface via a ‘shadow mode’ evaluation in real-time 
air traffic control.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was funded by the Bavarian State Ministry 
of Education and Science, Airbus Defense and Space, and 
DFS. The experiments and evaluations were accomplished in 
collaboration with C. Avenarius, C. Vernaleken, and J. 
Vogelmeier. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Craik, The Nature of Explanation. Cambridge: Cambridge: 
University Press, 1943. 
[2] P.N. Johnson-Laird. Mental Models: Towards a Cognitive 
Science 
of 
Language, 
Inference, 
and 
Consciousness. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983. 
[3] D. Gentner and D.R. Gentner, „Flowing waters or teeming 
crowds: Mental models of electricity,” in Mental models, D. 
Gentner and A.L. Stevens, Eds. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, pp. 99-129, 1983. 
[4] M.R. Endsley, “Toward a theory of situation awareness in 
dynamic systems,” Human Factors, vol. 37, pp. 32-64, 1995. 
[5] J.J. Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. 
Houghton Mifflin: Boston, USA, 1979. 
[6] M.R. Endsley, “Situation Awareness and Human Error: 
Designing to Support Human Performance,” Proceedings of 
the 
High 
Consequence 
Systems 
Surety 
Conference, 
Albuquerque, NM, 1999. 
[7] A. Baier and A.C. Zimmer, “How 3D-Displays in ATC 
Permit 
Direct 
Event 
Perception,” 
17th 
International 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (HCI 2015), 
August 2015, pp. 309-316, ISBN 978-3-319-20372-0. 
[8] A. Baier and A.C. Zimmer,  “From Spatial Reasoning to 
Direct Event Perception in Air Traffic Control,” 6th 
International Conference on Applied Human Factors and 
Ergonomics (AHFE 2015), July 2015, ISBN 978-1-4951-
6042-4. 
[9] S. Loft, S. Bolland, M.S. Humphreys and A. Neal, “A Theory 
and Model of Conflict Detection in Air Traffic Control: 
Incorporating 
Environmental 
Constraints,” 
Journal 
of 
Experimental Psychology: Applied, vol. 15, pp. 106-124, 
2009. 
[10] A. Bisseret, “Application of signal detection theory to 
decision making in supervisory control: The effect of the 
operator’s experience,” Ergonomics, vol. 24, pp. 81–94, 1981. 
[11] A. Baier, C. Vernaleken, L. Vogelmeier and A.C. Zimmer, 
“Machbarkeitsstudie 
Stereoskopische 
3-D-Anzeigen 
für 
Flugsicherungsarbeitsplätze: Abschlussbericht zur ersten 
Projektphase 30,“ unpublished report about a feasibility study 
on stereoscopic 3D-displays for ATC workstation. 
[12] S.G. Hart and L.E. Staveland, “Development of NASA-TLX 
(Task Load Index): Results of empirical and theoretical 
research,” in Human Mental Workload, P.A. Hancock and N. 
Meshkati, Eds., Amsterdam: North Holland Press, 1988. 
 
 
296
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

