“Personality-Friendly” Objects:
A New Paradigm For Human-Machine Interaction.
Niccol`o Rosini∗, Lorenzo Cominelli†, Michael Pieroni†, Filippo Chiarello‡, Daniele Mazzei † and Gualtiero Fantoni∗
∗Dep. of Industrial and Civil Engineering, University of Pisa, Italy
Email: nicco.rosini@gmail.com, g.fantoni@ing.unipi.it
†Research Center E. Piaggio, University of Pisa, Italy
Email: daniele.mazzei@centropiaggio.unipi.it
‡Dep. of Energy, Systems, Territory and Construction Eng., University of Pisa, Italy
Abstract—This work introduces the concept of “personality-
friendly” objects. Its goal is to investigate the relationship that
can exist between speciﬁc interactive products and the users’ per-
sonalities. Nowadays, it seems that every object being advertised
and put on the market has its own personality. This creates a
strong and immediate connection between the customer and the
object but often it does not go beyond the aesthetic level or the
dialectic of the advertisement. For this reason, a methodology
for the categorisation of interactive products has been developed.
With this classication, we intend to measure the compatibility
between the human way of thinking and the use of products. A
set of experiments have been done and their results are reported
in this work.
Keywords–Usability; Personality-Friendly; Human-Machine In-
teraction; Human-Computer Interaction; Myers-Briggs (MBTI).
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, everyday life devices like smart-phones,
smart-watches, etc., evolved considerably at both structural
level (e.g., novel interfaces) and functional level (e.g., novel
services). In addition, the split between hardware and soft-
ware, that guarantees regular ﬁrmware updates, allows to fully
exploit the potential of the devices hardware adapting their
functionalities to the user’s needs.
The continuous interaction with these devices is changing
our life modifying our habits and attitudes. For instance, recent
studies report that a typical smart-phone user interacts with
their phone about 150x per day [1].
The emerging phenomenon of the Internet of Things (IoT)
[2], [3] is bringing us to become part of the technology-
based immersive scenarios (i.e., smart-homes, smart-ofﬁces,
etc.) where a heterogeneous set of smart devices or objects is
interconnected through the network providing the users with
added functionalities and services.
The conversion of our daily-life spaces and routines in
smart ecosystems brings our smart devices to become a sort
of appendix of our body and, more importantly, of our brain.
Indeed, while interacting with smart devices and technology,
humans tend to adapt their behavior to the communication
skills of the machines they are using, exactly as a farmer does
with their animals.
The grand challenge in designing innovative smart objects
is the inversion of this paradigm. Designers need to ﬁgure out
how to build machines that are able to communicate with users
in a natural way so as to adapt their communication skills to
the level of their users.
In addition, humans have a natural attitude to humanize
technology and to associate personality to it [4]. For this
reason, the judgment about devices personality is guided by
several factors. Most of these factors are directly related with
the device like the shape [5], the associated advertisement and
the object functionalities and behaviour. On the other hand,
the user personality affects the judgment and acceptance of
the device.
In 2015, Pieroni et al. [6] proposed a novel framework
for the personality-driven design of IoT smart devices called
Affective Internet of Things (AIoT). In this paper, the authors
tried to endow smart objects with affective capabilities to
be used within the network and to enhance the level of
communication while introducing affective interactions. The
AIoT objects can endow different human-inspired personalities
having also humanized reaction to somatic (i.e., sensors) and
social (i.e., object-object interaction) stimuli.
While the link between associated personality and device
behaviours and shapes have been already investigated, a com-
prehensive analysis which also includes other factors (i.e.,
advertisement, functionalities and human personality) doesn’t
exist yet. This analysis is essential to enable the development
of interfaces that fully exploit the potential communication
capabilities of these emerging devices.
Our aim is to investigate how the humans perceive the
currently available technologies in terms of personality. In this
particular work, a model that can be used for the classiﬁcation
of interactive products is developed and tested. The paradigm
is based on the assumption that the user personality is a key
factor driving the approach of the human to the machine.
Indeed, any message or feedback sent by the machines is
interpreted differently by humans according to their speciﬁc
personality. We started by analyzing the distinctive features
of the different human personalities and the interaction ﬂow
between users and objects. The analysis allowed to establish
what factors determine the compatibility between the approach
of the machine and the one of the user. The products are then
classiﬁed according to which psychological type best ﬁts them,
in terms of the minor cognitive effort required to establish
the interaction. The paradigm of Personality-Friendly Objects
is based on this concept of compatibility and if included in
the AIoT is expected to raise the level of communication and
regulate the modalities of the human-machine dialogue on the
basis of the traits that characterise the user’s personality.
In summary, this work proposes and tests a methodology
that allows to determine which are the user personalities that
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

are the most suitable to use a speciﬁc interactive object. For the
method assessment, we selected ﬁve well-known interactive
objects according to their relevance with different levels of
interaction and engagement. The rest of the paper is organized
as follows: SectionII introduces objectives, possible applica-
tions and requirements related to the paradigm of personality-
friendly objects; SectionIII describes the model used for the
classiﬁcation of products and services; the experimental pro-
tocol is discussed in SectionIV while the experiments and
the results in SectionV; the conclusion and future research
directions are given in SectionVI.
II.
PERSONALITY-FRIENDLY OBJECTS
In this section, we propose the paradigm of personality-
friendly objects in which any interactive system can be clas-
siﬁed as compatible with certain types of human personalities
on the basis of how it usually leads the human-machine
interaction. The idea relies on the evidence that humans exploit
their own mental process and resources when using interactive
devices, therefore personal attitude in perception and action
can make some devices more suitable for a particular subject
but rather difﬁcult for another person. In other words, a
personality-friendly object owns those features in terms of
appearance, affordances, functions, behavior and advertisement
that allow subjects with a speciﬁc personality to interact with
the object by using familiar mental processes. Such a classiﬁ-
cation is fundamental to guide the design of new products or
the redesign of existing ones as well as to prevent many of the
difﬁculties encountered by users in using objects. In order to
achieve this goal, a dedicated classiﬁcation instrument needs to
be developed taking into account the many different situations
of human-machine interaction.
A. Applications
The personality-friendly objects paradigm could have a
large pool of applications and implications on the devices
development and design. Firstly, adapting technology to user’s
psychological type might offer many advantages in terms of
usability and user experience and, hence the name, make it
possible to overcome the current concept of user-friendly. The
possibility to associate an interactive object to a predetermined
category of users leads to numerous and immediate practical
repercussions in both the design of products and their com-
mercialization and positioning on the market. For example, a
product could be redesigned to make it more compatible with
people who currently experience difﬁculties in the interaction.
Another example is related to a product that now addresses a
market niche and could be developed in multiple versions in
order to attract different types of customers.
Secondly, assuming to know the personality of a user, in
the development of a smart object a designer could include
some functionalities and communication modalities that make
the interaction with the device more immediate and easily un-
derstandable for that speciﬁc person. In addition, products may
adjust their behavior, e.g., by modifying timing and frequency
of dialogue in order to be not too intrusive (or conversely,
to constantly keep company) and to meet user preferences.
For example, considering a smart-watch, for an extroverted
person it could act accordingly so as to continuously provide
sound and light stimuli; while for an introverted person it could
minimize the incentives to those strictly necessary in order
to avoid disturbing the user. Analyzing the state-of-the-art for
smart-watches, they seem designed to meet mainly extroverted
people. This simple example shows how this tool could guide
and improve the design of human-machine interaction for a
single product.
Finally, considering the future smart environment scenar-
ios (e.g., smart-home, smart-ofﬁce, and the AIoT [6]) it is
immediate to think about new applications that could beneﬁt
of the proposed paradigm. This would mean building an
intelligent, personalized room that is harmonic in the way it
reacts to events and custom-tailored to easily interface with the
personality of people who live there. Furthermore, knowing
the personality and the mood of the user makes possible to
program the affective objects in the room in order to try to re-
establish a positive mood within the domain (and therefore also
in the user) when the negative emotional state of the person
disturbs the environment.
B. Requirements
In order to implement a method for the classiﬁcation of
interactive objects and evaluate its possible beneﬁts, it has been
necessary to deﬁne several requirements:
1) What can be classiﬁed: the methodology to be devel-
oped and tested should allow to classify both real products
and services. In fact, each service in which the interaction
with the client (also through a human operator) is subject to
procedures can be included in the classiﬁcation. Following
this we claim that what is true for products also applies to
this type of services. On the contrary, if there was not any
speciﬁc procedure, each call would be an interaction that
differs from all the others and every interaction should be
classiﬁed separately.
2) Limits of the classiﬁcation: many multi-purpose devices
have a large pool of functionalities that can be used by the
user to accomplish several possible goals. This could lead to a
misleading classiﬁcation. Therefore, in cases where the product
has several features or can be used for different purposes, it is
recommended to consider only a single function and a single
goal separately. The results obtained by decomposing a single
product can then be integrated in a manner which is the most
appropriate following a case-by-case approach.
3) Classiﬁcation Process: the object classiﬁcation occurs
through a survey by submitting a questionnaire to the users.
Preferably, the person performing the classiﬁcation should
have the chance to interact with the product for a period of
time adequate to personally test all possible aspects of the
interaction with that object. If, for practical reasons, this is
not possible the person should thoroughly analyze the product
on written description attempting to answer to the preliminary
questions which are intended to guide the analysis.
On one hand, in literature we found several psychology
studies aimed at modelling cognitive mechanism and estimat-
ing human performance in performing certain task (e.g., Model
Human Processor (MHP) [7]). This data have been extensively
used in the design of interactive objects in order to meet the
human needs and resources.
On the other hand, these studies do not provide information
about the dynamics that generate different behaviors in differ-
ent people under identical conditions and that is more related
to subject personality. For this reason we have developed the
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

model of personality-friendly objects in order to consider the
effect of different human personalities in the context of human-
machine interaction.
III.
THE OBJECTS CLASSIFICATION MODEL
This Sectionsummarizes the pillars of the proposed classi-
ﬁcation model.
A. Outline of Human-Machine Interaction
The simplest way to represent interaction between a system
and a user is represented by the feedback loop. According
to the scheme shown in Figure 1) the interaction occurs as
follows: the user in the attempt to accomplish his goal gives
one or more inputs to the system, which receives and replays
according to its own behavior and communication modalities.
At this point the user analyzes the responses of the system, then
he/she interprets and compares them with the one expected.
The outcome of this comparison determines what should be
the next user action. Each new user action towards the machine
triggers a new cycle of action and response.
Figure 1. The Human-Machine interaction model based on feedback loop.
In this work we refer to the feedback loop model for de-
scribing the human-machine interaction. The necessary change
done to the model consists in observing the interaction from
the user perspective. From this point of view the human-
object interaction is a situation in which the person is engaged
alternately in two activities: to gather information about the
object (and the context if necessary) through the ﬁve senses;
to process the responses towards the object or to judge the
situation that are both based on the data which have been
previously acquired.
For example, in a common interaction with an ATM the
user needs to acquire data by seeing (or by listening to)
the information shown on the monitor (or transmitted from
the speaker); then he/she uses this information to process
the answers by pushing a button or by judging their own
economic situation on the basis of the balance that has been
just communicated.
Referring to the model of Norman [8] it is possible to
identify the moments of the interaction in which the user
may have difﬁculties in achieving the desired goal through
the system. The problems arise when the subject is within two
gulfs:
•
gulf of execution, when on the basis of collected data
the user has to switch from the intention to the action
towards the system;
•
gulf of evaluation, when on the basis of collected
information the user has to assess the results of their
actions.
The aim of our work is to classify any interactive system
according to its compatibility with the different human person-
alities. Compatibility is measured from the point of view of
the user and it is deﬁned with the degree of naturalness with
which a person interacts with the system. This is determined
by (i) the effort necessary to obtain useful information, and
(ii) the possibility for the user to respond (or judge) in the
right way (in order to achieve the purpose of the interaction)
without altering their own usual way of thinking.
In other words, the lower the cognitive effort required to
overcome the two gulfs of execution and evaluation, the more
the product is compatible with a certain personality.
B. Psychological Background
Regarding the personality, many theories have been pro-
posed over the years [9], but a common vision at the academic
level has not been reached yet. We analysed the available
theories [10] and, for the purpose of this work, we selected
the Jung’s theory of personality types [11] and in particular
the work of Briggs Myers and her mother, who developed
the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) in the ﬁeld of work
psychology [12]. The essence of the theory is that the much
seemingly random variation in the behavior is actually quite
orderly and consistent, being due to basic differences in the
ways individuals prefer to use their perception and judgment
[13]. The indicator identiﬁes sixteen psychological types,
meaning sixteen different ways that people have to perceive
reality, evaluate and act accordingly. The types, commonly
called personalities, differ from each other in terms of how
a person is located compared with four dichotomies.
The aim of this study is to understand how people approach
the human-machine interaction. For this reason, to outline the
personality traits that inﬂuence this process it is necessary to
take into account only the process of information acquisition
and the process of elaboration of answers or judgments. These
two mental processes are deﬁned in accordance with the
psychological theories of reference: perceiving and judging.
What is important for our work is the fact that according to the
vision of Jung and Myers [13] a person may obtain information
(perceiving) through two different ways:
Sensing (S) - acquiring data through the ﬁve senses in order
to perceive information that are relevant in the environment;
Intuition (I) - collecting information by perceiving the
possibility beyond the facts, focusing on the relationships
between the facts and linking them together to build a model
that justiﬁes the changes of events over the time.
Also according to the same vision [13] a person can
organize information and reach conclusions (judging) through
two different ways:
Thinking (T) - making decisions impersonally through
logical processes, assessing the consequences of choices or
actions.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Feeling (F) - making decisions with respect to their deepest
convictions and basing on subjective considerations.
Each person uses every day all of these four mental func-
tions. However, each human being has a personal attitude in
using one particular feature for perceiving and one for judging.
Every person tends to follow their innate tendency and, even
if unconsciously, to behave in a certain way. Having the
possibility to use their preferred way of perceiving, or judging,
in their own mental processes is extremely helpful for persons
in order to feel more competent, secure and natural [13].
Behaving according to these preferences generates a sense of
well-being, energy and satisfaction. Therefore there is a strong
link between usability (especially one of its component, i.e.,
satisfaction) and user’s personality. We used both to deﬁne the
degree of naturalness of an interaction.
C. The Proposed Questionnaire
The framework described above outlines the link between
the human personality and the way in which the user dialogues
with a system. Here we describe a methodology that can be
used to analyze objects and to determine their compatibility
with different individual preferences and therefore human
personalities. In particular the proposed questionnaire consists
of two parts: the ﬁrst part is dedicated to investigate how the
product is delivering information to the user and the second
part is about examining what kind of responses are required
by the system in order to achieve the user’s purpose. These
two parts are intended to investigate the two phases in which
we have previously outlined the interaction according to the
requirements reported in SectionIV.
The ﬁrst phase, the acquisition of information by the user,
is associated with the two ways in which a person can deal with
the mental process of perceiving (i.e., sensing or intuition).
This ﬁrst phase consists of seven closed questions conceived
for analysing the stimuli sent from the product to the user
during the interaction. The user ﬁlling out the questionnaire, in
light of him/her experience with the object, has to declare how
much the description reported in the questionnaire is adequate
for illustrating the stimuli that are sent from the object. Select-
ing among multiple answers, the users shows their agreement
with the description of the product and implicitly expresses
whether this acquisition of information is easier through the
use of sensing or intuition. On this basis it is possible to
classify a product as sensing-friendly, if it facilitates this type
of approach, intuition-friendly (vice versa) or neutral, if the
stimuli are acquired equally through both the approaches.
The second phase, the processing of responses by the user
towards the object (or elaboration of judgments on the current
situation) is associated with the two ways in which a person
can deal with the mental process of judging. Each of the seven
questions investigates what are the types of judgements and
responses required by the system from the user. The person
who ﬁlls out the questionnaire declares how much the features
that are reported in the questionnaire are adequate or not to
describe the opinions and responses required. In practice this
part of the questionnaire exploits the same methodology of the
previous one but is aimed at classifying the object under study
as thinking-friendly, feeling-friendly or neutral if it requests
both kind of responses.
Figure 2. The space in which we represent the results of classiﬁcations, the
J-P plane. The plane is divided in four quarters. In blue we highlighted the
functions of perceiving, in gray those concerning judging.
D. The J-P Coordinate System
While the user ﬁlls out the questionnaire he/she expresses
the level of agreement (through a scale of ﬁve values) with
the statements. The answers are analyzed assigning points to
each value. The two outer values lead to the attribution of
four points to an approach (e.g., sensing) and zero points to
the opposite approach (in this case intuition). The two inner
values assign in one case three points to an approach (e.g.,
thinking) and one point to the opposite approach (feeling in this
case). The central value assigns two points to both approaches.
The maximum difference that you can get for the score of one
approach against its opposite is twenty-eight points.
The results of classiﬁcation can be represented in the J-P
plan which is a Cartesian coordinate system where the x-axis
represents J the axis of judging and the y-axis is P the the
axis of perceiving. The goal is to identify a point in the plan
which is the result of each classiﬁcation. The J axis measures
the difference between the score of feeling and the score of
thinking. In this way a single value describes the user phase of
judging: positive if the product is feeling-friendly, negative if
it is thinking-friendly. The same for the P axis. In this case the
single value measures the phase of perceiving: positive if the
product is intuition-friendly, negative if it is sensing-friendly.
Figure 2 shows an example of a J-P plane used to plot the
results of our analysis.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL PROTOCOL
This section shows the experiments we carried out in order
to assess the consistency of the classiﬁcation methodology
and the model behind it. The experiments are oriented to
evaluate (i) the comprehensibility of the questionnaire by
people; (ii) whether the opinion of most people regarding
the same interactive object might be agreed. In the case
when most of people describes the same product, through the
questionnaire, in a similar manner, it could be argued that the
human-machine interaction can be categorised according to a
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

particular subset of parameters. Since these parameters were
created on the basis of trends (and recurring behaviors) that
the psychological theory associated to individual preferences, it
would be possible to support the principle that products could
be classiﬁed according to the personality and then according
to the paradigm of personality-friendly.
The experimental protocol has been built around the fol-
lowing pillars:
•
people involved in the test did not have previous ex-
perience with the questionnaire or with its theoretical
basis; participants have been informed that it was
based on psychological basis only afterwards;
•
the sample of participants was represented by 82
master students in Management Engineering of the
University of Pisa;
•
a real usage experience with the objects analyzed
by the questionnaire was not possible for logistical
reasons. To overcome such a limitation, each student
was asked to read a pre-compiled description;
•
all the object descriptions had the same structure and
focused on how the user’s interaction takes place with
that particular interacting system;
•
thanks to the descriptions, there was no informa-
tion asymmetry between the participants. Descriptions
contained images and videos, and have drawn from
encyclopedias, press releases, reviews of industry ex-
perts and user manuals in order to avoid any authors’
opinion or authors’ inﬂuence.
In this ﬁrst analysis, we classiﬁed ﬁve distinctive interactive
systems requiring a different level of engagement to both
gather information and reach a conclusion. The ﬁrst system is
the Tamagotchi which is a handheld electronic game created
in 19961. The aim is to ensure that the protagonist of the game
lives as long as possible and grows politely. For people it is,
like all games, a form of interactive entertainment. The second
system is the Furby (1998)2, a little and furry puppy available
in various colors. It can be roughly considered an evolution
of the Tamagotchi with more interacting functions. The third
system is a video cassette recorder (VCR), an electronic device
used for home entertainment. The fourth interacting system
is a service, the Black Jack that consists in a gambling card
game taking place between the dealer and the players. The
last interacting system is a design installation that has as main
subject the one who beneﬁts from it entering in it. Everything
must be built to change, or solicit, the viewer’s perception,
which becomes part of the work. Without the viewer, the
design installation does not make any sense.
Before starting with the analysis, a ’warm-up exercise’ was
performed to introduce the students to the tool. After reading
the description about the functioning and interaction with each
object, ﬁfty-nine students have been asked to complete the
questionnaire related to these objects.
V.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We did not record particular problems regarding the com-
prehensibility of the questionnaire. In order to establish if the
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tamagotchi
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furby
students who analyzed the same case studies were aligned
on the same conclusions, we analyzed their answers. This is
important because through the closed answers they described
the interaction that a user plays with the product to achieve
a certain purpose in a particular context. If these descriptions
were consistent, we can say that the questionnaire is versatile,
meaning that it can be applied to very different interactive
objects, but also that it is possible to categorise products
according to the degree of compatibility with human person-
alities.
The overall classiﬁcation result is reported in Figure 3
and shows that every considered product is characterised by
a different degree of compatibility with human personalities.
Each product has its own way to provide information and
to react to the users actions. Therefore, the system leads
the person to use only a subset of cognitive processes. For
instance, the design installation is in the top right quarter of
the J-P plane. This means that the object sends stimuli in
a manner consistent with intuition users and requires mental
processes which are usual for feeling users. The centroid of
the point cloud has coordinates J = 13 and P = 8.1. The
data demonstrate that the interaction between a user and an
installation should be done in an empathic way, it requires an
approach that consists in harmonizing with the environment
(feeling) while understanding rationally its every single parts is
quite useless. In addition, the installation requires the ability to
abstract the meaning of what the user sees, to understand how
the different parts are combined and communicate together.
Such results are consistent with an intuition-friendly user.
Instead, the Blackjack is easier for people who usually interact
with the world in a logical and intuitive way.
Although the results are similar each participant has clas-
siﬁed the objects in a slightly different way. As reported in
Table I, the variance is smaller when people describe how a
product sends stimuli (e.g., the mean value of the variance
is about 64 for the SN dichotomy) than when they have to
imagine the results of their actions with the system (e.g., the
same value is about 90 for the TF dichotomy). Such behavior
can be explained by the evidence that second exercise has
much more solutions than the ﬁrst one.
The video recorder has rather low values of the variance
because this device is almost in every house and during the test
everybody remembers how it works. Conversely, understanding
how to interact with Tamagotchi and Furby through their
descriptions is not easy for a student who has never interacted
with them thus implying the high level of variance for the
TF dichotomy. However the provided descriptions of both
Tamagotchi and Furby are able to clarify efﬁcaciously how
these toys send stimuli (i.e., low values in the SN dichotomy).
The variances of variances are 116 for the TF dichotomy
and 113 for the SN dichotomy. The values of the variance
ﬂuctuate a bit probably because some products are well known
by the students while others are barely new, e.g., everyone had
a notion of a VCR, few have already played Blackjack, many
have seen Tamagotchi or Furby but no one has ever been into
the described design installation.
The interacting systems were chosen in order to have a
different level of interaction and engagement with the hu-
mans, then we can consider how the path of the consumer
electronics has been evolved over the last decades. Figure 3
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 3. a) Personality-friendly object classiﬁcation of ﬁve interacting systems: Tamagotchi, Furby, Video Cassette Recorder, Black Jack and Design
Installation. Each centroid of the point clouds is represented though a crossed circle and the ellipse reports the 95% interval of conﬁdence
b) Position of the ﬁve interactive systems (Tamagotchi, Furby, Video Cassette Recorder, Black Jack and Design Installation) within the J-P plane. The arrows
report the evolution of the consumer electronics.
TABLE I. AVERAGE AND VARIANCE TABLE
VCR
Tamagotchi
Furby
Black Jack
Design installation
Avg.FT
Avg.SN
Avg.TF
Avg.SN
Avg.FT
Avg.SN
Avg.FT
Avg.SN
Avg.FT
Avg.SN
-16,65
-10,71
-5,35
-9,45
0,16
-9,24
-9,24
2,45
12,37
8,14
Var.TF
Var.SN
Var.TF
Var.SN
Var.TF
Var.SN
Var.TF
Var.SN
Var.TF
Var.SN
78,29
69,62
102,66
46,34
102,57
57,16
80,25
74,63
84,4
71,98
shows the centroids related to the ﬁve case studies highlighting
with arrows the evolutionary path made by the electronic
devices for entertainment. According to the students answers
(J
=
−16, 6; P
=
−10, 7) it is evident that VCR is
characterised by a remarkable compatibility with the mental
function named thinking. The interaction between a traditional
electronic device (e.g., video recorder) and the user is led by
an algorithm, which works only in a logical and objective
way. Probably this is the cause of this kind of compatibility.
Tamagotchi works through a similar algorithm but this fact
is not explicit because each stimulus sent by the device and
each answer of the user are about the needs of a puppy.
The participants seem to perceive such a difference, in their
opinion (J = −5, 4; P = −9, 4) it is possible to interact
with Tamagotchi not only through the logic but also via an
emotional way (i.e., mental function named feeling). For a
person who prefers reaching conclusions through an emotional
way a Tamagotchi is more natural to use than a video recorder.
Tamagotchi was the ﬁrst electronic product equipped with this
feature and probably this was one of the reason of its enormous
commercial success. This idea is supported by the analysis of
Furby, which can be considered the evolution of Tamagotchi.
It results equally compatible with both thinking and feeling
people (J = 0, 2; P = −9, 2). In our opinion, the designers
of the Furby have improved the compatibility with the people
who prefer the feeling function in order to reach a trade-off
and to create a product suitable for a larger audience.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, the new paradigm of personality-friendly
products is presented. Its scope is to clarify the inﬂuence of the
personality of people during their interaction in the context of
human-machine interaction. To achieve this goal we proposed
and tested a questionnaire for the classiﬁcation of interactive
objects. This tool is based on a model for describing the
human-device interaction and a model for human personalities
(i.e., Jung’s theory of personality types) that allows to catego-
rize products on the basis of certain characteristics that may
occur or not in the human-machine interaction. The approach
we propose here derives from MBTI and it was demonstrated
to be useful in mapping the ability of an inanimate object
to be friendly with respect to different types of users on the
basis of their personalities. The experimental results showed
how different objects are designed to better ﬁt with particular
sets of users than with others. This paradigm looks at the
interaction with objects from the point of view of different
users so as to be able to highlight different features of the
object itself. Future studies will be oriented to reﬁne the
classiﬁcation tool in terms of number of questions and level
of details. In addition, we will test the model in the design of
the interaction between people and humanoid robots, and in
the ﬁeld of smart object affordances. In long term vision, this
methodology will help the designer to customize the human-
device interaction taking into account the differences between
the personality of potential users by using both questionnaires
and real interactions with the products.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially funded by the European Com-
mission under the 7th Framework Program project EASEL,
Expressive Agents for Symbiotic Education and Learning,
under Grant 611971-FP7- ICT-2013-10.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

REFERENCES
[1]
M. Meeker and L. Wu, “D11 internet trends,” http://www.kpcb.com/ﬁle/
kpcb-internet-trends-2013/, 2013, kPCB - Kleiner, Perkins, Cauﬁeld &
Byers.
[2]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A survey,”
Computer networks, vol. 54, no. 15, 2010, pp. 2787–2805.
[3]
D. Mazzei, G. Montelisciani, G. Fantoni, and G. Baldi, “Internet of
things for designing smart objects,” in Internet of Things (WF-IoT),
2014 IEEE World Forum on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 293–297.
[4]
B. Reeves and C. Nass, How people treat computers, television, and new
media like real people and places.
CSLI Publications and Cambridge
university press, 1996.
[5]
P. Prieto, G. Fantoni, and R. Campolmi, “On products shapes and per-
sonalities,” Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering
Design, ICED, vol. 7 DS75-07, 2013, pp. 217–226.
[6]
M. Pieroni et al., “Affective internet of things: Mimicking human-like
personality in designing smart-objects,” in Internet of Things (WF-IoT),
2015 IEEE 2nd World Forum on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 400–405.
[7]
S. K. Card, A. Newell, and T. P. Moran, “The psychology of human-
computer interaction,” 1983.
[8]
D. A. Norman, The psychology of everyday things. Basic books, 1988.
[9]
D. Schultz and S. Schultz, Theories of personality.
Cengage Learning,
2012.
[10]
Y. Yan and P. Childs, “Creativity tool selection for design engineers
in idea generation.” in DS 80-8 Proceedings of the 20th International
Conference on Engineering Design (ICED 15) Vol 8, Milan, Italy, 27-
30.07. 15, 2015, pp. 359–370.
[11]
C. G. Jung, Psychological types.
Routledge, 2014.
[12]
I. Myers and P. Myers, Gifts differing: Understanding personality type.
Nicholas Brealey Publishing, 2010.
[13]
I. B. Myers, M. H. McCaulley, N. L. Quenk, and A. L. Hammer, MBTI
manual: A guide to the development and use of the Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator.
Consulting Psychologists Press Palo Alto, CA, 1998, vol. 3.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

