Privacy-Aware Digital Mediation Tools for Improving Adolescent Mental Well-being:
Application to School Bullying
Maria Gaci, Isabelle Von`eche-Cardia and Denis Gillet
School of Engineering
´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Lausanne, Switzerland
email: maria.gaci@epfl.ch, isabelle.voneche-cardia@epfl.ch, denis.gillet@epfl.ch
Abstract—In human-computer interaction, self-disclosure of sen-
sitive information regarding distressing experiences requires the
establishment of a trust channel between the user and the
digital tool. As privacy and security have been identiﬁed as
factors that contribute to increased levels of trust, they could
be utilized to design digital tools that encourage and empower
adolescents to disclose school bullying. This work-in-progress
paper presents an interdisciplinary research project aimed at
combining appropriate levels of usability and security to design
a privacy scheme for adolescents in order to provide a digital
solution that will help anti-bullying intervention at schools in
Switzerland and beyond. The process for designing the interaction
and interface of the digital tool is presented in the context
of interviews with domain experts. Furthermore, participatory
design workshops with Swiss teachers and students are used to
inform the key trustful features that the tool should exhibit.
Keywords–Human-Computer Interaction; Privacy; Trust; Secu-
rity; Child-Computer Interaction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Bullying, delinquency, substance abuse, depression, and so-
cial isolation are some not uncommon distressing experiences
that adolescents can encounter during their development [1].
These experiences affect their mental health, development, and
wellbeing. School bullying is one of the most prevalent and
complex of these experiences and can result in bullycide (sui-
cide due to bullying) [1]. According to two surveys conducted
in the Swiss cantons of Valais and Geneva in 2012 and 2013,
school bullying affects one to two students per class, or 5-10%
of all adolescents in Switzerland [2].
By deﬁnition, school bullying is “a systematic abuse of
power in interpersonal relations exerted by one or more chil-
dren” [3] [4]. It is a form of violence exerted by the wrongdo-
ers (referred to as bullies) to the target individuals (referred to
as victims) through different forms, such as physical, verbal,
or cyber (involving the use of electronic technology) [3].
Various approaches exist for solving bullying conﬂicts such as
the Shared Concern Method [5], yet the identiﬁcation of the
conﬂicts still remains a challenge as it relies on self-disclosure.
One of the major issues related to the identiﬁcation of
school bullying is the reluctance of adolescents to report
their experiences to teachers, parents, or support teams at
schools. In fact, it is estimated that less than 15% of students
report school bullying conﬂicts [6]. According to [7], students
perceive several barriers to self-disclosing, such as fear that
their bullies might perpetrate more frequent or severe attacks,
fear of peer disapproval, negative self-thoughts (e.g., feeling
weak/undermined), and preference for autonomy or “dealing
with it oneself.” Moreover, several studies have indicated that
teacher’s negligence, passive role in intervening and failure to
maintain a positive classroom climate directly affect students’
decisions to self-report [8]. Witnesses to bullying are also often
reluctant to disclose their observations due to fear of retribution
and uncertainty about intervention [9].
In spite of research demonstrating that self-disclosure re-
duces bullying in schools [10] and the fact that higher levels of
self-disclosure are recorded when a privacy-oriented approach
is adopted in digital environments [11], no digital solutions
currently exist in Switzerland. As such, this project aims to
design a digital tool for adolescents aged 12–16 years old that
will act as a mediator for disclosing school bullying. This
digital tool is being developed in collaboration with a Non-
Governmental Organization (NGO), and its validation will
be performed in public secondary schools in Switzerland in
collaboration with their health service teams.
Actor
Bully
Victim
Witness/es
Support Team
(Local School)
Action
Prevention
Detection
Disclosure
Intervention
Figure 1. The actors and the actions targeted by the digital tool.
Our tool will serve as a means for the detection and
disclosure of school bullying conﬂicts. Its goal is to encourage
adolescents to self-report instances of bullying by providing an
interface and means of communication with which adolescents
are comfortable, i.e. a mobile application. The application
should act as a catalyst to inspire students to seek face-
to-face discussions with a human mediator like a teacher
or member of the health services team. In order to create
a closed-loop model, however, prevention and intervention
will also be slightly targeted. Prevention will be targeted by
increasing awareness regarding bullying in schools through
testimonials. Temporary digital intervention will be provided
through tailored advice available in the mobile application. The
actors and the actions targeted by the digital tool are illustrated
in Figure 1.
This ongoing research project aims to contribute to the ﬁeld
458
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and eHealth by provid-
ing insights to the following research questions: How should
digital tools be designed in order to encourage adolescents
to disclose distressing experiences, such as school bullying?
What are the key trustful features that such digital tools should
exhibit? The paper describes the general framework of the
project, and the process followed for the initial design of
the prototypes of the digital tool for self-disclosing school
bullying.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents
a brief review of literature on the topics of self-disclosure
and privacy, existing anti-bullying solutions, and the current
limitations. Section III presents the development methodology
of the anti-bullying digital tool. Section IV presents the design
of the digital tool in accordance with the feedback gathered
from domain experts and the target audience of adolescents.
Finally, Section V brieﬂy summarises the current state of the
project.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
A. Self-disclosure and Privacy
In 2019, the world’s population was composed of 1.2 bil-
lion adolescents [12]. Despite the fact that this age group com-
prises 16 percent of the world population, research studies have
emphasized the lack of scholarly work focusing exclusively on
them [13]. This insufﬁcient knowledge results in little guidance
on the unique requirements, opportunities, and challenges
when designing interactive tools for this target group [14]. One
of the most effective practices for understanding the needs of
adolescents and designing creative interfaces for them is the
organization of participatory design workshops [15] [16], an
approach that aims to actively engage and include adolescents
as co-designers.
Research on the topic of self-disclosure has demonstrated
its importance in maintaining psychological, physical, and
spiritual well-being [17]. Some of the conditions identiﬁed
by [17] under which people are willing to disclose personal
information are: the speciﬁc need for physical “private places”,
the need for privacy more generally, the identity of the person
to whom one might disclose himself, and the relation between
the two.
Digital interaction also favors self-disclosure [18]–[21].
Medical patients have reported a higher number of symptoms
and negative behaviors when interviewed through a digital tool
rather than face-to-face [19]. Furthermore, participants claim
to provide more honest and candid answers when digital means
were utilized [20]. Higher disclosure rates have also been
recorded in studies eliciting sensitive information through digi-
tal means rather than face-to-face or using pen-and-paper [21].
The same applies to scenarios where individuals may feel par-
ticularly vulnerable to the consequences of self-disclosure [21].
Finally, rates of self-disclosure through digital interfaces have
been observed to be higher for individuals who perceive their
health condition to be stigmatized [11].
When comparing digital and face-to-face interactions, pri-
vacy, and anonymity were among the top factors listed af-
fecting subjects’ willingness to disclose sensitive informa-
tion [18] [21]. Higher rates of self-disclosure were recorded
when people communicated in a visually anonymous manner
rather than non-anonymously. Furthermore, increased will-
ingness to answer sensitive questions and decreased errors
associated with sensitive topics were recorded when privacy-
enhancing data collection modes were employed.
Recent studies by [22] and [23] have demonstrated a
preference for embodied conversational agents (e.g., virtual
agents) rather than human interviewers. Four principal reasons
were determined to affect the individuals’ preference: (i) lack
of judgment, criticism, and reactions (verbal or nonverbal), (ii)
ease of providing answers due to the digital interface (texting
enables participants to formulate their answers at their own
pace), (iii) personal comfort due to reduced negative feelings,
such as anxiety, embarrassment, or guilt, and (iv) protection
of personal information and privacy.
Individuals tend to more likely disclose their experiences
if they are doing so to someone who is perceived to be
trustworthy [17]. Hence, the establishment of trust is required
for individuals to feel comfortable in self-reporting sensitive
information. Due to the complexity of trust as a social phe-
nomenon, major questions arise with how to establish trust and
how to reliably signal that trust through different interfaces and
interactions [24]. According to [25], there are four elements
that ease the communication of trust through digital interfaces:
(i) design quality (site organization, visual design), (ii) up-front
disclosure and transparency, (iii) comprehensive and current
content, and (iv) connection to the rest of the web.
As privacy is signiﬁcant to encouraging self-disclosure,
attempting to establish trust requires a thorough security and
privacy model [26]. Trust models, like [27], which combine
aspects of usability and security have been demonstrated to
impact users’ levels of trust. The above model is composed
of six building blocks, namely: (i) security (authentication,
data access control, data integrity, software change procedures,
and physical security), (ii) usability (perception issues, motor
accessibility, and interaction design issues), (iii) privacy (user
anonymity and data conﬁdentiality), (iv) reliability and avail-
ability (vulnerability to denial-of-service attacks, connection
to the internet, quality of service), (v) audit and veriﬁcation
mechanisms (cryptographic methods, audit trails, use of trusted
agents), and (vi) user expectations (product reputation, prior
user knowledge, knowledge of technology).
B. Existing Solutions
Recently, increasing emphasis has been placed on the
design and evaluation of digital tools for adolescents. These
digital tools not only help adolescents understand the nature of
bullying but also serve as sources of positive intervention. The
existing approaches can be categorized into two major groups:
(i) as approaches for the prevention and (ii) as approaches for
the disclosure of the bullying cases in schools. Below, existing
solutions for each approach are presented along with a brief
analysis of the mechanisms utilized by each of them to give
an overview of the emerging technologies in this ﬁeld.
1) Prevention-oriented Approaches: FearNot! [28], Stop-
Bully [29] and #StopBully [30] are interactive mobile apps
aiming to develop the behavioral competence of victims and
witnesses necessary to avoid and deal with future bullying
situations. All three mobile apps educate and raise awareness
by presenting real-life situations that the players have to
respond to. The mechanisms utilized by the apps to teach
effective responses to bullying are as follows:
•
Storytelling is utilized by FearNot! to present the
user with a virtual environment that improvises real-
life bullying situations. Three-dimensional agents in
459
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

a virtual school are designed to foster empathy and
emotional involvement of the users. The story is grad-
ually built in response to the suggestions of the users
in the various episodes through artiﬁcial intelligence
techniques.
•
Games are a mechanism utilized by StopBully and
#StopBully for delivering educational content to play-
ers. The games provide players with challenges that
they have to solve to gain points and progress to higher
levels. Both games are educational with cartoon-like
characters and environments.
•
Videos, animated comics and quizzes are utilized by
#StopBully to train players on bullying. Videos and
comics present the friendship of four characters, which
is broken when one of them becomes a bully. The
knowledge acquired through the videos and comics is
put into practice through quizzes. There are different
types of quizzes, such as multiple-choice, rearrange
the letters, type an answer, etc.
2) Disclosure-oriented Approaches: STOPit Solutions [31]
and Anonymous Alerts [32] are two similar incident reporting
apps for students experiencing distress in schools. Both apps
are available as mobile and web versions, and they provide
digital solutions for two types of users — students and teachers
— as described below.
•
Students can utilize the platforms provided by the two
apps mentioned above to anonymously report bullying
cases by attaching videos, photos, and screenshots
to the report. The apps also enable students to cus-
tomize the incident type, location, and language. An
anonymous messaging channel is also available to
enable students to seek immediate help along with
an emergency button that alerts the severity of the
incident.
•
Teachers can utilize the incident management platform
to receive real-time updates on incident reports sent
by students and parents. The platform enables them to
monitor the reports and forward them to local authori-
ties in case immediate action is required. Teachers can
also run analytic and trend reports to identify patterns
of bullying in their school.
These approaches, while effective in some contexts and for
some problems, are not sufﬁcient for our intended application
and audience.
C. Limitations
In summary, digital solutions are available for adolescents
to disclose bullying acts, yet some gaps exist: the existing
solutions focus on one of the actors or speciﬁcally in one
action. Moreover, there is limited research in the ﬁeld of HCI
on how trust can be established by design between adoles-
cents and digital tools when self-disclosing sensitive mental
health experiences. Finally, there exists limited analysis of
how privacy and anonymity affect the disclosure of distressing
experiences among adolescents, as they could be also utilized
to promote spam or to practice additional bullying.
III.
METHODOLOGY
To develop digital tools that nudge adolescents (victims,
witnesses, and bullies) into disclosing bullying experiences
in schools, a design thinking process [33] is being followed.
The goal is to gain an empathetic understanding of the issue
of bullying in schools, necessary for designing an effective
solution for adolescents to disclose such experiences. The
design thinking process is composed of four stages (Ideating,
Prototyping, Implementing, and Validating), but as the project
is still ongoing, only the initial two stages of the process are
described in this paper.
Multiple iterations of this process were used to re-frame
the issue of bullying in a human-centric way. Ideas regarding
features and functions that the digital intervention should
encompass were gathered through engagement with experts
in the ﬁeld as well as future users, as described below:
Initially, the process of requirements elicitation was con-
ducted through unstructured interviews with domain experts,
educators, and bullying mediators. Interviews were designed
to be broad and open-ended to gain a deeper perspective
on domain-speciﬁc practices, goals, and concerns related to
bullying in public schools in Switzerland. The aim of the
interviews was also to identify factors that might inﬂuence the
adoption of new solutions in the speciﬁc context. Six one-hour
meetings were held in the span of one year.
Research studies have demonstrated that focus groups are
a successful data collection technique for interaction design
for adolescents [14]. Thus, focus groups were organized both
face-to-face and online (due to COVID-19) during the spring
semester of the 2019-2020 academic year. As the project
targets adolescents, the focus groups were organized with
students in public secondary schools in Switzerland. The focus
groups aimed to gather a wide range of opinions, viewpoints,
and insights by the users, as well as raising issues that were not
previously identiﬁed. Adolescents age 12–16 were encouraged
to engage in interactive group discussions regarding the design
of the digital tools and, participatory design workshops were
organized to propose the initial paper-based prototypes. A
teacher and/or mediator already familiar with the students of
each focus group (hereafter referred to as teacher T1 and T2)
were present and moderated the sessions. Two female and ﬁve
male adolescents were part of the ﬁrst focus group, and four
female and one male adolescent were part of the second focus
group (hereafter referred to as student S1 – S12). Students were
recruited on a voluntary basis by their teachers.
During the interactive group discussions, adolescents de-
scribed the bullying situation in their respective schools men-
tioning the methods that they can currently use to disclose
instances of bullying, i.e., talking directly to teachers, calling
a mediator, and sending an email. Students mentioned an
initiative for dropping anonymous letters in designated boxes
in the schools’ halls, yet the project was never ﬁnalized. The
principal issue identiﬁed with the current approaches was the
fact that “the students do not dare to talk” (S4), as “everyone
is different and some students are at ease talking to people that
they know, but some of them are at ease when anonymous”
(S10). Hence, anonymity emerged as an important aspect when
disclosing distressing experiences, as students: i) were afraid
of how adults would react, ii) were afraid of the fact that adults
might judge them, or iii) were feeling intimidated due to the
sensitivity of the topic. As such, in addition to requesting extra-
curricular programs for raising awareness about bullying in
schools, participants requested an anonymous digital channel
for self-disclosure.
During the participatory design workshops, adolescents
were involved in brainstorming sessions regarding design
460
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

possibilities. Participants imagined the application would “play
the role of a mediator that the students can write to, if they trust
it, as the information is conﬁdential” (S11). The application
would further help them “feel less lonely because usually
when students are bullied, they are left in the loneliness and
they do not really want to have contact with people” (S12).
Besides, the application would help students feel “reassured”
(S4) and “send small messages every day asking how they
were feeling” (S6). The main feature of the application was
voted to be anonymity, as “an anonymous application cannot
judge the students” (S4). Adolescents thought that the user
should enter a “pseudonym” (S4) and an optional phone
number, but no additional personal information or password
to guarantee anonymity by design. When the students were
asked to brainstorm on the series of interactions offered in
the application, they mentioned the selection of a “role, such
as victim or witness” (S3) and “form of bullying, such as
verbal or physical” (S5), so that the application could pose the
appropriate questions according to the needs of the student.
Several students from both focus groups suggested that a
chatbot might be used to customize the experience. Moreover,
they suggested that the chatbot might be able to decide if the
user was in danger and the appropriate measure that the user
should take. The questions posed by the chatbot should be
“convincing” (S4) so that the user is encouraged to request help
from the support team, but must also be able to decide what
information he/she would like to disclose. Finally, adolescents
stated that they would “trust the chatbot” (S12) because their
perception was that “Artiﬁcial Intelligence does not make
mistakes” (S3).
IV.
TOOL DESIGN
Taking into consideration the feedback from the domain
experts and the ideas of the students and teachers during
the participatory design workshops on the features that the
digital tool for self-disclosing bullying should exhibit, a mobile
application will be developed. The architecture, features that
will enhance usability, and the security considerations for the
application based on the trust model presented in Section II-A
are presented below.
A. Architecture
The requirements elicitation process with the experts and
future users enabled the selection of the appropriate type
of digital tool, namely a mobile application, for two main
reasons. Firstly, according to initial interviews with domain
experts, adolescents in the school setting are primarily bullied
by their peers, and portable devices that enable students to
disclose information quickly and privately were recommended.
Thus, even though the larger screen size of a computer-
based tool enables better readability, better visual acuity, and
higher usability, these beneﬁts are a drawback to privacy, as
bystanders may be able to read the content on the screen
from different distances [34]. Secondly, according to initial
interviews with the different parties, the majority of students
in Switzerland have access to mobile phones, although students
are not allowed to utilize them during lecturing.
A hybrid mobile application will be developed using the
React Native framework to support multiple mobile operating
systems. The application will be structured in two main layers
of infrastructure: the mobile device and the remote school.
Initially, the bullying information disclosed by the user will
Support Team
Secure Server
Chatbot
User
147
Call
Anonymous Chatting
Store Data
Anonymous
Notification
Store Case
Request 
Identity 
Disclosure 
Mobile
Phone
School
Local Device
Figure 2. The architecture of the app for self-disclosing bullying in schools.
be anonymously stored in the mobile device. If the user
agrees to disclose the information with the support team, their
information will be shared with the support team of the speciﬁc
school and stored in a secure local server. A human mediator
will then contact the user anonymously and request the user
to disclose their identity to provide face-to-face help. Students
can also utilize the app to directly and securely contact third-
parties, such as 147 (the consultation service for young people
in Switzerland) or the police department. A simpliﬁed version
of the architecture of the application is illustrated in Figure 2.
The ﬁgure depicts: (i) the two layers of infrastructure, (ii) the
interaction of users with the chatbot and the support team,
and (iii) the storage of data on the local device and the remote
server.
B. Usability
Chatbots were requested by students during the focus
groups as a means to automate the disclosing process by
“providing emergency support 24/7” (T1). As research has
also demonstrated that they could be utilized to enable users
to access information about bullying at any time and improve
school cohesion [35], they will be included in the app. Students
suggested that the chatbot will ﬁrstly ask generic questions
to familiarise themselves with the user and then gradually
perform a self-assessment task to determine the role of the user
(i.e., victim, bully, witness). According to the students, this
approach would also “increase the trust level” (S12) towards
the application. The chatbot will provide immediate support
in the form of advice (“Would it be possible to talk to your
parents about this issue?” - T2) and try to nudge the user
to disclose the case and seek help from a human mediator. It
will never disclose information without the consent of the user
unless the user explicitly mentions suicide, in which case due
to legal requirements in Switzerland, the anonymous chat will
be automatically forwarded to the support team. The chatbot
will be programmed to run locally on the mobile device, so
the costs and beneﬁts of rule-based versus AI implementations
are being evaluated. An illustration of a possible conversation
with the chatbot is shown in Figure 3.
Avatars were suggested by the students as an option for
creating immersive digital tools and have been demonstrated
to be an effective mechanism to interact with users for anti-
bullying education [36]. As such, users will be able to cus-
tomize the appearance and characteristics (e.g., gender, age,
name) of the avatar according to their preferences. The goal
will be to enable users to personalize the experience in the
application by creating distinct avatars that they “trust” (S11)
and “feel comfortable having digital conversations with” (S12).
An interesting feature identiﬁed during the focus groups
was continuously tracking the mental state of the adolescent
through regular reminders. Students proposed an automated
461
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

notiﬁcations system that “will contact the user if he/she has
not connected to the app for a speciﬁc amount of time” (S6)
(the amount of time can be conﬁgured in the settings of the
application). Through the notiﬁcations, the chatbot will ensure
that the mental health of the user is not at a critical level, and
it will “show interest” (S11) aiming to decrease the feeling
of solitude and negligence. Furthermore, reminders will also
be sent to teachers and the support team if the case has been
neglected for a long time.
Epione Bot
9:41
It seems like it is a difﬁcult moment 
for you. To my opinion, it would be 
helpful to talk to a real person. 
How about you send an 
anonymous text through the app? 
You can choose someone you feel 
comfortable with and they can help 
you solve the conﬂict without 
knowing who you are.  
Your message
I do not feel like talking to anyone.
Hm, I am not sure.
Let me send you a list of people 
who are here to help you.
1. Jean Dupont - Mediator
2. Pauline Lefevre - Teacher …
Do you trust any of them?
Yes, my teacher Pauline.
Message Human Mediator
Continue talking to chatbot
Figure 3. The User Interface of the app for self-disclosing bullying in
schools. (The original prototypes were designed in French and translated to
English for clariﬁcation purposes.)
The results of the interviews and focus groups gave insights
into the importance of creating a community feeling. An
effective way to endorse a feeling of community within the app
is through sharing personal experiences, thus a Temoignages
(testimonials) page has been created. Adolescents have the
option of choosing to disclose anonymously in the school
group their experience and receive support from their peers
through the heart button. To avoid additional bullying and
spamming, the shared experience needs to be validated by the
team of the local school. By sharing experiences on a dedicated
page, the application aims to raise awareness regarding the
negative aspects of bullying, as well as to show empathy to
the bullying targets.
Text and voice calls are the only modalities for sharing
experiences. No videos or pictures can be shared in the
application as “they might infringe the privacy of witnesses”
(T1). Users have the option of disclosing bullying either with
the support team or with a speciﬁc teacher. A list of teachers
who are willing to participate in the program will be included
in the app, as focus groups indicated that some students are
“more comfortable and trusting with speciﬁc individuals who
they already know” (S9). Emergency contact numbers will be
included in the application if the child wishes to make phone
calls and receive external help by third parties (147 or police
department).
C. Privacy and Security
Initial interviews with domain experts suggested that the
bullying reports should be handled by the designated team at
each local school. As such, an appropriate group signature
scheme [37] will be selected to ensure credential/membership
authentication. The group signature scheme will ensure that
the local school can verify that the bullying report was sent
from an authenticated adolescent, however, it will not reveal
his/her identity. A fully-anonymous system is being evaluated
by distributing a group member secret key to all the identi-
ﬁed adolescents [38] with no possibility of signature tracing
through the use of special trapdoors. QR codes will be posted
in each school in order to redirect users automatically to the
local school support team.
The implementation of an end-to-end encrypted messaging
channel will enable students and the support team of the
local school to communicate in real-time, using cryptographic
protocols such as Signal [39]. Thus, the support team can
provide help without being aware of who the student is if
the student wishes to remain anonymous during the process.
Furthermore, the encryption of the chat will ensure the security
of the sensitive information disclosed in the application.
Ofﬂine capabilities will be considered in order to ensure the
availability of digital tools for adolescents. The ofﬂine version
will offer limited functionalities, and it will enable automatic
syncing once the device is connected to the internet.
An emergency delete button will be included, in case the
user wishes to delete all the data saved in his local device and
restart the application from the beginning. Finally, the option
of deleting individual messages exchanged with the human
mediator will be included to give individuals control over their
personal data.
D. Trust
The authors of [27] suggested that usage of trust models
facilitates the successful deployment of new technologies,
hence, their trust model was referenced to design the digi-
tal tool for self-reporting bullying in schools. Usability and
security were carefully incorporated, and the features of the
tool are compliant with the six building blocks enumerated in
Section II-A:
•
Security: Integration of group signature schemes to
authenticate users provides enhanced security in the
app. Furthermore, users will have complete control
over the personal data provided in the app.
462
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

•
Usability: The user interface was designed in collabo-
ration with teachers, experts, and adolescents in order
to address the needs of all types of users.
•
Privacy: The tool will be fully anonymous, and no
identiﬁable data will be collected. User data will be
stored locally on the device until the user agrees to
contact a human mediator.
•
Reliability and availability: The tool will be open-
source and provided for free to students and teachers.
•
Audit and veriﬁcation mechanisms: End-to-end en-
cryption of the user messages will be provided to
ensure the security of sensitive data.
•
User expectations: The tool is being developed by a
public institution in Switzerland, and as a result, it
will follow the Swiss guidelines for the protection
of personal data. The simple design of the features
proposed during the workshops also aims to conform
with prevailing norms of mobile user interfaces.
The trust model will be validated in the future through test-
ing with adolescents and teachers, and it will be iteratively
improved to better meet the needs of the project.
E. Summary
In summary, the outcome of the focus groups and the
participatory design workshops reveals that the participants, on
the whole, agreed that the digital tool for bullying scenarios
should be designed as a means for adolescents to receive
support rather than as a means for ﬁling bullying complaints.
Therefore, participants suggested that the tool should be
carefully designed to act as a companion for adolescents
by providing advice through an intelligent chatbot, regularly
showing interest through notiﬁcations, and ensuring privacy
through anonymity.
Unlike the existing solutions presented in Section II-B2,
participants suggested that the digital tool addresses all actors
involved in a bullying scenario, namely the victims, the wit-
nesses, and the bullies. The reasoning behind the suggestion
was that the tool should raise awareness about bullying in
schools and support should be provided to all adolescents.
The majority of participants preferred a chatbot over di-
rectly contacting a human. Several reasons were echoed for
such a preference such as the lack of judgment, the general
perception that Artiﬁcial intelligence cannot make mistakes,
and the ability to provide immediate support. Another view
presented by the participants was the personalizing of the
experience in the tool tailored to one’s needs through the ability
to customize the behavior and the appearance of the chatbot.
The main advantage of the tool was revealed to be the fact
that students can receive support while remaining anonymous.
This would break the barrier of taking the ﬁrst step into self-
disclosing bullying and increase the level of trust between the
adolescents and the digital tool. While some students indicated
that they would be more comfortable talking to people they
were familiar with, all participants agreed that an additional
channel for disclosing bullying in their schools would be
necessary, as adolescents are different from each other.
Finally, students believed that bullying prevention is best
achieved through extra-curricular events in their schools, hence
the main target of the tool should remain detection and disclo-
sure. Prevention could be slightly targeted to raise awareness
through testimonials. Interviews with experts revealed that
intervention should be handled by a human mediator. Yet to
create an incentive for the student to utilize the tool, it was
decided that the chatbot would provide circumstantial advice
and repeatedly encourage students to talk to a human through
an anonymous channel.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper aims to present the design process of an
interactive digital tool for the self-disclosure of adolescents
who are involved in bullying conﬂicts in schools. As adoles-
cents belong to the group of the population that is not well
understood, participatory design workshops were organized in
public secondary schools in Switzerland to identify the key
trustful features that the digital tool should exhibit. The results
of this study indicate that: i) secure chatbots that assess the
emotional state of the users and react accordingly ii) features
that tailor the user experience such as avatars and notiﬁcations,
and iii) features that foster a feeling of privacy, are aspects that
should be taken in consideration when prototyping interfaces
for sensitive mental health data.
The current existing solutions for disclosing bullying are
not aligned with the feedback received from the students during
the focus groups organized for this study. The disclosure-
oriented approaches presented in Section II-B2 act primarily as
a reporting system for negative activity in schools and heavily
rely on the vulnerable individuals taking the initiative to ﬁle a
report. Based on the interviews with the experts in the ﬁeld,
this approach can act as a barrier for adolescents to take the
ﬁrst step and disclose bullying in schools. As such, the idea
is to assure users that the goal of the digital tool is to provide
support to vulnerable individuals rather than solve bullying
conﬂicts. This approach will nudge adolescents into gradually
disclosing sensitive information (regardless if they are victims,
witnesses, or bullies) and it was referred to be more favorable
and efﬁcient by the students who participated in the focus
groups.
Based on the literature review presented in Section II
demonstrating that self-disclosure reduces bullying in schools,
trust is required for individuals to feel comfortable self-
disclosing sensitive information, and privacy is an important
aspect for establishing a trust channel, a hypothesis has been
formulated in order to be tested in the future. The hypothe-
sis is that by designing privacy-aware medical applications,
adolescents will be more inclined to disclose the distressing
experiences that will contribute to improved mental health
and will help develop sustainable behavior among adolescents.
Initial focus groups and participatory design with adolescents
in Switzerland seem to support the hypothesis, yet additional
research is required to test and validate it.
Considerably more work will need to be done in the
future to evaluate the initial prototypes designed during the
participatory design workshops. A natural progression of this
work is to implement the digital tool based on the feedback
gathered from the adolescents and the experts. As soon as a
minimum viable product will be available, the features of the
tool will be tested ﬁrstly with the experts and teachers who
will contribute to devising several conversation scenarios for
training the chatbot. Secondly, the tool will be tested with the
students of the focus groups to validate the assumptions about
the tool’s requirements. Finally, the tools will be validated
through iterations on the design of the tool from the feedback
received through A/B testing in public schools in Switzerland.
463
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

To conclude, this research project will not only con-
tribute to various disciplines within Computer Science such as
Human-Computer Interaction, Computer Security and Cryp-
tography, e-Health, and Social Computing, but it will also
deliver digital solutions that will be available for immediate
utilization in public schools in Switzerland and abroad.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This EPFLinnovators project has received funding from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gramme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement
No. 754354. Special thanks to the domain experts from the
NGO and the support team for school health, teachers and the
students in the two secondary schools in Switzerland for their
inputs and feedback during the participatory design workshops.
REFERENCES
[1]
APA, “Developing adolescents: A reference for professionals,” Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2002.
[2]
RTS.
One
to
two
students
per
class
are
victims
of
bullying
in
Switzerland.
[retrived:
Oct,
2020].
[Online].
Available:
https://www.rts.ch/info/suisse/
6718365-un-a-deux-eleves-par-classe-sont-victimes-de-harcelement-en-suisse.
html (2015)
[3]
K. Rigby, The Method of Shared Concern: A positive approach to
bullying in schools.
Aust Council for Ed Research, 2011.
[4]
A. Pikas, “New developments of the shared concern method,” School
Psychology International, vol. 23, no. 3, 2002, pp. 307–326.
[5]
J.-P. Bellon and B. Gardette, School bullying: defeating it, it’s possible:
The shared concern method.
ESF sciences humaines, 2018.
[6]
A.
Castillo.
How
to
prevent
bullying
at
school.
[retrived:
Oct, 2020]. [Online]. Available: https://www.letemps.ch/economie/
prevenir-harcelement-scolaire (2018)
[7]
M. J. Boulton, L. Boulton, J. Down, J. Sanders, and H. Craddock,
“Perceived barriers that prevent high school students seeking help from
teachers for bullying and their effects on disclosure intentions,” Journal
of adolescence, vol. 56, 2017, pp. 40–51.
[8]
K. I. Cortes and B. Kochenderfer-Ladd, “To tell or not to tell: What
inﬂuences children’s decisions to report bullying to their teachers?”
School psychology quarterly, vol. 29, no. 3, 2014, p. 336.
[9]
I. Oh and R. J. Hazler, “Contributions of personal and situational
factors to bystanders’ reactions to school bullying,” School Psychology
International, vol. 30, no. 3, 2009, pp. 291–310.
[10]
W. P. Murphy, J. S. Yaruss, and R. W. Quesal, “Enhancing treatment
for school-age children who stutter: Ii. reducing bullying through role-
playing and self-disclosure,” Journal of ﬂuency disorders, vol. 32, no. 2,
2007, pp. 139–162.
[11]
S. A. Rains, “The implications of stigma and anonymity for self-
disclosure in health blogs,” Health communication, vol. 29, no. 1, 2014,
pp. 23–31.
[12]
Adolescents overview. [retrived: Oct, 2020]. [Online]. Available:
https://data.unicef.org/topic/adolescents/overview/ (2019)
[13]
S. Yarosh, I. Radu, S. Hunter, and E. Rosenbaum, “Examining values:
an analysis of nine years of idc research,” in Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, 2011, pp.
136–144.
[14]
E. S. Poole and T. Peyton, “Interaction design research with adolescents:
methodological challenges and best practices,” in Proceedings of the
12th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children, 2013,
pp. 211–217.
[15]
Z. Ashktorab and J. Vitak, “Designing cyberbullying mitigation and
prevention solutions through participatory design with teenagers,” in
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, 2016, pp. 3895–3905.
[16]
G. M. McCarthy, E. R. Rodriguez Ram´ırez, and B. J. Robinson,
“Participatory design to address stigma with adolescents with type
1 diabetes,” in Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems, 2017, pp. 83–94.
[17]
S. M. Jourard, The transparent self.
Van Nostrand Reinhold Company,
1971.
[18]
A. N. Joinson, “Self-disclosure in computer-mediated communication:
The role of self-awareness and visual anonymity,” European journal of
social psychology, vol. 31, no. 2, 2001, pp. 177–192.
[19]
J. H. Greist, M. H. Klein, and L. J. Van Cura, “A computer interview for
psychiatric patient target symptoms,” Archives of General Psychiatry,
vol. 29, no. 2, 1973, pp. 247–253.
[20]
M. Ferriter, “Computer aided interviewing and the psychiatric social
history.” Social Work and Social Sciences Review, 1993.
[21]
S. Weisband and S. Kiesler, “Self disclosure on computer forms: Meta-
analysis and implications,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on human factors in computing systems, 1996, pp. 3–10.
[22]
M. D. Pickard, C. A. Roster, and Y. Chen, “Revealing sensitive
information in personal interviews: Is self-disclosure easier with humans
or avatars and under what conditions?” Computers in Human Behavior,
vol. 65, 2016, pp. 23–30.
[23]
G. M. Lucas, J. Gratch, A. King, and L.-P. Morency, “It’s only a
computer: Virtual humans increase willingness to disclose,” Computers
in Human Behavior, vol. 37, 2014, pp. 94–100.
[24]
L. F. Cranor and S. Garﬁnkel, Security and usability: designing secure
systems that people can use.
O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2005.
[25]
A.
Harley,
“Trustworthiness
in
web
design:
4
credibility
fac-
tors,” Utg. av Nielsen Norman group. url: https://www. nngroup.
com/articles/trustworthy-design, 2016.
[26]
K. S. Jones, “Privacy: what’s different now?” Interdisciplinary Science
Reviews, vol. 28, no. 4, 2003, pp. 287–292.
[27]
L. J. Hoffman, K. Lawson-Jenkins, and J. Blum, “Trust beyond security:
an expanded trust model,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 49, no. 7,
2006, pp. 94–101.
[28]
M. Sapouna et al., “Virtual learning intervention to reduce bullying
victimization in primary school: a controlled trial,” Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry, vol. 51, no. 1, 2010, pp. 104–112.
[29]
C. Raminhos et al., “A serious game-based solution to prevent bullying,”
International Journal of Pervasive Computing and Communications,
vol. 12, no. 2, 2016, pp. 194–215.
[30]
H.-F. Neo, C.-C. Teo, and J. L. H. Boon, “Mobile edutainment learning
approach: #StopBully,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Confer-
ence on Digital Technology in Education.
ACM, 2018, pp. 6–10.
[31]
STOPit Solutions. [retrived: Oct, 2020]. [Online]. Available: https:
//stopitsolutions.com
[32]
Anonymous Alerts. [retrived: Oct, 2020]. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.anonymousalerts.com/webcorp/
[33]
H. Plattner, “An introduction to design thinking process guide,” The
Institute of Design at Stanford: Stanford, 2010.
[34]
J. F. Jones, S. A. Hook, S. C. Park, and L. M. Scott, “Privacy, security
and interoperability of mobile health applications,” in International Con-
ference on Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Springer,
2011, pp. 46–55.
[35]
A. Latham, K. Crockett, and Z. Bandar, “A conversational expert system
supporting bullying and harassment policies.” vol. 1, Jan 2010, pp. 163–
168.
[36]
R. Aylett et al., “Unscripted narrative for affectively driven characters,”
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 26, no. 3, 2006, pp.
42–52.
[37]
D. Chaum and E. Van Heyst, “Group signatures,” in Workshop on the
Theory and Application of of Cryptographic Techniques.
Springer,
1991, pp. 257–265.
[38]
Y.-k. Lee, S.-w. Han, S.-j. Lee, B.-h. Chung, and D. G. Lee, “Anony-
mous authentication system using group signature,” in 2009 Inter-
national Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive
Systems.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1235–1239.
[39]
K. Cohn-Gordon, C. Cremers, B. Dowling, L. Garratt, and D. Stebila,
“A formal security analysis of the signal messaging protocol,” in 2017
IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). IEEE,
2017, pp. 451–466.
464
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

