Trombosonic: Designing and Exploring a New Interface for Musical Expression in
Music and Non-Music Domains
Oliver H¨odl and Geraldine Fitzpatrick
Human Computer Interaction Group
Institute for Design and Assessment of Technology
Vienna University of Technology
oliver@igw.tuwien.ac.at, geraldine.ﬁtzpatrick@tuwien.ac.at
Abstract—The “Trombosonic” is a new digital music instrument
based on the foundational principles of the slide trombone.
An ultrasonic sensor combined with a red laser allows the
performer to play the instrument using similar movements to
playing a trombone to change the pitch, by moving one hand
back and forth even though there is no physical slider available.
Furthermore, additional sensors enhance musical expression by
gestural movement of the whole interface and by using the breath.
Due to its compact size and the lack of a slider, the Trombosonic
can be played in many different ways. This inspired us to do an
informal evaluation to explore the potential applicability of our
prototype in different ﬁelds and settings other than music. We
identiﬁed a certain suitability for old and young people and a
new possibility for people with restricted mobility to play such a
musical instrument. Further development might include a built-
in microphone to use the human voice and an expansion of the
synthesizer’s features.
Keywords-Sound and Music Computing, Interface for Musical
Expression, Exploratory Evaluation
I.
INTRODUCTION
Musical instruments equipped with sensor-technologies al-
low many different ways of expression and interaction [1].
Apart from using them for musical purposes the application
of such versatile interfaces can be manifold (e.g., [2], [3]).
In this paper, we present a new multi-purpose interface
named “Trombosonic”. The primary intention was a new
digital music instrument inspired by the slide trombone. Hence,
we started to design the interface under some self-deﬁned
constraints. Unlike many existing approaches, we did not
augment a trombone (e.g., [4]) or used the instrument as an
example for a digital music interface imitating the trombone’s
look and feel to create an electronic slide trombone (e.g.,
[5]). For our development we rather took the technique for
playing the trombone as a guiding principle only, to enable
an embodied control of sound with a preferably simple and
compact hand-held interface.
Our initial design considerations led to preconditions which
address sensor-technology and construction. To balance func-
tionality and complexity of the interface and keep it as simple
and cheap as possible, we decided to use only standard off-
the-shelf low-cost hardware, such as an ultrasonic sensor,
push buttons and an accelerometer, to mention some of the
important ones. By doing so, we could keep the costs for
hardware and material below 100 Euros in total and were still
able to explore a range of different sensors within one device.
Figure 1: The ﬁnal Trombosonic prototype
Throughout the design process, the basic intentions regard-
ing appearance, functionality and materials changed signiﬁ-
cantly. We initially started with a paper-made tubular prototype
to simulate a trombone. The ﬁnal interface is shown in Fig.
1 and illustrates the visual difference to a traditional slide
trombone (see Fig. 2). Most notable is the missing typical slide
that characterises a trombone. Despite that, it is played like a
trombone with slide motions by holding it in one hand, either
left or right, and changing the pitch by moving the other hand
back and forth. The name “Trombosonic” is the combination
of the two words “trombone” and “sonic”.
However, during the development phase it turned out that
the device might also be useful for other applications as a hand-
held interface. Apart from its original purpose to serve as a
musical instrument, an exploratory evaluation has shown its
potential applicability in ﬁelds such as education, soniﬁcation,
therapeutic prevention and rehabilitation.
The main contribution of this paper is the presentation of
the new digital music instrument Trombosonic along with an
exploratory evaluation. We use both expert knowledge and the
experience of extreme users [6] to identify potential future
applicability in music and non-music domains.
In the following we start with the description of similar
research and existing literature our project is built on. Then
we go on to describe the design and the functionality of the
Trombosonic. Finally, we present the exploratory evaluation
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 2: The jazz trombonist Roman Sladek plays a
traditional slide trombone (Photographer OhWeh)
that shows the potential applicability of our prototype.
II.
RELATED WORK
Both researchers and artists have used the trombone for
their work in many ways. Composers appreciate the trombone
as “very adaptable system for capturing, suspending and al-
tering shards of sound” using different electronic extensions
to create new sounds and sample external sources [7]. Farell
augmented a trombone by using a minimal-hardware ultrasonic
sensor for the slide, a modiﬁed mouthpiece and a loudspeaker
in the trombone bell to change the original sound of the
trombone for his electro-acoustic performances [4]. A very
simple prototype using an optical sensor to detect the position
of the slide was created by Lemouton et al. to realise a gestural
interface for a traditional trombone [8].
Instead of augmenting existing instruments, Bromwich
built a completely new instrument, the Metabone, using only
the trombone’s dynamics and characteristics [9]. Su et al.
present an electronic trombone for the entertainment of chil-
dren and a playful introduction in musical instruments [10].
The Double Slide Controller derives from the traditional trom-
bone [5]. It looks different though and appears as a complex
interface.
Unlike the presented examples that use the trombone as
a model or augment an existing instrument, we wanted to
combine its most promising features within one simple and
compact interface. Keeping in mind the trombone as original
instrument and its possibility to create sound by a unique hand
gesture, we also wanted to provide new features and embodied
interaction that goes beyond the usual musical purposes.
III.
OVERALL CONCEPT
The Trombosonic’s hand-held interface is purely electronic
without any loose or moveable parts. It is held in one hand,
either left or right, with a pinch grip. For data processing
it uses an Arduino Duemilanove microprocessor [11]. An
attached RedFly WiFi-Shield [12] sends sensor data as OSC
messages wirelessly to a computer running Max/MSP for
sound synthesis in our particular case or any other OSC-
compliant musical application.
The casing of the interface is cylindrical with rounded ends
and made of polystyrene and wood (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 4).
This keeps it lightweight but stable and handy. All electronic
Figure 3: Playing the Trombosonic, the red laser in the palm
indicates the direction of the ultrasonic sensor
devices are bolt-on or glued. Additionally, four aluminium rods
provide a good grip and they round out the overall appearance.
Its total weight including batteries is 294 g (10.37 oz).
For powering the Arduino, a battery pack is included at the
bottom of the interface which holds four standard AA batteries.
The longest period of time that the Trombosonic was turned on
for testing purposes was 130 minutes and no energy problems
were observed during this time. An accurate test regarding
energy consumption has not been done yet.
Both the compact design and the wireless network commu-
nication ensure free and easy movement during usage within
the range of the arm and without being wired to the computer.
The whole set of sensors and why they are speciﬁcally used
to enable embodied musical expression, are described in detail
in the following.
IV.
MUSICAL EXPRESSION
The Trombosonic’s primary intention is to serve as a
musical instrument. Hence, it has several features that enable
expressive sound control, including (1) four push buttons and
four LEDs, (2) an ultrasonic sensor, (3) a red laser pointer, (4)
a thermal resistor, and (5) an accelerometer. For its use as a
musical instrument the sensors and actuators are conﬁgured to
work for particular musical purposes. All features are shown
in Fig. 4 as they are located on the device and an overview
with a short description is given in Table I.
A. Physical sound generation
Four push buttons, mounted on the top board, enable the
control of the basic functions. They are ordered in a square
and operated with the middle ﬁnger and the ring ﬁnger. This
allows a good grip using the other two ﬁngers while pushing
the four buttons. For additional visual feedback each button is
connected to an LED in a different colour, which ﬂashes when
the button is pushed. All combinations of how the buttons can
be pushed and the corresponding functions are shown in Table
II.
The Trombosonic uses a subtractive sound synthesis. The
default frequency of the oscillator is 440 Hz. Button 1 turns
on the sound, while button 2 allows the user to save and hold
the actual frequency which changes continuously according
to play. With this function, the player is able to explore
the acoustic frequency spectrum endlessly or at least within
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4: Description of all features of the interface
TABLE I: Overview of features and functionality
Feature
Functionality
Four buttons
Tone on/off, set synthesizer param.
Ultrasonic sensor
Pitch/frequency control
Red laser pointer
Direction of the ultrasonic sensor
Accelerometer
Position/movement of the interface
Thermal resistor
Using the player’s breath
the human acoustic range. Buttons 3 and 4 switch between
waveforms of the oscillator and a Low Frequency Oscillator
(LFO). Pushing buttons 1 and 2 or 3 and 4 together switches
between ﬁlter types and turns on the laser. Pushing all buttons
at once, resets the reference value of the thermal resistor. All
functions are described later in detail.
B. Embodied expression
The design of Trombosonic enables a range of embodied
expressions in play. The ultrasonic sensor [13] at the front
enables the typical pitch control of the generated tone as known
from the slide trombone. Unlike the traditional instrument the
Trombosonic has no slider or handle. Instead, the red laser
pointer (a disassembled off-the-shelf model for presentations)
indicates the direction of the ultrasonic sensor for a better
orientation of the pitch-steering hand as shown in Fig. 3. While
moving it back and forth a red dot is projected on the palm.
This realisation allows the player to play the instrument with
two hands, comparable to a slide trombone which also makes
it familiar to spectators in its embodied movements.
Because the ultrasonic waves can bounce off any object,
TABLE II: Summary of button functions
Buttons pushed at once
Functionality
1
Tone on/off
2
Set new frequency
3
Switch oscillator wave
4
Switch LFO waveform
1 + 2
Switch ﬁlter type
3 + 4
Laser on/off
1 + 2 + 3 + 4
Set thermal resistor value
other button combinations
not used yet
the second hand is not mandatory, thus the Trombosonic can
also be played with just one hand and interact with other
objects. These objects may be items within the performer’s
environment, or the body itself. Whatever interface is pointed
on, the distance is transformed into sound. Even spectators who
are moving or waving hands can allow interactive soniﬁcation
of both performer and audience. The laser pointer can also be
turned off and on at any time during a performance to avoid
dazzling the spectators.
Another embodied sound control is realised with an ac-
celerometer [14] that measures the interface’s movement in
three dimensions. The actual synthesizer implementation uses
two of them. The device can be turned around the longest axis
(the one the red laser points to) and up- and downwards to
control frequencies of the LFO and the ﬁlter.
Given that the trombone, the source of our inspiration,
is a wind instrument, we also included a mouth piece in
our interface. Unlike the slide trombone, it is for additional
expression only and not the origin of the tone. For reasons of
simplicity we did not use a complex breath analyser [4], [5] but
a simple thermal resistor [15] to recognise the player’s breath.
During the design process we used this value to intensify
different parameters of the synthesizer, such as the bandwidth
of the frequency ﬁlter. However, with the actual prototype, the
breath control gives the volume a boost as this seems to be
comparable with a traditional wind instrument.
C. Sound synthesis
For our applications the Trombosonic uses Max/MSP for
a subtractive sound synthesis. The whole patch is controlled
remotely with the wireless interface and receives nine different
sensor-values (see Table I). To generate a sound, the player can
choose among simple waveforms which are attenuated by an
ADSR (Attack Decay Sustain Release) envelope, an LFO and
ﬁlter effects. Certain parameters can be controlled in real-time
with the Trombosonic’s hand-held interface.
For this prototype we focused mainly on the interface and
minimised the synthesizer’s features. Hence, the sound reminds
a little of old synthesizers. Furthermore, there is no special
musical training or knowledge needed to play the Trombosonic
and to explore its features.
V.
EXPLORATORY EVALUATION
We did an informal evaluation of the Trombosonic as a
musical instrument and explored the potential applicability of
our prototype in different ﬁelds. For this purpose we asked
experts at a competition for new musical instruments and a
researcher in game and interaction design.
Additionally we build on knowledge from existing lit-
erature about the value of extreme users [6]. The positive
impact of music and the suitability of musical instruments
in various non-music domains have already been shown. For
instance they can be used as playful, toy-like devices for non-
specialists (e.g. [3], [16]) or for therapeutic prevention and
rehabilitation (e.g. [17], [18]). This inspired us not only to use
expert knowledge to evaluate the Trombosonic but also to give
it away to people with different abilities and ages such as a 92-
year-old woman and a 13-year-old boy. We considered them
as untypical users for new musical interfaces and expected
them to help to explore the Trombosonic’s potential beyond
performances.
Everyone participating in the exploratory evaluation was
not involved in the project before and saw the device for the
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ﬁrst time. After a short introduction they were allowed to play
the interface freely. Afterwards they were asked to tell us about
their experience. In addition, we took photographs of their
explorations and took notes of their comments. All subjects
started to play the Trombosonic with its general sonic and
gestural features we described in section IV. With each of them
we spent about 30-45 minutes for exploration and talked with
them about their experience. For some we slightly changed
single features tailored to their anticipated interests and needs,
as will be described below.
A. New interface for musical expression - expert evaluation
To hand out the Trombosonic to a musician is the most
obvious test for a musical instrument. We did so in early spring
2013 for a performance in Vienna where the Trombosonic was
used as special instrument for a certain part of a show. The
artist used it as a solo instrument during one song.
However, to “ﬁt” better with the other unusual users and
to get the most interesting and diverse results, we did some-
thing different. We applied for the annual Margaret Guthman
Musical Instrument Competition [19] which is considered one
of the largest competitions for new musical instruments. The
Trombosonic was chosen out of more than 70 submissions
to take part in a performance as one of 17 semiﬁnalists
which means an acceptance rate of lower than 25%. The
successful submission to this highly competitive and renowned
competition proves that the Trombosonic is already well-
regarded as a new musical instrument. The actual performance
took place in Atlanta, USA, in April 2013. We took advantage
of this event to get the ofﬁcial feedback of the expert jury as
well as the opinion of other participants and audience members
when presenting it as a new musical instrument.
The performance at the competition was successful and two
pieces were presented: One original electro-acoustic composi-
tion and one rather mainstream oriented piece accompanied by
pre-recorded playback. People in the audience as well as the
jury enjoyed the presentation of the many different features
and how the Trombosonic was played in a trombone-like
manner during the ﬁrst piece. The second piece was called
“Trombopolka” and was intended to be a tribute to the original
instrument, the slide trombone. The Polka is a popular genre
of folk music. Some audience members explicitly stated after
the performance how they liked the combination of traditional
music and the new musical instrument.
The experts mainly criticized deﬁciencies in the sound
synthesis and some spectators missed the acoustic traceability
of the breath sensor. One suggestion from another musician
was to integrate a microphone for additional sound creation
using the human voice. Two other performers pointed out the
compact and wireless design which makes it easy for embodied
performances as they anticipated.
In summary, the performance at the musical instrument
competition conﬁrms the potential of the Trombosonic as a
new interface for musical expression and various comments
from new musical instrument experts suggest the direction of
future revisions and improvements.
B. Physical training for older adults
We then gave the Trombosonic to a 92-year-old woman
who is a relative of one of our project members. She was
willing to help us for the evaluation during a visit at her
own house. She has full mental abilities apart from some
forgetfulness from time to time, as she confessed herself. She
Figure 5: A 92-year-old woman playing the Trombosonic:
First impression (left), standing to operate it “in another
way” (right)
is still able to walk without a cane in her home. She told
us, she uses a walking stick only outside as a precaution and
especially during the winter season. However, according to
her own description her movement abilities are getting worse
and her visibility is already in a bad condition. Asked for her
musical knowledge she said, she had learned to play the piano
a long time ago and loved to play music and to sing. Now she
is unable to play any more since she cannot see the keys and
the score.
We did not present the Trombosonic as a music instrument
to her. According to what literature suggests in relation to
physical activity and elderly people [20] we rather said it
was an acoustic training device. Addressing her own musical
experience, we changed the original electronic sound with a
piano synthesizer to make it sound more familiar to her. After
an explanation of the buttons and some possibilities to make
sound, she started to handle it by herself.
Conversation with her and our own observation have shown
that the originally intended way to play the Trombosonic with
two hands was not very convenient for her. What was notable
though, was her behaviour changing her hands holding the
device alternately in both hands and ﬁnally she even stood up
to operate it “in another way” as she noted (see Fig. 5, right).
She said she tried to ﬁnd a good way to hold it and at the same
time preventing her arms from getting tired when moving the
device by changing hands. Unlike all other participants of the
exploratory evaluation, she was the only one considering tiring
issues during playing the instrument. This might be important
when using the Trombosonic for older adults or rehabilitation.
It appeared to us that she mainly concentrated on the device
itself instead of producing particular sounds. However, at the
end of our session she summarized her experience: “I really
enjoyed making it sound like a piano doing moves I am usually
not used to do. Though I do not know how it works and why
it sounded like a piano” (Translated from German).
Overall, we identiﬁed a certain interest in the Trombosonic
and her different ways to handle it. Following Rolland et
al. who illustrate that “regular physical activity is a key
component of successful aging” [20] and Bruhn and Schr¨oter
who discuss the positive impact of making music in old age,
we propose the Trombosonic as a potential device for elderly
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

people. It might be a good way to combine physical and
musical activity.
C. Playful interface for children
When talking about musical play and young children,
Tarnowski explains “functional musical play might include
exploring vocal, instrumental, and environmental sounds as
well as the way in which these sounds are made” [21].
This motivated us to give the Trombosonic to a young boy
aged thirteen (Fig. 6, right) who was visiting our lab for a
trial internship. He has no instrumental training but considers
himself a very interested listener to music which is also
indicated by the big headphones he wears around his neck
all the time. Additionally he started to make music with his
computer a little while ago, experimenting with a software-
synthesizer.
Similar to the older adult, we explained the basic function-
ality of the Trombosonic to him and how to handle it. When
he started playing we observed, most different to all other
evaluation participants, that he really seemed to focus on the
music. We also noticed that he played the Trombosonic mostly
in its originally intended way using two hands. However, once
he started to roll the interface with one hand on the table
to create a smooth wave-like sound using the accelerometer.
He was the only one who used the movement features of the
interface in this physical way together with other objects such
as the table.
In all, the young boy carefully analysed the different
features and ways to play the Trombosonic throughout his
whole session. Following his own words “it was a lot of
fun” and he would like to control his own sounds with the
interface. We propose the Trombosonic as a suitable instrument
for letting young people playfully explore music without being
able to play a traditional instrument.
D. Soniﬁcation and people with disabilities
Finally, we asked a researcher with expertise in interaction
design within our lab to tell us about his experience with
the Trombosonic. After an initial explanation of the basic
functionality we let him explore the device. It was signiﬁcant
that he started to use it as a one-handed device despite our
initial advice to play it in a trombone-like manner. Following
his own “intuition” (as he deﬁned it by himself) he started to
walk around the room using the Trombosonic as a soniﬁcation
device. He started to explore the environment acoustically
while pointing the device onto different walls and surfaces
(Fig. 6, left).
Furthermore, he turned the device around pointing the
ultrasonic sensor towards his own body. Moving it back and
forth he started explaining: “Look, now it is a one-handed
instrument. I can play a trombone without my second hand”
(Translated from German). During his test he complained
about the lack of clear feedback when using the buttons to
control the synthesizer. Since he was not familiar with the
synthesizer’s options this was really a problem when trying to
intentionally switch between wave forms and ﬁlters as he said.
The trial with the interaction designer suggests some
usability improvements for a more intuitive handling. Fur-
thermore, it might be worth considering the Trombosonic
as a one-handed musical instrument keeping in mind that
“thousands of people with disabilities in the UK, and millions
across the world, are excluded from music making” [22]. The
Trombosonic could be such an instrument to enable those
Figure 6: People playing the Trombosonic, as a one-handed
instrument acoustically exploring a shelf (left), trying its
features played with two hands (right)
people and people with restricted mobility in general to gain a
trombone-like musical experience. It could also have potential
for people with visual impairment as a way to playfully explore
their physical environment.
VI.
DISCUSSION
The exploratory evaluation was not meant to be compre-
hensive but to complement the main contribution of this paper,
the presentation of a new musical instrument. It gave us a
differentiated impression of how people play the Trombosonic
from the perspectives of both experts (in new musical instru-
ments and in interaction design) and extreme users (very old,
young). Their considered feedback, as well as their unantic-
ipated uses, pointed to potential applicability that might be
worth considering and gave some initial directions for future
development.
Overall, people tried various different ways to handle the
interface, such as using one-hand only or both hands and while
standing, sitting or moving around. The actual usage to pro-
duce sound was ranging from playing music following scores
in a traditional way to acoustically explore the environment.
The approach of using an exploratory evaluation when test-
ing new musical instruments turned out to be qualiﬁed. It was
inspiring to use expert knowledge as well as to see unexpected
behaviour of unusual users. We argue that our assumption
to widen the range for non-obvious applications by doing an
exploratory evaluation was veriﬁed. At least for the initial of
a new musical instrument and a new interaction device this
opened a set of unpredictable possibilities for improvements
and new directions to focus on for future development.
Compared to the initial described approaches which aug-
ment traditional trombones or create new interfaces on the
basis of the original instrument, our strategy to create a
compact device has its advantages as the exploratory evaluation
has shown. Despite its different appearance, people considered
the Trombosonic to be a trombone-like instrument. At least
when it is played as intended which happened during the
instrument competition in our particular case. Analogously
people tend to play with the interface in unusual ways and
they explore its features as soon as they do not think of it as a
trombone-like instrument such as the interaction designer and
the older adult.
Thus, designing a new musical instrument under cer-
tain constraints and evaluate the prototype in an exploratory
manner brought the anticipated insights in unexpected and
unpredictable user behaviour. The combination of experts and
extreme users helped to go beyond the usual applicability
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

of this musical interface in ﬁelds such as healthcare and
education.
VII.
CONCLUSION
The Trombosonic is a new instrument for musical expres-
sion that derives from the slide trombone. However, it does
not imitate the slide trombone either visually or acoustically,
rather the principles of this wind instrument serve as a design
inspiration for the interactive gestures.
Push buttons, an ultrasonic sensor and a red laser allow
an embodied playing of the instrument similar to the slide
trombone changing the pitch with one hand moving back and
forth. Compared to a traditional slide trombone, the whole
instrument’s size is much smaller and the slider is completely
missing. Furthermore, an accelerometer and a thermal resistor
enable an additional embodied expression. Moving the whole
interface enhances the musical possibilities compared to the
traditional instrument, while the use of the player’s breath
retains a typical feature of wind instruments.
Along with presenting the Trombosonic as a new inter-
face for musical expression we did an exploratory evaluation
looking for its potential as a musical instrument as well as in
other ﬁelds. Hence, we successfully submitted a performance
proposal to an international competition for new musical
instruments and gave the instrument to a 92-year-old woman,
a 13-year-old boy and a researcher in game and interaction
design. This let us identify different issues and unexpected
aspects to keep in mind for future improvements. All cases
also indicate the Trombosonic’s suitability for various musical
purposes as well as non-music applications.
VIII.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
For advanced prototypes of the Trombosonic we plan to
integrate a microphone for additional sound creation using the
human voice. Furthermore, the synthesizer needs some revision
regarding the sound and better mapping of sensor values to
single parameters, along with a more intuitive button control.
Beyond technical improvement addressing mainly musical
features, the evaluation suggests to adapt and use the interface
in other domains. It could be used as training device for elderly
people addressing physical and musical health-relevant activity
or it could let children intuitively explore sound generation
without being trained to play a traditional music instrument.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Dobrian and D. Koppelman, “The’E’in NIME: Musical Expression
with New Computer Interfaces,” in Proceedings of New Interfaces for
Musical Expression, 2006, pp. 277–282.
[2]
C. Pacchetti and F. Mancini, “Active music therapy in Parkinson’s
disease: an integrative method for motor and emotional rehabilitation,”
vol. 393, 2000, pp. 386–393.
[3]
D. Robson, “Play!: Sound toys for non-musicians,” Computer Music
Journal, vol. 26, no. 3, 2002, pp. 50–61.
[4]
N. Farwell, “Adapting the trombone: a suite of electro-acoustic inter-
ventions for the piece Rouse,” in Proceedings of New Interfaces for
Musical Expression, 2006, pp. 358–363.
[5]
T. Henriques, “Double Slide Controller,” in Proceedings of New Inter-
faces for Musical Expression, 2009, pp. 260–261.
[6]
L. Holmquist, “User-driven innovation in the future applications lab,”
Extended abstracts of the 2004 conference on Human factors and
computing systems - CHI ’04, 2004, pp. 1091–1092.
[7]
N. Collins, “Low Brass: The Evolution of Trombone-Propelled Elec-
tronics,” Leonardo Music Journal, vol. 1, no. 1, 1991, pp. 41–44.
[8]
S. Lemouton, M. Stroppa, and B. Sluchin, “Using the augmented
trombone in I will not kiss your f. ing ﬂag,” in Proceedings of New
Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2006, pp. 304–307.
[9]
M. A. Bromwich, “The Metabone: An interactive sensory control
mechanism for virtuoso trombone,” in Proceedings of International
Computer Music Conference, 1997, pp. 2–4.
[10]
M. Su, W. Lee, and S. Chen, “Electronic trombone: an interactive tool to
promote musical learning and performance creativity,” in Proceedings
of the 10th International Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and
Its Applications in Industry, 2011, pp. 585–588.
[11]
Arduino. [Online]. Available: http://www.arduino.cc (last access 24.
January 2014)
[12]
RedFly
WiFi-Shield.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.watterott.com/de/Arduino-RedFly-Shield
(last
access
24. January 2014)
[13]
Ultrasonic
sensor.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.watterott.com/en/Parallax-PING-Ultrasonic-Sensor-28015
(last access 24. January 2014)
[14]
Accelerometer
ADXL335.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.watterott.com/en/Breakout-Board-ADXL335
(last
access
24. January 2014)
[15]
Thermal
resistor.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sparkfun.com/products/250
(last
access
24.
January
2014)
[16]
S. Jord`a, “Digital Instruments and Players: Part I Efﬁciency and Ap-
prenticeship,” in Proceedings of New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
2004, pp. 59–63.
[17]
C. Plahl, “Musiktherapie - Praxisfelder und Vorgehensweisen,” in
Musikpsychologie.
Enzyklop¨adie, Rowohlts, 2009, pp. 630–652.
[18]
M. E. Clark, A. W. Lipe, and M. Bilbrey, “Use of music to decrease ag-
gressive behaviors in people with dementia.” Journal of gerontological
nursing, vol. 24, no. 7, Jul. 1998, pp. 10–17.
[19]
Margaret
Guthman
Musical
Instrument
Competition.
[Online].
Available: http://www.gtcmt.gatech.edu/guthman2013 (last access 24.
January 2014)
[20]
Y. Rolland, G. Abellan van Kan, and B. Vellas, “Physical activity
and Alzheimer’s disease: from prevention to therapeutic perspectives.”
Journal of the American Medical Directors Association, vol. 9, no. 6,
Jul. 2008, pp. 390–405.
[21]
S. M. Tarnowski, “Musical Play and Young Children,” Music Educators
Journal, vol. 86, no. 1, 1999, pp. 26–29.
[22]
The One-Handed Musical Instrument Trust. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ohmi.org.uk (last access 24. January 2014)
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

