User Interface for Trust Decision Making in Inter-Enterprise Collaborations
Puneet Kaur, Sini Ruohomaa and Lea Kutvonen
Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki
Helsinki, Finland
Email: puneet.kaur@cs.helsinki.ﬁ, sini.ruohomaa@cs.helsinki.ﬁ, lea.kutvonen@cs.helsinki.ﬁ
Abstract—Trust decisions on inter-enterprise collaborations
involve a trustor’s subjective evaluation of its willingness to
participate in the speciﬁc collaboration, given the risks and
incentives involved. In earlier work, we have built support on
automating routine trust decisions based on a combination of
risk, reputation and incentive information. Non-routine cases
must be dealt with by human users, who require access to
supporting information for their decisions; further, their needs
differ somewhat from the needs of automation tools. This paper
presents work in progress to provide a usable user interface
for manual trust decisions on inter-enterprise collaborations
in situations where automated decisions cannot be made. We
have implemented a trust decision expert tool and are in the
process of evaluating it and incorporating it into a broader
collaboration management toolset.
Keywords-trust decisions; reputation; risk; inter-enterprise
collaboration; expert tool
I. INTRODUCTION
The emergence of technology support ranging from
service-oriented architecture and Web Services to cloud
infrastructures are paving the way for semi-automated and
low-cost setup and management of inter-enterprise collabo-
rations. An inter-enterprise collaboration involves a network
of autonomous enterprises working towards a shared goal,
e.g., to provide a composed service to end users. An online
travel agency, for example, can compose travel packages
for its customers by utilizing a set of services provided
by its partners for payment handling, booking ﬂights, hotel
itinerary, car rental and other location-speciﬁc arrangements,
where each partial service is provided by a separate au-
tonomous enterprise.
Inter-enterprise collaborations are particularly useful for
small and medium-sized enterprises, which hold expertise
in their own domain but have limited resources. By collab-
orating with other enterprises, they can attain a competitive
edge in ﬁelds outside their individual scope, and also join
forces to expand their business into ﬁelds dominated by large
enterprises [1], [2]. Large enterprises can apply the same
methods to organize their production life-cycles in-house, or
to experiment on new service concepts together with external
collaborators.
The success of inter-enterprise collaborations relies on a
ﬂexible infrastructure that reduces the cost of setting up and
managing the collaborations, so that individual enterprises
do not need to solve issues of interoperability, collaboration
coordination and trust management using costly ad hoc
solutions. The Pilarcos open service ecosystem we have
proposed in earlier work [2] provides infrastructure services
for, e.g., ﬁnding potential partners and ensuring service inter-
operability, collaboration management and semi-automated
trust decisions [1]. In this paper, we focus on the trust
management support speciﬁcally.
Inter-enterprise collaboration depends on trust, as the
autonomy of partners causes uncertainty and risk that must
be found acceptable for the collaboration to proceed. The
distributed infrastructure services in Pilarcos allow the enter-
prises to make local, private trust decisions on whether they
want to join or continue in an inter-enterprise collaboration,
subjectively analyzing the risks and incentives involved in
the endeavour [3]. To ensure a combination of efﬁciency and
a swift reaction to any major changes in the risk estimations,
routine decisions are automated, following local policies [1].
Automated trust decisions can only be relied on in
routine cases: human intervention is required for making
trust decisions in situations where the risk or incentives are
particularly high, or the information available for supporting
the decisions is insufﬁcient. In earlier work, we have set
the basis for how to identify these special cases in policy,
including support for, e.g., measuring the amount and quality
of the input information [1], [4], and investigating the
information needs of human users in this context [5]. Our
goal in this paper is to provide a usable user interface for
human intervention in semi-automated trust decisions on
inter-enterprise collaborations.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
discusses related work in human trust decision making, and
summarizes our earlier ﬁndings on the topic. Section III pro-
vides an overview of the Pilarcos trust management system
and compares it to related work. Section IV presents the
implemented expert tool user interface. Section V presents
initial results of user evaluations, and Section VI concludes
the paper.
II. TRUST DECISIONS ON INTER-ENTERPRISE
COLLABORATIONS
Trust decisions measure a subjective willingness of a
trustor to perform a given action with a given trustee,
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

considering the risks and incentives involved [3]. In the
context of our work, both the trustors and trustees are
business services; this level of abstraction reﬂects the fact
that two services even within the same enterprise may hold
different information, have a different effect on assets, and
be governed by different policies. When a trust decision is
delegated to a human user, therefore, the interventions are
made on behalf of a speciﬁc service.
Some of the expected risks and gains can be estimated
based on past behaviour, i.e. the reputation of the trustee,
while other incentives are created by the business importance
of the activity itself, such as a need to fulﬁl existing
contracts, or a desire to try out a new way of making
business or a new set of partners.
A large body of existing work on reputation systems
has focused on electronic markets, aiming to support either
human or automated decisions speciﬁcally. Work in this
environment involves one-on-one transactions to purchase
goods or services, and often focuses on a relatively narrow
view of reputation information only [6]. We have found
that inter-enterprise collaborations, which involve multiple
partners and a wide range of interdependent services, require
a broader information model in order to capture the variety
of risks and incentives as well as their dependence on the
decision context [3].
Research on human information needs for trust decisions
has been made both in general and in the aforementioned
electronic commerce setting; we have surveyed the work
and translated it into inter-enterprise collaborations [5].
As a well-known example, McKnight and Chervany have
proposed a model of trust decisions that takes into account
a variety of factors, ranging from a situational willingness
to trust to a mental disposition, a belief that the target will
behave in a trustworthy manner and even whether structural
assurances make the situation appear less risky [7]. Different
factors affecting trust decisions can be categorized based
on whether they are speciﬁc to the trustor only (such as
disposition), depend on the trustee (such as reputation), or
the given decision context (such as the business importance
of the action) [5].
We have gathered the aforementioned information require-
ments and evaluated the Pilarcos trust information model
and trust decision process against them to ensure that the
expert tool provides the information needed for human
trust decision making [5]. Further input on the user inter-
face design was gained from Nielsen’s usability principles
for designing user interfaces [8] and different cognitive
strategies: Cognitive Fit Theory, Cognitive Load Theory,
Uniﬁed Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology and
Technology Acceptance Model [9], [10], [11].
III. SEMI-AUTOMATED TRUST DECISIONS IN PILARCOS
In this section, we ﬁrst discuss trust management foun-
dations in Pilarcos, and then present related work on trust-
aware inter-enterprise collaboration management.
A. The Pilarcos trust management system
The Pilarcos trust management system makes semi-
automated, local and context-aware trust decisions. These
decisions are repeated through the entire life cycle of the
collaboration, whenever further resources need to be com-
mitted [1]. They compare a risk estimation, based on the
past behaviour of the trustee represented as its reputation,
against a chosen risk tolerance, which reﬂects the strategic
importance of the tasks and the goals of the enterprise.
While routine trust decisions are automated to ensure the
efﬁciency of collaboration management, there are always
situations that require human intervention, for example due
to a combination of high risk and high strategic importance.
The local trust decision policies in Pilarcos therefore deﬁne
risk tolerance ranges for automatic acceptance, automatic
rejection, or for requesting a manual trust decision from a
human user.
The Pilarcos trust management system makes automated
trust decisions based on seven different parameters: trustor,
trustee, action, risk, reputation, importance and context [3].
As discussed in the previous section, the trustor and trustee
are business services operating within their respective enter-
prises. The action represents a collaboration task that needs
to be performed, involving a commitment of the trustor’s
resources.
The risk and reputation factors are closely connected:
risk estimates present probabilities of different outcomes,
and reputation information is stored as experience counters
of different observed outcomes so far. These experiences
are gathered both directly through local monitoring, and as
shared information through reputation networks [3]. While
shared reputation information may be erroneous and is there-
fore locally evaluated for credibility, it provides a valuable
extension to the ﬁrst-hand information particularly in the
case of actors that are not previously known, and actors
who have recently changed their behaviour.
Instead of trying to capture all possible outcomes of all
actions, Pilarcos represents their effects on assets. There are
four high-level asset classes: monetary, reputation, satisfac-
tion and control [3]. Probabilities of the outcome effects
are presented on the scale of large negative effect, slight
negative effect, no effect, slight positive effect and large
positive effect that the action has been observed to have on
that asset. This condensation of possible outcomes to a set
of categories for affected assets improves the reusability and
interoperability of reputation information across different
enterprises.
The monetary asset denotes any resources that can be
represented in monetary terms. The reputation asset reﬂects
the trustor’s own public relations, appearance in the me-
dia, and attitudes of their customers and partners towards
them [3]; in contrast, the reputation information discussed
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

above concerns the past behaviour of the trustee. The need
for security, privacy and other aspects related to autonomy
are represented by the control asset. Lastly, the degree of
fulﬁllment of the trustor’s expectations by the trustee is
represented by the satisfaction asset: it is used to measure
whether the trustee tends to respect its agreements [3].
The reputation counters of observed outcomes are con-
verted into a risk estimate by transforming the absolute num-
bers into ratios: essentially, 5 major positive experiences out
of 10 total experiences translates into a probability of 50% of
a major positive outcome for that asset. Relevant adjustments
are made to accommodate, e.g., low-stake actions that cannot
have a large monetary effect, and credibility-based weighting
between local and shared reputation information.
The risk estimate is compared to risk tolerance formulae
to determine the outcome of the decision. The risk tolerance
formulae may be adjusted automatically according to the
strategic importance speciﬁed for the action; this essentially
represents the known outcome of a positive decision, such
as not having to compensate other collaborators due to
withdrawal from the collaboration during its operation. In
the automated trust decision making process, the different
factors are also subject to change by the context parameter,
which manifests as conditional ﬁlters, or modiﬁers, of the
data to allow temporary situational adjustments in the sys-
tem. One example of a context modiﬁer is insurance, which
can apply to all actions in one speciﬁc collaboration and
essentially eliminate the monetary risk involved.
B. Related Work
The TrustCoM framework [12] and the ICT infrastructure
of ECOLEAD [13] are trust management systems for inter-
enterprise collaborations. Their approaches differ somewhat
from Pilarcos.
The TrustCoM framework [12], [14] performs trust de-
cision making during the joining and continuation of the
collaboration. In constrast to Pilarcos, TrustCoM makes trust
decisions only when a new partner needs to be added or
previous partner needs to be replaced, not routinely at each
resource commit. The trust decisions are made based on rep-
utation information measuring trustee capabilities, integrity
and benevolence, in addition to functional deﬁnitions of the
role, requirements of quality of service, cost and security.
The TrustCoM framework also involves a user interface in
the form of an eLearning portal in a scenario demonstra-
tor [14], helping users ﬁnd the best service suitable for them.
In the general case, the design of trustworthy and secure user
interfaces falls outside the scope of TrustCoM, although its
importance is acknowledged.
In ECOLEAD [13], [15], trust decisions are made at
two points: base trust is established during the entry into
the ecosystem and speciﬁc trust evaluated when each inter-
enterprise collaboration is set up. For base trust, all en-
terprises entering the ecosystem answer a questionnaire
on, e.g., organizational competences, prior successful col-
laborations, prior engagment in opportunistic behaviour,
and adherence to technology standards and delivery dates.
Collaboration-speciﬁc trust is established in a hierarchical
manner, starting from the speciﬁcation of objectives in
terms of measurable elements. The ICT infrastructure of
ECOLEAD also provides support for portlets for interaction
with the users [15]. The trust prototype has a web and mobile
portlet, providing a list of potential partners for collabora-
tion, where the users can select those found most suitable
for the task. Like TrustCoM, ECOLEAD does not focus on
user interfaces for trust-decision making speciﬁcally.
Handling human intervention for semiautomated trust
decisions remains an open research question in related work.
Factors to consider include the phenomenon of human trust
decision making, information requirements of the human
users, the appropriate way of presenting the information,
and reducing the frequency of calls for human intervention
in the future, to ensure that the efﬁciency of collaboration
management is maintained. We have summarized our earlier
work [5] on the two former in earlier sections, and continue
on the two latter in the following section.
IV. USER INTERFACE OF THE TRUST DECISION EXPERT
TOOL
In this section, we present the design of the user interface
handling human interventions on trust decisions. The pre-
sented user interface extends the Pilarcos trust management
system.
In accordance with the Pilarcos trust information model,
the user interface presents information about risk, reputation,
goals affecting the importance of the action, and con-
text [16]. Within its main information views, it presents fur-
ther details on the credibility of the information, behavioural
changes that can affect the validity of the reputation infor-
mation, assets endangered according to the risk tolerance
comparison, and the progress status of the collaboration
when trust decisions need to be made during the operational
phase of the collaboration. The information is presented as
a combination of textual and graphical formats. Figure 1
shows an example risk view of the user interface; the other
major views of reputation, context and progress information
are minimized in the screenshot.
On the top, the user interface presents the goals of
the inter-enterprise collaboration, such as earning money,
gaining experience or building reputation. The importance
of the goals that the enterprise has set for the collaboration
encourage a positive trust decision. In addition to the goals,
the deadline for making the trust decision is prominently
shown. Both these information elements and their placement
promote transparency.
The risk view presented in the ﬁgure shows the produced
risk estimate, represented in the form of probabilities of
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1.
Risk information view of the trust decision expert tool.
different outcomes. These outcomes for different assets
follow the trust information model of Pilarcos, as described
in the previous section. The four asset classes correspond to
four graphs in the risk information view.
The risk information can be studied through two different
views: collaborative and enterprise view. The collaborative
view presents collective risk probabilities for the collabo-
ration as a whole; it reﬂects the fact that even though a
trust decision is generally made concerning a one-on-one
interaction within a larger collaboration, other participants
in the collaboration may have a strong inﬂuence on the
eventual outcome of the action. A manager may consider
placing an order to a generally reliable contractor, for
example, yet decide against it because it cannot trust its
proposed subcontractors for this collaboration. In contrast,
the enterprise view provides information about the risk posed
by the single trustee individually. The current version of
the trust decision expert tool presents the collaborative and
enterprise view in the same format.
The reputation view provides background information to
the risk estimate. Reputation information is presented as
graphs. It consists of experiences, reﬂecting the past and
present behaviour of the trustee on the same outcome scale
as the risk information. The view also shows the estimated
credibility of the shared reputation information, and presents
whether the trustee’s behaviour has been consistent or not,
which may have an impact on the validity of the available
reputation information. Behavioral consistency is expressed
through the number of times the system has detected a
change in the actor’s behaviour [4], and by showing both the
overall experiences and the experiences based on the current
period of consistent behaviour. Finally, the view uses colours
to indicate the assets for which the risk estimate is not within
the automatically acceptable risk tolerance bounds, as the
actor’s reputation information for these speciﬁc assets may
be of particular interest.
In automated trust decisions in Pilarcos, risk estimates
are compared against risk tolerance, which is in turn based
on the strategic importance of the action at hand. While
the importance is represented through the goals of the
collaboration, and tolerance constraints are partially visible
through the assets shown not to be within limits, in manual
trust decisions the human user is responsible for analyzing
and setting the actual risk tolerance limits for the decision.
In the expert tool, the context information view presents
the currently active context items to the human users through
simple textual phrases, such as “Enterprise A is an important
strategic partner” or “The current collaboration is covered by
insurance”. This information is collected from the descrip-
tive metadata of any active context ﬁlters.
Finally, the progress information view of the expert tool
supports trust decisions on ongoing collaborations. The
view presents the progress of the collaboration in graphical
format, visualizing the tasks completed by different partners.
The eventual user decision is either to accept and approve
the action or reject it, which generally results in a withdrawal
from the collaboration. In addition, the tool will ask the
user to provide a scope for the trust decision: whether it
applies for the remainder of the contract, or for a given time
period, or for this speciﬁc decision only. This helps reduce
the frequency of requests for human intervention, as further
decisions needed within the set scope can be automated. The
scope information is stored as a context ﬁlter, which over-
rides the risk tolerance formulae appropriately to automatic
rejection or acceptance for future decisions within the given
scope.
V. USER EVALUATIONS
This section presents the user study setup and initial
results of the user evaluations of the trust decision expert
tool [16]. We evaluate the interface from four points of view:
(i) sufﬁciency of the presented information, (ii) usability,
(iii) user performance and (iv) quality. All the participants
are researchers more or less familiar with the Pilarcos trust
management system. The main objective behind recruiting
such participants is to gather feedback from users who are
representative of the actual target user base of Pilarcos. The
user study takes around one hour per user.
The user studies are conducted in three phases: in-
troduction, solving test tasks and debrieﬁng. During the
introduction phase, test participants are introduced to the
user interface and test setup. After the introduction by
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Table I
SUMMARY OF THE USERS’ OVERALL EVALUATIONS.
the moderator, the test participants are presented with the
following test scenario:
You are running an enterprise named “Quick Service”,
which provides online logistic services within Europe. Your
enterprise is involved in collaborating online with other
enterprises throughout the world. You are using the Pilar-
cos middleware for managing your online collaborations.
Usually, Pilarcos middleware makes automated decisions
regarding your enterprise’s participation in the online col-
laborations, but now you have received an email, containing
a link, asking you to make a decision regarding your
continuation in an ongoing collaboration.
Based on the test scenario, the participants are asked to
write their expectations about information that they would
like to have for making trust decisions in such a situation.
After the introductory phase, the test participants are allowed
to study the user interface themselves for getting familiar
with it. Afterwards, the test participants are asked to perform
the tasks using the user interface. The completion of each
task is followed by a short questionnaire capturing the
real-time experience of the participants after each task.
The test participants are encouraged to think aloud while
performing the test tasks. The “think aloud” methodology is
employed for getting insights into the problems and thought
process of the participants while they are performing the
test tasks [8]. The moderator notes the participant comments
while performing the test task as well as time taken by them
to perform each task. Finally, during the debrieﬁng phase,
the test participants are asked to ﬁll in a post questionnaire
aimed at gathering general experience and impressions about
the user interface. The user evaluations have been made with
ﬁve test participants, which has provided us with quite useful
feedback.
The ﬁrst point of view evaluated the sufﬁciency of the
information presented to the human users for trust decision
making. As previously mentioned, the user interface presents
risk, reputation, context, collaboration progress status, goals
and credibility information for trust decision making. Table 1
shows the user rating of the user interface in terms of
the sufﬁciency of the presented information. Based on the
analysis of the debrieﬁng phase and participant comments
while performing the tasks, we believe the probable reason
for disagreement might be the absence of some relevant
information, such as the value of the contract in terms of
possible monetary proﬁts to the enterprise. Another sugges-
tion for enhancing the available information concerned a
more detailed representation of the collaboration progress,
relating it to the underlying business process model instead
of simple milestones.
The second point of view of usability evaluated the ease
of using the user interface in terms of ease of ﬁnding the
presented information, clarity and existence of correlation
between the information presentation formats and tasks to
be performed. Missing or unclear information were again
a probable cause for critique here. For example, the test
participants were unclear about the ontological meaning
of the assets. Furthermore, some users suggested that a
summarized and concise view of the already presented
information should be added, including, for example, small
textual sentences such as “you have 63% probability of
gaining monetary beneﬁts”.
The third point of view of the user performance evaluates
the user interface in terms of the success rate of task comple-
tion, number of errors committed while performing the tasks,
and time taken for task performance. The evaluation results
reveal that the task completion rate is 100% irrespective of
accuracy. However, when considering the factor of accuracy,
the successful task completion rate is 100% for only two of
the participants. It is 93% for two other users, and 78% for
one participant. In other words, the error rate is 7%. We
suspect the lack of attentive focus while reading the tasks
to be the main reason for the existing error rate, because we
found the same participants giving correct answers for other
similar tasks. Regarding task completion timing, we found
that three of the test participants are able to perform 71% of
the tasks within seconds, whereas the remaining participants
perform respectively 79% and 93% of the tasks in seconds.
The time taken is agreeable considering the novelty of the
tool, as none of the participants have ever used any kind of
trust decision expert tool before.
The fourth point of view of quality aims to evaluate the
user satisfaction of using the user interface in terms of
ease of use, conﬁdence, willingness to use and perception
about security. The evaluations are summarized on the last
four lines of Table 1. As mentioned previously, insufﬁcient
presented information seems to be a likely reason for dis-
agreements or neutral opinions.
In general, we found that test participants found the
information presentation formats to be easy to read and
understand. They also stated they found the user interface
to be intuitive.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented a user interface for trust
decisions on inter-enterprise collaborations. The motivation
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

for this work arises from the fact that while we wish
to automate routine decisions on collaborations, there are
situations where human intervention is necessary. We have
evaluated the implemented expert tool with the help of users
familiar with the underlying Pilarcos system in order to
collect feedback on improving the tool. We found that the
current version of the user interface of the trust decision
expert tool is appreciated by the test participants. However,
the user evaluation also revealed a number of shortcomings,
which provide signiﬁcant pointers for not only improving the
existing version of the tool, but also possible future research
directions.
The user interface for simple trust decisions is a ﬁrst step
in a larger project to enable direct user interaction with
the entire Pilarcos collaboration management toolset [2],
which has so far focused on automating the relevant support
processes. As a direct extension of the basic trust decisions,
a planned collaboration negotiation expert tool should allow
the user to simulate the possible outcomes of coming to
a negative decision: Are there choices of better partners?
Can the terms of the contract be adjusted before entering
the collaboration? If a partner can no longer be trusted,
can it be replaced? Would a different trust decision policy
perform better for this collaboration, requiring fewer human
interventions?
The work on the expert tool also unveils a need to extend
the underlying information model. We concluded early in
the design process that trustee-speciﬁc risk estimates must
be complemented by a collaboration-wide risk estimation,
and will further explore the strength of different methods of
producing these collective estimates. During the user evalu-
ation, it became apparent that human users are inﬂuenced by
example, and therefore the relevant decision history (of both
automated and human decisions) has an important role and
should be visualized to the user. Similarly, while the textual
descriptions of context ﬁlters have no effect on automated
processing, they play an important role in the user interface.
We will continue this work in parallel to the expert tool
development.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Ruohomaa and L. Kutvonen, “Trust and distrust in adaptive
inter-enterprise collaboration management,” Journal of Theo-
retical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, Special
Issue on Trust and Trust Management, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 118–
136, Aug. 2010.
[2] L. Kutvonen, T. Ruokolainen, S. Ruohomaa, and J. Metso,
“Service-oriented middleware for managing inter-enterprise
collaborations,” in Global Implications of Modern Enterprise
Information Systems: Technologies and Applications, ser.
Advances in Enterprise Information Systems (AEIS).
IGI
Global, Dec. 2008, pp. 209–241.
[3] S. Ruohomaa and L. Kutvonen, “Making multi-dimensional
trust decisions on inter-enterprise collaborations,” in Proceed-
ings of the Third International Conference on Availability,
Security and Reliability (ARES 2008).
Barcelona, Spain:
IEEE, Mar. 2008, pp. 873–880.
[4] S. Ruohomaa, A. Hankalahti, and L. Kutvonen, “Detecting
and reacting to changes in reputation ﬂows,” in Trust Man-
agement V, ser. IFIP AICT, vol. 358, Copenhagen, Denmark,
Jun. 2011, pp. 19–34.
[5] P. Kaur and S. Ruohomaa, “Human intervention on trust deci-
sions for inter-enterprise collaborations,” in Post-Proceedings
of the 15th IEEE International EDOC PhD Symposium, 2011,
to appear.
[6] Y. Yao, S. Ruohomaa, and F. Xu, “Addressing common vul-
nerabilities of reputation systems for electronic commerce,”
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce
Research, 2011, accepted for publication.
[7] D. McKnight and N. Chervany, “The meaning of trust,”
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, Tech. Rep. 9604,
1996.
[8] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering.
Boston: M.A. Academic
Press, 1993.
[9] I. Vessey and D. Galletta, “Cognitive ﬁt: An empirical study
of information acquisition,” Information Systems Research,
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 63–84, 1991.
[10] L. Oshlyansky, P. Cairns, and H. Thimbleby, “Validating the
uniﬁed theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT)
tool cross-culturally,” in Proceedings of the 21st British HCI
Group Annual Conference on People and Computers, vol. 2,
ser. BCS-HCI ’07.
Swinton, UK: British Computer Society,
2007, pp. 83–86.
[11] J. Sweller, “Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects
on learning,” Cognitive Science, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 257 – 285,
1988.
[12] M. Wilson, D. Chadwick, T. Dimitrakos, J. Doser, A. Arenas,
P. Giambiagi et al., “The TrustCoM Framework v0.5,” in 6th
IFIP Working Conference on Virtual Enterprises (PRO-VE
2005), 2005.
[13] S. S. Msanijla, H. Afsarmanesh, J. Hodik, M. Rehk, and L. M.
Camarinha-Matos, “ECOLEAD deliverable D21.4b: Creating
and supporting trust culture in VBEs,” EC Information Soci-
ety, Tech. Rep., Mar. 2006.
[14] R. Ratti, M. del Mar Rodrigo Castro, C. A. Ferrandiz,
S. Mores, R. Rabelo, R. J. T. Junior, and P. Gibert, “TrustCoM
project ﬁnal report,” European Commission, Tech. Rep., 2007.
[15] R. Rabelo, S. Gusmeroli, C. Arana, and T. Nagellen, “The
Ecolead ICT infrastructure for collaborative networked orga-
nizations,” in Network-Centric Collaboration and Supporting
Frameworks, ser. IFIP International Federation for Informa-
tion Processing.
Springer Boston, 2006, vol. 224, pp. 451–
460.
[16] P. Kaur, “Supporting users’ trust decisions on inter-enterprise
collaboration,” Master’s thesis, Aalto University; Tech. Rep.,
University of Helsinki, 2011.
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

