Implementing the Tactile Detection Task in a Real Road 
Experiment to Assess a Traffic Light Assistant 
 
Michael Krause, Verena Knott, Klaus Benger 
Institute of Ergonomics 
Technische Universität München 
Garching, Germany 
emails:{krause, knott, bengler}@ lfe.mw.tum.de 
 
 
Abstract— The tactile detection task (TDT), a vibrating 
detection response task (DRT), was used to assess the mental 
demand of an in-vehicle information system (IVIS), which 
recommends a driving speed to the driver on a smartphone. In 
the experiment, the TDT was recorded as a single task, with 
the driving task as a baseline as well as with additional IVIS 
task, and with a cognitive task as reference and control. 
Results show that IVIS use did not significantly prolong the 
TDT reaction times, which can be interpreted as no increase in 
mental workload caused by the IVIS. The control task 
increased the reaction times significantly. The data of the real 
road experiment are analyzed in terms of correlations showing 
that the TDT was a reliable cognitive workload measurement 
tool in the experiment. Sideline: Driven speed revealed no 
correlation with TDT reaction times when the vehicle was in 
motion. 
Keywords-IVIS, 
detection 
response 
task; 
smartphone; 
cognitive workload 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A traffic light assistant for rural roads was developed on 
a smartphone in the Bavarian KOLIBRI project. The project 
involved human factors engineering along the whole project. 
The development was started in a static driving simulator for 
safety reasons. Selection of a favored graphical interface was 
done, related specifically to gaze behavior and assessment of 
the driving behavior, while using the assistant in the 
simulator [1][2]. After the system was validated in the 
simulator, further experiments were carried out on the real 
road. The mental demand needed to use the system is 
reviewed in the paper presented here.  
Pauwelussen et al. [3] assessed their green wave assistant 
system in a driving simulator with a visual peripheral 
detection task (PDT), which would now be called (head 
mounted) detection response task (HDRT). They found for 
their system a significant increase in the reaction times of 
participants, which is interpreted as increased mental 
demand. An interface similar to Pauwelussen et al. [3] was 
not liked by our participants and was opted out by subjective 
ratings in an early stage of the development process [4]. The 
work presented here assesses the mental demand of the 
developed traffic light assistant, but has a focus on tactile 
detection task method (TDT) used.  
The TDT is a version of the detection response tasks 
(DRT), which is currently subject to standardization by ISO 
TC22 SC13 WG8. 
Section 2 will describe the methods, used in this 
experiment. In section 3 the results are presented and 
discussed; first the subjective ratings from questionnaires, 
than the objective measurement from the TDT. The TDT 
results were correlated between different experimental 
conditions, to the subjective ratings and to the driven speeds. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Test Environment - Test Track 
A section of federal road 13 (B 13) in the North of 
Munich was used for the individual test runs of the study. 
The test section of B 13 has a length of almost 7 km and 7 
light signals control the individual intersections. In addition 
the route has two lanes in each direction. There is a median 
barrier separating the opposing highway lanes. Under dry 
conditions the speed limits on the track are usually restricted 
to 100 km/h and reduced to 70 km/h near intersections. In the 
individual test runs the test track was driven either from the 
North (GPS N 48.303477, E 11.572568) to the South (GPS 
N 48.245692, E 11.602002) or in the opposite direction. 
During the experiment, two turning points at the end of the 
track were used for evaluation of the individual test run 
(questionnaires). The traffic lights were acting on a 
coordinated scheme (green wave). Rush hours, which have a 
highly directional traffic load, were avoided for the 
experiments. The traffic density was about 500 cars/h in each 
direction. The study was conducted in May/June 2012. 
B. Test Environment - Test Vehicle 
The test vehicle used for the study on the real test field 
was a BMW X5. For the test series of the experiment, the 
experimental setup was completed with the following 
systems: A smartphone of the type Samsung GalaxyAce 
S5830 (3.5-inch display, resolution of 320 x 480 pixels, 
Android version 2.3.3) was used during the experimental 
procedure as mobile driver information system. Comparable 
to the driving simulator studies already carried out, the 
nomadic device was mounted on the ventilation slots on the 
right of the steering wheel on the center console of the BMW 
X5 (Figure 1).  
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 1 Experimental setup in the car 
 
Also an instrument for measuring the reaction time (RT) 
was installed in the test vehicle, because the experiment 
applied the TDT method. For the test run, in which a 
cognitive task (CoTa) had to be performed in addition to 
driving and the detection task, a microphone was mounted 
behind the driver’s seat and the speakers were fixed in the 
armrest in the middle area of the vehicle. Two cameras were 
mounted in the test vehicle to capture the road scene ahead 
of and behind the car. A self-developed program allowed the 
synchronous recording of objective data (TDT, camera 
pictures and GPS from smartphone). 
C. KOLIBRI Human Machine Interface (HMI) 
Initial studies in a static simulator resulted in findings 
regarding the representation of the human-machine interface 
(HMI) [1][2][4][[5]. Thus the state of the HMI-display of the 
traffic light assistant on the mobile device, which was used 
for the experiments in real traffic, includes the favored 
approach of the previous simulator-based studies. Figure 2 
illustrates the display states of the HMI that are offered to 
assist the driver. The favored concept of the traffic light 
assistant on the mobile device includes a recommendation in 
the form of a speed carpet. The green area represents the 
speed recommendation that supports the driving behavior for 
a green wave. The shown car position corresponds to the 
current vehicle speed. The white vehicle indicates that at the 
present rate the driver is within this recommendation and his 
driving behavior is optimal for achieving a green wave 
(Figure 2-1). The black car indicates the contrary (Figure 
2-2). The position of the pointer of the Heuer traffic light (on 
the right upper corner of the HMI) shows the current status 
of the next traffic light - green or red signal in form of a 
clock. When the speed limit is exceeded by more than 10 
km/h, the speeding display will appear (Figure 2-3). If the 
vehicle is outside of the calculation criteria for a speed 
recommendation, “preparing to stop” (“Vorbereiten auf 
Halt”) appears, which notifies the driver that the next traffic 
light will display a red signal on arrival (Figure 2-4). The 
fifth presentation - a combination of the Heuer traffic light 
and a countdown - appears at a speed less than 5 km/h at a 
red traffic signal. This function shows the waiting time until 
the traffic light changes back to green (Figure 2-5). 
Figure 2 State of displays of the KOLIBRI-traffic light assistant  
 
D. Tactile Detection Task (TDT) 
A tactile detection task is a common method for 
assessing the mental demand of the driver. All DRTs show 
sensitivity to cognitive workload [6]. The attentional 
demands are measured in terms of reaction times and the hit 
rate [7]. The tactile stimuli are transmitted via a vibration 
motor. Merat and Jamson [8] propose application of the 
vibration motor on the left shoulder. The responses are 
typically given by pressing the button mounted on the left 
index finger against the steering wheel [7]. Figure 3 
illustrates the mounting of the vibrating motor and the button 
on the test subject.  
 
 
Figure 3 Attachment of the vibration motor (1)  
and the button (2) on the test subject 
 
For the TDT realization in this study the test procedure 
was programmed into an Arduino Uno. The vibration 
stimulus was triggered every 3-5 seconds with duration of 1 
second. The activation was interrupted when a reaction was 
carried out. This also provided the test subject a feedback to 
the response. The mental demand can be determined as a 
result of the reaction times and the hit rate, in which only a 
response time within 200-2000 milliseconds was counted as 
a hit [7]. Reactions faster than 200 ms were labeled as 
cheats. Responses slower than 2000 ms were logged as miss. 
The metric hit rate is the number of hits divided by the 
number of stimuli [7][9]. For quality reasons, the hit rate of a 
data segment should exceed 70% [9]. The TDT-method is 
usually - as in this study – simultaneously applied to the 
driving task and additionally other tasks, such as the 
operation of a vehicle internal system or the processing of a 
cognitive task (CoTa). Therefore, a combination of up to 
three tasks (e.g., driving + TDT + CoTa) is performed by the 
test subjects. The TDT works in these combinations as a 
measurement task to get the reaction times. The subsequent 
section deals with the method of the cognitive task. This 
threefold task condition is compared with a two-fold task 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

execution, which does not include a secondary task. The 
difference can be interpreted as a measure of attentional 
demands; or different experimental conditions with the triple 
task setting can be compared. 
 
E. Cognitive Task (CoTa) 
The method of performing a cognitive task was used as a 
reference and control test. Simultaneous to the secondary 
task, the TDT is again carried out to determine the cognitive 
demand. Also terms, such as “Sternberg’s memory scanning 
task” or “Auditory Sternberg task (AUST)” are common in 
the literature for the here used ”Cognitive Task” [10]. The 
application Cognitive Task 1.0 from DaimlerChrysler AG 
(Stefan Mattes, 2005) was used in the experiment. The 
stimuli in the experiment were presented auditive. The test 
subject heard a three digit number (e.g., “3 5 2”). This was 
followed by a pause of 15 seconds for the cognitive 
processing. After this time interval, a further single digit 
(e.g., “3”) was announced, after which the subject had to 
decide whether the check digit was contained in the 
memorized sequence of digits as quickly as possible. Then, 
the participant gave a verbal response (“yes” or “no”).  
 
F. Test Procedure 
First, the test subjects explained their consent to study 
participation. In addition, a demographic questionnaire 
collected personal data. After that followed both the 
explanation of the test, which took up to 120 minutes time, 
and the description of the HMI on the nomadic device. The 
experiment began with a pre-test study in order to detect the 
reaction time on the TDT in the stationary vehicle, without 
any secondary or tertiary task. For this purpose, the vibration 
motor and the button were attached on the participant with 
suitable tape. Both vibration motor and button remained on 
the test person for the further course of the experiment. 
Afterwards a run on the described road section of the B13 for 
acclimatization followed while using the traffic light 
assistant. Four test conditions were then performed in 
randomized order: A baseline drive (BL), in which only the 
task of driving had to be fulfilled, and three conditions with 
execution of the TDT: 
 In addition to a BL+TDT run, there was a TDT-run in 
conjunction with the cognitive task (CoTa+TDT). In 
addition, one test run was combined with the KOLIBRI-
traffic light assistant (KOLIBRI +TDT). In this test run, the 
smartphone was used to display speed recommendations. All 
conditions were driven only in one random direction, from 
North to South (NS), or in the opposite direction (SN). 
Except the condition BL+TDT, which was carried out in 
both directions (random first BL+TDT NS or BL+TDT SN) 
by each participant, to get more data from driving while 
operating the TDT and to check whether direction has an 
influence. To sum it up: 
 
Pre-test (TDT only, car standing) 
 
Driving and IVIS accommodation 
 
BL (driving only) 
 
KOLIBRI +TDT (driving+IVIS+TDT) 
 
CoTa+TDT (driving+Cognitive Task+TDT) 
 
BL+TDT: 
o 
BL+TDT NS (driving +TDT, direction NS) 
o 
BL+TDT SN (driving +TDT, direction SN) 
 
Post-test (TDT only, car standing) 
After each of the individual test conditions a (raw) 
NASA-TLX questionnaire had to be completed by the 
participants in order to assess the subjective workload during 
the test run. For the two BL+TDT-conditions the NASA-
TLX [11] was filled in after the first driven direction. After 
completing the test run with the nomadic device (KOLBRI 
IVIS), the System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire [12] 
was answered in order to assess the usability of the 
KOLIBRI-traffic light assistant and the AttrakDiff2 
questionnaire was used to measure the quality and 
attractiveness of the system [13]. To determine correlations, 
as well as fatigue and learning effects, a study identical to the 
pre-test study was done at the end (post-test). The subjects 
were instructed to prioritize the tasks as follows: the driving 
task should be the highest priority, followed by the tactile 
detection task. The secondary tasks were in third position.  
 
G. Participants 
The study involved 23 test subjects. With an age range of 
24 years for the youngest participant up to 58 years for the 
oldest subject, the arithmetic mean of the age of the subjects 
is 30.6 years with a standard deviation of 9.9 years. With 18 
men and 5 women more than three-quarters of male subjects 
participated in the experiment. Two people had a self-
reported red/green color weakness, while one person has an 
eye disease. All test subjects had a normal or corrected to 
normal visual acuity. 26% of the participants corrected the 
visual acuity by glasses. All persons were right handed. 48% 
of people knew the test track and 35% had already 
participated in one of the KOLIBRI driving simulator 
experiments. Except for one person, all participants had 
driven a car with automatic gear before. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Questionnaires 
1) NASA-RTLX (NASA-TLX raw) 
The average subjective results of the NASA-RTLX 
shows a value of about 15 (SD: 10) for simple driving on the 
rural road. To work additionally on the TDT roughly doubles 
this value to 32 (SD: 13). In the triple task condition of 
driving, TDT and additionally engaging the CoTa the value 
is about three-fold: to 49 (SD: 16). The triple task with the 
KOLIBRI traffic light assistant (NASA-RTLX: 38 SD: 16) is 
rated in-between 32 and 49.  
2) System Usability Scale - SUS  
The System-Usability-Scale questionnaire used to assess 
the traffic light assistant in the KOLIBRI test condition 
resulted in a score of 79 (SD: 16). According to [14], this 
value can be related in between the adjectives good and 
excellent.  
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

3) AttrakDiff2  
The mean values of hedonic and pragmatic quality are in 
the “desired” sector, but the confidence rectangle touches 
“self-oriented”, “neutral” and “task-oriented”. Consequently, 
there is a tendency (not a full assignment) for “desired”.  
B. Tactile Detection Task 
The different experimental conditions resulted in reaction 
times as shown in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4 TDT reaction times in different experimental conditions  
 
 
Figure 5 TDT hit rates in different experimental conditions 
 
 Associated hit rates for the experimental conditions are 
shown in Figure 5. T-tests (two sided, paired) detected no 
statistical difference in the reaction times between normal 
driving and driving with the KOLIBRI traffic light 
assistance:  
BL-SN to KOLIBRI (t: -0.478; df: 22) p= 0.637 
BL-NS to KOLIBRI (t: -0.615; df: 22) p = 0.545.  
In contrast, the experimental condition CoTa prolonged 
the reaction times significantly. 
BL-SN to CoTa (t: -6.15; df: 22) p<0.0001 
BL-NS to CoTa (t: -7.43; df: 22) p< 0.0001 
This indicates an increased mental workload and is in 
line with a slightly reduced hit rate for the condition CoTa. 
The hit rates for the TDT pre-test and post-test (only working 
on TDT) is also lower. The drop in the pre- and post-test is 
due to “Cheat” classification (reaction < 200ms); the drop in 
CoTa mainly due to Misses (reaction > 2000ms). Figure 6 
holds the results of experimental condition baseline driving 
South-North (BL-SN) and shows a typical distribution. 
 
During the experimental condition CoTa, the participant 
answered on average 14 Sternberg sequences (SD 1.7). The 
answers were to 98 percent correct, which is a clear 
indication of task engagement.  
 
 
Figure 6 Histogram of reaction times in experimental condition 
baseline south-north (BL-SN) 
 
For the condition KOLIBRI is no direct measurement of 
the task engagement available (eye tracking was not 
involved). From a former experiment in the driving simulator 
with TDT, the KOLIBRI system and an eye tracker, we 
know, that even with this combination the KOLIBRI system 
is very frequently observed [5]. Another study [15] in real 
traffic with the KOLIBRI system and an eye tracker, 
revealed an increase in the NASA-RTLX from about 14 to 
20 between baseline driving and using the KOLIBRI system. 
This is similar to the shift from 32 to 38, in the here reported 
study (with TDT), which still does not indicate a high 
demanding task. These indications together with the 
observations from the examiner, led to the assumption that 
the KOLIBRI system was used by the subjects while driving. 
C. Tactile Detection Task - Correlations and Repeatability 
The experimental conditions pre-test and post-test, as 
well as baseline in direction North-South and South-North 
(BL-NS, BL-SN) can be seen as test-retest. Thus the 
correlations are interesting for these conditions. Table 1 
holds the correlations of all conditions.  
TABLE I.  
CORRELATION BETWEEN REACTION TIMES IN DIFFERENT 
EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS 
 
The test-retest correlation of pre-test to post-test is 
r=0.59. The test-retest correlation between the baseline 
direction North-South to South-North is r=0.71. The time 
gap between pre-test and post-test is the entire experimental 
time of about typically two hours. Baseline driving in 
direction North-South and South-North is carried out directly 
after one another, but in random order. The pre-and post-test 
are identical (out of real traffic in a standing car), as in a 
laboratory. In contrast, the baseline driving can be influenced 
by uncontrollable circumstances (real traffic, overtaking, 
stops, etc.). On a larger scale, these microscopic events are 
  
Pre 
BL SN BL NS KOLIBRI CoTa 
Post 
Pre 
1.00
BL SN
0.61
1.00
BL NS
0.55
0.71
1.00 
KOLIBRI
0.66
0.70
0.86 
1.00 
CoTa 
0.66
0.68
0.81 
0.80 
1.00
Post 
0.59
0.65
0.64 
0.50 
0.75
1.00
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

centered out and are not visible (see condition BL+TDT,SN 
and BL+TDT,NS in Figure 4). The order (SN, NS) was 
random. In a further analysis the two baseline drivings were 
correlated, depending on the order of driving (first baseline 
to second baseline) independent of the direction; the result 
was again r=0.71.  
From pre-test to post-test two-thirds (15 participants out 
of 23) get faster in the reaction times; on average 56ms (SD: 
51ms). One-third (8 out of 23 people) gets slower in 
reacting; on average 32ms (SD: 22ms). The test-retest 
reliability of pre-test to post-test of r=0.59 is not very high, 
and perhaps the time gap of about two hours, with car 
driving and experimental conditions between test and retest, 
had an influence. For some persons in the form of a fatigue 
effect, for others in a training effect. The test-retest of 
driving in North-South and North-South direction of r=0.71 
has a higher correlation. This result must be valued against 
the background of a real road experiment: The participants 
do not experience exactly the same situations each time 
while driving.  
The other real road conditions also have a good 
correlation of 0.68 to 0.86. The internal consistency (split-
half correlation) in pre-test is r=0.75 and in post-test r=0.83. 
 
Figure 7 Average reaction times in post-test for every single stimulus  
 
In pre-test and post-test, the participants were exposed to 
16 stimuli. Figure 7 shows that participants need, even in the 
post-test (after extensive training on the TDT in different 
experimental conditions), at least one first “training” 
stimulus at the start of a condition in order to achieve nearly 
constant results.  
 
NASA-RTLX scores were correlated to the reaction 
times. The correlation of individual reaction times in 
baseline driving South-North and North-South to individual 
NASA-RTLX scores is r=0.14 and r=0.09. In the condition 
KOLIBRI r=0.34 and in CoTa r=0.33. So, the congruence 
seems higher in triple task than in double task conditions.  
 
D. TDT Dependence on Speed and Acceleration 
For the following analysis each TDT reaction in the 
South- North-Driving-Baseline (BL SN) was normalized 
(divided) by the individual mean reaction in the TDT-only-
pretest data. For example, if one test person had data while 
driving such as 238ms, 320ms and 281ms and a mean TDT-
only-pretest (car standing) value of 274ms: the data were 
normalized by 274ms to 0.87, 1.17 and 1.03, to weaken 
intra-individuality. For the analysis, reactions were only 
accounted for when the vehicle was moving (faster than 
0km/h) and the reaction result was a Hit (no Miss or Cheat). 
For the resulting N=1955 reaction time values the 
correlation to the driven speed while reacting revealed no 
correlation (r= -0.03). The same analysis for the opposite 
direction North to South revealed r= -0.04 (N=2022) and for 
the COTA-condition r= -0.04 (N=1975). Figure 8 is a 
(typical looking) plot of the speed versus the normalized 
reaction time. On the one hand, it is a positive aspect that 
the driven speed seems to not influence the reaction times 
for the TDT. Thus the procedure is more robust against 
nuisances. On the other hand, it is curious: If the TDT 
measures mental demand, why does a higher speed seem to 
not impose more mental demand on the driver? An analysis 
of absolute speed difference between stimuli (treating 
accelerations and decelerations the same way) revealed the 
same result. The correlation between absolute speed 
difference and reaction time for the South-North-Driving-
Baseline (BL SN) is r=0.02. For the CoTa condition it is 
r=0.03. Therefore, even acceleration or deceleration seems 
not to influence the reaction time. 
 
 
Figure 8 Normalized reaction times depending on speed in 
experimental condition BL SN 
 
The duration of one experiment run was typically around 
seven minutes (about 100 stimulus onsets). For the 
experiment in South-North direction (BL SN) the correlation 
between normalized reaction time and the stimulus count up 
number (thus, related to experiment time) was r=0.04; for 
North-South run (BL NS) r=0.08 and for CoTa r= -0.02. It 
seems like the durations of about seven minutes of an 
experimental condition is not too long and fatigue effects do 
not affect the results.  
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
With the GPS values, we were also able to map the 
reaction times to road segments of 250m length. The results 
revealed plausible results (like non-overlapping confidence 
intervals) for e.g., some long, straight sections with low 
demand and more demanding sectors. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We could use the TDT in our experiment as an easy to 
administer and valuable tool. The TDT was able to detect the 
mental demand of a control task and showed no significant 
increase in reaction time, while using the carefully designed 
traffic light assistant. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This 
work 
was 
supported 
by 
Bayerische 
Forschungsstiftung (Bavarian Research Foundation). The 
authors would like to 
thank the project 
partners 
TRANSVER, BMW Group and the Center for Traffic 
Management of the Bavarian Road Administration. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
M. Krause and K. Bengler, “Traffic Light Assistant - Driven in a 
Simulator”, in Proceedings of the 2012 International IEEE Intelligent 
Vehicles 
Symposium 
Workshops: 
IEEE 
Intelligent 
Vehicle 
Symposioum (IV-2012), Madrid, June 3-7, 2012, pp. 1-6. 
[2] 
M. Krause and K. Bengler, “Traffic Light Assistant - Evaluation of 
Information Presentation”, in Advances in Human Factors and 
Ergonomics 2012 14 Volume Set: 6 Advances in human aspects of 
road and rail transportation: Proceedings of the 4th AHFE Conference 
21-25 July 2012, G. Salvendy and W. Karwowski, Eds, Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2012, pp. 6786–6795 
[3] 
J. Pauwelussen, M. Hoedemaeker, and K. Duivenvoorden, CVIS 
Cooperative 
Vehicle-Infrastructure 
Systems: 
Deliverable 
D.DEPN.4.1b Assess user acceptance by small scale driving 
simulator research, 2008. 
[4] 
M. Krause and K. Bengler, “Subjective Ratings in an Ergonomic 
Engineering Process Using the Example of an In-Vehicle Information 
System”, in Human-Computer Interaction. Applications and Services: 
Springer, 2013, pp. 596–605. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[5] 
M. Krause, A. Rissel, and K. Bengler, “Traffic Light Assistant-What 
the Users Want”, in ACHI 2014, The Seventh International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 2014, pp. 
235–241. 
[6] 
A. S. Conti, C. Dlugosch, R. Vilimek, A. Keinath, and K. Bengler, 
“An assessment of cognitive workload using detection response 
tasks”, in Advances in Human Factors and Ergonomics Series, 
Advances in Human Aspects of Road and Rail Transportation: CRC 
Press, 2012, pp. 735-743. 
[7] 
J. Engström, “The Tactile Detection Task as a Method for Assessing 
Drivers' Cognitive Load”, in Performance metrics for assessing driver 
distraction: The quest for improved road safety, G. L. Rupp, Ed, 
Warrendale, Pennsylvania: SAE International, 2010, pp. 90–103. 
[8] 
N. Merat and A. H. Jamson, “The Effect of Stimulus Modality on 
Signal Detection: Implications for Assessing the Safety of In-Vehicle 
Technology”, Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society, vol. 50, no. 1, 2008, pp. 145–158. 
[9] 
N. Merat, E. Johansson, J. Engström, E. Chin; F. Nathan and T. 
Victor, “Specification of a secondary task to be used in Safety 
Assessment of IVIS”, AIDE Deliverable 2.2.3. http://www.aide-
eu.org/pdf/sp2_deliv_new/aide_d2_2_3.pdf [retrieved: Jan., 2015]. 
[10] K. Bengler, S. Mattes, O. Hamm, and M. Hensel, “Lane Change Test: 
Preliminary Results of a Multi-Laboratory Calibration Study,” in 
Performance metrics for assessing driver distraction: The quest for 
improved road safety, G. L. Rupp, Ed, Warrendale, Pennsylvania: 
SAE International, 2010, pp. 243–253. 
[11] S. G. Hart, NASA Task Load Index (TLX): Volume 1.0; Paper and 
Pencil Package. Available:  
http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/20000021488_200
0015069.pdf [retrieved: Jan., 2015]. 
[12] J. Brooke, “SUS - A quick and dirty usability scale,” in Usability 
evaluation in industry, P. W. Jordan, B. Thomas, B. A. 
Weerdmeester, and I. L. McClelland, Eds, London, Bristol, PA: 
Taylor & Francis, 1996, pp. 189–194. 
[13] M. Hassenzahl, M. Burmester, and F. Koller, “AttrakDiff: Ein 
Fragebogen zur Messung wahrgenommener hedonischer und 
pragmatischer Qualität,” in vol. 57, Mensch & Computer 2003: 
Interaktion in Bewegung, G. Szwillus and J. Ziegler, Eds. 1st ed, 
Stuttgart: Teubner, 2003, pp. 187–196. 
[14] A. Bangor, P. Kortum, and J. Miller, “Determining What Individual 
SUS Score Mean: Adding an Adjective Rating Scale,” JUS Journal of 
Usability Studies, vol. 2009 Volume 4, no. Issue 3, 2009. pp. 114–
123. 
[15] M. Krause, V. Knott and K. Bengler, “Traffic Light Assistant – Can 
Take My Eyes Off of You”, Human Factors and Ergonomic Society 
Europe Chapter Turin 2013. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

