Focus Group Study on Student Perception of Electronic Textbooks 
 
Kimberly Anne Sheen and Yan Luximon 
School of Design 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hong Kong, SAR 
e-mail: Kimberly.Sheen@connect.polyu.hk 
sdtina@polyu.edu.hk
 
 
Abstract— Electronic textbooks are a common topic in 
academic research, yet the future is not being investigated 
from a student perspective.  This paper aims to add to the 
current research by outlining students’ reading habits in 
physical and electronic textbooks and identify what students 
believe they need to properly study.  This study utilized focus 
groups with design and engineering students.  These disciplines 
were chosen due to their similar goals, yet different 
approaches.  Findings showed that the two groups of students 
approach their academic readings in a different way and when 
looking towards future electronic textbooks require some 
discipline specific components.  Yet, their similarities caused 
some of their views and ideas to be the same, such as being able 
to insert their own images into the textbooks and the desire for 
less text and more interactive components to facilitate their 
learning.  Understanding discipline needs and including 
student input based on their perceived needs will assist in 
designing future electronic textbooks that will meet academic 
needs. 
Keywords - focus group; electronic textbooks; academic 
reading; design education; engineering education. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Electronic textbooks are considered the future of 
textbooks in higher education.  Yet, students are not as 
excited about this trend as many universities.  While 60% of 
students reported using electronic textbooks during their 
academic studies, with half being required to by their 
instructors, student preference for physical textbooks has not 
waned [1].  In fact, many studies have shown that student 
preferences of some components, such as search functions 
and long blocks of text, negatively impacted student opinion 
of electronic textbooks [2].   
While electronic textbooks are starting to evolve past 
simple .pdf representations of the physical text, they are in 
their infancy.  It has been individual schools creating their 
own interactive electronic textbooks, which are shifting away 
from the textbook metaphor [3] and creating this evolution.  
This shift from the textbook metaphor will allow for 
additional materials and components, which will enhance 
and assist with the reading task [4].  Yet, creating this type of 
electronic textbook for individual courses is time consuming 
and impractical on a larger scale.  On the other hand,  
 
electronic textbooks coming from major publishers tend to 
follow a one size fits all mentality, assuming that all 
components included in electronic textbooks can be used 
broadly across disciplines.  This is already accepted as 
incorrect reasoning, as different disciplines are known to 
approach their education in different ways [5], yet is still in 
broad practice.  Regardless of creating electronic textbooks 
specifically tailored for courses or broader textbooks, there is 
still the challenge of selecting and creating new supplemental 
materials and components for this new type of electronic 
textbook [6].   
Not only would academics and publishers find creating 
new content difficult, advancing technology and the use of 
electronic textbooks may have altered the ways in which 
students use textbooks.  Students can now easily read in 
cafes or while travelling [7], moving away from the desks 
and tables that used to confine students.  Being able to study 
in more locations may seem positive, but without normal 
study aides such as highlighters and notebooks, students may 
find themselves slipping from the deep reading required 
during revision, which allows for in-depth comprehension 
and recall [8] to surface reading, which provides students 
with a more limited understanding of the materials [9].  
While some components included in current electronic 
textbooks seem similar to the support activities students 
employ during reading, they are noticeably different.  For 
example, many students take notes in the margins of their 
physical textbooks to support their studying.  While 
electronic textbooks commonly offer notation software, 
notes are typically not displayed on the screen and require 
clicking on a small icon to later revisit.  This could cause the 
students to miss their notes or interrupt their reading process 
leading them to become distracted.  In fact, electronic 
annotation software is used less often than traditional note 
taking done with a physical textbook [10].  The lack of 
tangibility associated with electronic textbooks also 
negatively affects the reading task [11].  Past research has 
stated that electronic textbooks should enhance current 
physical active reading activities while presenting an 
interface that is easy to use [12]. 
Currently, the components being designed for future 
electronic textbooks are not being decided by the students 
[13].  This could lead to new textbooks not being able to  
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

fully support students’ study habits and not only failing the 
student but becoming something that is looked on with 
derision.  The purpose of the focus groups outlined in this 
paper was to identify, which components are important to 
students during their studies.  Since each discipline has 
different approaches to studying and different needs, focus 
groups were separated based on the two disciplines studied: 
engineering and design.  This allows for a better 
understanding of how these groups of students approach 
their studies.  It also assists in identifying what type of 
supplemental content needs to be created and what tools 
need to be included to support academic reading in these 
different disciplines. 
This paper also aims to bring a deeper understanding to 
the data from an earlier survey released at The Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University [14].  It also provides insights into 
how students complete their academic readings in physical 
and electronic mediums and how they envision their future 
electronic textbooks based on their discipline specific needs.  
The rest of this paper is organized the following way.  
Section II describes the method employed in this paper.  
Section III presents the results of the focus groups.  Section 
IV discusses the results within the literature and in a more 
general context.  Section V presents the main conclusions 
and presents some future areas that should be explored.   
II. 
METHOD 
The method chosen to uncover student needs and 
approaches in-depth was focus group [15].  The focus group 
method allows for internal validity, a better understanding of 
the phenomenon that would not be possible through methods 
that use quantitative analysis, and assists in understanding 
truly complex issues [15], which are necessary in this type of 
research. 
A. Participants 
Students were recruited from The Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University.  There were two requirements for 
participation.  The first, students need to be enrolled in either 
an undergraduate design or engineering program.  The 
second, the students needed to have prior experience using 
electronic textbooks during their academic studies.  Once 
students volunteered for participation, they were placed into 
three person focus groups made up of participants only from 
their discipline.  Students were overall balanced male and 
female aged between 18 and 23. 
B. Session Design 
Each focus group session was designed to last 
approximately one hour.  The sessions were made up of 
sixteen semi-structured interview questions, which were 
followed up with questions related to the answers.  Students 
also participated in two activities during the session.  The 
first activity asked them how they define current electronic 
textbooks.  The second activity asked them to envision their 
future electronic textbooks, without considering the 
limitations of current technology.  In this activity, students 
were asked to include components they wanted in their 
discipline specific electronic textbooks and then asked 
questions about how they would interact with these new 
textbooks.  Each session was audio taped and later 
transcribed. 
C. Data Analysis 
Once each session was transcribed, the data was coded.  
The codes used in this research were grounded in the data 
[16] and used to organize the data into recurring topics and 
subtopics for easier analysis and development of theory. 
III. 
RESULTS 
 
The semi-structured interview questions investigated the 
habits, task requirements, and preferences of students in 
regards to textbooks.  The questions were broken up into 
three segments on physical textbooks, electronic textbooks, 
and future electronic textbooks.  The same questions were 
used for both design and engineering focus groups, although 
follow up questions differed slightly based on the responses 
given by students.  During the future electronic textbook 
segment, students were also asked for feedback based on 
ranking data gained from an earlier survey.  Two activities 
were also completed by students, one during the electronic 
textbook segment and one during the future electronic 
textbook section.  The results presented in this paper are the 
detailed results from one design focus group and one 
engineering focus group.  These focus groups were a part of 
a larger set of focus groups conducted until homogeneity was 
reached [17, 18, 19].   
A. Physical Textbooks 
The questions regarding physical textbooks mostly dealt 
with student habits regarding physical textbook reading.  
Overall, design students reported to using physical textbooks 
around 80% of their time while doing academic readings at a 
desk at home for around two hours in the morning before 
lectures.  They reported using the textbooks as the main 
source of learning concepts.  The location preference is 
related to the reported issue of dizziness from reading 
physical textbooks on transportation.  Engineering students 
reported to using physical textbooks less than 50% of their 
time while doing academic readings.  How often engineering 
students did academic reading varied greatly from only 
during exam times to one hour per day in the afternoons and 
evenings.  They agreed that it should be done in the school 
library due to the quiet environment away from the 
distractions at home.  Engineering students reported that the 
purpose of their academic reading was to review that they 
had learned during the lecture. 
Investigation into the task requirements of academic 
reading in a physical textbook was undertaken.  Students 
were questioned about what types of supporting activities 
they did during physical textbook reading to help them 
comprehend the material.  Design students reported different 
supporting activities such as summarizing important points 
from the text into lists, highlighting, and searching for more 
information by keywords.  These students make notes in the 
margins of the text, or if on a separate piece of paper, they 
attach it to the original text.  Similarly engineering students 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

reported taking notes in the margins, highlighting, looking 
over drafts from class, and looking up definitions in the 
dictionary. 
Students also reported some ergonomics issues and other 
considerations when deciding to use physical textbooks.  
Both groups of students reported that physical textbooks are 
very difficult to carry around and that they are much more 
expensive than their electronic counterparts.  Yet, they 
believe that physical textbooks are much more convenient to 
take notes in. 
B. Electronic Textbooks 
1) Definition 
Before answering questions similar to those asked during 
the physical textbook segment, students were asked to 
complete an activity in which they defined the term 
electronic textbook.  Design students defined electronic 
textbooks as “a tool for learning without physical barriers.  It 
contains lots of text, with additional elements including 
pictures, audio, and video.”  During this process, they also 
highlighted several components as important to their current 
electronic textbooks such as text, animations, images, video, 
dictionaries, and infographics.  Text was considered 
especially vital to the electronic textbook as students felt that 
without text, the textbook loses its main purpose.  They also 
highlighted some ways that electronic textbooks have 
enriched their learning experience such as facilitating 
communication, 
increased 
mobility, 
and 
increased 
interaction between the reader and the text.  Engineering 
students defined electronic textbooks as “a portable device 
which includes all notes or text, video, and pictures into one 
appliance.  It is cheap, environmentally friendly, and 
convenient when comparing to the physical textbook.”  
Engineering students placed value on the electronic 
textbook’s ability to search for keywords and additional 
components such as animations, video, and images that help 
facilitate their learning.  They believe that the main purpose 
of electronic textbooks is to help students revise concepts 
they’ve learned in the classroom. 
2) Usage 
The questions regarding electronic textbooks mostly 
dealt with student habits regarding electronic textbook 
reading.  Overall, design students reported that they spent 
around 20% of their time reading in electronic textbooks in 
the classroom at their desk during the lecture.  The majority 
of the time they access electronic textbooks, they use 
laptops.  They will use the phone if they need to do a short 
reading and they feel the convenience outweighs the 
limitations.  Engineering students reported that they spent 
around 10% of their time reading in electronic textbooks at 
home or while travelling in the afternoon and evenings.  The 
students access their electronic textbooks on computers most 
of the time.   
Investigation into the task requirements of academic 
reading in an electronic textbook was undertaken.  Students 
were questioned about what types of supporting activities  
they did during electronic textbook reading to help them 
comprehend the material.  Design students reported using 
highlighting tools, music to help them focus, and Microsoft 
Word or the comment function to take notes.  While design 
students reported taking notes while reading electronic 
textbooks, they reported taking less notes than when using 
physical textbooks.  Engineering students reported using 
built 
in 
encyclopedia 
functions, 
search 
functions, 
highlighting, and screen capture functions most often. 
While not explicitly asked about physical and cognitive 
ergonomics issues related to electronic textbooks, both 
engineering students and design students brought this subject 
up.  Both groups cited eye fatigue as a major concern 
associated with the use of electronic textbooks, so students 
prefer to use them for shorter readings.  Design students also 
discussed how they would rather print long readings instead 
of viewing them online to facilitate their learning, believing 
that the addition of too many components may destroy their 
creativity, and difficulties reading paragraphs in the digital 
form.  While engineering students stressed electronic 
textbooks were easier to carry and allowed for more 
mobility. 
Students also reported several technical issues and other 
aspects, which influence their interaction with electronic 
textbooks.  Design students repeatedly reported the battery 
on their mobile devices as negatively impacting their 
academic reading along with the scrolling times and the size 
of the text.  Both sets of students also discussed how the ease 
of sharing and downloading electronic textbooks facilitated 
their learning.  In addition, the ability to take digital notes 
makes them less likely to lose said notes.  Yet, students felt 
like typing instead of writing made it more difficult to 
remember and digest the concepts.  Engineering students 
also wished for the ability to draw or write manually in their 
electronic textbooks, but reported that the current technology 
that allows these actions are buggy and slow making them 
unusable.  These students also discussed how cost, mobility, 
and environmental friendliness made using electronic 
textbooks more desirable. 
C. Future Electronic Textbooks 
The future of electronic textbooks was investigated in 
many ways.  Overall, design students reported that they 
would be more likely to use electronic textbooks if they were 
more interactive.  They also desire more features such as 
accurate text to speech and improved bookmarks that used a 
sentence or word as the placer.  Engineering students also 
agreed that they would be more likely to use electronic 
textbooks that were more interactive.  They believed that this 
type of electronic textbook would facilitate their learning, 
speed up their work progress, and make them more efficient 
students.  They wanted less text and more components such 
as 3D and manipulatable pictures and videos to help 
illuminate the concepts. 
When students were presented with information 
regarding the answers from the previous survey, design 
students agreed that the top five components chosen were 
appropriate.  They believed that text was more vital to the  
learning experience than students in the survey rated it, but 
agreed that the readings they have to read are diverse and 
that a lot of it seems unimportant to them, which could have 
influenced the ranking.  Design students also reported that 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the findings of the undesirable components from the survey 
were 
valid. 
 
Engineering 
students 
thought 
survey 
respondents had overestimated the importance of text and 
underestimated components such as 3D images.  They 
believed 
that 
this 
was 
because 
respondents 
chose 
components they were more familiar with and could 
envision.  Other than that, students believed the other 
components chosen as desirable and undesirable were valid. 
After this general information was gathered, students 
were asked to complete the final activity in which they were 
given free rein to create the perfect representation of an 
electronic textbook for their discipline.  As this was without 
the constraints of current technology, many of the solutions 
students presented would not be fully functional at this time.  
Design students produced a sketch of their electronic 
textbook, keeping notes on functionality and features 
surrounding the sketch (see Figure 1).   
Their electronic textbook took inspiration from Adobe 
Illustrator’s interface and included the ability to add notes or 
photos directly inline, bullet form text instead of paragraphs, 
adjustable line spacing and text size, a table of contents, 
video, audio, adjustable images, bookmarks, the ability to 
synchronize across devices, translations, a dictionary, and an 
encyclopedia.  They felt that highlighting and annotation 
tools would no longer be needed in their future electronic 
textbook because there would be much less text.  Students 
built in the ability to hide unimportant content automatically 
by extending the text by clicking on the bullet point text. 
Many similar components appeared in the engineering future 
electronic textbook, yet the representation students chose to 
convey their textbook was a list form (see Figure 2).  This 
electronic textbook also relied on less text, yet included some 
discipline specific aspects like interactive equations. 
 
Figure 1. Future electronic textbook by Design Students. 
 
 
Figure 2. Future electronic textbook by Engineering Students. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Student Usage 
Student usage of physical and electronic textbooks 
differed in both disciplines in all aspects of use.  The 
mobility offered to students by electronic textbooks change 
where and when they do their studies.  Even with this ease of 
downloading and mobility, students still reported that they 
preferred physical textbooks [1].  Similar to what past 
research has uncovered, students do not want to read long 
blocks of text in an electronic textbook [2].  Many of the 
focus group participants reported that they would print out 
long readings, rather than printing them on the screen.  
Printing out pages from electronic textbooks allows for 
students to continue to experience the four affordances of 
spatial flexibility, manipulability, tangibility, and tailorability 
which students are nostalgic about in regard to print 
textbooks [11].  Supporting activities also changed for many 
students.  They found themselves taking notes less and 
becoming frustrated with built in functions such as 
bookmarking and annotation tools [10].  Repeatedly, 
students reported taking notes in the physical form was 
easier and allowed them to see their notes with the concepts, 
which later assisted in revising the material.  By 
investigating current use of both types of textbooks, the 
differences in usage, and understanding the reasoning behind 
the usage design recommendations, such as shortening 
blocks of text and finding opportunities to incorporate 
aspects reminiscent of the four affordances, such as the 
ability to see notes on the page instead of hidden within an 
icon, can be made for future electronic textbooks. 
B. Future Textbooks 
Student preference for design attributes of electronic  
 
 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

textbooks was similar in both fields of design and 
engineering, yet several components differed.  Overall, all 
students agreed that text should be limited to the most 
important information presented in a bullet point form.  
More information could then be accessed through hovering 
over the text.  Students also felt that creating textbooks that 
were more interactive would facilitate their learning and 
allow them to truly understand the material.  Based on 
student responses, making this type of change would rectify 
the change in reading style from surface reading back to deep 
reading [8, 9], which is necessary for succeeding 
academically.  While these reported changes may make 
electronic textbooks more appropriate for the type of reading 
required, reported interaction may have been influenced by 
current ideas of electronic textbooks like the students in the 
focus group found with the past survey results [14].  In 
addition, student enthusiasm for these components may later 
wane yet that should do little to the effectiveness of the 
components [20]. 
Because of the issues associated with students’ dislike of 
long blocks of text and subsequent effect on reading quality, 
it is recommended that designers incorporate short blocks of 
text with extended information hidden.  The loss of 
information in long form can be supplemented with 
components such as multimedia or other engaging 
components. 
C. Comparison of Disciplines 
While there are many similarities in responses from both 
engineering students and design students, there were some 
fundamental differences.  One of these differences was 
illuminated during the second activity in which it became 
apparent that while similar requirements may be requested, 
the way students think and interact are different.  Design 
students felt comfortable creating a visual representation of 
what they thought their perfect discipline specific future 
electronic textbook was and worked together from the start 
to create their ultimate proposal.  This can be associated with 
the nature of design being undertaken as a team project.  On 
the contrary, engineering students presented their answers in 
a list form and instead of compromising and discussing 
opinions during the creation process, waited until after their 
individual lists were made to try and unify their answers.  
This can be attributed to the often solitary nature of 
engineering projects. 
When examining the differences in component inclusion, 
the discipline requirements become apparent.  While both 
groups of students wanted to be able to add their own photos 
to the text inline and have text represented in bullet form, 
engineering students did not feel that taking their own notes 
were necessary in the new textbook.  When asked about this, 
they stated that the information was now in point form and 
they no longer needed to take notes.  On the contrary, design 
students still wanted to take their own notes because of the 
interdisciplinary and creative aspects of the design process.  
Engineering 
students 
also 
requested the component 
interactive equations be included in their future textbook, 
which is consistent with a discipline that requires equations  
 
over those that do not such as design.  Based on the 
educational requirements of both disciplines of students, it is 
important to ensure that components change based on the 
needs of the students. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Overall, students believe that future electronic textbooks 
need to be improved to become more interactive to facilitate 
their learning and help them fully engage with the material.  
Although, students can agree on this, when comparing two 
similar 
disciplines 
that 
share 
many 
fundamental 
characteristics with differences in approaches, it becomes 
apparent that the one-size fits all approach to textbook design 
needs to be abandoned.  Generally, students place high 
priority on making future electronic textbooks more 
interactive, discipline specific, and with less text.  Yet, 
students also note discipline specific components as vital, 
such 
as 
interactive 
equations, 
in 
facilitating 
the 
understanding of their work. 
While design recommendations such as these have 
important applications to industry and academia, more 
research should be conducted to truly verify the practical 
validity of the components suggested.  The educational 
perspective should also be investigated to understand the use 
of electronic textbooks as a teaching aid.  This perspective is 
best investigated on an individual basis because of the 
changing opinions of instructors. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank The Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University for their support.  This research was 
supported by the Research Grants Council for the Hong 
Kong PhD Fellowship Scheme (1-904Z). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Denoyelles, J. Raible, and R. Seilhamer, “Exploring 
students’ e-textbook practices in higher education,” Educause 
Review. 
[Online]. 
March 
2016. 
Available 
from: 
http://er.educause.edu/articles/2015/7/exploring-students-
etextbook-practices-in-higher-education 
[2] M. Kropman, H. P. Schoch, and H. Y. Teoh, “An experience 
in e-learning: using an electronic textbook,” Beyond the 
comfort zone: Proceedings of the 21st ASCILITE Conference, 
2004, pp. 512-515. 
[3] N. 
K. 
Herther, 
“Ebooks 
everywhere: 
the 
digital 
transformation of reading,” Searcher, vol. 19(6), pp. 22-31, 
2011. 
[4] B. Shneiderman, Designing the user interface: Strategies for 
effective human computer-interaction. Boston, MA: Addison 
Wesley Longman, 1998. 
[5] D. A. Kolb, “Learning styles and disciplinary differences,” in 
The modern American college, A. W. Chickering Ed. 
London: Joseey-Bass Limited,  pp. 232-255, 1981. 
[6] J. Defazio, “Challenges of electronic textbook authoring: 
writing in the discipline,” Communications in Computer and 
Information Science, vol. 352, pp. 8-14, 2012. 
[7] G. Fairbairn and S. Fairbairn, Reading at university. 
Buckingham, England: Open University Press, 2001. 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[8] B. J. Phillips and F. Phillips, “Sink or skim: textbook reading 
behaviors of introductory accounting students,” Issues in 
Accounting Education, vol. 22(1), pp. 21-44, 2007. 
[9] J. Bowden and F. Marton, The university of learning. London: 
Psychology Press, 2003. 
[10] K. O'Hara and A. Sellen, “A comparison of reading paper and 
on-line documents.” Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 
Atlanta, GA, 1997, pp. 335-342. 
[11] A. Sellen and R. Harper, The myth of the paperless office. 
Boston, MA: MIT Press, 2003. 
[12] R. McFall, “Electronic textbooks that transform how 
textbooks are used.” The Electronic Library, vol. 23(1), pp. 
72-81, 2005. 
[13] X. Tian and B. Martin, “Value chain adjustments in 
educational publishing,” Publishing Research Quarterly, vol. 
29(1), pp. 12-25, 2013. 
[14] K. A. Sheen and Y. Luximon, “Relationship between 
academic discipline and user perception of the future of 
electronic textbooks,” Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 3, 2015, 
pp. 5845-5850. 
[15] S. R. Vaughn, J. S. Schumm, and J. M. Sinagub, Focus group 
interviews in education and psychology. Thousand Oaks: 
Sage Publications, 1996. 
[16] B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss, The discovery of grounded 
theory: strategies for qualitative research. New Brunswick, 
NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2009. 
[17] L. Millward, “Focus groups,” in Research Methods in 
Psychology, G. Breakwell, S. Hammond, and C. Fife-Shaw, 
Eds. London: Sage Publications, pp. 274-292, 1995. 
[18] R. Krueger, Focus Groups: A Practical Guide for Applied 
Research, 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, pp. 36-
45, 1994. 
[19] D. Stewart and P. Shamdasani, Focus groups Theory and 
Practice. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 1990. 
[20] M. Bode, M. Khorami, and D. Visscher “A Case Study of 
Student and Instructor Reactions to a Calculus E-Book,” 
PRIMUS, vol. 24(2), pp. 160-174, 2014. 
 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

