A User-centred Design and Feasibility Analysis of
the WiGlove - A Home-based Rehabilitation Device
for Hand and Wrist Therapy after Stroke
Vignesh Velmurugan
Robotics Research Group
University of Hertfordshire
Hatfield, United Kingdom
email: v.velmurugan2@herts.ac.uk
Luke Jai Wood
Robotics Research Group
University of Hertfordshire
Hatfield, United Kingdom
email: l.wood@herts.ac.uk
Farshid Amirabdollahian
Robotics Research Group
University of Hertfordshire
Hatfield, United Kingdom
email: f.amirabdollahian2@herts.ac.uk
Abstract—Stroke survivors often experience deficits in their
hand’s motor function, which can greatly impact their ability
to perform activities of daily life. Home-based rehabilitation
with robotic devices has been shown to improve the recovery of
hand functions. The WiGlove is a home-based robotic orthosis
that has been developed using a user-centred approach to offset
the hyperflexion in the hand and wrist of hemiparetic stroke
survivors. It facilitates training the distal joints of the upper
limb at home while performing activities of daily life or playing
therapeutic games on a tablet. In a formative evaluation, stroke
therapists positively rated the WiGlove’s usability and provided
feedback which assisted in improving its design. Additionally, the
preliminary results of a feasibility analysis at a stroke survivor’s
home showed evidence of the WiGlove’s usability and acceptance
with a noticeable impact on reducing the tone in the impaired
hand.
Keywords—Stroke rehabilitation; Robot-aided rehabilitation;
Home-based therapy; Hand-wrist orthosis; Feasibility.
I. INTRODUCTION
Stroke often results in hemiparesis, where the survivors
experience motor function deficits on one side of their body.
Hemiparetic stroke survivors often experience weakness and
abnormal synergies such as excessive involuntary flexion (hy-
perflexion) in their hand which severely affects their ability
to independently perform Activities of Daily Life (ADL)
[1]. While rehabilitation is prescribed to regain the hand’s
functions, the traditional approach of one-to-one physical
therapy limits the amount of training due to factors such
as the availability of therapists’ appointments. Robot-aided
rehabilitation techniques have shown the potential to act as
a valuable companion to therapists, offering the ability to
provide high repetitions and objective measures of assessments
without requiring their presence [2].
Robotic devices that allow stroke survivors to independently
perform exercises at home at a flexible schedule can lead to an
overall increase in training intensity and associated recovery
[3]. Home-based rehabilitation devices enable therapists to
remotely monitor the progress and use their expertise to
help more stroke survivors which is invaluable in times like
the COVID-19 pandemic. While a variety of robotic devices
Figure 1. WiGlove.
have been proposed for the neurorehabilitation of the hand
[4][5][6][7], the majority focus only on training either the
wrist or the fingers but not both [8], neglecting the synergy
between them. Most of them are only suitable for use in a
clinical environment, resulting in limited training durations.
Only SCRIPT Passive Orthosis (SPO) [1] was found to be
suitable for training independently at home.
SPO is a passive orthosis that allows stroke survivors to
perform hand and wrist exercises. Developed in a European
Framework 7 project, it is a part of the SCRIPT system that
includes interactive games and a back-end system for clinical
monitoring. While a study involving 23 stroke survivors val-
idated SPO’s feasibility, it also identified several functional
and usability shortcomings [1][9]. Usability is one of the
significant user requirements that affect the acceptance of such
devices [10].
Hence, the overarching aim of the research presented in this
paper aims to design and develop a home-based rehabilitation
device for the hand and wrist that addresses the limitations of
SPO through a user-centred design approach (UCD). Begin-
ning with the features of the WiGlove in Section II, this paper
focuses on discussing the methods (Section III) and findings
(Section IV) of its formative usability evaluation with stroke
therapists and presents preliminary results from the feasibility
study conducted at a stroke survivor’s home.
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 2. Image showing a stroke survivor’s hand with hyper-
flexion in the fingers being offset by WiGlove.
II. WIGLOVE
In a user-centred design process, an extensive review of the
state of the art including task analysis and user studies by the
SCRIPT consortium was used to compile a comprehensive
set of user requirements for such a device [10]. Building
on the knowledge from SPO, the WiGlove was designed to
satisfy these requirements. The WiGlove is a passive dynamic
orthosis that assists hemiparetic stroke survivors in performing
flexion/extension exercises with their fingers and wrist while
performing ADL or playing therapeutic games on a tablet. In
addition to providing support, a dynamic orthosis also helps
to articulate the joint. The WiGlove consists of a forearm
and a hand module coupled using a flexible interconnection
to allow for ab/adduction of the wrist reducing the risk of
hypertonia from non-use. It uses elastic straps with hooks
for easy don/doffing of the device with the unimpaired hand.
Furthermore, all the surfaces of the device that come in contact
with the body while wearing are lined with thermoplastic
polyethene foam to ensure comfortable soft interaction. Since
the modules are 3D printed, it allows the user to customise
their appearance which could enhance its acceptance.
A. Extension assistance
The WiGlove uses extension springs as passive actuators
to assist with the extension of the wrist and fingers to a
more neutral position from a fully flexed position (Figure 2).
This allows the stroke survivors to voluntarily perform flexion
against the resistive force of the springs. This mechanism
where the device remains passive during training is adopted
due to its reduced safety concerns compared to its active
counterparts.
The wrist’s assistance mechanism is located on the forearm
module from which the spring force is transmitted to the joints
using an inelastic cord that is attached to the hand module.
Similarly, each finger is individually assisted, where the cord
is attached to the distal segment of the finger in a base-to-
distal configuration that eliminates the concerns of misalign-
ment between the centres of rotation of the fingers and the
device. This also ensures that the ab/adduction of the fingers
is unrestricted. The cords are guided through an extension
structure and are attached to the fingers using a silicone digit
cap that allows for tactile feedback while grasping objects
(Figure 3). The extension structure is transparent to permit
Figure 3. Extension assistance mechanism.
visual feedback while training. The thumb’s mechanism is
attached to the forearm module to reduce the weight acting
on the hand. Additionally, it has a passive joint to facilitate
the thumb’s ab/adduction, which is essential for its opposing
action while grasping.
B. Feedback sensors
The spring in each assistance module is attached to the re-
spective inelastic cord through a coupler that rotates about the
shaft of a rotary potentiometer. When a finger or the wrist is
flexed, the inelastic cord exerts a torque on the coupler which
rotates the potentiometer’s shaft. This generates an analogue
output voltage that is interpreted by the microcontroller to
measure the flexion/extension angle of the wrist and individual
fingers. Furthermore, the microcontroller used to interpret the
joint angles contains a built-in 9-axis Inertial Measurement
Unit (IMU) which is used to estimate the arm’s posture.
C. Tension adjustment
Based on the degree of hyperflexion experienced by the
user, springs of appropriate stiffness can be used. However,
the amount of assistance required could change during training
with recovery. Therefore, the WiGlove has a motorised tension
adjustment system that increases or decreases the free length of
a given spring. This allows the user and the therapists to mod-
ulate the assistance so that the user is adequately challenged
during training using a slider interface on a touchscreen tablet.
D. Wireless connectivity and tablet interface
Unlike SPO which is tethered, the WiGlove is a wireless
device and as such does not require the user to be at a specific
location. This allows the user to train in different places in
their home. The microcontroller transmits all the data to a
touchscreen tablet through Bluetooth 4.0. This allows both
therapists and users to monitor the performance including
the range of motion (RoM), number of repetitions, training
duration, etc. It also allows the user to interact with therapeutic
games on the tablet while training with the WiGlove to
enhance motivation. It can be charged using a micro-USB
cable.
III. METHODS
In a previous study, a comparative evaluation of the
WiGlove and SPO in a counterbalanced, within-subject exper-
iment involving 20 healthy participants, showed statistically
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. Experiment flow.
significant evidence of the WiGlove improvements over the
SPO in the following usability aspects: ease of donning and
doffing, ease of adjusting the assistance, unrestricted natural
DoF, suitability for ADL and perception of aesthetics, wire-
less operation and safety [11]. Building on this preliminary
validation, further usability evaluation was conducted in two
stages with stroke therapists and stroke survivors as follows.
A. Formative evaluation - Stroke therapists
The objective of this phase was to leverage the expertise
of therapists with experience in post-stroke rehabilitation to
improve the WiGlove’s usability and safety before introducing
it to stroke survivors. This study was approved by the Univer-
sity’s Ethics Committee (Ethics protocol number: aSPECS/
PGR/ UH/ 04896(1)).
1) Study protocol: In this in-person heuristic evaluation
process, stroke therapists (N
= 6) from the Luton and
Dunstable hospital, UK used the WiGlove and assessed its
usability. Firstly, a demonstration of using the WiGlove was
provided to all the participants (Figure 4). Following this, each
of them used the device and performed a set of tasks designed
to help evaluate the above-mentioned aspects of usability,
similar to [11].
They involved don/doffing the different modules of the
device in a specific sequence, performing ab/adduction of
the wrist to ensure that the device does not block this
degree of freedom which could lead to hypertonia, and
adjusting the amount of extension assistance, etc. To assess
the WiGlove’s suitability for performing ADL while wearing
it, three different grasping tasks, namely palmar pinch (key),
cylindrical grasp (bottle) and a spherical grasp(ball) were
included (Figure 5). These precision (palmar pinch) and
power (spherical and cylindrical) grasps are significant to
perform ADL [12].
(a) Palmar Pinch
(Key).
(b) Cylindrical grasp
(bottle).
(c) Spherical grasp
(bottle).
Figure 5. Grasping Tasks
2) Data Acquisition: Upon completing the tasks, the ther-
apists individually gave feedback using a 7-point Likert scale
questionnaire. Each question related to the individual tasks
that they performed. For example, the following is one of the
questions that requested the participant to rate the ease with
which they could perform the cylindrical grasp.
How easy was it to grasp the bottle while wearing the device ?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Very Difficult
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
⃝
Very Easy
This approach was adopted since traditional usability scales
such as System Usability Scale (SUS) are tailored for end
users (stroke survivors in our case) and hence was rendered
unsuitable for this study. Additionally, open-ended questions
were also used to record their thoughts in a more detailed
and descriptive manner on the WiGlove’s suitability of ADL,
don/doffing and safety. Each participant took approximately 15
minutes to answer the questionnaire. This approach provided
invaluable context to their Likert scale scores and helped
to better address their concerns in improving the WiGlove’s
design.
B. Feasibility Study - Stroke Survivors
Having incorporated the therapists’ feedback, the revised
WiGlove is undergoing a 6-week evaluation at a hemiparetic
stroke survivor’s home. The participant uses the WiGlove to
perform flexion/extension exercises without the supervision
of a therapist. This study was approved by the University’s
Ethics Committee (Ethics protocol number: aSPECS/ PGR/
UH/ 05084(1)).
1) Study Protocol: The participant was recruited using
flyers placed in the stroke unit of the Luton and Dunstable
Hospital. He is a 78-year-old male, who experienced strokes
twice 15 months ago, resulting in left-sided hemiparesis. It
is evidenced by the excessive tone in the hand that resulted
in a clenched fist (as seen in Figure 2) which prevented
the participant from grasping any boxes or pegs in Box and
Block(BnB) and Nine Hole Peg Test (NHPT) [13]. These tests
were administered to establish a baseline similar to a recent
study investigating the feasibility of a hand exoskeleton [5].
Firstly, in the fitting stage, measurements were taken so that
the device was customised to the participant’s hand dimen-
sions. After this, the WiGlove and its tablet interface were
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a) Wrist exercise game
(b) Fingers exercise game
Figure 6. Games for training
delivered to the participant’s home. During the first week, the
participant was encouraged to get familiar with the device by
performing flexion/extension exercises and simple activities of
daily life like drinking from a bottle and eating with a spoon.
Following this familiarisation phase, apart from performing
ADL, the participant was introduced to two therapeutic games
designed to enhance engagement and motivation for training.
These games entailed the user controlling the position of a
character and triggering specific actions (e.g., hitting a moving
target) by performing flexion/extension of their wrist and
fingers (Figure 6).
2) Data Acquisition: During the home-based training pe-
riod, the tablet logs training data such as joint angle informa-
tion, number of repetitions, training duration and time, which
are later retrieved to analyse and monitor the participant’s
performance. The participant was also encouraged to com-
plete an online questionnaire about their experience with the
device once a week. Furthermore, an in-person semi-structured
interview after the first three weeks and at the end of 6-
weeks is used to gather his feedback on training with the
device. The audio of the responses is recorded, transcribed
and analysed. Additionally, similar to [5], The Quebec User
Evaluation of Satisfaction with Assistive Technology (QUEST
2.0) questionnaire was used to record his level of satisfaction
with the WiGlove on a 5-point Likert scale [14]. During this
first half of the study, the participant was visited twice to
collect the data.
IV. RESULTS
This section presents the results from the formative study
with the stroke therapists and the feasibility analysis involving
one stroke survivor.
A. Formative evaluation - Stroke therapists
The statistical results of the therapists’ feedback are pre-
sented in Table I. Overall the participants gave a median score
above 4 for most categories while performing a cylindrical task
with the WiGlove was judged to be the easiest with a median
score of 6.5. Furthermore, the participants unanimously gave
high scores for the WiGlove’s aesthetic appeal and safety as
evidenced by their corresponding interquartile ranges. Among
the different grasps, performing the palmar pinch received the
lowest median score of 4 indicating a neutral opinion. The
following remark by a participant provides insight into the
probable cause for this low score.
TABLE I. RESULTS OF THERAPISTS’ FEEDBACK (1 - VERY DIFFICULT, 7 -
VERY EASY)
Median
Inter
Quartile
Range
Ease of donning the forearm module
4.5
1
Ease of donning the hand module
5
0.75
Ease of donning the fingercaps
5
1.5
Ease of doffing the forearm module
5
1.5
Ease of doffing the hand module
5
0.75
Ease of doffing the fingercaps
5
0.75
Ease of performing the ab/adduction of the wrist
4.5
2.5
Ease of performing the ab/adduction of the fingers
3.5
1
Perception of the weight
4.5
2
Ease of performing a palmar pinch (key grasp)
4
1.5
Ease of performing a cylindrical grasp(bottle)
6.5
1.75
Ease of performing a spherical grasp(ball)
5.5
1.75
Suitability for ADL
4
2
Aesthetic appeal
5
0.75
Perception of user safety
5
0.75
Perception of safety for the family
5
0
Therapist 2 - “I found that the nuts of the glove were
resisting my normal movement.”
1) Design Revisions:
• The palmar pinch requires the thumb and the index finger
to flex more than the other grasps. The presence of
nuts on the device above the metacarpophalangeal (MCP)
joints of the fingers (knuckle) could have restricted their
flexion and ab/adduction reflected by its corresponding
median score of 3.5. Although. Plastazote foams were
used to provide padding from such nuts, the above
comment shows that this did not provide adequate isola-
tion. Hence in the revised design, a custom-made foam
found in SaeboFlex was used in the WiGlove to provide
isolation and ensure comfortable interaction. This foam
was used in SPO where no such issues were reported in
user trials. This revision was implemented in the WiGlove
before the next phase of evaluations.
• Similarly, another participant raised a concern about
a pressure point near the wrist due to impingement
from the thumb’s mechanism. In the revised design, the
thumb’s passive joint was moved such that it is located
proximal to the line of the wrist to ensure that it does
not create a pressure point for people with larger hand
sizes. Although, given that this was raised by only one
participant, this could be due to a mismatch in the glove’s
size where the thumb’s passive mechanism impinges on
a participant with a larger wrist. Unlike this study, the
device’s dimensions will be customised to the stroke
survivor’s hand in the succeeding stages.
B. Feasibility Study - Stroke Survivors
This manuscript reports the results from the first half of a
6-week home-based training study with the first participant.
The participant, using his dominant (unimpaired) hand, was
able to move 34 blocks in 60 seconds during the BnB test
and complete the NHPT test in 35 seconds. However, when
using their impaired (left) hand, the participant was unable to
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE II. USER EXPERIENCE FEEDBACK
Usability
Aspects
Comments
Ease of don-
ning/doffing
Due to substantial tone in the
elbow and shoulder, the
participant was unable to
independently don the device and
required the caregiver’s help. On
the other hand, he was able to
doff the finger caps and forearm
module without help.
Safety
The participant did not find or
experience any safety concerns.
Suitability
for the home
environment
Due to its small size the
participant found it easy to store
away from the reach of kids. The
wireless operation allowed them
to train in different rooms
including while lying in their bed.
It was deemed very suitable for
the home environment.
Learnability
Operating the device was
perceived to be straightforward
and easy to learn.
Battery
No concerns of battery life were
raised. It was charged for 30
minutes every day.
Games
The participant found the games
very interesting and was very
satisfied with the WiGlove’s
sensitivity for playing them. “Felt
very happy even when I hit just
twice”. He suggested that games
involving musical triggers and
multiplayer games where other
members of the family like the
grand kids also can be involved
would be even more stimulating.
“The grand kids, yeah, they
always want to win, yeah that
motivating factor ”
Comfort
It was perceived to be very
comfortable
Weight
The participant felt that the device
could be lighter. “It’s not heavy,
but it could be lighter”
Feedback on
WiGlove’s
effectiveness
The participant reported
observable improvements in his
hand with a noticeable reduction
in the finger’s stiffness. “It was
not supple enough, but over the
last two weeks, the mornings, it
is very relaxed and soft”, “How
long will, I need, I don’t know,
but, Definitely, the glove makes
a difference”.
grasp any blocks or pegs due to a hyperflexion-induced closed
fist. While wearing the WiGlove did enable the participant to
grasp boxes they were still unable to complete the test as a
result of excessive muscle tone in the shoulder and elbow,
impeding gross movements in the arm. Therefore, the baseline
for the hand alone was established through an examination of
the number of items that the participant was able to grasp,
which was 2 blocks in 60 seconds. The participant lacked the
necessary range of motion to grasp a peg for the NHPT test.
After 3-weeks of training, while wearing the WiGlove, the
participant was able to actively pick and drop 9 blocks in 60
seconds compared to the 2 at the beginning of the study. The
participant had not yet gained enough RoM to perform NHPT.
Both tests will be performed again at the end of the study to
evaluate the impact of the intervention.
Based on the data logged in the tablet, the participant
performed hand exercises without the therapist’s supervision
for an average of 50 (±42) minutes/day with the WiGlove.
It also showed that he often split his daily training into
multiple sessions with a maximum of 3 sessions on a specific
day leading to a total training duration of 175 minutes.
Furthermore, the participant’s comments during the 25-minute
semi-structured interview are summarised in Table II. Based
on his experience of using the WiGlove for three weeks, he
gave it a rating of 3.75 on the QUEST 2.0 satisfaction scale.
V. DISCUSSION
Overall,
the
therapists
positively
rated
the
ease
of
donning/doffing
the
WiGlove
independently.
Evident
in
their comments shown below, the therapists believed that
hemiparetic stroke survivors would be able to don/doff the
WiGlove easily and would only be limited by their cognitive
ability. They pointed out the need for written instructions to
guide the users during the familiarisation stage.
Therapist
1 - “Appears suitable for patients to do.
However, would be limited to those cognitively able to do so”
Therapist 3 - “Would need a good level of cognitive
ability. Can be a bit fiddly the first few times”
With regard to the WiGlove’s weight, although the ther-
apists’ scores indicate a neutral opinion, this is similar to
the median score (4.5) given by healthy participants in the
previous study who tried the WiGlove first before trying
[11]. In the previous study, the participants who rated the
WiGlove after trying SPO overwhelmingly rated the WiGlove
to be lighter. Since the therapists only tried the WiGlove, the
neutral score could be attributed to a lack of reference for
comparison. This will be verified in the study with stroke
survivors. This and the ease of performing a palmar pinch
could explain the neutral score for the WiGlove’s suitability
for performing ADL. Given the changes implemented, we
anticipate that stroke survivors will not face the above issue
faced by therapists and find it easy to perform activities of
daily life while wearing the WiGlove.
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Unfortunately, due to the excessive weakness in the prox-
imal joints of the first participant (stroke survivor) who is
discussed in this study, he was unable to perform any ADL,
precluding the evaluation of the effects of these design up-
grades at this stage. However, the participant was still able
to use the WiGlove to regularly train for long durations by
performing flexion/extension exercises.
Prior to his involvement in this study, his rehabilitation
involved 6 weeks of in-patient therapy to the lower limb
immediately after the stroke. Since then, the participant has
had three one-hour sessions of therapy(one-to-one with a ther-
apist) every week of which only five minutes were dedicated
to hand exercises. On the contrary in the first 20 days of
the study, the participant performed hand exercises for an
average of 50 (±42) minutes/day with the WiGlove without
the therapist’s supervision by splitting his training session. The
participant’s improved performance in the BnB test after 3
weeks could be ascribed to him regaining some active RoM
due to this increased training intensity and familiarisation with
the device. This serves as promising preliminary evidence for
the WiGlove’s effectiveness.
The participant’s adherence to training could be attributed
to the usability of the WiGlove based on their feedback in
the semi-structured interview. Overall, the responses indicate a
positive experience and acceptance of the device as evidenced
by their QUEST 2.0 score of 3.75 which is classified as ”more
or less satisfied to quite satisfied”. Although the games were
introduced to him 10 days after the study began, he did not
interact with them more than twice, due to unrelated secondary
health complications which reduced his overall daily training
durations and the use of the WiGlove. This precludes analysis
of the effects of the games on the training duration in the first
half of the study. This will be studied upon completion of
the 6-week study period. However, his feedback based on the
initial interaction with the games shows a positive impression
and attitude towards training with the games.
VI. CONCLUSION
The WiGlove is a passive robotic orthosis designed to
facilitate home-based rehabilitation of the hand and wrist
in stroke survivors. This manuscript highlights the different
aspects of the device and reports on its evaluation by six
stroke therapists and early evidence from a feasibility trial
that has begun with one stroke survivor. The objectives of
these evaluations were to assess the WiGlove’s usability
and its feasibility as a home-based rehabilitation device.
Stroke therapists positively rated the usability of the WiGlove
and their feedback was used to improve its design. The
preliminary results of the study with the one stroke survivor
serve as evidence supporting the feasibility of the WiGlove
for home-based therapy and reaffirm its usability. Due to
the supportive results, a second stroke survivor is now being
enrolled with an expectation to recruit up to 4 patients for
this feasibility trial.
Future work will involve the continuation of this study
with stroke survivors experiencing varying levels of motor
function deficits in the hand to validate its feasibility further
and evaluate its effectiveness in helping hemiparetic stroke
survivors regain their ability to perform activities of daily life.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors express their gratitude to the stroke clinicians
at Luton and Dunstable Hospital in the UK and the stroke
survivor who participated in this research by dedicating their
time and providing valuable feedback at various stages of this
research.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Amirabdollahian, et al., “Design, development and deployment of a
hand/wrist exoskeleton for home-based rehabilitation after stroke-script
project,” Robotica, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1331–1346, 2014.
[2] S. Straudi, et al., “Effectiveness of robot-assisted arm therapy in stroke
rehabilitation: An overview of systematic reviews,” NeuroRehabilitation,
no. Preprint, pp. 1–15, 2022.
[3] S. C. Cramer, et al., “Efficacy of home-based telerehabilitation vs in-
clinic therapy for adults after stroke: A randomized clinical trial,” JAMA
neurology, vol. 76, no. 9, pp. 1079–1087, 2019.
[4] A. Borboni, M. Mor, and R. Faglia, “Gloreha—hand robotic rehabilita-
tion: Design, mechanical model, and experiments,” Journal of Dynamic
Systems, Measurement, and Control, vol. 138, no. 11, 2016.
[5] A. Yurkewich, S. Ortega, J. Sanchez, R. H. Wang, and E. Burdet,
“Integrating hand exoskeletons into goal-oriented clinic and home stroke
and spinal cord injury rehabilitation,” Journal of Rehabilitation and
Assistive Technologies Engineering, vol. 9, p. 20556683221130970,
2022.
[6] T. B¨utzer, O. Lambercy, J. Arata, and R. Gassert, “Fully wearable
actuated soft exoskeleton for grasping assistance in everyday activities,”
Soft robotics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 128–143, 2021.
[7] H. Al-Fahaam, S. Davis, S. Nefti-Meziani, and T. Theodoridis, “Novel
soft bending actuator-based power augmentation hand exoskeleton con-
trolled by human intention,” Intelligent Service Robotics, vol. 11, no. 3,
pp. 247–268, 2018.
[8] B. Noronha and D. Accoto, “Exoskeletal devices for hand assistance
and rehabilitation: A comprehensive analysis of state-of-the-art tech-
nologies,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Robotics and Bionics, vol. 3,
no. 2, pp. 525–538, 2021.
[9] S. Ates, et al., “Technical evaluation of and clinical experiences with
the script passive wrist and hand orthosis,” in 2014 7th International
Conference on Human System Interactions (HSI).
IEEE, 2014, pp.
188–193.
[10] V. Velmurugan, L. Wood, and F. Amirabdollahian, “Requirements for
a home-based rehabilitation device for hand and wrist therapy after
stroke,” in UKRAS21: The 4th UK Robotics and Autonomous Systems
Conference, jul 2021, p. 23.
[11] V. Velmurugan, L. J. Wood, and F. Amirabdollahian, “Formative usabil-
ity evaluation of wiglove-a home-based rehabilitation device for hand
and wrist therapy after stroke,” in Companion of the 2023 ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, 2023, pp. 272–
276.
[12] B. Leon, et al., “Grasps recognition and evaluation of stroke patients for
supporting rehabilitation therapy,” BioMed Research International, vol.
2014, 2014.
[13] L. Haverkate, G. Smit, and D. H. Plettenburg, “Assessment of body-
powered upper limb prostheses by able-bodied subjects, using the box
and blocks test and the nine-hole peg test,” Prosthetics and orthotics
international, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 109–116, 2016.
[14] L. Demers, R. Weiss-Lambrou, and B. Ska, “The quebec user evaluation
of satisfaction with assistive technology (quest 2.0): an overview and
recent progress,” Technology and Disability, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 101–
105, 2002.
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

