A Presentation Support System by Expanding Embodiment  
with a Mobile Touchscreen Device 
 
Michiya Yamamoto 
Taku Murabayashi 
School of Science and Technology 
Kwansei Gakuin University 
Sanda, Hyogo, Japan 
michiya.yamamoto@kwansei.ac.jp 
asn48941@kwansei.ac.jp 
Tomio Watanabe 
Faculty of Computer Science and Systems Engineering 
Okayama Prefectural University 
Soja, Okayama, Japan 
watanabe@cse.oka-pu.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— Most of the people make presentations by using 
tools such as pointers. However, the use of information devices 
such as laser pointers and mice can restrict the presenter’s 
embodied motions and actions. In this paper, we propose a 
presentation support system that can expand embodiment by 
using a portable touch screen device. First, we develop a 
prototype of the system by using an iPhone, and then, we 
perform experimental evaluation. Next, we performe the 
evaluation of the modes of PPTouch, and the effectiveness of 
the system in various situations is clarified. Then we performe 
comparison with conventional pointers, and evaluation by 
participants. Both experiments also show the effectives of 
PPTouch. 
Keywords- presentation support; expansion of embodiment 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In presentations, tools such as pointers are used together 
with embodied motions and actions of body language and 
gestures [1]. However, the use of information devices such 
as laser pointers and mice can restrict the presenter’s 
embodied motions and actions. For example, when using a 
pointer, a presenter can explain the slides with various 
motions and actions depending on the content. Nevertheless, 
when the presenter uses a laser pointer or mouse, the 
participants may have difficulty seeing the presenter’s 
movements, and this makes the presentation harder to 
understand.  
Several researchers have studied this problem and 
attempting to provide possible solutions by using 
information devices. For instance, Murata et al. developed a 
presentation tool that superimposes a shadow, as in an OHP 
presentation [2]. Shimizu et al. developed a system that 
enables multiple pointing using mobile devices [3]. Some 
applications are available on App Store for iPhone [4, 5] or 
iPhone software [6]. However, these researches are based on 
functional support. 
On the other hand, we have developed a presentation 
support system that can share embodied rhythms between the 
presenter and the participants and demonstrated the 
effectiveness of our system. Our speech-driven embodied 
entrainment presentation support system can generate a 
listeners’ nodding reaction via visual and auditory 
information and create a sense of unity between presenters 
and participants [7]. We have also introduced the presenter’s 
embodied motions and actions into the system via a pen 
display and enabled the rhythmic communication of 
information [8]. In this study, we introduce the concept of 
PPTouch. With PPTouch, presenters can use mobile devices 
with embodied motions and actions as if they are a part of 
their body by expanding embodiment. We also develop a 
prototype and perform evaluation experiments. 
II. 
CONCEPT 
Figure 1 shows the concept of PPTouch. The presenter 
moves the finger-shaped cursor on the screen by operating a 
mobile touchscreen device, and the presenter can feel as if 
the embodiment is expanded. 
The mobile device has a touch screen and is WiFi-
enabled. Its use allows the presenter to gesture from various 
positions in various situations. Moreover, because the 
touchscreen has an intuitive interface, it can be used as if it 
is a part of the presenter’s body.  
In addition, the embodied visual effects such as the 
finger-shaped 
cursor 
enhance 
the 
efficiency 
of 
communication. 
 
Fig. 1 Concept of PPTouch. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III. 
PPTOUCH 
A. System Configuration 
Figure 2 shows the system configuration of PPTouch. 
For the mobile touchscreen device, we used an Apple 
iPhone (with iOS 4.2.1) and developed the software using 
XCode 3.2.6. When a presenter touches the iPhone screen, 
the software detects the input. When cursor operations are 
input, messages are sent to the PC (HP, EliteBook 8730w) 
using UDP. When page-control or effect-control commands 
are input, messages are sent using TCP. The PC handles the 
received messages and controls the presentation software 
(Microsoft, PowerPoint 2010). A finger-shaped cursor is 
projected on the main screen and controlled using the 
iPhone. 
 
B. Modes for Expanding Embodiment 
On the iPhone, we display a copy of the projected slide in 
the upper section of the touchscreen. The lower section 
contains the buttons that control the visual effects. We have 
developed three operation modes (see Figure 3): 
Mode A: Finger cursor 
A finger-shaped cursor is displayed on the iPhone screen 
and synchronized with the cursor on the main screen. By 
moving the iPhone cursor, presenters can point to the same 
point of the main screen. 
 
Mode B: No finger cursor 
Presenters can touch a point on the iPhone slide, and the 
cursor on the main screen will move to that point. Presenters 
feel as if they are directly touching the main screen. No 
finger-shaped cursor is displayed. 
Mode C: Touchpad  
As for a PC touchpad, the finger cursor on the screen 
moves according to the distance to which it is dragged. 
There is no slide or finger cursor on the mobile device.   
IV. 
COMPARISON BETWEEN MODES 
A. Method 
To compare the three modes, we assumed the four 
presentation scenarios shown in Table 1 and conducted an 
experimental evaluation. 
First, we explained PPTouch and the experimental 
scenario and asked the subjects to become familiar with the 
PPTouch system. We then selected a scenario, randomly. 
We evaluated the modes via a paired comparison (3P2 = 6) 
by asking the subjects to give a presentation using the three 
modes in random order. For the presentation, we prepared 
three slides that the subjects could easily explain without 
any previous knowledge. The slides included red keywords, 
as shown in Figure 4 and the subjects were asked to 
emphasize these during the presentation. We followed this 
procedure for four scenarios.  
After that, the subjects were instructed to perform seven-
point bipolar rating scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 (extremely), 
over all evaluation, and free comments of each mode as an 
overall evaluation. The experiment was performed by 15 
pairs of 30 Japanese students. Figure 5 shows the example 
scene of the experiment. 
Fig. 3 Three modes for expanding embodiment. 
Fig. 2 System configuration. 
Table 1. Scenarios. 
神戸市
– 人口は153万人
–
日本を代表する港町
–
1995年に阪神淡路大震災
が起きた
–
ハーバーランドなどはデートスポットで有名
神戸市
– 人口は153万人
–
日本を代表する港町
–
1995年に阪神淡路大震災
が起きた
–
ハーバーランドなどはデートスポットで有名
Fig. 4 Example slide. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Results 
Table 2 shows the results of paired comparison. Here, the 
Bradley-Terry model [9] was fitted to the result for a 
quantitative analysis, and preference  was estimated. Figure 
6 shows the result. As a result, in a large screen scenery the 
“mode A - finger cursor” and “Mode B - no finger cursor”  
were rated about twice than ” Mode C - touchpad”. In a 
medium screen scenario, mode B was rated more than twice 
as high as mode C. In speech, mode A was rated extremely 
high. In meetings, there was no large difference. 
Fig. 7 shows the result of overall evaluations. Mode B 
was rated highest. Mode A followed to it, however, mode C 
was not selected so much. 
Figure 8 shows the results of seven-points bipolar rating. 
The result of average, SD, and the Friedman test are also 
shown in this figure. For “I felt as if I was touching the 
screen” and “I looked at the device frequently”, there was a 
significant difference at a significance level of 1%; mode A 
and mode B were rated higher than mode C. There was also 
significant difference in “I looked at the main screen”.   
Table 3 shows the result of users’ comments.  Mode A 
and mode B were commented favorably, however, some of 
the subject pointed out that “I had to check the finger 
position”, etc.  
 
Fig. 7 Overall evaluations. 
Fig. 5 Four experimental sceneries. 
Fig. 8 Results of seven-point bipolar rating. 
Table 2. Results of paired comparison. 
Fig. 6 Preference . 
Table 3. Users’ comments. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Discussion 
Mode B (no finger cursor) received the highest 
evaluations except in the speech scenario. Thus, mode B 
was confirmed to be useful in various situations. Mode A 
(finger cursor) was also rated highly, especially in the 
speech scenario. Thus, a presenter can use this device even 
when facing the audience. Modes A and B were rated highly 
overall and in the category I felt as if I was touching the 
screen. Thus, our device is useful for presentation support. 
On the other hand, mode C received some positive 
evaluations; this was because some subjects favored a 
familiar operation on a mobile device. These results show 
the effectiveness of PPTouch. 
V. 
COMPARISON WITH CONVENTIONAL POINTERS 
A. Method 
Next, we compared the use of a pointer, a laser pointer, 
and PPTouch in three scenarios: large screen, medium screen, 
and meeting (see Figure 9). In the experiment, we asked each 
pair of subjects to choose the appropriate mode and become 
familiar with PPTouch. Then, we asked one person in each 
pair to identify himself/herself as the presenter and the other 
as the participant.  
 
We selected one scenario randomly. We evaluated the 
modes via a paired comparison (3P2 = 6) by asking the 
subjects to give a presentation using the three modes in 
random order. Then, the subjects were instructed to perform 
seven-point bipolar rating scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 
(extremely), and free comments of each mode. The 
experiment was performed by 15 pairs of 30 Japanese 
students. 
B. Results 
Table 4 shows the results of paired comparison. (Pointer 
is described as S, Laser pointer is L, and PPTouch is P 
hereafter). Here, the Bradley-Terry model was fitted to the 
result for a quantitative analysis, and preference  was 
estimated. Figure 10 shows the result. As a result, laser 
pointer was rated high in meeting. PPTouch was rated high 
in all scenery. Figure 11 shows the results of seven-point 
bipolar rating. The result of average, SD, and the Friedman 
test is also shown in this figure. Friedman’s test revealed 
significant differences of 1% between the pointer and 
PPTouch for all items. There was a 1% significant 
difference for “I was good to make the presentation”, “My 
pointing was clear”, and “I want to use the device” between 
the pointer and laser pointer. There was a 5% significant 
difference for “I could move or gesture freely”. On the other 
hand, there was no significant difference between the results 
for the laser pointer and PPTouch. 
We then classified the results on the basis of the 
response to “I want to use the device”. Figure 12 shows the 
results. Seventeen subjects preferred PPTouch, and thirteen 
preferred other devices. As shown in Figure 12, seventeen 
rated PPTouch highly. Friedman’s test revealed significant 
differences of 1% or 5% between the pointers for all the 
responses. There was a 1% significant difference for “I want 
to use the device”. There was a 5% significant difference for 
“It was good to give the presentation”, “I looked at the 
participants”, and “I felt as if I was touching the screen”. On 
the other hand, the remaining thirteen participants reported 
no significant difference between the results for the laser 
pointer and PPTouch. Thus, PPTouch was rated as highly as 
the laser pointer. 
Figure 13 shows the results by participants. There are 
significant differences between pointer and other devices at 
1% or 5% of significant level. However, there was no 
significant difference between laser pointer and PPTouch. 
Table 5 shows the result of users’ comments. PPTouch 
commented favorably for both presenter and participants. 
However, some of the subject pointed out that “Some of the 
words may be hidden by the finger cursor”, etc. 
 
Fig. 9 Three devices and three sceneries. 
Table 4. Results of paired comparison. 
Fig. 10 Preference . 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Discussion 
The pointer was rated highly in the medium-screen 
scenario, but its use is limited by its length. The laser pointer 
was rated highly in the meeting scenario because it was 
useful when the presenter pointed to the screen from the 
front. PPTouch was rated highly in all scenarios. Thus, we 
conclude that PPTouch is sufficiently versatile for various 
presentation scenarios.  
VI. 
EVALUATION BY PARTICIPANTS 
A. Method 
According to Lilian’s study, Highlighting, Outlining, the 
Pointing and Emphasizing are important in presentation [1]. 
As an evaluation experiment by participants the situation 
with a big screen where PPTouch can be used easily was 
prepared (see Figure 14 of left). The experiment was 
conducted by 3 persons (one presenter and two auditors 
were in a pair).  
First, we prepared the slide for each subject (Figure 15), 
and asked them practice the presentation by using PPTouch. 
In the practice, we told the method of pointing according to 
the contents of the slide, how to move the cursor at the 
presentation, and how to change the size of a cursor. After 
that, they performed the presentation of the slide using a 
laser pointer or PPTouch. Then, the participant filled in the 
seven-points bipolar rating and free questionnaire of the 
device. These are determined as one set. Then, we changed 
the device and asked them to fill out the form again. Then, 
they changed a presenter as a next set. And they performed 
the three set in total. 
An order of the used slides or a device was in random. 
The experiment was performed by 10 pairs of 30 Japanese 
students. 
Fig. 11 Results of seven-point bipolar rating (presenters). 
Table 5. Users’ comments. 
Fig. 12 Results of seven-point bipolar rating (presenters) 
subdivided by preference. 
Fig. 13 Results of seven-point bipolar rating 
(participants). 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Results 
Figure 16 shows the results. Friedman’s test revealed 
significant differences of 1% or 5% between the pointers for 
the items ③－⑦. There was a 1% significant difference for 
“The figure was highlighted” and “Explanation of the graph 
was understandable” and “The pointing was clear” and “I 
want to use the device”. There was a 5% significant 
difference for “The text on the slide was clearly 
emphasized”. 
 
C. Discussion 
Because the cursor position of PPTouch was stable, the 
participants rated PPTouch higher than laser pointer. As for 
Emphasizing, it was not rated so high than the other modes. 
It may be caused by the occlusion by the finger cursor.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this study, we proposed a PPTouch presentation 
support system that can expand embodiment. We developed 
a prototype using an iPhone and implemented three 
operation modes. Then, we performed an experimental 
evaluation, the results of which showed that PPTouch is 
useful for presentation support in various scenarios. We then 
compared PPTouch with conventional pointers and found 
that PPTouch is sufficiently versatile. Also, we performed 
evaluation experiment by the participants, and made clear its 
advantage.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work under our project “Generation and Control 
Technology of Human-entrained Embodied Media” has 
been supported by CREST of JST. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. L. Pozzer-Ardenghi and W. Roth, “Gestures: Helping 
Students to Understand Photographs in Lectures,” in 
Connections ’03, 2003,  pp. 1-30. 
[2] Y. Murata, K. Kurihara, T. Mochizuki, B. Shizuki and J. 
Tanaka, “Designing a pen shadow for the presentation tool 
which superimposes the shadow,” in IPSJ SIG Technical 
Report, 2010-HCI-139, 2010, pp. 1-5. (in Japanese) 
[3] K. Shimizu, T. Tsujino, S. Shiramatsu, T. Ozono and T. 
Shintani, “Implementing a Presentation Support System 
Using a Multi-pointing Mechanism,” in Proceedings of 
Forum on Information Technology 2009, Vol.4, 2009, pp. 
449-450. (in Japanese) 
[4] i-Clickr PowerPoint Remote:  
http://www.senstic.com/iphone/iclickr/iclickr.aspx <retrieved: 
Jan., 2012> 
[5] 
POINTER: 
http://www.zentropysoftware.com/ZS/Pointer.html <retrieved: Jan., 
2012> 
[6] S. Boring, D. Baur, A. Butz, and S. Gustafson and P. 
Baudisch, “Touch Projector: Mobile Interaction through 
Video,” in Proceedings of the 28th international conference 
on Human factors in computing systems, 2010, pp. 2287-2296. 
[7] H. Nagai, T. Watanabe and M. Yamamoto, “InterPointer: 
Speech- Driven Embodied Entrainment Pointer System,” in 
The 2005 International Conference o Active Media 
Technology (AMT2005), 2005, pp. 213-218. 
[8] Y. Takao, M. Yamamoto and T. Watanabe, “Development of 
Embodied Visual Effects which Expand the Presentation 
Motion of Emphasis and Indication,” LNCS 6762, 2011, p. 
603-612. 
[9] C. Hirotsu, “Analysis of Experimental Data, Beyond Analysis 
of Variance”, Kyoritsu Shuppan, Tokyo, 1992, pp. 203-217. 
(in Japanese) 
 
 
 
Fig. 16 Results of seven-point bipolar rating (participants). 
 
Fig. 15 Example of the slides. 
Fig. 14 Big screen scenario for evaluation by the 
participants. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

