HCI Education: Innovation, Creativity and Design Thinking 
 
Alma L. Culén  
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
E-mail: almira@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—Human-Computer 
Interaction 
(HCI) 
education 
needs re-thinking. In this paper, we explore how and what 
creativity and design thinking could contribute with, if 
included as a part of the HCI curriculum. The findings from 
courses where design thinking was included, indicate that 
design thinking contributed to increased focus on innovation 
and creativity, as well as prevented too early fixation on a 
single solution in the initial phases of HCI design processes, 
fostering increased flexibility and adaptability in learning 
processes.  The creativity and adaptability may be the best 
long-term foci that HCI education can add to its curriculums 
and offer to students when preparing them for future work 
practices. 
Keywords-HCI; innovation; creativity; design thinking; 
education. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
It has been argued in favor of purposefully managed 
innovation through design and creativity in many different 
ways [1]. Design thinking is one of those options. 
Understanding design thinking is not straightforward. In [2, 
p. 13], three different ways (of understanding design 
thinking) are offered: as a cognitive style, a general theory 
of design, or as an organizational resource. The latter 
understanding lends itself well as an approach to innovation 
and real-life problem solving through human-centered 
design, employing empathy with users, rapid prototyping 
and abductive thinking as its main components. This 
understanding of design thinking has strongly impacted the 
innovation in business, education, health and other crucial 
domains [3]–[7]. Many examples of how businesses and 
organizations could benefit from incorporating design 
thinking into business and organizational processes were 
given [8], making design thinking into an efficient 
innovation engine emphasizing observation, collaboration, 
fast learning, visualization of ideas, rapid concept 
prototyping, synthesis and concurrent business analysis. 
However, no approach solves all problems. Thus, just 
some years after the design thinking made a breakthrough in 
the world of business strategy and management, its 
limitations were brought forth in works such as [9], [10]. 
The point made by Nussbaum in [11], though, hits home 
best: “From the beginning, the process of Design Thinking 
was a scaffolding for the real deliverable: creativity. 
However, in order to appeal to the business culture of 
process, it was denuded of the mess, the conflict, failure, 
emotions, and looping circularity that are part and parcel of 
the creative process. In a few companies, CEOs and 
managers accepted that mess along with the process and 
real innovation took place.” In short, the core of innovation 
is creativity, a messy and unstructured process. By framing 
design thinking in a particular way, the creativity became 
limited, leading, in turn, towards failure to innovate. 
Concerns are voiced around the failure of design 
processes currently applied within the field of HCI to 
support more radical innovation [12]. In particular, HCI 
design processes are held to lead mainly to incremental 
innovation and small changes. Innovation, of any kind, is a 
much more complex process than design and invention of 
new products, systems, or interaction modes. It also implies 
their acceptance and use by people [13]. Upon careful 
consideration of design practices within HCI, one could 
argue that the invention is common. However, a very small 
percentage of those inventions (prototypes) ever become 
finished products and even smaller percentage gets to be 
adopted and used, see [14]. 
Preparing 
today's 
students 
of 
Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) for tomorrow's work practices is 
challenging. The technologies, interaction modes and 
interfaces all change fast. In addition, there are rises and 
falls of techniques in use, design processes, work practices, 
software and platforms in use. 
Students, on one hand, need to learn appropriate theories 
and research methods, understand the state-of-the-art 
research, importance of scientific rigor and relevance. 
However, being a profoundly inter-disciplinary field, HCI 
does not offer any unifying core theories, so this goal is hard 
to achieve once and for all (in other words, new application 
domains require acquisition of new theoretical knowledge, 
what the state-of-the-art research is, etc.). 
On the other hand, students need to be able to design 
new technologies and interfaces, using design processes and 
methods. This is also hard to achieve without any formal 
training in design, which is, in part, why design processes in 
HCI often depend heavily on engaging users and other 
stakeholders, thus sharing the responsibility with them for 
success or failure of a designed prototype. The latter is not 
seen as problematic, as prototypes are often not intended to 
become artifacts, but are tied to the research objectives. 
Combining insights from our previous work [12], [14]–
[16], this paper argues that teaching about innovation, and 
engaging students in creative innovation processes such as 
the design thinking (with acceptance of the messy parcel of 
creative processes [11]), offers one possible answer to what 
kind of knowledge and skills the students could be taught in 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

HCI. Adoption of this approach may be successful in a long 
run because, while on the road to becoming an innovator 
within a design team, one usually experiences creativity 
(one’s own or that of others) and a need to be adaptable to 
series of new situations. Creativity and adaptability may 
offer a greater permanent value to human-computer 
interaction students than many other kinds of knowledge 
and skills commonly considered to be part of the HCI 
education. As reported in [15], all ten students in a graduate 
HCI course that made use of design thinking processes, 
perceived themselves as non-creative individuals at the 
beginning of the course. At the end of the course all, except 
for one student who felt neutral, stated that the design 
thinking affected them and that they see themselves as more 
creative and confident in their skills. A new survey was 
conducted at the end of a combined bachelor-master course 
in the fall of 2014. All design teams who participated in the 
class filled the survey (18 teams consisting of 3-4 students 
each). They all said that they thought that HCI design is a 
creative process, and provided qualitative statements related 
to their experience of individual and group creativity. Some 
of these are presented later, in the discussion section of this 
paper. 
In summary, the question this paper tries to answer is: 
what kind of knowledge and skills should be passed onto 
new generations of HCI designers and researchers? While 
the whole solution remains elusive (many discussions 
around what HCI curriculum are already going on [17], 
[18]), our experience from the past two years of including 
design thinking and innovation in the curriculum shows that 
these benefit HCI students significantly.  
The paper is structured as follows: the next section 
offers some thoughts as to why HCI education should 
include innovation and creative thinking. In Section III, the 
concrete case is presented of how these elements are 
introduced within a mixed bachelor-master HCI course. 
Discussion of the case is presented in Section IV, followed 
by the conclusion in Section V. 
II. 
FOCUSING ON INNOVATION 
The ACM SIGCHI Curricula for Human-Computer 
Interaction defines Human-computer interaction as "a 
discipline concerned with the design, evaluation, and 
implementation of interactive computing systems for human 
use and with the study of major phenomena surrounding 
them" [19]. Teaching HCI typically includes teaching of 
user-centered requirement analysis, design and prototyping, 
implementation, design of experiments and evaluation. 
HCI's interdisciplinarity brings in tensions between the 
breadth and the depth of teaching, diverse theories and 
practices, including the basic choice between contributing to 
science, or to design (of new interfaces, products, services 
or interaction modes). Despite tensions, HCI education is 
very much alive and doing well in practice, although, still 
without generally agreed upon curricula. 
Innovation, on the other hand, is known to be hard to 
achieve in practice, while it is very easy to understand the 
need for it and the benefits it brings [20]. There are various 
ways to define innovation. Oslo Manual [13] defines it as: 
“the implementation of a new or significantly improved 
product (good, or service) or process, a new marketing 
method, or a new organizational method in business 
practices, workplace organization, or external relations.” 
It is difficult to teach students to be innovative, creative 
and inventive. It is not easy to make good frameworks for 
doing so. The processes related to innovation rely a lot on 
creativity, but also on both existing knowledge and on 
technical skills that are already present among the members 
of the design team and those whom they chose to include in 
the design processes. In particular, it is hard to define 
learning outcomes for such processes. 
Within HCI, the creativity bit is usually, at least 
partially, bypassed by two things: framing of the process as 
a procedure that all can follow on one hand, and relying on 
understanding of users and their needs on the other hand. It 
is, thus, usual to develop understanding of the knowledge 
domain first, and then this understanding is put to test 
through practical work involving a prototype design, 
evaluation, and the re-design cycle. However, creative 
problem solving, a core activity of innovative design [3], [4] 
is, as mentioned, harder to frame. 
Design thinking is but one facet of design. It employs, in 
part, similar steps to those often proposed in HCI: it frames 
its process in ways that have familiar overtones to those 
used in HCI, see Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 1.  A process that may seem familiar to HCI students, as well as to 
those using design thinking. 
Arguably, differences between design thinking and HCI 
must be sought by other means than comparing high-level 
design processes. One needs to consider differences in 
assumptions, scope and aim of the design process – 
concerning, for instance, the role of research, requirements 
specification, questioning assumptions, the consideration of 
organizational issues, the systematic exploration of design 
alternatives. Design thinking stands firmly on three main 
pillars: empathy with users and human centeredness, rapid 
prototyping to generate large number of alternatives in order 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

to solve the right problem rather than a problem right (the 
creative part), and last, but not least, their synthesis leading 
to best viable and feasible solutions that incorporate desired 
values [6]. IDEO [21], a design and innovation consultancy, 
has made a 60 minutes version of the process shown in Fig. 
1. Even  though the process appear to be simple and short, 
its power rests in its capacity to initiate deeper engagement 
with the problem space, that may last over time in some 
other form. 
As mentioned in the Introduction, HCI students need to 
master numerous and diverse types of knowledge and gain 
practical design experience. Why make teaching of HCI 
even 
more 
complicated 
by 
introducing 
a 
creative 
proposition through design thinking and innovation 
explicitly? 
III. 
THE CASE: TEACHING HCI WITH A CREATIVE WREE 
A. Previous Classroom Experiences with Design Thinking  
During the fall semester of 2013 two student project 
teams from a combined bachelor-master course in 
interaction design were introduced to design thinking. These 
teams worked with service design in the context of the 
University Library. They were given additional design 
thinking workshops, using service design cards and 
customer journeys as tools [22]. 
In addition, during the fall semester of 2013, a small 
graduate course of ten students, mentioned in the 
Introduction, adopted the design thinking approach and the 
studio based teaching. There, three student groups were 
taught about design thinking and focussed explicitly on 
nurishing creativity [15], [16]. They also were requireld to 
read articles like [23]–[28], in order to gain deeper 
understanding and knowledge of research through design, 
and design-centered research. In addition, successful 
examples of applications of design thinking were discussed 
[6], as was the work on reflection over the design practice as 
well as possibilities for understanding daily living practices 
as a design material, e.g., [29], [30].  
Experiences from both classes indicated strongly that 
cultivation of creative thinking and making has a potential 
in teaching of  HCI.  
B. The Course Setup 
The teaching approach that we argue for here is carried 
out within the combined bachelor-master course in 
interaction design. The course in question teaches traditional 
HCI research methods [31], and has two prior HCI courses 
as prerequisites. In addition to teaching research methods 
through lectures and small group learning sessions, the 
course aims to address the real-world problems, by offering 
a semester-long project in cooperation with external, local 
organizations. Usually, the class leadership involves ten or 
more organizations, soliciting two distinct proposals from 
each [32]. Students then form design teams and select one of 
the proposals, based on a first-come first-serve basis. The 
project work is, thus, anchored in a real need of some local 
company or organizations. Sometimes this need is not 
clearly formulated, rather, the company wishes to renew its 
offerings and they ask for new, open, creative solutions. 
Students may experience such open requests as intimidating 
at the start, as indicated by the fact that problems with 
narrow scope and clear goal tend to be selected first, while 
explorative problems are chosen last. 
The students in the course are further supported (or 
challenged) in their learning efforts as follows: they are free 
to make mixed master-bachelor student groups, but master 
students need to read, understand and be able to use in their 
project previously published research in the domain that 
their projects cover. All teams have a regular, hour-long 
design feedback sessions during the conceptual design and 
prototyping phases of the project. A senior researcher and a 
representative of a company for which the students are 
designing participate in these sessions. In addition, all 
groups make an in-class, mid-term, presentations of their 
design efforts. The presentations are open to anyone from 
interested 
organizations, 
other 
faculty 
members, 
professional designers and any other relevant parties, 
sometimes also younger students. All present could give 
constructive feedback to presenters.  
The course ends with the best project design 
competition. An independent jury of three HCI and design 
professionals judges the contest. The criteria for the jury are 
novelty, clarity of presentation, a potential impact of the 
designed prototype (relevance), validation of the prototype 
with users and overall design. This exact setup has been run 
for three consecutive years and has included surveys at the 
end of the semester. The surveys were individual and 
optional previously, but this last year they were focused on 
cooperation with the industrial partners, innovation and 
creativity, and thus were conducted in teams (team members 
were filling the survey together, having enough time to 
discuss and agree (or, sometimes not) on a common point of 
view. 
Although the course addresses real-life problems, which 
would be typically solved by multidisciplinary teams within 
professional circles, this was not always possible to achieve 
in the context of the course. In other words, despite the 
presence 
of 
the 
senior 
researcher 
and 
company 
representatives, teams were not truly multidisciplinary, 
although, some teams came close. For example, some 
students had background in psychology, some in graphic 
design, others in arts. In such cases, they were encouraged 
to understand the assemblages of skills and knowledge that 
they had within the group, organize work so that their skills 
could be well used, and focus on knowledge production 
forms from which the team could benefit the most.  
C. The Use of Creative Thinking and Innovation 
The teams were free to choose and follow an approach 
of their choice, as long as they complied with general course 
requirements, as described above. The challenge was how to 
support best creativity within each team. A lecture on 
creative thinking and design thinking was given at the start 
of the course, introducing concepts of assemblages of skills 
and practices. The idea that one can design a set of practices 
that support creativity was introduced. These were further 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

practically demonstrated and re-enforced during design 
sessions.  
In addition, all external opportunities were sought and 
used to motivate students. For example, every year, during 
the fall semester, the dean of the University offers his 
annual innovation challenge to all the students at the 
University of Oslo, whether they study science, politics, 
social sciences or entrepreneurship. The challenge runs 
through several selection processes, until the winner is 
chosen among the best projects that made the final round of 
selections. The student teams in the course were strongly 
encouraged to participate. Two teams took up the challenge. 
This has, in addition to the usual interaction design course 
work, involved making a financial proposal and a business 
plan for implementation of the proposed innovation. Both 
teams made it to the final round. Judged entirely 
independently during the final competition for the best 
project in the course, they won the first and the third place. 
The two student teams consisted of four second year 
undergraduate students each, and were supervised by a PhD 
student whose research relates to elderly living in a smart 
house. Thus, both projects address design for and with 
elderly, see [33] and [34] (both projects were delivered in 
Norwegian, but one group also posted the abstract in 
English of the paper that they are writing for HCII 2015 
conference  [35]). The latter project, see Fig. 2, developed a 
high fidelity interactive prototype utilizing frequency based 
technology (iBeacons) that helps elderly with cognitive 
difficulties to navigate complex buildings indoor.  
    
 
 
Figure 2.   SmartWalker: design and testing. Photos from [34]. 
Clearly, the effective use of the smart-walker requires 
mastery of the technology, but enables self-management to 
an increased degree, for the users that it is designed for. 
The second project [33], see Fig. 3, focuses on self-
management and bodily mastery [36]. The solution is based 
on a motion sensor (Kinect), and tracks exercises needed for 
bodily mastery and maintenance of the physical ailments.  
Even though these two groups have achieved very nice 
results, they were certainly not the only ones that pursued 
the goal to be innovative and creative. Different ways in 
which this focus on creative thinking and innovation 
affected the work of the project teams is discussed in the 
next section.    
 
Figure 3:   An exercise system that enables correction of movements 
during the exercise session. Photo from [33].  
IV. 
DISCUSION 
The contextual differences among briefs presented to 
students by organizations that participated in this 
educational endeavor were substantial. Some teams were 
required to find new application domains for existing 
technologies, others to design new applications involving 
new technologies, yet others had to use old applications and 
old technologies, but find new ways of working with them. 
For example, a team had to work with the latest technology 
such as Google glasses and their potential use in crises 
situations by police or paramedics. Another team had a 
complex web-based software used in the oil industry that 
required creative thinking around how to help users to 
customize it. The vast majority of teams benefited from 
being inspired by at least one of the three main components 
of design thinking: empathy with users, rapid prototyping, 
or abductive thinking. The use was never enforced, so teams 
could choose to use any component of design thinking, none 
or a combination of design thinking with other practices 
used in industry. Reflecting on possibilities and knowing 
why design process (for any given project) involved certain 
tools, techniques, and methods, was required. 
Empathy is a multifaceted construct that includes 
emotional recognition, vicarious feeling, and perspective 
taking [37]. Empathy was ‘new’ for many HCI students. 
While students were used to conducting user studies, they 
seldom tried to take the place of a user themselves and 
develop empathy with users in that way (through role 
playing, for example, in the wild). This might, in part, be 
due to the perception that by including personal experiences, 
subjectivity in the study would increase. Another reason 
might be that the phenomenological perspective, a 
characteristic of the latest wave of HCI, is still lagging 
behind in education. Regardless of the reason for empathy’s 
‘newness’, once tried, the students understood its benefits 
and could apply it creatively when working with conceptual 
development of their solutions. For example, a team needed 
to make a product that could be used in the children’s 
hospital waiting room. Being an emphatic observers in the 
particular hospital’s waiting room brought insight that, 
whatever they were to make, it should be quiet, it should not 
pass germs around, it could engage others, but should be 
fun, and OK, to interact with it alone. The result of this 
team’s design and research efforts, a Leap motion controlled 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

water fountain with LED lights, was fun to play with, had a 
pleasing, very soft sound of water and was nice to look at, 
see Fig. 4 and [38].  
 
 
 
Figure 4. The water fountain project that uses LEAP motion to control the 
level of water. Photos from [38]. 
Rapid prototyping was frequently used. Students found 
that it enables easier communication of ideas, in particular 
across groups with different backgrounds and levels of 
knowledge. In one particular case, design meetings were 
attended by the student design team, a course instructor, a 
PhD student in interaction design, and a rather large, very 
interested group of library employees (between 5 and 8 
persons at each meeting) with diverse backgrounds. Using 
pen and paper or tangible items such as service design cards 
for rapid ideation and construction of customer journeys 
was found to be helpful in such situations. Visualizing 
customer journeys using service design cards was valuable 
for creating a common understanding of certain services as 
they are today, and discussing points that offer opportunities 
for design interventions in order to improve those services. 
Unfolding one of those opportunities further was then 
undertaken using a workshop format, where all participants 
focused on producing as many rapid prototypes as possible, 
fostering good discussions around feasibility of solutions. 
The library experts could at once provide information on 
existing solutions and how the proposed new solutions 
could (or not) fit with the existing ones.  
The last pillar of design thinking, abductive reasoning, is 
related to being able to synthesize solutions and optimize 
design, seeking to find the best option given the series of 
constraints. This is something that comes easier to people in 
design disciplines, rather than those using analytic way of 
thinking. Yet, some projects, among them the above 
mentioned [33], clearly show the ability to use synthesis.  
At the end of the semester all teams filled a survey, 
providing 18 sets of answers. There were two questions 
related to creativity: 
1) Do you think that the kind of work you did in this 
course is also creative? 
2) What do you think about group creativity? 
All teams answered the first one in affirmative. As for the 
second question, here are some of the answers (the answers 
were given in English, as presented, only the very last 
statement was translated from Norwegian): “It really helps. 
Quite often you have some ideas, but you need help to be 
able to explain them. So in our group we really understood 
how each other was thinking, and we could really help each 
other describe and realize our ideas and creativity.” Another 
team expresses it as follows: “We have a group of different 
people with different ways of thinking, stirred together in a 
creative pot, it's awesome”! The third considers that the 
“group work increases creativity”. The two most cautious 
expressions were the following two: “We feel that the group 
works very well together, although this experience may 
vary”, and “Very good! Perhaps a bit too creative and 
ambitious”.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The aim of this paper has been to inquire into the 
interplay between innovation, design thinking and creativity 
as educational channels that stand out as alternative or 
complementary to the ones traditionally used by HCI 
educators.  The framework for learning about innovation, 
design thinking and creativity was introduced and explained. 
This setup has been repeated for the past two years and may 
be repeated by others. The concepts that have been helpful in 
cultivation of creativity were assemblages of skills and 
practices within multidisciplinary settings, empathy, rapid 
prototyping and abductive thinking. At the same time, care 
was taken not to reduce working with them as a specific 
procedure. Rather, tools, methods and techniques needed to 
be reflected over, and chosen in accordance with the problem 
at hand. Experimenting, or at least negotiating choices of 
research methods and techniques, was encouraged.  
Further research is required regarding other frameworks 
and best practices for supporting creativity and innovation 
in HCI curriculums, including a comparative analysis of 
outcomes.  
The achievements and learning outcomes in the here 
described course kept improving over the period of the last 
three years, as frameworks for supporting innovation and 
creativity got better and clearer described. The students’ 
understanding of processes has also increased over time.  
The findings indicate that design thinking contributed to 
increased focus on innovation and creativity, as well as kept 
design processes wider and open for a longer period of time, 
fostering increased flexibility and adaptability in learning 
processes.  The creativity and adaptability may be the best 
long-term goals that HCI education can add to its 
curriculums when preparing students for future work 
practices.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Many people deserve profound gratitude for helping with 
this work. Organization representatives who contributed with 
supervision and participation in design processes, PhD 
students and other professionals who helped student teams 
all have deep gratitude, as their work was entirely voluntary. 
Finally, thanks to all the students in the course, you have put 
in really good efforts and made it all worthwhile. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. von Stamm, Managing Innovation, Design and Creativity, 
2nd  edition. Chichester, UK: Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2008. 
[2] L. Kimbell, “Rethinking design thinking: Part I,” Design and 
Culture, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 285–306, 2011. 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[3] T. Brown and J. Wyatt, “Design Thinking for Social 
Innovation (SSIR, 2010),” Available from: http://www.ssirevi 
ew.org/articles/entry/design_thinking_for_social_innovation. 
[Accessed: 20-Jan-2015]. 
[4] T. Brown, “Design Thinking,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 
86, no. 6, pp. 84, 2008. 
[5] N. Cross, “Designerly Ways of Knowing: Design Discipline 
versus Design Science,” Design Issues, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 49–
55, Jul. 2001. 
[6] R. L. Martin, The Design of Business: Why Design Thinking 
is the Next Competitive Advantage. Harvard Business Press, 
2009. 
[7] A. L. Culén and M. Kriger, “Creating Competitive Advantage 
in 
IT-Intensive 
Organizations: 
A 
Design 
Thinking 
Perspective,” in HCI in Business, F. F.-H. Nah, Ed. Springer 
International Publishing, 2014, pp. 492–503. 
[8] T. Brown, Change by Design: How Design Thinking Can 
Transform Organizations and Inspire Innovation. New York, 
NY: Harper Collins Publishers, 2009. 
[9] H. Collins, “Can Design Thinking Still Add Value?” Design 
Management Review, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 35–39, 2013. 
[10] K. McCullagh, “Stepping Up: Beyond Design Thinking,” 
Design Management Review, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 32–34, Jun. 
2013. 
[11] B. Nussbaum, “Design Thinking Is A Failed Experiment. So 
What’s Next?” Co.Design. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.fastcodesign.com/1663558/design-thinking-is-a-
failed-experiment-so-whats-next. [Accessed: 20-Jan-2015]. 
[12] A. L. Culén and A. Følstad, “Innovation in HCI: What Can 
We Learn from Design Thinking?” in Proceedings of the 8th 
Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, 
Fast, Foundational, 2014, pp. 849–852. 
[13] Luxembourg, 
The 
Measurement 
of 
Scientific 
and 
Technological Activities Oslo Manual: Guidelines for 
Collecting 
and 
Interpreting 
Innovation 
Data. 
OECD 
publishing, 2005. 
[14] A. L. Culén, “Scaffolding Sustainability in the Academic 
HCID Practice,” in Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Interfaces and Human Computer Interaction, 
2014, pp. 45–54. 
[15] S. Finken, A. L. Culen, and A. A. Gasparini, “Nurturing 
Creativity: Assemblages in HCI Design Practices,” in 
Proceedings of DRS 2014, Umeå, 2014, pp. 1204–1217. 
[16] A. L. Culén, H. N. Mainsah, and S. Finken, “Design Practice 
in Human Computer Interaction Design Education,” in The 
Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions, 2014, pp. 300–306. 
[17] E. F. Churchill, A. Bowser, and J. Preece, “Teaching and 
Learning Human-Computer Interaction: Past, Present, and 
Future,” Interactions, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 44–53, Mar. 2013. 
[18] L. Bannon, “Reimagining HCI: Toward a More Human-
Centered Perspective,” Interactions, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 50–57, 
Jul. 2011. 
[19] T. T. Hewett, R. Baecker, S. Card, T. Carey, J. Gasen, M. 
Mantei, G. Perlman, G. Strong, and W. Verplank, “ACM 
SIGCHI Curricula for Human-Computer Interaction,” ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 1992. 
[20] G. C. O’Connor, “Major Innovation as a Dynamic Capability: 
A Systems Approach,” Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 313–330, 2008. 
[21] “IDEO | A Design and Innovation Consulting Firm.” 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.ideo.com/. [Accessed: 
20- Jan-2015]. 
[22] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, “Find a Book! Unpacking 
Customer Journeys at Academic Library,” in The Seventh 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, 2014, pp. 89–95. 
[23] J. Zimmerman, E. Stolterman, and J. Forlizzi, “An Analysis 
and Critique of Research Through Design: Towards a 
Formalization of a Research Approach,” in Proceedings of the 
8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, 
2010, pp. 310–319. 
[24] J. Zimmerman, J. Forlizzi, and S. Evenson, “Research 
Through Design as a Method for Interaction Design Research 
in HCI,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 2007, pp. 493–502. 
[25] D. Fallman, “Design-Oriented Human-Computer Interaction,” 
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, 2003, pp. 225–232. 
[26] E. Goodman, E. Stolterman, and R. Wakkary, “Understanding 
Interaction Design Practices,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2011, 
pp. 1061–1070. 
[27] J. Löwgren and J. L. E. Stolterman, Thoughtful Interaction 
Design: A Design Perspective On Information Technology. 
MIT Press, 2004. 
[28] B. K. Chakravarthy and J. Krishnamoorthi, Innovation By 
Design. Springer e-books, 2013. 
[29] D. A. Schön, The reflective practitioner: How professionals 
think in action, vol. 5126. Basic books, 1983. 
[30] L. Kuijer, A. de Jong, and D. van Eijk, “Practices As a Unit of 
Design: An Exploration of Theoretical Guidelines in a Study 
on Bathing,” ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., vol. 20, 
no. 4, pp. 21:1–21:22, Sep. 2008. 
[31] D. J. Lazar, D. J. H. Feng, and D. H. Hochheiser, Research 
Methods in Human-Computer Interaction. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2010. 
[32] Project areas. [Online]. Available from:  http://www.uio.no/st 
udier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h14/project-areas.pdf. 
[Accessed: 20- Jan-2015].  
[33] “Motus - Kampen Omsorg+ - INF2260 - Høst 2014 - 
Universitetet 
i 
Oslo.” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h14/pres
entations/kampen2/index.html. (in Norwegian). [Accessed: 
20-Jan-2015]. 
[34] “SmartWalker - Indoor Navigation for Eldery - INF2260 - 
Høst 2014 - Universitetet i Oslo.” [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h14/pres
entations/kampen1/smartwalker---indoor-navigation-for-elder 
y.html (in Norwegian). [Accessed: 20-Jan-2015]. 
[35]  HCII 2015 Abstract, SmartWalker. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h14/pres
entations/kampen1/abstracthcii2015.pdf [Accessed: 20-Jan-
2015]. 
[36] A. L. Culén, S. Finken, and T. Bratteteig, “Design and 
Interaction in a Smart Gym: Cognitive and Bodily 
Mastering,” in Human Factors in Computing and Informatics, 
A. Holzinger, M. Ziefle, M. Hitz, and M. Debevc, Eds. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 609–616. 
[37] A. A. Gasparini, “Perspective and Use of Empathy in Design 
Thinking,” in The Eighth International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, ACHI 2015, 
ThinkMind, 2015. 
[38] UTAIN – Interactive Fountain, [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h14/pres
entations/LeapFountain/dokumenter/sluttrapport-utain.pdf  (in 
Norwegian). [Accessed: 20-Jan-2015]. 
 
 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

