Usability Testing in the National Information Processing Institute, Poland
Katarzyna Turczyn
National Information Processing Institute
Al. Niepodległości 188 b, 00-608 Warsaw, Poland 
email: katarzyna.turczyn@opi.org.pl
Agnieszka Lepianka
National Information Processing Institute
Al. Niepodległości 188 b, 00-608 Warsaw, Poland 
email: agnieszka.lepianka@opi.org.pl
Abstract—This article describes the specifics of usability
research in public institutions using as example the work at the
National
Information
Processing
Institute
in
Poland.
It
describes the challenges faced by system creators, designers
and researchers.
It
presents
methods of
preparing
and
conducting usability tests (preparation, execution and further
steps after researches). The characterization of the systems
created in the Institute shows the specifics of working with
public systems and shares the insights from these researches.
Based on the gathered information, the article proposes
changes to improve the experience of systems’ users. It
presents good practices that the creators may follow during the
design process, such as: naming, icons, charts, cohesion,
searching, text editing and information architecture.
Keywords - UX research; usability testing; information
system;
system
design;
National
Information
Processing
Institute.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The National Information Processing Institute (OPI PIB)
is a public institution whose tasks include development of
Information Technology (IT) systems for the Ministry of
Science and Higher Education in Poland [1]. An inseparable
element of system design and development at the Institute is
research and testing, in particular usability tests, which
facilitate the detection of errors on websites and applications
as well as shortcomings in their architecture.
A.
Method
The article is the result of qualitative research, the main
element of which was the participant observation, which
began when we started working at the Institute in 2018 as
researchers in the User Experience (UX) research team at
the Institute’s Laboratory of Interactive Technologies. Data
and information on which this article has been created was
also collected thanks to many conversations with other OPI
PIB employees, mostly other researchers working in the
Institute several years longer, but also designers, analysts,
developers and product owners. Working at the Institute and
fulfilling our responsibilities also allowed us to analyse
documentation and other available materials. In this case,
Hastrup’s sentence: "reality is lived, not talked or written"
[2] is true. Thanks to the possibility of analysing our
experiences, we are a little closer to reality than we would
be by analysing only what we have heard or read.
The article is intended to approach the form of Geertz’s
thick description [3], trying to describe the broadest context
of the topic.
B.
Research Question
The aim of taking a closer look at the system
development process at OPI PIB is to show the specificity
of the job of a UX researcher in the public sector. An
analysis of what takes place at the Institute in terms of
usability testing has allowed us to indicate the pros and cons
of the working environment in comparison to the ideal
process of system design and development, as required by
the principles and guidelines of User Experience. By
looking at the current experiences, we will be able to
identify some areas which could bring the process closer to
the ideal if they are altered and optimised. The Institute's
example allows us to take a closer look at how working on
the software looks and, more precisely, how usability testing
of this software looks in the public sector. The article can be
a contribution to further work and reflection about the
specifics of work in the public sector and how it differs from
the private sector.
Section II introduces the research area, describing the
systems produced at OPI PIB. Section III presents the way
of conducting usability research in the Institute: preparation,
execution and further steps after research. Section IV
describes challenges faced by system developers and the
results of usability tests. In Section V, we draw the
conclusions from our qualitative research and present in-
depth observations of research implementation at the
National Information Processing Institute.
II.
RESEARCH AREA: A DESCRIPTION OF THE SYSTEMS
AND CHALLENGES FOR THEIR DEVELOPERS
Our work as researchers in the UX research team at the
Institute’s
Laboratory of Interactive
Technologies
has
allowed us to take a closer look at the following system
development projects:

Polish Graduate Tracking System (ELA) – a system
for
secondary
school
graduates,
students
and
university employees; the system contains statistical
data
on
graduates'
earnings
and
employment
obtained from the Social Security Institution (ZUS).

POL-on – a database system on institutions related
to higher education and science in Poland, designed
for employees from the public sector, in particular
university employees.
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions


Integrated System of Services for Science / Streams
of Financing (ZSUN / OSF) – a system which
facilitates submission of applications for funding in
the science sector (for students, doctoral students,
research workers) and the subsequent handling of
these applications by public administration entities.

Navoica – a free-of-charge educational platform
with
Massive
Open
Online
Courses
(MOOC)
courses.

Uniform
Anti-Plagiarism
System
(JSA)
–
an
anti-plagiarism
platform
for
verification
of
dissertation and thesis content.
As the project descriptions above suggest, the direct
recipient of the systems is the Ministry, and the systems’
users
are
predominantly
university
employees
(both
administrative and research staff), as well as scientists,
students,
secondary
school
graduates
and
university
graduates. The direct recipients of the system testing output,
in turn, are employees of the Institute – the developers and
creators of the systems.
The systems developed by OPI PIB are mostly database
systems, mainly used by employees of the science sector. To
a large extent, the systems reflect the processes that had
been taking place at universities and their dean’s offices
before computers appeared, when paper forms and files
played the key role. The development of the existing
systems
required
the
digitisation
of
data
and
the
establishment of software to reflect the previously applied
“paper-based” procedures. That is how the ZSUN / OSF
grant application filing system was developed (among other
systems). The current systems, for the most part, have not
only grown out of paper procedures – they have also
retained a lot of the legacy features. In Poland, electronic
documents are not yet regarded as equal to paper documents
because of, among other things, the attitude of employees of
public institutions [4], not just due to the existing legal
framework. Therefore, in one of the phases of system use
(usually the final phase), the user is often required to print
out a document to close out the process. This is the case of
the JSA anti-plagiarism system, where the final scan report
must be printed out. It seems fair to say that paper
documents continue to determine the interface of the
existing systems, at least to a certain extent.
The formats of documents and processes, including
digital ones, depend on the legal conditions, laws and
regulations. An example of a system determined by legal
acts is the POL-on system. Each of its modules is
conditioned by different legal sources, e.g., the "Employees"
module is based on several acts of law [5]. We can therefore
say that non-intuitive information architecture of some
system elements, a lack of certain functionalities or the
presence of illogical requirements within the system are
sometimes not the fault of system developers, but a
consequence of the legal framework.
Users of the systems developed by the Institute, despite
their often similar motivations to use the system, differ from
each other on many levels. The differences impact the final
interface of the system. First of all, users have different
levels of digital competence, varying even within one group
such as the group of researchers applying for grants.
Another element which contributes to the diversity is the
variety
of
the
fields
of
science
represented
by
the
researchers using the system: for example, some people find
it easier to understand a legal text, while others find legal
texts challenging.
The heterogeneity of system users also results from the
disabilities they may have. The Institute creates public
systems, which, according to the law in Poland, must
comply with the requirements of WCAG 2.0 [6]. The
WCAG guidelines are the relevant benchmark, and the
websites, as well as applications developed by the Institute,
are designed to be as responsive as possible to the needs of
people with disabilities. Some of the systems are intended
mainly for researchers. The JSA system is used primarily by
supervisors and reviewers of dissertations, i.e., persons who
hold a PhD degree or higher degrees. In the years 2000-
2010, the average age of university-nominated professors in
Poland was about 55 [7]. System design standards are
changing, and elderly users often transfer their experiences
from other media (newspapers, books, paper forms) to the
portals and systems they are expected to work with [8].
Younger users are impacted by the website services they
use, too. Additionally, at an advanced age people are more
likely to experience problems with vision and motor skills.
If systems are not adapted to the requirements of this group
of users, the hardware barrier may be the consequence, for
example, when the buttons and fonts are too small and when
the user interface is too complicated [8].
Much of the work at OPI PIB consists in introducing
changes, transformations, extensions to the systems which
were developed when the standards and requirements were
different from the current ones. As a result, the developers
are facing limitations from the very start of their efforts. In
order to maintain the coherence of the systems and to stay
within the budgetary constraints of the project, they
sometimes have to give up some ideas. It works similarly in
all other companies on the market.
The systems developed by the Institute are mainly aimed
at supporting the Ministry of Science and Higher Education,
universities
and
academics
in
collecting
information,
managing projects, acquiring funds and broadening their
competences. These system development projects are not
market endeavours, in which the most important result is for
the customer to buy a product or service. The users of the
systems developed by OPI PIB sometimes have to use them
for work (the POL-on system), and sometimes in order to
acquire a grant (the ZSUN / OSF system). In this
environment, some system developers may feel they are
monopolists, which may trigger the risk of disregarding the
needs and requirements of the users as the level of
competition
and
motivation
to
continuously
improve
decreases. Regardless of what the system will look like, its
users will still simply have to use it. For this reason, it is
necessary to carry out research and analysis based on data
from the end users of the systems [9].
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

III.
USABILITY TESTING IN THE NATIONAL INFORMATION
PROCESSING INSTITUTE
Since 2014, the number of usability studies and research
carried out by the Institute has increased significantly. The
evolution in research has not only changed the number of
studies, but also increased their diversity. New techniques,
such as usability tests, focus group tests and in-depth
interviews,
have
been
added
to
the
previously
used
workshop method. Additional tools, such as co and card
sorting were also used. An important element that became a
permanent part of the work of researchers at OPI PIB was
the UX audit of systems for designers’ and developers'
needs.
However, the most frequently used research method at
the Institute is still task testing, which takes place at the
Institute's headquarters in a specially adapted testing room.
Tests with one invited respondent allow the testing team to
see how a potential user will use the product. Such tests [10]
show how comprehensible the system is and where the
critical points are that need to be modified in the first place.
Moreover, this type of testing provides information on how
intuitive the application and its system is, and whether it
satisfies the needs of the users [10][11]. A big advantage of
the tests is that the developers of the system are able to see
live reactions of the respondents as they are interacting with
the system. Furthermore, during task testing it is possible to
ask in-depth questions which may have arisen during the
test (this is a big advantage over tests conducted remotely).
However, it is important to inform the recipients of test
output that a single test will not answer all their questions,
and that the number of tasks that can be performed during
one session is limited. Consequently, test objectives and
questions should be prioritised. As regards respondents, it is
very important to ensure that they feel comfortable during
the test, in particular if the respondent is a university
employee who may feel that their knowledge and skills are
being put to a test by an institution that supervises their
work.
Focus
groups
are
a
less
common
data
gathering
technique at OPI PIB. It is used in the early stages of system
design and in the redesign of existing systems. Thanks to a
focus group interview with invited users or prospective
users, it is possible to collect a large amount of information,
insights,
and
translate
them
into
conclusions
and
recommendations in a very short period of time (compared
to other techniques) [11]. Focus groups often give direction
to changes, provide information about users, their patterns
of behaviour and expectations, enabling the researchers to
use projection techniques and collaborative design [11]. The
greatest risk in focus groups is associated with the role of
the facilitator. Incorrectly facilitated tests may distort the
results. If the facilitator is too withdrawn in the testing
situation, one of the respondents may take over the role of
the leader. Shy persons with little leadership energy may
choose to avoid active participation in the conversation.
Moreover, the Groupthink Syndrome can also occur. It is
also a mistake to assume that focus groups can be the source
of opinions about the entire population of users – in fact in
only offers information about a segment of the population.
A.
Preparation
The process of data gathering preparation at OPI PIB is
presented in Figure 1. It concerns the implementation of the
most frequently applied type of testing at the Institute, i.e.,
task-based usability tests in a test environment. The points
on the vertical axis represent the degree of control over the
process
by
the
investigators
and
the
probability
of
complications. The horizontal axis shows the course of the
data gathering process in time. In the following section, the
next steps of the research process will be discussed.
After learning about the needs and questions of the
system’s designers, the next step is the recruitment process.
Due to the specific nature of the public institution in
question, the recruitment of respondents is implemented by
an external company selected in a tender. The complicated
nature of the recruitment procedure further complicates the
selection of the best external companies which, additionally,
need to meet strict tender criteria. The time needed to
prepare the tests makes it difficult to integrate them into
different phases of project development, so sometimes the
only solution is to carry out guerrilla research. The process
takes time, allowing the researchers get to know the system,
ask research questions and create test materials. In creating
a scenario, apart from the golden rules presented by Iga
Mościchowska in her book [11], two more rules are applied: 
1) The test scenario is not only for the researchers –
everyone should be able to understand the tasks, questions
and their purpose, so that people not involved in the
scenario’s development have the opportunity to comment on
it.
2) The respondent can look at the scenario during the
test; he/she should not be able to find any hints or the
facilitator’s expectations in the scenario.
The form of the scenario itself and its layout depend on
the type of test and the facilitator's preferences. However,
the rigid rules of public institutions reduce any leeway: test
materials are supposed to follow the established principles,
and patience is required if researchers wish to introduce any
changes.
As system developers are usually very busy, it can be
challenging to ensure that all of them watch the focus group.
Over the course of two years we have noticed a change in
the approach to tests and test attendance at the Institute.
Information passed on to respondents covers two areas:
first of all, practical information that will enable the
respondents to arrive at the test location, e.g., a map with the
location and the transportation suggestions. The second
information area is any material and documents that the
respondents will have to sign before starting the test
procedure (e.g., respondent’s consent).
OPI PIB has its own focus group room and one
observation room. In the focus room, in the case of usability
tests, two spaces are arranged. In the first one, the test is
introduced, the house rules are presented, and a short
introductory interview with the respondents takes place. The
second area is where the computer workstation is located.
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

“Freezing” test versions can be a tricky point, which
must be kept in mind, not only when reporting the test need
to the project manager prior to the test. Unfortunately, errors
can occur during testing, as can system malfunctions.
Postponing tests and not delivering test versions on time
happen relatively often. It works similarly in the public and
private sectors.
Based
on
the
above
can
claim
that
the
highest
probability
of
complications
is
in
situations
where
researchers depend on other people, not technology. This is
why the researcher's soft skills and good cooperation with
project team members are so important. Unfortunately,
despite the fact that these skills are highly relevant, it is not
easy for entities from the public sector to ensure and provide
employee training in this area.
B.
Implementation
Usability tests lasting more than an hour and a half can
be tiring not only for the respondent, but also for the
observers and the facilitator. Unfortunately, the need and
capacity to perform tests usually materialises when an
advanced version of the system is ready (often a production-
ready version). Stakeholders then want to test the entire
system. Individual user sessions almost never take only half
an hour – they are usually 60 to 90 minutes long.
Unfortunately, it is challenging for the respondents to
remain active and attentive for a long time. Although the
optimal length of the test is of crucial importance, it is often
subject to negotiations with the respondents at OPI PIB. The
three pillars on which good research results are based are
appropriately designed tasks, conversations and the test’s
overall atmosphere.
While creating the tasks, it is of key importance for all
tasks to be natural and logical – they should minimize
unnatural actions like logging out and logging in to another
account. Tasks should not be interrupted with questions.
There should be no suggestions to abandon a task before the
respondent has expressed his/her wish to abandon the task.
Importantly, the perception of the passing time is different
for the observers and different for the person who is actually
performing the task. Since the tested systems are often very
comprehensive and have many functionalities, requests for
reflection and questions to respondents are asked after a task
or series of tasks, rather than after the completion of the
whole test. Such conduct may yield more information than
just the results of observation of the tasks performed.
Employees of the science sector (users of previous versions
of the system) may have many valuable reflections. This
type of testing is no longer a classic usability test, but a
hybrid
with
an
in-depth
interview,
although
in-depth
interviews should typically take place before solution
design.
The
second
foundation
of
good
testing
is
the
conversation. In the introduction, it is always a good idea to
inform the respondents what the tests will look like and how
long they will take [12], as well as telling them tell about the
possibility of task interruption. The investigator should also
allow the respondent to ask questions in order to make the
respondent feel more confident in the new situation and
speak more freely. The most important information to be
conveyed to the respondent is that he or she is not going to
be evaluated – this seems particularly important when
working with employees of the science sector as they
sometimes perceive our institution as superior and affiliated
with the Ministry of Higher Education and Science.
As part of the third pillar of testing, the facilitator should
radiate positive energy and develop a friendly and open test
atmosphere. It is essential for the facilitator to be empathetic.
The results of the test largely depend on the facilitator's
involvement in building a positive, relaxed atmosphere
conducive to the respondent’s cooperation and information-
sharing.
Insights from the tests and interpretations based on user
feedback are provided in Section IV.
C.
After the Tests
Before the test report is produced and after completion
of testing, researchers at OPI PIB typically organise two
summary meetings. The first one is informal and aims at
discussing the results with the researchers involved in the
project. The second one involves the stakeholders and is
aimed at discussing the most important observations, and, if
possible, should be organised within a short period of time
after the end of the testing procedure. The meetings are also
associated with the a need to build relationships between
members of different teams, which would allow the project
teams to
work in a
more agile and
dynamic
way,
abandoning some procedures from the waterfall/cascade
model and improving some standards of work within
creative/UX teams [13][14]. After the report has been
created, the first thing to do is to establish the date of its
presentation, before the report is sent out to stakeholders. If
there is no set date, the stakeholders may find it challenging
to find time to meet later. It is a good idea to remember to
send the report out to the stakeholders (mainly designers)
before the presentation. This is sometimes due to the fact
that the designers may be slightly anxious as to whether the
report will show their work in bad light. They may also feel
that their contribution is being evaluated.
It is good practice to determine the progress in
introducing changes sometime after the test, as well as
determining if the designers have all the information
necessary to implement the necessary modifications. Their
continuous interest in the subject increases the probability
that the proposed changes will actually be implemented. The
abundance of responsibilities and, to a larger extent, the
formal procedures in place at the Institute, make it difficult
for the stakeholders to meet regularly. As people work in
different teams, official appointments for every meeting
need to be made, in most cases involving leaders and
managers whose availability is very limited. Although
managerial presence at the meeting is not always necessary
for the quality and efficiency of the meeting, meetings often
cannot be held without them. These formal requirements are
also responsible for a formal meeting atmosphere that
hinders an unrestrained and free exchange of ideas. It is also
likely that the physical
work environment influences
communication
between
teams.
Open
space
office
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

arrangements encourage conversations between employees,
while at the OPI PIB people work in four different
buildings.
IV.
CHALLANGES AND USABILITY TESTS RESULTS
A.
Challenges for Researchers and Designers
At OPI PIB, teams of UX researchers, UX designers and
developers
work
across
different
departments.
This
specificity of work organization at the Institute means that
people
involved
in
the
development
of
systems
are
separated from each other, and this undoubtedly hinders
cooperation.
As
a
result,
researchers
have
a
limited
capability to monitor the further development of the product
after the testing is completed. Therefore, it is important that
the project team members cooperate closely and have
frequent contacts to create product concepts together, co-
design, co-develop and monitor further product use.
At OPI PIB, like in many other institutions and
companies in Poland, UX testing is introduced at a fairly
advanced stage of product development, triggering the risk
of much higher costs of implementation of changes [15].
The benefits of early-stage UX testing include the ability to
verify the identified target group, define the real needs of
users, and investigate the initial concept of the system and
its architecture.
The
systems
developed
at
OPI
PIB
are
mostly
commissioned by the Ministry of Science and Higher
Education and are intended primarily for users from HEIs
[16]. The systems are mainly based on regulations and laws,
which directly affects the structure and functionality offered
by these solutions, as well as imposing design constraints on
developers and limiting the available options.
Due to the specificity and intended use of the systems
designed and developed at OPI PIB, they are used mainly on
desktop or laptop computers, so there has so far been no
need to create mobile versions. However, the situation is
now changing and new systems are being developed,
designed
also
for
users
from
beyond
the
academic
community – therefore it is becoming necessary to develop
mobile versions of the systems, too. In this respect, the
public sector is beginning to operate like the private sector –
“Mobile first” is beginning to apply.
Some of the systems created by the OPI PIB are digital
versions of various types of paper forms and application
forms.
The
designers
face
the
challenge
of creating
functional and user-friendly forms ensuring an easy fill-out
process. Unfortunately, despite the availability of digital
versions, users still have to print out paper versions of forms
as well.
Increasingly, stakeholders appear as observers in tests
because they recognise tests as a great opportunity to see
how users interact with the systems and what problems they
encounter. Thanks to participation in such processes,
stakeholders can count on receiving prompt feedback on
their effort, without having to wait for the final report.
Behind-the-scenes conversations in the viewing room also
offer a good opportunity to discuss and exchange ideas on
how to design systems, or how to redesign them. Thanks to
such conversations, it is possible to learn about the
limitations of both designers and users which for some
reason did not surface at project meetings preceding the
testing phase.
Remarks and comments from the post-test reports
should ideally be introduced into subsequent versions of the
system, with the critical points repaired of necessary.
Unfortunately, this scenario is only implemented in 50% of
the cases – not due to lack of involvement or bad will, but to
a large extent due to the binding legal constraints.
B.
Usability Tests Results
The numerous usability studies and conversations with
end users we have conducted at the Institute have allowed
us to outline the principles that designers should bear in
mind when creating systems. Here are some of the
recommendations:
1)
Names,
headings
and
keywords.
Users
quickly
browse the website for specific keywords, sentences or
paragraphs and skip most of the text. It is therefore
important to organise the content, group the elements and
assign headings, titles and labels to them in an appropriate
way. The terminology used should be simple, clear and
understandable to all system users.
In state institutions, some of the terminology that can be
found on websites is borrowed from acts of law, regulations
or
technical
documentation.
This
leads
to
lack
of
terminological
clarity
for
users
and
difficulties
in
understanding the content. Some system designers have
recognised this problem and the need to introduce plain
language so that users with different levels of education and
knowledge can understand the text. Consequently, public
administration entities now employ a growing number of
experts in their UX teams (UX writers).
2)
Icons. They help users remember content more easily
and quickly, making the message more interesting. It is
important to remember that icons should be adequate to
what the system is supposed to communicate to its users. In
the
case
of database
systems,
icons
can
help
users
understand content more easily.
3)
Diagrams
and
graphs.
They
should
be
understandable
and
legible.
Remember
to
include
explanations and legends. It is worth noting that the graph
and its description should be visible on one screen at the
same time so that the user does not have to scroll between
the graph and its description. System developers know what
information and data they want to present on charts and
assume in advance that their preferred way of presenting
data will be clear and legible for the users as well.
4)
Short texts. Large blocks of lengthy text are not
attractive and discouraging to users. Text should consist of
short or medium-length sentences grouped into paragraphs.
The content can also be split into bullet points. Furthermore,
the users who would like to find out more need to be taken
into account as well – include a link to a page with extended
information.
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

5)
White space. System developers often misinterpret
system legibility as a lot of white space on the screen. Such
an approach to design is often counterproductive, since
users who interact with such a site assess it as poorly
designed. Designers believe that by giving up illustrations
and graphics, they can avoid the superfluous content
characteristic of commercial websites overloaded with
advertisements,
pop-ups
and
banners.
This
misguided
ascetic approach may cause the system to be perceived, on
the one hand, as clear and transparent, but on the other hand
– as overly rigid and official due to the excessive amount of
white space. During the tests referred to in this paper, the
respondents pointed out that in many systems designed at
OPI PIB there is too much "vacant" space. They believed
that the blank area could have been better utilized to
accommodate more text and condensed content. A large
amount of white space may mean that there is little
meaningful content on the screen, and the user has to scroll
down to find out more.
6)
System coherence. It is important that all elements of
the system should fit together and the construction of the
site should be coherent. The design should be tailored to the
needs and expectations of the user. Consistency of the
components makes the design intuitive, easy to navigate,
and easy to use. The systems developed at the Institute are
comprehensive and complex. Due to changes in legal
provisions and for other reasons they must be updated from
time to time.
7)
Searching, querying, sorting and display of results.
User queries should be as easy as possible. It would be good
if the search results covered the whole system, not only its
selected part or category. Filters should be designed so that
the user can select several variants of the same feature.
Users should also be given to the possibility to enter
keywords with spelling mistakes, typos and incorrect
conjugation. It is very important to present the search results
properly,
displaying
the
searched
information
or
its
fragments in the format expected by the user. Unfortunately,
public institutions do not always want to rely on the
industry’s best practice and solutions – instead, own
solutions are created which are frequently neither proven
nor tested. Perhaps such an approach is associated with the
misconception that looking for own system solutions is a
way to avoid being accused of plagiarism.
V.
CONCLUSION
The aim of our research was to show the specificity of
the UX research in the public sector in Poland and identify
areas which could be change in order to bring the process of
developing and designing systems closer to the ideal. After
analysing the presented experiences and data and with a
view to facilitate a further development of research activity
at OPI PIB, the authors’ aim is to ensure that the UX
research of systems developed at the Institute are conducted
at various stages of product development. During the tests
and research conducted for this paper we noticed how
important it is to apply different research techniques,
appropriately matched to the given development phase of
the system. An important task is also to change the attitude
of designers and developers of systems to users. It is
essential that system designers focus mainly on users and
their
needs,
and
that
they
take
into
account
users’
limitations.
In order to achieve these goals, internal seminars can
help to present the work of UX researchers and the entire
testing process. It is also beneficial to indicate how both
system developers and users can profit from properly
delivered testing. Effective communication of said benefits
can be facilitated by issuing reports to provide stakeholders
with
more
information
about
users
and
the
testing
procedure. It is also necessary to organize meetings with
stakeholders as often as possible in order to talk about their
needs and indicate possible solutions. It is important to give
users a sense of security, support and space for their
creativity. Communication is the foundation for creating
systems that will match users’ expectations. Furthermore,
relations with other teams and the ability to communicate
effectively and efficiently are important elements of the
work of researchers. Additionally, researchers ought to
continuously improve their competences and acquire new
knowledge. It is of key importance that they continue to
develop by attending training courses, reading professional
literature or taking part in conferences where they can
exchange
their
ideas
and
observations
with
other
researchers.
REFERENCES
[1]
National Information Processing Institute. Research. [Online].
Available
from:
https://www.opi.org.pl/en/Research.html
2020.01.30.
[2]
K.
Hastrup,
“A
Passage
to
Anthropology:
Between
Experience and Theory”, London: Routledge, pp. 59, 1995.
[3]
C. Clifford, “A Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive
Theory of Culture”, New York: Basic Books, pp. 3-30, 1973
in “The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays”.
[4]
J. Janowski, "Elektroniczny obrót prawny”, Translation:
"Electronic legal transactions”, Warszawa: Wolters Kluwer
Polska, pp. 164, 2008.
[5]
Polon. Zestawienie danych o pracownikach, translation:
Summary
of
employee
data.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://polon.nauka.gov.pl/help/doku.php/terminy/pracownicy
2020.01.30.
[6]
“Rozporządzenie Rady Ministrów z dnia 12 kwietnia 2012 r. 
w sprawie Krajowych Ram Interoperacyjności, minimalnych 
wymagań dla rejestrów publicznych i wymiany informacji w 
postaci elektronicznej oraz minimalnych wymagań dla 
systemów teleinformatycznych”, translation: “Regulation of
the Council of Ministers of April 12, 2012 on the National
Interoperability
Framework,
minimum
requirements
for
public registers and exchange of information in electronic
form, as well as minimum requirements for ICT systems”,
Journal of Laws of 2012, item 526.
[7]
O. Achmatowicz, “Blaski i cienie awansu naukowego w
Polsce”, translation: "The splendors and shadows of scientific
advancement in Poland", Rocznik Towarzystwa Naukowego
Warszawskiego”, Warszawa, vol. 74, pp. 5-26, 2011.
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[8]
D. Batorski and A. Płoszaj, “Diagnoza i rekomendacje w
obszarze 
kompetencji 
cyfrowych 
społeczeństwa 
i 
przeciwdziałania wykluczeniu cyfrowemu w kontekście 
zaprogramowania wsparcia w latach 2014-2020”, translation:
“Diagnosis and recommendations in the area of digital
competence of society and counteracting digital exclusion in
the
context
of
programming
support
in
2014-2020”,
Warszawa,
2012
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.euroreg.uw.edu.pl/dane/web_euroreg_publication
s_files/3513/ekspertyza_mrr_kompetencjecyfrowe_2014-
2020.pdf 2020.01.30.
[9]
E. Buie and D. Murray, “Usability in Government Systems:
User Experience Design for Citizens and Public Servants”¸
San Fransisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 2012.
[10] S. Krug,
“Rocket Surgery Made Easy: The Do-It-Yourself
Guide to Finding and Fixing Usability Problems (Voices That
Matter)”, CA: New Riders, 2010.
[11] I. Mościchowska and B. Roguś-Turek, “Badania jako 
Podstawa
Projektowania
User
Experiencee”,
translation:
"Research
as
the
Basis
of
User
Experience
Design",
Warszawa 2016.
[12] S. Krug, “Don't Make Me Think, Revisited: A Common
Sense Approach to Web Usability”, CA: New Riders, 2014.
[13] J. Gothelf and J. Seiden, “Lean UX: Designing Great Products
with Agile Teams”, CA: O'Reilly Media, 2016.
[14] L.
Klein,
“UX
for
lean
startups:
faster,
smarter
user
experience research and design”, CA: O'Reilly Media, 2013.
[15] I. Mościchowska, J. Rutkowska and T. Skórski, “Raport User
Experience Design i Product Design w Polsce 2018”,
translation: “Report of User Experience Design and Product
Design in Poland 2018”, vol. 5, pp. 1-57, 2018. [Online].
Available
from:
http://raport2018.hci.org.pl/Raport_UxiPDwPolsce_2018.pdf
2020.01.30
[16] National
Information
Processing
Institute.
Databases.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.opi.org.pl/en/articles/id/88.html 2020.01.30.
Figure 1.
Research preparation process in the National Information Processing Institute in Poland.
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

