Modiﬁed Betweenness Centrality to Identify Relay Nodes in Data Networks
Masaaki Miyashita and Norihiko Shinomiya,
Graduate School of Engineering,
Soka University,
Tokyo, Japan
Email: shinomi@ieee.org
Abstract—Several types of data networks require relay nodes
to transmit data because the nodes would impact on services
with the networks. Betweenness centrality is one of the measures
that reveal important nodes for a network topology. However,
the measure does not specialized in relay nodes of survivable
networks. This paper proposes a evaluation method to designate
the relay nodes in the network modifying betweenness centrality
for relay nodes and survivability. In our simulation, we used
two routing algorithms for the survivability of the network and
compared the modiﬁed measure applying each algorithm with
original betweenness centrality. The simulation results show that
our approach estimates features different from the original does.
The different implies that our method is effective to identify relay
nodes.
Keywords–Betweenness centrality; Graph theory; Data networks
I.
INTRODUCTION
Several types of data networks including a wireless ad-
hoc network require relay nodes to transmit data because the
nodes would impact on services with the networks. One of
the measures to reveal important nodes like the relay nodes is
centrality which belongs to graph theory.
Centrality is known as a measure to capture characteristics
of network topology in ﬁelds of social network, computer
science, physics and biology [1], which, in detail, analyzes
the importance of each node from some points of view. The
importance is rated by a real-valued function on a node.
Above all, betweenness centrality is applied to the network
in which something such as packets or messages of the Inter-
net ﬂows between other nodes. For each node, betweenness
centrality counts the number of shortest paths that the node
lies on. Betweenness centrality assumes that every pair of
nodes interchanges a message with equal probability in equal
time intervals [1]. However, this assumption can be unsuitable
for several types of networks. Therefore, Freeman et al. [2]
suggests other betweenness centrality with not shortest paths
but max ﬂow.
Though a relay node is considered to be located closer
to the middle of a route along which two nodes exchange
data each other, suggested betweenness centrality may not be
able to recognize such. In addition, the original betweenness
centrality does not take consideration on survivability because
of single path connecting two nodes.
Consequently, our study proposes the modiﬁed between-
ness centrality based on two node disjoint paths to identify
relay nodes in the data network. The measure is expected to
give a ranking on the possibility that each node is to be a relay
one of a network.
Section II describes the deﬁnition of betweenness cen-
trality. Section III presents the modiﬁcation of betweenness
centrality. Simulation results are presented in Section IV.
Section V concludes this paper.
II.
BETWEENNESS CENTRALITY
According to Newman [1], betweenness centrality is de-
ﬁned as follows.
In a graph denoted as G = (V, E), let σst be the number
of shortest paths between two vertices s, t ∈ V , and let σst(v)
indicate the number of the paths through a vertex v ∈ V .
Betweenness centrality CB on v is deﬁned by
CB(v) =
∑
s,t∈V \{v}
s̸=t
σst(v)
σst
.
(1)
This formula supposes that if there exists multiple shortest
paths connecting s and t, i.e. σst ≥ 2, then one of the paths
is chosen equally, so that σst(v) is divided by σst.
III.
MODIFICATION OF BETWEENNESS CENTRALITY
This section shows the modiﬁcation of betweenness cen-
trality. A network are described as an undirected edge-
weighted graph G = (V, E). Let w(e) ∈ R+ be the weight of
an edge e = (u, v) ∈ E. Denote v ∈ p if a vertex v ∈ V is
included in a path p.
Because network ﬂow relayed on a node could be regarded
as several paths across the node which some data ﬂows along,
a path set is modeled as the ﬂow. Considering endpoints and
survivability. Since the graph G is undirected, it is unnecessary
to distinguish the source and the destination of a path. Addi-
tionally, Not all nodes can send and receive data depending
on the network. As a result, let a subset V ′ ⊆ V include all
endpoints contained in the graph.
On the other hand, to guarantee survivability of the net-
work, the graph G is required to be 2-vertex connected. Thus,
endpoints are certainly connected by two vertex disjoint paths.
Denote ψ = (p, p′) as a pair of two paths p and p′ that are
composed of the same endpoints. Depending on the way to
ﬁnd a path pair of a couple of endpoints and the topology of
the graph G, no pair may be found. Therefore, let ΨS be a
set of ψ able to be discovered between two endpoints s and t,
where a set S = {s, t} (s, t ∈ V ′, s ̸= t).
Let l(p) ∈ R+ be the length of a path p which is the
sum of the weights on edges in the path. Let dp(v) indicate
the distance from either of endpoints of a path to a vertex v.
Transmission distance of the network is limited to the upper
bound L ∈ R+. If l(p) holds L < l(p) ≤ 2L, a relay vertex
should belong to the set {v ∈ p | l(p) − L ≤ dp(v) ≤ L} to
intercommunicate between the endpoints of the path. If l(p) ≤
L, then p does not need the vertex. If l(p) > 2L, then at least
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

two relay vertices are necessary, so this paper assumes that
L ≥ l(p)/2, for all p for simplicity.
It is considered that the closeness of a vertex to the center
of a path corresponds to the appropriateness of the vertex for
the relay one. Thus, Deﬁne the function f : [0, 1] → [0, 1] that
satisﬁes the following:
•
f
(1
2
)
= 1
•
f(x) = f(1 − x)
•
f(x) < f(x′),
if x < x′ ≤ 1
2 or 1
2 < x′ < x.
The degree of the capability that a vertex v ∈ V acts as the
relay vertex on either path in a pair ψ is designated as the
function δψ : V → [0, 1] on v with the function f
δψ(v) =





f
(dp(v)
l(p)
)
,
if ∃p ∈ ψ s.t. v ∈ p,
l(p) − L ≤ dp(v) ≤ L
0,
otherwise
.
From the above, modiﬁed betweenness centrality CM as a
function on a vertex v is deﬁned by
CM(v) =
∑
S∈P(V ′\{v})
|S|=2
∑
ψ∈ΨS δψ(v)
|ΨS|
.
(2)
IV.
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Two network models were analyzed by betweenness cen-
trality and modiﬁed one. The results from each measures were
compared.
Modiﬁed betweenness centrality is made with Constrained
Shortest Path First (CSPF) and Vertex Disjoint Shortest Pair
(VDSP) for the pair routing algorithm. Simpliﬁed algorithm
of CSPF is given as follows:
1. Find a shortest path by Dijkstra algorithm in a graph.
2. Modify the graph to remove vertices in the path
without endpoints.
3. Search the other shortest path between the same
endpoints in the modiﬁed graph.
4. Obtain the pair of ﬁrst path and second path.
VDSP proposed by Bhandari [3] is an algorithm for ﬁnding
two paths that have minimum total length. It enables to get the
vertex disjoint pair in any 2-vertex connected graph.
Figure 1 shows network models for the evaluation of
analysis methods. Model A in the ﬁgure limits endpoints sets,
and model B does not. Model A possess 365 vertices. The
(a) Model A
(b) Model B
Figure 1. Two types of graph for experiments.
(a) Original betweenness centrality
(b) Modiﬁed with CSPF
(c) Modiﬁed with VDSP
Figure 2. Visualized evaluates on model A.
(a) Original
(b) with CSPF
(c) with VDSP
Figure 3. Visualized evaluates on model B.
endpoints set V ′ is composed of big circles illustrated in the
ﬁgure, of which the size is 39. Model B contains 49 vertices.
Its endpoints set is the same set as own vertex set.
Figures 2 and 3 show visualization of evaluation results
for the models by coloring each vertex the color of which
brightness corresponds to each evaluate value of the vertex
(palest = 0, darkest = max). These ﬁgures describe that
locations of high value vertices in both of the modiﬁed
measures are different from original measures on both model
A and B. From this result, each modiﬁed centralities can reveal
characteristics which existent betweenness centrality can not.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a method to identify relay nodes based
on modiﬁed betweenness centrality. This method is constructed
of a set of pairs of vertex disjoint paths, and the degree of
closeness to the center of each path. In our simulation, the
two types of modiﬁed measures by two algorithms CSPF and
VDSP to determine a set of pairs were compared with original
betweenness centrality in two different network models. The
simulation results show that our approach indicates attributes
the original does not. Thus, our method may be capable of
designating relay nodes.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Newman, Networks: an introduction. Oxford University Press, 2010.
[2]
L. C. Freeman, S. P. Borgatti, and D. R. White, “Centrality in valued
graphs: A measure of betweenness based on network ﬂow,” Social
networks, vol. 13, no. 2, 1991, pp. 141–154.
[3]
R. Bhandari, Survivable networks: algorithms for diverse routing.
Springer, 1999.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

