Study of Sign Language Expression of Medical Sign Language Words
Mina Terauchi
Polytechnic University
Kodaira–shi, Tokyo, Japan
Email: terauchi@uitec.ac.jp
Yuji Nagashima
Kogakuin University
Hachioji–shi, Tokyo, Japan
Email:nagasima@cc.kogakuin.ac.jp
Abstract—This paper will outline the construction of a database
of medical sign language words. The authors of this paper
investigated the more straightforward expression of medical
sign language by analyzing the problems of the existing sign
language words. As a result of a number of investigations
into sign language expressions, by paying attention to more
straightforward sign language expressions and focusing on the
consistency of movements and the uniﬁcation of expressions, we
have created representations for 1,324 words on the basis of the
existing movements.
Keywords–Sign Language; Medicine-Clinical Terms; Database
I.
INTRODUCTION
The medical ﬁeld is one of the areas in which sign
language interpreting is required. Although sign language for
medical use has already been investigated, the sign language
expressions have not yet become widely popular. This is due to
certain problems such as different expressions for words with
the same meanings depending on the book, the existence of a
number of sign language expressions that are not commonly
used, and inconsistency in the creation of sign language words.
Moreover, medical terminology includes many technical terms,
and it is difﬁcult to accurately understand the explanations of
doctors and nurses and translate them into sign language [1].
This paper will examine the sign language expression of
medical terminology. In Section II, for the existing medical
sign language expressions, an examination will be undertaken
of the problems with the existing method of creating medical
sign language words. In the database of medical sign language
words, an examination of the method of creating words will
be undertaken by the authors of this paper. In Section III,
this paper will explain the development of the Kogakuin med-
ical sign language word database, KOSIGN V5 (hereinafter,
“ KOSIGN ”).
II.
EXISTING MEDICAL SIGN LANGUAGE EXPRESSIONS
The medical sign language expressions presented in exist-
ing books involve problems, including those listed below [2]
[3].
1)
Expressions that are not commonly used are included.
2)
There is no consistency in the expressions, even for
related words.
3)
Inappropriate methods are adopted when creating
words, ignoring convenience for people in terms of
making movements.
4)
Sign language movements are presented as still im-
ages in books, so it is difﬁcult to understand the
speciﬁc movements involved.
Moreover, in terms of the problems of medical terminology
itself, there are numerous technical terms and it is sometimes
difﬁcult to correctly understand their meanings.
III.
METHOD OF USING KOSIGN TO CREATE WORDS
In creating the words, we focused on the consistency of
movements and the uniﬁcation of sign language expressions.
Moreover, while creating the words, we took into account the
convenience for people in terms of making movements and a
more straightforward method of expression. We created words
mainly for commonly used words in a hospital setting, such
as names of body parts, organs and bones, medical conditions
and diseases, hospital departments, tests and equipment, and
drugs. Table I shows word classiﬁcation and examples.
TABLE I. Medical word classiﬁcation and example words
Classiﬁcation
Example words
Body parts
Head, Face, Body, Skin, Eye
Organs and Bones
Stomach, Skull, Spine, intestine, lung
Medical Conditions and Diseases
Cold, High Blood Pressure, Stomatitis, Dizziness
Hospital Departments
Surgery, Gastroenterology, Internal Medicine
tests and equipment
echocardiography, MRI, endoscopic
drugs
mouthwash, antibiotics, powdered medicine, tablets
others
doctor, receptionist, medical history, recurrence
A. Consistency of Expressions
Sign language words in KOSIGN are created in such a
way that if words are related, the same expressions are used.
In this paper, Japanese Sign language words are represented
in {CAPITAL LETTERS}.
For example, for words such as {XXX DISEASE} and
{Y Y Y
SY NDROME}, the expressions are uniﬁed in all
the words by placing either
{DISEASE}
or
{SY NDROME} = {V ARIETY } + {DISEASE}
at the end.
Figure 1 shows an example of ”Heart disease”. The anima-
tion images used in Figure 1 were created using TV program
Making Language (TVML), which is currently being devel-
oped by NHK Science & Technical Research Laboratories.
Moreover, for words related to {BONE}, to clarify the
expression {BONE}, it has been determined that the words be
expressed by including {BONE}. However, movement words
that are commonly used, such as {SPINE} and
{CLAV ICLE}, are expressed without including {BONE}.
297
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a) {HEART}
(b) {DISEASE}
Figure 1. Sign language for the word ”Heart disease”
B. Method of Creating Words
Morphological elements that are used in the expressions of
sign language for medical words adopt not only the existing
morphological elements, but also expressions that are similar
to gestures to express medical and treatment activities. For
example, in expressions related to medication, movements
imitating the actions of drinking or applying are involved. Sign
language sometimes expresses words by adopting movements
that are similar to gestures. As a result, in the expression
of medical sign language, if it is considered to be easier to
understand, expressions similar to gestures are also adopted.
The signer expresses body parts that are externally visible
by pointing to their own body parts. In contrast, when creating
words for the names of organs that are not externally visible,
the signer not only points to the position where the organ is
located, but also indicates the shape of the organ.
Moreover, many explanatory sign language expressions are
used to express words with difﬁcult meanings. For example,
an antacid is expressed in sign language that describes it as a
medication that suppresses the rise of acid substances.
There are also expressions that use Japanese words, which
are similar to explanatory sign language. This is a method
of creating words to represent the expression of Japanese
labels in sign language. When using Japanese words, the
signer’s knowledge of Japanese words is a precondition. We
believe that this is not a signiﬁcant problem, because the
Japanese language capability of sign language native speakers
has recently improved.
There are many medical terms whose meanings are ex-
plained using kanji. In such cases of expressions using kanji,
the signer expresses the Chinese characters in the order in
which they appear.
There are also cases when manual characters are used. In
manual characters, there are cases when all the Japanese labels
are expressed by manual characters, and cases when expressing
some Japanese labels using manual characters plays the role
of supporting the subsequent sign language expressions.
C. Database of Medical Sign Language Words: KOSIGN
The purpose of developing KOSIGN is to promote sign
language by providing explanations of medical terminology
and difﬁcult terms that sign language interpreters, sign lan-
guage native speakers, medical workers and other people are
considered to require at the time of medical treatment. The
method of creating new words is that the existing problems
are analyzed and the focus is placed on the consistency
of movements, the uniﬁcation of expressions and a more
straightforward way of making expressions.
Moreover, when using the existing sign language move-
ments instead of creating words, investigations are also un-
dertaken to determine whether or not the relevant movement
expressions are widely used. Medical words to be created
in sign language and explanatory notes were selected with
the cooperation of medical workers acting as sign language
interpreters, sign language interpreters, sign language native
speakers and other parties. KOSIGN has determined 1,324 sign
language words to date.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
The authors of this paper have developed a database of
medical sign language words. By analyzing the problems of
the existing sign language, we investigated sign language
expressions that are easily understood so that they will be
widely used. As a result, KOSIGN has determined 1,324 words
using sign language movements.
We will strive to further improve the database to achieve
the popular use of the expressions of KOSIGN in the future.
By examining whether or not there are other words that need
to be included, we will create and add necessary words by also
using the synthesis of morphological elements. In addition, we
will add explanatory notes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Part of this study was subsidized by a Grant-in-Aid for Sci-
entiﬁc Research (A) 23240087 and (A) 26244021, a scientiﬁc
research grant by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Terauchi, et al., ”Compilation of a sign language database for use
in medical practice,” Proc. of the Communications in Computer and
Information Science (CCIS) series, June 2014, pp. 264–269: , HCI
International 2014, ISBN: 978-3-319-07853-3.
[2]
Medical Sign Language Language, Medical Sign Language Series 1-3,
Publication Bureau of Japanese Federation of the Deaf, Tokyo, 2009(in
Japanese).
[3]
F. Nakagawa, Medical Sign Language Dictionary, Hiroshima Prefectural
Sign Language Interpretation Research Association, Hiroshima, 2005(in
Japanese).
298
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

