Investigating Players’ Affective States in an Interactive Environment 
 
Uttam Kokil  
Department of Technology, CoBPA 
UND, Grand Forks, ND 58202. USA 
Email: uttam.kokil@und.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—The objective of this paper is to examine player 
experience from a Human Computer Interaction Design 
perspective 
whereby 
usability, 
aesthetics, 
and 
hedonic 
components can be investigated in an interactive domain. 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi’s concept of flow has been applied to 
the Component of User Experience (CUE) model to measure 
user experience (UX) of products, and other instruments such 
as the Presence Involvement Flow Framework (ver. 2) (PIFF); 
Gameflow and Game Experience Questionnaire to evaluate 
game enjoyment respectively. So far, the CUE Model has been 
applied in simulated user-testing situation. It becomes 
important to gauge the potential of the CUE Model in an 
interactive game scenario, given that it is composed of 
components such as perceived usability, perceived aesthetics 
and emotional responses. The aim of this study is to conduct a 
comparative 
analysis 
of 
two 
user 
experience 
models 
(Component of User Experience) and PIFF to examine players’ 
emotional responses in four different conditions (low and high 
usability, low and high aesthetic value) when they play two 
different computer game category, namely “Hard Fun” and 
“Easy Fun” game respectively, for the touchscreen. This 
research will investigate how two independent variables, 
usability (low and high) and visual aesthetic (low and high), of 
a game user interface design will affect the dependent 
variables: player experience, task performance and emotional 
responses (enjoyment).  
 
Keywords-user experience; visual aesthetics; computer 
games; game usability.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Researchers argue that experiences are the new area of 
economic growth among consumers [1]. The game designer 
creates various experiences in a game in order to generate 
player enjoyment. PIFF [2] is a validated questionnaire that 
can be used to investigate user experience in games. The 
Component of User Experience (CUE) Model describes the 
three fundamental components of user experience that is 
comprised of instrumental quality, non-instrumental quality 
and emotional responses [3]. CUE Model has been applied 
to simulated product scenarios (e.g. simulations of audio 
players) however we are interested to examine its potential 
in an interactive environment to understand how it can be 
appropriated into the domain of computer game. It is 
important to investigate if CUE Model shares the same 
validity as another user experience tool such as PIFF, and 
whether it can be utilized to study “users’ experience of 
interaction with interactive products and systems,” in a 
gaming environment, as is the essence of this model. 
Video and computer games are the fastest growing form 
of entertainment. The revenue generated by the computer 
game industry escalated to US$ 16.6 billion in 2011 from 
US$ 5.5 billion in 1999, in the U.S.A [4]. Technology is 
evolving at such an unprecedented pace that many end-users 
suddenly find themselves confronted with new mode of 
interaction especially when it comes to computer gaming 
with multi-touch screen or other controls. User experience 
varies in different environments [5], on different display 
sizes [6] or when using different input devices. Technology 
alone does not make a game successful. Player experience 
forms part and parcel of the gaming process. For instance, 
despite the rise of gaming technology, players have 
continued to express dissatisfaction with current computer 
games because most games do not provide the optimal level 
of challenge to accommodate players’ skills, learning 
capabilities, and emotional qualities [7,8]. It is said that 
certain games are either too easy to win, or that they do not 
challenge the player to use his or her skills appropriately, 
and as a consequence, the player does not derive enough 
enjoyment during game play [7]. Lazarro explains that only 
20% of the games that hit the market are successful [10]. It 
becomes imperative to investigate the phenomena that 
create optimum player experience in computer games by 
exploring the components of player experience as regards to 
the graphical user interface. Kankainen [11] defines user 
experience as a “result of a motivated action in a certain 
context. User’s previous experiences and expectations 
influence the present experience; this present experience 
leads to more experiences and modified expectations.” 
Until recently, more attention was given solely to the 
usability of a product, while other aspects that formed part 
of user experience were neglected. Gaming has received 
more attention in the HCI area, but “there have been only a 
few attempts to study user experience in games holistically.” 
[5]. There are several components in a user interface design 
that give rise to different types of cognitive and emotional 
responses among users during interaction. Interaction design 
creates “user experiences that enhance and extend the way 
people work, communicate and interact” [12]. “User 
experience is highly subjective and dependent on a user’s 
expectations, which in turn are shaped by user’s age, 
education, cultural background, gender and several other 
factors” [13]. Researchers recognize the fact that games 
evoke an intensified level of emotions during game play so 
as to make the experience entertaining and enjoyable [14]. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Aesthetics have been found to affect users' perceptions 
toward product use [15]. Lindgaard and Dudek [16] state 
that aesthetics is directly associated to emotions through the 
senses. Don Norman [17] also mentions that appearance of a 
product affects the very visceral part. 
This research is designed to study the theory of the “four 
Fun Keys.” Lazarro [18] describes game classification in 
terms of Fun Keys: “Hard Fun, Easy Fun, Altered state and 
People factor.” This theory explains how each game 
category provides the necessary motivation to play, and the 
spirits of the gamer in each type of game. The player is 
determined to meet specific goals when playing a hard fun 
game that elicits emotions such as frustration and “fiero.” 
For example, the scores achieved gauge the skill level. In an 
Easy Fun type game, the players explore and discover the 
game by “focusing on the enjoyment of experiencing the 
game activities.” This is not about winning the game but 
rather it focuses and stimulates one’s curiosity by figuring 
out the different game strategies and levels. In the Altered 
state, players feel an internal change, from one mental state 
to another. People factor is more about the experience a 
player derives while interacting with other players during 
gameplay such as in multiplayer games.  
For this research, “visceral rhetoric” can be defined as 
the emotional responses that are automatically triggered by 
audio and visual components of the game surface layer. 
Game design comprises of game interface, game mechanics 
and Game Play [19]. This indicates that game interface has 
an influence on players’ behavior and interaction. Cara 
Wrigley [20] defines visceral hedonic rhetoric in the context 
of interactive products as "the properties of a product that 
persuasively elicit the pursuit of pleasure at an instinctual 
level of cognition." 
II. 
GAPS 
Cara Wrigley [20] describes how the visceral hedonic 
rhetoric model or tool is relevant to product designers to 
devising interactive products that will create a continuing 
emotional impact with the consumers. The whole gamut of 
design elements of a product elicits some kinds of emotional 
responses from the users. The researcher mentions that this 
tool needs validation. It is important to investigate which 
specific attributes of the visceral rhetoric will give rise to 
hedonic responses. Furthermore, she recommends that the 
model could be tested out in other design domain for 
designers to better understand how consumers' visceral 
responses are affected by visceral hedonic rhetoric. 
Research has demonstrated mixed results when it comes to 
perception of usability and visual aesthetics. Many studies 
have been conducted to evaluate users’ emotional responses 
in games or to developing tools to measure user experience, 
however, little is known how the visual rhetoric of a game 
interface affect user behavior, performance, emotional 
responses and player experience. There are several gaps 
identified when it comes to perception of beauty and 
usability as they relate to user interface design. “Game 
interface is part of the surface layer for game control. The 
experience of the controls is directly tied to the emotional 
experience of play, thus user interface in a game is very 
important” explains video game designer, Robin Hunicke. 
Another researcher defines aesthetics as the “sensuous 
qualities, the emotions, moods, and experiences” that occurs 
while interacting with a product [21]. Aesthetics have 
become an important topic among HCI researchers lately as 
it forms an integral part of user experience. In the study 
“what is beautiful is usable,” [22] the researchers found out 
that the relationship between usability and aesthetics were 
strongly correlated, which was in line with a previous study 
in the field of marketing and consumer behavior that 
explained how physical appearance of a product were 
related to personality traits [23]. On the contrary, when 
Hassenzahl [24] conducted a study on MP3 skin players, he 
did not find any relation between beauty and perceived 
usability. 
Usability may be considered more important when the 
product is used for an important and time critical task, and 
less so in “a more relaxed mode of exploration and 
discovery” [25]. Hence it becomes imperative to investigate 
the connection between usability and aesthetic, when 
computer games are played in the action or goal mode. 
According to Hassenzahl, classical aesthetic is different 
from beauty; he considers classical aesthetic to include 
visual usability that complements usability of interaction. 
“Aesthetics is too broad as a term (modern art has an 
aesthetic value, but most of the time not beautiful) or we use 
it as a pretentious replacement of what we actually mean, 
just because aesthetic sounds more learned. In both cases, 
beauty is the better term,” declares Hassenzahl in an email 
conversation. “Beauty is synonymous to an affect driven 
evaluative response to the visual gestalt of a product.” [26]. 
Hassenzahl [24] further explains that beauty and usability is 
mediated by “goodness” and there is a low correlation 
between hedonic and pragmatic. The latter finding in turn 
reiterates Lavie and Tractinsky’s study [27] that reveals the 
correlation between expressive aesthetics and usability is 
low. 
Thuring and Mahlke [28] conducted two studies using 
portable audio players to find out whether perceptions of 
instrumental and non-instrumental qualities were related. He 
simulated two versions of the portable audio players by 
varying the level of usability and visual aesthetics such that 
there were four combinations in all. The results revealed 
that both the variations of usability and aesthetics had an 
effect independently on emotional responses (valence and 
arousal) respectively. Mahlke and Lindgaard [29] suggested 
that the effect of perceived visual aesthetics on emotional 
aspects of user experience should be investigated further. 
The researchers explain that there are challenges such as the 
“inter individual differences of aesthetics judgments” 
concerning 
visual 
aesthetics 
in 
human 
technology 
interaction that need to be addressed [29]. Everyone has a 
different level of perception of beauty. When evaluating 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

visual aesthetic aspect of an interface, it is important to take 
recourse to Centrality of Visual Product Aesthetics (CVPA) 
scale that measures the degree of visual aesthetics an 
individual accounts for a product [30] to obtain accurate 
results. Furthermore, Hartmann et al. [26] state that it is 
imperative to study the behavior of aesthetically sensitive 
and 
non-aesthetically 
sensitive 
participants 
in 
user 
populations, especially if the aim is to investigate different 
level of visual complexity in a user interface design. Hence, 
aesthetic perception also depends a lot on the background of 
the user. 
When a user is exposed to a web interface, usually this 
gives rise to a halo effect [31, 26] that affects user behavior 
on subsequent webpages. For instance, if the visual aesthetic 
is of high quality, even though there is a slight usability 
issue, the halo effect will override the glitch, and provide a 
satisfying user experience. One aspect that needs further 
investigation is the intensity of the halo effect, and how it 
relates to the degree of usability and aesthetic value. This 
finding resonates to Hassenzahl and Ullrich’s [25] study, 
which explains in a critical situation, usability is considered 
the most valuable in contrast to an exploratory/discovery 
situation, where usability issue is regarded as secondary. 
Lindgaard and Dudek [16] conducted a study on websites 
styles to find out that high aesthetic quality and very low 
perceived usability gave rise to high user satisfaction. It was 
concluded from this study, “what is beautiful may not be 
necessarily perceived to be usable.” Yet, Tractinsky et al. 
[22] state “what is beautiful is usable.” The above studies 
are all contradictory to each other. There is little evidence 
that “explain how and why users judge a particular design to 
be more or less aesthetic” [26]. 
Liu et al. [32] investigated the dynamic difficulty 
adjustment (DDA) in computer games so that the 
“mechanism in computer games can automatically be suited 
to gaming experience of the player's characteristics.” Liu et 
al. (2009) further explained that much research is being 
carried out to evaluate player’s performance that is based on 
game adaptation. It would be more useful to investigate the 
“affective state” of the players instead. Katsyri et al. [33] 
made use of electromyography (EMG) to measure 
emotional responses of 44 participants to aesthetic 
background images that has a varying level of valence 
(unpleasant to pleasant) and arousal (calming to exciting). 
When a pleasant image was presented alone and along with 
text (new message), positive emotions were evoked. It was 
found that high arousal images improved superimposed text 
recall. They suggest that future research should be 
conducted to investigate the effects of aesthetic background 
images in other domains. 
III. 
AIMS 
One of the major objectives of this research is to carry 
out a comparative study to investigate how player 
experience is affected by the visual rhetoric (graphic, text, 
animation, sound) of a computer game, when participants 
play two different kinds of game, Hard Fun and Easy Fun 
respectively [18]. It is relevant to examine how the visual 
aesthetic, including the attributes of interactivity such as 
“movement speed, movement range, response speed, 
concurrency” [34] of the dynamic game user interface will 
affect players’ physiological arousal and valence by using 
physiological 
measures, 
in 
addition 
to 
self-report 
measurement. This research is important because game 
designers should understand what user interface elements 
can optimally enthrall game enthusiasts and that developers 
should devise specific types of games or platform, 
depending on the objectives (goal mode or action mode), to 
make it appealing and enjoyable to the right audience. This 
research will eventually contribute to understand the 
creation of appropriate user interface components that can 
lead to better game interaction for players to derive optimal 
enjoyment and challenges that will lead to enhanced user 
satisfaction. It is also important to find out how the players’ 
emotional responses are affected by the visual rhetoric of 
the game interface when they are in different meta-
motivational states. Players’ emotional responses will be 
examined in two different conditions: telic (goal) and 
paratelic (action). In the goal mode, the participants will be 
required to play the computer game until they reach a 
certain score or level, whereas in the action-mode, all 
participants will be given equal amount of time to play the 
game. “Usability is considered to be a more important 
component when the product is utilized for an important and 
time critical task, and less so in a more relaxed mode of 
exploration and discovery.” [25]. Does this hold true in a 
game scenario when one plays a hard fun and easy fun game 
category respectively? How does the visual rhetoric and 
gestalt affect the player when he is in a goal mode and in an 
action mode of gameplay respectively? Moreover, the users 
can be further segmented into two different groups called 
verbalizers and visualizers [35] to examine how each group 
would process and elicit emotional responses towards the 
visual rhetoric of the game user interface. 
Admittedly, components like engagement, immersion, 
and flow have been used as attributes to measure UX in 
games. For this study, it is essential to evaluate user 
experience in games from a multi-dimensional perspective, 
by appropriating CUE [28] Model and compare the results 
using other game enjoyment and UX models in the field of 
Human Computer Interaction Design, like Gameflow [8], 
Game Experience Questionnaire (GameLab, Eindhoven 
University of Technology) and UX model such as PIFF [2], 
that integrates components like Adaptation (Presence and 
Involvement) and Flow (cognitive evaluation and emotional 
outcomes), Component of User Experience Model. In 
addition, it may be useful to compare the above experiments 
in different cultural settings to check if the results are 
generalizable. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
It is clear that measuring emotional responses in HCI has 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

been a challenge for many researchers despite numerous 
techniques that have been devised. Physiological (skin 
conductance, heart rate, pupillary dilation, blood pressure, 
respiration, vocal tone, facial expressions, muscles action, 
electroencephalography (EEG), electromyography (EMG)) 
[36] and self-report tools (pre and post-test questionnaires, 
interviews, focus groups) have been commonly utilized to 
measure 
emotional 
responses. 
The 
advantage 
with 
physiological measures is that the researcher can capture 
emotions accurately. The disadvantage is that it is costly to 
administer and collect data. Researchers can still detect 
different kinds of affect using the self-report measurement 
that includes rating scales, questionnaires, graphical 
differentials, and verbal depiction of emotional states. The 
drawback of self-report methods is that the participant is 
conscious when his emotion is being measured; self-report 
methods are not suitable for measuring low intensity 
emotions, according to Frijda [39]. Researchers have 
commonly utilized self-report measurements because they 
are cheap to conduct. For the scope of this study, two UX 
models (CUE and PIFF) will be compared in a game 
context, and data will be collected when participants play a 
touch screen game on ipads. Instruments that will be used to 
collect data include both physiological (skin conductance) 
and self-report tools. 
Data will be collected using the following instruments: 
(i) Verbalizer-Visualizer questionnaire [37] for screening 
participants. (ii) HEP Questionnaire [38] for gathering 
usability data. (iii) Classical and Expressive Aesthetics [27] 
(iv) Game Experience Questionnaire (GEQ) to measure 
enjoyment in games. The GEQ is a verbal emotional tool 
that can measure human experience of media enjoyment, in 
the context of gaming. The GEQ consists of three modules: 
actual game experiences, post-game experiences, and social 
roles of players. The items are based on concepts like 
immersion, flow, challenge and affect. The stimuli used to 
collect data are a hard fun and easy fun category game 
devised for the touch-screen that can be customized in terms 
of its usability and aesthetics features. A panel of game 
experts will first validate the game to ensure that it meets 
the norms as far as game play, game mechanics and game 
user interface design are concerned. The game will then be 
modified into four different conditions as shown in Table 1. 
The independent variables are usability and aesthetic 
quality. The dependent variables are emotional reactions 
and user experience. 
TABLE I.  
 
 
          Usability (A) 
Low (A1) 
High (A2) 
Aesthetics 
(B) 
Low (B1) 
 
 
High (B2) 
 
 
Both Qualitative and Quantitative methods will be used in 
this study. 200 participants will be recruited, and devised 
into two groups known as “verbalizers” (better at processing 
text) and “visualizers (better at processing images).” The 
verbalizer-visualizer [37] questionnaire is a five items 
questionnaire in which the participant needs to select 
between the two approaches of processing information, 
either words or pictures. Based on the visualizer-verbalizer 
questionnaire, participants will be screened into two groups: 
the verbalizer and the visualizer, each group will consist of 
100 participants. Gender balance will be taken into 
consideration within each condition. A two-way ANOVA 
in-between subject test will be performed, with two 
independent variables: usability (low and high) and visual 
aesthetics (low and high). In addition, by making use of the 
CVPA (Centrality of Visual Product Aesthetics) instrument, 
individual differences among participants can be analyzed in 
order to understand to which degree users are aesthetically 
oriented. The data gathered from the CVPA questionnaire 
can be added as a covariate to the analysis, which will result 
in an ANCOVA. 
 The following research questions will be attempted: 
(i) How is player experience affected in the following states: 
(telic) goal mode and (paratelic) action mode? (ii) What 
impact does the level of visual aesthetic in each game 
category has on the two group of players (visualizers and 
verbalizers)? (iii) How is the Flow Graph (Challenge v/s 
Skills) affected by varying levels of the two independent 
variables? How do components like enjoyment, player 
experience, player performance and emotional responses 
affected by the two levels of independent variables? 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This study is expected to answer multiple research questions 
that will be important for game designers to consider and 
apply during game development. It is necessary to 
understand the characteristics of players for instance, 
whether verbalizers derive more enjoyment than visualizers 
in gaming context, and how the visual rhetoric affects each 
category of players. Game designers will need to further 
explore specific elements of the user interface that give rise 
to particular emotional responses, in the case of each game 
category–hard fun and easy fun. It is also necessary to 
investigate whether the “flow” concepts still hold true when 
the game attributes (visual aesthetics) are varied in each 
game condition. Answering the above questions will help 
pave the way to devise optimal game experience for 
appropriate audience. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

VI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Pine and J. Gilmore, The experience economy: work is 
theatre and every business a stage. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press, 1999. 
 
[2] J. Takatalo, “Psychologically-Based and Content-Oriented 
Experience in Entertainment Virtual Environments,” Ph.D. 
dissertation, University of Helsinki, Finland, 2011. 
 
[3] S. Mahlke, “User Experience of Interaction with Technical 
Systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Technical University of Berlin, 
Germany, 2008. 
 
[4] “Game Player Data, Entertainment Software Association.” 
Accessed Oct 03, 2012. 
http://www.theesa.com/facts/salesandgenre.asp 
 
[5] J.Takatalo, J. Hakkinen, J. Kaistinen, and G. Nyman, “User 
Experience in Digital Games: Differences Between Laboratory and 
Home.” Simulation & Gaming (August 10, 2010). 
doi:10.1177/1046878110378353. 
 
[6] D. Machaj, C. Andrews, and C. North, “Co-located Many-
player Gaming on Large High-resolution Displays.” In 2009 
International Symposium on Social Computing Applications 
(SCA-09), 697–704, 2009. 
 
[7] K. Gilleade, A. Dix, and J.Allanson. “Affective Videogames 
and Modes of Affective Gaming: Assist Me, Challenge Me, Emote 
Me.” In Proceedings DIGRA 2005, 16–20. Vancouver, Canada, 
2005. 
 
[8] Penelope Sweetser and Peta Wyeth. “GameFlow: A Model for 
Evaluating Player Enjoyment in Games.” ACM Computers in 
Entertainment 3, no. 3 (2005). 
 
[10] K. Isbister and N. Schaffer, In Game Usability: Advice from 
the Experts for Advancing the Player Experience. Burlington, MA: 
Morgan Kaufman, 2008. 
 
[11] A. Kankainen, “UCPCD: User-centered Product Concept 
Design.” In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference on Designing for 
User Experiences, 1–13. New York: ACM, 2003. 
 
[12] J.Preece, Y. Rogers, and H. Sharp. Interaction Design: 
Beyond Human-Computer-Interaction. New York: Wiley, 2002. 
 
[13] A. Kukulska-Hulme, “Mobile Usability and User 
Experience.” In Mobile Learning: A Handbook for Educators and 
Trainers, ed. Kukulska-Hulme & Traxler, (United Kingdom: 
Routledge, 2005). 
 
[14] R.L. Hazlett, “Measuring Emotional Valence During 
Interactive Experiences.” 1023. ACM Press, 2006. 
doi:10.1145/1124772.1124925. 
 
[15] P. Zhang and G.M. Von Dran, “Satisfiers and Dissatisfiers: a 
Two-factor Model for Website Design and Evaluation,” Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science 51 (2000): 1253–
1268. 
 
 
 
[16] G. Lindgaard and C. Dudek, “What Is This Evasive Beast We 
Call User Satisfaction?” Interacting with Computers no. 15 
(2003): 429–452. 
 
[17] D.A. Norman. “Emotion and Design: Attractive Things Work 
Better.” Interactions 4, no. 9 (2002): 36–42. 
 
[18] Nicole Lazarro, “Why we play games: Four Keys to more 
emotion without story,” (2004), 
http://www.xeodesign.com/whyweplaygames.html 
 
[19] A.M. Federoff, “Heuristics and Usability Guidelines for the 
Creation and Evaluation of Fun in Video Games” (Master’s thesis, 
Indiana University, 2002). 
http://melissafederoff.com/heuristics_usability_games.html. 
 
[20] C.J Wrigley, “Visceral hedonic rhetoric” (PhD diss., 
Queensland University of Technology, 2011). 
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/46040/  
 
[21] I. Engholm, “The Good Enough Revolution – the Role of 
Aesthetics in User Experiences with Digital Artefacts.” Digital 
Creativity 21, no. 3 (2010): 141–154. 
 
[22] N. Tractinsky, A.S. Katz, D. Ikar, “What is beautiful is 
usable” Interacting with Computers no. 13 (2000), 127–145. 
 
[23] K. Dion, E. Berscheid, and E. Walster, “What is beautiful is 
good,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 24(3), 1972): 
285-290. 
 
[24] M. Hassenzahl, “The interplay of beauty, goodness and 
usability in interactive products,” Human-Computer of Interaction, 
19 (2004): 319-349. 
 
[25] M. Hassenzahl and D. Ullrich, “To do or not to do: 
Differences in user experience and retrospective judgments 
depending on the presence or absence of instrumental goals,” 
Interacting with Computers 19, Issue 2, (2005): 429-437. 
 
[26] Hartmann, Jan, Alistair Sutcliffe, and Antonella De Angeli. 
“Towards a Theory of User Judgment of Aesthetics and User 
Interface Quality.” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction 15, no. 4 (November 1, 2008): 1–30. 
doi:10.1145/1460355.1460357. 
 
[27] T. Lavie and N. Tractinsky, “Assessing dimensions of 
perceived visual aesthetics of web sites,” International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies 60 (2004): 269–298. 
 
 [28] M. Thuring  and S. Mahlke, “Usability, Aesthetics and 
Emotions in Human Technology Interaction,” International 
Journal of Psychology 42(4) (2007): 253-264. 
 
[29] S. Mahlke, and G. Lindgaard. “Emotional Experiences and 
Quality Perceptions of Interactive Products.” In Human Computer 
Interaction, ed. J.Jacko, 164–173. 1st ed., (Berlin 
Heidelberg:Springer-Verlag, 2007. 
 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[30] P.H. Bloch, F.F Brunel, and T.J. Arnold, “Individual 
differences in the centrality of visual product aesthetics: concept 
and measurement,” Journal of Consumer Research 29, no. 4 
(2003):551-565. doi: 10.1086/346250 
 
 [31] L. Deng and M.S. Poole, “Affect in Web Interfaces: A Study 
of the Impacts of Web Page Visual Complexity and Order,” MIS 
Quarterly 34 no.4 (2010): 711-730. 
 
[32] Liu, Changchun, Pramila Agrawal, Nilanjan Sarkar, and Shuo 
Chen. “Dynamic Difficulty Adjustment in Computer Games 
Through Real-Time Anxiety-Based Affective Feedback.” 
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 25, no. 6 
(August 12, 2009): 506–529. doi:10.1080/10447310902963944. 
 
[33] Kätsyri, Jari, Niklas Ravaja, and Mikko Salminen. “Aesthetic 
Images Modulate Emotional Responses to Reading News 
Messages on a Small Screen: A Psychophysiological 
Investigation.” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 
70, no. 1 (January 2012): 72–87. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2011.08.007. 
 
[34] Y. Lim, S. Lee and K. Lee, “Interactivity Attributes: A New 
Way of Thinking and Describing Interactivity.” 105–108. New 
York: ACM Press, 2009. 
 
[35] Massa, Laura J., and Richard E. Mayer. “Testing the ATI 
Hypothesis: Should Multimedia Instruction Accommodate 
Verbalizer-visualizer Cognitive Style?” Learning and Individual 
Differences 16, no. 4 (January 2006): 321–335. 
doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2006.10.001. 
 [36] Shami, N. Sadat, Jeffrey T. Hancock, Christian Peter, 
Michael Muller, and Regan Mandryk. “Measuring Affect in Hci.” 
3901. ACM Press, 2008. doi:10.1145/1358628.1358952. 
[37] Mayer, Richard E., and Laura J. Massa. “Three Facets of 
Visual and Verbal Learners: Cognitive Ability, Cognitive Style, 
and Learning Preference.” Journal of Educational Psychology 95, 
no. 4 (2003): 833–841. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.95.4.833. 
 
[38] H. Desurvire, M.Caplan and J.A. Toth. “Using Heuristics to 
Evaluate the Playability of Games.” In CHI  ’04 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. New York: 
ACM Press, 2004. 
[39] Frijda, N.H (1986). The emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

