From Individual to Collective Personas 
Modeling Realistic Groups and Communities of Users (and not Only Realistic Individual Users) 
Alain Giboin 
INRIA Sophia Antipolis - Méditerranée 
Team-Project Edelweiss 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
Alain.Giboin@inria.fr 
 
 
Abstract— Personas are user models that are represented as 
specific, realistic humans. Initially focused on the modeling of 
individual users, the Persona method (see, e.g., Cooper) is 
gradually changing towards the inclusion of collectives of users 
(groups, communities, etc.). In other words, a “Collective 
Personas” trend is emerging. This paper reports a literature 
review reflecting this emerging trend. It synthesizes some 
issues and avenues related to collective personas development. 
Keywords- personas, collective personas, interaction design, 
social interaction design, user modeling, group modeling 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Personas are user models that are represented as specific, 
realistic humans. Initially focused on the modeling of 
individual users, the Persona method (see, e.g., Cooper 
[2][3], Pruitt and Grudin [15]), also called method of 
“individual personas” [14], is gradually changing towards the 
inclusion of collectives of users (groups, communities, etc.). 
In other words, a “Collective Personas” trend is emerging, 
as evidenced by a number of works attempting to extend the 
Individual Persona method to collectives. In this paper, after 
a short reminder on Individual Personas, we report a 
chronological and comparative literature review of the works 
we consider to belong to the Collective Personas trend. We 
conclude the review by synthesizing some issues and 
avenues related to the development of collective personas. 
II. 
INDIVIDUAL PERSONAS: A SHORT REMINDER  
Our presentation of Individual Personas will be mainly 
based on the Cooper’s founding Persona method ([2][3]). For 
a review of existing Individual Persona methods, see [5]. 
A. Individual Persona Definition and Construction 
Personas are “user models that are represented as 
specific, individual humans” [3]. In other words, personas 
are fictional personifications [3] which represent realistic 
individual persons [14]. This realism is heightened by 
identifying the persona by a name (e.g., Mike) and a photo. 
Personas are derived from significant behavior patterns (i.e., 
sets of behavioral variables) elicited from interviews with 
and observations of users (and sometimes customers) of the 
future product. Behavioral variables are axes or ranges (e.g., 
“necessity-only” vs. “entertainment”) across which product 
use is segmented. For each pattern identified, information 
about related users’ characteristics (e.g., goals, attitudes, 
activity flow) is synthesized in order to reveal personas. To 
translate the knowledge about users/personas into a user-
oriented design solution, personas are role-played as the 
characters of scenarios of product use. 
B. The Collective Aspects in Individual Personas 
The typical case for individual personas, Cooper and 
Reimann [3] claimed, is “to be completely unrelated to each 
other and often from completely different geographic 
locations and social groups.”  However, Cooper and 
Reimann acknowledged, it sometimes “makes sense” for 
personas “to be part of the same family or corporation and to 
have interpersonal or social relationships with each other.” 
This acknowledgment shows that the collective aspects are 
not completely absent from the Individual Personas method. 
Nevertheless, the emphasis is not on the collectives to whom 
individuals belong, but on the relationships between the 
individuals, so that the notion of Collective Persona is not 
made explicit, as opposed to the works described below. 
III. 
COLLECTIVE PERSONAS: A CHRONOLOGY 
The notion of a Collective Persona appeared explicitly in 
six works that we will present chronologically in this section. 
For each work, we will report its motivation, its genre 
(researcher’s work, practitioner’s work, marketer’s work), its 
contents (collective persona definition, persona construction 
method, etc.), and its applications (when all this information 
is provided by the authors of the works). 
A. 2004: Group Personas1 
To our knowledge, the first explicit work on collective 
personas is Kuniavsky’s work [11], a practitioner’s work. It 
describes how Kuniavsky and his students-practitioners 
constructed the Group Persona method while respectively 
training, and being trained to, the original Cooper’s 
individual persona technique. Students were told to apply the 
technique to the design of some wearable/portable 
technology for people to use in an amusement park. In the 
course of elaborating individual personas and their related 
scenarios, Kuniavsky and his students realized that the 
technology will be simultaneously used by two or more 
people forming a coherent group. They consequently got the 
idea of modeling such groups of people as a group persona, 
rather than as individual users, and of modeling their goals as 
group goals (defined as a negotiated combination of 
individual goals).  
132
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

Kuniavsky and his students developed a 4-step method:  
1) Making rough outlines of the clusters of people to 
focus on, and giving them distinctive names (e.g., “Young 
Parents, Young Kids;” “College-age Friends”).  
2) Defining axes along which situating the group (e.g., 
for the “Young Parents, Young Kids” persona: NUMBER OF 
PEOPLE IN GROUP: 5; [KIND OF] PEOPLE IN GROUP: 2 adults, 2 
kids ages 3-10, grandparent;etc.). 
3) Iteratively creating personas: (a) Roughly sketching 
the persona; (b) Brainstorming the persona details; (c) 
Editing the persona description (cutting the irrelevant 
details); (d) Writing preliminary scenarios; (e) Tuning the 
personas according to the scenarios. 
4) Finalizing the personas: Finalizing the fleshing-out 
of group personas (e.g., The Ancona Family) and related 
scenarios felt to be typical examples of groups who visited 
the park and how they would behave.  
Kuniavsky suggested applying the group persona method 
to “groupware” such as entertainment, education, and 
collaboration software. 
B. 2006: Organizational Personas1 
A second explicit work dealing with collective personas 
was achieved at “Cooper” (the corporation founded by Alan 
Cooper). This is a practitioner’s work on the so-called 
Organizational Personas. Such personas are created when 
the problem the practitioners are working on “is in the 
domain of a complex, multi-user, business system” [4]. 
Organizational personas “are fictional organizations that 
represent certain key characteristics of the (visited) 
companies.” They “highlight the patterns and objectives of 
the kind of organization that requires this type of complex 
system.” Practitioners from Cooper position their user 
personas in “relevant roles” within their organizational 
personas, to model the functioning of the system they are 
examining. 
C.  2006: Communitas & 2009: Collective Personas 
A third explicit work on collective personas is our own 
work, a researcher’s work. This work was initiated in 2006 in 
order to extend the Cooper's persona technique to the design 
of intranets as collective tools [8]. This work was interrupted 
in 2007 (because it was not a priority for our team), and 
resumed in 2009, in a different context: the design of social 
semantic 
collaborative 
tools 
for 
assisting 
corporate 
intelligence tasks [9][6]. 
Communitas. The idea of addressing Collective Personas 
is born under the USABLEINTRANET project. The idea came 
from the intersection of two research goals: (1) to elaborate 
individual personas representing intranet users; (2) to 
elaborate collective scenarios of intranet use. Knowing that 
in the scenario-based design literature, a distinction was 
made between individual and collective scenarios, we 
thought we might as well distinguish individual and 
collective personas, so that we could develop intranets better 
adapted to the collectives who use them, and not only to 
individual users. 
We reviewed the literature, and discovered only the two 
works on Group Personas1 and Organizational Personas1. We 
tried to find the most appropriate name to refer to the notion 
of a “collective persona.” We found a Latin name à la 
“Persona,” namely Communitas. We selected this word 
because it referred to: (a) a notion increasingly employed at 
the time by researchers interested in collective system 
design, the notion of a “community” (community of practice, 
community of interest, etc.); (b) definitions that we wanted 
to convey, such as “an unstructured community in which 
people are equal” (Wikipedia). 
The work had stopped at the time to setting the following 
research agenda: (1) to continue the literature review on 
collective personas, (2) to further analyze Kuniavsky’s 
“Group Persona” concept and method, (3) to further analyze 
the collective aspects appearing in individual personas, (4) to 
feed the collective personas method by elements of the 
scenario method, (5) to explicit the links between individual 
and collective personas. 
Collective Personas. When we resumed our work in 
2009 under the French ANR project ISICIL, we decided to 
abandon the term “Communitas,” because it seemed too 
restrictive and too community-connoted. We choose a more 
neutral and generic term, that of Collective Personas. We 
updated the literature review on collective personas, and 
extended it to collective scenarios. To type the collectives 
and their characteristics, we relied on the literature on 
collective models―models describing standard collectives 
(groups, teams, departments, companies) and non standard 
collectives (online communities, social networks). 
We elaborated a 4-step method: (1) Identifying “directing 
contexts” (i.e., the contexts orienting the collective and 
individual personas’ or actors’ activities to be supported by 
the system), and the actors carrying the directing contexts. 
(2a) Identifying the critical individual and collective actors 
and their critical characteristics (goals, roles, tools, etc.) 
through interviews and observations; concerning the 
collective actors, the dimensions considered were among 
others: formal ↔ informal, sustainable ↔ ephemeral, intra-
organizational ↔ extra-organizational. (2b) Identifying the 
relationships that users maintain. (3) Identifying the current 
and future scenarios involving the interacting actors. (4) 
Translating scenarios into story-boards. 
This method has been used in particular for analyzing 
practices and needs of the individuals and collectives 
performing corporate intelligence activities within an 
Environment and Energy Management Agency.  
D. 2008: Group Personas2 
A fourth explicit work on collective personas is also a 
researcher’s work [1]. The focus of this work was the 
visualization of Group Personas through Web 2.0 
collaborative software.  This software “analyzes data from 
social networks and measures the feelings, perceptions, and 
activities of the group members and displays a summary of 
these measures.” Group Persona Visualization is intended 
“to inspire communication and collaboration among groups 
in which status information is often fragmented across a 
wide variety of Web locations.” 
133
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

E. 2010: Organizational Personas2 & Persona Ecosystems 
A fifth explicit work on collective personas is a 
marketer’s work [10]. It introduces the very interesting 
notion of a Persona Ecosystem, which is an “additionally 
refined organizational persona.” An Organizational Persona 
is “an archetypal model of a segment of customer or partner 
companies.” It “provides characteristics of a typical 
organization within a given segment, and the goals of that 
organization as a whole.”  A Persona Ecosystem is “an 
additionally refined organizational persona that uses business 
role personas to model typical, relevant, title roles within an 
organization, their relationships to each other, their tasks that 
relate to [the] company’s concerns, and their roles in a 
buying decision.” This level of detail provides “information 
about how role relationships impact decisions.” “Buyers,” 
“product users,” and “influencers” or “stakeholders” are 
typical role persona groupings. 
Note that Microsoft Research perspective on personas 
resonates with the idea of persona role since it implements an 
approach to systems design tailored by users’ roles. For 
example, Miller and Williams [13] elaborated the so-called 
“MSF Agile Persona Template” with a Role slot “to place 
the user group in which the persona belongs.” In this 
example, however, the notion of a “group” doesn’t resonate 
with the notion of an “organization.” It refers to a role type, 
e.g. “normal user” or “administrator.” 
F. 2010: Collaboration Personas 
The sixth and final explicit work to date about collective 
personas is a researcher’s work by Matthews, Whittaker, 
Moran, and Yang [12]. The tools targeted by Matthews et al. 
are 
intended 
to 
support 
Collective 
Intelligence 
in 
organizations. 
Collaboration 
personas 
are 
empirically 
derived 
descriptions of hypothetical groups of people with specific 
qualities, goals, and needs. They are grounded in multiple 
empirical 
studies 
and 
CSCW 
research 
literature. 
Collaboration personas are a super-structure that includes 
individual personas and describes their actions in the context 
of collaboration. Collaboration personas are inherently about 
interactions, and thus should describe the actions, decisions, 
and norms that have led to stable interactions. 
Matthews et al. propose a framework―also named 
Collaboration Personas―for (a) helping users choose and 
adopt appropriate workplace collaboration tools and (b) 
design new collaborative tools that better meet the needs of 
typical groups. The framework describes distinct types of 
collaborations common to global companies used for large-
scale efforts (communities of interest/practice and task 
forces) and small-scale efforts (traditional team-focused uses 
of collaborative tools). The main element of the 
framework is a set of dimensions or variables (also called 
“collaboration qualities”) along which groups can be 
situated:  (a) a purposeful dimension (SHARED ELEMENT: 
shared interest ↔ shared objective), (b) a temporal 
dimension (GROUP LIFESPAN: short-lived ↔ long-lived), and 
(c) five compositional dimensions (SIZE: small ↔ large; SUB-
GROUPS: no subgroups ↔ many subgroups; PERSONNEL: 
stable ↔ dynamic; MEMBERS DEPENDENCY: interdependent 
↔ independent; GROUP MANAGEMENT: self-managed ↔ 
designated leader).  
Collaborative 
groups 
have 
dynamics, 
roles 
for 
individuals (e.g. regular member, super-team leader), and 
collaboration phases (e.g., Starting, Planning, Executing, and 
Reporting) that should be considered. Collaboration personas 
are supposed to make these various aspects visible and 
understandable. 
Matthews et al. reported how collaboration personas 
might be applied to a core collaborative intelligence 
problem: supporting communities of practice with tools such 
as Lotus Activities (a tool helping teams organize their work, 
and tap their professional networks to help execute), Lotus 
Quickr (a “Team space” Web tool), and Lotus Communities 
(a Web tool helping people with similar interests or job 
responsibilities share information). 
IV. 
COLLECTIVE PERSONAS: A COMPARISON 
The works on collective personas can be compared along 
the dimensions which characterize the “collective persona” 
notion/artifact, and the method for building collective 
personas as described in the reviewed works. The 
comparison is just outlined here. 
A. Comparing the “Collective Persona” Notions/Artefacts 
Persona name: The terms used to name collective 
personas focus either on the collective as an entity (e.g., 
“{group|organizational|collective} persona”, “communitas”) 
or on the activity performed by the collective (e.g., 
“collaboration persona”). 
Persona definition: Collective personas are defined either 
as personas belonging to a collective (see “organizational 
personas2” and “persona ecosystem”, “group personas2”) or 
as an entities composed of individuals (see “communitas”, 
“collaboration personas”). 
Persona variables: The variables used to define 
collective personas are individual personas variables 
transposed to collective personas (e.g., goals), or variables 
coming from existing models of collectives, etc. 
Collectives considered: Some works focus on specific 
collectives (e.g. families or groups of friends in group 
personas1) while others cover a wider range of collectives 
(see collective personas and collaboration personas). 
Realism of personas: The level of realism of the 
collective personas as entities varies among the presented 
works. However this level has not reached the realism level 
of individual personas.   
B. Comparing the “Collective Personas” Methods 
Origin of the method: The methods originate from a 
practical need (e.g. group personas1) or from a theoretical 
motivation, or a mixture of both (e.g., collective personas). 
Aim of the method: Most of the methods aim at informing 
or supporting the design of explicitly collective tools 
(groupware, multi-user business system, intranets, Web 2.0 
tools), or of individual tools that can be used within groups. 
Availability and accessibility of the method: Some works 
proposed a method while others do not; when a method is 
134
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

available, it is not always accessible. When accessible, the 
level of detail of the method description differs. 
Degree of achievement of the method: The methods 
presented can be mainly considered as initial versions 
needing to be improved. 
Place of the scenarios in the method: Most of the time, 
scenarios have a greater place in the methods; the main 
reason is that scenarios make explicit the interactions 
between the individual personas acting within a collective. 
V. 
COLLECTIVE PERSONAS:  ISSUES AND AVENUES 
To conclude this literature review illustrating the 
emergence of the “Collective Personas” trend, we would like 
to synthesize some issues and avenues related to the 
development of collective personas. 
Issues. We have seen that when trying to design 
collective tools, designers are faced with a double need: (1) 
to characterize the collectives for whom these tools are 
intended and (2) to get a method for doing such a 
characterization or modeling. This double need raises several 
issues (some of them have been identified by the authors 
quoted in this paper), e.g.: 
• 
Do we need to elaborate collective personas or is it 
enough to develop the collective dimensions of 
individual personas (e.g., interpersonal or social 
relationships, roles, etc.), and/or to develop the 
collective scenarios related to individual personas 
acting collectively? This issue may arise in cases 
where the collective is extremely short-lived. 
• 
What are the features/dimensions allowing to 
characterize collective personas realistically? Which 
features/dimensions can we transfer from individual 
personas to collective personas? For example, what 
kind of image can represent a collective: a collection 
of individual photos or a group photo? 
• 
How can we account for the links between 
individual and collective personas? Can we attach 
the same individual persona to a user playing a role 
in collectives referring to two different collective 
personas? 
• 
What kinds of scenarios can we attach to collective 
personas?  
Avenues. The issues listed above, and many others, 
clearly need to be further explored. For this exploration, it 
would be beneficial to rely on modeling techniques coming 
from communities close to the HCI community, especially 
the User Modeling and Groupware/CSCW communities. For 
example, we could rely on: (a) Models of “collectives:” 
communities, social networks, groups, teams, families; (b) 
Collective scenarios techniques, an extension of individual 
scenarios technique; (c) Group modeling techniques, an 
extension to groups of the classical user modeling techniques 
dedicated to individuals. These techniques aim to develop 
“models of groups, collaboration and communities [which] 
collect and structure the rich information describing 
interactions between users” [7]. We are currently exploring 
these avenues. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by grants from INRIA 
COLOR Action USABLEINTRANET and ANR Project ISICIL. 
The author thanks Sophie de Bonis, Sandra Belfils, and 
Anne-Laure Négri for stimulating discussions about persona-
based 
design, 
and 
anonymous 
reviewers 
for 
their 
constructive comments on an earlier version of this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Armstrong, A. Bartlett, A., M. Taylor, and A. Burman. Group 
Persona Visualization, IBM Hursley, 2008. Last access December 
2010 from: services.alphaworks.ibm.com/groupvis/ 
[2] 
A. Cooper. The Inmates Are Running the Asylum: Why High Tech 
Products Drive Us Crazy and How To Restore the Sanity. 
Indianapolis, IN: Macmillan, 1999. 
[3] 
A. 
Cooper 
and 
R.M. 
Reimann. 
About Face 2.0: The Essentials of Interaction Design, John Wiley and 
Sons, 2003. 
[4] 
Cooper Corp. Modelling [Phase of the Interaction Design Process]. 
Retrieved 
November 
2006 
from 
(no 
longer 
accessible): www.cooper.com/content/why_cooper/modeling.asp 
1007
[5] 
I.R. 
Floyd, 
M.C. 
Jones, 
and 
M.B. 
Twidale. 
Resolving 
Incommensurable Debates: A Preliminary Identification of Persona 
Kinds, Attributes, and Characteristics. Artifact, 2(1): 12-26, 2008. 
[6] 
F. Gandon et al.  ISICIL: Information Semantic Integration through 
Communities of Intelligence Online,  Proc. International Workshop 
on Web Intelligence and Virtual Enterprise (WIVE), at 10th IFIP 
Working Conference on Virtual Enterprises ( PRO-VE'09), 
Thessaloniki, Greece, 2009, pp. 1-25. 
[7] 
E. Gaudioso, A. Soller, and J. Vassileva (Eds). User Modeling to 
Support Groups, Communities and Collaboration. User Modeling and 
User-Adapted Interaction 16, Special Issue, 2006. 
[8] 
A. Giboin. Des “personas” aux “communitas” ou comment 
représenter des collectifs concrets particuliers pour aider à la 
conception de systèmes destinés à des collectifs, INRIA Sophia 
Antipolis, 
INRIA 
Color 
Action 
“UsableIntranet”, 
Working 
Document, December 2006. 
[9] 
A. Giboin, M. Leitzelman, E. Soulier, F. Bugeaud, V. Le Meur, F. 
Herledan, and A. Merle. Analyse des pratiques et des exigences pour 
les utilisateurs d'ISICIL, ANR Project ISICIL, ANR-08-CORD-011-
05, Deliverable ISICIL-ANR-RA01, 2009. 
[10] Goal Centric Corp. What Is a Persona Ecosystem? 2010. Last access 
December 
2010 
from: www.goalcentric.com/contentdisplay.asp?id=
 
[11] M. Kuniavsky. Extending a Technique: Group Personas, 2004, Last 
Access 
December 
2010 
from: www.boxesandarrows.com/view/extending_a_technique_group
_personas 
[12] T. Matthews, S. Whittaker, T. Moran, and M. Yang. Collaboration 
Personas: 
A 
Framework 
for 
Understanding 
and 
Designing 
Collaborative Workplace Tools. In Workshop Collective Intelligence 
in Organizations: Toward a Research Agenda at Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW), 2010, pp. 1-8. 
[13] G. Miller and L. Williams. Personas: Moving Beyond Role-based 
requirements Engineering. Microsoft and North Carolina State 
University, 2006.  
[14] D.A. Norman. Ad hoc Personas and Empathetic Focus. In J. Pruitt & 
T. Adlin (Eds.). The Persona Lifecycle: Keeping People in Mind 
during Product Design (pp. 154-157). Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
Morgan Kaufmann Press; Elsevier, 2006. 
[15] J. Pruitt and J. Grudin. Personas: Practice and Theory. Proceedings of 
the 2003 conference on Designing for user experiences. New York: 
ACM Press, 2003, pp 1-15. 
 
135
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

