Interacting with the Customers through New Technologies
Having a better understanding of the user's experience
Lucía Sánchez de la Guía, Marina Puyuelo Cazorla, Lola Merino Sanjuán
Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería del Diseño
Universitat Politècnica de València
Camino de Vera, s/n
46022 Valencia, Spain
E-mail: lusande1@etsid.upv.es, mapuca@ega.upv.es, mamesan@ega.upv.es
Abstract—
Nowadays,
new
technologies
and
information
systems are important tools to carry out many different
activities in daily life. The use of these new technologies is also
a means for getting information on the users’ experience. This
paper aims at giving a brief review of how users may
participate in the development process of products and
services, and how they communicate their needs and suggest
their preferences through these new interactive tools. This is a
preliminary study, which focuses on how companies may
incorporate the concept of Co-design into their proposals, in
order to add customer value. Our first findings show that,
consciously or not, users are participating more in the
development process. Thanks to the use of new technologies
and tools, their involvement has increased - and so have their
expectations and their perception of feeling empowered. It is
argued that a direct relation exists between the interaction of
users and their experience of the products or services.
Keywords- interactivity; virtual prototypes; user experience;
product development; user satisfaction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, having information from users’ experience
and their interaction with products and services is an
important aspect for companies and designers. The concept
of user experience is becoming a key term in the world of
interactive product design. The term itself lacks proper
theoretical definition, and is used in many different, even
contradictory, ways. Models and
frameworks on user
experience, as shown in Figure 1, have emerged in the last
ten years [1]. In the first stage of this preliminary study, we
review ideas to better understand why it is important for the
user to collaborate and participate in the development of the
product or service from the first stages. This paper aims at
discussing the areas in which users act through usability tests
and interaction tools. These new tools facilitate and increase
collaboration
between
users
and
companies.
Hence,
companies seek to analyze the results after collaborating with
users because they can provide greater knowledge on the
users’ needs. There are some case studies demonstrating that
a lack of understanding of the users’ needs results in a
reduction of production. So, it is essential that the interests of
users are taken into account. It is taken for granted that
customer satisfaction occurs when an experience meets or
exceeds the customer’s needs or wants of a service [2].
Based on these premises, the new process of interaction
can lead to increased user loyalty. This is possible through
the new interaction tools used by companies to obtain
valuable results, which they later interpret and study. Thanks
to the rapid advances in new technologies and to the
development of information systems, more interactive and
participative innovation has taken place in recent years. User
experience evaluation has become a useful tool to analyze
how a firm can design and create new products, services or
interfaces which respond to the characteristics and needs that
users would like to see fulfilled. Furthermore, authors like
Sang Lee, David Olson and Silvana Trimi [3] discuss the
strategies a firm uses to focus on innovation and the use of
new technologies. These authors seem to suggest that
innovation is directly related to the creation of value. They
justify that this has been possible because users are present in
the new development process, and they take part in it.
Internet plays an important role as an interactive,
multimedia technology for mass communication, which is
also low cost [4, 5, 6]. It allows consumers to have a wide
variety of virtual experiences with new products, and it
allows interaction between producers and consumers. With
more than one billion users [7], the Internet currently offers
an enormous pool of knowledge, which is impossible to find
elsewhere. According to von Hippel [8], users found in
online communities are a promising source of innovation.
Hence, the emergence of the Internet has facilitated unique
and inventive opportunities to capitalize on the innovative
potential and knowledge of users, resulting in what has been
termed as virtual customer integration [9].
302
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1.
Network representing co-occurrence of users’ keywords around innovation
Another
stage
of
research
should
focus
on
the
development and implementation of virtual interfaces. In that
regard, we found that is a useful tool to have a better
understanding of the future product or service. Also, users
could start to take part in the design and development
process.
Regarding this issue, the involvement of the user is
achieved thanks to the concept of co-creation, defined by
Prahalad and Ramaswamy [10] as the process of creating an
experience environment in which consumers can have an
active dialogue and co-construct personalized experiences.
They talk about how companies interact with customers, who
feel loyalty thanks to the exchange of ideas to create a new
product or service.
However, an aspect to analyze is the specific point in
time, or stage, during the creation process, when interaction
is most interesting. Anderson and Narus [11] analyze
customer collaboration during the development stage, that is,
in laboratory tests and with early prototypes. This is the stage
when companies need to decide between several possible
applications, and it would be the most interesting stage to
analyze user participation.
After analyzing these applications, obtained from the
collaboration between the company and the users, the
company has to analyze, using a prototype or proposed
model, if there could be advantages and benefits in the near
future.
Authors like Johann Füller, Hans Mühlbacher, Kurt
Matzler, and Gregor Jawecki [12] research how clients take
part in the virtual co-creation process and how they perceive
their involvement. They state that Co-production emerges as
a new form of collaboration between consumers and
companies, through the use of Information Technologies
(IT). This way, consumers can take on new roles throughout
the New Product Development NPD process. The empirical
study showed how Internet-based tools and technologies
contribute
to
the
consumers’
perceived
empowerment
through virtual new product co-creation activities. The
conclusion was that the level of empowerment experienced
depends on the design of the applied virtual interaction tool.
Moreover, there was an associated enjoyment of the virtual
interaction,
the
participants’
task
and
their
product
involvement, as well as their creativity and leading-user
characteristics.
After researching through different scientific databases,
we can say that the experience of the users is being analyzed
mainly in the areas of health care and new information
systems.
Thanks
to
this
previous
research,
we
can
corroborate that there is a lack of understanding of user
experience in the context of product design. Therefore, this is
a subject that we consider relevant and merits in-depth
research in the near future.
In the sections that follow, we explain the increasing role
of interaction using virtual tools. We also introduce the
relationship between user participation and user satisfaction,
as these are concepts which are directly related. The paper is
structured in the two sections, as follows:
In Section 1, we explain some interaction tools and user
participation during the design process, making reference to
some authors who support its importance. We also analyze
usability and user experience goals to get a wide view of the
interest of these methods to get further information about
them. At the same time, we introduce virtual reality as a new
medium for participation.
In Section 2, we explain how the use of IT opens up a
"virtual" context and an opportunity for customer integration
in the design process.
303
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Finally, in the discussion, we insist on the main idea that
there is a new landscape for design based on participation in
the design process.
II.
INTERACTION TOOLS AND USER PARTICIPATION
In view of the above, there is a need to establish the
concept of interacting tools because, as some authors state,
user interaction and participation offers advantages to the
firm. Recently, some case studies have shown that the new
interaction tools allow increasing the value and loyalty of
users via the Internet and the new information systems. In
this way, users can fulfill their goal because they are getting
involved, and they meet their real needs during the process
of developing a new product or service. Johann Füller and
Kurt Matzler [13] show how customers can be virtually
integrated into a company’s innovation process. New
interaction tools allow companies to gain valuable input from
customers via the Internet.
Needs are present during the entire development stage of
a new product or service, because they are considered as the
“desires of users”. In connection with this, it can be of
interest to mention the KANO model [14], often used to
identify customer needs in new product development.
Matzler and Hinterhuber [15] help to explain why customers
have difficulties expressing their needs. The model shows
that it is difficult for customers to express their latent needs,
as well as those which they take for granted. As a result, it is
interesting to develop an adequate environment in which
users can express their real needs and participate in the
development process. Regarding this, we could state that
new virtual interaction tools and virtual product experiences
help to overcome these problems and enable customers to
transfer their explicit and implicit knowledge to innovation
teams.
A.
Usability and user experience goals
The concept of usability has become important in recent
years, due especially to the important role of the user in the
process of development and design of products and services.
The goals of usability and user experience in today's society
have a great impact on new information systems and new
devices. We find numerous authors, such as Pharalay and
Ramasway, who have already studied this phenomenon in
multimedia mobiles and what kind of involvement or
interaction takes place.
Authors like Kathy Brittain White and Kwasi Amoako-
Gyampah
[16]
examine
some
contingencies
of
user
involvement and user satisfaction. User involvement has a
potential impact on the success of systems, and results are
obtained through a survey questionnaire to show that user
perception of their level of involvement has a direct, positive
and significant impact on user satisfaction. Therefore, we
could say that when users take part in the development of an
interaction tool, their level of satisfaction improves and they
bring relevant information to develop a new product or
service. However, the impact of user involvement in system
development and implementation is still an issue under
considerable debate.
In the same direction, research shows that there is a direct
relation between user participation and information systems,
and it shows that the strong participation of future users in
the design of information systems (IS) leads to successful
outcomes in user satisfaction.
In this respect, M. Mengoni, M. Germani, and M.
Peruzzini [17] state that, during product development,
usability tests allow to investigate product performance also
in terms of effectiveness. For instance, Virtual Reality (VR)
systems provide new modes of Human-Computer Interaction
(HCI) that can support usability testing in the early design
stages by adopting virtual prototypes to simulate product
experience.
Usability
tests
generally
allow
assessing
product
performance in terms of efficiency, effectiveness and user
satisfaction in order to reduce the gap between the perceived
and the designed product quality. The main concern in the
assessment of emotional usability is identifying product
features that stimulate an affective user response and its
translation into design requirements. Although usability tests
can support innovation, companies seldom use them during
the product development process due to the high costs
connected to their implementation. In these cases, the
measure of usability could be considered less relevant. But it
has been shown that these tests improve the process of an
enterprise and increase the value to its users.
The use of prototypes allows to include the sense of
touch, which has a great importance in the emotional
evaluation. It allows exploring products with the hands and
collecting information about materials and shapes. Carrying
out usability tests is not as easy as it seems in the beginning,
but it is clear that it helps to know the needs of the user. The
use of virtual prototypes allows conducting usability tests in
the early design stages. However, an additional problem is
that only a few usability aspects can be measured in the
virtual
environment,
such
as
posture
and
occlusion
parameters. User satisfaction in terms of pleasantness is
difficult to assess, as virtual prototypes poorly support
emotional and touch and feel analysis [18].
B.
Virtual reality and participation
As a consequence of integrating customers into the
creation of value, new methods are needed to allow the
active
involvement
of
customers
in
new
product
development [19]. Especially, virtual product experiences
enable customers to transfer not only what they want to
know, but also their unknown needs. As recently shown by
Matzler and Bailom [20], companies which are able to
identify customer needs and align them with their core
competencies are those that champion innovation. Such
companies are more profitable than others. Nowadays, new
product development cannot be conceived without powerful
three-dimensional (3D) modeling software to help create
products better and faster.
Taking this concept a step further, manufacturers may
use virtual prototypes to integrate customer ideas and needs
into new product development via the Internet. Thus,
customers can get their hands on innovations long before the
design has been finalized, when changes to suit their
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

opinions and wishes can be done quickly and at low cost.
However, in recent decades there has been a debate about
which are the correct tools for testing prototypes. In
response, Dahan and Srinivasan’s [21] show that virtual
prototype testing online provides almost identical results as
using physical prototypes, and is easier and cheaper. In
connection with this, we conclude that virtual reality and
virtual prototyping are fully relevant tools. Today the
prototype is an interesting tool, which is possible thanks to
the rapid advance of new technologies and information
systems.
III.
VIRTUAL CUSTOMER INTEGRATION IN CO-DESIGN
Virtual customer integration represents “one of the most
promising areas of development (…) that the new virtual
customer environments make possible” [22]. In a virtual
environment,
consumers
communicate
their
knowledge
through an electronic interface, with no direct personal
contact with the product or service. They do not get
immediate personal feedback. Thus, the virtual environment
must be created in a way that enables and motivates
consumers
to
play
an
active
role
in
New
Product
Development (NPD), and to make them participate in further
NPD projects. Information Technologies (IT) enable new
forms of producer-consumer collaboration in NPD processes.
Rooted in collaboration through the use of IT, the co-
production mode has emerged as an important and growing
production method. Customers can assume a number of
different roles in the NPD process [23]. In the ideation phase,
customers can be a resource through interactive multimedia
tools, virtual brainstorming, or virtual focus groups. In the
design and development phase, customers can take on the
role of co-creators, and tools such as Web-based conjoint
analysis,
virtual
user
design,
Internet-based
design
competitions, tool kits, and so forth, allow users to express
their preferences and to design their own products. In the test
and launch phase, IT tools such as virtual concept testing can
help to provide valuable feedback on products, services or
interface.
Such co-creation tools enable consumers to realistically
experience virtual prototypes in real-world usage scenarios,
long
before
they
actually
come
into
existence
[24].
Displaying
design
and
feature
options,
engineering
constraints and price effects in real time, with easy-to-use
and drag-and-drop options, support consumers in creating
their ideal product.
Technologies and interaction tools enable consumers to
engage virtually in meaningful and challenging NPD tasks to
effectively share their knowledge with producers, making
them feel like they are autonomously contributing to the
collaboration. Also, if they believe that their input will be
seriously considered, these tools may provide consumers
with a sense of mastery. Thus, participants in virtual co-
creation may feel empowered.
However, there is a lack of case studies shedding light on
how to virtually integrate customers in practice. The detailed
missing information is: how to identify qualified customers
on the Internet; how to motivate them and how to interact
with them, and under what conditions are users are willing
and able to share their knowledge with producers.
Thus, it remains necessary to focus on the work of design
in this field, in order to identify which are the interactions
that are useful and give some guarantee of higher success
both for users and for the firm. The research show that
virtual customer integration provides valuable input for new
product development. A number of new tools to interact
virtually with customers can be found in the literature [25,
26].
Other authors suggest that, by integrating users of virtual
worlds into an interactive new product development process,
companies can tap into the innovative potential of customers
using the latest technology [27]. They argue that the latest
advances in information and communication technologies
enrich the interaction process and can improve the new
product development process.
DISCUSSION
This paper has sought to offer a perspective on the
breadth of the concept of getting information from users by
taking advantage of the new communication tools. The
development of different virtual environments is promising
as they give users an active role in NPD. In this article, we
argue that user participation increases user satisfaction
because users feel that they take part in the co-creation
process.
In view of this, it is of interest to develop an adequate
environment where users can express their real needs and are
able to participate in new development processes. Nowadays,
there are new interacting tools that allow interaction between
users and companies, and generate valuable feedback.
Virtual interaction and virtual product experiences help users
know what their real needs are. Usability tests, play an
important role in narrowing the gap with the “perceived
quality” of the designed products. Therefore, usability tests
increase the value that users give to products. When users
take part in the development process through interactive
tools, they improve their level of satisfaction and bring
relevant information to the companies. As this paper shows,
user involvement has a direct, positive and significant impact
on user satisfaction.
As a summary, this article shows how new technologies
offer a perfect setting for users, due to their variety and
interactivity, and this experience provides information. For
this reason, it is important to work on systems that allow
greater communication with users to let them have greater
participation in the design process. Some companies have
seen participation in design as a new way to engage
customers and achieve their loyalty.
In this sense, in future studies we will perform case
studies
that
allow
us
to
analyze
the
feasibility
and
effectiveness of this client-company communication.
305
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank Cátedra Stadler at the School of
Design Engineering for the support provided to participate in
this Conference, and for the possibility of researching
experiences of user participation in the field of interior
design for public transport.
REFERENCES
[1]
Battarbee, Katja Koskinen, Ilpo , 2008.
Co- Experience:
Product Experience as social interaction. Elsevier B.V, pp.
461-476.
[2]
R. Oliver, “Cognitive, affective, and attribute bases of the
satisfaction response”. Journal of Consumer Research, 20(3),
1993, pp. 418– 430.
[3]
M.
Sang,
O.
David
and
Silvana,
“Co-innovation:
convergenomics,
collaboration,
and
co-creation
for
organizational values,” Management Decision, 50 (5), 2012,
pp. 817-831.
[4]
E. Dahan and J. R. Hauser. “The virtual customer,” Journal of
Product Innovation Management 19 (5), 2002, pp. 332–353.
[5]
E. Dahan and J. T. Hauser, “Managing a dispersed product
development process”, In: Weitz, B., Wensley, R. (Eds.),
Handbook of Marketing. Sage Publications Inc, Thousand
Oaks, CA, 2002.
[6]
G. Urban and J. R. Hauser ‘‘Listening in to find and explore
new combinations of customer needs,” Journal of Marketing,
68, April 2004, pp.72–87.
[7]
Almanac,
http://www.c-i-a.com/pr0106.htm.
Accessed:
August, 2006.
[8]
E.
Von
Hippel,
Democratizing
Innovation.
MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 2005.
[9]
T.
Kohlera,
K.
Matzlera,
and
J.
Füller,
“Avatar-based
innovation: Using virtual worlds for real-world innovation,”
vol. 2, June–July 2009, pp. 395–407.
[10] Prahalad,
C.K.
and
V.
Ramaswamy.
“Co-creation
Experiences: The Next Practice in Value Creation,” Journal of
Interactive Marketing, 18 (3), (2004), pp. 5–14.
[11] J. Anderson and J. A. Narus. Selectively pursuing more of
your customer's business. MIT Sloan Management Review,
44(3), 2003, pp.42–49.
[12] J. Füller, H. Mühlbacher, K. Matzler, and G. Jawecki,
“Consumer
Empowerment
through
Internet-Based
Co-
creation,” Journal of Management Information Systems, vol.
26 2009–10, pp. 71–102.
[13] J. Füller and K. Matzler, Virtual product experience and
customer
participation—A
chance
for
customer-centred,
really new products. Technovation vol.2, 2007, pp.378-387.
[14] N. Kano, Attractive quality and must be quality. Hinshitsu
(Quality) 14 (2), 1984 (in Japanese), pp. 147–156.
[15] K. Matzler and H. H. Hinterhuber, How to make product
development projects more successful by integrating Kano’s
model
of
customer
satisfaction
into
quality
function
deployment. Technovation vol.1, 1998, pp. 25–38.
[16] K. B. White and K. A. Gyampah,”.User involvement and user
satisfaction. An exploratory contigency model”, Information
& Management vol. 25, 1993, pp.1-10.
[17] M. Mengoni, M. Germani and M. Peruzzini, “Products
experience: How can virtual prototyping improve usability
testing? “, In Innovative Developments in Design and
Manufacturing - Advanced Research in Virtual and Rapid
Prototyping, 2010, pp. 505–514.
[18] M. Mengoni, M. Bordegoni, G. Mandorli, F. Peruzzini,
“Performing Ergonomic Analysis in Virtual Environments”: A
Structured
Protocol
to
Assess
Humans
Interaction,
Proceedings of the ASME International Design Engineering
Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in
Engineering
Conference,
IDETC/CIE,New
York,
USA,
August 2008, pp. 3–6.
[19] G. L. Lilien, P. D. Morrison, K. Searls, M. Sonnack, and E.
von Hippel, “Performance assessment of the lead user idea-
generation
process
for
new
product
development”,
Management Science vol. 48 (8), 2002, pp. 1042–1059.
[20] K. Matzler and F. Bailom, “Top management innovation
orientation, market orientation and competence management
as antecedents of product innovation success and firm
performance”. In: 13th International Product Development
Management Conference, Milan, 2006.
[21] E. Dahan and V. Srinivasan, “The predictive power of
internet-based product concept testing using visual depiction
and animation”. Journal of Product Innovation Management
vol.17, 2000, pp.99–109.
[22] E. Prandelli, G. Verona, and D. Raccagni, “Diffusion of Web-
based product innovation”, California Management Review,
vol. 48, April 2006, pp-109–135.
[23] S. Nambisan, Designing virtual customer environments for
new product development: Toward a theory. Academy of
Management Review, vol. 27, pp. 392–413, March 2002.
[24] J. Füller and K. Matzler, Virtual product experience and
customer participation—A chance for customer centered,
really new products. Technovation, vol.27, July- August 2007,
pp.378–387.
[25] E. Von Hippel, “Perspective: User toolkits for innovation”,
The Journal of Product Innovation Management vol.18 (4),
2001, pp. 247–257.
[26] E.
Von
Hippel,
Democratizing
Innovation.
MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 2005.
[27] T.
Kohlera,
K.
Matzlera,
and
J.
Füller,
“Avatar-based
innovation: Using virtual worlds for real-world innovation,”
vol.
2,
June–July
2009,
pp
395–407
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

