Effect of non-Uniﬁed Interaction Design of in-car
Applications on Driving Performance, Situational
Awareness and Task Performance
Julia Manner, Christopher Kohl, Michael Schermann, Helmut Krcmar
Chair for Information Systems
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen
Boltzmannstraße 3
85748 Garching bei M¨unchen, Germany
Email: {julia.manner, christopher.kohl, michael.schermann, krcmar}@in.tum.de
Abstract—It is common understanding that human-computer
interaction (HCI) systems should be designed uniﬁed. However,
ensuring a uniﬁed interaction design (UID) is a cost intensive
and time-consuming venture. Especially the automotive industry
struggles with exceeding costs and time-to-market pressure as
drivers want to stay connected and informed while driving.
Therefore, we investigated the effect of non-uniﬁed interaction
design (NUID). We report on a simulator study with 44 par-
ticipants in which we studied the effect of a NUID within an
automotive HCI system consisting of ﬁve in-car applications. We
measured the effect on driving performance, task performance
and situational awareness when carrying out tasks. We found no
signiﬁcant effect of UIDs. We offer an explanation based on HCI
and cognitive ergonomics literature.
Keywords-interaction design; in-car applications; cognitive
load; multi-tasking; multiple-tasks; task complexity
I. INTRODUCTION
It is common understanding that HCI systems should be
designed consistently to reduce the effort to use the technology
[1]. Since the mid-nineties [2], literature considers consistent
and standardized HCI design to be desirable. Accordingly,
software designers generally implement UIDs. To give an
example: the button ”x” at the top right of a window to close
programs or the index tab with partial similar options like save
have consistently been implemented. But, ensuring a UID for
an IT system with various functionality is a cost intensive
and time consuming venture [3], [4]. Every application not
only needs to be tested on functionality and performance, but
also on (subjective) characteristics like usability, design and
compatibility which cannot be evaluated easily [4]. By contrast
to this, the standard approach researchers acknowledge that
usability needs to be engineered speciﬁcally for the context of
use for the system under investigation [5]. In-car applications
are now penetrating the automotive sector as it is widely recog-
nized that drivers want to stay connected and informed while
driving [6], [7]. Moreover, to serve this promising market,
car manufacturers must provide various and innovative in-car
applications [8], [9]. Consequently, the amount of money car
manufacturers have to spend on providing in-car applications
with a UID is exceeding [10]. We investigate the effect of a
NUID for this new domain and – therefore - if the common
understanding still holds in the automotive domain. We study
the effect of a NUID of in car applications by proposing an
experiment with two groups. The control group was provided
with an in-car system that consists of ﬁve similarly designed
applications with a UID. Therefore, the UID of a premium
car manufacturer was imitated. The test group used the same
applications but each application had a different interaction
design. Besides, each group was instructed to carry out several
tasks while driving in a simulator. A signiﬁcant difference
in consistency and standardization and hence the usability
between the two groups was veriﬁed with a questionnaire after
the usage including the empirically acknowledged construct of
effort expectancy from the uniﬁed acceptance theory proposed
by Venkatesh [1]. We measured the effect of NUID on driving
performance, task performance, and situational awareness.
No signiﬁcant effect of NUID on driving performance or
situational awareness was found. However, a signiﬁcant effect
on the driver’s task performance was measured. The remainder
of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, the
theoretical background of our study will be explained. We
then outline the study completely. Henceforth, we report on
the results of our study and conclude with a summary of our
ﬁndings and prospects of future research.
II. BACKGROUND AND THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Literature of usability design [11] and on cognitive er-
gonomics [3], [12] emphasize the importance of ease of use.
Thereby, standards and conformity are considered as crucial
as they reduce the effort to operate HCI systems. In non-
safety critical environments ease of operation is considered
an important factor for user’s technology acceptance [13], but
in a safety critical environment a NUID is endangering people
[3]. Answering the need to measure the ease of use which is
part of the acceptance, theory researcher proposed measuring
instruments like the Technology Acceptance Model proposed
by Davis in 1989 [13] or the Uniﬁed Theory of Acceptance
and Use of Technology (UTAUT) model, which is a further
development of the ﬁrst [14]. Both models are empirically
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

validated and include a construct for measuring the effort users
feel they need when operating the system. From this matured
area of consumer behavior research, we use the construct of
effort expectancy from the UTAUT model that evaluates the
”degree of ease associated with the use of the IT system”
and investigate if we provide a sound research design. Effort
expectancy of users is measured by the following four items
proposed by Venkatesh [15]:
1) Interaction with the system is clear and understandable
2) Ease of becoming skillful at using the system
3) Evaluation of the ease to use the system
4) Evaluation of the learnability of system use
Taking these in several domains [15], [16] applied indicators
for effort expectancy into account, it is likely that a NUID
increases the effort to use.
H1: A NUID leads to higher effort expectancy.
A. Driver’s distraction by an additional task
Driving is a cognitively demanding multi-tasking activity
[17], [18] which is competing for the limited resource of
cognitive capacity [12] when an additional task like op-
erating in-car applications or speaking on the phone take
place simultaneously. Hence, it is not surprising that several
studies show a negative effect of additional tasks on driving
performance revealed by distraction [19], [20]. According to
the American Automobile Association for Trafﬁc Safety, a
driver is distracted when he is ”delayed in the recognition
of information needed to safely accomplish the driving task
because some event, activity, object or person within or outside
the vehicle compelled or tended to induce the driver’s shifting
attention away from the driving task” [21]. A study by Lee
et al. [22] even found out that by increasing the operating
complexity of an IT system, likewise an increase of cognitive
resources of the operator needed is recorded. Similar results
were reported by Gkikas and Richardson [23] as they found
out that an increasingly demanding conversation has a negative
impact on driving performance. Moreover, Besnard and Cacitti
[3] discovered that interface changes in a working environment
cause accidents. Going along with these results, it can be
concluded that an IT system which causes more effort to
operate has a negative effect on driving performance [12].
Following this argumentation, we expect a NUID to have a
negative effect on driving performance. This leads us to the
following hypothesis:
H2: A NUID leads to a decreased driving performance
B. Task performance
Task performance is deﬁned by the time a user needs to
complete a task and the quality the user has performed [24].
Task quality can be measured by the number of mistakes made.
According to Burns et. al. [25], a driver needs to maintain
an overview of his overall plan. Task duration is a measure
that needs to be monitored when studying such an effect.
This is because an additional task competes with the driving
task for limited cognitive resources. A negative effect on task
performance can be assumed when the effort of carrying out
the task is signiﬁcantly higher through a NUID. Hence, we
propose the following hypothesis:
H3: A NUID leads to a lower task performance
C. Situational Awareness
Proactive safe driving without considering additional tasks
can be considered as multi-tasking [26]. Not only must the
driver drive, but he also needs to monitor and process the
environment. A concept that integrates this aspect is called
”situational awareness”. Endsley [27] simply deﬁnes it as
”knowing what is going on around you” or in more detail
he [28] deﬁnes it as ”the perception of the elements in
the environment within a volume of time and space, the
comprehension of their meaning, and the projection of their
status in the near future”. The concept was introduced in
aviation psychology more than 24 years ago. Therefore, in
this study, not only the driving performance was measured, but
also the situational awareness. A poor system design, which
disregards usability guidelines such as uniﬁed interaction and
therefore demands more effort to carry out an instruction, leads
to a limited situational awareness [29]. Ma and Kaber (2005)
found a similar result. They were able to prove that reducing
the effort to drive by an adaptive cruise control leads to an
improvement of situational awareness. For this reason, we
claim that the working memory of an individual is limited
[12], [19] which is in accordance to Baumann et al. [19] who
state that cognitive load ”withdraws resources necessary for
comprehension of the current situation” which often leads to
a phenomena called ”looked but did not see”. Therefore, we
propose the following hypothesis:
H4: A NUID leads to a lower situational awareness
III. USER STUDY
A. Experiment design
The study participants were undergraduate and graduate
students from Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen with a mean
age of 26 years. Each volunteer with a driver license was
eligible to participate in the study. The study was announced
in lectures as well as in ﬂyers around the campus. We attracted
participants by rafﬂing an Apple iPhone 4S. In order to test
the hypotheses, we divided the participants into two groups.
Each group had to operate the same ﬁve in car applications
to complete the same three tasks but with a different interac-
tion design approach. In the control group, each application
displayed the interaction design of a major car manufacturer.
In the test group, the applications had different interaction
designs. The experiment was conducted as follows. First, some
general information about in-car applications and an agenda
of the experiment was given to the participants. Then, each
participant ﬁlled a questionnaire containing questions about
demographics and driving experience. After completing the
survey, the participants were shown how to drive the driving
simulator and how to operate the given applications. After
completing all tasks, a second questionnaire had to be ﬁlled
out which contained questions regarding the tasks. These
questions were applied to measure the situational awareness.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1.
Driving Simulator
The answers were graded from 1 (wrong answer) to 3 (correct
answer) because the participants could answer the questions in
their own words. We also asked questions regarding the effort
expectancy. Moreover, in this experiment, the participants were
advised that the odds of winning the iPhone increase according
to their driving performance. This incentive was used for
substituting the natural human avoidance of suffering damage,
which we would otherwise not be able to attain realistically
with a simulator study. Furthermore, a constant speed of 40
km/h was required. All participants obeyed this request. Thus,
it can be determined that throughout the whole experiment the
complexity of the driving task is constant between the groups.
The similarity of the tasks the participant had to perform
and understand is ensured by an instruction and procedure
document for the experiment supervisor. The instructions were
read to all participants.
B. Driving simulator
To measure the driver’s distraction, the study participants
had to sit in a driving simulator as shown in Figure 1. They
were instructed to fasten the seat belt and to use the provided
Logitech Driving Force GT steering wheel and pedals. While
the driving simulation was shown on a 27-inch screen, the
applications were displayed on a separate screen. Both groups
operated the in-car applications with the same controller with
a jog dial to eliminate potential confounding inﬂuences from
the controller [30]. The controller allowed the users to rotate
and push the jog dial or nudge it in a speciﬁc direction.
The controller also provides direct access to the functions
”menu”, ”back”, and ”navigation” when enabled in the active
application.
C. Application development
We used three different interaction designs among ﬁve in
car applications. For example, one interaction design is to
rotate the jog dial clockwise to select the next item. The
items were always arranged vertically with the ﬁrst item at
TABLE I
DEFINITION OF MDEV
Description
Deﬁnition
Number of measured data points
N
Distance difference
∆yi = yi+1 − yi−1
2
(1)
Actual-Reference-Deviation
xa,i = |xi − xi,ref|
(2)
Length of trip
S = PN
i=1 ∆yi
(3)
Mean
Reference-Actual
Deviation
(MDEV)
xa = 1
S
Pi=1
N
xa,i∆yi
(4)
the top of the screen. The applications were implemented
with the SDK of a major car manufacturer to ensure the
same design and functionality for both groups. We speciﬁcally
excluded any signs of the manufacturer’s brand to avoid any
brand-speciﬁc prejudices or preferences. The applications were
designed to help the participants to go through a predeﬁned
scenario consisting of three tasks which should make the ex-
periment as realistic as possible. We also developed a logging
application which recorded speciﬁc decisions the participants
could take in the scenario while using the applications. The
study participants were instructed to memorize as much of the
displayed information as possible. Each participant operated
a movie rental service before starting the actual experiment.
This was to ensure that all participants were familiar with the
controller and the general concept of using applications in a
car-like environment. The ﬁrst task in the scenario was to book
a hotel room in a given hotel. The application displayed the
most important information like the price for a room, a rating
(1 to 5 stars) of the hotel and a short description which required
the driver to look on the screen for a longer time span in order
to get all necessary information and complete the booking
process. After having completed the booking process, the hotel
had to be set as the new navigation target and the route had
to be displayed on a map in the navigation application. The
second task was to book a table for two people in a restaurant
near a tourist attraction in Munich at 9 pm. The restaurant
then had to be added to the navigation targets and a map
with the current route had to be displayed on a map in the
navigation application. Again, many details were provided
in the restaurant application, out of which some had to be
remembered. The last task was to display the weather for the
evening. The weather application displays the weather forecast
with large symbols so that a short glance at the screen was
sufﬁcient to get the information.
D. Measurement instruments
The lane change test (LCT) is acknowledged by the Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization for being cost-efﬁcient,
reliable and a simple tool to measure driver’s performance
while carrying out an additional task [31], [32]. The LCT
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 2.
Driving Simulator
measures the mean reference-actual deviation (MDEV), i.e.
the mean deviation between the reference lane and the actual
driven lane. The formal deﬁnition of MDEV is shown in Table
I. Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of a section of
a LCT ﬁle. The test was applied by several authors which
acknowledged the suitability of the tool [25], [32]. Bruyas
et al. [33] reviewed the sensitivity of the LCT and found
it excellent for differentiating between the execution of an
additive task and the sole driving task. The LCT also allows
setting a speciﬁc maximum speed and enables to provide the
same driving challenge for each participant so that a direct
comparison is possible and thus makes it especially suitable
for experimental studies with simulators [31]. Hence, we chose
the LCT for measuring the driver’s distraction in our study.
The LCT tool was conﬁgured to allow a maximum speed of
40 km/h in order to simulate a typical driving situation in
Munich with an average speed of 32 km/h [34]. The study
participants were instructed to accelerate fully in order to
maintain the same speed throughout the driving part of the
experiment. We incentivized serious driving by including the
driving performance as a criterion for winning the iPhone. The
LCT was started after each participant indicated that he or she
was ready.
IV. DATA ANALYSIS
A. Sample characteristics
44 licensed drivers (36 male and 8 female) with a mean
age of 26 participated in this study. This particular age range
was selected to represent the generation of future drivers.
The mean mileage was 5,200 kilometers per year. In the
study, there were 30 smartphone user and ten participants had
experience with in-car applications. In each group there were
22 participants. Although we assigned each participant with a
random distribution, there were some differences. In the NUID
group the amount of females was slightly higher (5) than in
the group with the UID (3). Furthermore, the mean mileage
per year in the group with UID was higher (12.368km) than
in the group with NUID (8.840km).
B. Statistical analysis
We ﬁrst inspected the boxplots of the data, if there were any
outliers. We found outliers in the measurements of MDEV, task
completion time and effort expectancy (see Figure 3-6). We
checked that we did not make an error and therefore chose to
keep the outliers. As the distributions of these values have the
same shape in both groups, we applied a Mann-Whitney test
to determine, if there are differences between the groups.
Figure 3.
Boxplot of the MDEV distribution
Figure 4.
Boxplot of the task completion time distribution
MDEV: The test did not show signiﬁcant differences in
MDEV between the UID (Mdn = 0.923m) and the NUID
(Mdn = 0.904m), U = 221, z = -0.493, p = 0.662. The NUID
group even has a slightly lower MDEV (see Figure 3) i.e. the
participants in this group drove slightly better than in the UID
group.
Task performance: Task performance is measured by the
quality of execution and the failures occurring by carrying out
the tasks., e.g., booking a table only for one person instead
of two. The test shows a signiﬁcant difference between the
UID (Mdn = 175s) and the NUID (Mdn = 213s), U = 363, z
= 2.840, p = 0.005. Therefore, the UID group completed the
tasks signiﬁcantly faster. Figure 4 shows that there are also
more outliers in the non UID group. The circle indicates a
normal outlier, that has a distance of 1.5 box lengths to the
edge of their box whereas the star indicates an extreme outlier,
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 5.
Boxplot of the effort expectancy distribution
Figure 6.
Boxplot of the situational awareness grades distribution
that has a distance of 3 box lengths to the edge of their box.
We assume that the outliers had serious difﬁculties to operate
the applications. The second aspect of task performance, the
quality of task completion, showed no difference at all. In both
groups, we had two participants who deviated from the given
scenario in one aspect by e.g. booking a room in the wrong
hotel. We therefore only consider the task completion time for
measuring task performance.
Effort expectancy: The test shows signiﬁcant differences in
the mean of all four dimensions of effort expectancy (see
theoretical background) between the UID (Mdn = 6.13) and
the NUID (Mdn = 5.63), U = 158, z = -1.982, p = 0.047. So
the participants in the NUID group recognized a decrease of
the ease of use as they have rated it signiﬁcantly lower than
the participants in the UID group (see Figure 5).
Situational awareness: In order to measure situational
awareness, the participants had to answer several questions
about the characteristics of the hotel they had booked or the
restaurant where they freely chose to book a table. The answers
to the questions were graded and we examined the mean grade
of all questions. There were no outliers in the boxplot of the
mean grades (see Figure 6), the Q-Q plot showed a normal
distribution and Levene’s test for equality of variances showed
the homogeneity of variances for the mean grades (p = 0.657).
Therefore, we applied an independent samples t-test. The t-test
did not show a signiﬁcant difference between the UID (M =
2.39, SD = 0.200) and the NUID (M = 2.43, SD = 0.195);
t(42) = -0.667, p = 0.508 . Both groups showed good results
regarding situational awareness as the grade 3 was the best
possible grade if every answer was answered correctly.
C. Result discussion
Our proposed hypotheses about the effect caused by a NUID
in the automotive domain, were derived from the ﬁelds of sit-
uational awareness, marketing and previous studies of driver’s
distraction and cognitive ergonomics. We could conﬁrm our
ﬁrst hypothesis. Indeed, a NUID leads to a signiﬁcantly higher
effort expectancy perceived by drivers. Contrary to that, we
could not conﬁrm H2 and H3. There was neither a signiﬁcant
difference in driving performance nor in situational awareness
detected by the applied statistical tests. H4 however was
conﬁrmed. The task performance is reduced by a NUID.
Although there was no difference in task quality, the second
measure of task performance the time to complete the tasks
was measured to be signiﬁcantly longer. According to Burns
et al. [25], task completion time is only an indirect measure
that does not have an impact on driver’s safety. Literature is
consistent that the cognitive capacity of humans is limited
[35]. When humans perform multiple tasks simultaneously,
these tasks are in competition to each other for the limited
resource of cognitive capacity. Based on Besnard and Cacitti
[3], we notice that humans allocate that resource according
to their respective goals. Based on our results, we claim
that performing a task with a NUID causes not only more
effort but also a different cognitive load for the participants.
Complexity is an acknowledged increase factor for cognitive
capacity [20]. Hence, we conclude a NUID that leads to a
higher number of user interactions for successful selection of
bookings or categories. This not only enhances complexity
but also cognitive load. This conclusion is also in agreement
to Bensard and Cacitty [3] who report the changing interface
design increases the cognitive resources needed for operating
a task. Our observations of the effect of an additive task
cognitive load increase are in harmony with previous research
and suggest that drivers allocate their existing limited cognitive
capacity proactively according to their goals [3]. We found
no evidence that drivers change the allocation of cognitive
resources for driving and situational awareness while driving,
if the task complexity of the additive task is increased. Our
results rather show that drivers start to multiplex the additive
task. Based on the assumption of a limited cognitive capacity,
we conclude that this is the only option for drivers to carry
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

out the task without enhanced failure rate or a performance
decrease in driving or situational awareness. Moreover, we
assume a connection between cognitive load intensiﬁcation
and task completion time in a multi-task situation where the
additive task has a low priority for the user as shown in
Figure 4. We emphasize that this correlation is only appliciable
for additive low priority tasks. In safety critical evironments
where multi-tasking is necessary, the allocation decision of the
user may not be possible as presented [3]. Results observing
from other authors like Ma and Kaber [36] which study the
effect of increasing conversations complexity while driving
reveal opposing results. However, we argue that a driver
needs to answer his conversation partner. That is why a
conversational task while driving cannot be easily multiplexed.
This assumption is also in accordance with previous results.
According to Broadbent [37] and Salvucci et al. [17], the
concept of multi-tasking is always carried out by a series
of temporal multiplexing. People are multiplexing when they
are ”sequentially allocating the available attention on a task”
[17]. Our results indicate that the time slots allocated for
situational awareness, driving and accomplishing tasks remain
the same as the respective goals of the participants do not
change [3]. Thus, the attention that is left to allocate for the
tasks remain the same, users need more time when the task is
more complex. The presented discussion shows that although
our results may surprise, they can be integrated very well in
the previous research and complement it with new insights.
However, there are some limitations to our study. First, we
examined the effect of ignoring standard and conformity only
on one example: the UID. Although this is an outstandingly
important example [11], there are different manipulations pos-
sible whose effects could be completely different in the auto-
motive domain. Second, we provided a sound research design
to achieve the presented expected results. The two treatments
presented were demonstrated to cause signiﬁcantly different
effort expectancy. Although effort expectancy is an empirically
tested construct that is widely acknowledged measure, it is
not a measurement instrument to measure cognitive load. An
experimental design also has a severe drawback. Building an
artiﬁcial environment like proposed does not reﬂect the real
world. Especially, events while driving are difﬁcult to simulate
due to many unpredictable factors. Therefore, the external
validity of our experiment design is only partly fulﬁlled [38].
Furthermore, although the LCT is an ISO standard [31], it only
simulates driving to a certain degree. For this experiment, we
propose a speed of 40 km/h. Thereby, we were simulating the
average speed of driving in a city like Munich [34]. Due to
this fact, the results may not be generalized for other driving
situations. At last, this study is limited by a gender bias as
we recruited more male than female students. According to
Petzold et al. [39] the comparison of simulator studies shows
a difference between driving and task performance regarding
the gender.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We investigated the effect of a NUID of in-car applications
on drivers. As driving solely can be considered as multi-
tasking [18] since the driver must not only drive, but also
realize and comprehend the situation around him, we measured
the driving performance as well as the situational awareness.
Besides, the task performance was measured to cover also
this factor of cognitive capacity consumer. Surprisingly, we
could not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant effect on driver’s performance and
situational awareness. Only the task performance decreased.
Although, the task failure rate showed no signiﬁcant effect
between the groups, task completion time of the drivers
increased signiﬁcantly. According to Burns et al. [25], task
completion time is only an indirect measure that does not have
an impact on driver’s safety.
The proposed results also contribute to literature. Although
situational awareness and cognitive capacity are seen as im-
portant concepts for understanding driving performance, they
are not well understood [35], [36]. There are key gaps in liter-
ature as researchers still wonder what compromises situational
awareness while driving [35]. Although, this research does not
provide factors compromising situational awareness, it shows
that an IT system that can be suspended and respectively
can be operated slower have not a signiﬁcant negative factor
on drivers. Moreover, it indicates that there is a correlation
between task complexity and therefore cognitive demand and
task completion time for additive tasks in the automotive
domain.
Our results also have a practical value. We could not ﬁnd
evidence of an endangering of a NUID. Consequently, this
results leads in-car application designer to further test the
topic. As the costs of ensuring UID are enormous, a lesson
of some tests for usability could be a promising perspective.
Besides, the experiment shows that the adoption of results
from other domains is critical and some guidelines for design
should be tested again in this domain.
Finally, we suggest two further research directions. Ac-
cording to Endsley [12] and others [40] the cognitive load
needed for operating a system can be reduced by experience
and further enhance performance on the primary driving task.
Repeating the experiment with participants that are trained to
operate the in-car applications could provide further insights.
Furthermore, the effect of predeﬁned pauses when operating
the system while driving, forcing more attention to the road
should be investigated. As the allocation of attention for
multiple tasks is a key sub-skill of situational awareness [26]
new insights for road safety could be detected.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, “User
acceptance of information technology: Toward a uniﬁed view,” MIS
Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 425–478, 2003.
[2] J. Nielsen, L. A. Blatt, J. Bradford, and P. Brooks, “Usability inspection
methods,” p. 2, 1994.
[3] D. Besnard and L. Cacitti, “Interface changes causing accidents. an
empirical study of negative transfer,” Human-Computer Studies, vol. 62,
p. 20, 2005.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[4] K. Ehrlich and J. Rohn, “Cost justiﬁcation of usability engineering: A
vendor’s perspective,” pp. 73–110, 1994.
[5] C. Harvey, N. A. Stanton, C. A. Pickering, M. McDonald, and
P. Zheng, “A usability evaluation toolkit for in-vehicle information
systems (iviss),” Applied ergonomics, vol. 42, no. 4, p. 12, 2011.
[6] F. Alt, D. Kern, F. Schulte, B. Pﬂeging, A. S. Shirazi, and A. Schmidt,
“Enabling micro-entertainment in vehicles based on context informa-
tion,” p. 8, 2010.
[7] D. Basacik, N. Reed, and R. Robbins, “Smartphone use while driving -
a simulator study,” Transport Research Laboratory, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[8] Mercer, “Future automotive lndustry structure (fast) 2015,” Heinrich
Druck + Medien, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[9] R. Reichwald, H. Krcmar, and S. Reindl, Mobile Dienste im Auto
der Zukunft Konzeption, Entwicklung, Pilotierung.
Lohmar-K¨oln:
Reichwald, R., Krcmar, H., Reindl, S., 2007.
[10] A. Zauner, H. Hoffmann, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, Automotive
Software and Service Engineering (ASSE) - an exploration of challenges
and trends in an industry experts’ view. Norderstedt: Books on Demand,
2010, pp. 61–74.
[11] J. Nielsen, Usability engineering, 1st ed.
Boston: Academic Press,
1993.
[12] M. R. Endsley, B. Bolt´e, and D. G. Jones, Designing for Situation
Awareness: An Approach to User-Centered Design.
New York: Taylor
& Francis Inc., 2003.
[13] F. D. Davis, R. P. Bagozzi, and P. R. Warshaw, “User acceptance
of computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical models,”
Management Science, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 982–1003, 1989.
[14] V. Venkatesh, V. Ramesh, and A. P. Massey, “Understanding usability
in mobile commerce,” Communications of the ACM - Mobile computing
opportunities and challenges, vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 53–56, 2003.
[15] V. Venkatesh and V. Ramesh, “Web and wireless site usability: Under-
standing differences and modeling use,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 30, no. 1,
pp. 181–205, 2006.
[16] M. Williams, N. Rana, Y. Dwivedi, and B. Lal, “Is utaut really used or
just cited for the sake of it? a systematic review of citation of utaut’s
originating article,” pp. 1–13, 2011.
[17] D. Salvucci, E. Boer, and A. Liu, “Toward an integrated model of driver
behavior in cognitive architecture,” Transportation Research Record, vol.
1779, no. 1, p. 7, 2001.
[18] A. Sethumadhavan, “In-vehicle technologies and driver distraction,”
Ergonomics in Design: The Quarterly of Human Factors Applications,
vol. 19, no. 4, p. 3, 2011.
[19] M. Baumann, T. Petzoldt, C. Groenewoud, J. Hogema, and J. Krems,
“The effect of cognitive tasks on predicting events in trafﬁc,” p. 11,
2008.
[20] K. Young, M. Regan, and M. Hammer, “Driver distraction: A review
of the literature,” Monash University Accident Research Centre, Tech.
Rep., 2003.
[21] J. R. Treat, A Study of Precrash Factors Involved in Trafﬁc Accidents.
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Highway Safety Research
Institute, 1980.
[22] J. D. Lee, B. Caven, S. Haake, and T. L. Brown, “Speech-based
interaction with in-vehicle computers: The effect of speech-based e-mail
on drivers’ attention to the roadway,” Human Factors: The Journal of
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 631–640,
2001.
[23] N. Gkikas and J. Richardson, “Behaviour & information technology the
impact of verbal interaction on driver lateral control : an experimental
assessment,” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 31, no. 6, p. 12,
2012.
[24] A. Bar´on and P. Green, “Safety and usability of speech interfaces for
in-vehicle tasks while driving,” University of Michigan, Transportation
Research Institute, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[25] P. C. Burns, P. L. Trbovich, T. McCurdie, and J. L. Harbluk, “Measuring
distraction: Task duration and the lane-change test (lct),” p. 3, 2005.
[26] L. L. Gugerty, Situation awareness in driving.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press, 2011, ch. 26, p. 25.
[27] M. R. Endsley, Theoretical underpinnings of situation awareness: A
critical review.
Mahwah, NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
2000, pp. 1–24.
[28] M. Endsley, “Design and evaluation for situation awareness enhance-
ment,” in Human Factors Society Annual Meeting.
Human Factors
Society, 1988, pp. 97–101.
[29] C. Bolstad, A. Costello, and M. Endsley, “Bad situation awareness
designs: what went wrong and why,” in Proceedings of the 16th
international ergonomics association world congress. Elsevier Science,
2006.
[30] K. Bengler, M. Herrler, and H. K¨unzner, “Usability engineering accom-
panying the development of idrive,” Informationstechnik und Technische
Informatik, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 145–152, 2002.
[31] S. Mattes and A. Heall´en, Surrogate distraction measurement tech-
niques: The lane change test.
Florida: CRC Press, 2009.
[32] J. L. Harbluk, J. S. Mitroi, and P. C. Burns, “Three navigation systems
with three tasks: Using the lane-change test (lct) to assess distraction
demand,” pp. 24–30, 2009.
[33] M.-P. Bruyas, C. Brusque, H. Tattegrain, A. Auriault, I. Aillerie, and
M. Duraz, “Consistency and sensitivity of lane change test according to
driving simulator characteristics,” IEET Intelligent Transport Systems,
vol. 2, no. 4, p. 306–314, 2008.
[34] P. Olson and K. Nolan, “Europe’s most congested cities,” 2008.
[35] P. M. Salmon, N. A. Stanton, and K. Young, “Situation awareness
on the road: review, theoretical and methodological issues, and future
directions,” Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, vol. 13, no. 4,
p. 22, 2012.
[36] R. Ma and D. B. Kaber, “Situation awareness and workload in driving
while using adaptive cruise control and a cell phone,” International
Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, vol. 35, pp. 939–953, 2005.
[37] D. E. Broadbent, Perception and communication.
London: Pergamon
Press, 1958.
[38] L. Nilsson, Contributions and limitations of simulator studies to driver
behavior research.
London, Washington DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993,
ch. 401-407.
[39] T. Petzoldt, N. Baer, and J. Krems, “Gender effects on lane change test
(lct) performance,” pp. 90–96, 2009.
[40] K. S. O’Brien and D. O’Hare, “Situational awareness ability and
cognitive skills training in a complex real-world task,” Ergonomics,
vol. 50, no. 7, p. 27, 2007.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

