Design Thinking as a Process for Innovative Older Adult Applications 
 
Claudia B. Rebola 
Industrial Design 
Rhode Island School of Design 
Providence, USA 
crebola@risd.edu 
Elizabeth Hermann 
Landscape Architecture 
Rhode Island School of Design 
Providence, USA 
ehermann@risd.edu
 
 
Abstract—Design Thinking is a critical methodology used by 
designers to work through and solve complex problems, and to 
develop solutions aimed at creating a preferred future. 
Designing for aging requires focused expertise, considerations, 
and principles for bringing about effective solutions for this 
target population. While there is vast knowledge within each of 
these areas of knowledge and practice, little has been discussed 
and presented at the intersection of the two – design thinking 
and aging. This paper introduces a system for design thinking 
addressing the needs of older adults. The system is comprised 
of a seven-phase “P” methodology: Position, Purpose, 
Prosthetics, Place, Participation, Potential and Presentation. 
This paper discusses a case study of the application of this 
methodology in a project titled “Aging and Health(care) 3.0: 
Place of Aging," a collaboration across Industrial Design and 
Architecture. The significance of this paper is to introduce 
approaches that better identify critical opportunities when 
designing for older adults. This paper discusses approaches 
that are contextual and personal in the realm of designing for 
one in the context of many, with the aim of redefining care for 
healthy aging. 
Keywords-Design Thinking; Critical Making; Design for Aging; 
Methodologies 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Design practices have become more complex, yet 
essential, for addressing challenging societal problems. 
While design once was considered a more linear iterative 
activity for problem-solving, user requirements have 
expanded the design process making it more inclusive and 
comprehensive. The incorporation of the social sciences in 
design has resulted in switching practices from a designer-
centered design to a user-centered design approach [1][2]. 
User-centered design approaches have been dominating the 
design disciplines in order to design products that better 
serve users [3]. IDEO, a global design company, was one of 
the pioneers in harnessing the power of specific methods to 
develop a more critical, nuanced and responsive design 
process. Since then, a plethora of alternative methods have 
emerged in response to better understanding user needs [4]–
[7]. While design methods are still suitable for better 
identifying user requirements, usability and adoption, they 
limit their impact on contemporary design practice and 
rhetoric. Even though participatory design aims at involving 
the targeted user in the design process for meeting the needs 
of the stakeholders [6][8], the method can challenge critical 
insights. The emergence of design thinking is responsible to 
address complex issues within complex social issues that 
focus on understanding user experiences in our built 
environment [9].  Design thinking supports the belief that 
designers should be more involved in the big picture of 
socially innovative design; that design is a collaborative 
effort; and that ideas have to be explored in a hands-on way 
with stakeholders [10].  
Building on the strengths of design thinking, this paper 
discusses the curricular process of a class exercising empathy 
towards users, cooperative activities, design prototyping and 
contextualization. A set of design activities was envisioned 
as a system to address the problem area of abandonment of 
older adults in our society. The rationale was to customize a 
methodology that can go beyond participatory design by 
collectively setting principles for designing for impact in the 
population—in this case, behavioral change and well-being 
of older adults by reformulating health by focusing on care. 
The goal was to set forward the need for design thinking for 
improving the perception and integration of older adults in 
the community.  
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we 
introduce principles for design and well-being, as well as 
objectives for designing solutions for the aging population. 
In Section III, we describe a seven-phase “P” methodology: 
Position, Purpose, Prosthetics, Place, Participation, Potential 
and Presentation. The subsections describe in detail each 
phase and its application. Lastly, section IV discusses 
concluding thoughts about the “P” methodology reflecting 
on its application in a project titled “Aging and Health(care) 
3.0: Place of Aging," a collaboration across Industrial Design 
and Architecture. 
II. 
DESIGNING FOR OLDER ADULTS 
Designing for older adults requires focused expertise, 
considerations and principles for bringing about effective 
solutions for the population. There are a number of sources 
aimed at giving easily accessible information as a primer for 
designing for older adults [11]. Fisk et al offer a practical 
introduction to human factors and older adults by illustrating 
practical translations of scientific data into design 
applications. Similarly, Universal Design principles provide 
guidance for designing products and environments involving 
the consideration of the human factors across populations of 
varied abilities [12].  Universal Design holds the promise to 
design products and environments to be usable by all people, 
to the greatest extent possible, without the need for 
adaptation or specialized design.  
310
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A. Principles of Well-Being in Aging  
The International Plan of Action on Ageing in 1991/1992 
held as its main objective “to add life to the years that have 
been added to life” [13]. Building on this objective and 
considering Universal Design principles, the following 
guiding principles were proposed in parallel with design 
activities: 
• 
AGENCY: Independence in decision-making and 
actions. 
• 
DIGNITY: Ability to maintain one’s image of 
oneself and one’s values. 
• 
IDENTITY: Recognized as an individual person by 
others. 
• 
RELEVANCY: One has purpose in one’s own and 
others’ eyes. 
• 
CONNECTIVITY: Integrated into the rest of society 
• 
CURIOSITY: One keeps discovering and learning 
(progressive) 
• 
ECCENTRICITY: Ability to behave outside of 
expected or normative actions.  
• 
LOVABILITY: How others care about you and 
respect you regardless of your quirks.  
B. Design objectives for the Aging Population 
Clarifying design objectives is a central component for 
the success of any project. A design process cannot exist in 
isolation. Design objectives guide the creativity and critical 
thinking. Without objectives, the design process can arrive at 
solutions that may not meet the requirements of the end user. 
Design objectives are not a list of requirements from the 
user, neither scoping the project but advancing a 
comprehensive approach to delineate a guide on how to 
advance human beings by design. When designing for the 
aging population, the design objectives should reflect 
integration, implementation, inspiration and progression.  
In delineating the objectives, integration refers to 
proposing products and/or systems to build intergenerational, 
supported and connected communities. The goal is to 
develop bottom-up approaches across generations that can 
help older adults have access to a community of care. 
Implementation is about proposing products and/or systems 
to have a successful effect and long-lasting impact within the 
aging population. The goal is to develop solutions that are 
feasible for implementation in the near future and more 
importantly, sustainable from the point of view of self-
maintaining. Inspiration is about proposing products and/or 
systems that are forward thinking and enablers. The goal is 
to celebrate the aging populating with creative, attractive and 
pervasive solutions that avoid physical, visual or experiential 
segregation. Lastly, progression is about proposing products 
and/or systems that allow positive growth. The goal is to 
develop solutions that grow with the aging population and 
inspire them to do more and be more. 
III. 
“P” PROCESS 
Exercising the aforementioned design objectives and 
principles, the goal was to create a curriculum that would 
focus on understanding and questioning current conventions 
around aging, and portray how design - from the products, 
systems, platforms, programs, services, experiences, digital 
and non-digital perspective - can impact health and well-
being in dwellings for a meaningful aging of future 
generations.  
The design thinking approach for addressing the needs of 
older adults starts with people and ends with people. 
Through interactions among research, interventions, and 
implementation (see Figure 1), the system provides the basis 
to contextualize problem setting and problem-solving 
grounded in needs. The design methodology described here 
is comprised of a seven-phase “P” structure: Position, 
Purpose, Prosthetics, Place, Participation, Potential and 
Presentation. The following sections describe in detail these 
phases applied to a project "Aging and Health(care) 3.0: 
Place of Aging", a collaboration across Industrial Design and 
Architecture.  The sections are structured with the curricular 
approach used in the course (see Table 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Design Thinking as a Processs 
 
TABLE I.  
RESEARCH THROUGH DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
Step 
“P” Process 
User Centered Approach 
Research 
Design  
1 
Position 
Recognize 
Scoping 
2 
Purpose 
Understand 
Defining 
3 
Prosthetics 
Identify 
Exploring 
4 
Place 
Locate 
Applying 
5 
Participation 
Engage 
Co-creating 
6 
Potential 
Propose 
Generating 
7 
Presentation 
Report 
Validating 
a. Curricular approach for Aging and Health(Care) course 
A. Position 
The goal of this step is to move beyond preconceptions 
and build a deeper understanding of users through direct 
evidence. It requires an attentive observation of the 
population with the aim of discovering experience 
perceptions of older adults.  While an abundance of 
311
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

observations exists within the literature, the aim is to learn 
about the population firsthand with sensitive and critical 
eyes, and to go "out" and record observations of encounters. 
The goal is to have the designer obtain an open-ended and 
exploratory personal view. This step requires exercising 
observational and interviewing skills that can be materialized 
through a video outcome summarizing the insights. One 
interesting aspect of the outcome is that it should be a 
conceptual representation of data collections excluding 
voice. Voiceless representations force reflection, and help 
avoid potentially erroneous a preconceptions. The end result 
is an evidence-based storytelling around being an older adult 
in America (see Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of preconceptions observations—stillness in age. 
B. Purpose 
The goal of this step is to understand the personas/types 
of users going beyond preconceptions and building them 
with evidence. For this step, types should be constructed as 
prototypes. Prototypes serve as material typologies for 
applying design thinking and critical making in the 
understanding of users. The construction of persona 
prototypes involves the translation of observations, building 
from the previous step, to reflective insights (see Figure 3).  
Questions to guide the development of this step include: 
How individuals physically carry themselves in public? How 
individuals engage with others (actively approaching others, 
cheerful, withdrawn)? How individuals react to change or 
stress? Are there family members present in their lives (and 
what are the age groups)? Are they experiencing physical 
limitations? Can they move around on their own or are they 
dependent on others? Do they and how do they engage in 
activities? Answering these questions provides insights for 
categorization. The aim is to develop a situated classification 
criterion. Each category should be based on multiple 
variables and carefully considered, while setting the range of 
each category (and its variables) before determining that 
there now is a different category. This part of the process 
involves identifying the critical factor/s (the ‘tipping point’) 
separating one category/type and another.  
While there is a need to create personalized typological 
categories, it is worth knowing how, over time, psychologists 
have attempted to classify personality types. The most 
widely used classification systems that sort humans by how 
they understand and respond to the world around them 
include the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) based on 
Carl Jung’s theory that we experience the world in four basic 
ways: sensation, intuition, feeling, and thinking [14]; the 
Five 
Factor 
Model 
(FFM) openness 
to 
experience, 
conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, neuroticism; 
and 
the 
Keirsey 
Temperament 
Sorter uses 
Plato’s 
temperament categories of the Artisans, Guardians, Idealists 
and Rationals [15]. This model is broken into two categories 
each, where each of these has two role variants, and then 
filters the 16 categories through “rings” of: abstract vs. 
concrete; cooperative (complying) vs. pragmatic (adapting); 
directive (proactive) vs. informative (reactive); expressive 
vs. attentive. Overall, for this step, it is worth considering 
typological studies in other fields. The ones below are not all 
about appearance. Rather, appearance is a factor of how 
something is structured, how it performs, when and how it 
was made, available materials and technologies, alterations 
and stresses upon it over time, the circumstances and the 
histories of those who created it. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of a purpose prototyped personas. 
C. Prosthetics 
With aging, older adults find themselves needing support 
where they live. Aging in place aims at keeping older adults 
in their "home" places for as long as they can. Yet, aging at 
"home" challenge self-care even in activities of daily living, 
the common, everyday tasks people do to become be self-
sufficient such as bathing, eating and dressing. Some 
activities require re-learning to remain independent and 
healthy. With age or when becoming ill, the body and mind 
lose dexterity, balance, motor skills and the brain's keen 
awareness of the body's signals. Many of these activities 
have a strong and direct impact on our health. The question 
is, what tools, as prosthetics, people use to remain 
independent in one’s environment? 
The goal of this step is to understand activities and 
devices supporting the aging population; and how these 
activities are contextual. There is a need to consider 
questioning the role of place and environment: What are the 
living conditions?  How the environment enables or 
constrains us? What is the landscape of aging in terms of 
abilities and disabilities? What type of tools do older adults 
use to support their daily living? Are these tools wearable 
prosthetics, environmental prosthetics? What are the 
cultural/social implications of adopting these "prosthetics" 
for aging?  
The key is to identify the interplay between artifact and 
place as there are associated activities that need to be 
identified as issues (i.e., bathing has associated issues such as 
balance). This step involves working with older adults and 
constructing a photo storyboard representing the critical 
perspective (analysis) on a single need of older adults aging 
in place. Storyboarding is a suitable technique for 
documenting insights (see Figure 4). Photo storyboarding 
can 
represent 
taxonomies 
of 
needs 
helping 
312
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

visualize problems/opportunities: how older adults do those 
activities through time? What insights come from observing, 
photographing and annotating older adults environment and 
activities?  In addition, this step can benefit from creating 
customer journeys by understanding and visualizing what 
older adults do on a daily basis? What problems might they 
have? What has become a "new normal"?  
 
 
Figure 4.  Example of a prosthetics visualizations. 
D. Place 
The goal of this step is to define what is the place for 
aging. Historically, and today in many parts of the world, 
one ages in the home of a family member, usually that of a 
grown child and their family. In this case, aging is done 
within an intergenerational setting where any assistance 
needed is readily at hand. Moreover, aging within the family 
means the older person is a respected member of the group, 
revered for their wisdom, origin stories, memories shared 
with the rest of the group, and their lifetime of being the 
protector and provider for the clan. Yet, in other parts of the 
world, and certainly in the United States, families are widely 
scattered having relocated for jobs or other opportunities. 
Moreover, in a large number of households, there is either 
only a single parent, or there are two where both have full 
professional working lives. In either case, there is seldom 
someone at home able to take care of an aging parent. In the 
United States, aging members of our society typically stay in 
their own home as long as they are able to fend for 
themselves, and when home is no longer an option, they 
move on to some type of assisted-living facility where, more 
often than not, their community consists of other elderly 
adults who can no longer care for themselves. Some of the 
most often heard complaints about such facilities – even the 
very best – are that they are “full of old people;” that the 
individual feels like an “inmate” (i.e., “imprisoned” with 
little agency); and that they are a nobody, surrounded by 
people and a place with which they have no history. So, what 
do we mean by ‘place’?  
We spend a life time finding our particular place in the 
world and as we age and days become increasingly marked 
by loss – one’s abilities, one’s memory, one’s friends and 
family members – one’s place of return, one's sanctuary, and 
the physical manifestation of one’s agency and rootedness in 
this world – one’s home – takes on significantly greater 
importance. Yet, not all adults can age in place in the sense 
they can stay in their own home for the duration of their life. 
The reasons may be economic, they may be physical, or they 
may have to do with decisions being made by others. 
Whatever the case, many of the new places aging adults are 
moved to do little to address the fundamental loss of ‘one’s 
place in the world’ and ‘home.’ This step looks critically at 
recent housing solutions for older adults from various parts 
of the world. The intent is to develop an understanding of 
what issues are being addressed in the design of these 
facilities, what aspects are not, and what role might a 
designer play in developing places and conditions that 
restore the aging to their ‘place in the world’ (albeit a new 
one), a more meaningful version of ‘home’ and all that 
implies about purpose, identity, memory and agency. The 
outcomes of this phase should be a map (see Figure 5) 
summarizing the components of place. If necessary, maps of 
older adults showing their movement and activities in place 
can help visualize components of place.  
This step involves having a critical perspective on place 
and summarizing insights on the ‘place of aging’ by visiting 
local housing options ranging from nursing homes, a variety 
of income neighborhoods, assisted living facilities and 
various retirement communities. There is a need to think 
across scales from the overall location within the town or 
city, to relationship to adjacent streets, houses, schools, store, 
to the grounds of the facility, to the building itself, to the 
details of the building’s layout and design including 
corridors, common spaces, private spaces, bedrooms and 
bathrooms, interfaces between indoor and out – views, 
access, to mention a few.  
E. Participation 
The goal of this step is to develop methods and tools for 
empowering older adults to co-create solutions to their 
concerns and needs, and to develop solutions that involve the 
larger community in an essential way. This step requires 
partnering 
with 
someone 
in 
the 
aging 
community 
(presumably someone met during the previous steps) to 
313
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

develop an intervention responding to concerns or specific 
needs they have articulated. What this means is that the 
researcher/designer, as someone familiar with creative 
problem-solving processes, needs to develop methods that 
allow the elderly partner to think like a designer/inventor and 
co-create a way to address their concerns. This approach 
places the researcher/designer as a teacher, and to do so in a 
way that is sensitive to the changes and fears that older 
adults are confronted with. Moreover, while the older adult 
partner may never again be able to address their own needs 
alone, the researcher/designer can help them obtain the tools 
they need to continue to have agency going forward. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of a place development. 
The Participation step involved developing methods and 
tools for giving a member of the aging community a process 
by which they can become the designer’s creative partner in 
addressing concerns they have articulated (see Figure 6).  
 
 
Figure 6.  Example of participation though a meal preparation. 
The goal is to develop a process, service, product or 
space that addresses these concerns, and include the larger 
community in the solution. The participation can be in the 
form of cultural probes such as booklet that in text and image 
lays out the process of the entire endeavor [16]. However, 
other participatory methods can be envisioned for collecting 
insights building on the previous steps. 
F. Potential 
The goal of this step is to propose possibilities—design 
interventions to make a change on the health and well-being 
of the aging population.  Design interventions are defined as 
innovative older adult applications not limited to artifacts, 
but systems, platforms, programs, services, experiences, 
digital and non-digital (see Figure 7). The goal is to develop 
interventions which allow the community to take charge of 
generating the change. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Examples of potential interventions. 
Students were guided in the design of the interventions 
and encouraged to consider the following: How the 
interventions are designed as a creative response connected 
to health? How stakeholders are engaged with the designed 
intervention? How implementable, feasible is your designed 
intervention? Can the interventions be designed to be 
socially adopted and self-sustainable?  Do designed 
interventions respond to the principles of the class 
(Independence, Progression, and Integration)? 
G. Presentation 
As the last step of the process, students build a 
presentation of their final projects. While a “potential” 
proposition may evolve across the length of the project, 
students needed to look back at every step of the process and 
314
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

develop a presentation supporting their design decisions. In 
addition to describing the overall goal and the criteria used to 
envision programs, the presentation should also discuss 
details about use and implementation. Such details should be 
presented with the stakeholders in the program and 
visualize/map the value for each of them (i.e., the gains for 
the older adult might be different from the gains of the 
community). In addition, it should discuss incentives for the 
stakeholders: Why should they participate in the program? 
What are their gains?; the feasibility of the program: Is it a 
realistic solution? What resources are needed?; the financial 
needs: Who would sponsor the program? Of what 
organization 
would 
finance 
the 
program?; 
the 
implementation plan: How it would unfold the first months 
versus the first year, growth in next years? ; and lastly and 
more importantly, its sustainability: How would the program 
would survive through time? What resources would keep it 
alive? How can its enrollment be guaranteed? And how does 
this program address the principles presented in this class.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Building on the strengths of design thinking, this paper 
discusses the curricular process of a class exercising empathy 
with users, cooperative activities, design prototyping and 
contextualization. This paper introduces a system for design 
thinking for older adults. The system is comprised of a 
seven-phase 
“P” 
methodology: 
Position, 
Purpose, 
Prosthetics, Place, Participation, Potential and Presentation. 
These steps allow to interchangeably mix the roles of 
researcher, designer, and participant into one system to 
advance better solution for the aging population.  The 
methodology is built on a research-through-design approach 
with the goal of integrating stakeholders and designers in a 
unified system. More importantly, it is a methodology that 
celebrates a systematic understanding of issues from 
different scales ranging from the designer to the user and 
place. This paper is an attempt to provide an organized 
methodology that the design for aging community and 
related disciplines can adopt for course curriculum to 
speculate in the future place of aging. The significance of 
this paper is to introduce approaches that better identify 
critical opportunities when designing for the older adults. It 
is to discuss approaches that are contextual and personal, in 
the realm of designing for one in the context of many aiming 
at redefining care for healthy aging. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the Academic Affairs at the 
Rhode Island School of Design and the Academic 
Enrichment Grant for supporting the collaboration across 
departments, Industrial Design and Architecture/Landscape 
Architecture 
Urban 
Systems, 
for 
new 
curricular 
development. Special thanks to Tracie Costantino, Dean of 
Faculty, for granting mechanisms that support endeavors like 
this project.  
REFERENCES 
[1] E. B. N.Sanders, “From User-Centered to Participatory 
Design Approaches,” Design and the Social Sciences: 
Making Connections: CRC Press, pp. 1–8, 2002. 
[2] V. J. Papanek, Design for the Real World : Human Ecology 
and Social Change, 2nd ed, Chicago, IL: Academy Chicago, 
1985. 
[3] IDEO, Human-Centered Design Toolkit: An Open-Source 
Toolkit To Inspire New Solutions in the Developing World, 
2nd ed: IDEO, 2011. 
[4] B. Hanington and B. Martin, Universal Methods of Design: 
100 Ways to Research Complex Problems, Develop 
Innovative Ideas, and Design Effective Solutions. Beverly, 
MA: Rockport Publishers, 2012. 
[5] L. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, Convivial Toolbox: Generative 
Research for the Front End of Design, Amsterdam: BIS 
Publishers, 2013. 
[6] E. B. N. Sanders, E. Brandt, and T. Binder, “A Framework 
for Organizing the Tools and Techniques of Participatory 
Design,” The 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference, 
Nov-Dec, 2010, pp. 195–198. 
[7] V. Kumar, 101 Design Methods: A Structured Approach for 
Driving Innovation in your Organization, 1st ed, Hoboken, 
N.J: Wiley, 2012. 
[8] L. Sanders, “An Evolving Map of Design Practice and Design 
Research,” Interactions, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 13–17, 2008. 
[9] J. Kolko, "Design Thinking Comes of Age," Harvard 
Business Review, September Issue, 2015. 
[10] E. Bjögvinsson, P. Ehn, and P. A. Hillgren, "Design Things 
and Design Thinking: Contemporary Participatory Design 
Challenges,” Design Issues, vol. 28, pp. 101–116, 2012. 
[11] A. D. Fisk, W. A. Rogers, N. Charness, S. J. Czaja, and J. 
Sharit, Designing for Older Adults: Principles and Creative 
Human Factors Approaches, 2nd ed, Boca Raton, LA: CRC 
Press, 2009. 
[12] The 
Center 
for 
Universal 
Design: 
About 
UD: 
https://www.ncsu.edu/ncsu/design/cud/about_ud/udprinciples
.htm 
[13] United Nations: Implementation of the International Plan of 
Action 
on 
Ageing 
and 
related 
activities: 
http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/46/a46r091.htm  
[14] The 
Myers 
& 
Briggs 
Foundation: 
MBTI® 
Basics: 
http://www.myersbriggs.org/my-mbti-personality-type/mbti-
basics/ 
[15] Keirsey Temperament: Overview of the Four Temperaments: 
http://www.keirsey.com/4temps/overview_temperaments.asp   
[16] B. Gaver, T. Dunne, and E. Pacenti, “Design: Cultural 
Probes,” Interactions, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 21–29, 1999. 
 
315
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

