FatCombat: A Health Video Game for Education and Promotion of the
Recommended Fat Intake Among Children
Ismael Edrein Espinosa-Curiel∗, Edgar Pozas-Bogarin∗, Janeth Aguilar-Partida∗, Maryleidi Hern´andez-Arvizu∗
and Edwin Emeth Delgado-P´erez†
∗ CICESE-UT3
Andador 10 #109, Ciudad del Conocimiento, 63197, Tepic, Nayarit, M´exico
Email: ecuriel@cicese.mx, pozas@cicese.mx, amara@cicese.mx, maryleidi@cicese.mx
†Center for Studies and Research in Behavior
Universidad de Guadalajara (UdG)
Francisco de Quevedo 180 Arcos Vallarta, 44130, Guadalajara, Jalisco, M´exico
Email: emeth.delgado@gmail.com
Abstract—Overweight and obesity are frequently assumed to be
the result of an energy imbalance caused by an excess in calories
and fat intake. To help children learn about the different types of
fat and their intake recommendations, we developed the health
video game FatCombat (FC). In this game, players go inside the
bodies of children to help them eat healthily by respecting fat
intake recommendations. As a result of their actions, the heart
can stay healthy and generate a constant ﬂow of blood to the
children’s bodies. FC is based on knowledge of fat intake and
integrates a set of behavior change techniques related to cognitive
and behavioral theories used in children’s health interventions.
In this paper, we describe the design process for FC and report
the results of a pilot study to evaluate the effect of FC on the
knowledge children have of fat and to evaluate the user experience
of FC players. Players of FC improved their knowledge of fats
and the game provided high levels enjoyment.
Keywords–Health video game; Children; Fat intake recommen-
dations; Learning; Fat intake change.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The prevalence of childhood overweight and obesity has
reached alarming levels, affecting virtually all socio-economic
groups, irrespective of sex and ethnicity, of both developed and
developing countries [1]. Childhood obesity can profoundly
affect children’s physical health, social, and emotional well-
being and self-esteem [2]–[4]. It can also contribute to in-
creased premature mortality [5]. Childhood obesity is a multi-
factorial problem; however, it is frequently assumed to be
the result of an energy imbalance caused by an excess in fat
intake in children [5]. One possible solution to this problem
is to eliminate as much fat as possible from children’s diets;
however, children need fat for adequate growth (e.g., it helps
them absorb vitamins and minerals, provides fuel and insulates
the body). Therefore, instead of reducing fat intake, to have
adequate growth, children must learn how to intake the daily
recommended amount of the four types of fat. Different fats
have different effects on the body. While saturated and trans
fats can raise blood cholesterol levels and increase the chance
of getting heart disease, monounsaturated and polyunsaturated
fats have several health beneﬁts. In addition, children need to
identify the types of fat contained in the food they usually
consume in order to be more selective and improve their fat
intake habits.
Health video games are an emerging strategy that can
help fulﬁll these objectives of learning and changing behavior.
These types of video games are innovative and enticing meth-
ods for attracting attention, educating, and promoting changes
in the knowledge, attitudes and behaviors of players [6], [7].
The literature indicates that health video games can have
positive effects on nutritional knowledge, physical activity, and
eating attitudes and behaviors of children [6]–[8]. In particular,
this type of video games can help children to increase their
knowledge regarding nutrition deﬁnitions and eating rules [9],
the ﬁve most important macronutrients of foods [10], and the
U.S. Department of Agriculture MyPlate guidelines [11]. This
type of game can also help increase the intake of healthy
food, such as vegetables, fruits, legumes, and white meat [12]–
[14], and reduce the intake of unhealthy food, such as sugar-
containing snacks and beverages and processed snacks [13],
[15], [16].
Some of the current nutrition health video games for
children include knowledge related to fats. The video game
“Fit, Food, Fun”, for instance, includes a mini game structured
like a quiz that compares protein, fat, carbohydrates, or calories
between two food items. It also includes a mini game designed
to estimate the content of sugar, fat, or salt in food [9].
Similarly, the video game “Alien Health” encourages students
to discourse about the somewhat similar food items and to
make an optimal choice, taking into account the protein, fats,
carbohydrates, ﬁber, and vitamins/minerals of the food [10],
[11]. In the game ‘Fitter Critters”, the player is responsible
for the health of a virtual pet (Critter) and needs to complete
quests to learn how food and activity choices inﬂuence their
Critter’s behavior and health. By choosing healthy foods
without surpassing the fat, sugar, and caloric allotment, the
Critter becomes healthier and is sick less [17]. The game
“Creature 101” includes a mini game to learn about the role
of taste, sugar, and fat in our diets. It also includes a mini
game related to food and nutrition facts about sugar and fat
contents of commonly consumed beverages and snacks [15].
In the “NutritionBuddy” video game, players collect food
to make a well energy-balanced combination of food and
beverages by keeping carbohydrates, fats, and proteins within
the recommended limits [18].
II.
PRESENT STUDY
Although the health video games described above include
knowledge related to fats, to the best of our knowledge, there
is not an explicit game designed to educate children about the
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

different types of fat and their effects in the body, the daily fat
intake recommendations for children, and the type and amount
of fat that have the food frequently consumed by children.
Therefore, we developed FatCombat (FC), a health video game
that focuses on helping children understand and apply the
nutritional concepts related to fats mentioned above. The FC
elements and mechanics are based on nutrition knowledge and
Behavior Change Techniques (BCT). FC is part of IFitKids, a
platform that integrates nutrition mini games and components
related to psychology, nutrition, and physical activity. In this
paper, we describe the design process of FC and how BCTs
were operationalized into the game elements to induce changes
in the fat intake of players. We also describe the results of a
pilot study to evaluate the effect of FC on the fat knowledge
of children and to evaluate the user experience and usability
of the game.
We organize this paper as follows. Section III describes
the methodology we used to design FC. In Section IV, we
describe our proposed health video game. Section V describes
the evaluation of FC. Section VI reports the results of a pilot
study to evaluate the effect of FC on the knowledge children
have of fat and to evaluate the user experience of FC. Section
VII discusses our ﬁndings. Finally, Section VIII provides some
concluding remarks and some research directions for future
work.
III.
GAME DESIGN
To design FC, we used an iterative game design method-
ology based on the work of Macklin and Sharp [19]. Our
methodology consisted of the following ﬁve steps (see Figure
1): (1) learning and behavioral change planning; (2) game
design; (3) prototype development; (4) play-testing; and (5)
evaluation. We conducted three cycles until we obtained the
version of FC evaluated in this study. Next, we describe the
activities conducted in each step.
•
In Step 1, we conducted a literature review to position
FC in the specialized serious game literature (e.g.,
[20]–[22]) and nutrition knowledge. In addition, we
conducted several multidisciplinary design sessions
with two nutritionists and a psychologist to establish
and improve the learning objectives, target behaviors,
behavior change objectives, and BCTs that could be
integrated into the gameplay elements to support the
behavior change objectives.
•
In Step 2, we conducted multidisciplinary design
sessions with the participation of two nutritionists, one
psychologist, one expert on human-computer interac-
tion, and three game designers. The session aimed to
propose design ideas and game rules and mechanisms
and deﬁne how to include the nutritional concepts
and implement the selected BCTs into the gameplay
elements. Based on these activities, we designed high-
ﬁdelity prototypes. We conducted 4, 2, and 2 mul-
tidisciplinary design sessions in cycles 1, 2, and 3,
respectively. The number of sessions is higher in the
ﬁrst cycle because this is when we go from the idea
to have a working prototype.
•
In Step 3, we implemented in the video game engine
Unity R
⃝ a high-ﬁdelity prototype based on the game
design obtained in the previous step.
Figure 1. Process of designing FC
•
In Step 4, children played with the prototype and
later participated in a focus group where they were
encouraged to talk about their game experience (e.g.,
instructions, activities, challenges, game ﬂow, human-
computer interaction, and amount of fun) and to draw
new game elements or features. Some suggestions
from cycle 1 were to improve the explanation of fats,
the tutorial, the health indicators, and the feedback
messages, as well as to clarify the mission and em-
phasize the role of fats in the game mechanics. The
suggestions for improving and changing cycles 2 and
3 were to add a map, add difﬁculty levels, increase
the reward coins, make the heart interactive, and add
more fun elements. In cycles 1, 2, and 3 there were
6, 12, and 10 children participating, respectively. The
age range of all participants was 8 to 11 years. Dif-
ferent children participated in each cycle. The playing
duration was 10, 15, and 15 minutes for cycles 1, 2,
and 3, respectively.
•
Finally, in Step 5, we conducted a multidisciplinary
session with the same participants of the Step 2
session to discuss and analyze the obtained results, the
changes suggested for the game and the new require-
ments obtained in the previous step, and we elaborated
a set of recommendations to improve the usability,
enjoyment, player experience, game mechanics, game
elements, and learning and behavior change strategies.
IV.
FATCOMBAT
Players have to ﬁll out a “welcome form”, which creates a
user-tailored proﬁle, and then they are allowed to start playing.
The requested data are gender and age in years and months.
This information is used to estimate the recommended energy
consumption, and based on this information, estimate the total
number of grams of fat and the amount of each type of fat.
FC includes a conﬁguration section, where players log-in, play
through the game’s story, select and buy avatars, and select the
next level from a map. In addition, FC includes an educational
section, where the players learn about the importance of fat for
adequate growth, the four types of fat and their effects on the
body, fat intake recommendations, and the predominant types
of fat contained in popular food (see Figure 2, top left and top
right screens). Players should see this tutorial completely the
ﬁrst time they play. Then, they can see it again if they want
to review the explanation. This section also includes a tutorial
that explains the game goal, how to play the game, the game
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 2. FatCombat’s screens.
options and elements, the indicators, and the results section
(see Figure 2, bottom-right screen).
A. Active playing
We designed FC as an active game to make it more
fun, improve the user experience, and promote light physical
activity [23]. Active games require physical activity beyond
that of conventional hand-held games and rely on technology
that tracks body movements or reactions for game progress
[24]. FC players must perform basic physical movements, such
as squats, jumps, lateral body movements, and arm movements
to pick up the food. They also need to perform kicks and
punches to prevent the avatars of trans and saturated fats from
delivering food to the heart. To follow the body movements of
the players, FC uses the Microsoft Kinect V2 R
⃝ sensor.
B. FC gameplay
The adventure of FC takes place in HealthyTown, a city
controlled by a group of evil chefs who added fats that come
to life within the children’s bodies to the food. Dr. Yokuro
Kokoro, the chief scientist of the city, realizes what is going
on, so he assigns a secret agent (the player) the mission to
go inside the bodies of children and help their hearts eat
healthy, respecting the intake recommendations for calories,
total fat, trans fats, saturated fats, monounsaturated fats, and
polyunsaturated fats. The Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) proposed the following daily fat
intake recommendations for children aged between 2 and 18
years old [25]:
•
Between 25% and 35% of Kcal should come from fat.
•
Up to 1% of Kcal should come from trans fats;
•
Up to 8% of Kcal should come from saturated fats;
•
From 6% to 11% of Kcal should come from or
polyunsaturated fats;
•
The intake of monounsaturated fat depends on the total
fat intake and the characteristics of dietary fat. Analyz-
ing the possible combinations of fat consumption, we
calculated that the recommended consumption range
is from 5% to 29% of Kcal.
C. FC mechanics
In the game, food appears randomly, and players must
decide whether the heart should consume it or not. For each
food, the game shows a real picture and a tag that speciﬁes
the type and amount of fat that the food contains. The game
has a database of 400 foods frequently consumed by Mexican
children. The food included in the database was selected from
interviews with children from 8 to 11 years of age and the
opinion of two nutritionists. The fat quantity of the foods
was obtained from the Mexican equivalent food system [26].
To make their decision, players must take into account the
type and amount of fat that the food contains and the fat
already consumed by the heart, which is speciﬁed in fat bars. In
alignment with the recommendations mentioned previously, we
integrated into the game six variables that inﬂuence gameplay
(see Figure 2, middle screen). These variables are “total calo-
ries”, “total fat”, “trans fats”, “saturated fats, “monounsaturated
fats” and “polyunsaturated fats”. A bar displayed on the user
interface serves as a visualization of the “variables” levels, and
each bar has an exclusive range depending on the variable.
When the player feeds the heart with food that contains
saturated or trans fat, yellow or pinks fats will appear in the
veins and the bars of these fats will increase. When the player
feeds the heart with food that contains monounsaturated or
polyunsaturated fats, green or blue fats will appear in the veins
and, since these fats help clean the trans and monounsaturated
fats, some yellow and pink fats will disappear and their bars
will drop. The blood ﬂow in the veins is determined by the
amount of fat they have. Therefore, the more fat, the less blood
ﬂow. When the blood ﬂow is low, it is reﬂected in the facial
expressions of the heart. In addition, the avatars of the saturated
and trans fats randomly appear and try to give the heart food
with their type of fat (see Figure 2, bottom-left screen). For
example, the saturated fats avatar gives the heart a dish of beef,
and the trans fats avatar gives the heart a chocolate cake. The
player must determine if the heart should be allowed to eat
these foods. If the player does not want the heart to consume
such food, he or she must defeat those fats by kicking or hitting
them. FC has other scenarios in which questions related to
fats, types of fat, and the types of fats present in popular food
appear randomly. The player earns coins if he or she answers
the questions correctly.
We included a curve of increasing difﬁculty across the 10
levels of the game to encourage players to have fun through the
end of the video game. The learning objectives of the levels
are incremental. For example, at level 3, in addition to the
objective of level 3, players must meet the objectives of levels
2 and 1. The game levels are as follows:
•
Level 1. Players need to ensure that the total calories
and fat intake are within the recommended ranges.
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

•
Level 2. Players have to prevent the heart from intak-
ing food with trans fats.
•
Level 3. Players need to ensure that the intake of sat-
urated fats is less than the maximum amount allowed.
•
Levels 4 and 5. Players need to ensure that the intake
of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats is within
the recommended range.
•
Levels 6 and 7. The hints about the types and amounts
of fat in the foods are hidden.
•
Levels 8, 9, and 10. The bars showing saturated,
monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fats are hidden,
and only the grams consumed are shown.
If the player meets the objective of the levels, he or she
earns points and moves on to the next level. On the contrary,
if he or she loses, the level must be repeated.
D. Behavioral change techniques
We integrated a set of BCTs in the gameplay elements
of FC to induce changes in the fat intake behaviors of
players. Figure 3 explicitly shows the relationship between
the BCTs used and the gameplay elements. A BCT is deﬁned
as “an observable, replicable, and irreducible component of
an intervention designed to alter or redirect causal processes
that regulate behavior; that is, a technique is proposed to be
an “active ingredient” [27]. BCTs are based on constructs
of theories frequently used in health interventions, such as
behavioral theory, cognitive theory, control theory, theory of
planned behavior, and social cognitive theory. BCTs can be
used alone, but the combination of several BCTs is frequently
critical for effectiveness [28]. The BCTs integrated into the
game show empirical evidence of the game’s efﬁcacy in aiding
weight loss and addressing other kinds of dietary problems
in children [29]. In the game, we integrated BCTs related to
the explanation of the natural consequences of fat intake in
order to shape knowledge by providing instructions on how
to perform the planned behaviors. The game also provides
an environment to substitute and practice new behaviors and
includes game mechanisms to instigate the selected behaviors.
To support the practice of the behaviors, FC includes prompts
and clues that are reduced or eliminated in the last levels of the
game. In addition, to guide the activities, the game includes
goal setting, review, feedback and monitoring. The game also
includes rewards to immediately reinforce short-term actions
(e.g., maintain the blood ﬂow) and long-term actions, such as
level completion. The reward follows an incremental scheme.
Finally, the game includes other elements associated with
learning and behavior change, such as vicarious consequences,
social comparison, and the player being centered as a role
model. The work of Michie et al. [27] provides a broad
deﬁnition of the BCTs operationalized in FC.
V.
GAME EVALUATION
We conducted a pilot study to evaluate whether the game
helps improve the children’s knowledge about fats and to
examine the user experience of the players. Although FC
was also designed to generate changes in fat intake attitudes
and behaviors related to players, we did not evaluate this
due to the short duration of the evaluation study. A longer-
term study is required to evaluate changes in the fat intake
attitudes and behaviors of players. A total of 13 children
Figure 3. BCTs operationalized in the gameplay elements of FC
(n=5 girls, n=8 boys) aged 8-10 (mean age 9.6, SD 1.12
years) from a primary school voluntarily participated in the
experiment. Of the participants, 50% of the girls and 70%
of the boys were overweight or obese. Before collecting the
data, we obtained written authorization from school authorities
and written consent from the parents for the children to
take part in the study. Later, we applied a fat knowledge
questionnaire. The questionnaire included seven general fat
questions with 5 response options (e.g., What is the type of
fat that is solid at room temperature and is found in animal
foods?) and 10 questions about the types of fat various foods
contain (e.g., What type of fat does avocado mainly contain?).
Later, over a period of 25 days, the participants conducted
six game sessions, with an average of 35 minutes per session
(one session every two days). The total average time that the
children played was 3.5 h. When the students ﬁnished the game
sessions, we applied the fat knowledge questionnaire and a user
experience questionnaire. The user experience questionnaire
was based on two validated questionnaires [30], [31] and
had 47 items grouped into 13 categories. For each item, we
asked the participants to indicate on a 5-point Likert-type scale
ranging from (1) “Totally disagree” to (5) “Totally agree” the
level to which they believe the game accomplishes each of the
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I. FAT KNOWLEDGE PRETEST AND POSTTEST RESULTS
Correct responses
Mean
SDa
Pb
pretest
5.1
4.5
0.038
posttest
8.9
4.6
aStandard deviation
b P value of<0.05 was considered to be statistically signiﬁcant
questionnaire statements.
VI.
RESULTS
We compared the pretest and posttest levels of fat knowl-
edge using the Wilcoxon signed-rank sum test. We used the
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 25
software [32] to conduct the statistical analysis. From the
statistical analysis results (see Table I), we identiﬁed that
the players signiﬁcantly improved their fat knowledge after
playing the game (P=0.038). In relation to user experience,
for each category, Table II, shows the number of items,
an example of the statement, the median and interquartile
range, and the percentage of participants who agreed that the
game fulﬁlls the statements in that category. The agreement
percentage represents the result of dividing the number of
responses with an evaluation of 4 or 5 by the total number
of responses. The game received a median score of 4 or
above in all dimensions, which reﬂects high levels of user
experience, enjoyment, and usability. Most of the participants
agreed that FC is fun and easy to use; has a clear story, goals,
and dialogues; provides useful feedback; and has pleasing
sounds and graphics. Another signiﬁcant result is that most
of the players agreed that the game adapts the difﬁculty to
their capacity and skills, stimulates their curiosity, and allows
them to be imaginative. They also agreed that the game helped
improve their knowledge and constantly motivated them to
advance to the next stage or level. These characteristics provide
them with a good amount of immersion because most of the
players agreed that they forgot about the passage of time,
became unaware of their surroundings while playing the game,
and could not wait to play again.
VII.
DISCUSSION
To best our knowledge, FC is the only nutrition health
video game explicitly designed for education on and the
promotion of the recommended fat intake among children.
The obtained results show that children signiﬁcantly improved
their knowledge of fat after playing FC. The video games
that include some knowledge about fat have also obtained
favorable results in knowledge improvement and behavior
change. The video game “Creature 101” [15] helped children
to improve their eating behaviors, and the video games “Fit,
Food, Fun” [9], “Alien Health” [10], [11] and “Fitter Critters”
[17] helped to improve the general nutrition knowledge of
children. However, because none of these studies evaluated the
effect of the video game on children’s knowledge about fats,
we cannot be made a comparison against the results obtained
by FC. The study conducted by Holzmann et al. [9] is the
only that includes some questions to evaluate fat knowledge of
children; however, they reported that players obtained a lower
score in the knowledge of fat and oil after play the video
game. These results are encouraging for further research on
the ability of FC to teach about fats and improve fat eating.
Moreover, the high user experience and usability results of
FC were in line with results from other health video games
for children. These studies reported satisfaction and usability
ratings ranging from 4.11 to 4.52 on a 5-point scale [13], [17],
[33] which are similar than ratings observed in the present
study. As satisfaction and usability appear to be correlated with
knowledge gained, the high user experience and usability of
FC has implications for its ability to impact fat knowledge.
Two areas of improvement for the video game are autonomy
and visual aesthetics because these were the subscales with the
lowest rating. The ﬁrst refers to the control that the players felt
in the game elements and the support provided to players in the
game so that they would know what the next steps in the game
were. The second relates to the quality of the game’s graphics
and whether the players like them and ﬁnd them pleasant. One
limitation of this study is that it was conducted in a single
school and with only a few participants. However, given that
the objective of this study was not to generalize our ﬁndings
but to achieve an overall impression of the usability of FC, we
consider our results to be valuable for researchers exploring
the design context of this type of serious game.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present FatCombat (FC), an active health
video game used for educating and promoting the adequate
intake of different types of fat among children. Additionally,
we describe how a multidisciplinary team used an iterative
game design methodology to design FC. Finally, we describe
how BCTs were operationalized into FC gameplay to induce
changes in the fat intake of the players. These contributions can
help game designers design new serious games for nutritional
education and for encouraging changes in eating behaviors
of children. From a pilot study, we identiﬁed that players
of FC improved their knowledge of fats. In addition, we
identiﬁed that the game provides high levels of user experience,
enjoyment, and usability. For future work, we are planning to
conduct additional design cycles in which parents, teachers,
and children will be involved as co-designers to improve game
design. In addition, we are planning to conduct a comparative
study of using FC versus the traditional lecture way. Finally,
we are planning to conduct a randomized controlled trial to
evaluate more in-depth the effectiveness of FC to support
player learning about fats and to evaluate its effects on
fat intake intentions, fat intake auto-efﬁcacy, and fat intake
behaviors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnolog´ıa
(CONACYT, Mexico) for ﬁnancial support (grant number
PDCPN-2015-824 awarded to CICESE). We thank the Colegio
Real de San Juan for facilitating the evaluation of FC and all
of the teachers, students, and parents who participated in this
study. We also thank the participating experts and users who
helped develop FC. Finally, we thank the graphics designer
Laura Nayely Miranda Pi˜na for participating in the design of
the several graphical elements of FC.
REFERENCES
[1]
UNICEF-WHO-The World Bank Group, “Joint child malnutrition esti-
mates - levels and trends,” UNICEF, WHO & World Bank, Tech. Rep.,
2019 edition.
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE II. USER EXPERIENCE RESULTS
#
Category
Items
Question example
Median(IQR)
Agreement
1
Goal clarity
2
The overall game goals were presented clearly.
5(1)
81% (21/26)
2
Feedback
3
I received feedback on my progress in the game.
5(1)
79% (31/39)
3
Challenge
3
The level of challenge in the game was adequate for me.
5(1)
77% (30/39)
4
Autonomy
2
I felt a sense of control in the game.
4(2)
65% (17/26)
5
Immersion
4
I cannot wait to play again
5(2)
71% (37/52)
6
Knowledge improvement
3
I understood the basic ideas of the knowledge taught in the game.
5(1)
77% (30/39)
7
Playability/Usability
9
I think it is easy to learn how to play the game.
5(2)
72% (84/117)
8
Narratives
3
I enjoyed the story provided by the game.
5(1.5)
74% (29/39)
9
Enjoyment
3
I think the game is fun.
5(1.5)
74% (29/39)
10
Creative freedom
3
I feel that my curiosity has been stimulated as a result of playing the
game.
5(1)
77% (30/39)
11
Audio aesthetics
3
I enjoyed the sound effects in the game.
5(1)
79% (31/39)
12
Personal gratiﬁcation
4
I am very focused on how to achieve the game’s goals and get the
rewards.
4(2)
77% (40/52)
13
Visual aesthetics
3
I enjoyed the game’s graphics.
4(2)
62% (24/39)
Data are expressed as the median (interquartile range) of the participants’ scores. The scores are (1) “Strongly disagree”; (2) “Agree”, (3) “Undecided”,
(4) “Agree”, (5) “Strongly agree”.
[2]
M. Kelsey, A. Zaepfel, P. Bjornstad, and K. Nadeau, “Age-Related
Consequences of Childhood Obesity,” Gerontology, vol. 60, no. 3, 2014,
pp. 222–228.
[3]
E. P. Williams, M. Mesidor, K. Winters, P. M. Dubbert, and S. B.
Wyatt, “Overweight and obesity: Prevalence, consequences, and causes
of a growing public health problem,” Current Obesity Reports, vol. 4,
no. 3, 2015, pp. 363–370.
[4]
A. W. Harrist, T. M. Swindle, L. Hubbs-Tait, G. L. Topham, L. H.
Shriver, and M. C. Page, “The social and emotional lives of overweight,
obese, and severely obese children,” Child Development, vol. 87, no. 5,
2016, pp. 1564–1580.
[5]
K. Sahoo, B. Sahoo, A. K. Choudhury, N. Y. Soﬁ, R. Kumar, and A. S.
Bhadoria, “Childhood obesity: causes and consequences,” Journal of
family medicine and primary care, vol. 4, no. 2, 2015, pp. 187–192.
[6]
T. Baranowski et al., “Games for Health for Children: Current Status
and Needed Research,” Games For Health Journal, vol. 5, no. 1, 2016,
pp. 1–12.
[7]
A. S. Lu, H. Kharrazi, F. Gharghabi, and D. Thompson, “A Systematic
Review of Health Video Games on Childhood Obesity Prevention
and Intervention,” Games for health journal, vol. 2, no. 3, 2013, p.
10.1089/g4h.2013.0025.
[8]
H. Parisod et al., “Promoting children’s health with digital games: A
review of reviews,” Games for Health Journal, vol. 3, no. 3, 2014, pp.
145–156.
[9]
S. L. Holzmann et al., “Short-Term Effects of the Serious Game “Fit,
Food, Fun” on Nutritional Knowledge: A Pilot Study among Children
and Adolescents,” Nutrients, vol. 11, no. 9, 2019, pp. 1–13.
[10]
M. C. Johnson-Glenberg, C. Savio-Ramos, and H. Henry, “Alien health
game: A nutrition instruction exergame using the kinect sensor,” Games
For Health Journal, vol. 3, no. 4, 2014, pp. 241–251.
[11]
M. C. Johnson-Glenberg and E. B. Hekler, “Alien Health Game: An
embodied exergame to instruct in nutrition and myplate,” Games for
Health Journal, vol. 2, no. 6, 2013, pp. 354–361.
[12]
T. Baranowski et al., “Video game play, child diet, and physical activity
behavior change: A randomized clinical trial,” American journal of
preventive medicine, vol. 40, no. 1, 2011, pp. 33–38.
[13]
D. Marchetti et al., “Preventing adolescents’ diabesity: Design, devel-
opment, and ﬁrst evaluation of ”Gustavo in Gnam’s Planet”,” Games
for Health Journal, vol. 4, no. 5, 2015, pp. 344–351.
[14]
K. W. Cullen, Y. Liu, and D. I. Thompson, “Meal-Speciﬁc Dietary
Changes From Squires Quest! II: A Serious Video Game Intervention,”
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, vol. 48, no. 5, 2016, pp.
326–330.e1.
[15]
D. Majumdar, P. A. Koch, H. Lee, I. R. Contento, A. d. L. Islas-Ramos,
and D. Fu, “Creature-101: A serious game to promote energy balance-
related behaviors among middle school adolescents,” Games for Health
Journal, vol. 2, no. 5, 2013, pp. 280–290.
[16]
S. V. Sharma et al., “Effects of the quest to lava mountain computer
game on dietary and physical activity behaviors of elementary school
children: A pilot group-randomized controlled trial,” Journal of the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, vol. 115, no. 8, 2015, pp. 1260 –
1271.
[17]
K. L. Schneider et al., “Acceptability of an online health videogame to
improve diet and physical activity in elementary school students: “Fitter
Critters”,” Games for Health Journal, vol. 1, no. 4, 2012, pp. 262–268.
[18]
S. Michael, P. Katrakazas, O. Petronoulou, A. Anastasiou, D. Iliopoulou,
and D. Dionisios Koutsouris, “Nutritionbuddy: a childhood obesity
serious game,” in 2018 Second World Conference on Smart Trends
in Systems, Security and Sustainability (WorldS4), Oct 2018, pp. 5–8.
[19]
C. Macklin and J. Sharp, Games, Design and Play: A detailed approach
to iterative game design.
Addison-Wesley Professional, May 2016.
[20]
M. T. Baranowski et al., “Videogame mechanics in games for health,”
Games for Health Journal, vol. 2, no. 4, 2013, pp. 194–204.
[21]
T. Baranowski, R. Buday, D. Thompson, E. J. Lyons, A. S. Lu, and
J. Baranowski, “Developing games for health behavior change: Getting
started,” Games for Health Journal, vol. 2, no. 4, 2013, pp. 183–190.
[22]
D. Thompson et al., “Serious video games for health how behavioral
science guided the development of a serious video game,” Simulation
& gaming, vol. 41, no. 4, 08 2010, pp. 587–606.
[23]
S. Y. S. Kim, N. Prestopnik, and F. A. Biocca, “Body in the interactive
game: How interface embodiment affects physical activity and health
behavior change,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 36, 2014, pp.
376 – 384.
[24]
A. G. LeBlanc et al., “Active video games and health indicators in
children and youth: A systematic review,” PLOS ONE, vol. 8, no. 6,
Jun. 2013, p. e65351.
[25]
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), “Fats
and fatty acids in human nutrition. report of an expert consultation,
10-14 november 2008, Geneva,” Tech. Rep., 2010.
[26]
A. B. P. Lizaur, B. P. Gonz´alez, A. L. C. Becerra, and I. F. Galicia,
Sistema Mexicano de Alimentos Equivalentes.
Fomento de Nutrici´on
y Salud, 2014.
[27]
S. Michie et al., “The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1)
of 93 hierarchically clustered techniques: building an international
consensus for the reporting of behavior change interventions,” Annals
of Behavioral Medicine, vol. 46, no. 1, Aug. 2013, pp. 81–95.
[28]
S. Michie, R. West, K. Sheals, and C. A. Godinho, “Evaluating the
effectiveness of behavior change techniques in health-related behavior:
a scoping review of methods used,” Translational Behavioral Medicine,
vol. 8, no. 2, Mar. 2018, pp. 212–224.
[29]
J. Martin, A. Chater, and F. Lorencatto, “Effective behaviour change
techniques in the prevention and management of childhood obesity,” In-
ternational Journal of Obesity, vol. 37, no. 10, Jun. 2013, p. 1287–1294.
[30]
F.-L. Fu, R.-C. Su, and S.-C. Yu, “Egameﬂow: A scale to measure
learners’ enjoyment of e-learning games,” Computers & Education,
vol. 52, no. 1, Jan. 2009, pp. 101–112.
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[31]
M. H. Phan, J. R. Keebler, and B. S. Chaparro, “The development
and validation of the game user experience satisfaction scale (guess),”
Human Factors, vol. 58, no. 8, 2016, pp. 1217–1247, pMID: 27647156.
[32]
IBM Corp., “IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 25.0,” New
York: IBM Corp, 2017.
[33]
Y. Hswen, L. Rubenzahl, and D. S. Bickham, “Feasibility of an online
and mobile videogame curriculum for teaching children safe and healthy
cellphone and internet behaviors,” Games for Health Journal, vol. 3,
no. 4, 2014, pp. 252–259, pMID: 26192373.
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

