Find a Book! Unpacking Customer Journeys at Academic Library  
 
Alma L. Culén and Andrea A. Gasparini 
Department of Informatics, Group for Design of Information Systems 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
almira@ifi.uio.no, a.a.gasparini@ub.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—Academic libraries are especially poised to serve 
knowledgeable and technologically advanced user population: 
students and researchers. The technological advances are 
dictating significant changes for academic libraries. This paper 
is concerned with building awareness within the library 
around the need to re-think its role in academic life, its use of 
technology and willingness to co-innovate with users. The 
paper reports from four workshops that aimed to explore 
existing and future services offered by the academic library. 
Library employees, students and researchers were participants 
in all workshops. The participants were first informed about 
service design and its tools, and then engaged in creating 
customer journeys, using service design cards. The set of cards 
used was an of-the-shelf product, modified for the purpose, 
introducing images specific to the library and allowing for 
rating of services in terms of their importance. The paper 
reports on our findings from these workshops. One interesting 
finding is that librarians still focus mostly on physical space 
and personal services, such as organization of courses in the 
library, while students and researchers almost exclusively 
think of digital services, related to literature they need for their 
work.  
Keywords—service design; service design cards; touch 
points; innovation; customer journeys; academic libraries. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
During the last decade, the Internet has been a game 
changer [1] for academic libraries. It created a challenge for 
academic libraries by providing access to articles anytime 
anywhere through, for example, Google Scholar and other 
open access publications sites catering to academic 
communities.  In the past, the main issue with Internet access 
to academic literature has been the lack of credibility. In [2], 
credibility is considered as a multifaceted concept with two 
primary 
dimensions: 
expertise 
and 
trustworthiness. 
Academics have trusted for centuries the expertise of the 
library to provide good and credible information. Yet, the 
same are now trusting Wikipedia, Google Scholar, and 
similar, to provide them with credible academic information 
[3]. In addition to the Internet, the appearance of disruptive 
technologies, such as eBooks first, and tablets later [4]–[6], 
has posed further challenges. In combination with cloud 
computing, interested students and researchers are able to 
create their own collections of teaching and research 
materials, always at their fingertips. The libraries are 
practically forced to re-think their role in academic life, their 
use of technology and willingness to innovate.  
An academic library is a place where serving academic 
community, 
cultivating, 
preserving 
and 
expanding 
knowledge is raison d'être. However, due to technological 
developments and changing habits of the academic 
communities, the services, as well as the ways of delivering 
them, are changing. The changes also imply the need and 
interest in ways of evaluating library services [7] and 
designing new ones. Looking through a variety of definitions 
and concepts regarding service and service design, see [8]–
[10], we consider the following characteristics of a service to 
be useful also for discussing the library services: 
intangibility, heterogeneity, inseparability and perishability 
(IHIP). Intangibility is often cited as the most important 
distinction between tangible goods (products) and intangible 
services. For example, the help to a student by a librarian, in 
form of information, is intangible. Heterogeneity addresses 
the fact that services, even when the product obtained 
through the service is the same, for example, a book, is 
depending on different service providers and thus may be 
experienced in variety of ways. For instance, an experienced 
librarian may provide a different service and customer 
experience than a new librarian, when a customer inquires 
about a book. The experienced librarian may be able to offer 
similar titles, supplementary references etc. It is, thus, often 
difficult to achieve uniformity of the service delivery, a 
‘standard’ service. Inseparability of service addresses the 
fact that it is impossible to separate the supply or production 
of the service from its consumption. The interaction between 
a provider and a customer in an act of offering/consuming a 
service may also be seen as an act of co-creation of the 
customer experience with the service, and thus, the customer 
may be identified as service co-producer [11]. Perishability 
of a service is addressed in the literature in multiple ways. 
Many consider a service to be something that happens in the 
moment and thus cannot be saved for later. For example, 
even though a student can borrow a book from the library for 
4 weeks, the service takes place at the time of checking the 
book out. Alternatively, one may consider the service as 
ending at the time when the book is returned to the library. 
Similarly, in a new library database system, one may not be 
able to make certain inquires which were possible in the old 
database, and thus some services related to those may perish.  
One fundamental attribute of services is that they have 
value only when they are used [12]. Other relevant attributes 
are trust, fast delivery (speed) and consistency of the service 
[13]. These attributes have a crucial impact on the 
customers’ experience of a service, but do not have to be 
equally relevant for the provider. For example, Amazon has 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

built on trust, while McDonalds on the speed of the service. 
Services offered by a private and public sector differ in some 
important ways. In the public sector, the motivation to 
innovate services or to co-create them with users is often 
reduced, since the public sector services are actually 
intermediaries between the state (the actual service provider) 
and the user [14].  This makes it more difficult to influence 
improvement of existing, or development of new services 
[14]. It is more difficult for providers to understand and 
evaluate customer’s experience of the service [15]. Finally, 
public sector customer services design may involve some 
paradoxes [16] that are difficult to resolve. Thus, working 
with services in public sector may be more challenging than 
working with services within the private sector. 
In this paper, we examine how the academic library 
views service design and co-creation of services with users. 
To this end, we have organized four workshops with library 
employees, students and researchers. Part of the time during 
workshops was used to introduce concepts from service 
design, as well as methods and techniques used in service 
design. This content is presented, in its condensed form, in 
Section II. The remaining time was split equally between 
creating customer journeys in today’s library and exploring 
future services. The main tool used to create customer 
journeys was a set of service design cards. The use of cards 
and card sorting is common in human computer interaction; 
see for example [17]. More on specific cards used is also 
provided in Section II. The paper reports on tool 
modification in order to collect more meaningful data from 
workshops, as well as insights gained and lessons learned. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II introduces 
design thinking, service design, customer journeys, touch 
points and service design cards. Section III describes our 
case and presents the workshops. The discussion is provided 
in Section IV, and it is followed by a conclusion and future 
work in Section V. 
II. 
SERVICE DESIGN 
This section presents, very concisely, the material used 
as a theoretical background during the four workshops that 
were conducted in order to initiate the envisioning and re-
thinking process around services in the academic library.  
A. Design Thinking 
In contrast to analytical thinking in science, designers 
have developed another way of thinking, called design 
thinking. Design thinking involves building of new 
cognitive patterns to grasp multiple knowledge and multiple 
perspectives, related to the context at hand, that are to be 
synthesized and transformed into new products or services. 
It combines the empathy for the context of a problem, 
knowledge and understanding of others and designers’ 
creativity in generation of insights gained around the 
problem. The entire process, including the translation of all 
insights towards solutions, often happens with stakeholders 
within the context of use. In practice, it is a method of 
finding solutions by going through certain stages, typically 
very similar to those of interaction design: formulate the 
problem, investigate it, brainstorm, make prototypes, chose 
one, implement and find out how well the solution solves 
the problem. Design thinking has also allowed designers to 
move from a post-production and branding place and 
become active participants in the making of new products 
and services [18]. 
Using design thinking in design of services offers a 
possibility to better meet customers needs [19], based on 
understanding of their behavior, motivations and other 
responses while interacting with services. 
B. Service Design  
It seems straightforward to define service design (SD) as 
a design of new services or re-design of existing ones. 
Design of services is not new; services have existed for 
millennia, but the recent popularity of service design may be 
attributed to design thinking approach to service design (see 
[18], [19]).   
Service design differs from product design in the act of 
“doing” of the design [12]. Service design also differs from 
interaction design in that it uses more explorative ways to 
challenge the problem area, as opposed to interaction design 
with its more analytic approach [20]. Our understanding of 
service design is in line with that of Schneider:  
“Service design is an interdisciplinary approach that 
combines different methods and tools from various 
disciplines. It is a new way of thinking as opposed to a new 
stand-alone academic discipline. Service design is an 
evolving approach; this is particularly apparent in the fact 
that, as yet, there is no common definition or clearly 
articulated language of service design”. [21] 
Ideally, the service design teams should include all 
stakeholders related to the service context, as well as service 
designers, and other professionals, as needed for a specific 
project. The first step in the process of SD, an equivalent to 
defining a problem space in human-computer interaction, is 
an agreement on the context and interests. Different research 
methods such as ethnography, immersion, shadowing, sense-
making methods such as mapping (including blue-prints, 
Giga maps and customer journeys), safaris, expert interviews 
and self-directed tools such as diaries are all part of the SD 
toolkit.  
For the purposes of this paper, customer journeys and 
touch points are central. 
C. Customer Journeys  and Touch-Points  
One of the most effective processes in service design is 
being able to visualize a service offered by an organization 
or a company using a tool called a customer journey. 
Koivisto explains: 
“Services are processes that happen over time, and this 
process includes several service moments. When all service 
moments are connected the customer journey is formed. The 
customer journey is formed both by the service provider’s 
explicit action as well as by the customer’s choices”, [22]. 
The ‘service moments’ Koivisto talks about are called 
touch points. Touch points, as stated above, comprise a 
customer journey and provide understanding of the service 
over time. They are thus a central aspect of service design 
[23], [24].  
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

D. Service Design Cards 
A good tool, helping to understand and address touch 
points in the initial stages of service development, is a set of 
service design cards. The card set that we chose was 
developed as part of AT-ONE method, a practitioner-based 
method for service-design, aiming towards maximization of 
the innovation potential at early stages of service design, see 
[23]. Clatworthy provides six different use contexts for the 
card set and evaluates the usefulness of cards in these 
contexts and in relation to their intended function.  The 
cards were found to help with team building in cross-
functional teams. Further, they were found to be helpful in 
assisting with the analysis and mapping of existing 
situations, generating ideas for new solutions or approaches, 
needs elicitation and facilitation of communication. In 
addition, Clatworthy says that the cards “afford embodied 
communication and embodied cognitive processes”, [23]. 
III. 
THE CASE 
As stated in the introduction, our goal was to re-think 
services offered by the academic library. The establishment 
of User-Driven Innovation project in the context of academic 
library at the University of Oslo approximately three years 
ago, started us on a research activity concerned with 
investigation and experimentation around users’ involvement 
in innovation processes within the library. We have 
considered students’ potential as innovators [25], as well as 
the living lab approach [26]. In this work, with students as 
innovators, we have found that images facilitated initial 
communication well, and they helped established common 
understanding of the problem area. Thus, our experience was 
similar to findings reported in [23].  The natural course of 
action was to buy the card set from [23], as shown in Fig. 1.  
 
 
Figure 1.  A sample of SD cards [23], including cards describing the two 
ways in which the cards were used in pilot workshops. 
The set was then tested in couple of pilot workshops 
focusing on the library context and using the cards in two 
different ways: to map touch points and to remove a touch 
point from a customer journey. We chose to focus on 
customer journeys only, the removal of the touch point was 
deemed too specific. We quickly realized that some library 
specific cards would be helpful. This resulted in a modified 
set of cards which included vital touch points for the library, 
such as books, e-books, academic papers. Furthermore, we 
introduced two non-touch point cards, a critical point and a 
decision point, meant to be placed next to the touch point 
card in order to provide a clear visual clue related to the 
importance of the card. Then the set was tested one more 
time and we found out that differently colored dots placed 
next to the touch point card would be more useful in 
providing a graded importance clues. In addition, we found 
that colored arrows could provide further visual information, 
helpful in visualizing choices in the flow of the customer 
journey, again graded by importance. Thus, the set of cards 
used in workshops consisted of the original deck, plus added 
touch and non-touch point cards as described, and many dots 
and arrows in different colors, see Fig. 2, and Fig. 3 – Fig. 6, 
showing the cards in use. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Cards suitable as touch points related to library services. Dots 
helped visualuize degree of relevance of a touch point, and arrows the flow.  
When the cards were ready, we organized a series of four 
workshops, about 2 hours long, with similar set up. During 
the first hour, we introduced the concepts presented in the 
Section II: service design, design thinking, customer 
journeys, touch points and touch point cards. During the 
presentation two simple questions were asked in order to 
engage everyone in thinking about the library and 
innovation, and to invite the participants to be creative. The 
two questions were:  “Can you give an example of a library 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

service?” and “What does innovation in the library mean for 
you? Give an example.”  
During the second part of the workshop, service design 
cards were used to discuss a specific task. The task was to 
create a customer journey based on the following service 
provided by the library: find the literature relevant for a 
research or student project. When the journey was mapped, 
the new task was to envision this same journey in the future. 
During the first workshop, the same task was repeated using 
visual language in the making [27] for service design. This 
has not been done in other workshops.  
The choice of the task was motivated by the sense of 
difficulty that users have when considering the role of the 
library in this particular process today (as explained in the 
Introduction, users often search Google Scholar and similar 
sites). It turned out to be a good choice for all participants. In 
fact, one of the researchers in the workshops admitted that 
she did not know that e-books purchased by the library are 
available for all university users, free of charge. The library 
employees could see that users did not have easily available 
information on this important new service, e-books access. 
The same questions and the same task were used in 
subsequent workshops. While the first workshop involved 
many library employees, the remaining three workshops 
were predominantly composed of students, with at least one 
researcher and a library employee present.  
Our main analytic tool was photo documentation [28]. A 
large number of photos were collected during workshops, so 
that we could analyze similarities and differences in 
processes with different groups, as well as how they made 
their journeys, for both present and the future service. 
A. The First Service Design Workshop 
The first workshop was held in May 2013, with 25 
participants. 17 participants were library employees 
(included library leaders, librarians, subject librarians, digital 
services management, digital services support, e-resources 
consultants, open access consultant and others), 4 were 
students and 4 researchers. The participants were divided 
into four groups of six (seven in one of the groups) people, 
each group having at least four librarians, a researcher and a 
student. All four groups had their own deck of cards, dots 
and arrows, a large sheet of paper, and colored pens. The 
participants took some time to become familiar with cards, to 
discuss them and negotiate both the touch points and how to 
proceed with thinking about customer journeys. After 10-15 
minutes, all groups decided on what touch points they would 
have on their journeys. Changes in the order of touch points 
and discussions became faster, as common understanding got 
established. Soon, all groups started using arrows and dots, 
Fig. 3. In one case, the paper under the cards was used to 
mark new paths between touch points that arrows could not 
reach. Also, some groups felt the need for additional card or 
two, or to document the process. Those were made using 
Post-it notes on the fly, and participants (mostly library 
employees and researchers) took pictures with their own 
mobile phones, showing engagement and importance of the 
subject discussed for their own work.  
Looking at journeys made, we could notice that multiple 
starting points were deployed, usually from the physical to 
the digital. If the journey started in the digital world, it 
generally ended back in the physical world, in form of a visit 
to the library. This shows that meeting up at the library in 
person was regarded as vital in order to gain access to 
services.  
The journey making allowed for relating anecdotes 
around how library services can be experienced by users. For 
example, in one of the groups, a student related a story of 
being charged a fee after the return of a book, which was 
long past due. For the library, the charge, as a source of 
income or compensation, is minimal and insignificant. For 
the customer, it provided for a really negative experience.  
 
Figure 3.  The workshop in the library. Each small picture shows the 
customer journey made by one of the four groups. 
B. The Second Service Design Workshop 
In this workshop, only three bachelor students from 
interaction design course participated, and one library 
employee/researcher. The same program, as described above 
for the first workshop, was followed. 
The difference between the customer journey made at 
this workshop, and those that resulted from the first 
workshop, was where the service start points were, see Fig. 
4. For the three participating students, it was not conceivable 
to start the journey elsewhere then with digital interfaces as 
touch points. The only reason that they added the physical 
library in the journey was because the library employee 
wanted to introduce it. The students added the card, and then 
quickly added a critical point card, from which an arrow lead 
to the library building card (Fig. 4), signaling clearly that 
only in times of absolute crisis would they venture into the 
building. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 4.  The journey always started from the digital: PC, a tablet or a 
phone. 
Asked what kind of crisis they are thinking of, they 
exemplified with network failure, or the library site being 
down.  An interesting outcome of envisioning the future 
service was the “book-to-door” service, a delivery of a 
physical book at home address, for which they were willing 
to pay. 
C. The Third Service Design Workshop 
The third workshop was carried out in the context of a 
graduate course in experimental design, with 18 participants 
divided into three groups. The journeys made are shown in 
Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 5.  The three journeys and Post-it notes on new services. 
In this case, too, all customer journeys (present and 
future) had starting points in the digital world. Similar to the 
previous group, as shown in Fig. 5, upper right image, the 
red dot was placed over the card depicting the building. Here 
too, the building became a touch point only in the case of an 
emergency. This group, however, would not opt for visiting 
the library at all, but would make a phone call instead.   
 Even though participants had ample time and seemed 
engaged in envisioning future services around finding 
academic literature, journeys they made remained quite 
conservative in terms of how far the ideas were from today’s 
solutions.   
D. The Fourth Service Design Workshop 
The fourth workshop was also conducted with students 
taking a graduate course, but with ten students. The course 
had design and design thinking as a theme, thus little in 
terms of introduction was needed. We had expectation that 
these students would be more creative. This expectation was 
not met. The outcome was rather similar to journeys made in 
workshops two and three. 
 
Figure 6.  Students taking the course with focus on design and design 
thinking working on their journeys. 
The use of the myths card is worth mentioning. A student 
related that she was afraid of visiting the library, since the 
library is a quite place, and she sees herself as being loud. 
She thinks that the library is not the right environment for 
her (see Fig. 6, the bottom right corner). 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
After the last workshop with students, we felt that we 
have gotten much information on one hand, while on the 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

other hand, for further development of ideas, a different team 
composition and format of workshops is needed. The 
workshops have shown that the card set worked well. It 
indeed engaged participants in discussions around touch 
points, and served as ground for building common 
understanding. They served well as a visual tool for 
understanding today’s services and envisioning the future 
ones. The added cards worked well, and the participants 
considered the use of color-coded dots useful. In negotiating 
the touch points, groups sometimes added touch points that 
some members of the group were not convinced needed to be 
a part of the journey (like the library building in workshop 
3). Placing a red dot on that touch point gave it a meaning 
(emergency only, for example).  The color-coding was done 
by negotiating the meaning of the color within the group, and 
thus, was not the same across all groups.  Arrows were used 
similarly. The participants were not encouraged to use either 
dots or arrows in any way, but most groups found them to be 
helpful in visualizing the journey.  
Although 
all 
workshops 
were 
including 
library 
employees, researchers and students, the first workshop was 
the one where library employees accounted for a vast 
majority of participants. The outcome of that workshop was 
distinctly representing the library view of its services. It was 
very interesting to observe that most suggestions for 
innovation had to do with physical space and face-to-face 
communication, even if later had to be done using video. Fig. 
7 shows a sample of what library employees gave as 
examples of innovation during the initial part of the 
workshop. As it can be seen, several suggestions had to do 
with avoiding queue in the library, while equally many were 
suggesting a video call canter. Later, while thinking about 
touch points and customer journeys, variation in envisioned 
journeys was greater. Yet, it was evident that the decision 
power in negotiations around customer journeys clearly 
belonged to the library employees.  
On the other hand, the remaining workshops strongly 
represented users’ point of view. The journeys, both present 
and future, show mostly digital touch points and digital 
services. Even when they were not digital, like the ‘book-to-
door’ service from the second workshop, they did not 
involve the library building or face-to face communication. 
Even in cases of emergency, as in the example from the 
workshop three, the students seem to prefer other forms of 
contact, such as the phone, over the visit to the library.  
 
Figure 7.  Post-it notes with answers to the question “What does 
innovation in the library mean for you? Give an example”.  
From what we could hear and observe during the 
workshops, the perception of what a service should be 
characterized by (intangibility, heterogeneity, inseparability, 
perishability) also differs between the library employees and 
the library users. The students in the workshops were in 
favor of automated online services, in part, due to the 
equality in the delivery of the service and its independence of 
either the librarian, or the librarian’s perception of the user. 
The customer journey in the second workshop (see Fig. 4, in 
the red box), describes the aforementioned book-to-door 
service, possibly inspired by Amazon [29]. Even though the 
service delivers a tangible object to the door, it still 
eliminates heterogeneity. The heterogeneity was not the 
characteristic that students valued. The librarians, on the 
other hand, consider their knowledge as extremely valuable, 
but highly dependent on the inseparability of the service. 
While the explicit part of their knowledge may become part 
of some system, the tacit knowledge and the long and rich 
experience in working with academic community is 
transferable only at the moment of service delivery in the 
physical world. If this experience and tacit knowledge are 
not valued enough by users, this kind of service is indeed in 
peril of perishing. From the outcomes of the workshops we 
can see that value and meaning of IHIP characteristics of 
services needs to be further negotiated among the 
stakeholders. The gap that exists needs to be bridged by 
design of services that better suit user ways of doing things, 
but do not lose the extremely valuable assets that the 
librarians have. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper described the case of exploring the present and 
the future academic library services, focusing on finding 
literature relevant for some student or research project. Four 
workshops were organized. The first featured a large number 
of library employees, while the remaining three focused 
mostly on student population. The main tool for engaging 
stakeholders in the process of creating customer journeys 
was a set of service design cards, modified to best fit this 
very specific context. The process was photo documented.  
First, we remark that that our extension of the service 
design cards was meaningful for our participants, as were the 
tasks. Several groups have explicitly and unsolicited 
mentioned that it was nice to be able to use the colored dots 
and arrows and ‘grade’ the importance of certain touch 
points. Only 2 groups have chosen not to use this possibility. 
Our main finding shows that the library still focuses very 
much on physical services, while the students are nearly 
exclusively concerned with digital services. A very positive 
outcome of the whole process for the academic library is 
increased awareness of just how large this gap is and its 
recent commitment to engage in a long lasting user cantered 
project focusing on user experience and design of services 
with users. 
The ideation and thoughts around new services that 
started in some of these workshops have already been carried 
a step further. One new service that helps find e-books has 
been designed and implemented. The future work involves 
participation in the afore mentioned project, which is now at 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

its start, and deepening understanding of the role of human-
computer interaction research, its methods and techniques, in 
design of user experience and services for the academic 
library. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are indebted to all workshops participants, 
and the university library for initiating the project. The 
National Library, in part, financed the project.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. E. Casey and L. C. Savastinuk, “Library 2.0: services for 
the next generation libraries,” Library Journal. Vol.1(9), 2006, 
pp. 1–5.  
[2] M. J. Metzger, “Making sense of credibility on the web: 
models 
for 
evaluating 
online 
information 
and 
recommendations for future research,” J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. 
Technol., vol. 58, no. 13, 2007, pp. 2078–2091.  
[3] F. J. Harris, I found it on the Internet: coming of age online. 
Chicago: American Library Association, 2011. 
[4] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, “E-book reader and the 
necessity of divergence from the legacy of paper book,” in 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Advances 
in Computer Human Interaction, 2011, pp. 267–273.  
[5] A. L. Culén, B. K. Engen, A. Gasparini, and J. Herstad, “The 
use of iPad in academic setting: ownership issues in relation 
to 
technology 
(non)adoption,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
ICEM&SIIE, 2011, pp. 564–572. 
[6] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, “iPad: a new classroom 
technology? A report from two pilot studies,” in Information 
Sciences and e-Society, 2011, pp. 199–208. 
[7] E. J. Davis, “What does success look like? Evidence-based 
assessment of the academic library”, 17th Conference of 
Greek Academic Libraries: Academic library evaluation as a 
measure of In stitutional Quality Assessment, Ioannina, 2008, 
pp. 1–9. 
[8] J.-V. Nisula, “Searching for definitions for service design - 
what do we mean with service design?”, ServDes 2012, Co-
Creating Services, 2012, pp. 171–175. 
[9] C. Lovelock and E. Gummesson, “Whither services 
marketing? In search of a new paradigm and fresh 
perspectives,” J. Serv. Res., vol. 7, no. 1, 2004, pp. 20–41. 
[10] M. Barrett, E. Davidson, A.-L. Fayard, S. Vargo, and Y. Yoo, 
“Being innovative about service innovation: service, design 
and digitalization,” International Conference on Information 
Systems (ICIS) 2012, Panel 7, 2012, pp. 1–5.  
[11] S. L. Vargo and R. F. Lusch, “Evolving to a new dominant 
logic for marketing,” Journal of marketing, 2004, pp. 1–17. 
[12] A. Polaine, L. Løvlie, and B. Reason, Service design: from 
insight to implementation. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Rosenfeld Media, 
2013. 
[13] E. Fragnière, B. Nanchen, and M. Sitten, “Performing service 
design experiments using ethnomethodology and theatre-
based reenactment: a swiss ski resort case study,” Serv. Sci., 
vol. 4, no. 2, 2012, pp. 89–100. 
[14] C.-K. Chen, C.-H. Yu, S.-J. Yang, and H.-C. Chang, “A 
customer-oriented service-enhancement system for the public 
sector,” Manag. Serv. Qual., vol. 14, no. 5, 2004, pp. 414–
425. 
[15] A. Kumar, D. S. Lokku, and N. R. Zope, “Value driven 
approach for services design,” Proceedings of the 56th Annu. 
Meet. ISSS, 2012, pp. 1–9. 
[16] J. E. Fountain, “Paradoxes of public sector customer service,” 
Governance, vol. 14, no. 1, 2001, pp. 55–73. 
[17] G. Rugg and P. McGeorge, “The sorting techniques: a tutorial 
paper on card sorts, picture sorts and item sorts,” Expert 
Systems, vol. 22, no. 3, 2005, pp. 94–107. 
[18] T. Brown, “Design thinking,” Harward Bus. Rev., vol. 86(6), 
2008, pp. 84–95. 
[19] R. Cooper, S. Junginger, and T. Lockwood, “Design thinking 
and design management: a research and practice perspective,” 
Des. Manag. Rev., vol. 20, no. 2, 2009, pp. 46–55. 
[20] S. Holmlid, “Interaction design and service design: expanding 
a comparison of design disciplines”, Nordes, 2007, pp. 1–8. 
[21] J. Schneider, M. Stickdorn, F. Bisset, K. Andrews, and A. 
Lawrence, This is service design thinking: basics, tools, cases. 
Bis B.V, 2012. 
[22] M. Koivisto, “Frameworks for structuring services and 
customer experiences,” in Designing Services with Innovative 
Methods, Finland, 2009, pp. 136–149. 
[23] S. Clatworthy, “Service innovation through touch-points: 
development of an innovation toolkit for the first stages of 
new service development,” Int. J. Des., vol. 5, no. 2, 2011, pp. 
15–28.  
[24] S. Miettinen and M. Koivisto (Eds.), Designing services with 
innovative methods. University of Art and Design Helsinki, 
2009. 
[25] A. L. Culén and A. A. Gasparini, “Student driven innovation: 
designing university library services,” The Sixth International 
Conference on Advances in Human oriented and Personalized 
Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services, 2013, pp. 12–17. 
[26] A. Gasparini and A. L. Culén, “University library as a living 
lab: innovating with students”, The 2nd International M-sphere 
Conference for Multidisciplinarity in Science and Business, 
2013, pp. 19. 
[27] E. Lee and A. Karahasanović, “Can business process 
management 
benefit from service 
journey modelling 
language?,” The Eighth International Conference on Software 
Engineering Advances, 2013, pp. 579–582. 
[28] M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing ethnographies. London: SAGE, 
2007. 
[29] T. Treanor, “Amazon: Love Them? Hate Them? Let’s Follow 
the Money,” Publ. Res. Q., vol. 26, no. 2, 2010, pp. 119–128. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

