Perceptional Approach to Design of Industrial  
Plant Monitoring Systems 
 
                           Mehmet Göktürk                                            Mustafa Bakır, Burak Aydoğan, Mehmet Aydın 
 Department of Computer Engineering  
 
Process Improvement and Software Division 
       Gebze Institute of Technology 
 
 
       TÜPRAŞ İzmit Petroleum Refinery 
                gokturk@gyte.edu.tr   
 
 
      {mustafa.bakir,burak.aydogan,mehmet.aydin@tupras.com.tr}
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we have investigated the perceptional 
attitudes of a massive scale industrial plant staff towards 
process monitoring systems and focused on human factors that 
are influential in design of plant monitoring systems. The study 
is a part of a plant-wide monitoring system which is under 
development, aimed to help staff to monitor processes and 
plant performance in detail. The paper first gives focused 
introduction on large scale enterprise and plant monitoring 
and management information systems, then discusses human 
machine interaction relevance of these systems to the staff 
performance and perception. Examples from the literature and 
previous work are presented. Primary human factors in 
proactive monitoring and highly automated systems are briefly 
discussed. A design survey study follows the introduction and 
relevant literature sections. The survey is designed to collect 
perceptional status of the staff against such systems, including 
the perception of their current performance. Results are 
analyzed and discussed in order to enhance system design 
decisions in such plant monitoring systems. We believe that 
such perceptual studies, performed before attempting to 
implement large scale monitoring systems that are highly 
interactive to the existing staff, should be considered as 
essential part of the design process. The results of this study is 
being used as inputs in implementation of a recent petroleum 
plant monitoring system. 
Keywords-Plant 
Monitoring 
Systems; 
Management 
Information System; Perception, Human Performance. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Large scale industrial plants comprise challenging 
environments for information technology specialists and 
software developers. Small scale plants do usually include 
few number of independent technical systems and simple 
information architecture. On the contrary, large scale plants 
are made up of various subsystems each probably built by 
different 
vendors 
at 
different 
times, 
using 
various 
technologies and diverse information architectures. Large 
scale plants are therefore significantly heterogeneous 
environments. Since assimilation of plant-wide information 
and trends completely by each user/staff is relatively a hard 
task in such heterogeneous environments, any lack of 
awareness about certain parameters could result in serious 
consequences and losses.  
Modern process control systems are highly connected to 
plant-wide 
information 
systems 
and 
able 
to 
push 
significantly detailed data to upper information layers for 
control and monitoring activities. Such plants have highly 
automated processes with independent computerized process 
controllers that are responsible for running individual 
processes in optimum performance. High degree of 
automation and heterogeneous structure usually impairs 
visibility of parametric information about processes.  
Often, information exchange between these automation 
and users who are responsible from running the plant are 
inadequate. This can eventually cause inefficiencies in plant 
performance and even result in life threatening catastrophes. 
The famous Three Mile Island nuclear accident (1979), is 
one example where poor user-system information exchange 
caused catastrophic plant failure [1][2].  
Munro and Tilyard indicate the problem of user 
interaction in industrial environments as follows: “The 
industry’s strength has been in finding technical or hardware 
solutions while its weakness has been at the people end of 
the business in maximizing and consolidating the gains from 
the technologies” [3]. 
Monitoring a complex system is generally a hard task. A 
human operator needs to be aware of what is going on in a 
plant to a certain degree where his job is performed without 
any consequences or loss of production. However, required 
degree of awareness and level of detail that need to be 
provided remain unknown for most cases. The term 
“situational awareness” is used to describe this condition in 
literature. There have been numerous studies regarding 
situational awareness of the user in aviation and military 
areas due to their relative importance due to life critical 
nature of the operations [4][5]. As plant technologies 
advance, importance of plant monitoring also becoming 
significant both due to increased life critical nature and 
economical impacts in case of possible failures. When plant 
staff is unable to interact with and control correctly the 
required parameters, it is usually attributed to situational 
awareness problem. This is due to the fact that a normal 
behaving staff would think to act positively and in parallel to 
task descriptions in all situations.  
Researcher David Hopkins summarizes major reasons of 
most situational awareness problems into four categories in 
terms of their consequences on user actions [6]: 
 
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

1. The user has a full appreciation and understanding of 
the situation but an inability to take action. This is rare but 
may occur, such as, in extreme fatigue where the human can 
appreciate a situation but is too tired to do anything about it. 
2. The user may have an adequate perception of all the 
relevant stimuli but a failure to appreciate their meaning or 
import. For example, the user may see an indicator, but 
forget what it means. 
3. A user may fail to perceive a particular stimulus. 
He/she may not notice an icon for example, but see other 
items perfectly well. 
4. A user may not perceive any of the surrounding 
stimuli, being for example, preoccupied with his/her 
thoughts and mind wandering. 
 
Among the above problems the first one is rarely 
observed in extreme circumstances in critical conditions. Job 
descriptions, workflow and management decisions are 
expected to eliminate such scenarios. However, latter three 
are 
highly 
relevant 
to 
system 
design, 
information 
presentation, user interaction design and interruption 
mechanisms. It is therefore essential to establish a successful 
system-operator interaction with adequate and reliable 
information flow for a highly complex industrial plant. 
An important fact of most industrial plants is that large 
amounts of staff work together. Some of them work in shifts 
whereas other work during day work hours. Therefore a 
collaborative awareness about plant is sought. This type of  
awareness about the status of the plant processes can be 
interrupted or totally lost, due to multiple causes such as lack 
of adequate collaboration or improper handover structure 
between shifts [7]. These problems can further be worsened 
through inadequate and mismanaged flow of information to 
user from the plant, unavailability of temporal  and historical 
information from system monitoring displays and other 
factors.  
It is therefore imperative for a good plant monitoring 
architecture, to be designed in accordance with expectations 
and needs of the staff and theoretical foundations of human 
machine interaction discipline. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2 we discuss relevant properties of plant monitoring 
systems. Section 4 gives the results of the survey study 
which is given in Section 3. We provide results and 
discussion in Section 4 and Section 5 respectively. 
Conclusive remarks are given in Section 6.  
 
II. 
PLANT MONITORING SYSTEMS 
Complex industrial plants have numerous activities and 
processes that are independent of each other while being 
controlled by an army of staff and workers, where some 
work at different hours. Although these processes are 
independent processes and controlled by independent 
automation and staff, they are also interrelated through 
product flow, energy and other variables to some degree [8]. 
Therefore, upper level supervisory monitoring and control, 
focusing on the whole plant as a single entity is also a 
necessity. Typical staff types that are in touch with plant 
monitoring activities are as follows:  
 
• 
Facility operation engineers, engineers, specialists 
• 
Unit head operators, and unit operators 
• 
Unit and facility operation chiefs, chiefs 
• 
Unit and facility chief engineers, chief engineers, 
coordinators 
• 
Managers and upper level staff 
 
Considering needs of above different staff members of a 
plant, a hierarchical multiple level architecture for 
monitoring and control is necessary as shown in Figure 1.  
Due to massive number of plant variables and separated 
units which are often installed by different vendors at 
different times, large scale industrial plants have at least four 
different monitoring levels about ongoing operations. At 
each level, as one moves up, level of detail is reduced and 
plant-wide abstraction with data combination is performed. 
This enables strategic thinking and better management 
decision making.  On the other hand, monitoring tasks at 
lower levels require more fine grained, localized parametric 
access, visualization and control. 
When an individual process of a plant is concerned, 
process level monitoring is implemented and staff is only 
trained and responsible from monitoring only the process 
that he/she is assigned to. Similarly, middle level engineers, 
unit chiefs, operation engineers are more interested in 
examining and monitoring the conditions of units that they 
are responsible for as a complete set. Upper management on 
the other hand, mush have access to all parameters in more 
abstract forms but only in detail when required. Moreover, 
security and authorization mechanisms must be implemented 
between different levels and members of all plant monitoring 
staff. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Multiple levels of monitoring in large scale plants. 
 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

For safety and successful integration, supervisory 
monitor level is placed at a level where chief engineers 
monitor individual units, processes or overall of the plant. At 
the top, managerial monitoring for decision process and 
implementation is required to steer the plant with respect to 
business 
goals 
and 
market 
conditions, 
such 
as 
accommodation to market conditions and adaptation to input 
supply levels. Therefore as greater overall control power is 
expected in managerial level of monitoring, lower details 
should be visible in order to enable situational awareness of 
the whole plant variables.  
Unlike systems of 1990’s or earlier, today’s plant control 
computers are highly connected through plant-wide 
networks. These are usually number of individual networks 
such as separate ones for data collection, control and security 
operations. Typical components of large scale plant 
information system is shown in Figure 2. Vast number of 
sensors connected to individual machines, reactors, motors 
etc. allows plant engineers to collect valuable information 
remotely through plant-wide information network. However, 
this benefit poses three challenges: 
 
a) Storing sensor and status data in a central database, 
b) Using various collected data for information 
extraction and automation purposes, 
c) Representation and visualization of this data for 
human consumption, monitoring and decision 
making. 
 
Therefore, contemporary plant monitoring and control 
systems with data collection and storage facilities are 
required in order to keep up with this new kind of high 
volume data. Furthermore, presentation of such a high 
volume data in a proper way, so that it can be assimilated 
and used for decision making by different staff is a 
challenging task. A “user centric” plant monitoring and 
control strategy needs to be implemented to achieve high 
situational awareness about the current and historical status 
of the plant condition. The following section further 
discusses stages of plant monitoring and critical components 
in order to create a user centered modern plant monitoring 
system. 
A. Several Stages of Monitoring 
Li et. al in their study, suggests to study monitoring 
process in four stages [9]. These are briefly described as 
follows: 
Detection: The first stage, detection, involves sensing, 
perception and discrimination of the current state of the 
process. Thus, early and accurate detection is critical to any 
successful human intervention. Existing research suggests 
that 30% of the human error failures occurred at the 
detection stage [10].  
Analysis: The second stage is quite a complicated 
cognitive process. It usually involves interpreting current 
process state, reasoning possible causes of any unusual 
condition, projecting the future process state with or without 
a specific intervention, planning future actions or assessing 
the associated risks and competing prioritization of control 
tasks. 
These 
activities 
require 
adequate 
operational 
knowledge and experience. The research indicate that most 
operators mainly rely on trend displays, data overview 
displays and CCTV (Close-Circuit Television) to analyze  
process status.  
Action: This step involves conducting necessary actions 
in order to meet predetermined goals of plant production 
based on the cognitive analysis of the data that is assimilated 
in previous stage. 
Evaluation: The 
last 
stage, 
evaluation, 
basically 
determines whether the process has been stabilized or not by 
monitoring the feedback from control system. An operator 
needs to know what the current process state is, and whether 
it is moving in the right direction towards production goals, 
and when he/she can return control to automation if it exists. 
Usually, operators would target same displays and control 
system screens used at analysis stage for this evaluation task. 
There are several factors associated with these stages that 
may cause incorrect handling of plant operations among 
these the following can be given as major ones: 
“Alarm Flooding” with too many alarms causing 
ignorance of alarms. Failure to mentally integrate distributed 
information on screens. Low trust in sensor readings and 
lack of early detection support on the interface and 
underlying technology. Lack of in-depth insight of critical 
process dynamics and lack of predication of future plant state 
[11]. As a result of above factors, an operator may fall into a 
situation 
where 
overall 
mental 
picture 
of 
process 
performance is absent. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Primary monitoring components of large scale plant 
management information system. 
B. Proactive Monitoring 
Proactive monitoring is the term that describes 
monitoring paradigm, that enables operators to take actions 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

before unwanted events occur. Through monitoring 
proactively, it is hoped that staff would notice problems 
while they are visible as small events, and can intervene 
before there are more drastic consequences, such as larger 
equipment failures, plant destabilization, human injury or 
loss of production efficiency [12].  
A significant portion of proactive monitoring lies under 
“trend monitoring” and “trend analysis” techniques [13]. 
Reacting proactively means taking a more comprehensive 
look at human factors in order to sustain efficient and safe 
operation of a plant. Trend monitoring techniques rely on 
collection of significant amount of data and displaying 
current values along with and with respect to old values 
indicating trends to human operator [14][15]. Proactive 
monitoring therefore requires high situational awareness and 
understanding facts about a plant or unit in which a human 
monitoring staff is responsible. In order to provide this, such 
responsible staff should be able to ascertain, 
 
• 
“What is the system doing now?” 
• 
“Why is it doing that it is doing?” 
• 
“What will it do in near future?” 
 
We believe that well designed human machine interfaces 
along with adequately trained staff regarding underlying 
structure of the processes can achieve above three 
requirements. However, as systems include more automation 
behind controllers, the problem of “automation opacity” 
becomes an issue affecting awareness of control/monitor 
staff about current status of the processes. Abstraction 
techniques that incorporate and reflect principles of 
underlying automation (controller behavior) used for such 
processes, can help to overcome opacity issues and increase 
proactive monitoring success. Care must be taken when 
designing interfaces for these systems without obscuring 
underlying structure and creating false cognitive mental 
models. The survey study that is explained in Section 3 
attempts to gather preliminary information on how 
information technology and graphical user interfaces can 
work together helping to achieve better level of proactive 
plant monitoring. 
C. Information Flow and Messaging 
Large industrial plants have number of people working 
together, sometimes on the same unit, plant, process and 
sometimes on different ones. Although most are relatively 
independent, there are sometimes relations between 
parameters where one staff is responsible from and other is 
not in particular. In such cases, monitoring staff usually 
inform each other via various different information channels. 
Common methods are calling via telephone, sending e-mail 
or SMS message, sending paper message or sometimes 
visiting in person. 
Therefore, a contemporary plant monitoring system is 
necessary, enabling staff interaction through advanced 
messaging and notification mechanisms. This, in turn will 
help reduce overhead and redundant messaging and 
interactions through traditional channels, as well as possible 
errors. Further, a successful notification system will have 
learning capabilities, in such a way that certain types of 
events are automatically routed to responsible monitoring 
staff once they are initially addressed as a result of manual 
notification by peers. Messaging and notification architecture 
should allow labeling certain normal and abnormal cases for 
further notification processing. 
It is also noteworthy to mention that temporal status of 
the plant units and processes should be carried through 
between shifts. As mentioned in earlier sections, using 
advanced trend analysis, display techniques and user 
message tagging to the trend display data, monitoring staff 
can have access to all information beyond their allocated 
time span during their work time. 
 
III. 
SURVEY STUDY 
Based on the literature that we have reviewed, it was 
found necessary to conduct a preliminary survey study, 
understanding what staff thinks about current and future 
monitoring structure. It was planned to make a survey study 
and then, to use the outcomes in design of the new plant-
wide management information and plant monitoring system. 
We have conducted a survey study prior designing the 
plant-wide monitoring for management information systems 
among the related staff. Based on the previous research, it 
was essential for the staff to accept the technology and 
methods in order to fully utilize in the work environment. 22 
subjects selected randomly from petroleum plant staff 
working in various positions (except worker level) related to 
monitoring tasks are selected. They were interviewed and 
given a questionnaire regarding the plant-wide monitoring 
system. Both quantitative and qualitative results are obtained 
as an input to design of monitoring system.  
A. Questionnaire 
A total of  20 question questionnaire with an addition of 
open ended free discussion form was given to oil refinery 
staff. Questions were targeted to understand the attitude and 
perception of staff towards proactive and enhanced plant 
monitoring and management information system. Open 
ended and explanatory questions were also asked in order to 
gather as much information as possible. Main focus of the 
questionnaire was to identify how much staff time and effort 
was currently allocated to plant monitoring tasks and how 
difficult is to work with the existing structure. Understanding 
and attitude of staff perception towards plant monitoring 
were key issues in answering these questions.  
The effect of possible new information architecture and 
staff perception towards this was among expected outcomes 
of the study. Furthermore, crucial parameters, the expected 
frequency of monitoring these parameters and additional 
information to understand daily activities of staff were asked 
as questions in the study. Prior to giving the questionnaire, 
full confidentiality were assured, and the purpose of the 
study was explained. 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV. 
RESULTS 
Tabular 
results 
that 
were 
obtained 
from 
the 
questionnaires given in Table 1 and Table 2. In terms of a 
measure for engagement to monitoring activities, subjects 
indicated that they spend over 75% of their overall work time 
using computers where 17% of this time (mean value) is 
dedicated to monitoring activities. 22 parameters must be 
continuously monitored on average and 16 parameters must 
be checked daily. Higher number of parameters however 
(64) must be checked occasionally although variance 
between subjects was high on that parameter. 
TABLE I.  
CATEGORICAL QUESTIONS REGARDING             MONITORING 
TASKS 
No 
Question 
mean  
 (std) 
(media
n) 
1 
How often you look at the parameter that 
you are mostly interested in? 
3.09  
(0,68) 
(3) 
2 
Do you think you or other staff made 
errors in the past in monitoring refinery 
parameters? 
4.35 
(0,89) 
(4) 
3 
Do you think you spend too much time 
with software and methods in monitoring 
parameters? 
3.75 
(1,26) 
(4) 
4 
Do you think there are measurement 
devices in operation that have errors 
beyond acceptable limits? 
4.55 
(0,93) 
(5) 
5 
Do you prefer the variables that you 
follow be represented in graphical 
formats such as bar charts, pie charts, 
histograms etc? 
4,61 
(0,74) 
(5) 
6 
Do you believe that graphical 
representation is not as necessary and 
you can monitor parameters by looking 
at numbers? 
1,55 
(0,83) 
(1,5) 
7 
Do you share refinery parameter facts 
that pulls your attention with your 
colleagues other than your manager? 
4,47 
(0,77) 
(4) 
8 
Do you need printed material when 
making decisions regarding plant 
parameters? 
2,69 
(1,25) 
(3) 
9 
Do you think that better use of 
information technologies will improve 
refinery efficiency? 
4,75 
(0,66) 
(5) 
10 
Do you think is it technically beneficial 
to be able to check parameters that you 
are responsible by using mobile phone? 
4,47 
(0,70) 
(4) 
11 
Do you think that you know refinery 
processes well enough? 
3,87 
(1,21) 
(4) 
 
Answers for 5-point likert scale (strongly disagree,  
disagree, neutral, agree, strongly Agree) questions indicated 
a clear positive attitude towards graphical plant monitoring 
systems and their benefits. Subjects believed that they or 
other colleagues made errors in monitoring tasks in the past 
(4,35). They also believe that measurement devices in the 
plant might have inaccurate readings (4,55), which is indeed 
reported in literature among causes of situational awareness 
problems.  
They support the use of graphical content and use of 
mobile phones to monitor parameters will be beneficial 
along with more intelligent and proactive information 
presentation. Subjects felt comfortable with understanding 
the plant parameters and indicated that they rarely open up 
printed material in order to understand and solve issues. 
Open ended questions were related to individual parameters 
that they are mostly interested in and how they want them to 
be presented in detail. We have gathered quite helpful 
individual details, parameter conventions, ranges and 
suggestions from the survey and follow up interviews after 
filling the questionnaires. These are beyond the scope of this 
paper and will be included in the final design. 
 
TABLE II.  
NUMERICAL QUESTIONS REGARDING MONITORING TASKS 
No 
Question 
mean  
 (std) 
(media
n) 
1 
What percent of your total time do you 
spend on computers in your job 
normally? 
76 %   
(24) 
(90%) 
2 
 What percent of your total computer 
usage time at work goes to monitoring 
refinery plant parameters only? 
17 % 
(23) 
(7,5%) 
3 
 How many plant parameters that you 
may want to follow continuously? 
22 
(38) 
(5) 
4 
 How many plant parameters that you 
may look at once a day? 
16 
(24) 
(6) 
5 
 How many plant parameters that you 
may look at occasionally? 
64 
(211) 
(6) 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Modern plant control and monitoring systems are 
significantly different from systems of the past. With the 
help of new advanced information technologies, plant 
operators seem to have access to all parameters; yet, having 
access to all parameters causes information overload and 
failures. To make things worse, advanced process 
automation techniques that are implemented in modern 
process control systems may hide certain details from the 
operator inadvertently, causing automation opaqueness. 
Moreover, market pressure, environmental concerns and 
tighter profit margins push plants into operating ranges that 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

are very narrow, which further makes controlling and 
monitoring more difficult and critical.  
A contemporary solution to this should employ user 
centered design of plant monitoring. Traditional reactive 
approach should be replaced with proactive techniques. The 
use of mobile devices, tablets, standalone status displays are 
reported as beneficial. In order to proactively monitor the 
system, integration of task elements into a highly graphical 
and well designed interface, with messaging, notification and 
data reconciliation properties is suggested. Through this, 
monitoring staff can achieve higher level of situational 
awareness and work in parallel to the plant objectives.   
There might be other critical dimensions regarding plant-
wide monitoring and control in modern plants such as 
security and vulnerability to malicious software. It becomes 
extremely critical, when staff start using mobile devices, 
smartphones and other equipment to reach and control plant 
parameters. As traditional plant systems are not connected 
directly to internet and mobile devices and assume presence 
of certain physical access security, such modern access 
methods which might seem beneficial at first, require 
extreme security measures, which are beyond the scope of 
this paper. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We conclude that as recent connectivity and information 
technology properties of large industrial plants make new 
types of plant-wide control and monitoring tasks possible, 
one needs to define how these tasks will be implemented 
successfully through modern interactive user interfaces and 
mobile technologies.  
It appears that staff work shifts, hierarchical organization 
structure and common understanding of plant goals are 
among the essential factors that must be taken into account. 
We observed that in many situations considerable amount of 
time required to monitor certain parameters periodically. 
Therefore, parameter information that is graphical and easy 
to assimilate will be welcomed both in mobile and desktop 
settings by plant staff. 
We believe that staff surveys, in large plants must be 
conducted prior to modification and new design of control 
and monitoring systems. Getting into contact and collecting 
feedback from plant staff during design stages were found 
beneficial and encouraging in many directions. We have 
recently used the results of this study in development of our 
new plant monitoring software. Initial feedback that we 
received about our new software were  satisfactory. An 
evaluation of new software is also planned, after being used 
for about a year for further conclusions. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank TUBITAK, Turkish National Scientific 
Technical Research Organization for supporting this work 
through research grant no: 3130475. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Rogovin, M. (1979). “Three Mile Island: A report to the 
Commissioners and to the public”, Nuclear Regulatory 
Commission, Washington, DC (USA), 1979. 
[2] Lau, Nathan, Greg A. Jamieson, Gyrd Skraaning jr, and 
Catherine M. Burns. "Providing Operator Support during 
Monitoring for Unanticipated Events through Ecological 
Interface Design." In Proc. of the 29th Annual Canadian 
Nuclear Society Conference. 2008. 
[3] Munro, P. D., & Tilyard, P. A., “Back to the Future - Why 
Change Doesn’t Necessarily Mean Progress”, Conference 
Proceedings from the Tenth Mill Operators’ Conference 2009. 
Tenth Mill Operators’ Conference 2009, Adelaide, South 
Australia, 2009. 
[4] Sarter, N. B., & Woods, D. D., “Situation awareness: A 
critical but ill-defined phenomenon”, The International 
Journal of Aviation Psychology, 1(1), pp45-57, 1991. 
[5] Endsley, M. R., “Measurement of situation awareness in 
dynamic systems”, Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 37(1), pp65-84., 1995. 
[6] Hopkin, V.,D, “Situational Awareness in Air Traffic Control”, 
Situational awareness in complex systems, Proceesings of the 
Center for Applied Human Factors in Aviation, Conference 
on Situational Awareness in Complex Systems, Orlando, FL, 
Ed. Gilson et. al, pp171-178,1994. 
[7] Li, X., D. J. McKee, T. Horberry, and M. S. Powell. "The 
control room operator: The forgotten element in mineral 
process control." Minerals Engineering 24, no. 8 pp 894-902, 
2011. 
[8] Woods, David D. "Decomposing automation: Apparent 
simplicity, real complexity." 
Automation and human 
performance: Theory and applications pp3-17,1996. 
[9] Li, X, Malcolm S. Powell, and Tim Horberry. "Human 
Factors in Control Room Operations in Mineral Processing 
Elevating Control From Reactive to Proactive." Journal of 
Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making 6.1, pp88-111, 
2012. 
[10] Hollifield, B., Oliver, D., Nimmo, I., Habibi, E., “The High 
Performance HMI Handbook: A Comprehensive Guide to 
Designing, Implementing and Maintaining Effective HMIs for 
Industrial Plant Operations”, PAS, 2008. Burns, Catherine M.  
[11] Hollnagel, E., “Time and time again”, Theoretical Issues in 
Ergonomics Science, 3(2), pp143-158, 2008. 
[12] "Towards 
proactive 
monitoring 
in 
the 
petrochemical 
industry." Safety Science 44, no. 1 pp27-36, 2006. 
[13] Yin, Shanqing, Angela Tan, and Martin Helander. "Proactive 
Process Control Monitoring using Trends." In Proceedings of 
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 
vol. 52, no. 24, pp. 2003-2007. SAGE Publications, 2008. 
[14] Cook, Maia B., Harvey S. Smallman, and Cory A. Rieth. 
"Increasing the effective span of control: Advanced graphics 
for proactive, trend-based monitoring." IIE Transactions on 
Occupational Ergonomics and Human Factors, 2014. 
[15] Charbonnier, Sylvie, Carlos Garcia-Beltan, Catherine Cadet, 
and Sylviane Gentil. "Trends extraction and analysis for 
complex 
system 
monitoring 
and 
decision 
support." 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 18, no. 1 
pp21-36,2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

