E-book Reader and the Necessity of Divergence from the Legacy of Paper Book 
 
Alma Leora Culén  
University of Oslo 
Institute for Informatics 
Oslo, Norway 
almira@ifi.uio.no 
Andrea Alessandro Gasparini 
University of Oslo 
University library 
Oslo, Norway 
a.a.gasparini@ub.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract— The traditional paper-based book as we know it 
has been read and loved for hundreds of years. The first 
generation of e-book readers, based on electronic ink, 
attempted to emulate the traditional paper-based book, both in 
content and functionality. In this paper we discuss how the 
reading of e-books starts to diverge from the legacy of paper 
books. Many still favor the sensory experience of touching an 
actual book, smelling the paper, and hearing the sound of 
turning pages. However, huge memory, easy readability, the 
possibility of sharing text between users (such as Nook allows), 
the multi-functionality (such as iPad has) and the ease of 
downloading books, all make e-book readers increasingly 
popular. Based on insights gained from ethnographic studies, 
workshops, focus groups, and questionnaires, we discuss some 
advantages and disadvantages of e-book readers, speculate on 
how they may change the way we read, in particular actively, 
and propose some guidelines for future e-book reader 
functionality design specifically aimed at the student 
population. The first prototype resulting from co-design work 
with primary school students is presented as an example of our 
design approach.  
Keywords- digital libraries; e-book readers; HCI; interface; 
co-design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The idea of an electronic equivalent of a book is not new. 
Since the Gutenberg project began in the early seventies (by 
M. Hart as a volunteer-based effort to digitize and archive 
cultural works, as well as encourage the creation and 
distribution of e-books [8]), there have been many attempts 
to design a device from which one could read, store and 
access books easily.  
Developers have been working for over three decades on 
e-book readers based on LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) 
technology without success in the market. One of the major 
difficulties was not only that the visibility of the text in 
bright light was significantly diminished, but also that the 
rendering of pictures and drawings was not good enough. In 
addition, since e-books based on this technology had a 
tendency to use a lot of power, the life of the battery was 
short.  
With the invention of electronic paper (see [16] for the 
history and technology behind e-paper), several companies 
(Sony and Amazon among others) have used this material to 
create different types of reading devices. The technology 
behind e-paper is e(lectronic)-ink. A short summary of how 
it works is given in the Appendix A. These technologies 
overcome all major difficulties LCD technology had. Market 
interest in e-readers is soaring. A natural question that arises 
is how would these devices influence the act and the 
experience of reading. 
Reading activity itself, whether using paper or e-paper, 
falls into two major categories of active and passive reading. 
Active reading is often related to work, research and studies. 
Passive reading often occurs in the context of leisure. Active 
reading is frequently associated with other kinds of activities, 
such 
as 
writing, 
cross-referencing, 
annotating, 
self-
interrupting, rereading etc. (see [12,17]). Active readers 
often have a need to search through the text, in order to 
locate specific words or phrases [20,21]. Generally, this type 
of reading requires analyzing and structuring large amounts 
of information from various text sources [17]. 
 
TABLE I.  
READING  SITUATIONS 
Single text Passive 
Enjoying a novel, reading a 
poem aloud 
Single text Active 
Studying a textbook or manual, 
reviewing a proposal 
Multiple text Passive 
Keeping up with e-mail, 
browsing the newspaper, surfing 
the Web 
Multiple text Active 
Surveying a field, researching a 
problem, keeping up-to-date 
professionally 
 
 
 
The World Wide Web and hypertext, in particular, have 
changed the way we read.  New technological advances 
continue to provide more ways of presenting information 
that allow for a richer experience. Many sources confirm 
that, if properly designed, multimedia rich presentations not 
only promote learning (see for example [11,13]), but also 
have affected the reading of books. For example, company 
Vook [24] has a product that integrates videos with text 
(video+book=vook). 
Potential 
for 
classroom 
use 
of 
multimedia applications and innovative interfaces for reading 
has not gone unnoticed. Recently, in [18], Sharma et al. 
report efforts to develop software and hardware in order to 
267
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

turn small classroom PCs into reading and writing devices 
for children 5-11. This project, even though it is concerned 
with young students only, has goals similar to what is 
presented here.  
The present article does not discuss technical issues with 
e-book readers to any significant degree, but rather the use of 
books or e-book readers as well as the experience of the act 
of reading using paper based media (mainly books and news-
papers) vs. e-book readers (most of which offer the 
possibility or reading the news online as well). We are 
interested in a range of topics related to e-book readers: the 
ways in which they may influence our reading habits, levels 
of understanding, and how they may be adapted to better 
suite active reading for specific groups of users such as, for 
example, students. 
Ethnographic studies (observations and interviews) of 
how people read in different contexts have been carried out. 
Observations were carried out at the university library, where 
the majority of users are active readers, as well as public 
spaces such as bookstores, cafés, busses and trains.  
The university library has obtained some e-book readers 
early on and the opportunity, as one of the authors works at 
the library, presented itself to observe and interview the users 
of the library who were willing to try e-book readers. The 
users of e-book readers were also handed a short 
questionnaire (see Appendix B) and asked to fill it out. These 
preliminary studies pointed out in the direction that 
functionality of the e-book reader needed to be improved in 
order to better accommodate the needs of an active reader. 
Additionally, e-book readers were taken to the classroom in 
the primary school (third grade), to test the device with 
younger readers. The result there was similar, devices need 
to be better tailored for the needs of young students. 
Focus groups and workshops conducted after the 
preliminary studies had getting to understand users needs as 
a goal as well as to gain better understanding of what users 
do during a typical day at school or university. Mixing of 
ideas (see [7]) and brainstorming about the future use of the 
devices was conducted with young users aged 7-8 years. We 
have attempted to create an interface co-design situation (see 
[2,3,5,23]). The first prototypes and experiences from these 
sessions will be presented here. Finally, all our findings are 
summarized in a future oriented scenario and a set of 
guidelines for functionality design of e-book readers for 
students.   
The structure of the article is as follows: a short overview 
of what an e-book reader is, technologies used for e-book 
readers and a few e-book reading devices are briefly 
described in Appendix A. Section 1 contains some of our 
observations, as well as some other research results related to 
the activity of reading paper based media (books and 
newspapers).  
Section 2 contains the results of observations, interviews 
and questionnaires we conducted on the use of e-book 
readers. Section 3 discusses the differences between the 
affordances two artifacts provide and how those may affect 
the reading habits in a long run. Section 4 summarizes our 
findings from workshops and focus groups in form of a 
future scenario and design guidelines. 
II. 
READING PRINTED MEDIA  
Long sequences of innovations and technological 
advances have transformed writing from initial carvings on 
stone, (and later papyrus) to a medium printed on paper. 
Books themselves have directly affected the development of 
the society as a significant and primary tool of the mind. As 
noted in [9], “Reading itself was for many centuries mainly 
conceived of as a ruminatio (pondering at length). In the 
eighteenth century, a new relationship to reading appeared, 
making it legitimate to browse through vast amounts of 
reading material. This form of “extensive reading” became 
pervasive with the advent of newspapers and magazines.” 
Today, a new relationship to reading is emerging through the 
extensive use of digitalized material. People read, world 
around, both traditional paper and digital material. To better 
understand the dynamics of interaction between the reader 
and artifact (whether book or e-book reader), we have 
conducted ethnographic studies to observe how people read 
books and other printed material as both active and passive 
readers.  
Short interviews with people reading in libraries, 
bookstores and on public transportation often yielded 
unexpected reasons for people’s interest in paper books. For 
example:  
A 15-year-old girl sitting in a café had the “New Moon” 
book on the table in front of her. As she started to collect her 
things, we asked whether she had read the book. She said 
that she had finished and was now rereading it, but more 
importantly, that she always brought it with her as doing so 
had started several interesting conversation with people 
seeing the book and making a comment. “Kind of like you 
did now”, she noted. She said that she had read all the other 
books in the series as well and is an active member of several 
Facebook fan groups related to the series. 
In another instance, a 49-year-old woman was walking 
around, browsing in a small bookstore. After she picked up a 
large, thick book, she smelled it. We asked why she had 
done so. The women said that she does not really know why 
but that the smell of the book affected her interest in it. For 
example, she did not like the ones that smelled moldy which 
she associated with dark cellars. If by contrast the book had 
“good smell”, she would open it and look through. She also 
said that she did not do the same with new books. In addition 
to smell, the title and cover art play a large role in attracting 
her to the product. She said that she liked this particular 
bookstore since she could get used books really 
inexpensively. We asked if she read all of the books she 
bought. “Not always”, she said, “but I like having them 
anyway. I think that some day I will have more time to read.” 
A 21-year-old male student said that he loves poetry and 
poetry books because of the poems in them, but also because 
he may put a love letter or his own poem into them.  
Another 19-year-old female student liked the evidence of 
the time passage linked to events from her life, being visible 
on the books. For example, she enjoys taking (time and 
268
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

again) a certain book from the shelf to see the mark of a 
spilled drink left during a first date.  
As examples above illustrate, our general observations 
found that people have not only varied reading habits but 
also unexpected factors attached to their love of books.  
The following summarizes what was important about 
paper books to readers we observed and interviewed: 
• 
The smell of the book, in particular in the library and 
at used bookstores.   
• 
The sense of touch, the feel of the book as one picks 
it up.  
• 
The quality of the paper. As one subject described, 
“Touching a glossy page of a book from a 
photographer, makes me more respectful than 
reading a novel in a pocket format.”  
• 
The size of font and spacing between the lines. 
• 
The weight of the book. 
• 
When the user keeps the book in his/her hand while 
reading, the grip of the book provides a sense of how 
far along one has come in finishing the book. 
• 
Cover art (its content, style, quality, texture etc., see 
also [10]). 
• 
Quickly finding a specific location in the book 
(through the index, for example). 
• 
Page indexing using post-it notes or other markers 
give extra functionality to the paper book. 
• 
The ease and speed with which one can move back 
and forth between pages (see also [22]). 
• 
Notes and underlining done by others in used books 
is important (and can be experienced as either 
frustrating or interesting/helpful). 
• 
The amount of wear of the book can affect the 
choosing of it (see also [5]). 
• 
Sharing a book is important to many readers (not 
only the actual physical copy but also in discussing 
the content with others). 
• 
The social aspect of holding and reading a book may 
be used to communicate a certain message about the 
reader. “Reading a medicine text book on the bus 
gives another signal than if I am reading comics,” 
remarked one reader. 
• 
Variety of ways of using books (sometimes not 
related to reading, such as above mentioned poems 
holder) 
As with other objects acquired in our daily lives, books 
are chosen emotionally [14]. Both the reading and sensorial 
experience of the book itself affect our relationship with it. 
The question was: what happens to all these sensorial and 
emotional factors related to paper books when they are 
digitalized? 
III. 
READING THE E-BOOK  
In the beginning of September 2009, the library at the 
University offered to its users the option of checking out e-
book readers (SONY PRS 505 and Iliad iRex) thereby 
previewing the new technology. The interest among library 
users for checking out the e-book readers was large. Over a 
6-month period, the library lent out e-book readers 120 times 
with users initially waiting more than a week to get one. 
Because of the waiting list, students were allowed to use the 
e-book reader only once. That is to say that there were no 
repeat users in the sample. 
A questionnaire (see appendix B) accompanied each e-
book reader, 41 of which were returned completed.  Below 
are findings from the questionnaire: 
All respondents (41 users) were interested in reading the 
university curriculum on the e-book reader.  
Approximately half of respondents (21 users) preferred 
text in PDF format, finding it easier to read.  
All respondents (41 users) desired a better framework for 
downloading e-books from the library into the reader. Six 
users found the Sony software for communicating between 
the e-book reader and their computer was difficult to use.  
Eight users pointed out that turning the pages on the 
device was annoying because it took too long.  
Six respondents noted wanting to be able to annotate and 
mark the text on the e-book reader. One person said s/he 
would want a dictionary included as part of e-book reader 
software. 
• 
From direct observations of people using e-book 
readers and short conversations we compiled the list 
of things they wish for in a new generation of e-book 
readers. This list is consistent with the findings of 
earlier studies [11,12,13,17,22]: Color images and 
text 
• 
Information about original pagination 
• 
Tables of content for each document 
• 
Fixed/standardized layout and page orientation 
• 
Providing a structure to keep similar texts together 
• 
Portability and comfort in use from different 
positions (sitting, lying down) 
• 
Focus on reading comfort (with clear and large text 
and the ability to adjust to different lighting  i.e. 
outdoor vs. indoor, daylight vs. nighttime)  
• 
Search capacity (through both the text in use and 
those available on the device) 
• 
Annotation tools 
• 
Highlighting capacity 
• 
Simplified navigation between documents  
• 
Capacity to interact between different information 
platform media 
• 
Tools to facilitate collaboration 
Many of these items are already supported by the visual 
and user-friendly format of  iPad.  
A comment from one participant was interesting: "Iliad 
shows signs of being designed by engineers who are a little 
over zealous; it has many functions that work halfway". It in 
a way summarizes our conclusion: this technology has a far-
reaching capacity that, in these first generations at least, has 
been suggested but not fulfilled. However, e-book readers or 
similar devices are here to stay. And like it or not, the e-book 
is not only made for reading on a digital device, but also 
shapes the reading itself. How the artifacts and actual skill of 
reading influence and inform one another over time and with 
different groups of readers is an interesting question to be 
answered in the future. 
269
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

IV. 
DIVERGING FROM THE LEGACY OF PAPER BOOK 
It seems from Sections 1 and 2 that books would have a 
much longer list of “things I love about books” than would e-
book readers. However, people are starting to love the new 
technology as well (see [10]). It is clear that browsing, 
searching, and powerful annotating (tagging, indexing etc.) 
provide a clear-cut advantage to e-book readers, at least in 
active reading and learning situations. To the extent that this 
advantage is true even within the present technology, it 
promises to further grow with future advances.  
The shift that is about to take place in the e-book reader 
technology involves its departure from the legacy of the 
paper book. Admittedly one cannot expect to fold poems 
within the plastic e-book casing. Nor will one ever be able to 
experience the level of tangibility offered by books with their 
weight, size, smell, and other physical properties. While 
turning pages on an e-book reader may have a sound, most 
would agree that it is not the same as actually turning the 
page of a book. So at this stage where e-book readers have in 
place all of the basic reading functions (inherited from 
books), they must necessarily depart from these basics and 
consider the additional affordances of this new digital 
medium.  The e-book reader has the potential to include 
multimedia 
presentations, 
cooperative 
environments, 
creative environments related to reading and writing (such as 
for example interactive writing, hyper fiction, or digital 
storytelling). Fully personalized, as each owner of an e-book 
reader will have own selection of books. And technology is 
available to make all the wishes from the list in section 2 
true, and more. Exploring the possibilities is ahead!  
As mentioned earlier, with each new technological 
advance and each difference in the medium from which we 
read, there are also qualitative changes in the act or reading 
itself. We have shifted from pondering to hyperlink reading. 
And writing in the same style. Humorist Carr jokes about his 
inability to concentrate on a single piece of text any longer, 
and his lost ability to write. On the other hand, [1] reports 
that working with e-book readers seem to deepen 
concentration of the user on the text at hand. Through our 
observation and interviews, we cannot say anything 
conclusive about quality of concentration; it would require a 
much more focused study, which is outside the scope of this 
research. Whether one is true or the other, it seems that the 
question about the influence of the new device on the reading 
quality is in place.  
 
V. 
FOCUS GROUPS AND WORKSHOP FINDINGS 
Two workshops were conducted in September and 
October of 2009, and two focus groups, in February 2010. 
A. First Focus Group 
The first focus group was comprised of four randomly 
selected University students (between the ages of 19 and 32) 
who were active readers interested in studying the texts they 
were reading. The main purpose of the group was to hear 
what students might need or want to see on a device such as 
an e-book reader. 
Findings support that students want something more than 
the traditional paper version can offer, especially when they 
are actively reading in order to learn, for example, an 
academic curriculum. They are willing to sacrifice some of 
the benefits traditional paper books have in return for the 
possibility of searching through all of the texts they may 
have on the reader. As one of the member of our focus group 
reflected: “It may be disturbing to read texts with links to 
searchable phrases or external information and be tempted to 
use them unnecessary, but the gain is BIG” 
Results from discussion in the focus group supported a 
content oriented approach. That is to say within the context 
of studying and research, the availability of information (the 
content) is the primary goal. E–book readers have the 
advantage over paper books of being able to access, 
annotate, and compile content within a single source – a 
finding supported by another study conducted at Princeton 
University [15]. 
One important advantage of e-book readers is the 
immediate availability of information. A participant of the 
focus group noted the advantage of owning one’s own 
mobile library: “I can move all my books to this device, 
since I perceive it as a private dings, like the mobile phone. 
And have them all whenever I need them.”  
This finding is also supported by other studies 
[12,17,15,21]. Worth mentioning here is finding that users 
bring the e-book reader everywhere and are not afraid of 
damage or loss as with more expensive devices such as a 
laptop. 
Some participants in the focus group pointed out that 
they had already tested and used an e-book reader alongside 
a laptop (like a paper book) when doing homework.  
While our users did not discuss the quality of 
concentration when using the e-book reader, a study, done at 
Penn State University [1] analyzed student behavior while 
reading and using e-book readers and found a more 
immersed type of reading with the latter.  
B. Second focus group  
The second focus group was conducted in a business 
setting rather than academic setting. Most participants in this 
group were passive readers, not interested in reading books 
with learning as the primary goal. Instead, other functions 
such as being able to listen to music, take notes, and watch 
movies were more valued.  
A participant, when told what one could do with an e-
book reader, said: "So an e-book-reader is like a modern 
Gameboy to bring on boring trips!" 
Another participant said he would consider purchasing an 
e-book reader if he could easily download the daily 
newspaper in the morning, the text was easy to read, and the 
user interface had good navigational buttons.  
Another explained his appreciation for pocket sized 
books, and wished for an e-book reader one could put in a 
jacket-pocket with the navigational buttons on the back. 
Regarding the interface, he said: "As long as the text is 12-
point and Arial or New Times Roman-style, I don't really 
need fancy apps and programs." 
270
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

A preliminary conclusion from this second focus group 
of passive readers was that while interested in the e-book 
reader, their interest was focused on non-content areas such 
as platform and the readers use in providing news, 
entertainment, and pleasure reading in contrast to students 
who are vitally interested in the content and for whom the 
platform is less important. 
C. Workshop 
In addition to the two focus groups, two workshops were 
conducted at the third grade level (ages 7-8) of the primary 
school.  
During the first session we had a period of observation of 
how children would use e-book readers (see Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1. Third grade students trying Iliad e-book reader. 
The young participants reported a number of problems. 
They found reading books in PDF format on the e-reader 
boring, in part because of the content, in part because of 
problems navigating. Children were frustrated that they 
could not simply “jump out” of the text and try another. 
They were comparatively a lot more interested in our 
supposedly inconspicuous iPhones used to record the 
session, than at the e-book reader itself. 
However, as soon as they were handed paper and color 
pencils, their interest in drawing their ideas for an interface 
that would be interesting for them increased dramatically. 
They spent the remainder of the first workshop vigorously 
drawing. Students were divided into four groups, each of 
which was instructed to work on an idea, pre-selected by the 
children together with an adult mediator. This was an attempt 
to emulate the mixing of ideas process as discussed in [7,11]. 
An example of one such idea is shown in Figure 2. Several 
simple prototypes, one of which is shown in Figure 3, were 
created and we worked on these together with the same 
group of children during the second workshop.  
Our main findings from this workshop were that working 
with children in co-design situation is very complex and 
requires much better preparation and much more time than 
with adult users. Also, we worked with a too large group of 
children. At that age the children cannot have long 
concentration spam and they influence each other strongly. 
Children were very articulate about what they like and 
dislike, while working creatively with an idea took longer 
time to get into. Once going, their fantasy was very inspiring.  
 
 
Figure 2. Child’s drawing of a more visually based interface navigated by 
clicking on images or text 
If the project continues, co-design with children would be 
the method of choice. 
From what we have seen and heard, active readers have 
higher demands and a longer wish list for good support 
software on their e-book readers then passive readers do.  
However, any item from the wish list changes the e-book 
reader it into something else, more complex. For example, 
one “simple” wish for collaboration on projects involving e-
book readers could require e-book reader to become an e-
writer as well, and ultimately, another communication tool.  
 
              
 
             Figure 3. Prototype created on the tablet PC. 
D. Informing the future design of e-book readers for active 
readers 
Does it make a difference whether one starts from a small 
PC and makes it into an e-book reader by using appropriate 
technology for the ease and comfort of reading, such as in 
[18], or whether one starts from an e-book reader and builds 
it into a device that also writes, searches, browses, 
collaborates, perhaps writes hyper-fiction or tells stories? We 
believe that the convergence will take place. iPad, now 
widely available, is one possible answer to that question.   
From the fall 2010, University Library will test iPads. 
And iPad is the platform of choice for us to continue 
working with. This choice is personal; there may be an e-
book reader of the next generation that will surpass the iPad. 
But whatever the platform, there are some general guidelines 
we will follow in our effort to design e-book reader 
interfaces better suited for active readers: 
• 
Working with narrower groups of users (for 
example, active readers, age 7-9, as the use of and 
271
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

the needs for software change rather quickly at that 
age) 
• 
Co-designing with users 
• 
Allowing the possibility for end users to participate 
in the design process 
  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Extensive empirical studies have been done on the 
actions related to reading printed media versus e-book 
readers. E-book readers at first emulated functionality of the 
book, but now we see divergence from the legacy of the 
book. Focusing on active reading, we take a closer look at 
the design of the future e-book reading devices. In doing so, 
we have worked with young users in a co-design situation 
and created the first interface prototype for e-book reader. 
We have conducted qualitative and quantitative studies with 
university students who volunteered to try e-book readers. 
The conclusion of the study is a list of feature users would 
like to have on e-book readers as well as the set of guidelines 
continuing towards design of interfaces, better suited for 
specific user groups.  
APPENDIX A 
 
The technology behind e-paper is based on the 
e(lectronic)-ink developed by Vizplex. Use of e-ink 
improved the quality of reading experience significantly. A 
very short summary (see [21] for more details) of how e-
paper works: e-ink is like traditional ink in that it is a 
colored liquid that can be coated onto nearly any surface. 
Suspended in the liquid are millions of microcapsules that 
contain tiny, two-toned (dark and light) polymeric particles. 
Similar to a magnet, the two tones have opposing electric 
charge. When the e-ink is exposed to an electric field, the 
particles realign themselves and form crisp text and images. 
The e-paper uses power only when a page is refreshed or 
changed ([19]).  
All e-book readers consist of an enclosure made of 
plastic or metal, with buttons to navigate through the 
documents and to activate the menu. They may have support 
for USB, memory cards, SD cards, WiFi and GSM 
communication, touchscreen-interface, audio and have their 
own web browser. They are usually the size of A4 or A5.  
There are many models of e-book readers on the market 
today. A great summary of devices for reading and the text 
formats they support is available at Wikipedia e-book 
readers comparison site [25]. We mention here only the 
ones used by the library in our study, SONY and Iliad, as 
well as most fashionable ones today, Kindle and iPad. 
Iliad (see Figure 4) is an e-book in A5 format. It came out in 
mid 2006, has a 8.1 inch e-paper display, and it weighs 
approximately 0.85 lb. It uses WiFi to connect, and operates 
on a Linux system. Software developer kit follows with it, 
allowing users to extend its functionality. One of the more 
advanced features it has, is the ability to make notes on most 
of the documents. In 2007 iRex released Version 2, which 
has some minor updates, and a Book edition in 2008, which 
has eliminated WiFi in order to make the reader less 
expensive.  
                                       
 
 Figure 4. E-book readers Iliad and Sony, used in our study. 
 
Sony has already produced six models of e-book readers. 
The first one came out in the USA in 2006. The new series 
of e-book readers, available from 2009, come in 3 different 
sizes to fit some specific uses. A pocket edition with a 5'' 
screen and navigational buttons, a touch edition (see Figure 
4) with a 6'' touch screen and a memory card slot and last 
the daily edition with a 7'' touch screen, weighting from 0.5 
lb to 0.75 lb. All of the readers have wireless connection 
through 3G mobile networks.  
 
    
 
Figure 5. iPad, iBook reader application.                     
iPad (see Figure 5) is the newest Apple multitouch 
tablet, that comes with nearly all the features iPhone has: 
pretty design in crisp color, a large, 9.7 inches high-
resolution LED-backlit IPS display, a Multi-Touch screen 
and a powerful chip. It weights 1.5 lb and is 0.5 inches 
thick.  
It is expected to set new standards in functionality and 
aesthetics. In addition, it comes with iBook application, 
from which books can be easily downloaded either using 3G 
or wireless network. Apple claims that the iPad's battery can 
provide up to 10 hours of video, 140 hours of audio 
playback, or up to one month on standby [26]. 
Amazon has released a series of e-book readers. The 
original Kindle was released in 2007and the newest Kindle 
DX was released in May 2009 (see Figure 6). The DX has a 
9.7'' screen, a function to rotate the picture according to the 
way the device is held, improved storage capacity and 
battery-life. 
272
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
Figure 6. Amazon’s Kindle DX. 
The interface is a black and white screen. However, the 
most interesting distinction is that this 3G version has 
possibility of access Kindle library from other devices such 
as iPhone, Blackburry, PC, etc.  
VII. APPENDIX B 
Questionnaire handed out with e-book readers 
We would like to know what you thought about the e-
book reader you borrowed from the library. Your input is 
very valuable to us.  It will take only a few minutes to 
answer the questions bellow. Please return the completed 
questionnaire to checkout desk at the library at your 
convenience. 
Thank you for your input. 
1) Which e-book reader did you use? Sony Iliad 
2) What made you want to try an e-book reader? 
3) What did you think of the e-book reader? Please 
comment on the functionality it has 
4) How did e-book reader function with the resources 
for your classes? 
5) What do you think about the library lending out e-
book readers? 
6) Would you care to lend it again? 
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Behler, 
A. 
(2009) 
"Readers 
in 
Action", 
available 
at: 
http://www.americanlibrariesmagazine.org/features/09242009/e-
readers-action (accessed February 3, 2011)   
[2] Culen, A,: "Designing for Youngest", conference 'Designing for 
Children', IIT, Bombay, February 2-6, 2010 
[3] Culen, A., Herstad, J.  and Karahasanovic, A.: "Collocated 
collaborative storytelling for children: what does the technology bring 
in", conference "Designing for Children", IIT, Bombay, February 2-6, 
2010 
[4] Dieberger, A. and Dourish, P. (2000) "Social navigation: Techniques 
for building more usable systems", Interactions, 7(6), pp.  36-45 
[5] Druin, A., Bederson, B., Hourcade, J.P., Sherman, L., Revelle, G., 
Platner, M., and Weng, S. (2001). "Designing a Digital Library for 
Young Children: An Intergenerational Partnership", Joint Conference 
on Digital Libraries (JCDL'01) 
[6] Grenier, L. (2009) "unBook" netWorker, Volume 13 ,  Issue 2  A 
Digital Trail is Forever, pp. 8-10 
[7] Guha, M. L., Druin, A., Chipman, G., Fails, J., Simms, S., and Farber, 
A. (2004). "Mixing Ideas: A new technique for working with young 
children as design partners". In Proceedings of Interaction Design and 
Children (IDC'2004). College Park, MD, pp. 35-42 
[8] Gutenberg 
project, 
available 
at: 
http://www.gutenberg.org/wiki/Gutenberg:About 
(accessed 
February 3, 2011) 
[9] HCI 
–book 
Strategic 
Research 
Cluster: 
www.hci-
book.org/cluster/uses.php (accessed February 3, 2011) 
[10] Kragler, S. and Nolley, C. (1996). "Student Choices: Book Selection 
Strategies of Fourth Graders". Reading Horizons, 36 (4), pp. 354-365 
[11] Mayer, R. E. and Moreno, R. (1998). "A Cognitive Theory of 
Multimedia 
Learning: 
Implications 
for 
Design 
Principles" http://www.unm.edu/~moreno/PDFS/chi.pdf (accessed 
February 3, 2011) 
[12] Moore, L. M. (2009) "At your leisure: Assessing eBook reader 
functionality and interactivity", Master thesis, University College, 
London, UK. 
[13] Muller, D. A., Lee, K. J., and Sharma, M. D. (2008). "Coherence or 
interest: Which is most important in online multimedia learning?". 
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 24 (2), pp. 211-221. 
http://www.ascilite.org.au/ajet/ajet24/muller.pdf. (accessed February 
3, 2011) 
[14] Norman, D. (2004) "Emotional Design", New York: Basic Books. 
[15] Princeton University. "The E-reader pilot at Princeton", available 
at: 
http://www.princeton.edu/ereaderpilot/index.xml 
(accessed 
February 3, 2011) 
[16] Romanowski, 
P. 
"Electronic 
Ink", 
 
available 
at: 
http://www.madehow.com/Volume-6/Electronic-Ink.html 
(accessed February 3, 2011)  
[17] Schilit, B.N., Price, M.N., Golovchinsky, G., Tanaka, K. and 
Marshall, C.C. (1999) "As we may read: the reading appliance 
revolution", IEEE Computer, 32, 1(January), pp. 65-73 
[18] Shama, M. and Abraham, T.: "Case for Reading and Writing on a 
Classmate PC", in conference ’Designing for Children’, IIT, Bombay, 
February 2-6, 2010 
[19] Shapira, B.; P. Shoval; J. Meyer; N. Tractinsky, and D. Mimran 
(2008)  "Epaper the personalized mobile newspaper", in: WorkShop 
Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Intelligent User 
Interfaces, pp. 1-12. 
[20] Springer, eBooks the end user perspective. White paper, available 
at: http://www.springer.com/cda/content/document/cda_downloaddoc
ument/eBooks+-+the+End+User+Experience?SGWID=0-0-45-
608298-0 (accessed February 3, 2011)  
[21] van der Velde, W. and Ernst, O. (2009) "The future of eBooks? Will 
print disappear? An end-user perspective", Library Hi Tech, 27,4 , pp. 
570 – 583 
[22] Tajika, T.; Yonezawa, T. and Mitsunaga, N. (2008) "Intuitive page-
turning interface of e-books on flexible e-paper based on user 
studies", in: Proceeding of the 16thACM International Conference on 
Multimedia, October 26-31, 2008, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada, pp. 1647-1656 
[23] Taxen, G., Druin, A., Fast, C., and Kjellin, M (2001). KidStory: "A 
Technology Design Partnership with Children". Behaviour and 
Information Technology, 20(2),  pp. 119-125  
[24] vook, the smart book, avaible at: http://www.vook.com (accessed 
February 3, 2011) 
[25] Wikipedia, 
Comparison 
of 
eBook 
readers, 
available 
at: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_e-book_readers, 
(accessed February 3, 2011)  
[26] Wikipedia, iPad, available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ipad 
(accessed February 3, 2011) 
273
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

