Rotoscopy-Handwriting Interface for Children with Dyspraxia    
Muhammad Fakri Othman 
Cardiff School of Art and Design 
University of Wales Institute, Cardiff (UWIC) 
Cardiff, United Kingdom 
 faothman@uwic.ac.uk 
Wendy Keay-Bright 
Cardiff School of Art and Design 
University of Wales Institute, Cardiff (UWIC) 
Cardiff, United Kingdom 
 wkbright@uwic.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—We discuss the design and development of 
computer-animated interface for children with dyspraxia using 
a specialist animation technique known as Rotoscopy. The 
technique may provide an engaging environment for children 
with dyspraxia to improve their handwriting skills,   thus 
increase their motivation and self-esteem towards learning.  
Keywords-Animation technique; prototyping, learning 
difficulties 
I. 
 BACKGROUND  
Rotoscopy process involves frame-by-frame projection of 
moving images to allow the animator to copy every single 
frame to create a natural-looking animation [1]. A famous 
film that used rotoscopy is A Scanner Darkly, produced in 
2006 by Richard Linklater using a specially-developed 
software system called Rotoshop. Originally Rotoscopy 
technique was invented in 1917 by Max Fleisher for his 
film, Out of the Inkwell. It is named after projection 
equipment called the Rotoscope; where pre-recorded live-
action film images were projected onto a frosted glass panel 
and re-drawn by an animator. In other words, rotoscopy 
refers to the technique of manually creating a silhouette for 
an element on a live-action plate to be composited over 
different background [3]. Figure 1 shows how rotoscopy 
techniques can create a 2D graphics from a photo whilst 
Figure 2 is a transformation of a video footage to a short 2D 
animation. In these examples, graphics images as well as 
human motion and body shape from a video sequences were 
traced manually using rotoscopy system to get the image 
silhouettes, which are then been transformed to 2D graphics 
and animation. From the output, we can create a new 2D 
graphics and animation that has similar look and key-
frames. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  A 2D graphics sketched from a photo  
 
 
 
Figure 2. A new 2D animation character created from a video clip 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
A. Tracking, 3D Graphics and Animation 
 
 Previous research in Rotoscopy has been focused on 
techniques for 2D graphics and animation, such as 
SnakeToonz [4]. Keyframe-based Tracking [2] was 
proposed as a technique for rotoscopy and animation, which 
has been improved by Bi-directional Tracking [5]. 
However, both methods produced 2D results and faced 
similar difficulties. Rotoscopy typically produces non-
photorealistic images and animation as it requires more 
human effort to trace object contours from captured video 
sequences, whilst tracking is a process in rotoscopy to 
capture video to be transformed to 2D or 3D graphics and 
animation. Although a few tracking algorithms have been 
introduced, previous research in rotoscopy and animation 
focuses more on video and 2D image rather than producing 
3D output. Rotoscopy research for 3D graphics and 
animation has involved the production of 3D models from 
video, as well as to improve the image quality. A real-time 
3D model acquisition system [6] was developed to assist 
user to rotate an object by hand and see a continuously-
updated model as the object is scanned. However the system 
has limited functions and required much human efforts. 
Another research, 3D objects from photographs and video 
clip [7] has emerged, but it was only for non-animated 3D 
images. More recently, a new method to capture 3D mesh 
from 2.5D video [8] has been used, but the result has several 
limitations such as it cannot distinguish between different 
objects in the scene, the output cannot be viewed from any 
direction and there is a flickering problem. A 3D sketching 
system to create 3D models [9] was developed in 2006 but it 
has problem to generate correct skeleton and accurate 
sampling of the silhouette.  
254
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

B. Dyspraxia and Handwriting 
 
Children with Dyspraxia have difficulty planning and 
organising smooth coordinated movements [10]. Other 
terms, such as developmental co-ordination disorder (DCD), 
clumsy child syndrome, minimal brain dysfunction, and 
perceptuo-motor dysfunction are also used to describe 
dyspraxia [11]. According to World Health Organisation’s 
(WHO) report, dyspraxia normally affects 6% of all children 
and the percentage is estimated to increase as high as 10% 
[12]. However only a few study related to computer 
animation technique such as rotoscopy have been 
undertaken to investigate the potential benefits for people 
with learning difficulties. This gap provides the main 
objective and motivation of our research. Application 
allowing children to be creative and expressive with 
movement will be beneficial as children with dyspraxia will 
be engaged with activities to practice their movement and 
gesture ability.  
 
Research on the efficiency of e-learning and multimedia 
computer technology for children with learning difficulties 
strongly recommended such approach as it has emerged 
positive results to the children [13]. Rotoscopy may also 
appropriate due to the highly visible nature of the graphical 
output, which is critical for children with dyspraxia who 
have difficulties in hand movement as well as handwriting. 
A study of sign language co-articulation has been 
undertaken using the rotoscopy technique [14] as it 
promotes movement to perform signs using hands. 
Walden’s research [15] found that technical advances of 
rotoscopy have had aesthetic consequences not just for the 
quality of image but also to the nature of the actor’s 
performance within animation.  
In terms of handwriting, Boyle [16] has revealed children 
with Moderate Learning Difficulties (MLD) like dyspraxia 
can be helped to improve their handwriting using simple 
intervention programme like speed of handwriting exercise, 
with support of other general gross motor coordination test. 
Meanwhile an investigation by Snape and Nicol [17] using a 
pen-based computer writing interface, has given positive 
improvement to children, though it hasn’t employed 
rotoscopy for their system.  
As a summary, early study of rotoscopy has been 
established in the area of tracking, video and animation. 
Previous research in rotoscopy has not focused to 
handwriting, whilst handwriting recognition system hasn’t 
employed rotoscopy as its main solutions nor supporting 
children with handwriting difficulties. There has been little 
research investigating the potential of Rotoscopy as a 
learning tool. However the success of ReacTickles® [18] 
software, a relaxing and playful experience with technology 
for children with autism, has given us motivation on system 
design and development.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Why Rotoscopy? 
Rotoscopy may provide a suitable handwriting application 
as it allows the user to trace hand movement along specific 
guided lines. Furthermore, rotoscopy enables children to 
learn through play via tracing and drawing of still images 
and video footage. The flexibility of rotoscopy is another 
benefit for children with dyspraxia as it allows many novel 
and developmentally appropriate inputs. For instance we 
can use a favourite character as a background image as a 
practice for hand movement, or a live video of children 
faces and tracing it using rotoscopy system.   
B. Experience Prototyping  
We are currently developing series of prototypes using 
Experience Prototyping [19]. This method tries to 
demonstrate content and identify issues and design 
opportunity. These normally can be achieved by exploring 
through direct experience of the systems. The designer need 
to apply the concept of ―exploring by doing‖, especially to 
get high fidelity for simulation developed from existing 
experience (actual products) that cannot be accessed directly 
due to safety, availability and budget issues or constraint. 
We have to consider several factors such as contextual, 
physical, temporal, sensory, social and cognitive issues, the 
essence of existing user experience and essential factors that 
our design should preserved. At early stage of developing a 
user experience, multiple design directions need to be 
efficiently prototyped and compared. Temporary or ad-hoc 
use of analogous objects as props can help to decide which 
kind of experience is most appropriate. The main purpose of 
this phase may includes facilitating the exploration of 
possible solutions, directing the design team toward a more 
informed development of user experience and identifying 
tangible component who creates the system. The role of 
experience prototyping in this level is to let our client, 
design colleague or user to understand subjective value of 
design idea by directly trying it in their own, or in other 
words to let user experience the product. It is usually 
accomplished by persuading the audience or user such as 
saying that the idea is compelling or the chosen design 
direction is not right or incorrect.   
C. Usability Testing 
The implementation of prototypes and the testing process 
will be held at the Dyscovery Centre, University of Wales, 
Newport, a special research centre for children with 
dyspraxia and other learning difficulties. The metrics of 
testing are video coding and observation, involving series of 
different version of prototypes. We use 
Wechsler 
Intelligence Scales for Children® (WISC) [21] as the 
evaluation standard.  
255
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

WISC is a special intelligence test designed for children age 
6 to 16 to generate their IQ score as well as to diagnose 
children’s learning disability. The results will be measured 
on children’s performance, and how the application helps 
users improve their gross-motor skills, as well as their 
interest and motivation towards learning. For video coding, 
we will record children activity with the system during 
series of workshop held at the Dyscovery Centre. This will 
includes a record of children handwriting process to allow a 
replay and analysis of their result.   
D. Medium of interaction 
The interactive whiteboard has been used in classroom to 
test early prototypes as well pre-handwriting activities. It 
has been chosen as it is easy to use as it has touch screen 
mode that allows children to make free hand movements on 
the screen [22]. The concept is quite similar to pen and 
graphics tablet but in more spacious movement area. 
Previous research using pen-based computer writing 
interface [23] has considered it was as efficient as, and 
produced comparable writing to the pencil and paper. Figure 
3 shows example of different size of interactive whiteboards 
including children playing with the device. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Different size of interactive whiteboard 
IV. ROTOSCOPY-HANDWRITING INTERFACE 
At the moment we are investigating rotoscopy technique to 
identify whether motivation and engagement can be 
increased by using a performance-led embodied approach, 
which would allow children to practice handwriting using 
gross motor skills, for example bodily movement and 
gesture; as our research aims to give children with dyspraxia 
a playful and physical experience in developing their 
handwriting skills. The development and implementation of 
the systems have been focused on the benefits of using 
interactive whiteboards [24], as large-scale environments 
that support gross-motor skills and performance. Rotoscopy 
technique has been used to trace a projected image on an 
interactive whiteboard screen. The prototype system 
developed using 2D and 3D animation software has been 
utilised and adapted to respond to user activity in such a 
way that the mirrored or abstracted image enables the child 
to visualise the activity and to recognize the projected 
actions own.  
This mirroring capacity of the system is vital for the 
development of social communication and learning [25]. 
For this reason rotoscopy is chosen to be used as a 
technique to assist children with dyspraxia, who are known 
to experience problems with low self-esteem as a result of 
co-ordination difficulties [26]. 
A. System Pipeline 
 
Figure 4 illustrates the system pipeline which contains the 
research problem, objective, methods and solution. In other 
words our research tries to prove the effectiveness of 
rotoscopy as an appropriate solution to assist coordination 
difficulties and to improve handwriting skills among 
children with dyspraxia.  It is clear that the study occupies 
user-centred 
design 
and 
experience 
prototyping 
as 
rotoscopy-handwriting prototypes has been used as a tool to 
improve handwriting skills among children with dyspraxia 
as well as to support their gross-motor skills. 
Figure 5. The rotoscopy handwriting system pipeline 
B. Prototype system 
 
The prototype system is designed to assist children with 
dyspraxia to practice their handwriting skills through 
movement and performance, rendered visible to them via 
the projection of actions onto a large surface. Evaluation 
methods will measure the extent to which the animation of 
movement in a child-friendly graphic form can engage 
children's motivation and lead to improved handwriting 
skills [23] The prototype has been designed based-on 
Ripley’s Methods for teaching of handwriting to children 
with dyspraxia [11]. Ripley’s method consists of different 
stages of skills, starting from drawing basic shapes and 
symbols to get familiar with lines and curves, followed by 
writing basic numbers, simple to more complex letters, and 
ending with writing children’s own name.  
 
We divided this approach into 5 different level of prototype: 
Prototype 1: Group 1 to Group 4 Symbols, Prototype 2: 
Numbers, Prototype 3: Circle Letters, Prototype 4: Wiggly 
Letters and Prototype 5: Child's Name. Each stage has 
different level of difficulties that need to be completed 
before the student can move to next higher level. Figure 3 
and Figure 4 are examples of early version of the prototype 
interfaces that contains the first two groups of basic shapes. 
256
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

These shapes are a basic hand movement and gesture 
practice for children with dyspraxia before they learn more 
complex letters. Children's interaction with the system 
occurs with the use of interactive whiteboard to test 
Rotoscopy-Handwriting 
prototype. 
For 
instance, 
in 
Prototype 1, Group 1 to Group 4 symbols, children or user 
need to master basic lines and shapes in order to train their 
hand movement. Group 1 consist of three most fundamental 
shapes, a horizontal line for hand movement from left to 
right (and vice versa), a vertical line for hand movement 
from top to bottom and a circle for round or curve hand 
movement. 
 
Figure 4. Group 1 and Group 2 Symbols 
Figure 5 depicts examples of the first three interfaces of 
Group 1 symbols. The system will allow children to draw 
horizontal and vertical lines as well as circles on interactive 
whiteboard using early the version of rotoscopy-handwriting 
prototype. Every interface has several number of lines or 
circle to give more chances to children to practice. Different 
types of line-pattern as well as colours have been used to 
engage children to learn through play.  
 
Figure 5. Prototype 2: Group 1 symbols 
Meanwhile examples of learning to write a single letter are 
shown in sequences from start to end (Figure 6 to 8). In 
Figure 6, the first interface is steps with arrows to show how 
to write the letter and the second is demo animation of the 
steps. In Figure 7, the interface shows the rotoscopy 
process, where users are allowed to trace the letter, followed 
by two interfaces for exercise as shown in Figure 8. For 
exercise, the first interface allows user to train to write the 
letter with reference or guide (a watermarked image of the 
letter), but the second is an exercise without references, 
assuming the user already know how to write the letter.  
 
Figure 6. Steps and demo animation 
 
 
Figure 7. Rotoscopy interface 
 
 
Figure 8. Sample of rotoscopy exercise 
 
257
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

C. Pre-writing interface 
 
We have included a pre-writing interface to see how 
children with dyspraxia and typical-developed children 
response to system’s design and usability. Figure 9 shows 
drawing results obtained from a group of typical developed 
children age 6 to 9 using the screen and playing with 
rotoscopy function. In this activity, children were 
encouraged to produce free drawing based on basic shapes 
from Ripley’s symbols.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Sample result of rotoscopy pre-writing interface 
We have also tested the children to draw more complex 
images, as shown in Figure 10, as they traced real photo to 
get 2D graphics and images. Their favourite cartoon 
character has been used as attraction to engage them to trace 
and draw pictures.  It is emerged that such an activity was 
really fun and interesting for them. From this experiment or 
testing we try to adapt system design for children with 
dyspraxia which should be simple, easier and less 
complicated. The next version of our prototype will use a 
pen tablet and a monitor. Children will be able to use their 
fingers as well as the pen to draw lines and shapes on the 
screen. The size of the shape should be drawn according to 
the screen’s medium of display; for example when using 
interactive whiteboard; a bigger shape size is required whilst 
for monitor-based display, smaller size is preferred. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Sample rotoscopy result of cartoon character 
258
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The goal of this investigation is to discover the potential of 
rotoscopy to assist the teaching of handwriting skills for 
children with dyspraxia. With evidence gathered from our 
prototype systems, the proposed methods may place these 
developments in an original context. Rotoscopy may prove 
appropriate for children with dyspraxia as it enables them to 
practice their skills using naturalistic hand movement. In 
this case, the input and output device play important role as 
a medium of communication between children and the 
methods; as this tangible technologies have a close 
correspondence in behavioural meaning between input and 
output. Our next milestones will be to undertake contextual 
analysis [27] of the prototype systems which will include 
end user feedback and practitioner reflection. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
A special thanks to University of Wales Institute, Cardiff, 
The Dyscovery Centre, University of Wales Newport, 
Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, Ministry of Higher 
Education Malaysia, PhD supervisory team and our beloved 
family for their supports. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Garcia, E., Debreuve, and M. Barlaud, ―Contour Tracking 
Algorithm For Rotoscopy,‖ Proc. ICASSP 2006: IEEE International 
Conference On Acoustic Speech. 
[2] A. Agarwala, A. Hertzmann, D. Salesin, and S. Seitz, ― Keyframe-
Based Tracking for Rotoscoping and Animation,‖ Proc. SIGGRAPH, 
Aug. 
2004, 
pp. 
584—591, 
doi: 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1186562.1015764. 
[3] J. Bouldin, ―The Body, Animation and the Real: Race, Reality and 
the Rotoscope in Betty Boop,‖ Proc. Affective encounters: rethinking 
embodiment in feminist media studies. Eds. A. Koivunen and S. 
Paasonen. Turku, FI: Media Studies, 2001, pp. 48‐54. 
[4] A. Agarwala, ―SnakeToonz: a semi-automatic approach to creating 
cel animation from video,‖ Proc. 2nd ACM International Symposium 
on Non-photorealistic Animation and Rendering,  2001, pp. 139-ff. 
[5] J. Sun, et al, ―Bi-directional tracking using trajectory segment 
analysis,‖ Proc. SIGGRAPH 2005. 
[6] K. Nickel, et al, ―3D-tracking of head and hands for pointing gesture 
recognition in a human-robot interaction scenario,‖. Proc. Sixth IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Automatic 
Face 
and 
Gesture 
Recognition, 2004, pp. 565-570. 
[7] J Ponce, et al, ―3D photography from photographs and video clips,‖ 
Proc. International Symposium on Core Research, 2003. 
[8] N. Snavely, et al, ―Stylizing 2.5-D Video,‖ Proc. NPAR 2006, pp. 63-
69. 
[9] F. Levet, et al, ―3D Sketching with Profile Curves,‖ Proc. 
International Symposium on Smart Graphics, 2006. 
[10] M. Boon, Helping Children with Dyspraxia., Jessica Kingsley 
Publishers, 2001. 
[11] K. Ripley, B. Daines, and J. Barrett, Dyspraxia: A Guide for Teachers 
and Parents., David Fulton Publishers, 1997. 
[12] M.M. Portwood, Understanding developmental dyspraxia: a textbook 
for students and professionals., David Fulton Publishers, 2000. 
[13] A. Savidis, and C. Stephanidis, ―Developing inclusive e-learning and 
e-entertainment to effectively accommodate learning difficulties,‖ 
SIGACCESS Access. Comput. , 83, Sep. 2005, 42-54. 
[14] J. Segouat, ―A study of sign language coarticulation,‖ SIGACCESS 
Access. 
Comput. 
, 
93, 
Jan. 
2009, 
31-38, 
doi:http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1531930.1531935. 
[15] K. L. Walden, ―Double Take: Rotoscoping and the processing of 
performance,‖ Refractory: a journal of entertainment media, Dec. 
2008. 
[16] C.M. Boyle, ―An Analysis Of The Efficacy Of A Motor Skills 
Training Programme For Young People With Moderate Learning 
Difficulties,‖ International Journal Of Special Education 2007, Vol 
22, No. 1, pp. 11-24.  
[17] L. Snape, and T. Nicol, T., ―Evaluating the effectiveness of a 
computer based letter formation system for children,‖ Proc. The 2003 
Conference on Interaction Design and Children, 2003. 
[18] W. Keay-Bright, ―Can Computers Create Relaxation? Designing 
ReacTickles© Software with Children on the Autistic Spectrum,‖ 
CoDesign, 3, (2), 2007, pp. 97—110. 
[19] M. Buchenau, and J. F. Suri, ―Experience prototyping,‖ Proc. The 3rd 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices, 
Methods, and Techniques; August 17 - 19, Aug. 2000, doi: 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/347642.347802. 
[20] M. Buchenau, and J. F. Suri, ―Experience prototyping,‖ Proc. The 3rd 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices, 
Methods, and Techniques; August 17 - 19, Aug. 2000, doi: 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/347642.347802. 
[21] E. Kaplan, D. Fein, and J. Kramer, ―Wechsler Intelligence Scale for 
Children® - Fourth Edition Integrated,‖ 2004, Available at: 
http://www.pearsonassessments.com/HAIWEB/Cultures/en-
us/Productdetail.htm?Pid=015-8982-800 
[22] W. Keay-Bright, ―Designing Playful Sensory Experiences with 
Interactive Whiteboard Technology: The Implication for Children on 
the Autistic Spectrum,‖ EAD 07, 2007. 
[23] J.C. Read, S. MacFarlane, and M. Horton, ―The Usability of 
Handwriting Recognition for Writing in the Primary Classroom,‖ 
People and Computer XVIII - Design for Life, Springer, London, 
2004, doi:10.1007/b138141. 
[24] M. Horton, and J. C. Read, ‖Interactive Whiteboards in the Living 
Room? – Asking Children about their Technologies,‖ The 22nd BCS 
British-HCI 2008, Liverpool, UK.  
[25] K. Facer, and B. Williamson. ―Designing Educational Technologies 
with 
Users‖, 
Futurelab, 
2004, 
Available 
at 
http://www.futurelab.org.uk/resources/documents/handbooks/designi
ng_with_users.pdf 
[26] S.E. Henderson, and L. Henderson, ―Toward An Understanding of 
Developmental 
Coordination 
Disorder: 
Terminological 
and 
Diagnostic Issues,‖ Neural Plasticity 2003, Vol.10, No. 1-2. 
[27] M. Stringer, E. Harris, and G. Fitzpatrick, ―Exploring the space of 
near-future design with children,‖ Proc. The 4th Nordic conference 
on Human-computer interaction: changing roles, Oct 2006,  pp. 351-
360, doi:10.1145/1182475.1182512. 
 
259
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

