BrainSnake: Exploring Mode of Interaction in a Cooperative Multi-brain BCI Game
Based on Alpha Activity
Marc van Almkerk∗, Lena Brandl†, Rui Li‡, Pietro Romeo§ and Mannes Poel¶
Human Media Interaction
University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
Email: m.vanalmkerk@student.utwente.nl∗, l.brandl@student.utwente.nl†,
r.li-1@student.utwente.nl‡, p.romeo@student.utwente.nl§, m.poel@utwente.nl¶
Abstract—This paper describes the design, development and
evaluation of BrainSnake, a cooperative multi-brain closely-
coupled brain-computer interface (BCI) game based on alpha
activity. BrainSnake uses communication to address common
shortcomings of BCI as an interaction modality. A within-subject
study was performed to understand the value of communication
in a BCI setting by putting players in both a “co-present”
and “remote” condition. Results draw a complex picture of
player experience but indicate that participants attributed
more control over the snake character and less frustration to
the co-present condition. Moreover, there was a preference
for balancing communication and BCI input while playing
the game. Recommendations for future design of cooperative
multi-brain BCI games are derived.
Keywords—brain computer interface; game design; multimodal
interaction; user experience; communication.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) have
been investigated as an input modality for user interfaces in
recreational human-computer interaction (HCI), such as art [1]
and games [2] [3]. At present, multi-brain BCI games enable
multiple users to work towards the completion of cooperative
or competitive tasks [4] [5]. However, BCI as an input
modality still comes with a number of issues preventing it from
becoming mainstream, such as delays in inputs, bad signal
recognition, long training time, and cumbersome hardware
[4]. Nevertheless, research on User Experience (UX) in games
provides cumulative evidence that the use of (multi-brain) BCI
as an interaction modality has considerable potential for the
gaming community [3]–[6].
Research suggests that multi-player game setups may be
preferred over single player mode with regard to fun and
motivation [5]. However, to the best of our knowledge,
no attention has been devoted to how people experience
communication in multi-brain BCI games and how in-game
communication should be implemented. This is due to the
fact that Electroencephalography (EEG) recordings are easily
disturbed by facial expressions, speech and bodily movements
[4], limiting the scope of efficient modes of communication.
This poses a challenge to BCI game designers.
We invite BCI researchers and game designers to view
shortcomings of BCI in a new light. [6] makes a case for con-
sidering shortcomings of BCI in traditional BCI applications
as in-game tasks and challenges from a game design point of
view [6] [7]. One way to overcome these shortcomings is by
using BCI as a complementary control modality. An example
of such a BCI implementation is AlphaWoW, a variant of
the popular videogame World of Warcraft, which calculates
power in the alpha frequency (8-12 Hz) of the brain to control
the shape-shifting ability of certain playable characters: when
the user experiences stress, such as under in-game battle
conditions, there is little alpha activity, and the character
changes into a powerful bear form. Once the user starts to
relax, alpha activity increases and the character reverts back to
its natural elf shape [6]. However, such an implementation of a
BCI is passive, i.e., the user is not directly controlling the game
with brain activity. One of the easiest ways to control alpha
activity is by closure of the eyes, however this introduces a
counterintuitive control mechanism: alpha activity is increased
when the subject closes their eyes, and by doing so, they
give up visual feedback. Moreover, it takes a few seconds
to induce higher alpha activity and for the system to detect it
[4], preventing BCI players from playing fast-paced games.
Nonetheless, alpha activity is still worth exploring, since
retrieving alpha band frequency is comparably uncomplicated
without (extensive) training and it only requires a few elec-
trodes for signal acquisition. Hence, inspired by Nijholt et
al., we explore alternative ways of using BCI as a game
input modality aimed at overcoming common shortcomings
of alpha activity. For this, we propose “BrainSnake”, a game
with a novel design that uses both verbal player interaction
and eye closure as main gameplay mechanics. Additionally,
we investigate how the presence of direct communication, or
the lack thereof, may affect playability and user experience of
a multi-brain BCI game.
Section II of this article illustrates the design and imple-
mentation of BrainSnake and its novel interaction modality
based on alpha activity. Section III describes the design and
execution of a user study in which players evaluated Brain-
Snake under different inter-player communication conditions.
Results of the user studies are reported and discussed in
Section IV. Finally, in Section V, conclusions are drawn
and recommendations for future designs of (alpha-based) BCI
games are given.
II. GAME DESIGN
BrainSnake is based on the popular game “Snake”, in which
a snake character made up of dots has to collect pieces of
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. Screenshots from the final version of BrainSnake.
food on the screen whilst avoiding its own tail. The body of
the snake grows by one dot for each piece of food collected,
gradually increasing the difficulty of the game. Game over
occurs when the snake eats its own tail (or hits one of the
screen borders). BrainSnake adopts a similar gameplay in
which two players have to collect apples by sharing control
over the snake character. Both players control the snake
avatar using their brain activities to turn either left or right.
The complementarity-based control [8] was expected to elicit
cooperative activities typical of closely-coupled games (e.g.,
“working out strategies together”) which may be affected by
the presence of communication (or lack thereof) [9]. Fig. 1
shows the graphical interface of the game, showing the snake
avatar in yellow and collectable apples in red. Moreover, the
current score, high score and the amount of deaths is visible
in the bottom corners of the screen.
A. Gameplay and Interaction
The interaction of BrainSnake is designed to compensate
three main limitations of alpha activity as an input modality.
Firstly, alpha activity is most suitable for being used as a
binary input despite being measured on a continuous scale,
since it is difficult to regulate. Secondly, inducing and detect-
ing alpha activity requires time, which results in a delay of
a few seconds [4]. Thirdly, in order to induce alpha activity
effectively, the subject has to close their eyes.
In the classic Snake game, the player has to choose, real-
time, between “no action”, “turn left” and “turn right” in order
to direct the snake. This type of input combined with the
delay in detecting alpha activity and lack of visual feedback
over the game, would be likely to affect the playability of the
game negatively and make players frustrated. To overcome
this, BrainSnake featured a social component. Two players
played the game together so that, whenever one player closed
their eyes to induce alpha activity, the other player could act
as the feedback provider communicating the state of the game
to their partner. Game controls were designed such that, if
there is no input from either player, the snake will move
forward in its direction. One of the players can take ‘control’
over the snake by increasing their alpha activity. When this
happens, the snake stops moving and goes into a “rotation
mode”. Depending on which player took control, the snake’s
head will rotate either left or right to a 90 degrees angle,
as visualized in Fig. 2, in steps of 0.5 degrees per frame.
When the controlling player opens their eyes - and reduces
their alpha activity - the snake will be “released” and move
forward again. When a player takes control over the snake, the
alpha activity of the other player will be neglected and will
have no influence on the gameplay. Additionally, the game
uses audio assistance as another modality to indicate when the
snake rotates, eats an apple, or when it dies. In contrast to the
classic snake games, when the snake hits one of the borders
of the screen, it bounces back instead of dying, reducing the
overall difficulty of the game.
This interaction mechanism overcomes the earlier men-
tioned limitations of alpha-based BCI as (i) the binary (high
or low) input is split over two players, (ii) the delay in
response can be corrected by the other player (in the form
of feedback) and (iii) there is an additional pair of eyes
for the players to help them keep track of the state of the
game. Additionally, this setup allowed to further stress the
complementarity cooperative game pattern of BrainSnake:
while it is possible to play the game without communication
and rely on acoustic feedback only, even when the player’s
eyes are closed, talking to each other is expected to make the
gaming experience more enjoyable [9].
B. Implementation
The implemented BCI system consisted of three subcompo-
nents for EEG-data acquisition, data pre-processing and game
visualization. For the data acquisition a BioSemi Active 2 [10]
was used to buffer the raw EEG signals of 7 channels [C3,
Cz, C4, P3, P4, O1 and O2] using a 7 to 12 Hz temporal
filter to record the alpha waves. OpenVibe [11] was used to
pre-process the data into a numeric representation of the alpha
activity of the player. Lastly, the binary classification of the
alpha activity (high or low) as well as the game visualization
were done with the Unity game engine [12].
High or low alpha activity is detected by means of the in-
coming data-signal from OpenVibe. The signal was duplicated
and filtered with an infinite impulse response filter to reduce
Figure 2.
Players have joint control over the snake, one player rotates the
snake’s head left and the other player rotates it right. Rotation happens in steps
over time (θ1) till a 90 degree angle is reached, after which the snake will
rotate back to its original position. Rotation continues till the player ‘releases’
the snake.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

noise; it was then analysed alongside with the raw samples to
determine high and low alpha activity according to a static,
pre-determined threshold. When the filtered signal reached the
threshold (for a certain amount of samples), the subject was
classified as having high alpha activity, triggering the rotation
mode in the game. By contrast, when the raw signals stayed
below the threshold for a certain amount of time, the alpha
activity was classified as low.
III. METHOD
A. Study Design
A within-subject experimental design was devised to in-
vestigate how players experienced different modes of com-
munication in a BCI setup. This included two experimental
conditions: (i) a “co-present setup”, in which the two players
were located next to each other, allowing them to communicate
face-to-face while playing; and (ii) a “remote” set-up, in which
the players were physically separated from each other by a
wall and prohibited from communication. Fig. 3 illustrates
the experimental setup of both conditions. Each participant
experienced both conditions. The order of completion was
counterbalanced. A within-subject design was chosen to allow
participants to make well-informed comparisons between both
modes of interaction. Player experience was assessed quan-
titatively using the Game Experience Questionnaire (GEQ)
[13] once after each condition. Next to this, a semistructured
interview was conducted at the end of the experiment to
capture player experience qualitatively. Topics discussed in
the interview included the seven core dimensions of the GEQ,
user experiences regarding the different modes of interaction,
difficulties encountered while playing BrainSnake, as well
as user suggestions regarding improvements of inter-player
communication.
B. Participants
A total of 12 participants (ten male, two female) aged 18 to
28 (M = 23.5, SD = 2.939) were recruited to take part in the
experiment. Participants were all students from the University
of Twente recruited through convenience sampling. Six pairs
were formed with the intention of pairing up participants who
did not know each other prior to the experiment. This was
done to prevent relationship bonds from biasing the game
experience of our participants.
C. Procedure
Prior to the experiment, participants were briefly introduced
to their partner and asked to fill in a demographic question-
naire, including questions about their previous experience with
games and BCIs. Moreover, participants were briefed on the
experiment and instructed what was required from them in
order to play the game. The participants were then equipped
with a BioSemi cap and set up for a short individual training
session. During training, the game is played in single-player
with the snake only able to rotate in one direction. Once
both participants reached enough confidence with the BCI, the
multiplayer version of the game was introduced in one of the
two experimental settings. In the remote condition, a partition
wall was placed between the two players and earphones were
used to ensure that no verbal communication would occur
between the two players. Each game session lasted eight
minutes and was followed by an administration of the GEQ.
After both conditions were played, the BCI equipment was
removed from each participant who was then asked to take part
in an individual, audio recorded 20-minute interview aimed at
further investigating dimensions from the GEQ as well as their
personal experiences with the game in each condition.
D. Ethics
All participants were asked to sign an informed ethical
consent form prior to the experiment. Participants were in-
formed that they would be required to wear EEG equipment
and that the data collected would be anonymised and only be
used for research purposes. Moreover, participants were asked
for consent to have their interview sessions audio recorded.
This research was approved by the ethics committee of the
University of Twente. No funding is received for this research.
E. Measurements
The GEQ consists of three modules: a core module which
measures game experience on seven components calculated
from 33 items: Immersion, Flow, Control, Positive and Neg-
ative Affect, Frustration, and Challenge. The remaining two
modules, the social presence module (three components cal-
culated from 17 items: Psychological Involvement - Empathy,
Psychological Involvement - Negative Feelings, Behavioural
Involvement) and the post-game module, assess psychological
and behavioural involvement of the player with other social
entities, and how players felt after they stopped playing,
respectively. The post-game module was not included in this
study because it is targeted at assessing naturalistic, rather than
experimental gaming. All items of the GEQ are measured on a
five-point Likert scale with answers ranging from 0 to 4. The
GEQ was filled in by the participants after each condition. The
interview schedule was partly inspired by the GEQ, covering
six of the seven dimensions of the core module of the question-
naire. The dimension of Immersion was left out intentionally
because immersiveness was not an aim of the developed game.
Moreover, the interview schedule was targeted at exploring the
communication between players and the suitability of either
mode of communication for cooperative or competitive game
settings.
IV. RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Internal consistency reliability was assessed for the relevant
GEQ modules using Cronbach’s alpha, the core module (co-
present condition α = .807, remote condition α = .886) and
the social presence module (co-present condition α = .856,
remote condition α = .919). For the semi-structured interviews,
a coding scheme was developed following a grounded theory
approach to identify patterns, contrasts and similarities in par-
ticipants’ responses [14]. The coding scheme was informed by
the measured constructs of the GEQ. Pattern-based inspection
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a)
(b)
Figure 3. Experimental setup for the co-present (a) and remote (b) condition.
was then performed based on the Cooperative Performance
Metrics (CPMs) proposed by El-Nasr et al. [8]. As BrainSnake
was designed following patterns typical of closely-coupled
games [9], it was expected to raise a need for communication
between the two players, reflected in CPMs such as “helping
one another” and “working out strategies together” [8].
Results suggest that mode of communication did influence
all the investigated aspects of player experience, although the
obtained results draw a complex picture: player experience
was affected, amongst other things, by individual differences
and the level of harmony between players. This is also re-
flected in the high standard deviations of the GEQ core scores
in Fig. 4. Similar results were obtained for the social presence
module, as shown in Fig. 5. In the co-present condition, where
direct verbal communication was allowed, participants tended
to feel more psychologically and behaviourally involved with
their partners. However, the obtained scores for the social pres-
ence components show great individual differences, whereas
the results obtained from the semi-structured interviews give a
more complete picture of how participants experienced playing
BrainSnake and the interaction with their partners. In the
remainder of this section, the results from the interviews are
discussed.
A. Control
Eight participants explicitly indicated that they had a higher
perceived control in the co-presence condition. Only one of
the participants felt more in control in the remote condition,
naming the lack of pressure from having to engage in com-
munication with an unfamiliar person as a potential factor for
this. P5-1: “I was doing my thing, and let him do his thing,
and it kinda worked better”. It should also be noted that three
of the participants felt that their partner was more in control
of the character than they were, and that they were feeling
overpowered by the other’s level of control on the snake. P5-
2: “I felt that’s because she kept turning, I could not turn…
somehow, because she kept doing it, it was overpowering”.
This could be accounted as an instance of the Got in each
other’s way CPM [8] in which one player’s actions slow down
the other’s.
B. Flow
Seven participants stated having experienced more flow in
the co-present condition. Participants attributed the experience
of flow to either i) the presence of their partner in the co-
present condition, ii) being able to focus more on themselves
and their actions in the remote condition, iii) the increasing
skills level in the second game session (regardless of the ex-
perimental condition). The flow of one participant was actually
compromised due to the increasing frustration throughout the
course of the experiment. Despite the fact that the same written
definition of flow was provided during each interview, the
variety of responses suggests that each participant provided
an answer according to their own mental model and personal
concept of flow. As it turns out, the concept of flow is
difficult to understand and might be more suitable for indirect
assessment in subsequent research.
C. Frustration
Nine participants felt more frustrated in the remote con-
dition. Two participants felt frustrated due to the absence of
communication options in the remote condition. P5-2: “I felt
more frustrated because I couldn’t verbally communicate with
the other player”. However, lack of control over the game
character was named as the main source of frustration. P6-
1: “I felt like the system is just not picking up enough of
what I want to do”. This is in line with earlier research on
user frustration due to malfunctioning control systems in HCI.
For instance, Reuderink, Nijholt and Poel (2009) succeeded
in inducing frustration in players of an adapted Pacman game
by manipulating the user input and visual output of the game.
Results obtained from the current study confirm the paramount
importance of well-functioning game controls for minimising
user frustration in HCI in general, and for BCI games in
particular.
D. Challenge
A number of participants perceived both conditions as
equally challenging, albeit for different reasons. Lack of
communication in the remote condition added challenge for
some, as one could not rely on their partner for the timing of
the controls. P3-1: “You can’t work with each other, you can’t
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4. GEQ core component scores. High standard deviations are visible
due to the individual game experiences of the participants.
talk...”. For others, managing communication while playing
was regarded as more challenging since verbal communication
distracted participants from entering a state of relaxation. P1-
2: “I felt more challenged in the first round because you had
to communicate and actually motivate each other and talk to
each other”. One of the participants mentioned that having
to rely on communication added challenge because their
partner was not “in sync” with them. P5-2: “Because we had
completely different ways of planning, then the communication
made it really hard”. Others pointed out how not being able to
communicate added the challenge of having to rely on intuition
to anticipate the other player’s moves. P1-1: “The challenge
was understanding the other player”.
E. Positive & Negative Affect
Overall, BrainSnake was well-received by the participants.
Eight participants showed enthusiasm towards the BCI con-
trol mechanism, while four stated that they appreciated the
cooperative nature of the game. P1-2: “I liked the way you
could play the game with another player. So you actually
had to work together”. Two participants stated that they
enjoyed the added challenge of having to rely on intuition
to anticipate their partner’s move in the remote condition. P3-
2:“I preferred the one where we were not allowed to talk to
each other ‘cause I think that’s more challenging to get the
feeling of what the other is doing”. When asked what they did
not like about BrainSnake, five participants pointed out the
earlier mentioned delay in detecting alpha activity and three
participants indicated that they did not like having to close
their eyes to perform a game action. P4-2: “(...) that is not
really what a player enjoys generally. You want to be able to
track what you’re controlling.”
F. Effect of communication on alpha based BCI
Ultimately, responses from around half of the participants
suggest that there may have been a trade-off between com-
municating with a partner and being able to regulate levels of
relaxation and focus in order to control the character. These
Figure 5.
GEQ social component scores. Similar to the core components,
high standard deviations are visible.
participants stated that either communication made it harder
for them to regulate their alpha activity, or that it would be
preferable to keep communication to a minimum in order
to keep one’s mental state stable. P1-2: “I was a bit more
distracted in the first round, because you have to talk to each
other and you can’t only concentrate on what you’re doing on
the screen”. This could be accounted as another instance of
the Got in each other’s way CPM, although this could likely
be influenced by individual differences. For instance, a few
players seemed concerned about getting a high score and even
the CPM of worked out strategies which involved keeping
communication with their partner to a minimum. P6-1: “We
spoke about strategies, how to achieve the most points in the
game. During the game, we tried to keep the communication to
a minimum. I tried it, to not distract my partner when he had to
go into relaxation”. Another participant, admittedly unfamiliar
with gaming, only enjoyed playing BrainSnake in the co-
present condition thanks to the communication component.
G. Limitations
One noteworthy limitation of the current study is the fact
that participants were exposed to a cooperative game while
being questioned about a hypothetical competitive game set-
ting in the subsequent interview. Similarly, participants were
offered only one form of communication during the game ses-
sions, namely direct verbal communication, but subsequently
they were asked about their preferences for hypothetical
alternative forms of communication. Participants’ statements
regarding their preferences for either mode of communica-
tion for a competitive or cooperative game setting and their
preferences for a specific form of communication have to be
interpreted with caution. The inspection of CPMs was also
performed based on user interviews rather than by analysing
recorded gaming sessions, which made it difficult to identify
metrics such as laughter or excitement together and got in
each others’ way. Future studies should consider investigating
the effect of communication modalities on players’ experience
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

with novel BCI mechanisms in more detail, for instance by
analysing recorded gaming sessions.
V. CONCLUSION
The current study exemplifies how game design allows
users to play fast-paced BCI games using alpha activity,
addressing common limitations associated with this input
modality. Evaluation of the communication component of
BrainSnake shows that most participants attributed more con-
trol over the snake character and less frustration to the co-
present condition, albeit for different reasons. Moreover, most
participants found playing in co-presence more enjoyable,
while many felt that the lack of communication in remote
added frustration and/or challenge to the game. Nonetheless,
a few participants reported enjoying the extra challenge of not
being able to communicate in the remote condition. Multiple
participants suggested that there could be in fact a trade-off
between direct communication and alpha based BCI, and play-
ers who self-reportedly worked well with each other worked
out strategies which involved minimal use of communication
in order to maintain focus. After having played BrainSnake,
participants expressed their own ideas on alternative ways
of communication (e.g., in-game visual and auditory cues)
that could be implemented to enhance cooperation while
compromising alpha activity as little as possible. Conceivably,
the counterintuitive control mechanism of eye closure was
received with mixed feelings: despite the fact that a few
participants were intrigued by the interactive potential of this
game mechanism, many regarded it as a main source of
frustration.
Ultimately, BrainSnake was well-received and we suggest
that novel gameplay mechanisms and dynamics departing from
traditional gameplay should continue to draw genuine interest
in the BCI game community. While individual and contextual
differences in the way players experienced BrainSnake make
drawing general conclusions difficult, the development of
BrainSnake and insights from our participants’ responses are
of potential interest to those involved in the design and
development of BCI games. In conclusion, the following
recommendations are made:
• When using alpha waves or other BCI-paradigms as input
modality for games, it is worth to think about creative
compensations for its limitations as this can result in in-
teresting new interaction modalities. For example, future
work should look into assistive game mechanisms, such
as one player having control over the movement of a
character, while another player controls its speed or the
direction of the camera [15]. This may potentially lead to
improved game performance and enhanced immersion.
• Results indicate that closely-coupled cooperative BCI
games based on alpha activity benefit from subtle, less
intrusive ways of communication between players, while
face-to-face verbal communication may disrupt one’s
levels of focus or relaxation causing players to get in
each other’s way more often. Future work should focus
on extending this knowledge into other BCI-paradigms
as well as exploring less intrusive ways of communica-
tion. For example, previous research shows that tactile
feedback can be useful when the visual channel is highly
loaded by a complex task [16] [17]. This may also benefit
communication in BCI games.
• On the contrary, the use of direct verbal communica-
tion could be of potential interest for competitive BCI
games based on alpha activity as, for example, verbal
communication may allow for strategic manipulation of
the opponent. Novel interaction modalities that allow to
interfere with the opponent’s ability to control the game
are conceivable and worth investigating in the future.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Hamadicharef, M. Xu, and S. Aditya, “Brain-computer interface
(bci) based musical composition,” in 2010 International Conference on
Cyberworlds, Oct 2010, pp. 282–286.
[2] E. C. Lalor et al., “Steady-State VEP-Based Brain-Computer Interface
Control in an Immersive 3d Gaming Environment,” EURASIP Journal
on Advances in Signal Processing, vol. 2005, no. 19, pp. 706–906, Nov
2005.
[3] C. Mühl et al., “Bacteria Hunt: Evaluating multi-paradigm BCI interac-
tion,” Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 11–25,
Mar. 2010.
[4] D. P.-O. Bos et al., “Brain-computer interfacing and games,” in Brain-
Computer Interfaces.
Springer, 2010, pp. 149–178.
[5] L. Bonnet, F. Lotte, and A. Lécuyer, “Two brains, one game: Design
and evaluation of a multiuser bci video game based on motor imagery,”
IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games,
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 185–198, June 2013.
[6] A. Nijholt, D. P.-O. Bos, and B. Reuderink, “Turning shortcomings
into challenges: Brain–computer interfaces for games,” Entertainment
Computing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 85 – 94, 2009.
[7] A. Y. Kaplan, S. L. Shishkin, I. P. Ganin, I. A. Basyul, and A. Y. Zhi-
galov, “Adapting the p300-based brain-computer interface for gaming:
A review,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in
Games, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 141–149, June 2013.
[8] M. Seif El-Nasr et al., “Understanding and evaluating cooperative
games,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
SIGCHI
Conference
on
Human
Factors
in
Computing
Systems,
ser.
CHI
’10.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2010,
pp.
253–262.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1753326.1753363
[9] A. Beznosyk, P. Quax, K. Coninx, and W. Lamotte, “The influence of
cooperative game design patterns for remote play on player experience,”
in Proceedings of the 10th Asia Pacific Conference on Computer Human
Interaction, ser. APCHI ’12. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 11–
20. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2350046.2350051
[10] BioSemi. (accessed on 22.05.2017) BioSemi. https://www.biosemi.com/
. [Online]. Available: https://www.biosemi.com/
[11] OpenVibe. (accessed on 22.05.2017) Software for Brain Computer
Interfaces
and
Real
Time
Neurosciences.
http://openvibe.inria.fr/.
[Online]. Available: http://openvibe.inria.fr/
[12] Unity
Technologies.
(accessed
on
22.05.2017)
Unity.
http://www.unity3d.com/. [Online]. Available: http://www.unity3d.com/
[13] W. IJsselsteijn, Y. de Kort, and K. Poels, “The game experience ques-
tionnaire,” Eindhoven: Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Jan. 2013.
[14] A. Strauss and J. Corbin, “Grounded theory methodology,” Handbook
of qualitative research, vol. 17, pp. 273–85, 1994.
[15] D. Coyle, J. Garcia, A. R. Satti, and T. M. McGinnity, “Eeg-based
continuous control of a game using a 3 channel motor imagery bci: Bci
game,” in 2011 IEEE Symp. on Computational Intelligence, Cognitive
Algorithms, Mind, and Brain (CCMB), April 2011, pp. 1–7.
[16] R. Leeb, K. Gwak, D. S. Kim, and J. d. R. Millán, “Freeing the visual
channel by exploiting vibrotactile bci feedback,” in 2013 35th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC), July 2013, pp. 3093–3096.
[17] F. Cincotti et al., “Preliminary experimentation on vibrotactile feedback
in the context of mu-rhythm based bci,” in 2007 29th Annual Interna-
tional Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society (EMBC), Aug 2007, pp. 4739–4742.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

