How Can Intelligent Persona Features Support Online Advertising Work?
Ilkka Kaate  
Department of Marketing 
University of Turku 
Turku, Finland 
iokaat@utu.fi 
Joni Salminen 
School of Marketing and Communication, Marketing 
University of Vaasa 
Vaasa, Finland 
joni.salminen@uwasa.fi 
Soon-gyo Jung 
Qatar Computing Research Institute 
Doha, Qatar 
sjung@hbku.edu.qa 
Rami Olkkonen 
Department of Marketing 
University of Turku 
Turku, Finland 
rami.olkkonen@utu.fi 
Bernard J. Jnasen 
Qatar Computing Research Institute 
Doha, Qatar 
bjansen@hbku.edu.qa 
Abstract— The concept of “Intelligent Personas” or “AI 
personas” presented here builds on extant research on data-
driven personas and interactive persona systems. With this 
conceptualization, we particularly focus on outlining a vision 
for an intelligent end-to-end advertising system that supports 
human marketers’ decision making by deploying data-driven 
personas throughout the stages of the online advertising 
process. We start by defining the relevant concepts, continue 
by discussing intelligent personas for online advertising, and 
conclude by proposing research directions that need to be 
addressed in order to realize the value of personas in such a 
system, as well as discussing its potential value for the digital 
marketing profession. 
Keywords- Personas; online advertising; optimization 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Personas are fictitious people representing real customer 
groups, i.e., different types (e.g., most valuable, most loyal, 
most responsive – or the least valuable, etc.). Most typically, 
personas are presented to decision makers as persona 
profiles, i.e., narrative representations of different kinds of 
users belonging to a particular demographic, behavior, 
and/or attitude involved in using a product, site, or brand [1]. 
However, personas can also be accessed via interactive 
persona systems that rely on Web technologies and enable 
searching, filtering, or even generating personas from raw 
data [2]. Overall, personas act as surrogate mental models 
when inputs from actual customers are absent or unavailable 
for decision makers [1] – essentially, personas provide 
customer-centric inputs when needed, where needed. 
The concept intelligent persona (IP) can refer to two 
aspects: (a) the intelligent features of an interactive persona 
system, or (b) persona generated through artificial 
intelligence (AI) technology (this is also called AI personas
by 
some 
authors 
[3], 
while 
yet 
others 
refer 
to 
algorithmically-generated personas [4] or data-driven 
personas [5]). Finally, persona analytics refers to either 
understanding customer or users via systems that combine 
analytics and personas, or the goal of understanding how 
stakeholders interact with persona profiles and systems [6]. 
Overall, the concept of IP builds on extant research on 
data-driven personas, interactive persona systems, and 
intelligent system features that leverage state-of-the-art 
human-computer interaction (HCI) techniques and support 
marketing functions via the employment of personas [2]. 
More broadly, the IP concept can aid in outlining a vision for 
an intelligent end-to-end advertising system that supports 
human marketers’ decision making by deploying data-driven 
personas throughout the stages of the modern online 
advertising process. What we mean by this is that the work 
of online advertisers consists of various tasks, and those 
tasks can be supported through IP. 
In Section 2, we outline a vision for the use of IP in the 
context of online advertising. In Section 3, we present 
conclusions and discuss future work on this domain. 
II.
VISION FOR INTELLIGENT PERSONAS
The value of IP can be particularly salient in the context 
of computational advertising which refers to the use of 
technology and data to optimize the targeting and delivery of 
ads [7] (a closely related concept is intelligent advertising
which refers to the use of features that mimic human 
intelligence in the advertising process [7]). Hence, the vision 
of IP in online advertising can be formalized as [personas + 
computational advertising + intelligent features = ?]. In other 
words, a scrutiny that considers multiple perspectives: the 
benefits of personas as empathy-friendly mental modeling 
instruments, the contributions of computational advertising 
in terms of algorithms, and user interface (UI) and user 
experience (UX) aspects brought about by intelligent 
systems research. If in the equation these are on the 
numerator side, then advertiser work tasks are on the 
denominator side, resulting in the following formulation: 
[(personas + computational advertising + intelligent features) 
/ advertiser work tasks = ?]. In other words, we need to 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

consider the benefits or possibilities provided by technology 
HCI in regard to user needs which are reflected in the daily 
work tasks among advertisers. 
What does advertisers’ work consist of, then? There are a 
few prime elements which we discuss. First, we consider 
segmentation. This refers to dividing the total available 
market into addressable constituents, i.e., segments. Here, we 
observe that persona is a segment with a name and a face. 
Hence, segmentation can be done in a persona-assisted 
manner, yielding personas as outcomes. Once segmentation 
is done, targeting follows; namely, advertisers select which 
segments to focus on. Here, an IP system can recommend 
specific personas to target, given an explicit goal such 
maximize reach, engagement, or sales. After targets are 
chosen, ad copywriting follows. Here, IP can be of use by 
generating 
ad 
headlines, 
texts, 
and 
even 
imagery 
personalized to the selected personas. After ad content has 
been created, advertisers proceed to campaign set-up. This 
means creating the campaigns in the ad platform and 
configuring the settings. Here, IP can provide a structure; 
i.e., campaigns can be organized by personas, ensuring that 
the naming and targeting criteria match the personas [8]. 
This then yields an advantage in the next stage which is 
optimization; i.e., making decisions based on the results. 
Namely, once campaigns are running, they start to generate 
data; if the data is organized by personas, it becomes easier 
for an algorithm (or a human) to adjust budget allocation 
given the actual marketing performance of a given persona. 
As decision making in online advertising work practice 
ranges from insights formation to targeting, campaign and ad 
creation, reporting, and optimization, for each stage, we 
envision intelligent persona features that support the core 
tasks associated with the stage. To illustrate, Figure 1a 
presents AI-generated personas with ad text and image boxes 
for each persona (highlighted in red) for ad text creation and 
image selection for a human marketer. In contrast, Figure 1b 
shows a view where “Tyler” has been expanded for a more 
detailed view with ad text columns for multiple advertising 
channels for easier ad creation. 
III.
CONCLUSION
We have outlined some examples of how IP can be 
deployed in online advertising. By using algorithms, 
machine learning, and AI, marketers can create more 
personalized ad campaigns and more accurately measure the 
impact of their efforts. This paradigm shift can increase 
transparency, efficiency, and effectiveness within the 
industry. While computational advertising is transforming 
traditional advertising to become more cost-effective and 
efficient, while allowing marketers to better understand and 
reach their target audience, personas can accelerate this 
positive transformation. Nevertheless, much work is needed 
to capture IP’s potential value for the advertising profession, 
toward the realization of a visionary framework that 
leverages intelligent personas for more efficient and effective 
management of online advertising campaigns by human 
marketers. There is also a need to investigate the dynamics 
of machines replacing marketing work, and the sharing of 
labor in situations where intelligent features collaborate with 
humans towards more optimal advertising performance. 
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Concept example of intelligent persona features.  
REFERENCES
[1] 
A. Cooper, The Inmates Are Running the Asylum: Why High 
Tech Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore the Sanity, 1st ed. 
Indianapolis, IN: Sams - Pearson Education, 1999. 
[2] 
S.-G. Jung, J. Salminen, and B. J. Jansen, “Giving Faces to 
Data: Creating Data-Driven Personas from Personified Big Data,” in 
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User 
Interfaces Companion, in IUI ’20. Cagliari, Italy: Association for 
Computing 
Machinery, 
Mar. 
2020, 
pp. 
132–133. 
doi: 
10.1145/3379336.3381465. 
[3] 
A. Holzinger, M. Kargl, B. Kipperer, P. Regitnig, M. Plass, and 
H. Müller, “Personas for Artificial Intelligence (AI) an Open Source 
Toolbox,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 23732–23747, 2022, doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3154776. 
[4] 
J. Salminen, S.-G. Jung, and B. Jansen, “Intentionally Biasing 
User Representation?: Investigating the Pros and Cons of Removing Toxic 
Quotes from Social Media Personas,” in Nordic Human-Computer 
Interaction 
Conference, 
2022, 
pp. 
1–13. 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3546155.3546647. 
[5] 
J. J. McGinn and N. Kotamraju, “Data-driven persona 
development,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, Florence, Italy: ACM, 2008, pp. 1521–
1524. doi: 10.1145/1357054.1357292. 
[6] 
J. Salminen, S.-G. Jung, and B. Jansen, “Developing Persona 
Analytics Towards Persona Science,” in 27th International Conference on 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Intelligent User Interfaces, in IUI ’22. New York, NY, USA: Association 
for 
Computing 
Machinery, 
Mar. 
2022, 
pp. 
323–344. 
doi: 
10.1145/3490099.3511144. 
[7] 
Y. Yang, Y. C. Yang, B. J. Jansen, and M. Lalmas, 
“Computational Advertising: A Paradigm Shift for Advertising and 
Marketing?,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 3–6, May 2017, doi: 
10.1109/MIS.2017.58. 
[8] 
J. Salminen, I. Kaate, A. M. S. Kamel, S. Jung, and B. J. Jansen, 
“How Does Personification Impact Ad Performance and Empathy? An 
Experiment with Online Advertising,” International Journal of Human–
Computer Interaction, vol. 0, no. 0, pp. 1–15, Aug. 2020, doi: 
10.1080/10447318.2020.1809246. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

