Developing Positive Attitudes Towards Cooperative Problem Solving by Linking
Socio-emotional and Cognitive Intentions
Masato Kuno
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
Email: kuno@ii.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
Yoshimasa Ohmoto
Shizuoka University
Shizuoka, Japan
Email: ohmoto-y@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp
Toyoaki Nishida
Fukuchiyama University
Fukuchiyama, Japan
Email: toyoaki.nishida@fukuchiyama.ac.jp
Abstract—We focus on problem-solving situations in which people
cooperate with virtual interactive agents. The ﬁnal goal is to
achieve high-quality problem solving through a problem-solving
process in which people recognise agents as effective collaborators
and actively cooperate with the agents. It is known that trust,
which is the basis of cooperation, has both affective and com-
petent aspects. However, because the impression of agents tends
to focus on the ability side, it is necessary to make the people
recognise that the ability and emotional sides of agents are not
separate but are integrated. In the proposed method, we apply the
Alternate Estimation by representing Global and Local (AEGL)
goal-oriented behaviour model, which adjusts the behaviour of an
agent that show the agent’s ability side and the emotional side by
estimating the causes of the human behaviour. We demonstrated
how both behaviours change consistently through interaction with
people. In this study, we designed an experimental agent model
to realise the proposed model. The people and agents are asked
to perform cooperative decision-making tasks by exchanging
opinions and adapting to each other’s behaviour. The results
suggest that the relationship between the ability and affective
functioning of the agents eases tension and that people feel more
comfortable talking to the agents.
Keywords–human-agent interaction; cooperative problem.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Today, agents are developed to cooperate for solving
problems. When solving complex problems with no optimal
solution, if people think alone, their view is narrow, and they
will not be able to generate a solution. If people speak with
other people and exchange opinions, their opinions stimulate
them to produce various ideas. However, not everyone can be
a good collaborator.
　 Kwon et al. argued that a situation in which self-disclosure
and intimacy with collaborators are triggered is a precondition
for a sense of community and that a sense of community is the
ﬁnal product of successful collaborative learning [1]. If people
feel uncomfortable interacting with a partner who is unfriendly
and difﬁcult to talk to, they are not likely to interact willingly.
　 On the other hand, if they ﬁnd a partner who is likeable and
easy to talk to, they are expected to cooperate with him/her
without resistance and to consider his/her opinion to be valid.
They will be able to compare opinions efﬁciently and have
a broader perspective regarding problem solving. As a result,
good quality satisfactory problem solving can be achieved.
　 However, such a partner does not always exist in the scene
of problem solving. Therefore, an agent who can be called on
as a partner at any time and who is easy to talk to and likeable
is expected to be available as a collaborator.
　 The ﬁnal goal of this study is to realise good, satisfactory
problem solving through a process in which people recognise
agents as effective partners and actively cooperate with them.
However, it is difﬁcult to induce people to actively cooperate
even in situations in which people must cooperate with other
people.
　 Chi et al. categorised student engagement behaviours into
four patterns: interactive, constructive, active, and passive
[2]. This classiﬁcation suggests that a gap exists between
the passive and interactive states, in which students produce
knowledge by talking with others. Therefore, to induce peo-
ple’s willingness to cooperate, it is necessary for people to feel
that it is easy to talk to agents and to be friendly with them
to overcome the gap. This study focuses on this aspect.
　 In collaborative learning where learners discuss and ex-
change opinions with each other to solve problems, social
interaction is important for the learners’ positive attitude
towards cooperation [3]. The following two types of social
interactions are typical during collaborative learning [4] [5]:
•
Cognitive interaction: Discussions related to the task
itself or the metacognition of the collaborators; and
•
Socio-emotional interaction: Shared emotions about
the task and pronounced expressions of positive and
negative emotions.
First, cognitive interaction with other learners implies an active
exchange of ideas for the solution of the problem. Smooth
cognitive interactions can stimulate discussion of the problem
and enhance people’s evaluations of the agents’ abilities. A
previous study has shown that a group of learners who share
their thoughts and understanding through cognitive interaction
engage in a deeper level of the learning process than a group
of learners who do not actively share their thoughts and
understanding [6]. A study by Maltz et al. also demonstrated
that people continue to accept system suggestions when they
trust the system’s capabilities [7]. Thus, if the partner makes
appropriate and accurate statements about the task, the learner
trusts his/her partner’s ability, and the learner’s positive attitude
towards cooperation is expected to be induced.
　 Second, socio-emotional interaction is related to the ex-
pression of emotions in a social context. In other words, the
interaction aims to ‘build trust and belonging by getting to
know each other’. Kwon et al. argued that socio-emotional
interaction has the effect of smoothing out the behaviour of
the members and protecting them from friction [1]. Kreijns
419
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

et al. further argued that socio-emotional interaction facilitates
overall interaction and increases the efﬁciency of cooperative
learning [8]. In conclusion, socio-emotional interaction may
increase the familiarity with other learners and induce smooth
and low-resistance interaction. In addition, socio-emotional
interaction is thought to have the effect of increasing the
learners’ positive attitudes by synergistically inducing total
interaction including cognitive interaction.
　 From the above discussion, cognitive and socio-emotional
interactions have the effect of giving people positive im-
pressions about the competence and familiarity of the other
learner, respectively. In this study, we induce agents to per-
form cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours to that people
can recognise agents as collaborators and interact with them
without resistance.
　 In the case of people, it is obvious that they have emotions
in addition to their abilities. However, the fact that agents
have emotions (including intention) is not obvious, since
because their abilities are often emphasised due to their strong
associations with machines. In this regard, Dennett proposed
an idea called ‘intentional stance’, which refers to the idea that
robots and agents have intentions when people interact with
them [9]. Dennett stated that people do not usually think that
robots and agents have intentions. A comparison of interactions
between people and agents that induce intentional stance and
those that do not induce intentional stance demonstrates that
people who interact with the former interact more actively,
even in situations unrelated to the task [10].
　 In conclusion, it is possible that the two functions of
an agent are understood by people separately. If these two
functions are not understood as a whole, people cannot per-
ceive an agent’s intention consistently. As a result, people
cannot perceive the agent’s abilities and emotions towards
the inconsistent behaviour of the agent, and thus, they cannot
induce positive attitudes towards the cooperation of the agent.
We aim to demonstrate how agents behave with consistent
intentions by inducing people to perceive that their cognitive
and socio-emotional behaviours are related to each other. For
this purpose, the cognitive and socio-emotional intentions of
the agents are represented by the model, and both intentions are
updated with consistency. Thus, we propose generating both
cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours of agents using the
AEGL model developed by Omoto et al. [11]. The AEGL
model has the characteristic of combining the intentions of
both people and agents, estimating their intentions alternately.
Because cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours of people
are consistent, it is expected that the cognitive and socio-
emotional intentions of agents, which are updated based on
the estimated intentions of people, are also consistent. In
other words, it is expected that people can perceive how
the two intentions are integrated and combined with people’s
intentions.
　 In this study, as a ﬁrst step towards the realisation of
the above-proposed method, the cognitive and socio-emotional
behaviours of agents are generated in parallel. In the generation
of socio-emotional behaviours, we suggest the relationship
between the agents’ socio-emotional behaviours and cognitive
behaviours so that humans can recognise the relationship
between them. Speciﬁcally, the AEGL model is not used,
but a simple model that mimics the AEGL model is used to
generate agents’ behaviours. We then asked the agents and
people to solve problems by cooperating and observed how the
relationship between the agents’ cognitive and socio-emotional
behaviours affects people.
　 The goal of this study is to induce people to feel that agents
are easy to talk with and are familiar to them. That is, we aimed
to reduce the resistance that people feel to cooperating with
an agent and to increase the subjective liking of the agent.
These effects support people’s willingness to cooperate with
agents. When people feel comfortable and familiar with agents,
they are more likely to speak with the agents and accept their
opinions.
　 This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 introduces the
related work. Section 3 provides an overview of the proposed
method. Section 4 describes the experiments conducted in this
study. Section 5 presents the results of the experiment. Section
6 describes the results of the experiment and future tasks.
Section 7 concludes the work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Previous studies have shown that treating emotional in-
teractions in addition to task-oriented interactions in dialogue
systems and agents can increase people’s satisfaction [12] and
induce positive perceptions of interactions [13].
　 For example, Kumar et al. investigated the effect of having
tutor agents support students in their studies while performing
socio-emotional behaviours in addition to cognitive behaviours
[14]. The tutor agents work on socio-emotional behaviours
using interaction strategies based on the three categories of
‘showing solidarity’, ‘showing tension release’, and ‘agreeing’.
The rules for generating the behaviours are predeﬁned, and the
cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours of the agents were
triggered using different interaction strategies with the input of
task progress and interaction states. The tutor agents generated
cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours separately, and the
students did not perceive these behaviours to be linked to each
other. Thus, although the questionnaire results indicated that
the agents who performed the socio-emotional behaviour were
friendlier than those who did not perform the socio-emotional
behaviour, we did not ﬁnd that the students had the impression
that the agents were easy to talk to or friendly, and we did not
obtain any indicators that revealed students’ positive attitudes
towards cooperation.
　 In contrast, in this study, agents used the same intention
model to generate these behaviours, and the agents always
behaved according to their intentions during the interaction.
Furthermore, the parameters of one intention model were used
as input to the other, and the goal was to make the partici-
pants perceive that the agent’s cognitive and socio-emotional
behaviours do not follow different interaction strategies, but
that they are acting based on consistent intentions.
　 A study that considers the generation of behaviours based
on the estimated intentions of people is the work by Zhou
et al. [15]. Zhou et al. proposed a neural model that can
detect emotions in people’s speech and generate conversations
by learning from a large set of conversational data. In the
study by Zhou et al., emotions were detected by the trained
model and the agent’s optimal emotion was expressed based
on the trained model. However, this study used the AEGL
model to present the agents’ goal orientation, assumed the
same two-layered intention model for people and agents, and
alternately updated the intention model based on the real-time
cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours of the people during
the interaction. Then, people can observe how the agents
420
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

change their behaviour based on the intentions and emotions
of the people during the interaction and can predict the agents’
intentions. By making people strongly aware of the cognitive
and socio-emotional intentions of agents, people can expect
consistent intentions.
III.
PROPOSED MODEL
The goal of this study is to induce the effect of the ease
of talking and familiarity with an agent to support people’s
willingness to cooperate with the agent. For this purpose, we
attempted to induce people to recognise the relationship be-
tween agents’ abilities and emotional functions. The proposed
model differs from previous studies in that both cognitive
and socio-emotional behaviours are simply output in parallel,
and both types of behaviour are output using the AEGL
model developed by Omoto et al. [11]. The AEGL model,
in which the intentions of people and agents are alternately
estimated and combined, is used to output the agent’s cognitive
and socio-emotional behaviours in parallel so that people can
perceive how the two intentions are combined with the people’s
intentions. In the following, we describe the details of the
proposed model.
A. AEGL Model for Cognitive and Socio-Emotional Behaviour
Generation
First, an overview of the AEGL model developed by Omoto
et al. is presented in Figure 1. In the AEGL model, the
intention of the people is inferred from their verbal and non-
verbal behaviours. However, various intentions are inferred
from the observed behaviour of the people. In the AEGL
model, the relationship between behaviour and intention is
represented by two different levels of concreteness: global
purpose and local objective. That is, the two-layered relational
intention model, with global purpose and local objective, is
used to infer human intentions. The local objective is the
categorisation of the actual observed behaviours and represents
a temporal objective. For example, the observed behaviours,
such as ‘laugh’ and ‘eye contact’, can be categorised into
the category ‘synchronize’. Therefore, ‘laugh’ and ‘eye con-
tact’ are related to the local objective called ‘synchronise’.
However, the global purpose expresses a longer-term purpose.
For example, temporary objectives, such as ‘synchronise’ and
‘show attention’, are thought to lead to the long-term purpose
of ‘showing acceptance’. Therefore, ‘synchronise’ and ‘show
attention’ are related to the global purpose called ‘showing
acceptance’. In this way, the task-speciﬁc global purpose and
local objective are represented as nodes, and each node has its
own parameters.
　 Omoto et al. assumed the above intention models for both
agents and people and updated the parameters of both intention
models alternately with people’s behaviours as input. Figure 1
presents an overview of the update, and Figure 2 reveals the
details of the update.
1)
First, the agent outputs the behaviour based on the
parameters of the local objective.
2)
Next, the agent observes the behaviour of the peo-
ple, updates the parameters of the local objective in
the people’s intention model, and then updates the
parameters of the global purpose of the people.
3)
The parameters of the people’s global purpose and
the agent’s global purpose are merged, and the agent
updates the parameters of the local objective based
on the parameters of the global purpose.
4)
The agent then outputs its next behaviour based on
the parameters of its updated local objective.
　 Omoto et al. stated that, by making people observe an
agent’s trial and error behaviour, people can infer the unob-
servable internal state of an agent [10]. By doing so, the agent’s
intentions are inferred by people, and their intentional stance
is induced. Therefore, by outputting the cognitive and socio-
emotional behaviours of agents using the AEGL model, it is
possible to induce people to estimate the process by which
agents produce their task behaviour and emotional expressions.
Moreover, it can make people recognise that the agent has
intentions regarding competence and emotional aspects.
　 In this study, we apply the feature of the AEGL model of in-
ducing people to estimate the internal state of the agent and at-
tempt to induce people to estimate the association between the
agent’s cognitive and socio-emotional intentions. An overview
of the proposed model is illustrated in Figure 2. In the proposed
model, cognitive and socio-emotional intentions are inferred
from people’s behaviour, and the next cognitive and socio-
emotional behaviours of agents are determined in parallel. Both
actions are output as a single behaviour of an agent. Because
task-related behaviours and emotional behaviours of people
are consistent, the cognitive and socio-emotional intentions of
the agents, which are updated based on the estimated people’s
intentions, are also considered consistent (dotted arrows in
Figure 2).
User
Agent
Showing
Acceptance
Synchronize
behaviour
behaviour
(3)update
(1)(4)output
(2)estimate
Be cheerful
Motivate
Showing
Solidarity
Global
purposes
Local
objectives
Showing
Acceptance
Synchronize
Be cheerful
Motivate
Showing
Solidarity
Figure 1. AEGL model.
Figure 2. Agent model in this study.
421
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

B. Experimental
Socio-emotional
Behaviour
Generation
Model
The goal of this study is to facilitate people to perceive
the relationship between agents’ cognitive and socio-emotional
behaviours so that they feel that it is easy to talk to and
be familiar with the agents. In this study, we designed an
experimental agent model that mimics the proposed model,
and we investigated the effects of the relationship between
agents’ cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours on people.
Speciﬁcally, the agent’s cognitive behaviour, to which the
AEGL model has already been applied in Ohmoto’s study,
is generated using the rule-based model, which is described
later for simplicity. The socio-emotional behaviours of agents
to which the AEGL model has not been applied in the previous
studies are generated based on a simple behavioural model that
mimics the AEGL model, which is also described later. Such a
simple experimental agent model can also present the structure
of the interaction in which cognitive and socio-emotional
behaviours are performed in parallel during the interaction.
Thus, we can induce people to feel that the agents perform
each behaviour based on consistent intention, and people can
recognise the relationship between each behaviour. The cog-
nitive behaviours of the agents are generated from verbal and
non-verbal behaviours of people based on predetermined rules.
Cognitive behaviours, such as ‘proposal’, ‘dividing labour’,
and so on, are triggered by the rule base on the observed task-
related behaviours of the people.
　 The socio-emotional behaviours of the agents are generated
using the behaviour generation model depicted in Figure 3.
This model differs from the AEGL model in two respects. One
aspect is that only the agent’s intention model is assumed, and
the other is that the local objective layer does not exist. In
this model, the parameters related to the emotional state of
people are set, and the connection between the parameters and
their verbal and non-verbal behaviours is predetermined. Thus,
based on the verbal and non-verbal behaviour of people during
the interaction, parameters related to people’s emotional state,
such as ‘nervous’ and ‘favourability’, are updated. The socio-
emotional intentions, such as ‘showing tension release’ and
‘showing acceptance’, are selected according to the values of
these parameters, and the speciﬁc behaviours, such as ‘praise’
and ‘acknowledge’, are output for each intention. The ﬁve
basic behaviours to express intentions other than ‘seeing users
attitude’ are based on Kwon’s classiﬁcation of socio-emotional
interactions [1].
Parameter(1 to 5)
-
Nervous
-
Favourability
-
Cooperative
Seeing User’s
Attitude
Showing
Tension Release
Showing
Acceptance
Showing
Solidarity
・ Apologize
・ Encourage
・ Acknowledge
・ Be anxious
・ Praise
・ Talk politely
Cooperative is
maximum
Favorability is
maximum
Nervous is
maximum
All parameter
is 2 to 4
Figure 3. Socio-emotional behaviour generation model in this experiment.
C. Role of the Agent
In the proposed model, the following two agents are
used to develop a positive attitude towards cooperation. The
cooperative agent takes the same position as the people and
interacts with them to engage in collaborative problem solving.
This agent generates behaviours using the AEGL model. The
teacher agent knows the details of the task that neither the
people nor the cooperative agent knows and offers knowledge
in response to their questions. This agent is not directly
involved in solving the problem but leads the way in ensuring
the task goes smoothly. In this study, we used two agents based
on the work by Ohmoto et al. [16]. One of the reasons was
to reduce the psychological resistance to interaction by having
people observe interactions between agents. By doing so, we
aim to induce people to learn how to interact with agents and
reduce their psychological resistance to the interaction. The
other reason is that this study is based on a cooperative learning
situation in which learners in the same position work together
to solve problems. Therefore, we aim to promote an equal
discussion between the people and cooperative agents and to
smooth the progress of the task by having a separate agent as
a teacher who maintains the knowledge of the task. In the next
section, we provide an overview of the evaluation experiments
using this experimental model.
IV.
EXPERIMENT
For the realisation of the proposed model, we designed
the experimental model and conducted experiments in which
people and agents were asked to perform cooperative problem
solving. The purpose of this experiment is to generate both
cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours of the agents in
parallel and to observe the effects of the link between these be-
haviours on people. For this purpose, we adopted experimental
tasks that require cooperation and assistance between people
and agents. The task is performed in such a way that they
help each other and show socio-emotional behaviours, such as
gratitude and apology. In this way, we can evaluate the degree
of familiarity and ease of talking of the agents based on their
behaviour and physiological indices.
A. Task
1) Task Overview: For the task, we use a tower defence
game. The player and agent communicate with each other to
place a tower in position to prevent an enemy attack. The
game was developed using Unity, and the player can move the
character in the virtual world using a controller. The player
interacts with the agent in the virtual world by speaking.
Interactions involve three parties: the player, cooperative agent,
and teacher agent. In the experimental group, the socio-
emotional behaviour of the cooperative agent throughout the
task is generated by the experimental model in Section 3-B.
In the control group, the cooperative agent does not perform
any socio-emotional behaviour. The experimental model of
Section 3-B is not used for cognitive behaviour, but both
groups generate rule-based behaviours based on the goal of
completing the game. The game overview is illustrated in
Figure 4.
2) Rule: The player works with the cooperative agent
to discuss and determine how to place the towers to allow
the player to defend his/her position against the enemy. The
placement of the towers is costly and must be within the cost
limitations. Players need to discuss and consider the placement
of towers that can efﬁciently defeat enemies, considering trade-
offs, such as the tower attack power versus cost. Players can
422
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Agent
Participant
Recorded
video and
physiological
signals
Experimenter
Perceived by the
Experimenter
Input
commands
Figure 4. Experimental setup.
also strengthen and repair towers. The player and cooperative
agent can communicate with the teacher agent and ask ques-
tions about the effects of the tower and types of enemies. The
player and two agents talk to each other using voice chat.
　 To succeed in this task, the player and cooperative agent
must work well together. For example, differences exist in
the ability to strengthen and repair towers, and the players
and agent must discuss and choose an action depending on
the situation. When socio-emotional behaviours are displayed,
such as thanking the partner for his/her help, praising the
partner for his/her skill, and apologising for the failure of the
tower, we believe that the player will become more familiar
with the agent and more willing to interact and cooperate more
actively.
B. Wizard-of-Oz
The experimental model used in this study was realised
using the Wizard-of-Oz (WoZ) method. The experimenter
observed the verbal and non-verbal behaviours of the players
during the task and manually increased or decreased the
parameters of the players associated with the behaviours based
on predeﬁned rules. For example, the ‘cooperative’ parameter
increased if the player acted to encourage the cooperative
agent, and the ‘showing acceptance’ parameter decreased if
the player rejected the suggestion of the cooperative agent.
The experimenter manually selected the behaviour of the co-
operative agent from among the behaviours expressing socio-
emotional intentions according to the highest parameters. The
physical behaviours of the agents were performed manually by
the experimenter using a controller, and the real-time speech of
the experimenters was changed to be perceived as the agents’
speech using a voice changer. The reason for not using the
recorded audio is to respond immediately to changes in the
player’s behaviour.
C. Participants
In this experiment, 15 students who were not involved in
information engineering were subjects. Participants ranged in
age from 19 to 32 years old with an average age of 22.53
(variance of 10.65), including 12 males and three females.
D. Experimental Setup
Eight participants were set up as the experimental group,
and seven participants were in the control group. An overview
of the experimental setup is illustrated in Figure 4. Participants
interacted with the agents through a monitor and controlled
their avatars in the game using an Xbox controller. The
perceptions of the participants’ actions and statements and
the manipulations of the agents were assessed by the experi-
menters based on the above model for each group of agents.
The video images of the participants’ upper body during the
experiment were captured using a web camera, and the time
series of the heart rate and Skin Conductance Response (SCR)
were obtained using a Polymate biometric analyser.
　 After the game, a questionnaire was conducted to obtain the
participants’ subjective evaluations. The physiological indices
obtained in this study were missing the heart rate data and SCR
data for two participants, and for another three participants,
the SCR data exhibited little response, so we concluded that
they were not appropriate for use in the analysis. Therefore,
considering the small number of participants, we included par-
ticipants whose data were correctly obtained for each analysis.
　 The analyses in Sections 5-C, 5-D, and 5-E were performed
on eight subjects in the experimental group and seven subjects
in the control group. The analysis in Section 5-A was per-
formed on six subjects in the experimental group and seven
subjects in the control group. The analysis in Section 5-B was
performed on ﬁve subjects in the experimental group and ﬁve
subjects in the control group.
V.
RESULTS
A. Cardiac Sympathetic Index and Cardiac Vagal Index
To estimate the internal state of the participants during
the task, the Cardiac Sympathetic Index (CSI) and Cardiac
Vagal Index (CVI) were calculated from the participants’ heart
rate data. The CSI and CVI are indices designed by Toichi
et al. [17]. The long-axis component L and the short-axis
component T were calculated from the distribution of the heart
rate intervals in the Lorenz plot analysis, where T/L is CSI,
and log(L×T) is CVI. These are indicators that can detect the
heightened sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves. Hayashi
et al. found that the stress state is higher when the sympathetic
nervous system is high, and the relaxed state is higher when the
parasympathetic nervous system is high [18]. In this analysis,
we evaluated the participants’ stress state in terms of their ease
of talking with the agents and their resistance to cooperation.
　 We hypothesised that the change in the internal state of
the participants would be more pronounced after the speech
of the cooperative agent. Thus, we calculated the CSI and
CVI of the participants for 30 seconds after normal speech
(excluding socio-emotional speech) by the cooperative agent
and analysed them separately as statistical data. The agent’s
socio-emotional speech was ‘acknowledged’, ‘apologies’, ‘be
anxious’, ‘encourage’, and ‘praise’. First, the average CSI for
30 seconds after normal speech for the entire task was 1.58
for the experimental group and 1.78 for the control group,
with Welch’s t-test showing a signiﬁcant difference between
the groups at p = 0.0001 (t = -4.38, p = 1.29*e-05). The
average CVI is 5.33 for the experimental group and 5.12 for
the control group, with Welch’s t-test showing a signiﬁcant
difference between the groups at p = 0.001 (t = 3.67, p =
0.00025; Figure 5).
　 Therefore, to capture the temporal variation of CSI and CVI
values, we calculated the average CSI and CVI 30 seconds
after the cooperative agent’s speech during the ﬁrst and last
5 minutes of the task for each participant (Figures 6 and 7).
A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the averages
of CSI indicates no signiﬁcant differences between groups or
over time. We also analysed the CVI and found a signiﬁcant
423
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

interaction at the signiﬁcance level of p < 0.05 (F = 7.34, p =
0.02), and an effect of temporal variation exists in the control
group at a signiﬁcance level of p < 0.05 (F = 5.98, p = 0.033).
　 The above analysis suggests that participants’ internal states
were particularly affected after the speech of the cooperative
agent. The experimental group exhibited lower post-speech
CSI values and higher CVI values throughout the task (i.e.,
the participants were at a relatively low level of tension and
excitement and were relaxed). In the control group, the CVI
value after the speech decreased and approached a tense state
as the task progressed, whereas no decrease was found in the
experimental group. This suggests that the socio-emotional
speech of the cooperative agent suppresses the participants’
tension and enhances their relaxation, removing some of their
psychological resistance to cooperating with the cooperative
agent, whereas under normal circumstances, the participants’
tension and excitement levels increase as the task progresses.
　 Finally, to investigate whether the socio-emotional speech
of the cooperative agent directly affects the internal state of
the participants, we calculated the CSI and CVI values for 30
seconds after the socio-emotional and normal speech of the
cooperative agents in the experimental group and compared
them. The average CSI is 1.71 after the socio-emotional speech
and 1.64 after the normal speech, and the paired t-test was
performed with no signiﬁcant difference found (t = 0.25, p =
0.81). The average CVI is 5.60 after socio-emotional speech
and 5.34 after normal speech. A similar test was performed,
and no signiﬁcant difference was found (t = 0.80, p = 0.44).
　 The results suggest that, although socio-emotional speech
does not affect participants immediately, the accumulation
of socio-emotional speech may change the inﬂuence of the
agent’s normal speech. In other words, by performing cog-
nitive and socio-emotional behaviours in parallel, the socio-
emotional behaviour supports the cognitive behaviour in sup-
pressing the participants’ tension.
Figure 5. CSI, CVI average for 30 seconds after cooperative agent’s speech
for the entire task.
Figure 6. CSI average over time for 30 seconds after the cooperative agent’s
speech in the ﬁrst and last ﬁve minutes in each group.
Figure 7. CVI average over time for 30 seconds after cooperative agent’s
speech in the ﬁrst and last ﬁve minutes in each group.
B. Skin Conductance Response
To estimate the internal state of the participants during the
task, we measured their SCR. The SCR is an electrical measure
of sweating caused by mental tension and excitement, and it
is expected that SCR can be used to estimate mental stress
and emotion. Lin et al. showed that higher subjective stress
results in a higher SCR value [19]. In this study, we focused
on the effect of the cooperative agent’s speech on the stress
state of the participants by examining the change in the SCR
value 30 seconds after the cooperative agent’s speech during
the task. In terms of the participants’ stress state, we assessed
the degree of resistance to cooperation and the ease of talking
with the agents.
　 There is a delay in the reaction of the SCR and a delay
in returning to the original value after a reaction. Therefore,
it is reasonable to examine how the values vary concerning
a certain threshold in the SCR analysis. For each participant,
we calculated the average of the SCR for 30 seconds after
each speech of the cooperative agent and set the average of
the bottom 20% of values in the speech as the baseline for that
participant. Then, we analysed the variation in SCR values 30
seconds after the speech based on a baseline +0.5 threshold.
　 First, we analysed the SCR response rate of the cooperative
agent’s normal speech, considering the speech to be responsive
if the SCR value exceeded the threshold within 30 seconds
after the speech. Thus, we found 330 responsive and 91
nonresponsive speech results in the experimental group, and
364 and 77 in the control group, respectively. We performed
the chi-square (χ2) test to compare the response rates between
groups, ﬁnding no signiﬁcant differences in the response rates
(χ2 = 2.11, p = 0.15). To investigate the response of the SCR
in each group, we focused on the speech with an SCR. We
ﬁrst calculated the number of seconds that the SCR value
exceeded the threshold within 30 seconds after speech and
then compared the averages between groups (Figure 8). The
average of the experimental group is 7.72, and the average of
the control group is 8.48, which is the result of Welch’s t-
test. The signiﬁcance level is p < 0.05, with the control group
having a signiﬁcantly longer time (t = -2.01, p = 0.045).
　 This result indicates that the control group tends to have a
longer reaction time than the experimental group. This suggests
that participants in the control group tend to pay too much
attention to the cooperative agent’s speech and become tense.
However, the participants in the experimental group were not
too tense and were able to relax in response to the agent’s
speech. 　
C. Participants’ Speech
We measured the participants’ socio-emotional speech and
compared the speech with that of the experimental and control
424
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 8. Results of analyses on SCR.
groups. Based on the categorisation of socio-emotional inter-
actions by Kwon et al., we measured ﬁve types of speech:
‘acknowledge’, ‘apologies’, ‘be anxious’, ‘encourage’, and
‘praise’ [1]. The annotations were done manually by the
experimenter after observing the video of the experiment. The
chi-square (χ2) test was used in the evaluation statistics.
　 We measured the number of socio-emotional and other
normal speech in the task for each group and compared the
proportion of socio-emotional speech between groups. The
results are listed in Table I. The results reveal that the number
of instances of socio-emotional is high in the experimental
group at a signiﬁcance level of p < 0.001 (χ2 = 12.05, p =
0.00052).
　 Next, participants’ cognitive speech other than socio-
emotional speech was measured for 5 minutes after the start of
the task, 5 minutes before the end of the task, and in the middle
of the other tasks, and the number of instances of speech
between the experimental and control groups was compared.
The two-way ANOVA was used as a statistical measure.
　 The results of that average are presented in Table II. The
results indicate no signiﬁcant difference between the groups
(F = 3.85, p = 0.072) and no signiﬁcant interaction (F = 3.00,
p = 0.067), but the cognitive speech of the experimental group
increased in the middle part of the task. The mean mid-task
time (s) was 1376.875 for the experimental group and 1321
for the control group, and Welch’s t-test found no signiﬁcant
difference (t = 3.17, p = 0.10).
　 These results suggest that the familiarity and ease of talking
to the cooperative agent felt by the participants were exhibited
in the participants’ behaviour in the form of increased socio-
emotional speech. Furthermore, the recognition of the link
between the cognitive and socio-emotional speech of the co-
operative agent may have led to an increase in the participants’
cognitive speech.
TABLE I. NUMBER OF SPEECHES OF PARTICIPANTS IN THE TASK
Socio-emotional
Normal
Experimental group
40
538
Control group
7
381
TABLE II. NUMBER OF COGNITIVE SPEECHES OF PARTICIPANTS
IN THE TASK
First 5
Middle
Last 5
Experimental group
14.25
70.50
16.00
Control group
13.14
46.00
14.71
D. Participants’ Speech Latency
The latency between the end of the cooperative agent’s
speech and the start of the participant’s speech was measured,
and the speech latency was compared between the experimen-
tal and control groups. We assessed the participants’ familiarity
and ease of talking with the cooperative agent by observing
whether participants respond to the cooperative agent’s speech
in a fast-paced way.
　 A two-way ANOVA was used to evaluate the participants’
speech latency. To capture the temporal changes in speech
latency, we focused on the ﬁrst and last 5 minutes of the task.
The latency averages were calculated for each participant in
each situation. The results are displayed in Figure 9. The re-
sults of the analysis reveal that the average of the experimental
group is 1.51 seconds for the ﬁrst 5 minutes and 0.95 seconds
for the last 5 minutes. The average of the control group is 1.73
seconds for the ﬁrst 5 minutes and 1.38 seconds for the last
5 minutes. A two-way ANOVA was applied, corresponding
to each participant. A main effect between groups was found
at a signiﬁcance level of p < 0.05 (F = 4.68, p = 0.0498),
and the experimental group exhibited a shorter speech latency
than the control group. The main effect of the temporal change
was found at a signiﬁcance level of p < 0.01 (F = 12.27, p =
0.0039).
　 As the task progressed, the speech latency became shorter
in both groups, but it was particularly short in the experimental
group. We assumed that the long speech latency indicates
that the participants found it challenging to communicate
with the cooperative agent and that they did not consider the
suggestions and opinions of the cooperative agent to be valid.
The short speech latency indicates that they were actively
attempting to communicate and cooperate with the cooperative
agent.
　 In both groups, as the task progressed, the speech latency
decreased because participants felt that the cooperative agent
was easier to communicate with and more effective as a
partner; thus, the speech latency decreased. However, in the
experimental group, the latency of speech was shorter because
participants felt more familiar with the agent and felt it
was easier to talk to the cooperative agent due to the link
between the cooperative agent’s cognitive and socio-emotional
behaviours.
Figure 9. Speech latency in the ﬁrst and last ﬁve minutes in each group.
E. Subjective Evaluation by Participants
A questionnaire with a seven-point Likert scale was con-
ducted after the experiment to investigate the participants’
subjective evaluations. Participants were asked to evaluate all
statements on a scale of 1 (not true) to 7 (true). We assessed the
425
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

answers to the following 12 statements about the cooperative
agent.
•
　 Q1: I took a liking to the agent.
•
　 Q2: The agent was reliable.
•
　 Q3: I felt easy to talk with the agent.
•
　 Q4: The behavior of the agent was natural.
•
　 Q5: I found the agent’s behaviour human-like.
•
　 Q6: I felt the value of the cooperation with the
agent.
•
　 Q7: I was willing to the cooperation with the agent.
•
　 Q8: I could understand the way of thinking of the
agent.
•
　 Q9: The agent understands my way of thinking.
•
　 Q10: I felt accepted by the agent.
•
　 Q11: I felt relieved by the agent.
•
　 Q12: I felt solidarity with the agent.
The answers to each statement were analysed, and the results
of some of the statements are summarised in Figure 10. In the
following section, we describe the content of each statement
and the results of the answers.
Figure 10. Questionnaire results (left: experimental group, right: control
group).
•
Q1: I took a liking to the cooperative agent.
　 We assessed the participants’ subjective liking
for the cooperative agent. We performed the Mann-
Whitney U test on the answer results and found
a signiﬁcance level of p < 0.05, resulting in high
favourability in the experimental group.
•
Q2: The cooperative agent was reliable and Q7: I was
willing to the cooperation with the cooperative agent.
　 We assessed the subjective trust in the cooperative
agent and the participants’ positive attitude. There was
no signiﬁcant difference in the answer results between
the groups.
•
Q5: I found the cooperative agent’s behavior human-
like.
　 We used a voice changer for the cooperative agent’s
speech; however, if the participants were aware of
WoZ, their perception of the cooperative agent’s hu-
manity could have been greatly enhanced. The actual
answers obtained in both groups are close to the
median, which suggests that the participants were not
aware of the use of the WoZ technique using the voice
changer.
•
Q10: I felt accepted by the cooperative agent. /Q11:
I felt relieved by the cooperative agent. /Q12: I felt
solidarity with the cooperative agent.
　 These statements assessed the participants’ subjec-
tive perceptions of each socio-emotional intention ex-
pressed by the cooperative agent. As a result, although
no signiﬁcant difference was found between groups,
the experimental group exceeded the average of the
control group.
VI.
DISCUSSION
A. Effect of Link of Socio-emotional and Cognitive Behaviour
Sections 5-A and 5-B demonstrate how the link between
the cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours of the cooper-
ative agent affect the internal state of the participants. The
results reveal that the participants tend to be less tense and
more relaxed in response to the cooperative agents’ speech.
This tendency supports the participants’ willingness to co-
operate with the cooperative agent and that the participants’
psychological resistance to the cooperation with the agent was
reduced. Furthermore, the results in Section 5-A suggest that
the socio-emotional behaviour of the cooperative agents did
not directly affect the participants but that cognitive behaviour,
based on socio-emotional behaviour, was effective in reducing
the participants’ tension. This suggests that it is important to
perform both behaviours in parallel.
　 The above psychological changes may have led to the
changes in the participants’ behaviour observed in Sections 5-
C and 5-D. The increase in the participants’ socio-emotional
speech is thought to be due to a decrease in the partici-
pants’ psychological resistance to sharing and expressing their
emotions as a result of feeling more familiar with agents
and because it was easier to talk to the cooperative agent.
Furthermore, the participants’ cognitive speech also increased
in the middle part of the task, which suggests that familiarity
with the cooperative agent may have affected the participants’
willingness to cooperate. The decrease in the latency of the
participants’ speech may be because they became less stressed
when interacting with the cooperative agent and thus responded
more quickly.
　 The results of the questionnaire demonstrated that the
participants in the experimental group were more favourable
towards the cooperative agents. As a result of the participants’
recognition of the link between the cognitive and socio-
emotional behaviours of the cooperative agent and because
they felt less tension and burden when interacting with the
cooperative agent, their subjective favourability towards the
cooperative agent was likely to increase. However, this study
failed to develop more cooperative attitudes, such as trust and
active cooperation, among participants towards the cooperative
agent.
B. Constructing an Ideal Proposal Model
In this study, the analyses of the CSI, CVI, and SCR
indicated that the participants in the experimental group tended
to be more relaxed. According to the questionnaire results,
the participants in the experimental group more strongly
perceived the socio-emotional intentions of showing tension
release, acceptance, and solidarity expressed by the cooperative
agent. Thus, the socio-emotional intentions adopted in the
experimental model used in this study were relatively well
426
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

conveyed to the participants. Considering the purpose of the
proposed model, which is to induce participants to feel the
intentionality of the cooperative agent using the AEGL model,
the types of adopted intentions were appropriate. However,
room for improvement still exists in terms of the failure to
develop the participants’ positive attitudes, and it is necessary
to continue to investigate optimal intentions.
　 In the experimental model, we aimed to generate the
cognitive and socio-emotional behaviours of the cooperative
agent in parallel, so that the participants perceive the link
between the behaviours and experience familiarity and the
ease of talking with the cooperative agent. However, we could
not induce the participants’ trust in the cooperative agent and
strong positive attitudes towards it. Therefore, there is room
to devise more effective ways to link the cognitive and socio-
emotional behaviours of the cooperative agents. In this study,
we did not implement the link in the model. However, it is
possible to induce participants to feel a stronger consistency
of the agent’s behaviour by implementing the model using
the intention parameter state to update the other intention
parameters.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The ﬁnal goal of this study was to induce people’s posi-
tive attitudes towards cooperation with agents in cooperative
problem-solving situations. To achieve the ﬁnal goal, we aimed
to induce people to feel that agents are easy to talk with
and that they are familiar with the agents, which supports
their positive attitude towards cooperation. Therefore, we pro-
posed an agent model in which cognitive and socio-emotional
behaviours are output in parallel using the AEGL model.
The AEGL model was used to demonstrate that the agents
behave based on consistent intentions and to induce people
to recognise the integrity of their behaviours and to induce
positive attitudes. As a ﬁrst step towards the realisation of the
proposed model, we designed an experimental agent model
to simulate the link between cognitive and socio-emotional
behaviours and aimed to make the agents feel easy to talk
with and friendly to people. For the task, we used a tower
defence game.
　 As a result, we found a change in the psychological state of
people who became less nervous about the agents’ speech and
a change in the behaviour of people who were presumed to feel
more comfortable talking to the agents. In addition, based on
the socio-emotional speech of the agents, the positive effects
of cognitive speech on people were increased.
　 The next task is to create a method to link the cognitive
and socio-emotional behaviours of agents based on the ﬁndings
of this experiment. Further consistency between cognitive and
socio-emotional intentions in the model would further allow
people to recognise the agent as a single entity with intentions
and induce people’s willingness to cooperate.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JST CREST Grant Number
JPMJCR17A5, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Kwon, Y.-H. Liu, and L. P. Johnson, “Group regulation and social-
emotional interactions observed in computer supported collaborative
learning: Comparison between good vs. poor collaborators,” Computers
& Education, vol. 78, 2014, pp. 185–200.
[2]
M. T. Chi and R. Wylie, “The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive
engagement to active learning outcomes,” Educational Psychologist,
vol. 49, no. 4, 2014, pp. 219–243.
[3]
S. J¨arvel¨a, H. J¨arvenoja, J. Malmberg, J. Isoh¨at¨al¨a, and M. Sobocinski,
“How do types of interaction and phases of self-regulated learning set a
stage for collaborative engagement?” Learning and Instruction, vol. 43,
2016, pp. 39–51.
[4]
P. Dillenbourg, M. Baker, A. Blaye, and C. OMalley, “The evolution
of research on collaborative learning,” In P. Reimann and H. Spada,
Learning in humans and machines. Towards an interdisciplinary learn-
ing science, 1995, pp. 189–211.
[5]
R. Toni and L.-G. Lisa, “Socially shared regulation in collaborative
groups: An analysis of the interplay between quality of social regulation
and group processes,” Cognition and Instruction, vol. 29, no. 4, 2011,
pp. 375–415.
[6]
P. N¨aykki, J. Isoh¨at¨al¨a, S. J¨arvel¨a, J. P¨oys¨a-Tarhonen, and P. H¨akkinen,
“Facilitating socio-cognitive and socio-emotional monitoring in collab-
orative learning with a regulation macro script–an exploratory study,”
International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning,
vol. 12, no. 3, 2017, pp. 251–279.
[7]
M. Maltz and J. Meyer, “Cue utilization in a visually demanding task,”
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting, vol. 44, 2000, pp. 283–283.
[8]
K. Kreijns, P. A. Kirschner, W. Jochems, and H. Van Buuren, “Deter-
mining sociability, social space, and social presence in (a) synchronous
collaborative groups,” Cyber Psychology & Behavior, vol. 7, no. 2,
2004, pp. 155–172.
[9]
D. C. Dennett, “The intentional stance,” MIT Press, 1989.
[10]
Y. Ohmoto, T. Suyama, and T. Nishida, “A method to alternate the
estimation of global purposes and local objectives to induce and main-
tain the intentional stance,” in Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Human Agent Interaction, 2016, pp. 379–385.
[11]
Y. Ohmoto, T. Suyama, and T. Nishida, “Extended method to alternate
the estimation of global purposes and local objectives in multiple
human-agent interaction,” The Eleventh International Conference on
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 2018, pp. 212–217.
[12]
H. Prendinger, J. Mori, and M. Ishizuka, “Using human physiology to
evaluate subtle expressivity of a virtual quizmaster in a mathematical
game,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 62,
no. 2, 2005, pp. 231–245.
[13]
H. Prendinger and M. Ishizuka, “The empathic companion: A character-
based interface that addresses users’affective states,” Applied Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 19, no. 3-4, 2005, pp. 267–285.
[14]
R. Kumar, H. Ai, J. L. Beuth, and C. P. Ros´e, “Socially capable con-
versational tutors can be effective in collaborative learning situations,”
in International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
Springer,
2010, pp. 156–164.
[15]
H. Zhou, M. Huang, T. Zhang, X. Zhu, and B. Liu, “Emotional chatting
machine: Emotional conversation generation with internal and external
memory,” in Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
2018, pp. 730–738.
[16]
Y. Ohmoto, J. Karasaki, and T. Nishida, “Inducing and maintaining the
intentional stance by showing interactions between multiple agents,” in
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Intelligent Virtual
Agents, 2018, pp. 203–210.
[17]
M. Toichi, T. Sugiura, T. Murai, and A. Sengoku, “A new method of
assessing cardiac autonomic function and its comparison with spectral
analysis and coefﬁcient of variation of r–r interval,” Journal of the
Autonomic Nervous System, vol. 62, no. 1-2, 1997, pp. 79–84.
[18]
R. Hayashi and S. Kato, “Proposal of design policy of therapy robots
system based on relaxation state,” in 2017 IEEE 6th Global Conference
on Consumer Electronics (GCCE).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–3.
[19]
T. Lin, M. Omata, W. Hu, and A. Imamiya, “Do physiological data
relate to traditional usability indexes?” in Proceedings of the 17th
Australia conference on Computer-Human Interaction: Citizens Online:
Considerations for Today and the Future, 2005, pp. 1–10.
427
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

