Architecture of an Intelligent Tutoring System Applied to the Breast Cancer Based on 
Ontology, Artificial Neural Networks and Expert Systems 
 
Henrique P. Maffon, Jairo S. Melo, Tamara A. 
Morais, Patrycia B. Klavdianos, Lourdes M. Brasil 
Post Graduation Program in Biomedical Engineering 
University of Brasilia at Gama 
Brasilia, Brazil 
{henrique.maffon, jairossmunb, 
tamaramorais89,patryciaklav, lmbrasil, }@gmail.com  
Thiago L. Amaral 
Graduation Course in Engineering 
University of Brasilia at Gama 
Brasilia, Brazil 
thiaguimamaral@gmail.com
Gloria Millaray J. Curilem Saldias 
Eletrical Engineering Department 
Universidad de La Frontera 
Temuco, Chile 
millaray@ufro.cl
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents an Intelligent Tutoring System 
(ITS) applied to the teaching of breast anatomy and pathology, 
more specifically of the breast cancer, the type of cancer that 
kills more women in the world. This paper aims to elucidate 
the importance of using these systems, lift requirements for the 
development and designing of an architecture of ITS. Through 
resources and applications of Artificial Intelligence techniques 
this ITS has the capacity to acquire the profile of its user and 
define teaching methodologies to build interactive and 
dynamics environments, based including in the use of Virtual 
Reality. The architecture of this ITS consist on four modules: 
Tutor Module (Artificial Neural Network), Student Module 
(Expert System), Domain Module (Ontology) and Interface 
Module (Adaptive Hypermedia Systems). The use of this ITS 
provides a didactic help to students and health professionals to 
the 
understanding 
of 
the 
explanations 
and 
practical 
applications needed to this domain of knowledge. 
Keywords - Intelligent Tutoring System; Expert System; 
Artificial Neural Network; Ontology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This article presents an Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) 
– a system which incorporates Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
techniques – applied to the breast cancer [1]. This is the most 
common type of cancer that affects women and causes more 
deaths among them in the world. In 2008, 23% (1.38 million) 
of new cases and 14% (458.400) of deaths were caused by 
this disease [2]. In 2012/ 2013, 52.600 new cases of breast 
cancer are expected for Brazil, with an estimated risk of 52 
cases in each 100 thousand women [3]. 
In order to provide improvements in both education and 
quality of life, the areas of health, education and information 
technology have been working together to develop education 
systems and disseminate information about prevention of 
diseases [4]. 
The first educational software used were the Computer 
Aided Instruction (CAI) Systems, designed in the 50’s with 
the aim to provide to the students improvements on learning. 
However, these systems could not differentiate the individual 
abilities of students, because they used to implement same 
actions to all users [5]. 
Carbonell (1970) proposed the creation of the ITS in 
order to create an environment that allows a more 
individualized interaction between the student and the 
system [1], which has proven the effectiveness in improving 
the performance and motivation of students [6]. 
The use of AI techniques gives ITS a great capacity to 
store knowledge about the learning virtual environments and 
about the apprentice’s characteristics. These characteristics 
are used, on the scope of Education, to define which 
strategies and tactics can be used to get the best teaching 
process [7]. The strategies describe the required process to 
achieve learning and they are based in theories as 
Behaviorism and Constructivism, among others; the tactics 
refer to specific resources used to facilitate the teaching, as 
images, videos, texts, among others features. 
Most of develop ITS is composed by four modules 
(Student, Domain, Tutor and Interface), however this pattern 
is not always used. Basically, the Student Module stores the 
apprentice’s characteristics; the Domain Module stores the 
content to be taught; the Tutor Module decides which ways 
the content shall be presented, adapting the Interface to the 
apprentice’s characteristics, to display the content through an 
immersive, interactive and intuitive environment [8]. 
The aim of this article is to elucidate the importance and 
lift requirements for the development and designing of an 
architecture of ITS, including its possibility to use this ITS in 
a Medical Simulation Environment (MSE). 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
the next section we discuss related works. In Section 3 we 
describe the material and methods, which comprises the 
domain, student, tutor and interface modules. In Section 4, 
we discuss about the functioning of the ITS. In Section 5 is 
presented the conclusions and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Several researches have been carried out to develop an 
architecture of an ITS which can capture some learner’s 
information and use it to present an interactive and dynamic 
interface to the user.  
Many different techniques to implement an ITS have 
been used, including the use of ontology to represent the 
knowledge, the apprentices characteristics [9] and the 
teaching strategies [10]. 
Some techniques to develop an Expert System were used 
to acquire the Learning Styles [11] of the apprentice to be 
stored in the Student Module and used as a parameter for the 
presentation of the content in the interface [12][13].  
Tutor Module controls all the system and an Artificial 
Neural Network type Interactive Activation and Competition 
(ANN IAC) was used to implement this Module [12], which 
updates both the Interface Module and the Student Module 
[14]. An ITS can be integrated in a MSE which enables the 
learner to obtain experiences with a wider variety of 
structures and peculiarities, even being possible to repeat or 
redo procedures training free of charge [15]. 
The use of these architecture using tools, ontology, 
expert system and ANN IAC, including the Adaptive 
Hypermedia Systems shows up as a new approach to the 
development of ITS. Due this type of system involves 
various areas of knowledge applied with a common goal, the 
adaptation of the system in teaching to a particular student 
profile and its dynamicity is actually achieved with this 
approach.  
III. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
The first version of this ITS was developed as traditional 
architecture (Figure 1), which consists of four modules: 
Domain, Student, Tutor and Interface [14][16][17]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture of the ITS. 
A. Domain Module 
The Domain Module was developed as an ontology 
model (Figure 2) that allows an easy way to organize and 
formalize the knowledge and ensure access with a single 
vocabulary. It can also represent organizational structures of 
a large complex domain and reason about itself [18].  
The Protégé Software [19] from the Stanford University 
was used to build this Module. This software is based on 
Java and consists of a free open source ontology editor and 
knowledge-base framework that can be exported into a 
variety 
of 
formats 
including 
Resource 
Description 
Framework (RDF), Web Ontology Language (OWL) and 
Extensive Markup Language (XML) Schema. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Breast Ontology (Protégé) 
The idea of use ontology came from the fact that is 
needed to represent multimedia content as well as the 
medical vocabulary associated with the anatomy of the 
female breast and it’s most important pathologies, including 
several types of breast cancer and other anomalies. 
The Domain Module will include all the elements needed 
to represent the knowledge as well as a mechanism for 
automatic information retrieval (Figure 3). The ontology 
model 
is 
named 
ONTOMAMA-Model 
and 
the 
computational mechanism for information retrieval is known 
as ONTOMAMA-Engine. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Ontomama Model. 
The ONTOMAMA-Model is comprised by four distinct 
and interconnected OWL files (ontomama_main.owl, 
ontomama_anatomy.owl, 
ontomama_pathology.owl 
and 
ontomama_datatype.owl). The ontology was segmented to 
favor reuse and understandability of the model. While the 
file ontomama_main.owl will contain the model instances 
and their associated multimedia contents, the other three files 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

will represent the medical vocabulary that depicts the 
anatomy and pathology of the female breast. 
The ONTOMAMA-Engine has been programmed in 
JAVA by using Protégé API and Web Service technology. 
From this, it is intended to provide services in open standard 
format that might be consumed to retrieve any information in 
the ONTOMAMA-Model. 
The challenge of the Domain Module of this ITS was to 
provide an efficient mechanism of tutelage where the 
requested of the apprentice can be intelligently delivered in 
the interface. 
B. Student Module 
The first version of the Student Module was developed as 
an Expert System (ES) – a system in which is possible to 
simulate the behavior of an specialist before a given situation 
- using the shell Expert Sinta [12][20]. This shell, developed 
in Delphi, uses a knowledge representation module which is 
based on production rules and probabilities and has an easy 
way to build screens and menus and a good inference engine 
shared. Because there is difficulty in integrating systems 
developed in Delphi in conjunction with other developed in 
Java, it was necessary to change the used shell. 
The second version of this ES (Figure 4) was developed 
on Java Expert System Shell (JESS), a rule engine and 
scripting environment written entirely in Sun’s Java 
language by Ernest Friedman-Hill at Sandia National 
Laboratories [21]. Similarly to Expert Sinta, JESS has the 
capacity to reason using knowledge supplied in the form of 
declarative rules. It is one of the fastest rule engines 
available, using an algorithm called Rete, which consists of a 
very efficient mechanism that organizes the rules as a tree, 
where similar rules are grouped at the same branches [22]. 
 
 
Figure 4.  JESS Interface - Example of questions (CNF: degree of 
certainty of the learner’s response). 
The JESS Interface is not very friendly, which may cause 
the learner does not want to answer the questionnaire. To 
solve this problem a friendly and more attractive interface 
was created (Figure 5), so that the user does not feel 
unmotivated to answer the questions. 
The Student Module is subdivided into two sub-modules. 
The first one is used to apply the initial questionnaire to the 
apprentice to identify his learning styles; this ES is intended 
to obtain qualitative information about the learner to enable 
the system to make decisions about the interface. The second 
one is activated when the user choice some different way to 
the interface present the content. Thereby, this modification 
caused by the user will both update the Student Module and 
the Interface Module. 
 
 
Figure 5.  JESS Interface. 
The Student Module stores information about the 
apprentice’s characteristics in a database (Figure 6) to 
facilitate the access of the needed information. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Student Module Database. 
C. Tutor Module 
The Tutor Module was developed by a mechanism of 
parallel distributed processing known as ANN IAC [23]. 
This topology is composed by units of processing (neurons) 
organized in groups that represent similar concepts, 
presenting characteristics of Bidirectional Associative 
Memories (BAM) [24]. 
This Module is responsible for all the behavior of the 
system, choosing what and how to present the content on the 
interface. For this purpose, the ITS will make use of the 
Student and Domain Modules that will provide information 
about the apprentice’s behavior and the content used during 
the learning activities. From this, the ITS will adapt itself 
according to the individual profile and characteristics of each 
student. 
D. Interface Module 
The Interface Module was developed as an Adaptive 
Hypermedia System (AHS), which builds a model for each 
user based on their desires, preferences and knowledge 
stored on the Student Module and applies it to adapt to 
various visible aspects to the system. These systems work 
the concepts for the construction of hyperdocuments for 
presentation and navigation to suit to the user’s needs [25]. 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV. 
FUNCTIONING OF THE ITS 
The first step is to login and create a password to the ITS. 
When it is done, the user must have to answer some 
questions about him (name, sex, age, career, time experience 
and a questionnaire to acquire his Learning Styles). This 
questionnaire consists of 22 questions, represented by 44 
declarative rules described in the ES developed at JESS. 
Once the user has answered the questionnaire, all the 
information will be stored in a database which will serve as a 
parameter to the Tutor Module decides what is need to do in 
some occasions. 
The second step is to choice the content that will be 
presented at the interface. Once the user has chosen the 
content, the Tutor Module will send to the interface the 
correct content in the correct type of media, according to the 
learning styles of the student stored on the Student Module. 
The Domain Module delivers multimedia contents to the 
Tutor Module which includes text, pictures, medical 
photographs, videos and animations. All of these to enrich 
the apprentice learning experience throughout a VR 
environment provided by the Interface Module. 
The Tutor Module have as input values the apprentice’s 
characteristics, that will be supplied by the Student Module; 
as output, the ANN IAC will have values related to the 
attributes (e.g., medias, videos, text, icons, images) stored in 
the Domain Module [14]. By means of the interactive 
activation feature, the ANN IAC can have as input values 
related to the attributes – actions of the apprentice – that will 
be back-propagated to retrieve values matching the 
apprentice’s characteristics. 
Due to this work in a bidirectional way, the network can 
both update the Interface Module by processing the 
apprentice’s characteristics and the Student Module by 
processing the apprentice’s actions in the Interface 
environment, thereby, representing the Didactic Ergonomic 
Knowledge (Figure 7) [7]. 
 
 
Figure 7.  ANN IAC operation: update the learning environment according 
to the student characteristics and update the student profile according to the 
student actions in the learning environment, selecting the correct media 
type to be shown on the interface. 
Besides retrieval by apprentice’s characteristics and 
actions, ANN IAC also allows assignment of plausible 
default values in case of missing information and 
generalization over a set of instance units. 
The Interface Module will present the attributes which 
will be related to the characteristics detected by the Student 
Module. The environment will supply icons, bottoms, media, 
text and images, in short, the resources available to the user 
to get a better preview of the content. If the learner wishes to 
define a different interface, modifying the type of media 
presented, he/she will have autonomy to select other way to 
represent the content. In this case, the Student Module will 
be updated storing the new characteristics related to this new 
media presented on the interface; and the Interface Module 
will be modified for the next screen there will be presented 
the content with media related to this updated done on the 
Student Module. 
As mentioned before, once the questionnaire of the 
Student Module is correctly answered and converted to 
numeric values, representing the student profile, it will be an 
input to the ANN IAC. This input will create/ activate the 
student profile and this respective value will be inserted in 
the 
Ontology 
by 
the 
ONTOMAMA-Engine. 
The 
ONTOMAMA-Engine will choice the respective media of 
the content supplied by the Domain Module, and it will be 
given back to the ANN IAC. The Tutor Module will, then, 
show on the Interface the content adapted to the student 
profile. 
Therefore, the validation process of this ITS is in 
progress because the class period has not yet started. Three 
Universities will be participating in this process: the 
University of Brasília (federal) and the Catholic University 
of Brasília (particular), both located in Brasília city in Brazil, 
and the Universidad de La Frontera (federal) located in 
Temuco in Chile. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This work has a great relevance on the scope of 
Education and Health areas, since this system helps in the 
teaching learning process of the female breast. 
The architecture proposed in this paper proves to be ideal 
in order to submit a facility in the organization and changing 
the knowledge, including the sharing of information with 
others systems, through the use of ontologies. 
The identification of the profile of the learner through the 
ES proved to be very effective and this information, used to 
determine the media which is going to be displayed in the 
interface, was quite consistent with the user request. 
The use of an ANN IAC in this ITS was very efficient 
due its capacity to associate the apprentice’s characteristics 
to the contents and its dynamics process of updating the 
media on the interface and the profile of the learner, during 
the use of the system. 
Intended future works refer to: a) integrate this ITS in a 
MSE based on VR, in which will be constructed 3D models 
using real images and an interaction based on the touch of 
organs and others structures to make possible the 
embodiment of invasive medical procedures related to the 
study of the female breast. This tactile interaction will use an 
Haptic Interface [26][27] called Omega 7 [28], a dispositive 
that works together with a graphic interface designed to 
promote a tactile simulation; b) to improve the development 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

of the Student Module terms of access to information in the 
database and providing this information to the Tutor Module 
by using fuzzy logic techniques.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thanks to CAPES and PQ 2F/ CNPq for 
finance and support research grant and acknowledge INCT/ 
MACC and Ministry of Health by the financial support to the 
development of this research. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Carbonell, J. R. AI in CAI: an artificial intelligence approach to 
computer assited instruction. IEEE Transactions on Man Machine 
Systems, v.11, n.4, pp. 190-202, 1970. 
[2] GLOBOCAN. Section of Cancer Information (IARC), 2008. 
Available at: http://globocan.iarc.fr. Acessed on January 29, 2013. 
[3] INCA. National Cancer Institute of José de Alencar Gomes da Silva/ 
Healthy Ministry, 2011. Estimative 2012: Incidence of Cancer in 
Brazil. Rio de Janeiro (In Portuguese).  
[4] Curilem, G. M. S, de Azevedo, F. M and Ferneda, E. Artificial 
Intelligence in Education Support Health. In BRASIL, L. M. (Ed.). In 
Health Informatics. Taguatinga e Londrina: Universa e Eduel, v. 1, 
pp. 255-271, 2008 (In Portuguese). 
[5] Urretavizcaya, M. L. Sistemas Inteligentes em el âmbito de la 
educación. Iberoamericana Journal of Artificial Intelligence, v. 5, n.  
12, pp. 5-12, 2001. 
[6] Thiry, M. C. C. An Agent Based Architecture to Support Distance 
Learning. Florianópolis. Doctoral Dissertation, Federal University of 
Santa Catarina, 2001 (In Portuguese). 
[7] Curilem, G. M. S. and De Azevedo, F. M. Didact Ergonomy for the 
Interface of Intelligent Tutoring Systems. In Computers and 
Education: Towards a Lifelong Learning Society Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. Netherlands, pp.75-88, 2003. 
[8] Melo, J. S. S., Brasil, L. M., Panerai, C. E. B. and da Silva, A. P. B. 
Integration Interface Phantom of the Intelligent Tutoring System for 
Medical Simulation Environment. Brasilian Journal of Biomedical 
Engineering, v. 27, n. 2, pp. 98-109, 2011 (In Portuguese). 
[9] Latham, A. M., Crockett, K. A., McLean, D. A., Edmonds, B. and 
O’Shea, K. Oscar: an Intelligent Conversational Agent Tutor to 
Estimate Learning Styles. IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy 
Systems (FUZZ), 2010. 
[10] Zhang, Z., Geng, X., Jiang,Y. and Yang, Y. An Intelligent Tutoring 
System (ITS) for Tactical Training based on Ontology. IEEE 
International Conference on Information Engineering and Computer 
Science (ICIECS), 2009. 
[11] Felder, R.M. and Solomon, B. A. Index of Learning Styles 
Questionnaire. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.engr.ncsu.edu/learningstyles/ilsweb.html, Accessed on 
January 29, 2013. 
[12] Curilem, G. M. S. Methodology for The Construction of Adaptive 
Interfaces for Intelligent Tutoring Systems. Doctoral Dissertation. 
Federal University of Santa Catarina, 2002. 
[13] Zatarain-Cabada, R., Barrón-Estrada, M. L., Zepeda-Sánchez, L., 
Sandoval, G., Osorio-Velasquez, J. M. and Urias-Barrientos, J. E. 
Modeling student’s learning styles in web 2.0 learning systems. 
World Journal on Education Technology – Special Issue: Artificial 
Intelligence on Education -, v.1, n.2, pp. 78-88, 2009. 
[14] Curilem, G. M. S., Barbosa, A. R. and de Azevedo, F. M. Intelligent 
tutoring systems: Formalization as automata and interface design 
using neural networks. ScienceDirect. Computers & Education v. 49, 
issue 3, pp. 545-561, 2007.  
[15] Melo, J. S. S., Brasil, L. M., Ferneda, E., Balaniuk, R., Costa, E. de 
B., Bitencourt, I. and Rocha, L.Use of Virtual Reality in Intelligent 
Tutoring Systems Intended for Teaching Anatomy. XVIII Brazilian 
Simposium on Computing Education (SBIE). Mackenzie, pp. 51-54, 
2007 (In Portuguese). 
[16] Wenger, E. Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring Systems. Los Altos, 
CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1987. 
[17] Freedman, R. What is an Intelligent Tutoring System? Published in 
Magazine Intelligence, v.11, issue 3, pp. 15-16, 2000. 
[18] Lopes, L. F. A model of engineerting knowledge-based ontology and 
probabilistic calculation support for diagnosis. Doctoral Dissertation. 
Federal University of Santa Catarina, 2011 (In Portuguese). 
[19] Protege. The National Center for Biomedical Ontology. Stanford 
Center for Biomedical Informatics Research. Available at: 
http://protege.stanford.edu/. Accessed on January 29, 2013. 
[20] LIA. Artificial Intelligence Laboratory of Federal University of 
Ceara. Fortaleza, Brazil. Available at: http://www.lia.ufc.br/site/. 
Accessed on January 29, 2013. 
[21] JESS. Rule Engine For The Java. Sandia National Laboratories. 
Livermore, CA. Available at: http://www.jessrules.com/. Accessed on 
January 29, 2013. 
[22] Friedmann-Hill, E. JESS in Action: Ruled-Based System in Java. 
USA: Manning Publications, 2003. 
[23] McClelland, J. L. and Rumelhart, D. E. Explorations in Distributed 
Processing: A handbook of models, programs and exercises. Ed. 
Bradford Book. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1989. 
[24] De Azevedo, F. M., Brasil, L. M. and Oliveira, R. C. I. Neural 
networks with applications in control and expert systems. 
Florianópolis: Visual Books, 2000 (In Portuguese). 
[25] Fragelli, R. R. An Approach of Quantized Network and Multiform 
Objects to Model Domains in Intelligent Tutoring System. Doctoral 
Dissertation. University of Brasilia, 2010 (In Portuguese). 
[26] Strauss, E. Feeling the Future. In: Scientific American Presents – 
Your New Senses, Scientific American Digital, 1999. 
[27] Mauerberg-deCastro, E., De Paula, A. I., Tavares, C. P. and Moraes, 
R. Space Orientation for Visually Impaired Adults: Effects of a 
Training Navigation. Psychology: Reflection and Critique, v. 17, n.2, 
pp. 199-210, 2004 (In Portuguese). 
[28] Force Dimension. Force Dimension Haptic Devices. Available at: 
http://www.forcedimension.com/. Accessed on January 29, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

