A System to Depict the Cognitive Process of Trainees Based on Multiple Skill 
Parameters 
System validation involving normal individuals with an electrician’s license  
 
 
Norikatsu Fujita, Hiroshi Takeshita, Hirotada Fukae, Sho Aoki, Kazushige Matsumoto, Tomohiro Murakami,     
Minoru Hoshino                                                                                                  
Ability Development Dept.  Polytechnic University of Japan                                                               
e-mail:fujita@uitec.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Instructors of vocational training are increasingly 
encountering trainees, such as individuals with developmental 
disorders, who need special accommodations. Flexible teaching 
of diverse trainees requires the characteristics of trainees to be 
comprehensively ascertained from an educational perspective. 
This paper describes a system to depict the cognitive process of 
trainees based on multiple skill parameters to comprehensively 
ascertain the characteristics of trainees from an educational 
perspective. The system to depict the cognitive process while 
feeding back to the trainee skills essential for vocational 
training. Instructors of vocational training will give optimum 
instruction to each trainees based on the cognitive process 
generated by the system. From the simulation using the 
theoretical value and the verification by the field, we confirmed 
that the cognitive process visualization of the trainee can be 
performed with 32 multi-dimensional skill parameters. 
Keywords-Vocational 
Training; 
Theory 
of 
Multiple 
Intelligences; 
Action 
Research; 
M-GTA; 
Developmental 
Disabilities; Cognitive Information Processing Model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In vocational training, trainees in every age group have 
various vocational and educational backgrounds. Over the 
past few years, there have been an increasing number of 
situations where trainees, such as individuals with 
developmental disorders, need special accommodations. 
Instructors of vocational training have to teach them in 
accordance with their abilities. 
In general schools for vocational training, a method to 
learn from causality analysis of successes and failures is used 
to deal with people with developmental disabilities[1] [2] [3]. 
However, the information obtained from this method is only 
the causal relationship between factors that affect a specific 
situation. Therefore, dealing with various situations 
encountered in reality is difficult. In other fields, there have 
been attempts to explore parameters with which to 
comprehensively ascertain the characteristics of subjects, and 
these parameters have been used in national policies and 
education[4]. 
However, 
parameters 
with 
which 
to 
comprehensively ascertain developmental disorders are 
mainly those used for diagnosis[5], and there are no 
parameters from an educational perspective.  
Until now, there are training practices that use evaluation 
scales such as interpersonal skills and social skills[6] [7]. In 
addition, a system to measure skill gap by measuring 
physical exercise skill using a haptic device has been 
reported[8] [9]. However, these efforts target specific skills 
necessary for vocational training. 
This paper describes a system to depict the cognitive 
process of trainees based on multiple skill parameters to 
comprehensively ascertain the characteristics of trainees 
from an educational perspective. The system to depict the 
cognitive process while feeding back to the trainees skills 
essential for vocational training. Instructors of vocational 
training will give optimum instruction to each trainee while 
judging whether the deficient multiple skill parameters are 
due to under-experience or ability based on the cognitive 
process generated by the system. 
 
II. 
A THEORETICAL MODEL OF TEACHING 
COMPETENCIES  FORMATION PROCESS OF VOCATIONAL 
TRAINING INSTRUCTORS  
In vocational training, conventional teaching methods do 
not work, and struggling to respond to trainees who need 
consideration to cause unexpected reactions and behaviors. 
From such a problem, the purpose of this study is to realize 
evidence-based training from the cognitive process of 
trainees generated by the system. In a previous study, the 
current authors analyzed the development of teaching  
competencies in experienced instructors of people with 
developmental disabilities using a modified grounded theory 
approach  [10].  
Figure 1 shows a theoretical model of teaching 
competencies 
formation 
process 
of 
experienced 
instructors(hereinafter referred to as the theoretical model). 
This theoretical model was constructed by M-GTA. The M-
GTA makes unique modifications to technique, improving 
GTA [11] for greater practicability, developed by Kinoshita. 
Unlike GTA, M-GTA does not use technique of slicing data, 
but uses the concepts of the Analytical Theme and 
Analytically-Focused Person[12]. M-GTA is an inductive 
method for creation of a theoretical model, requiring skill 
and experience in analysis and involving a high degree of  
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
 
 
 
difficulty. Dr. Takeshita, one of the authors, is a supervisor 
of the M - GTA Study Group and has sufficient experience. 
This theoretical model was constructed by semi-
structured interview with 15 senior instructors who 
specialize in teaching people with developmental disabilities. 
The semi-structured interview was conducted by the 
interview guide shown in Table 1. 
In this theoretical model, Instructors first are interested in 
investigating the causes of problems dealing with persons 
with developmental disabilities by recognizing their lack of 
experience. Then, instructors will "skill formation" against 
"user" and "organization". The instructors will grow to 
become an experienced instructor through such "learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cycle". If a problem-coping cycle occurs, instructors become 
frustrated that trainees fail to meet their expectations and 
instructors see no way out. The plight of people with 
developmental disabilities worsens, and instructors who are 
"Interested in ways of intervention" fall into a Problem-
coping cycle as they become "Coping behavior". To escape 
from such a Problem-coping cycle, it is necessary to make a 
"Psychological balance in organization" by consultation with 
seniors and mental switching by questioning. In other words, 
the theoretical model shows the need to improve the 
environment of "Psychological balance in organization" and 
the smooth circulation of "learning cycle ". 
The basic approach to this study is to adopt an action 
research methodology involving mutual feedback of 
Figure 1.  A  theoretical model of teaching competencies formation process of experienced instructors (Details of the concept are shown in Figure 6.) 
TABLE I.  
INTERVIEW GUIDE 
No Questions
1　 Please tell me about your current job. (A) responsible work, (b) teaching skills, (c) stakeholders
2　 Please tell me about your experience of employment assistance. (A) year, (b) content, (c) number of students
3　 Compared to the past, is the concept of trainees different from now? (What triggered the event)
4　 Compared to the past, is the way of teaching trainees different from now? (What triggered the event)
5　 Compared to the past, is the relationship with the trainee different now?
6　 What kind of troubles or problems you have ever had?
7　 What kind of idea did you do?
8　 When do you feel joy, pleasure, rewarding?
9　 In the beginning, what did you most want?
10
What is the biggest problem at work?
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

"theories" and "practice." This system realizes "skill 
development" by circulating "learning cycle" in the 
theoretical model. The multiple skill parameters are a 
common measure for "skill development". By storing best 
practices with multiple skill parameters as key, we can 
construct a training environment based on evidence. 
III. 
DEPICTION OF THE COGNITIVE PROCESS OF 
TRAINEES 
In Section3, we describe depiction of cognitive processes 
of trainees. The system measures skill factors that cause 
trainee's unexpected reactions and behaviors from actions 
selected in a part-time job interview and training at a family 
restaurant. The trainees will deepen the recognition of his / 
her skills while receiving feedback on the selected actions. 
The vocational training instructors decide the overall class 
guidance and individual guidance from the state of the skill 
output by the system, and aims to train all participants. 
A. Definition of theoretical construct 
Depiction of the cognitive process of trainees are realized 
by three processes: definition of theoretical constructs, 
design of questions by stories, and implementation in the 
system. This section describes definition of the theoretical 
construct. A theoretical construct abstracts cognitive patterns 
from human behavior and predict human behavior. 
Figure 2 shows the theoretical construction based on the 
cognitive information processing model of Card[13]. The 
theoretical construct is based on a simple Card cognitive 
information processing model which is easy for the 
instructors to understand. The cognitive information 
processing model of Card is widely known in the cognitive 
science field trying to understand the intellectual system and 
the nature of intelligence from the viewpoint of information 
processing. Card's cognitive information processing model 
consists of three systems, "perception system", "cognitive 
system", and "motor system", and each system includes a 
memory and a processor. However, since human perception 
is known to have a deep relationship with psychology, we 
define a theoretical construct that consists of four systems 
that add "emotional system". The multiple skill parameters 
of "cognitive system" and "motor system" are measured by 
computer. Meanwhile, "perception system" and "emotion 
system" are measured by instructors by trainee observation. 
The multiple skill parameters are the root of problem 
behavior in vocational training and are the minimum 
elements for instructor to develop teaching skills. Many 
problem behaviors in vocational training are thought to have 
resulted from a combination of 32 multiple skill parameters. 
Instructors learn basic countermeasure strategies for each 
multiple skill parameters, and as a next step, respond to the 
combined case. 
Extraction of multiple skill parameters is extracted from 
192 cases occurred in the vocational training written in 
"Support and correspondence guide for trainees who need 
special consideration" published by Japan Organization for 
Employment of the Elderly[14]. Dr. Fukae is one of the 
authors of this book. Multiple skill parameters are extracted 
based on a theoretical construct by inductive reasoning 
which considers the cause from the problem behaviors in 
vocational training. The extracted multiple skill parameters 
are classified into six categories in the MI theory shown in 
Table 2. In the MI theory[15], " Naturalistic " " Musical-
rhythmic and harmonic " exists in addition to these six 
categories, but excluded because they are intelligences not 
related to vocational training.  The MI theory advocates that 
the human frame of mind is 8 intelligences. Educational 
practices of MI theory are widely practiced in the world[16] 
[17].  
 
 
Outside world information
Cognitive unit
Motion unit
Emotional unit
Behavior / speech
○Bodily-kinesthetic
○Verbal-linguistic
○Logical-mathematical
○Visual-spatial
Awareness of positioning in space
○Interpersonal
○Intrapersonal
ffect relationships
fferent perspectives
Perceptual unit
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Cognitive information processing model using Card  
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3 shows the details of the multiple skill parameters. 
The multiple skill parameters consists of 32 in six categories 
in MI theory. The minimum factor for the instructors to 
develop teaching skills are the correspondence to the case 
shown in the typical case in Table 3. After that, instructors 
will be able to teach closer to experienced instructors by 
learning correspondence to typical cases combined cases. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Design and implementation of questions with story by 
cartoon 
Next, design and implementation of questions with story 
by cartoon. Questionnaires using psychometric measures are 
commonly used for grasping behavior with psychological 
phenomena. However, question papers written in language 
have problems such as dependency on language 
TABLE II.  
MULTIPLE SKILL PARAMETERS CATEGORIES 
（Vl)
（Lm）
（Vs）
（Bk）
（Ie）
（Ir）
I like the teaching materials explained in detail.
Word smart
Number reasoning smart
I like to be reasonably explained.
Picture smart
I like to think about while drawing.
Body smart
I like to memorize with the body.
People smart
I like to learn in groups.
Self smart
I like to learn while looking at examples.
Multiple intelligences
Typical example
Characteristic
TABLE III.  
MULTIPLE SKILL PARAMETERS  
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
comprehension degree, difficulty in deeply grasping inner 
side in linguistic expression, existence of false and socially 
desirable answers[18]. Therefore, it is difficult to guarantee 
"reliability" and "validity" in vocational training conducted 
in various "age", "occupation history", "learning history". 
Therefore, this system develops a system with a story by 
cartoon, not questionnaire by language. To set up questions, 
make the case shown in Table 4 on an episode basis. After 
that, we implemented  questions with a comic story on the 
system, implemented on the group of subjects to be 
measured, and repeated individual interviews to ensure 
practical "reliability" and "validity".This system converts 
typical cases of multiple skill parameters into context to 
work part-time at family restaurant. Trainees have visualized 
cognitive processes by choosing actions in the context of 
performing work at family restaurants. The standard 
implementation time is 30 minutes. The total number of 
questions are depending on the answer and is 24 to 34 
subjects. The question format has problems involving work 
on the computer and questions asking actions in 5 
alternatives. In the question of asking actions by choosing 
one of the five questions, we always have the option of "I do 
not know". In addition, although it does not count to the 
number of questions, as a reference information, it is a free 
description formal, and prepares a question "hobby" and " 
requests from my teacher". Development of the system is 
made with ArticulateStoryline[19] authoring tool for e-
learning which is widely prevalent globally. 
Figure 3 shows the number of questions and scores of the 
system. Depending on the multiple skill parameters, the 
number of questions and points involved are different. There 
are not only plus points but also minus points as options. For 
example, Vl1 has a maximum score of 7 for 10 problems. 
The number of related questions and the score are 
determined normatively between members. Also consider the 
independence of the six categories in the MI from the score. 
In the trial production of the system, one question was 
associated with one multiple skill parameter. However,  
 
 
 
It is important to worry around you.
However, the store manager speaks loudly to you.
In such cases, let's greet and speak out loudly, not by bow.
 
 
 
 
without increasing the number of questions, accurate 
viewpoints of this study demonstrated that the cognitive 
process of the trainees can depict thirty-two multiple skill 
parameters from 34 questions(Total number of questions 274 
in Figure 3). 
Figure 4 shows an example of feedback to the trainee. 
This example is the scene of the first greeting to the manager  
with part-time job interview. People differ in behavior 
depending on skill characteristics. For example, some people 
greet themselves with a small voice, paying attention to 
people around outside, others always say a loud voice 
regardless of the surrounding circumstances. That is, the skill 
characteristics are related to the actions to be selected. The 
system depicts the cognitive process of the trainees based on 
which skills are emphasized. After the trainees respond, the 
system will feed back to the socially desirable direction that 
respects the individuality of the trainees. The role of many 
feedbacks is to inform trainees of the characteristics of their 
Number of questions
Maximum score
Figure 3.  Number of questions and scores of the system  
Figure 4.  An example of feedback to the trainees  
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

cognitive processes and to realize training in which both 
trainee and instructor cooperate. 
Figure 5 shows a question example with a branching 
structure. This is a scene where the store manager instructs to 
take an order machine. If you can not take the order machine  
 
I will take orders, please take it.
・Vase
・Order Machine
・Order
・Menu
・I do not know
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correctly, it will become a scene where customers waiting for 
accounting will get angry for slowly working clerks. The 
multiple skill parameter common to these two scenes is "tacit 
understanding" in the conceptual model of Figure2. If there 
is only one trainee who does not have the skill of "tacit 
consent", the overall guidance of the class will teach using 
the language, gesture, model, body using the sequential 
proximity method based on behaviorism[20]. Until now, the 
usefulness of overall guidance design that matches the skill 
characteristics of individual classes has been confirmed in 
practical cases of active learning[21] using Just-In-Time[22] 
Teaching. In this way, this system is useful for both guidance 
design and individual guidance design of the whole class. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
As system evaluation, from the simulation using the 
theoretical value and the verification by the field, confirm 
depiction of the cognitive process of the trainee through 32 
multi-dimensional skill parameters. This study was approved 
by the Ethical Committee of the Polytechnic University of 
Japan(No.607).   
Table 4 shows simulation results of abnormal values 
using theoretical values. The system outputs the evaluation 
value in five stages. For abnormal value detection, output 
with evaluation value of 2 or less. The theoretical value A 'is 
a simulation of a trainee who detected an abnormality in a 
specific skill such as tacit consent. The theoretical value B 'is 
a simulation of a trainee who detects an abnormality in the 
language category and also has another category. The 
theoretical value C 'is a simulation of a trainee who detects 
abnormality by skill of physical movement category and 
other category has high skill. From these simulation results, 
the system is able to output outliers with categories and skills. 
Table 5 shows the assessment results of 10 Trainees. 
Subjects are the top trainees in the class who acquired the 
electrician's license. It is understood that the skill level  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV.  
SIMULATION RESULTS OF ABNORMAL VALUES USING THEORETICAL VALUES  
TABLE V.  
TRAIAL RESULTS  
Figure 5.  A  question example with a branching structure 
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
A‘
B‘
C‘
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

related to qualification acquisition is uniformly high and 
there are variations in skills. However, Trainee H has many 
items with low skill level. Trainee H has a low skill level 
overall. In a later interview, he said that he had worked in a 
hurry without time. In this system, we emphasized 
familiarity by embedding context, but it is not perfect. 
From the simulation using the theoretical values and the 
verification by the field, we confirmed that the cognitive 
process of the trainees can be depicted by the multiple skill 
parameters defined in this paper.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we described a cognitive process depiction 
system of trainees based on multiple skill parameters which 
comprehensively grasp the skills necessary for vocational 
training from the viewpoint of education. From the 
simulation using the theoretical values and the verification 
by the field as described above, we confirmed that the 
cognitive process of the trainees can be depicted by the 
multiple skill parameters defined in this paper. 
The originality of this work has been to comprehensively 
ascertain developmental disorders from an educational 
perspective. This originality is achieved through the 
followings: 
1) We defined a theoretical construct based on a simple 
Card cognitive information processing model, which the 
instructor can easily understand.  
2) We extracted and weighted the pluralistic skill 
parameters from the theoretical construct.   
3) We classified the pluralistic skill parameters in the 
intellectual category of MI theory from the viewpoint of 
education in vocational training. 
Future 
tasks 
are 
verification 
for 
people 
with 
developmental disabilities and construction of a database of 
teaching methods carried out by skilled instructors. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number JP26350303. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Japan Organization for Employment of the Elderly， Persons 
with Disabilities and Job Seekers，" Research on promoting 
employment of people with developmental disabilities using 
technology and support for continuing work，" Research 
ReportNo.149，2010，Japanese. 
[2]  Japan Organization for Employment of the Elderly， Persons 
with Disabilities and Job Seekers，" Effective vocational 
training examples for people with developmental disabilities， 
"Research ReportNo.119，2007.Japanese. 
[3] Japan Organization for Employment of the Elderly， Persons 
with Disabilities and Job Seekers ， "Vocational training 
handbook of people with developmental disabilities ， " 
2008.Japanese. 
[4] Alfred B， Jacqueline C， "Characterizing Criminal Careers，
"Science ，Vol.237， No.4818， pp.985-991， 1987. 
[5] Kaufman， Alan S. ， "Lichtenberger， Elizabeth (2006). 
Assessing Adolescent and Adult Intelligence (3rd ed.)," 
Hoboken (NJ): Wiley. pp. 3， 2010. 
[6] Japan Organization for Employment of the Elderly， Persons 
with Disabilities and Job Seekers ， " Research on 
characterization of communication skills of people with 
developmental disabilities ， " Research ReportNo.119 ，
2014.Japanese. 
[7] Japan Organization for Employment of the Elderly， Persons 
with Disabilities and Job Seekers，" Research on human 
resource development program using SST ， " Research 
ReportNo.124，2014.Japanese. 
[8] Fujita ， N. ， Hayashi ，  T. ，  Yamasaki ， T. ， "Torch 
Operation Learning System Based on Welding Skill 
Parameters ， "The IEICE transactions on information and 
systems (Japanese edetion)， J90-D，Vol.9，pp.2522-2529， 
2007. Japanese. 
[9] Aswathi P.，Amritha Natarajan， Namitha K.，  "Bridging 
the skill gap using vocational training simulators:Validating 
skill assessment metrics，" IEEE Conference Proceedings， 
Vol.2016， No.ICACCI， pp.645-651，2016. 
[10] Takeshita， H. and Fujita， N， "Psychological intervention 
in an Employment transition support center: Support staff 
psychological balance"， Poster session presented at the 22nd 
World Congress of Social Psychiatry-WASP2016 ，  New 
Delhi， 2016. 
[11] Glaser B， Strauss AL.，" The discovery of grounded theory. 
Chicago (IL)"， Aldine， 1967. 
[12] Nishigaki ，  K. ，  "Changes in Mothers' Psychosocial 
Perceptions 
of 
Technologydependent 
Children 
and 
Adolescents at Home in Japan:Acknowledgement of 
Children's Autonomy，"Asian Nursing Research，pp100-
105， 2016. 
[13]  S.K.Card and T.P.Moran，"The Psychology of Human – 
Computer Interaction，" Lawrence Erlbaum Associates， 
1983. 
[14] Japan Organization for Employment of the Elderly， Persons 
with Disabilities and Job Seekers，"Support/ correspondence 
guide for students who need special consideration in the 
progress of training / learning (practical edition) ， 
"2015 .Japanese. 
[15] Gardner ， H. ， "Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in 
Practice， Basic Books; Reprint Edition edition，" 1993. 
[16] Gardner ， H. ， "Assessment in context:The alternative to 
standardized 
testing.In 
B.R. 
Gifford
，
& 
M.C.O’Connor(Eds.) ， Changing assrssment:Alternative 
views of aptitude ，  achievement ，  and instruction. ， 
"Boston: Kluwer. ，1991. 
[17] Gardner，H.， Krechevsky，M.， Sternberg， R. J.， & 
Okagaki，L.，" Intelligence in context: Enhancing students’ 
practical intelligence for school. In K. McGilly(Ed.) ，  " 
Cambrige: Bradford Books/MIT Pree，1994. 
[18] Yokouchi， H， " Basic understanding of psychometric 
scale,"J Jpn Soc Intensive Carw Med， Vol.14，No.4，
pp.555-560，2007.Japanese. 
[19] Articlute Storyline 
http://www.articulate.com 
[20] Dennis H. Reid， Carolyn W. Green， "Preference-Based 
Teaching: Helping People with Developmental Disabilities 
Enjoy Learning without Problem Behavior， "Habilitative 
Management Consultants， Inc. ， 2005 
[21] Novak, G. M. and  Patterson, E. T. , "Just-in-Time 
Teaching:Blending Active Learning with Web Technology, 
" Addison-Wesley,pp1-188,1999 
[22]  Deslauriers, L., Schelew, E.,  Wieman, C., "Improved 
Learning in a Large-Enrollment Physics Class", SCIENCE, 
Vol.332, No.862, pp862-864,2011  
 
 
 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 6.  Details of the concept 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

