 
Electronic Health Records and the challenge to Master the Patients’ Pathways. 
Proposals around a comparative analysis (France / Spain). 
 
Biedma José Maria 
Business Organization Department 
University of Cadix 
Cadix, Spain 
e-mail: josemaria.biedma@uca.es 
Bourret Christian 
DICEN IDF Research Team 
University of Paris East 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
e-mail: bourret@u-pem.fr
 
 
Abstract 
- 
Issues 
about 
patients’ 
pathways 
and 
interoperability of Information Systems are at the heart of the 
challenges faced by Healthcare Systems to control costs and 
also to improve quality of care. We propose a comparative 
analysis of the issue of computerized patients’ records in 
France and Spain highlighting requirements, similarities and 
differences and new possibilities of actions. Most of the 
challenges faced by the Healthcare Systems converge on this 
issue. After an analysis of the broader context of Healthcare 
Systems in these two countries, which have different designs, 
but have also similar problems, we’ll examine the issue of the 
Healthcare record ownership, then the access to its data and its 
handling of doctors’ personal notes. We’ll also discuss ethics’ 
issues and especially that of medical confidentiality. We’ll then 
consider the central topic of interoperability linked to different 
approaches: national in France and at the level of the 
Autonomous Communities in Spain. The changes are only at 
their beginning. The use of these new socio-digital tools 
necessarily meets the European dimension, the issue of using 
open data and that of digital territories in Healthcare. 
Keywords - Electronic Health Records ; Healthcare ; 
patients’ pathways ; access ; interoperability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
All the Healthcare Systems in developed countries, 
particularly in the European Union, are in crisis, facing many 
problems, both to control costs and to improve quality of 
care. The development of socio-technical devices within the 
broad 
context 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies (ICT) induces deep changes and provides new 
opportunities. The solutions are sought through the patient’s 
pathway, i.e., traceability issues with information and 
communication 
challenges. 
Shared 
Electronic 
Health 
Records can be considered as "hologrammatic" (when a part 
contains the same properties as the whole system cf. E. 
Morin and J.-L. Le Moigne ideas on Intelligence of the 
complexity [1]) of the whole Healthcare Systems’ 
challenges. If the problems are the same everywhere, the 
national or regional approaches may vary. In this paper, 
which is a joint work between two researchers (Spanish and 
French), we propose the outlines of a comparative analysis of 
the requirements, the challenges faced in the two countries 
with proposals for improvement and opportunities for future 
research studies.  
After an introduction, we will show that the two 
Healthcare systems have the same requirements but in 
different contexts. Then we will analyze some specific 
aspects of the Electronic Health Records in the two 
countries: ownership, access, the collection of data with the 
issue of physician’s personal notes. Afterwards, we will 
discuss the question of the interoperability, ethics’ aspects 
and especially medical confidentiality. After regarding 
towards a European record and the question of open data, as 
a conclusion, we will outline that we are only at the 
beginning of profound changes. 
 
II. 
SIMILAR REQUIREMENTS IN DIFFERENT CONTEXTS  
Spain and France have a different approach of 
Healthcare issues. In France, the governance of the 
Healthcare System is traditionally centralized, but with a 
distribution of roles. The State controls the system 
(regulation) and the supervision of the Healthcare 
Organizations. Since 1945, the different Health Insurance 
Offices: Caisse Nationale d’Assurance Maladie des 
Travailleurs Salariés (CNAMTS), MSA (Mutualité Sociale 
Agricole) and RSI (Régime Social des Indépendants), are 
supervised on a parity way by the social partners (both 
employers and trade unions representatives). They manage 
the funds on the basis of contributions coming both from 
employees and employers. It is a so-called Bismarck’s 
system [2] (from the name of the German Chancellor who 
created this type of Social Insurance System in 1875). In 
France, since the 1980s, we also get an important part of 
resources 
coming 
from 
taxation: 
General 
Social 
Contribution (CSG). Since the mid-1990s, the system has a 
more regionalized management, with the recent creation of 
the Regional Health Agencies (ARS) in 2010, but managed 
at the regional level by State officers (déconcentration) and 
not 
by 
Autonomous 
Regions 
(décentralisation). 
In Spain, the Autonomous Communities appeared with the 
Status of Autonomy (1978). They have gradually gained the 
control of the management of their citizens’ Health. They 
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

have developed specific policies. This was particularly the 
case for Catalonia (1981), for the Basque Country (1982) 
and Andalusia (1984). These Regional Healthcare Systems 
are financed through taxation:  Beveridge’s systems [2] 
(from the name of the designer of the British Health 
National System in 1946, mainly the NHS or National 
Health Service). 
There is a major difference between Spain and France. In 
Spain, the Communities are autonomous and develop 
specific tools and may have specific legislation for Health 
data, in addition to those of the Spanish State, especially in 
Catalonia. In France, the main tools, including the Personal 
Health Record (DMP: Dossier Médical Personnel) of the 
patients, whose construction began in 2004, are implemented 
from a national perspective. In Spain, they are in a large part 
developed at the regional level, which immediately raises the 
question of the transfer of data and systems’ interoperability. 
As all the other developed countries (United Kingdom, 
Germany, United States of America, etc.), France and Spain 
have quite similar requirements to improve different aspects 
of their Healthcare Systems.  
First, they must master the growing costs: 11.7 % of the 
GDP (Gross Domestic Product) in France and 9.4 % in Spain 
in 2011. They must also improve the quality of care with a 
key idea: avoid the breaks in the traceability of care, which is  
costly and does not improve patients’ care. Consequently, the 
central issue has become that of patients’ pathways. Thus, it 
is imperative to master the use of new tools, especially the 
Electronic Health Records (EHR). 
Other important requirements are both security of 
managed information and that of interoperability between 
various technical devices.   
 
If the requirements are roughly similar, the general 
contexts are different: national in France and rather regional 
in Spain, as we have outlined above.  
The two systems are also different in the way the medical 
profession is exercised and remunerated in primary care. In 
Spain, as in the United Kingdom, the General Practitioners 
(GPs) often work in cooperative organizations and receive a 
global amount for each registered patient. In France, the 
GPs’ activities is private and still essentially isolated: each 
GP has his own office. The French GPs are not globally 
financed but paid for each accomplished medical act by the 
patients, the patients being reimbursed later by the different 
Health Insurance Organizations. 
       In France, the EHR’s issue is particularly sore. The GPs 
fear that new electronic tools may be tools to control their 
activity and, consequently, their incomes. So, in 2004, the 
DMP has been named “personal” and not “shared”. It has 
been decided that it will be hosted by private companies.  
The question of the ownership of the EHR is essential.  
III. 
THE OWNERSHIP OF THE PERSONAL HEALTH RECORDS 
We have already mentioned that in France, the patient's 
medical record was (Health Insurance Law of August 2004) 
designed as "personal" and not "shared". For some people, 
the weight of the medical lobby was very heavy in 
Parliament to avoid controlling the activity of Physicians by 
Health Insurance Companies. The patient owns his personal 
medical record.  
But, since 2004, things have gradually evolved towards a 
more "shared" DMP. First, medical practice is a little less 
individual and new cooperative organizations have formed 
(Healthcare Networks, Homecare, medical centers, etc.). 
Then the two public consortia managing the DMP, the 
GIP- DMP and, after 2008, the ASIP (Agency for Shared 
Information Systems in Health) have had significant 
problems. In December 2013, only 500,000 records were 
opened, compared to 5,000,000 contractually hoped for, and 
very few are really operational. With this scandal, some 
people talk to entrust the management of DMP to CNAMTS 
but then the fear that the DMP then becomes primarily a 
monitoring tool for rationalization of the activities of the 
doctors and not only and principally to improve patients' 
pathways reappears . 
As a result of his ownership, the patient may "hide", even 
destroy some data. Some spoke about a "naked doctor in 
front of a masked patient." What is the medical value of a 
non-exhaustive record? The issue is all the more serious 
since in France the responsibility of the physician remains 
individual. The DMP is still experimental although originally 
its generalization was scheduled for 2007. 
In Spain, Law 41/ 2002 of November 14 does not tackle 
this issue which is still debated. We can distinguish four 
positions. One group believes that the ownership of personal 
medical records must belong to the health center ([3], [4] and 
[5]). For the second group ([6] and [7]), the property of the 
personal medical records must belong to the doctor. This 
position’s basis lies in the notion of the doctor’s copyright. 
This does not mean that the patient doesn’t have a right of 
access its content. A third group, as Gay Montalvo, believes 
that the ownership of personal medical records must belong 
to the patient [8]. For other authors [9], the question of the 
ownership of personal health records is a problem that is 
irrelevant and of little practical importance. What is really 
important is to know who gets the right of access. 
The debate has rebounded with differences in the various 
Autonomous Communities. Some (Galicia and Valencia) 
consider that the property belongs to the government or to a 
health center if the doctor works for others. If the medical 
profession is exercised individually, the property belongs to 
the physician. Other Autonomous Communities have not yet 
legislated on this subject. 
IV. 
ACCESS TO ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS 
The issue of access (consents) is also a key one. As a 
result of his ownership of the record, in France, the patient 
gives the access rights (authorizations) to the DMP. He must 
have access to hospitalizations’ data and copies of his 
hospital records. This follows from the Law of 4 March 2002 
on the Rights of Sick People and the Quality of the Health 
System, confirmed by a law of August 2004 on the evolution 
of Health Insurance (providing experimentation for DMP) 
and different decrees in 2006. In case of emergency, when 
patient’s life is engaged, the physician can "force" the access, 
but the situation is not satisfactory. There are two opposite 
278
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

camps: the “fundamentalists” of the absolute property of the 
patient and those who insist that the DMP is not a safe for 
personal data but simply a tool to improve patients’ care and 
traceability. Recent developments seem to go to a shared 
record [10]. 
In Spain, Law 41/ 2002 (Article 18) extended the right of 
access the patient's personal medical records and he is 
allowed to get copies of the data. Health centers must 
comply with this patient’s right, exercised directly by them 
or by a duly accredited representative. 
The right of access to medical records is not an absolute 
right. According to art. 18.3 of Law 41 /2002, the exercise of 
this right has two limitations: first it cannot be exercised to 
the detriment of others' right to confidentiality of the 
information it contains and the therapeutic benefit in relation 
to the data collected from the patient. It may be exercised at 
the expense of professionals who have participated in the 
preparation of this medical story. Yet, there is a limit derived 
from the rights of the professionals involved in the 
development of medical records, which may restrict the right 
of access, excluding its subjective annotations made in the 
record [11]. 
Another situation is the access to a record belonging to a 
dead person, or to a mentally ill person or a minor one. The 
law 
allows 
health 
centers 
and 
individual 
exercise 
practitioners to provide access to medical records of patients 
who died or persons associated with them for family or 
factual reasons (art.18.4 Ley 41/2002). However, this is 
denied if the dead people had expressly forbidden it. Some 
authors point out that the right of access to personal medical 
records is only for the patients and is not transferable to their 
heirs. Therefore, in order to get them it is necessary to prove 
the cause and the legitimate interest of the applicants in the 
context of a judicial or administrative proceeding [12]. 
The question of the age of the child to exercise his right 
of access to personal medical record by himself is also 
problematic. Law 41 /2002 does not address this issue 
explicitly. As recalled by Saiz and Larios [13], the doctrine 
has been applied by analogy to the minimum age (sixteen 
years, unless emancipation), according to Article 9 of the Act 
on the Protection of Data for the provision of informed 
consent without representation. However, for these authors, 
the entire solution is currently governed by Article 13 of the 
Regulations of the Organic Law on Data Protection that 
allows a fourteen years old person to gain access to their 
personal data "except where the Act requires assistance for 
holders of parental authority or guardianship." It is therefore 
necessary to adopt a uniform approach to determine the age 
when the child can get the right to this access. 
V. 
DATA COLLECTION FOR PATIENTS’ RECORDS: THE 
ISSUE OF PERSONAL PHYSICIANS’ NOTES 
After the questions of the ownership of the patient’s 
record and of its access, another one is that of the data it 
contains. 
These questions are raised in different ways in France 
and Spain, according to different specific approaches. 
In France, the central issue of the collect of data, patients’ 
data or not, is a main one. Since 1927, the physician has been  
paid directly by the patient for each medical act. The patient 
is then reimbursed by the various Health Insurance 
companies. This is the origin of so-called French “liberal 
system”. Private primary care physicians did not want to be 
paid directly by the Health Insurance organizations which 
could thus control their activity. The central issue (often not 
formulated officially), already outlined, is always the fear of 
Health Insurance organizations’ control of doctors’ activity 
and of their incomes. Many blockages around the DMP 
come from this not formulated but very real fear. 
So who will fill the DMP? If the data is not validated by the 
doctor it has no medical value. The doctor did not incur 
individual responsibility for a medical record that would 
have been filled by the patient. In times of severe budget 
pressures, the Health Insurance Organizations do not want 
that the collection of patients’ data (and also the 
reconstitution of their personal health history in the past) 
could become a new and therefore reimbursed medical act. 
The problem underlines a limit of the doctor’s payment for 
each medical act [14]. 
The question can be expressed otherwise: that of the 
"double collection" of patient’s data by a physician. With the 
developments in ICT, some optimists believe that a single 
“click” will switch patients’ personal records with data 
coming from the personal physician's file concerning the 
same patient. But then comes the main question of the 
personal physician’s notes, their ownership and their 
confidentiality.  
The approach is different in Spain. The concept of 
subjective notes or annotations of the doctor gives way to 
multiple interpretations. Lorenzo (2006) [15], according to 
Cantero [5], considers that the notes are personal impressions 
of the doctor on the attitudes of patients who were tested 
objectively. For Sanchez-Caro and Abellán [16], subjective 
notes include comments or personal impressions of the 
doctor. If they do not have clinical importance, they should 
not be included in the clinical history. On this issue, the 
Spanish Justice emphasized that these notes are "assumptions 
made on prints that do not strictly correspond to the content 
of the record" (STSJ de Canarias 48904). It is also 
understood that they are "personal impressions of the patient 
or his social environment, attitude or behavior of the patient's 
reactions (STSJ Madrid, 2006/162708). The physician can be 
attacked on personal notes which were not intended to 
circulate. 
Other authors have objected to the exclusion of 
subjective notes. For Galán [17], if these possibilities of 
entries are deleted, they eliminate 90% of the clinical history 
of the patient. The author argues that these terms should be 
maintained, because deleting them would act against the 
fundamental right of patients to access to a document. This 
would have a negative effect in terms of an investigation or 
assistance. Other authors believe that the support for this 
limitation is in accordance with the right to privacy [13]. 
Regional laws that have tackled the issue of subjective 
annotations are rare. We can give the example of Article 32 
of Law 3/2005 of 8 July (Health Information and patient 
autonomy) in Extremadura. This article examines the 
subjective annotations that are considered as "impressions of 
279
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

health care based on the unique perspective of people, and 
that in any case are not relevant to the true knowledge and 
update status patient's health, but cannot be considered a 
diagnosis." Note also Article 19 of law 3/ 2001 of 28 May 
the Government of Galicia, which concerns informed 
consent 
and 
medical 
history 
of 
patients. 
According to Troncoso [18], the right of access to personal 
medical records cannot affect the rights of health care 
professionals. Therefore, they may refuse to provide access 
to their subjective annotations. 
Saiz and Larios [13] point out that, in theory, the patient 
has the right to know and obtain copies of all reports and 
documents listed in Article 15 of Law 41 /2002. However, in 
practice, it is not uncommon to find some medical 
institutions whose internal rules only allow specific delivery 
of data and diagnostic reports. This is also the case in France 
where patients do not get the copies of their documents as 
easily as the law requires it. 
A solution would be the standardization of sizes and 
types of documents that must be provided to patients and to 
establish greater control of this aspect of the patients’ rights 
to information in health organizations, in order to avoid 
situations like those listed. In this perspective raises another 
question: it is not the same thing to write notes for yourself 
or 
to 
be 
read 
by 
others 
(question 
of 
semantic 
interoperability)? 
VI. 
THE CENTRAL ISSUE OF INTEROPERABILITY 
Interoperability is not considered in the same way in 
France and Spain due to different approaches: national 
(France) and regional (Spain). 
In Spain, the lack of standardization of Personal 
Electronic Health Records creates problems when the patient 
moves from one Autonomous Community to another one, 
with a loss of a chance of survival in case of disease or 
accident. The launch of the Online Health is a progress. Its 
purpose is the exchange of clinical information between 
Autonomous Communities with the "Digital Health Record" 
project of the Spanish National Health Service. The second 
phase of the implementation will be completed in 2014. On 
20 September 2013, the Council of Ministers has approved 
the establishment of a National Health Card in the next five 
years to replace all other cards [19].  
For Criado [20], the project is not yet achieved due to the 
difficulties to reach an agreement between all the actors of 
the system, despite the fact that the majority of semantic, 
technical, organizational and even interoperability problems 
have been resolved. There are 16.7 million electronic 
medical records existing, but four autonomous communities 
have not yet joined the project [21].  
The Spanish Health System is moving towards a shared 
and interoperable computerized clinical history. As in 
France, it concerns three types of professionals: computer 
scientists, healthcare professionals, clinical documentation 
workers. To improve the interoperability of the Electronic 
Health Record, it is necessary to incorporate reference 
models that also allow to correctly identify the contents [22]. 
A very effective element to support this interoperability 
effort is the use of EN / UNE 13606 (Health informatics - 
Electronic health record communication) standard [23]. But, 
in addition to the use of a reference model (standard), Spain 
must gradually develop archetypes, a decisive technical 
artefact to incorporate clinical knowledge in existing 
electronic documents from the design phase of the 
implementation of the system. Since the project “Historia 
Clínica Digital del Sistema Nacional  de Salud (HCDSNS)”, 
significant progress has taken place in the construction and 
dissemination of archetypes in a large scale, they give 
support to the requirements of the National Health System 
projects.  
According to the Study of Information Technology and 
Applied Communication for Health and Inclusion, carried 
out in 2011 [24], a fundamental challenge for Health 
Information Systems is interoperability. This means 
exchanging clinical information so that patients can have 
their clinical data available in any place. As this study 
demonstrates, from a technological point of view, 
interoperability needs Enterprise Application Integration 
(EAI), Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) or Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) platforms. 
Benson [25] considers that the development of 
interoperability in the health field needs the use of standards. 
These include: 
- SPL HL7 (Structured Product Labeling): electronic 
labeling standard for drugs. 
 - HL7 [26] Medical Records: for the management of 
medical records. 
- HL7 Clinical Genomics: This standard facilitates the 
exchange of customized clinical data between multiple 
agents: assistance providers, laboratories and centers for 
biomedical research. 
- DICOM [27] (Digital Imaging and Communication in 
Medicine). It is a worldwide recognized standard for 
handling, storing, printing and transmitting medical images 
between different information systems. 
 
Other resources are devoted to the development of 
projects for the security of information systems and the 
implementation 
of 
technological 
platforms 
for 
the 
integration of systems that enable interoperability of 
Electronic Health Records in each region. 
 
In France, a major issue is that of the divisions 
(cloisonnements): between the Ministry of Health and the 
various Health Insurance organizations, between primary 
care and hospital sector, between public and private sectors, 
between doctors and other healthcare professionals, between 
care sector and the social one, etc. 
The question of boundaries may also be involved in the 
great number of various patients' medical records. In France, 
the highlighted DMP is nevertheless far from unique [28, 
29]. Patients may have different records: DMP, DCC 
(Communicating Record for Cancer), Drug History (dossier 
pharmaceutique), records of patients in different care or 
medical-social organizations, and also records of different 
interface structures (Networked Organizations, Health 
centers, 
hospitalization 
at 
home, 
etc.). 
280
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Would not all these personal patients’ records, expected to 
help to break down barriers in the Health sector, create new 
ones finally? A great change is necessary because their 
multiplication is the source of not essential expenses and of 
confusing problems. But there are also many competing 
interests. 
The authorities seem to be aware of the problem. During 
the presentation of the National Health Strategy on 2013 
September 23th, the Minister of Health announced the 
"progressive construction of a Public Information Service in 
Health" and a wider opening of health data [30]. Initially, it 
should be designed to validate sites offering health 
information and ultimately to coordinate all institutions 
providing and managing health data. The unfortunate 
experience of DMP still at the experimental level and the 
financial situation may contribute to temper the initial 
enthusiasm. 
It is also necessary to overpass an initial confusion. The 
DMP has become a computerized patient record among 
others. We need a coordination tool for interoperability at 
national 
level: 
the 
DMP or another device [31]. 
 
The issue of interoperability does not have only a 
technical aspect for cooperation between different socio-
technical systems but also a semantic aspect, in terms of 
vocabulary between different professions (engineers and 
professionals of care), concepts and national cultures [32]. 
So if in Spain and France national starting points are 
different, the problems converge around the notion of 
interoperability and the need for a tool for national 
coordination. 
 
VII. ETHICS’ ASPECTS AND MEDICAL CONFIDENTIALITY 
In the health field, the use of the technologies of 
information and communication (ICT), is now irreversible 
and has undeniable advantages, such as traceability of 
actions (care pathways), but, at the same time, may raise 
fears. Some, like Romeo and Castellano [3] fear an increased 
risk of violations of privacy and other individual interests. 
Therefore 
the 
French 
DMP 
arises 
ethics’ 
issues. 
Three different points emerge very quickly: the issue of the 
chosen security devices, the use of personal data in relation 
to the specificity of the health data: their medical 
confidentiality. 
 
The security issue is primarily that of the systems used. 
Many examples are discussed showing loss of data, errors in 
transmission 
of 
electronic 
documents 
or 
in 
data 
anonymization. Cañas and Santander [33] stress the risk of 
intentional attacks (malicious) or that of employees’ error, 
which may affect the confidentiality of information 
transmitted or manipulated. 
But we must not exaggerate. The digital data are more 
largely protected than the paper patient records lying around 
on tables or in cabinets in medical offices or in hospitals. 
 
Then comes the question of personal data. Nowadays, 
each country has its own approach resulting from various 
collective mentalities. 
Anglo-Saxon countries do not have the same approach as 
the Latin countries. The United Kingdom, always very 
concerned by the civil liberties, is repugnant to the 
development of national cards, like identity or health cards. 
In the United States, freedom of use of personal data is much 
more important, and so the risks of skidding are higher. The 
Congress instructed the Health and Human Services 
Department (HHS) to protect the patients’ privacy by 
integrating its aspects into the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 (Office for Civil 
Liberties). Each federate State can add specific aspects. In 
Quebec (Canada), the Commission of Access to Information 
has a specific role. 
Spain has an agency for data protection (Agencia 
Española de Protección de Dados). Under the Statute of 
Autonomy of 1978, some autonomous communities have 
established their own organizations to protect the rights of 
their citizens. In Catalonia, an Agència Catalana de 
Protecció de Dades (APDCAT) was been established by the 
Organic Law 15/1999 on Data Protection. They also have an 
Administraci ó Oberta de Catalunya which aims at 
developing a "digital citizenship”. We can find too an 
Agencia Vasca de Protección de Datos (AVPD). The 
Agencia de Protección de Datos of the Madrid’s Community 
was closed in 2013. 
Citizens' attitudes towards personal data (privacy) may 
vary. A survey conducted in the United States on adults by 
Harris Interactive in March 2003 [34] distinguish the 
"privacy fundamentalists" (26%), the "privacy pragmatists" 
(64% compared to 54 % in 1994) and the "privacy 
unconcerned" (10 % compared to 22% in 1994). Nearly 70 
% of surveyed adults agreed with the statement that 
"consumers have lost all control on information collected 
and used by companies" and the majority are relatively 
pessimistic about the impact of legislation, 53% do not agree 
on the fact that "existing laws and organizational practices 
provide a reasonable level of protection for the consumer 
today". 
 
There exists fears with the development of Big Data 
(large and unstructured data that invade networks and storage 
systems of all kinds) uses and, above all, about the risk of 
sales of patients’ data to organizations for commercial 
purposes, for example of patient’s personal data to 
pharmaceutical companies, without patients’ consent. 
The European Directive of October 1995 extended the 
protection of individual rights, introducing the concept of 
personal data, understood as any data that allows the 
identification of an individual. The United Kingdom adapted 
its legislation with EU Directive in October 1998. France 
will put a lot more time. Begun in 2002, the legislative 
process has been only finalized by the Act of 6th August 
2004. 
On 21th October 2013, the European Parliament voted a 
major revision of the 1995 Directive to strengthen citizens' 
control over their personal data. In the following years, a 
281
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

new EU regulation is going to replace the various national 
regulations. If it succeeds, in Europe, national approaches 
should be progressively erased.  
Health data are personal and sensitive data but with 
strong 
specificities 
especially 
regarding 
medical 
confidentiality. 
 
The concept of medical confidentiality is very old. It 
goes back to the famous Hippocratic Oath (from the name of  
the famous Greek physician of Antiquity), taken by all 
physicians who specifies that, "admitted in the privacy of 
people, I will not reveal the secrets that will be entrusted to 
me" [35]. 
For Dr. P. Cressard: "Medical confidentiality is the sum 
of the exchanges collected in a context of trust between a 
doctor and a patient" [36]. 
In 
France, 
the 
concept 
of 
breaking 
medical 
confidentiality appeared in 1810 under the First Empire. It 
has been extended to other professions in 1992. 
The Law of 4th March 2002 on “Sick people’s rights and 
the quality of the Health System [37] introduces major 
changes: medical confidentiality has become a right of the 
patient and not just an ethics’ obligation of the physician. It 
placed the patients at the center of all decisions that affect 
them, introducing the concept of "health democracy." This 
law has been adapted to the hospital sector in particular with 
the 2nd March 2006 circular on the "Charter of the 
hospitalized person and the rights of users." 
 
For Pr Anne Laude, the current state of the law reflects 
the partitioning (divisions) of the French Healthccare system: 
it would be preferable that a single text should bring together 
all the citizen’s rights, whatever the nature of the medical act 
to simplify the work and the responsibility of physicians 
[36]. 
Thus, in France, but it can be generalized, the concept of 
medical confidentiality is going to evolve: with the impact of 
the new technologies of information and communication 
(ICT) at the heart of this article, but also because of the 
evolution of the practices of medicine. The medical practice 
is less isolated. Interface Organizations between isolated 
primary care and hospital have developed: Healthcare 
Networks, 
Homecare 
Organizations 
(in 
French: 
Hospitalisation à Domicile - HAD), medical houses, etc. 
Many actors are involved in the patients’ care. But the 
responsibility of the physician and of medical confidentiality 
remains individual. What information is the doctor permitted 
to share? 
The term of trust is often used in the relationship between 
doctor and patient or in the use of socio-technical devices 
(ICT). The "digital trust" is an essential issue. For Kaplan 
and Francou [38], we may invent new tools to rebuild the 
relationship between organizations and individuals and new 
creative spaces to develop trust. In France, perhaps the new 
interface organizations in Healthcare can play this role. 
VIII. PROSPECTS: TOWARDS A EUROPEAN HEALTH RECORD 
AND THE CHALLENGE OF OPEN DATA 
Today, in the European Union, health issues are always 
managed by the different national States. But we have seen 
that for personal data, national legislations had to adapt to 
the European Directive of 1995 and that they should 
gradually give way to a single European regulation. 
Moreover, since 2002 we have got a European Health 
Insurance Card, which permits medical or hospital care be 
obtained in a foreign country without advance payment. This 
is particularly important in the tourism sector or for people 
who move a lot [39]. 
Various projects have been developed in the European 
area to improve interoperability in the Health sector. This is 
for example the Calliope (European thematic Network for 
eHealth Interoperability) [40] project, HITCH (Healthcare 
Interoperability Testing and Conformance Harmonisation) 
[41], and especially, the epSOS or European patients Smart 
Open Services project [42]. It is the largest project in the 
European e-Health sector which emphasizes interoperability. 
The epSOS project is of great interest to facilitate the 
evolution of the national personal records to a European 
record. 
Its main goal is to improve the health monitoring of 
citizens when they are outside their origin country, allowing 
health professionals of any country participating to the 
epSOS’ project access to his medical data. To achieve this, 
providers of health services participating to the project 
cooperate by sharing their data to test this new service. For 
the first time, European people can use these cross-border 
services when they need health services in all countries 
participating in epSOS as a tourist, businessmen, students, 
travelers or tourists. This project is still in progress. In Spain, 
are associated the Ministry of Health, Social Services and 
Equality and five Autonomous Communities are associated: 
Andalucia, Castilla la Mancha, Catalonia, the Balearic 
Islands and Valencia. 
In France, the project is managed by the ASIP [Agency 
for Shared Information System in Health) and is especially 
tested in the Ile-de-France region. 
For Criado [20], the role of the European Union in this 
area is primarily for general guidance and incentives. We 
have shown important first steps for interoperability of data, 
imperative for data exchange in all the European Union 
territory. 
Beyond the national projects, a more ambitious project 
would be the creation of a European personal medical record 
for each European citizen, which would allow access to his 
record from any country of the European Union. Of course 
the Health’s sector is still a national competence, but the 
European Union is trying to facilitate cooperation to 
converge to a European health policy. There is already a 
European Health Insurance Card. It is only an administrative 
card and must be renewed each year. But it could be an entry 
for the access of the patient’s data, including first emergency 
data. It would be an important step to a European e-Health. 
Another point to outline is the use of digital data to 
improve care at a local level. In France, at the end of 2013, a 
282
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

new specific project was launched around areas of digital 
health or territories of digital care (in French, TSN: 
territoires de soins numériques) to develop the uses of digital 
data to improve the patient’s care on specific territories. In 
an other manner, couldn’t we also consider the creation of a 
specific new digital territory at the level of each patient 
representing a specific and personal digital care territory 
around its own personal medical record? This issue is very 
connected with telemedicine. Its development depends on 
specific national regulations (in France, 19th October 2010 
decree). 
Another important point is the challenge of the Open 
Data. In France, the CNIL, already mentioned, organized a 
seminar about this issue last July [43]. Participants stressed 
the idea that the open data is primarily a tool for modernizing 
public action and of general interest for democracy which 
needs the best opacity and privacy for citizens and 
transparency of the State, while it is often the opposite that 
happens. Open Data is an essential component of 
transparency. Personal data is not a priori the first concerned 
by the Open Data. Open Data have no personal nature, they 
concern mainly State data (maps, raw data, general 
indicators). 
 
But we have entered a period of "revolution of the data." 
"Putting the world in data” lead us to redefine the way we 
act, and to create knowledge infrastructure of a new kind. 
The boundaries between the different categories of data, 
personal or public, anonymous or indirectly identifiable, are 
not always clear. "To build an Open Data legitimate and 
sustainable, it is essential to examine ethically the role of 
personal data, anonymisation, consent, etc." 
 
IX. 
CONCLUSION: ONLY THE BEGINNING OF PROFOUND 
CHANGES 
Privacy, ethics, consent, and also the concepts of access, 
interoperability, ownership; we find all the essential points of 
this article on the issues surrounding the Electronic Health 
Records and the challenge to master the patients' pathways 
through proposals around a comparative analysis in France 
and Spain. 
The question of the implementation of electronic medical 
records is at the heart of the challenge of mastering the 
patients’ pathways, both in France and Spain. We are only at 
the beginning of great changes caused by the rapid 
development of e-Health. In the future, the EHR that 
nowadays concern national or regional levels, will also be 
effective at local level and European level. 
According to E. Morin’s idea, it is also largely 
"hologrammatic” (representing a summary of various 
problematics) and at different levels. 
Firstly, the EHR is “hologrammatic” for the challenges 
tackled by the two Healthcare Systems, and more largely 
those of all developed countries, facing the double problem 
of controlling costs and improving quality of care, in a 
particularly hard financial situation. 
New ICT tools can help. The issue of electronic patient 
data is at the heart of our evolving health systems with the 
central issues of traceability of patients’ pathways in care 
Patients become involved in their health and co-producers of 
new services concerning themselves, data and experiential 
knowledge 
such 
as 
tools, 
interoperability 
and 
the 
development of new uses and care practices. This is one 
aspect of the concept of "health democracy" (démocratie 
sanitaire) proclaimed by the Act of March 4th, 2002 which 
also insists on the idea of patients’ responsibility, the Anglo-
Saxon speaking of “empowerment”. 
But, secondly, it is also “hologrammatic” in a wide 
perspective around the “data revolution” with the definition 
of different data (public, personal, sensitive …), the 
questions of personal data and open data. So it is a global 
societal subject. 
The newspaper La Tribune.fr (January 10th 2014) points 
out that “France is struggling to bring its Health System in 
the Digital Age”. For the authors of the article, with the 
affirmation of the patient 2.0, the DMP reviewed, essential 
for the coordination of care, "may be the passport to the 
world of e-health" [44]. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] E. Morin and J.L. Le Moigne, The Complexity’s Intelligence, in 
French : L’intelligence de la complexité, Paris, L’Harmattan, 2003. 
[2] M. Duriez and D. Lequet-Slama, The Health Systems in Europe, In 
French : Les systèmes de santé en Europe, Paris, PUF, 1998. 
[3] C.M. Romero and M. Castellano,  “Patient privacy from the 
perspective of medical confidentiality and access to medical 
records”, in Spanish: “La intimidad del paciente desde la 
perspectiva del secreto médico y del acceso a la historia clínica”, D 
y S, 1993, vol. 1, 1, pp.5- 10. 
[4] J.M. Álvarez-Cienfuegos, “Clinical history: custody and property 
(II) ", Presentation at the First Conference of Data Protection of the 
Community of Madrid”, in Spanish: “La historia clínica: custodia y 
propiedad (II)”, Fundación Mapfre-Medicina y Agencia de 
Protección de Datos de la Comunidad de Madrid, Madrid, 2000, 
pp. 123-128. 
[5] R. Cantero, “Questions relating to medical history (I) and (II)”, in 
Spanish: “Cuestiones relativas a la historia clínica (I) y (II)”, La 
Ley,1996,  pp. 1424 - 1430. 
[6] A. De Lorenzo, “Who owns the medical records?”, in Spanish 
“¿De quién son propiedad las historias clínicas?”, Deontología, 
Derecho y Medicina, Ilustre Colegio Oficial de Médicos de 
Madrid, Madrid, 1977, pp. 491 - 495. 
[7] A. Luna and E. Osuna, “Medico-legal storage and custody 
problems for the medical records” in Spanish “Problemas médico-
legales en el almacenamiento y custodia de la historia clínica”, 
Medicina Clínica, 1987, vol. 118,  2, pp. 631-635. 
[8] E. Gay, “The patient’s right to health  and to clinical 
documentation. Problem on the property of the medical record”, in 
Spanish: “El derecho a la salud y documentación clínica del 
enfermo. Problema sobre la propiedad de la historia clínica y su 
caso”, Todo Hospital, 1987,  42, pp. 31-36. 
[9] L. Sarrato, “The legal regime on access to medical records and 
guarantees”, in Spanish:  “El régimen legal de acceso a la historia 
clínica y sus garantías”, Revista Jurídica de Castilla y León, 2009,  
17, p.185-190. 
[10] C. Bourret, “Issues of Information and Communication for New 
Managerial approaches: the Challenges of the French Health 
System”, Journal of Computing and Information Technology – 
283
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

CIT, University of Zagreb (Croatia), 2012, vol. 20,  n° 3,  p. 195 – 
200. 
[11] A. Garriga, Processing of Personal Data and Fundamental Rights, 
in Spanish: Tratamiento de Datos Personales y Derechos 
Fundamentales, Ed. Dykinson, Madrid, 2004, p. 119. 
[12] J.M Méjica, The history, basic statute and proposed regulations, in 
Spanish: La historia clínica, estatuto básico y propuesta de 
regulación, Edisofer, Madrid, 2002. 
[13] M. Saiz and D. Larios, “The right of access to medical records by 
patients: proposal for reservation of subjective annotations”, in 
Spanish:“El derecho de acceso a la historia clínica por el paciente: 
propuesta para la reserva de anotaciones subjetivas”, Derecho y 
Salud, 2009, Vol. 18, 1, pp.30, 36. 
[14] C. Bourret,“Electronic Health Record (Dossier Médical Personnel) 
as a major tool for Improving Healthcare in France: an approach 
through the Situational Semiotic”, The Second International 
Conference on Networked Digital Technologies (NDT), Prague, 
July 7-9, 2010, in F. Zavoral et al. (Eds.): Proceedings NDT 2010, 
Part II, Communications in Computer and Information Science 
(CCIS) Series of Springer LNCS, 88, pp. 7 – 14. 
[15] O. Lorenzo, “Problem of subjective annotations in the 41/2002 
Law”, in Spanish: “Problemática de las anotaciones subjetivas de 
la Ley 41/2002”, Paper XII, Congreso de la Asociación Española 
de  Derecho sanitario, 2006.   
[16] J. Sanchez-Caro and F. Abellan, Right and duties of patients, in 
Spanish:Derecho y deberes de los pacientes, Madrid, Ed. Comares, 
2003.  
[17] J.C. Galan, “The allusion to subjective annotations in the 
Autonomy Law creates uncertainty”, in Spanish: “La alusión a las 
anotaciones subjetivas en la Ley de Autonomía crea inseguridad” 
Diario Médico, 2006, p. 10. 
[18] A. Troncoso, Data protection in search of equilibrium, In Spanish: 
La protección de datos en busca del equilibrio, Tirant lo Blanch,  
Valencia, 2010, p.1186. 
[19] Available 
on : 
http://www.elmundo.es/elmundosalud/2013/09/20/noticias/137968
5783.html [Access Dec. 2013]. 
[20] J.I. Criado, “Interoperability and health policy in Spain”, in 
Spanish : “Interoperabilidad y política sanitaria en España”,  
Barataria, Revista Castellano-Manchega de Ciencias Sociales, 
2013, 15, pp. 85 - 90. 
[21] Available on : http://www.abc.es/sociedad/20130618/abci-historia-
clinica-digital-201306181702.html [Access Dec. 2013]. 
[22] A.Romero, “Project HCDSNS on Medical Records in the National 
Health System, Progress and Prospects”, in Spanish: “Proyecto 
HCDSNS Historia Clínica Digital del Sistema Nacional  de Salud 
Avances y Perspectivas”, Papeles Médicos,  2012, vol. 21, pp. 8-
12. 
[23] Available 
on : 
http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail
.htm?csnumber=50122. [Access Dec. 2013]. 
[24] Study of the Information and Communication Technologies. 
Applied to Health and Inclusion. Study of Art:e-Health and e-
inclusion, in Spanish: Estudio de las technologias de la 
Informacion y de la Communicacion Aplicadas a la Salud y a la 
Inclusion, 2011, pp. 105-110. 
[25] T. Benson, Principles of Health Interoperability, New York, 
Springer, 2010. 
[26] Available on : https://www.hl7.org/ [Access Dec. 2013]. 
[27] Available on: http://www.dicom.com/fr/index.php [Access Dec. 
2013]. 
[28] M. Fieschi, “To personal medical records. Patient data shared: an 
asset not to spoil to change the healthcare system” , in French : 
« Vers le dossier médical personnel. Les données du patient 
partagées : un atout à ne pas gâcher pour faire évoluer le système 
de santé », Droit social, 2005, n° 1, pp. 80 – 90. 
[29] M. Fieschi dir., “ Patient’s shared data: the culture of sharing and 
of quality information to improve the quality of care”, in French,  
« Les données du patient partagées : la culture du partage et de la 
qualité des informations pour améliorer la qualité des soins », 
2003.  
[30] Available on : http://www.acteurspublics.com/2013/09/23/vers-un-
service-public-d-information-de-sante [Access Dec.2013]. 
[31] T. Ficatier, “Information System to coordinate care: performance 
driver ” , in French :  “Système d’information de la coordination 
des soins : levier de performance”, Revue hospitalière de France, 
2008, n° 521, p. 30-33. 
[32] M. Fieschi, Governance of semantic interoperability is at the heart 
of the development of health information systems, in French : La 
gouvernance de l’interopérabilité sémantique est au cœur du 
développement des systèmes d’information en santé, Paris, 2009. 
[33] F. 
Canas 
and 
F. 
Santander, 
“New 
technologies 
and 
confidentiality”, 
in 
Spanish: 
“Nuevas 
tecnologías 
y 
confidencialidad”,  Asociación Española de Derecho Farmacéutico 
(A.S.E.D.E.F.), 2002, p 29. 
[34] Available 
on : 
http://www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/index.asp?PID=365) 
[Access Dec. 2013]. 
[35] Conseil National de l’Ordre des Médecins, Code of Medical 
Ethics, in French : Code de déontologie médicale, Paris, Jouve, 
2004, p. 63. 
[36]  “Medical confidentiality between patients’ right and ethical 
obligation”, in French: “ Le secret médical entre droit des patients 
et obligation déontologique” , Special issue nov.-dec. 2012, 
Bulletin d’information de l’Ordre national des médecins,  p. 5. 
[37] Law of 4 March 2002 on patients' rights and the quality of the 
health system, in French : Loi du 4 mars 2002 relative aux Droits 
des malades et à la qualité du système de santé.  
[38] D. Kaplan and R. Francou,  The Digital trust, in French : La 
confiance numérique, Paris, Ed. Fyp, 2012. 
[39] C. Bourret, “Tourism, Leisure and Health: the issue of cross-border 
cooperation in case of accidents”, in Spanish: “Turismo, Ocio y 
Salud: la cuestión de la cooperación transfronteriza en caso de 
accidentes”, 1er Congrés d’Oci I Turisme, Mataró – Barcelona,  
May 2012. 
[40] CALLIOPE Project, available on : http://esante.gouv.fr/en/node/45 
[Access Dec. 2013]. 
[41] HITCH 
Project, 
available 
on: 
http://hitch-
project.eu/sites/www.hitch-project.eu/files/HITCH-Roadmap-
V1.1.pdf. [Access Dec. 2013].  
[42]  EpSOS Project, available on: http://esante.gouv.fr/le-mag-numero-
3/le-projet-europeen-epsos [Access Dec. 2013]. 
[43] CNIL (National Commission on Informatics and Freedom), 
Seminar "Open data, which issues for data protection? "in French : 
Séminaire « Open data, quels enjeux pour la protection des 
données ? », 
Paris, 
July 
9th, 
Available 
on : 
http://www.cnil.fr/fileadmin/documents/approfondir/dossier/Open
Data/CR_Workshop_Open_Data_9_juillet_2013.pdf. [Access Dec. 
2013]. 
[44] Available 
on : 
http://www.lesiss.org/445_p_37398/en-2014-a-
votre-e-s@nte.html. [Access Dec. 2013]. 
 
 
 
 
284
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

