User Support System for Designing Decisional Database 
 
Fatma Abdelhédi, Gilles Zurfluh 
University of Toulouse1 Capitole – IRIT ( UMR 5505 - France) 
{Fatma.Abdelhedi, Gilles.Zurfluh}@irit.fr 
 
Abstract— The design of a multidimensional schema is 
usually performed by a specialist (computer scientist). 
According to data-driven, requirement-driven or hybrid-
driven approaches, he determines the facts and axis of 
analysis. Such an approach assumes that the decision maker 
expresses, more or less formally, analysis needs and 
communicate them to the computer scientist. We propose 
multidimensional schema designing by the decision maker 
himself following a hybrid-driven approach. Through a 
process of assistance successively viewing intermediate 
schemas from sources, the decision maker gradually built his 
multidimensional schema. As what determined the measures 
studied, the analysis dimensions and hierarchies within 
dimensions. A software tool named SelfStar based on this 
principle has been developed and validated with decision 
makers. 
Keywords-Multidimensional 
model; 
design 
process; 
decisional Data-base; decision-makers’ requirements; data-
source 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Decisional Data Base (DDB) allows decision maker to 
analyze data structured according to a multidimensional 
schema (star or constellation). Multidimensional schema 
design has motivated numerous works which can be 
derived from data-driven, requirement-driven or hybrid-
driven approaches [1][2][3]. These approaches, to perform 
as well as they are, all involve a designer who is only able 
to design a multidimensional schema from decision 
makers’ requirements or data source schema. The 
development of such a schema is a cumbersome process 
because it requires decision makers to articulate their 
needs to a designer and that it captures well the need to 
translate them to a adapted schema form. 
Decision makers do not generally mastered formalisms 
and IT (Information Technology) tools but are experts in 
their field work. The SelfStar project fits into this fact and 
aims to define the data warehouse process dedicated to 
casual users (decision makers). It propose an approach 
and a software tool allowing to the decision-maker to 
design himself his DDBs incrementally, according to his 
requirements, and this without recourse to an expert 
designer. This paper focuses on the constellation schema 
[4] design. 
This paper focuses on the incremental design of a 
constellation schema from the relational schema of a data 
source. This work is part SelfStar project developed by 
our team and aimed to decision-makers to design their 
data-warehouses. 
The paper is structured as following. In Section 2, we 
present 
briefly 
several 
approaches 
to 
design 
a 
multidimensional schema. The justification of SelfStar 
system is provided in Section 3. In Section 4, the input 
and the output of the system are successively defined. 
Section 5 is devoted to a presentation of multidimensional 
schema process. Section 6 describes the architecture of a 
case tool allowing to experiment these mechanisms. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Many 
studies 
have 
been 
devoted 
to 
the 
multidimensional schema approach. These approaches can 
be classified into 3 categories: data-driven, requirement-
driven, 
and 
hybrid-driven 
approaches. 
Data-driven 
approach [1][5] uses database source to generate a set of 
candidate multidimensional schemas and presents the 
drawback of not taking into account decision makers’ 
requirements, consequently, going towards a possible 
failure of expectations of decision maker. Requirement-
driven approach [2][6] takes into the needs of decision 
makers, but the sources are ignored at first. After that, 
multidimensional schema has to be mapped on the data 
sources. So, the designer can discover that the 
requirements do not correspond to sources. 
Hybrid-driven 
approaches 
[3][7] 
combines 
and 
integrate the benefits of these two previous approaches. In 
fact, this approach designs on the one hand candidate 
schemas from the data (data-driven approach) and on the 
other hand multidimensional schema from decision 
makers’ requirements (requirement-driven approach). A 
designer must map these two types of schemas to obtain a 
consistent multidimensional schema. Romero and Abelló 
[3] propose an automatic method Multidimensional Design 
by 
Examples 
(MDBE) 
following 
a 
hybrid-driven 
approach. To generate multidimensional schemas, this 
method takes as input, on one hand, the decision makers’ 
requirements expressed as SQL queries, and on the other 
hand, the relational data source. 
Source analysis is provided by SQL queries and 
knowledge of relational source schema. Therefore, the 
multidimensional schema design requires an expert (a 
computer scientist) to formulate SQL [15] query and 
analyze data source. Pinet and Schneider [8] propose to 
generate a multidimensional schema from a conceptual 
schema using UML notations. This approach represents 
source classes with a directed acyclic graph. The user 
chooses a node from this graph to design a fact. All 
connected nodes to this chosen fact represent the potential 
dimensions of this fact. However, in our opinion, this 
377
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

representation of multidimensional schema is complex for 
the decision maker because of the number of generated 
nodes to represent the dimension hierarchies. However, 
interactions with the decision maker choices are limited to 
the facts. 
To our knowledge, few works [7] try to allow users to 
participate in the process of multidimensional schema.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.   UML Class Diagram of products sales ans stock management 
 
III. 
JUSTIFICATION OF SELFSTAR PROJECT 
In the current approach, the decision makers should ask 
the specialists of the data management (administrators, 
computer scientist) each time they wish to get a new 
decisional 
database 
or 
to 
evolve 
the 
deprecated 
multidimensional schemas. This is related primarily to the 
complexity of: 
 
principles of designing of a decisional 
database 
 
ETL Processes ensuring the periodic load of 
the decisional database from there [9][10]. 
SelfStar project aims to propose a full approach and a 
software environment to allow to the decision maker to 
design a constellation schema. The design process of the 
schema is based on a hybrid approach: it starts from the 
database schema (class diagram CD) and the decision 
makers’ requirements. This process is incremental: the 
decision maker integrates progressively the analysis needs 
in 3 successive intermediate schemas. 
The advantage of such process is twofold: 
 
The decision maker becomes independent 
to express his decisional requirements, 
 
The process automatically controls the 
correspondence 
between 
analysis 
requirements and sources. 
However, the decision maker, even if he knows his 
needs, is obviously confronted with a double complexity: 
 
Data 
source 
organization 
(Relational, 
Entity-Association or UML diagram), 
 
Process of the star or constellation schema 
design (fact(s), dimensions, hierarchy). 
SelfStar 
project 
aims 
to 
propose 
formalized 
mechanisms to palliate this complexity. 
IV. 
INPUT AND OUTPUT OF SELFSTAR 
SelfStar system allows constellation schemas design 
from a data source and the decision-maker’s requirements. 
In order to illustrate the input/output of the design 
process, we present successively an example of source 
schema, an expression of analysis needs and finally the 
decisional base schema resulting from the process. 
A. Data source: Input of SelfStar 
Data source is described by UML language. The 
choice of this formalism is justified by the semantic 
378
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

richness of the data model [2] and also by the 
correspondence between this language with the models 
entity-association and relational. Figure 2 gives the 
example of a classes diagram (CD) describing a 
management of the sales. 
Figure 2.  Our design process that allows a decision-maker to build a 
data-mart schema 
The CD not being easily exploitable in the state, it is the 
subject thus of a reprocessing. This principle was already 
proposed in [11] for the Entity-Association model and in 
[7] for the UML CD. According to this principle, the 
conceptual schema is transformed into a simplified 
schema containing only object classes and binary links of 
type 1..N between these classes. The transformation of a 
DCL into an exploitable schema is carried out as follows: 
 
An object’s classes or association’s classes 
of the source becomes a class in the 
exploitable schema, 
 
A binary  association links type 1..N is 
deferred in the state, 
 
A binary association links type M..N is 
transformed into a class bound by 2 links 
1..N, 
 
A link of aggregation or composition is 
processed as an association links (these type 
of links are not meaningful in the 
multidimensional schema), 
 
A link of heritage disappears; the subclass 
of the source becomes a class and it will be 
on the same level as the super-class by 
inheriting its attributes and links (it 
preserves the semantics of the data). 
The exploitable schema obtained is an oriented acyclic 
graph. 
B. Requirements: Input of SelfStar 
When a decision maker wants to analyze the data of a 
source, it can express his requirements: 
 
Either in the form of SQL request [12] ;  but 
this proves to be difficult for decision 
maker except IT, especially when these 
requests make use of clauses Group By and 
Having; 
 
Or in the dashboards forms corresponding 
to the expected analysis results. 
In SelfStar, the decision maker integrates his 
requirements by himself through a graphic interface and 
this without formalizing them beforehand. 
C. Data-mart: output of SelfStar 
From a data source and analysis needs, SelfStar 
system visualizes a decisional database on which the 
decision maker can apply its queries. The schema of 
Figure3 describe a decisional database allowing the 
decision maker to analyze the number of Orders 
(Orders_Nb 
measure) 
and 
the 
delivered 
quantity 
accumulated (Orders Amount measure) according to 
Products and Dates dimensions. Each dimension is 
associated to a set of organized parameters into 
hierarchies. 
Figure 3.  Data-mart schema 
V. 
PERSONNALIZATION PROCESS 
A. Multidimensional schema design 
The proposed process in SelfStar (Figure 3) has a 
starting point the data source schema (CD) and the 
decision-makers’ requirements (informal). It contains four 
successive steps in which the decision maker will interact 
with 
the 
system 
to 
integrate 
progressively 
his 
requirements. Each step produces a new schema more 
comprehensive than the previous one. The 4th schema 
corresponds to that of the decisional database, i.e. the 
desired result (Figure 3). The decisional schema design is 
performed incrementally. 
First step consists to display a set of candidates facts 
in the intermediate schema number 1 (noted IS1). InIS1, 
the decision maker chooses the fact that he wants to 
analyze with the measures and their aggregations 
functions. 
Second step generates automatically the intermediate 
schema number 2 (IS2); it proposes all possible associated 
dimensions with the selected fact. InIS2, the decision 
maker will be able to indicate dimensions according to 
which they wish to analyze the fact. 
Third step generates an intermediate schema number3 
(IS3) containing the constellation schema (fact(s) + 
dimensions) with all the possible hierarchies. In IS3, the 
decision maker will choose each responding hierarchies to 
their requirements. 
Fourth step produces the multidimensional schema 
data-mart. At this level SelfStar will record the 
personalization metadata which later will allow the 
decision maker to elaborate the newest multidimensional 
379
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

schemas. All algorithms related to the different phases of 
the process are presented in [13]. 
B. Personnalization meta-data 
Industrial experience of our team [14] showed that (1) 
a data source (sales or production BD) contains frequently 
from 30 to 60 objects classes and many links and (2) the 
analyzes carried by the same decision maker are usually 
very similar in terms of facts and dimensions. 
 
 
 
 
According to (1), we consider that the decision maker 
isn't able to choose the fact directly from the conceptual 
source schema because this schema is considered complex 
for any person (except computer scientist). We have 
decided to show for the decision maker a simplified 
presentation of the source (noted IS1) that is extracted 
automatically from the source schema.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  The transformation from data-source and decision makers’ requirements to data-mart schema 
 
The second point noted (2), led us to define a 
personalization mechanism on the IS1; this mechanism can 
extract, from the CD of source, the most significant classes 
for helping the decision maker. 
The simplification of a source is based on the 
extraction of classes which must be analyzed by the 
decision maker (candidates facts). This extraction method 
is based on the personalization technical developed in our 
team and which inspired from the work of [12]. SelfStar 
record the personalization metadata whenever a decision 
maker develops a decisional schema. It is based on the 
scheduling of the candidate facts when the same decision 
maker will design a new multidimensional schema. 
Figure5 presents the algorithm that producing the 
personalization metadata. 
 
Algorithm : PersoWeight 
Input : ES, CW, MS, U     -- Exploitable Schema, Classes Weight, 
Multidimensional Schema and User 
Output: CW                                         --new weight values 
begin 
for i1 to p do                                 -- from each fact from MS 
  s  source(Fi) 
Ps Ps+ Coef    -- increases the class source weight 
for x in Dim(Fi) do 
    s   source (x) 
    Ps  Ps +2 
end for 
end for 
Figure 5.  Generation personalization metadata 
 
VI. 
CASE TOOL 
A. Experimentation 
SelfStar project was implanted in order to experiment 
all the proposed mechanisms. Figure 6 presents the 
software architecture. JAVA was used to develop this 
software. We used JAXP (Java API for XML Processing) 
that is a set of API including the SAX, DOM, XSLT 
(eXtensible Stylesheet Language Transformations) and 
XPath. The set of schemas used by SelfStar are with 
XML. We use JAXP tools to transform them. To view all 
XML 
schemas 
(intermediate 
schemas), 
we 
have 
developed a visualization module. It allows also the 
interaction between the system and the decision maker via 
the interface. This module uses the JGraph library. 
Soon activation, the software demands to the decision 
maker identifier of relational database (source). CD 
source is transformed into an exploitable schema through 
the XSLT API (XSLT generator). The DOM generator 
creates then intermediate schema 1 (IS1) through by 
analyzing exploitable schema and using basic metadata 
(calculated weight). IS1 is displayed and the decision 
maker can choose directly on the screen fact(s) to analyze. 
This process is repeated to integrate choice of dimensions 
and attributes in the following intermediate schemas (IS2 
and IS3). 
Finally, 
the 
multidimensional 
schema 
will 
be 
displayed and personalization metadata are generated. 
They will subsequently be used to guide the decision 
maker in developing new multidimensional schemas. It 
should be noted that during the first analysis of the source, 
only the basic metadata are available. With each new 
380
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

analysis of this source, the metadata is enriched and will 
better define the profile of the decision maker. 
Figure 6.  Software architecture of SelfStar 
This paper does not deal ETL process. But, SelfStar 
has a module for loading data warehouse from sources. 
This module is automatically generated by SelfStar after 
the development of multidimensional schema. 
B. Validation 
To validate our approach and our tool, we used marks 
management application at University of Toulouse. The 
database source is composed of extracted data from the 
management education package (APOGEE [16] available 
in most french universities). We chose three decision 
makers of staff responsible for managing marks and 
awarding degrees. 
The source is a relational database containing training 
descriptions, students and results. Figure 7 shows an 
extract from the schema describing the database source. 
 
 
Figure 7.   CD extract of Database source 
 
We asked three employees of the University, having 
similar activities but independent create their own 
decisional databases using the database sources for 
analysis. It is noted that these decision makers use 
Business Object [17], occasionally. 
 
(1) An official school: analyzes the students’ 
absenteeism in the exams; observes the dates of 
issuance of marks of exams, etc.  
 
(2) A training manager: defines the rate of exam 
success by students, analyzes the evolution of result per 
scholar year, etc. 
 
(3) An academic manager of an academic year: 
examines student grades per subject per teacher 
(average, standard deviation, etc.), analyzes the results 
per subject, etc 
 
After a brief training regarding the using of SelfStar, 
these three decision-makers showed certain affluence to 
quickly design new data-marts and manipulate them with 
Business-Object. The scheduling of the candidate facts 
was realized through the mechanism of personalization. 
 
Figure 8.  Intermedite schema n°1 
 
Figure 9.  Intermedite schema n°2 
 
Figure 10.  Multidimensional schema 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper provided an approach to design a 
multidimensional schema from the data sources schema to 
be analyzed; the decision makers’ requirements are 
integrated progressively throughout the process. This 
approach is original in the measurement that it allows for 
the 
decision 
maker 
to 
design 
progressively 
his 
multidimensional schema without resorting to a database 
specialist (computer scientist). It is distinct clearly from 
the others data-driven, requirement-driven or hybrid-
driven approaches in which the user is not directly 
involved. 
 
381
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

REFERENCES 
[1] 
 F. Ravat and O. Teste, « Personalization and OLAP databases », 
New Trends in Data Warehousing and Data Analysis, vol. 3 , pp. 
1–22, 2009. 
[2] 
 N. Prat, J. Akoka, and I. Comyn-Wattiau, « A UML-based data 
warehouse design method », Decision Support Systems, vol. 42, no 
3, pp. 1449–1473, 2006. 
[3] 
 O. Romero and A. Abelló, « Automatic validation of requirements 
to support multidimensional design », Data & Knowledge 
Engineering, vol. 69, no 9, pp. 917–942, December, 2010. 
[4] 
 R. Kimball, « The data warehouse toolkit : Practical Techniques 
for  Building Dimensional Data Warehouses », John Wiley and 
Sons, ISBN : 0-471-15337-0, 1996. 
[5] 
 D. L. Moody and M. A. R. Kortink, « From enterprise models to 
dimensional models: a methodology for data warehouse and data 
mart design », DMDW’00, Sweden, vol. 5, 2000. 
[6] 
 J. Trujillo, S. Lujan-Mora, and I. Y. Song, « Applying UML and 
XML for designing and interchanging information for data 
warehouses and OLAP applications », Journal of Database 
Management (JDM), vol. 15, no 1, pp. 41–72, 2004. 
[7] 
 P. Giorgini, S. Rizzi, and M. Garzetti, « Goal-oriented requirement 
analysis for data warehouse design », in Proceedings of the 8th 
ACM international workshop on Data warehousing and OLAP, 
2005, pp. 47–56. 
[8] 
 F. Pinet and M. Schneider, « A unified object constraint model for 
designing and implementing multidimensional systems », Journal 
on Data Semantics XIII, pp. 37–71, 2009. 
[9] 
 P. 
Vassiliadis, 
« A 
survey 
of 
Extract–transform–Load 
technology », International Journal of Data Warehousing and 
Mining (IJDWM), vol. 5, no 3, pp. 1–27, 2009. 
[10]  F. Atigui, F. Ravat, O. Teste, and G. Zurfluh, « Using OCL for 
Automatically 
Producing 
Multidimensional 
Models 
and 
ETLProcesses », Data Warehousing and Knowledge Discovery, 
pp. 42–53, September 2012. 
[11]  I. Y. Song, R. Khare, Y. An, S. Lee, S. P. Kim, J. Kim, and Y. S. 
Moon, « SAMSTAR: An automatic tool for generating star 
schemas from an entity-relationship diagram », Conceptual 
Modeling-ER 2008, pp. 522–523, 2008. 
[12]  F. Ravat, O. Teste, R. Tournier, and G. Zurfluh, « Graphical 
querying of multidimensional databases », in Advances in 
Databases and Information Systems, pp. 298–313, 2007. 
[13]  F. Abdelhédi, G. Pujolle, O. Teste, and G. Zurfluh, « Computer-
Aided Data-Mart Design », ICEIS, pp. 239-246, June - 2011. 
[14]  E. Annoni, F. Ravat, O. Teste, and G. Zurfluh, « Towards 
multidimensional requirement design », Data Warehousing and 
Knowledge Discovery, pp. 75–84, 2006. 
[15] « Accueil 
oracle ». 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://docs.oracle.com/cd/B19306_01/server.102/b14200/toc.htm. 
[Accessed: 12/25/2012]. 
[16] « Accueil 
Amue 
- 
Amue ». 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.amue.fr/. [Accessed: 12/25/2012]. 
[17] « SAP France - SAP BusinessObjects - Solutions de Business 
Intelligence (BI) et de gestion de la performance ». [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.sap.com/france/solutions/sapbusinessobjects/index.epx. 
[Accessed: 12/25/2012]. 
 
382
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

