Suggesting Design Method for Performance Evaluation System Based on IoT Data: 
Considering UX
Its Application to Lane Keeping Assistance System 
Hyeji Jang1, Jiyoung Kwahk1, Sung H. Han1, Minseok 
Song1, Dong Gu Choi1, Kyudong Park2, Dohyeon 
Kim1
Department of Industrial Management and Engineering1
Department of Creative IT Engineering2
POSTECH 
Pohang, South Korea 
Email: {wdfokj, kjy, shan, mssong, dgchoi, kdpark, 
kdohyeon}@postech.ac.kr 
Young Deok Won3, In Sub Jeong3
ADAS Performance Development Team3
Hyundai Motor Company3
Namyang, South Korea 
Email: {nicewyd, jis}@hyundai.com 
Abstract— The rapid development of Internet of Things (IoT) 
technology makes it possible to connect various objects among 
each other and to collect sensor data from the objects. 
Connected car, achieved by advanced driver assistance system 
(ADAS), is one of the representative example of IoT 
technology. Since massive amount of IoT data could be 
effectively analyzed with appropriate methods, it is helpful to 
introduce supportive systems for the analysis. This study 
proposes a method to design supportive system for the analysis 
of IoT data considering user experience (UX). The suggested 
method is applied to design the supportive system for lane 
keeping assistance system (LKAS), which is one of the ADAS. 
Keywords-Internet of Things; connected car; user experience; 
system design; advanced driver assistance system; lane keeping 
assistance system 
I.
INTRODUCTION
A.
IoT and Connected Car 
The rapid development of Internet of Things (IoT) 
technology makes it possible for connecting various smart 
objects together through the internet and providing more data 
of interoperability methods for application purpose [1]. 
According to European commission [10], IoT means a 
worldwide network of interconnected objects that is uniquely 
addressable, based on standard communication protocols. 
IoT is rapidly applied to various area, connecting many parts 
of our life. It brings us a new level of convenience by 
connecting physical and virtual objects [2]. 
The connected car is a representative example of IoT. It 
means that vehicles are not part of the connected world, 
rather continuously Internet-connected, generating and 
transmitting data, which can be helpfully integrated into 
applications [4]. For example, dashboard application is 
linked to social media services and sensors attached in cars 
help drivers in variety of ways for car maintenance. With the 
growing attention to IoT, scale of the connected car market 
already exceeds 25.2 billion dollars in 2014 [2]. 
The vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) network is essential to 
realize the connected car. Advanced driver assistance system 
(ADAS) supports the V2V network with technologies, such 
as vision/camera systems and sensor technology [3]. For this 
reason, research of ADAS has actively been proceeded. 
B.
Data Colleced from IoT 
Enormous amount of data is easily and quickly collected 
from various sensors, which are attached on a number of IoT 
objects. For example, there are quantified-self sensors 
(sensors that measure the personal biometrics of individuals 
like heart rate) and automotive sensors (sensors that measure 
quantitative automotive performance metrics like speed and 
braking activity) [4] attached in vehicles. These kinds of 
sensors collect data related with operations and status of car 
in real time. 
The result of analyzing IoT data may be useful in various 
ways. The effort to analyze the IoT data is easily found in the 
healthcare field. In fact, a growing number of researches 
have been conducted using the IoT data in this field [11]. 
However, because the IoT data is collected in real time, its 
amount is significantly large. Supportive tools can be helpful 
to go through this process. Designers should provide decent 
user experience and enhance usefulness by considering UX 
when they design this kind of tools. Therefore, this study 
suggests design method for ADAS performance evaluation 
system based on the IoT data collected from connected car. 
In addition, this study aims to apply the suggested method on 
LKAS performance evaluation system. 
In Section 2, theoretical points of whole process and 
techniques used to design the system from UX point of view 
are 
introduced. 
Section 
2 
also 
includes 
detailed 
implementation method and advantages of using each 
technique. Suggested system design method was applied to 
make performance evaluation system for lane keeping 
assistance system (LKAS). Section 3 shows application 
process and practical result. 
283
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II.
METHOD
This study suggests six main steps for system designs 
from writing out user persona to creating key screen designs. 
This process needs to be iterated several times to derive more 
systematic and accurate system designs. Enough iterations of 
the process reduce any potential risks of the system and 
allow the actual software development more smoothly. 
The main objective of the system designer is to derive 
proper key screens. To design persuasive key screens, 
systematic analysis on system users has to be preceded. This 
study deals from creating user persona, which is to reflect 
user analysis on the system, to developing information 
architecture (Figure 1). This section provides detailed 
explanations on the five steps for system designs. 
A.
User Persona 
User centered design is significantly important for 
efficient system design. It considers the requirements of 
users to develop the system instead of simply considering 
technical requirements. For this purpose, designers need to 
identify and analyze the main users of the system. The actual 
observation data of how users behave provides valuable 
information to the designers [5]. User persona is a method 
for this purpose. According to Cooper and Reimann [6], user 
persona is a collection of realistic and representative 
information on users. That information is collected for the 
purpose of to catch the significant aspects of user behavior 
for designers. 
The target for the user persona is not just limited to 
current users of the products and services. It includes all the 
users who has potentials to change any of the tasks of the 
products and services. The user persona can be developed by 
asking questions like “what the users do”, “what frustrates 
them”, “what makes them satisfied” and more [7]. Those 
questions mainly consider the role and main tasks of users 
related with the system, the characteristics of the tasks, and 
needs and pain points of current tasks. Preparing user 
persona allows to determine interaction characteristics like 
navigation scheme and the visual designs [7]. 
Stakeholder relationship, the relationship between users 
analyzed by user persona, can be created in this step. It 
shows the products, services, and the tasks of users. It allows 
how the products and services influence the relationship 
among users. In addition, it is able to find additional 
opportunities of utilize the system, which have not been 
thought of in the early stages of system design. These 
processes of user persona can derive the final outputs that 
can be provided to users. 
B.
User Journey Map 
User journey map shows the behavior of the system users 
[8]. All the user tasks, considering the user persona which 
has been developed in the previous stage, can be illustrated 
as a diagram. User journey map has two different types, 
current process and expected process with the system. First, 
the current process shows the flow of user tasks before 
introducing the new system. It allows how users interact 
currently on the flow of tasks. Therefore, it easily figures out 
any problems in the current flow of the tasks. For example, 
overwhelming workload applied on a certain user can be 
found and no cooperation or communication occurred 
between users with the current process can be recognized. 
Second, the expected process with the system shows the flow 
of user tasks after introducing the new system. Comparing 
the two user journey maps helps to understand the flow of 
user tasks as well as what has been improved. 
C.
User Scenario 
User scenario is a flow of user tasks on how the system 
can be effectively and valuably utilized. With user scenario, 
users can predict when the system can be helpfully utilized. 
Among different scenarios, it is able to set the priority of the 
scenario and select the most frequently usable scenario. 
Several methods can be applied when listing the scenario. 
For example, designers can conduct interviews asking about 
user tasks on potential type of references on features of 
similar systems. Those methods can help designers to 
determine the deepness of the user scenario that is covered 
by the system. The user scenario states functions that can 
actually be implemented, as well as functions that will be 
implemented in future. The system becomes more powerful 
by preparing the case of the system’s expansion, considering 
the potential functions to be implemented. The usage 
frequency or checking the importance of each scenario can 
be used as a reference to set up the concept of system. 
D.
Define Key UX Concept 
The type of UX concepts that would be mainly 
considered needs to be concerned when developing the 
system. It is important to define the key UX concepts since 
the characteristics of the system can be changed on which 
UX concept is used. Clarity, digestibility, familiarity are the 
examples of UX principles [9]. This step builds the base for 
the entire structure of the system by exploring proper UX 
concepts that well represent the characteristics and objective 
of the system. 
Figure 1. Whole process of making system 
284
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

E.
Information Architecture (IA) 
Information Architecture (IA) is a flow of information 
reflected upon the user scenario and system UX concept. UX 
and IA are closely connected. By forming IA, the necessary 
information for establishing the system can be identified. 
The proper IA takes the task flow in consideration and 
makes the flow smoother. In addition, the information can be 
classified with clear classifiers. In short, a good IA helps 
users to understand their surroundings and find what they are 
looking for [12]. The actual system is built based on IA. The 
IA needs to consider all the steps mentioned in the previous 
stage. 
III.
APPLY TO LKAS PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SYSTEM
This study applies the introduced method for system 
designing on LKAS performance evaluation system. LKAS 
is one of the key features of ADAS in connected-car. LKAS 
supports car to keep the lane by recognizing the lane with 
camera and applying torques on steering. Data collected 
from several sensors attached on the connected-car can be 
utilized to evaluate the performance of LKAS. The system 
suggested by this study can help as a reference in evaluating 
the ADAS for connected-cars. 
A.
System Characteristic 
The system introduced in this study differs from the 
general performance evaluating system. The general IoT data 
analysis system has two separate stages, data collection stage 
and data analysis stage. However, the system in this study 
performs the two stages simultaneously. Therefore, there are 
strong requirements for short evaluation time of the system 
and no additional analysis for users. The collected data are 
vehicle driving information including vehicle velocity, 
steering angle, torque applied, etc. Since large amount of 
data are collected in very short period of time pre-processing 
is 
necessary. 
The 
pre-processing 
includes 
selecting 
significant factors and filtering out unnecessary data. 
B.
User Persona 
It is expected that there are four types of system users in 
LKAS evaluating system. First, performance evaluator is the 
user who actually evaluates the performance of LKAS and 
makes decisions about LKAS tuning. The mission of this 
evaluator is to optimize the performance of LKAS through 
driving tests. They have enough understanding of LKAS 
operating principles and of collected data. The most 
important paint point is evaluating the driving test results 
subjectively. In other words, all the decisions are made based 
upon evaluator’s personal thoughts. It causes many problems 
when reporting the result to others. In addition, because of 
the absence of the objective evaluation criteria, the 
evaluation process depends on subjective feeling rather than 
systematic and quantitative approach. As a result, the 
reliability of the reporting will decrease. 
The second user is cooperator, who is in charge of 
controlling LKAS parameters. They control the parameter 
related to LKAS based on the evaluation results of the 
evaluator. Cooperator also have great knowledge of LKAS 
operating principles and of collected data as well as the 
behavior of vehicles according to the change in LKAS 
parameters. The main pain point for the cooperator is that 
they have to control the parameters with only subjective 
evaluation results. 
The third and fourth system users are manager and 
advanced developer, respectively. Manager provides a big 
Figure 3. Current user journey map (left) and expected user journey map (right) 
Figure 2. Stakeholder relationship 
285
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

outline of LKAS to other users. The advanced developer 
deals with developing high-performance LKAS algorithms. 
They have similar pain points like the cooperator that they 
are not able to identify objective results of LKAS 
performance. It makes difficult for advanced developers to 
clearly set the direction that they have to pursue. 
The stakeholder relationship can be drawn from the 
above user persona (Figure 2). It shows the work relationship 
among users and how the system helps the current workflow. 
C.
User Journey Map 
Figure 3 shows the task flow of LKAS optimization 
process. The picture on the left side is current process and 
right side is expected process with the system. These journey 
maps are derived from the user persona. We can easily see 
the difference between task flows. In current journey map, 
because there is no objective results of the evaluation, 
algorithm development and adjustment of LKAS are in 
separate procedures. With the expected process with the 
system, these separated processes can be integrated as a 
single process. It also improves communication among the 
users. By comparing the two journey maps, it can be easily 
identified that the problems are solved with the introduced 
system. 
D.
User Scenario 
Considering characteristics of each scenario, three phases 
are suggested in this study (Figure 4). Phase 1 is composed 
of scenarios that is essential to the system. Phase 2 covers 
the scenarios achieved in advanced version. Scenarios with 
highly advanced function are contained in phase 3. Each 
scenario is assigned by considering the possibilities to be 
implemented, user requirement, etc. 
E.
Define Key UX Concept 
The term ‘simplicity’ and ‘glanceable’ are chosen as key 
UX concepts for the system, considering characteristics of 
the system and user scenarios. ‘Simplicity’ means the design 
of the system should be simple and easy for users. It can be 
achieved with the simple screen construction and navigation. 
In addition, the system has to provide proper shortcuts by 
figuring out the tasks that takes long period of time. 
Similarly, ‘glanceable’ means that the design which is shown 
on the screen should be quickly understood by users without 
particular attentions.  
F.
Information Architecture (IA) 
IA for the system is developed by reflecting the steps 
shown in Figure 5. We distinguish the background 
information and future functions. Background information is 
the information that has to be considered on the back-side of 
the system. Future function is the information that is 
achieved in the advanced version. System developers can 
refer this IA when they actually implement the system. 
IV.
CONCLUSION
This study suggests the method to consider UX when we 
design the performance evaluation system based on the data 
collected from IoT. The introduced method is applied to 
LKAS, one of the ADAS. With the suggested method, 
designers can systemically reflect the requirement of the user 
from user’s aspect. In addition, it helps the advancement of 
the system in the future by considering advanced version. It 
will be applied to various systems for analyzing enormous 
data collected from connected products and services. 
Although only researcher’s analysis is considered in this 
study, in actual situation, designers are able to use various 
methods to reflect user’s needs. By considering user’s 
behaviors, characteristics, pain points and requirements, it is 
expected that designers can provide better UX. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported by Hyundai-NGV. 
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Xu et al., “Ubiquitous data accessing method in IoT-based 
information system for emergency medical services,” IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 
1578-1586, 2014. 
[2]
J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, 
"Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, 
and future directions," Future generation computer systems, 
vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 1645-1660, 2013. 
[3]
Microsemi, Introduction to ADAS and Secure Connected Car, 
WP0199 White Paper, 2015 
Figure 4. User scenario with three phases 
Figure 5. Information architecture 
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[4]
M. Swan, “Connected car: quantified self becomes quantified 
car,” Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, vol. 4, no. 1, 
pp. 2-29, 2015 
[5]
P. T. A. Junior, and L. V. L. Filgueiras, “User modeling with 
personas,” In Proceedings of the 2005 Latin American 
conference on Human-computer interaction October, 2005, 
pp. 277-282, ACM. 
[6]
A. Cooper, and R. M. Reimann, About Face 2.0 The 
Essentials of Interaction Design. John Wiley & Sons. 2nd 
edition, 2003. 
[7]
K. Goodwin, Perfecting Your Personas. Cooper Interaction 
Design. Cooper, San Francisco, CA, 2004, available from 
Internet, 2005. 
[8]
A. Richardson, “Using customer journey maps to improve 
customer experience,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 15, no. 
1, 2010. 
[9]
UX think. Using Scenarios. [Online]. Available from: 
https://uxthink.wordpress.com/2010/11/30/using_scenarios/ 
2017.01.29 
[10] European Commission, “Internet of things in 2020 road map 
for the future,” Working Group RFID of the ETP EPOSS, 
Tech. Rep., Available from: http://ec.europa.eu/information 
society 2017.01.28 
[11] C. Perera, A. Zaslavsky, P. Christen, and D. Georgakopoulos, 
“Context aware computing for the internet of things: A 
survey”, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16, 
no. 1, pp. 414-454, 2014. 
[12] The information architecture institute. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.iainstitute.org/what-is-ia 2017.01.29 
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

