A Trial of Prevention of Physical and Social Frailty for Older People
via Chatting Bot Installation on Moving Stall
Yoko Nishihara
Col. of Inf. Sci. and Eng.
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
email: nisihara@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp
Junjie Shan
Ritsumeikan Global Innovation Research Org.
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
email: shan@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp
Yihong Han
Dept. of Inf. Sci. and Eng.
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
email: is0387ps@ed.ritsumei.ac.jp
Abstract—This research uses information science approach for
preventing the physical and social frailty of older people living
in an aging community with a low birthrate. In this study, we
hypothesize that older peoples’ physical activity and sociable
communication will increase if they have more interactions with
others and the outside environment. We believe that by raising
their interest in the surrounding daily activities could help
improve their interaction with the outside society. This study is
conducted in Yogo Town in Shiga Prefecture, Japan as an area of
an aging community with a low birthrate. Yogo Town provides
a moving stall for older people to assist them in purchasing
daily necessities. We install a chatting bot in the moving stall to
attract older people to visit it. If older people visit the moving
stall more, their physical frailty could be prevented through
these increased physical activities. If older people could interact
and communicate more with others through the enjoyment of
conversations and games with the chatting bot, their social frailty
also has the chance to improve. This paper describes the issues
discussed in this study, introduces a developed chatting bot, and
reports on plans for future experiments.
Keywords-frailty prevention; physical and social frailty; chatting-
bot; elderly care
I. INTRODUCTION
Japan is facing an aging society with a low birthrate.
People request to prevent older people’s frailty [1]. Frailty
is a condition in which the mind and body weaken due to
aging. There are three types of frailty; (1) physical frailty,
(2) social frailty, and (3) cognitive frailty. To reduce the
progression of frailty, older people need to raise motivation of
frailty prevention through exercises [2]. However, it is difﬁcult
for them to maintain awareness continuously because they
have physical constraints and low communication with their
neighbor, especially for those older people who live away from
urban areas. It is desirable to increase the amount of physical
activity and sociable communication. In this paper, we use an
approach of information science to try to increase the intention
of older people’s physical activity and sociable communication
to help them prevent frailty indirectly.
A. Targeted Field
This study is conducted in Yogo Town in Shiga Prefecture in
Japan as an area of an aging community with a low birthrate.
The percentage of residents aged 65 years and older is 43.1%,
and the rate of them aged 80 years and more senior is 18.5%
(as of December 1st, 2021). In the last few years, the problem
of frailty has become more severe due to Covid-19 infection
control. The area is facing an urgent need to understand the
current situation regarding the physical and mental health of
older people and to take measures to address this issue.
Yogo Town provides a moving stall for older people to assist
them in purchasing daily necessities. Though the residents in
the town use automobiles every day, the older people have
returned their driving licenses due to their low physical and
cognitive ability. Therefore, the moving stall is indispensable
for their lives. The moving stall carries foods and daily
necessities in the back and goes to community meeting spaces
and doorsteps of individuals. The older people can conduct a
walking exercise on their way to the moving stall and back.
They can also conduct conversations with others around the
moving stall. A saleslady actively talks to the older people
coming to the moving stall. She also takes a role in providing
daily attention and care for the community.
B. Our Approach for Frailty Prevention
We hypothesize that physical activity and sociable commu-
nication will increase if older people have more interactions
with others and the outside environment. We believe that by
raising their interest in the surrounding daily activities could
help improve their interaction with the outside society. To
achieve the above, we install a chatting bot in the moving stall.
Chatting bots have been used in counseling [3], coaching [4],
and conversations with people [5]. However, there is few case
of chatting bot used for prevention the physical and social
frailty. The chatting bot has functions of conversation and
playing a game. We hope that older people could be interested
in the chatting bot. If they visit the chatting bot, their physical
activity will increase, which prevents their physical frailty. If
they enjoy conversations with a chatting bot, their sociable
communication will also increase, which prevents their social
frailty. This study is approved by The Ritsumeikan University
Ethics Review Committee for Medical and Health Research
Involving Human Subjects.
II. PROPOSED METHOD
This section describes an interaction pattern and a developed
chatting bot.
A. Interaction Pattern between Chatting-bot and Older People
Figure 1 illustrates the interaction pattern between our
chatting bot and older people. The chatting bot changes its
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. Interaction pattern between our chatting bot and older people.
behavior according to the distance from older people to attract
them closer to the chatting bot. If the older person is far from
the chatting bot, he says a greeting to draw their attention. If
they approach the chatting bot, he will announce new items
and invites them to play a game with him. If the person is
close to the chatting bot, he welcomes to enjoy the game.
B. Developed Chatting-bot
Figure 2 shows the appearance and construction of the
chatting bot. The chatting bot mainly has two functional
components: (a) human and object detection by a camera and
(b) a speech function using a pair of speakers.
C. Human and Object Detection
For human and object detection, the chatting bot uses a
camera to capture real-time frames. YOLO is used for human
and object detection. For human detection, the chatting bot
will ﬁrst detect whether a person is in the frame. If a human
is found, the chatting bot will estimate the distance from the
human to determine whether the older person is far from or
close to him. The estimation result is used for the interaction
pattern’s selection.
In object detection, the chatting bot recognizes the barcode
of items to judge whether they are newly listed. A list ﬁle
is prepared to store the information of the barcode and a the
item’s name. If a recognized barcode is included in the list,
the item is judged as a listed new good. If not, the item will
be judged as a former product. The judgment result will be
used for speech response selection.
D. Speech according to Detection Result
The chatting bot gives speech responsens depending on the
human and object detection result. There are two situations
of human detection results; older people are far from the
chatting bot or close to it. If the older people are far from
the chatting bot, the chatting bot gives speeches designed to
attract their attention. For example, “Hello, please come here,”
and “Welcome to our shop” are given with a synthesized voice.
In contrast, if they are close to the chatting bot, the chatting
Figure 2. Inside of a moving stall (left). Foods and daily necessities are
sold. Developed chatting bot as a stuffed frog (right).
bot gives speeches to prompt new items and invites playing
a game. For example, “New goods are coming” and “Please
ﬁnd it” would be given with a synthesized voice.
There are two results of the selected items’ detection: a
newly listed product or a former product. If the selected good
is a new one, the chatting bot gives a speech “That is correct.
The good is a new one called (good’s name).” Conversely, if
the selected good is not a new one, the chatting bot gives a
speech “That is not correct. Please ﬁnd it again.”
III. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper proposes an installation of a chatting bot on a
moving stall to prevent the physical and social frailty of older
people living in an aging community with a low birthrate. The
chatting bot attempts to interact and make conversations with
older people. If older people are interested in the chatting bot,
the chance of physical exercises and sociable communication
will increase, which prevents physical and social frailty.
We ask the residents in Yogo Town (Shiga, Japan) to join the
experiments with the chatting bot. We will survey the effect of
the installation of the chatting bot for the prevention of frailty.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by staffs of Yogo area in Japan.
We show our best appreciate. This research is partly supported
by Ritsumeikan Global Innovation Research Organization and
JSPS KAKENHI (22K03041).
REFERENCES
[1] X. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Tian, Q.Cheng, Y. Gao, and M. Gao, Research
Progress on the Intelligent Health Management of the Cognitive Frailty
of the Elderly. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Medicine Sciences, pp.53-57, 2021.
[2] Z. S´aenz-de-Urturi and O. C. Santos, User Modelling in Exergames for
Frail Older Adults. In Adjunct Publication of the 26th Conference on
User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization, pp.83-86, 2018.
[3] N. Suresh, N. Mukabe, V. Hashiyana, A. Limbo, and A. Hauwanga,
Career Counseling Chatbot on Facebook Messenger using AI. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Data Science, Machine
Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp.65-73, 2022.
[4] J. Casas, E. Mugellini, and O. A. Khaled, Food Diary Coaching Chatbot.
In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM International Joint Conference and
2018 International Symposium on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
and Wearable Computers, pp.1676-1680, 2018.
[5] M. E. Kamali, L. Angelini, D. Lalanne, O. A. Khaled, and E. Mugellini,
Multimodal Conversational Agent for Older Adults’ Behavioral Change.
In Companion Publication of the 2020 International Conference on
Multimodal Interaction, pp.270-274, 2021.
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

