Temporal Aspects of Human-machine Interaction 
in the Perception of Visual Information 
Igor Petukhov 
Dept. of Radio Engineering 
Mari State Technical University, MarSTU 
Yoshkar-Ola, Russia 
e-mail: laboratory502@rambler.ru 
 
 
Abstract—The vision system is one of the major sensory 
systems in the process of human-machine interaction. To 
improve the quality of interaction it is necessary to evaluate 
optimal parameters for the speed of perception and volume of 
visual information. New methods of evaluating the time of 
visual perception as well as the time of recovery and lability of 
the vision system are elaborated determining the inertia of the 
vision system and its ability to perceive visual information. 
New data on the temporal parameters of visual information 
processing are obtained through experimental research. The 
inertia of visual perception is ascertained to depend on the 
operator’s fatigue in the working process.  
Keywords-human-machine interaction; visual perception; 
inertia 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The problem of providing human-machine interaction is 
considered to be relevant and important. The human factor is 
responsible for more than 70% of all industrial and traffic 
accidents [1]. The reason for this is the fact that a human’s  
professional activity is becoming more and more complex. 
As a result, the load on the perceiving, identifying and 
decision making systems of a person is becoming 
increasingly heavy. 
A mismatch between the information load and the 
capacities of human perception results in early fatigue of a 
human operator and errors in his/her work. 
Human errors are caused by many factors, poor human-
computer interface (HCI), amount of operator’s workload, 
his/her experience, shift-fatigue, etc. being among them [2, 
3]. 
The most badly influenced is vision system providing 
perception of 80% of all the information actively involved in 
professional activity. 
Temporal parameters of the vision system stipulate the 
requirements for HCI organization: the speed of information 
presentation, color, shape and size of objects and their 
complexity [4, 5]. 
The fatigue of an operator, the number of errors and labor 
productivity depend on the parameters of an HCI [6]. 
The development of HCIs adaptively configured to user, 
depending on the degree of his/her fatigue and difficulty of 
the tasks performed is of current interest. 
 All this requires knowledge on the mechanisms of visual 
information processing, the temporal dynamics of visual 
perception indicators. 
Thus, the study of information interaction between a 
human operator and a technical system, aiming at 
determining the optimal modes of their operation, is of 
paramount importance. 
The objective of the current work is to obtain new data 
on the processes of perceiving and processing visual 
information. 
In this paper, a new method of recovery time 
determining, method of visual perception time evaluation 
and method of the vision system lability evaluation are 
developed. The results of modeling and new data on the 
temporal parameters of visual information processing are 
obtained. 
II. 
APPROACHES TO RELIABILITY CONTROL 
According to the analysis carried out, enhancing 
reliability of man-machine systems requires taking two basic 
approaches: 
 
Adapting the structure of information flow and 
interface parameters to the needs of an individual 
human operator [7]. 
 
Adapting the user to a computerized system [8]. 
There is a progress in the achievement of certain quality 
indicators in both approaches. 
Adaptive interfaces are aimed at changing and optimizing 
themselves automatically, depending on the workload of the 
operator and dynamically changing characteristics of the 
medium [9]. 
It is known that using intellectual adaptive interfaces 
allows considerably reducing the time expenses of the 
operator and the volume of his/her work, helping to make   
correct decisions [10]. 
Adaptation of the interface parameters is carried out 
through the automatic correction of the user errors [11], 
changes in the level of complexity of the interface [12], 
adaptation to the intensity of information exchange between 
the user and the system, customization of the technical 
system to the aims and intentions of the user [13-15], etc. 
Simplification of information blocks is one of perspective 
methods of the organization of modern user interfaces [16]. 
The methods and means of adapting a user to the system 
are mainly based on the user study and training. To organize 
43
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

adaptation of the user to the system it is necessary to take 
into account his/her physiological characteristics, behavior 
and physical state, for which testing (diagnosis) of the user to 
form his/her psycho-dynamic portrait is implemented [17]. 
It should be noted that both methods are based on the 
data about the processes of information perception and 
processing by a human. 
There is a large number of methods for studying the 
processes of information perception such as the critical 
flicker frequency (CFF) [18], the time of visual identification 
[19, 20], the visual sensation [21] and etc. obtained by 
numerous experimental data on the temporal aspects of 
processing. 
At the same time, the data obtained by different 
researchers are not systematic by nature and sometimes 
contradictory. 
This brings about the development of new highly 
accurate and reliable methods and systematization of 
methodological base. 
 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODS 
 The information used by the operator strongly differs by 
complexity, the form of representation and information 
content. 
To determine potential ability of perception it is 
necessary to use the information being the simplest for 
perception. This provides the maximum speed of information 
processing. 
Such condition is satisfied by light pulses of rectangular 
shape of the "yes-no" type. 
Besides, this method of evaluation of the critical flicker 
frequency is well known in the studying of the processes of 
visual perception [18]. 
Critical flicker frequency is the frequency of light 
flashings per second at which the subjective flicker fusion 
takes place. 
The disadvantage of this method is its low accuracy, low 
reliability of measurement results. 
The research results of the CFF are achieved at 
successive masking caused by a rhythmic sequence of light 
pulses, which hinders visual information processing. 
A number of new research methods into the visual 
perception time aspects based on the CFF method has been 
worked out. 
 
A. The method of recovery time determining 
 
Recovery time (RT) of the visual system is the time 
during which the vision system is not able to accept a new 
flow of information. It is the time interval between the first 
and the second light pulses during which the impulses are 
perceived separately. 
To determine the recovery time a human is supposed to 
be exposed to a sequence of pairs of light pulses of fixed 
duration τimp (Fig. 1). 
The pause between light pulses tPI is reduced to critical 
value tcr at which the fusion of light pulses in a pair is 
observed (Fig. 2). 
 
 
Figure 1.  The time diagram of sequence of pair light impulses 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Changing the length of the pause diagram. 
 
The pause at this point is taken equal to the recovery time 
of the vision system. 
To shorten the measurement time at intervals Т0 – Т4  the 
change of the pause length occurs continuously at different 
speeds. To enhance the accuracy at the final stage (interval 
T5 – Т7) the change of the pause length occurs discretely 
with a step of 0.1 ms. 
It is known that at light pulse duration of 40-50 ms the 
processes of neurons receptive fields restructuring in the 
vision system terminate. Therefore, the duration of light 
pulses τimp is chosen to be 50 ms not to disrupt the process of 
visual perception. 
It is also known that a consistent visual masking is 
observed at time intervals less than 800 ms. Therefore, the 
time interval between pairs of light pulses T is equal to 1 sec. 
As the operator works with visual information of various 
colors, it is meaningful to carry out research of vision system 
restoration time on several colors. 
The measurement technique will be modified as follows 
(Fig. 3). 
After determining the recovery time on one of the colors 
tcr 1 (Т7), the pause between the paired light pulses is 
increased by a random value. Then the color of the light 
pulses is changed, and the process of evaluating the recovery 
time is repeated. The duration of the pause varies discretely 
with a step of 0.1 ms. 
 
44
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
Figure 3.  Changing the length of the pause with different colors diagram. 
When using light pulses of different colors the process of 
measuring on the interval Т7 – Т12 is repeated as many times 
as necessary. 
 
B. The method of visual perception time evaluation   
 
Time of visual perception (TVP) is an integral parameter 
of visual perception inertia. TVP is the period from the start 
of a short exposure test stimulus to the inclusion of a 
masking stimulus, when the latter cannot interfere with the 
test stimulus comprehension. 
The time for visual information processing is known to 
depend on the exposure time of test stimulus. 
The advantage of the method for determining TVP 
consists in the fact that it takes into account the duration of 
the light stimulus exposure. 
To define TVP it is offered to use the method of visual 
system restoration time evaluation. Similarly, a human is 
exposed to a sequence of paired light pulses, and the duration 
of a pause at which light pulses in a pair fuse is evaluated. 
TVP is accepted equal to the sum of the pulse τimp and the 
pause tcr duration at the time of light pulses fusion. 
The method of determining TVP technique is similar to 
the recovery time evaluation method described above. 
 
С.   The method of the vision system lability evaluation 
 
The lability of the vision system is an integral value of 
the lability of the central nervous system and changes in 
functional status of a human as a whole. 
Lability characterizes the ability of the nervous system to 
react to excitation in exact conformity with the rhythm of 
stimulation. 
The determination of lability is also suggested to be 
carried out, basing on the method of visual perception time 
evaluation. 
To define the lability of a vision system the examinee is 
exposed to paired light pulses of fixed duration. In each 
series of experiments the duration of light pulses is different 
and equals 110, 90, 70, 50, 30, 10, 5 and 1 ms. 
At each duration of light pulses a pause between light 
pulses in a pair at which impulses fuse is evaluated. 
The method of a pause evaluation is shown in Fig. 4. 
For each duration of light pulses TVP is calculated and a 
graph of TVP is built based on the duration of the light pulse, 
evaluating the minimum functions. 
The lability of a human vision system is taken equal to 
the value of the repetition frequency of light pulses at the 
minimum point of Hz function: 
F=1/( τimp+tcr) 
τimp  – duration of the light pulse in seconds; tcr – pause 
length between the light pulses during which the light pulses 
fuse. 
 
Figure 4.  Changing the length of the pause diagram. 
 
IV. 
MODEL OF THE VISION SYSTEM 
 
As the analysis of literature shows, there is a great 
number of vision system and its subsystems models. 
Our task was to develop a model that can be used for the 
methods elaborated and can explain the differences in 
temporal dynamics at the perception of light stimuli of 
different colors. The structural model based on the data about 
the vision system structure is presented in Fig. 5. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  
Scheme of the visual system, PC - photoreceptor 
cell, BC - bipolar cells, HC - horizontal cells, AC - amacrine cells, 
GC - ganglion cells, LGN - lateral geniculate nucleus, VC - visual 
cortex, VS – visual system. 
45
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

This model considers division on rods and cones paths of 
perception and on-, off-channels. 
This agrees with the data obtained by T. Gollisch & M. 
Meister, 2008 [22], that for adequate simulation of the vision 
system it is necessary to consider the parallel ON- OFF 
channels. 
For mathematical modeling the well-known transfer 
functions of neurons and retinal neurons were used. 
The results of modeling the perception of paired light 
pulses of 10 ms are shown in Fig. 6. 
The dependence of visual perception on the pulse 
duration is shown in Fig. 7. 
Here the point on the graph with duration of 10 ms 
corresponds to the lability of the visual system. 
 
 
Figure 6.  
Results of modeling the perception of paired light 
pulses of 10 ms; а) timing diagram of the two input pulses of 10 ms, 
separated by a pause of 40 ms; b) timing diagram of the output pulses 
model presented in Fig. 6 a; c) timing diagram of the two input pulses 
of 10 ms, separated by a pause of 35 ms; d) timing diagram of the 
output model to pulses presented in Fig. 6 c. 
 
Figure 7.  Dependence of visual perception on the pulse duration diagram. 
 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Experimental research was conducted in a group of 30 
operators. The time of vision system restoration, the time of 
visual perception and lability were evaluated, basing on the 
methods mentioned above. The source of light pulses was 
LED of yellow color.  
The experimental results are presented in the table below. 
 
TABLE I.    
№ 
Estimates of the temporal parameters 
Value of time parameter 
Individual 
values 
Median for 
the group 
1 
Recovery time 
12,7 … 37,9 ms 
22,9 мс 
2 
Time of visual perception 
62,7 … 87,9 ms. 
72,9 мс 
3 
Lability of the visual system 
11,1 … 24,6 Hz. 
19,4 Гц 
 
The data concerning the time of restoration and the time 
of visual perception as a whole correlate with the data from 
other researchers. The accuracy of the methods developed 
above is 18-25% higher in comparison with the methods 
known. 
The data on lability of visual system coincide with the 
data received by means of electrophysiological methods and 
do not coincide with the data received by means of the CFF 
method. 
In the method described above we eliminate masking 
effect obtained during the perception of paired light pulses. 
This explains the difference in the data obtained from those 
obtained by the CFF method. 
The accuracy of the method described above is 17-38 %  
higher than of the CFF method. 
The main advantage of the methods developed is their 
simplicity; they provide an opportunity to evaluate visual 
exhaustion. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Thus, we have developed new methods of studying 
temporal aspects of human-computer interaction in the 
perception of visual information. 
All the methods developed are protected by Russian 
patents for inventions. 
We developed the model of visual perception; established 
the dependence of time of visual perception on the duration 
of impulses. 
Separation on rod and cone paths allows simulating the 
change of light and the spectrum of light pulses. This is 
determined by the fact that the rods are most sensitive to blue 
color and the cones are most sensitive to yellow one. In this 
RGB triplet and theme map of the ganglion cell were 
ignored. 
We obtained new data about the time of restoration, the 
time of visual perception and lability of a vision system. 
The data are consistent with the simulation data, which 
confirms the adequacy of the model. 
46
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

The results obtained can be used to develop human-
focused communication devices, displays as well. They will 
allow to choose characteristics of video terminal devices so 
that the maximum consistency of a video display device and 
a vision system be achieved. 
It will also be possible to raise the exchange intensity in 
the "display-person" system, to increase the reliability of data 
communication, and to reduce the negative influence of a 
video terminal on a vision system. 
The results of the work can be used to develop human 
centered HCIs, as well as adaptive HCIs taking into account 
the peculiarities of visual perception and their change at 
shift-fatigue of an operator. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research results reflected in the paper are obtained 
with grant support under the analytical departmental target 
program «Development of scientific potential of the higher 
school (2009-2010)» № 2.1.2/4841"Methodical, algorithmic 
and soft-technical maintenance of research of time aspects of 
touch perception of the person-operator» and Russian 
Foundation for Basic Research № 10-08-97019. 
Special thanks to Dr. V. Rozhentsov for collaborative 
research. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Zhang, V.L. Patel, T. Shortliffe, M. Freed, and R. Remington,  
"The nature of human error: An emerging interdisciplinary 
perspective",  Proceedings of the 22-th Annual Conference of the 
Cognitive Science Soceity (CogSci2000), Institute for Research in 
Cognitive Science University of Pennsylvani, USA. 2000,  date 
accessed 
23/12/10, 
http://acad88.sahs.uth.tmc.edu/research/ 
publications/human%20error.doc.  
[2] C.P. Shelton, "Human Interface/Human Error", Report, Carnegie 
Mellon 
University, 
Feb. 
1999, 
date 
accessed 
23/12/10,  
http://www.ece.cmu.edu/~koopman/des_s99/human.  
[3] A. Kumar and P.K. Sinha, "Human Error Control in Railways", 
Jordan Journal of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, vol. 2, No 
4, December, 2008, ISSN 1995-6665, pp. 183 - 190. 
[4] G.D.  Abowd, "Formal Aspects of Human-Computer  Interaction", 
Doctoral Dissertation, Univ. of Oxford, UK, June 1991, 232 p. 
[5] L.C. Begosso and L.V. Filgueiras, "Human error simulation as an aid 
to HCI design for critical systems",  Proceedings of the VII Brazilian 
symposium on Human factors in computing systems (IHC '06), pp. 
120-127,  doi:10.1145/1298023.1298040. 
[6] F.A. Schreiber,  "A Model for the Human Computer Interface 
Evaluation in Safety Critical Computer Applications", Proceedings of 
the IEEE International Conference and Workshop: Engineering of 
Computer-Based Systems, March 1998, Jerusalem, Israel, pp. 178-
182. 
[7] M. Jipp, E. Badreddin,  C.Abkai, and J.Hesser, "Individual Ability-
based System Configuration. Cognitive Profiling with Bayesian 
Networks", Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference: 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC 2008), Oct. 2008, pp. 3359 – 
3364, doi:10.1109/ICSMC.2008.4811816. 
[8] A.Yu. Burov, "Psychophysiological features of adaptation to stress 
and risk assessment at operator's work",  Proceedings of the 18th 
Digital Avionics Systems Conference, 1999, vol. 2, pp. 6.D.6-1 –  
6.D.6-4, doi:10.1109/DASC.1999.821983. 
[9] J.D.Cress, L.J.Hettinger, W.T. Nelson, and M.W. Haas, “An approach 
to developing adaptive interface technology for advanced airborne 
crew stations”, Dayton Section Symposium, 1997., The 14th Annual 
AESS/IEEE. 1997. - Fairborn, OH , USA, pp. 5-10, doi:10.1109/ 
DAYTON.1997.595089. 
[10] M.Hou and R.D. Kobierski, “Intelligent adaptive interfaces: 
Summary report on design, development, and evaluation of intelligent 
adaptive interfaces for the control of multiple UAVs from an airborne 
platform”, 
DEFENCE 
RESEARCH 
AND 
DEVELOPMENT 
TORONTO (CANADA). 2006. – 88 р. 
[11] D. Leadbetter, A. Hussey, P. Lindsay, A. Neal, and M. Humphreys, 
“Towards Model Based Prediction of Human Error Rates in 
Interactive”, J. Australian Computer Science Communication, vol. 23, 
January-February 2001, pp. 3-12. 
[12] N. Sarter, “Coping with complexity through adaptive interface 
design”, Proceedings of the 12th international conference on Human-
computer 
interaction: 
intelligent 
multimodal 
interaction 
environments, Beijing, China, 2007, pp. 493-498. 
[13] ATCA, "Next Generation Air Transportation System Transformation 
[Special Edition]", Journal of Air Traffic Control 48(1), 2006, pp. 1-
64. 
[14] J. Wreathall, D.D. Woods, A.J. Bing, and K. Christoffersen, “Relative 
Risk of Workload Transitions in Positive Train Control“, Technical 
Reports (DOT/FRA/ORD-07/12), Federal Railroad Administration, 
Washington, D.C., March 2007, 55 p. 
[15] U. Ahlstrom, “An Eye for the Air Traffic Controller Workload”,  
Journal of  the Transportation Research Forum, 2007, vol. 46, No 3, 
pp. 103-108. 
[16] G. Song, “Analysis of Web Page Complexity Through Visual 
Segmentation”, Human-Computer Interaction. HCI Applications and 
Services: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2007, vol. 4553, 2007, 
pp. 114-123, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-73111-5_14 
[17] F. Joseph Dyro, “Clinical engineering handbook”, Elsevier, 
Academic press series in biomedical engineering, Medical, 2004, 674 
p. 
[18] E.F. Wells, G.M. Bernstein, B.W. Scott, P.J. Bennett, and J.R. 
Mendelson, “Critical flicker frequency responses in visual cortex” 
Experimental Brain Research, vol. 139, No.1, pp. 106-110, doi: 
10.1007/s002210100721. 
[19] J.M. Henderson, “Two representational systems in dynamic visual 
identification”, J Exp Psychol Gen., 1994, Dec., vol.123, No. 4, pp. 
410-436. 
[20] D. Harris, “Human-Computer Interaction: Theory and Practice (part 
2)”, Volume 2 (Human Factors and Ergonomics), 2003, 1480 p. 
[21] D.D. Dilks, C.I. Baker, Y. Liu, and N. Kanwisher, “Referred Visual 
Sensations”: Rapid Perceptual Elongation after Visual Cortical 
Deprivation”, The Journal of Neuroscience, 2009, July, vol. 29(28), 
pp. 8960–8964. 
[22] T. Gollisch and M. Meister, “Modeling convergent ON and OFF 
pathways in the early visual system”, Biol Cybern, 2008, November, 
1999, vol.(4-5), pp. 263–278, doi: 10.1007/s00422-008-0252-y. 
 
47
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

