Digital Reconstruction of a Historical and Cultural Site Using AR Window 
 
Jiyoung Kang  
Graduate School of Culture Technology 
KAIST 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: lov2jung@gmail.com 
Jung-Hee Ryu 
Graduate School of Culture Technology 
KAIST 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: ryu@kgsm.kaist.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract— There are many historical and cultural sites which 
have been demolished due to the reckless urban development 
projects. ‘Pimatgol’ is one of those with meaningful history and 
culture. There were many attempts to reconstruct the sites 
using technology to remember the important places. AR 
Window 
is 
an 
Augmented 
Reality 
application 
for 
reconstructing ‘Pimatgol’ for smart phones. User can see the 
past scenes over the present scenes through AR Window.  User 
can attempt multiple interactions like blowing a breath, wiping 
with a finger and touching buttons on a phone. We 
concentrated on how the multiple interactions affect interests 
and level of awareness of the users. AR Window will open a 
new path of digital reconstruction for smart phones through 
the multiple interactions. 
Keywords- Case studies;  Multiple interaction;  Emotional 
effect;   AR 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Due to the reckless development project in many cities in 
Korea, historical and cultural sites have been destroyed. 
„Pimatgol‟ with over 600 years of history is one of the 
historical and cultural sites in Seoul that have embraced 
sorrow and happiness of the people throughout the time. It 
has been a very meaningful and precious place to our 
community. The name „Pimatgol‟ is derived from the word 
„Pima‟ which means avoiding horses. The alleys from behind 
the Kyobo Building in Gwanghwamun to the YMCA Hotel 
in Jongno that make up Pimatgol have their roots in the 
Joseon Dynasty (1392-1910). Pimatgol is thought to date 
back to the Joseon Dynasty when commoners and lower-
class government officials had to kneel before passing high-
level officials. The alleyway is so narrow that a person can 
scrape his/her hands along the walls on each side. The air is 
filled with the tangy smell of grilled mackerel and the stale 
leftover smell of makgeolli, a kind of rice wine. This is 
„Pimatgol‟, the alley that runs east-west alongside Jongno in 
central Seoul. People can feel they‟ve stepped back into 
another generation in this place. But the place was forcibly 
demolished by the City of Seoul as a part of Jongno 
Redevelopment Plan launched in 2003. Regular customers 
and the public mourned the store‟s closing as the end of an 
era. Many of the general public felt sorry for the habitants of 
Pimatgol and hoped that the site will be preserved.  
There have been many efforts to preserve these kinds of 
historical and cultural sites. There, especially, have been 
many projects using Virtual Reality technology for digital 
recreation of the sites. For example, they measure all the 
remains from the historic sites and collect all the data to 
recreate digital images of the past. However, this has some 
problems like lacking interactions, necessary equipments or 
lack of reality. Due to these, we need to find another way to 
recreate our historical and cultural sites. 
As members of the part who feels sorry for the 
disappearance of the historical and cultural site of „Pimatgol‟, 
we decided to recreate the place using Augmented Reality. 
AR [1] is one of the most perspective technologies that could 
combine real and virtual world to show the combination of 
( A )                                             (B) 
Figure 1. (A) Past photo of one street of „Pimatgol‟ in 2007, 
(B)Photograph of dismantlement of the same street of „Pimatgol‟ in 2010 
ancient and current view of the historical site [2]. Compared 
to the ordinary instructions like static images, videos, sand 
table etc., AR can provide user with an intuitive and visual 
experience by digitally recreating the ruins. User can 
compare past scenes over present scenes immediately by 
using AR for digital recreation.   
There are many iPhone applications using AR. For 
example, there are „ScanSearch‟ [3], „Layar‟ [4], „Sekai 
Camera‟ [5] etc. Users usually scan, touch or move around 
the smart phones. Those are typical interactions for AR 
applications which are now too simple and common. 
Through this paper, we suggest AR Window the novel 
digital recreation application for smart phone which has 
implicit and interesting interactions that will raise people's 
emotional responses. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
There have been many works in the field of digital 
recreations. Virtual reality and augmented reality techniques, 
especially, are the most progressive and leading methods of 
170
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

digital recreations. Here are few cases of digital recreations 
using virtual or augmented reality. 
A. 
Hwang-ryong Temple 
Hwang-ryong Temple was the most representative 
temple which was built by the Shin-ra Dynasty in Kyong-ju, 
Korea. It was built by selected master craftsmen and became, 
very famous for its beauty and magnificence. However, it 
was burnt down 800 years ago and there, only remain a site 
for the original temple. To recover the original temple‟s 
beauty, Graduate School of Culture Technology (GSCT), 
KAIST produced a digital 3-dimentional video of the 
original Hwang-ryong Temple. They collected all the paper 
and other materials from the past for recreating the temple. 
Digital recreation of the temple was evaluated as a very 
accurate and immersive work due to the effort. However, 
being as it is a digital video; user can only just experience 
one way interaction of watching the video. 
B.  Sungnyemun in Second Life  
Sungnyemun is the Number One National Treasure of 
Korea. It was destroyed by fire in 2008. Every Koreans felt 
sorry for the disaster. A developer company called „Acid 
Crabiz‟ [6] recreated Sungnyemun in 3-dimentional virtual 
reality game „Second Life‟ as an effort to recreate 
Sungnyemun. It was built accurately following the same 
blueprint of the original building, so user can see the realistic 
and immersive recreation of Sungnyemun. Many people 
from all around the world can visit and interact with the 
Sungnyemun in the virtual world. Users have to go into the 
virtual world „Second Life‟ to visit the building. Moreover, it 
only exists in the virtual world so there is no reality. 
C.  AR-View: an Augmented Reality Device for Digital 
Recreation of Yuangmingyuan  
Yuanmingyuan was a vast and magnificent royal garden 
built by several emperors over a period of time during the 
Qing Dynasty. It was burnt down by the Anglo-French 
forces in 1860 and suffered continual damages later on. 
Beijing 
Institute 
of 
Technology 
digitally 
recreated 
Yuanmingyuan by designing and manufacturing a fixed-
position device AR-View to provide a combined real and 
virtual image of Dashuifa (Great waterworks), a symbol of 
Yuanmingyuan. With the help of AR-view, the original 
exquisite architectures and fountains are superimposed upon 
the current ruins. However, user needs special equipment for 
AR-View to see the beautiful garden. User‟ sight is also very 
limited because the AR-View is fixed in one place that 
cannot be moved around. 
III. 
OUR WORK 
 
We created AR Window to recreate the historical and 
cultural site of „Pimatgol‟. AR Window is an application for 
iPhone. AR Window is using AR for combining past scenes 
over present ruins of „Pimatgol‟. AR Window provides user 
with immersive, intuitive and entertaining experience. 
A.  System Concept and Design 
There were many cases of digital recreations, but none 
concentrated on responses from the user. Maybe it is because 
they surveyed the satisfaction from the user after 
experiencing the recreations. However, we concentrated on 
how this case affects user‟s emotion. We wanted to raise the 
level of attention and affection to our historical and cultural 
site of „Pimatgol‟ from the users. Interactive input 
interactions were given to users to give implicit meaning. 
The interaction is called „window wiping‟ comprising of 
actions of wiping the AR Window. This is a metaphoric 
interaction of wiping the actual window to see the outside 
well. Novel interactions include the blow-and-wipe transition 
between the current camera views. A user blows a breath to 
the scene shown at „Pimatgol‟ where the user is now on a 
smart phone. The AR Window will bring the "fogged-up" 
view of historical photos of the site with the blow. Then the 
user wipes the blurry view with his/her fingers and the past 
photos become clearer. Finally, the user can see the past 
scenes of the site clearly. User needs to perform „window 
wiping‟ interactions to see the past photos of present ruins. 
Norman [7] proposed the theory of seven stages of action. 
 
Forming the goal 
 
Forming the intention 
 
Specifying an action 
 
Executing the action 
 
Perceiving the state of the world 
 
Interpreting the state of the world 
 
Evaluating the outcome 
It is important to notice that Norman‟s theory of action 
focuses on user cognition. User can get used to the idea of 
blowing and wiping easily because they already know the 
why. It is called Expressive Representation(ER) according to 
Ulmer [8]. We „read‟ and interpret representations, act on, 
modify, and create them in interactions. In restricted or 
mobile circumstances like in this case, it integrates 
complementary modalities, by having multiple interactions 
like seeing, blowing and wiping, [9], in a manner that brings 
a synergistic blend in such as way that each mode can be 
capitalized upon and used to overcome weaknesses in other 
modes. 
171
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Exact address of the marked spot 
Through this implicit input, user can get explicit 
outcomes that are photos from the past. Those photos are 
from blogs of general public. They also feel sorry for the 
disappearance of „Pimatgol‟ or having their personal 
memories for the place. We can find the fact from their texts 
and photos from blogs of users. We manually selected 
photos from the community sites like „Naver‟, „Nate‟ and 
„Daum‟ which form over 70 percent of Korea blogs. Due to 
this, user can interact and share thoughts through the photos. 
User can get information awareness from their sites which 
have text and photos of the place. 
Using augmented reality for AR Window application, 
user can get context awareness in outdoor environment and 
location awareness (GPS) like in „Human pacman‟ [10], 
because user can see the exact addresses and a map where 
they are seeing. They can see the outside environments over 
the current photo of the smart phone. 
B. System Description 
It has three menus, the first is a map view, the second is a 
camera view and the last is the list of the places. There are 
two methods of using „AR Window‟. User can visit the place 
and connect to the application with the first method. User 
will select a camera view and they will see the markers by 
scanning the site with their phones. The markers contain the 
past photos of the marked spots. By touching the markers, 
the user can start the multiple interactions with the 
application. It will ask the user to blow on the window to see 
the past scenes of the spot. When the user performs the 
blowing action, the screen on the phone will show the past 
photos taken by other community members. The blurry 
scenes will clear by wiping the screen with their fingers like 
wiping the window. The clear past photos overlay the 
present ruins or newly constructed buildings. User can enjoy 
more past photos of the place taken from 2004 to 2010 by 
repeating these interactions. For the second way, user can 
explore the site without going there. User just stays where 
they are, and they can use the application by using the „Map 
View‟ of the application. In the map view, user can see 
marked places where they can see the past photos on the 
Google map. User can see past photos of the markers by 
touching the markers.  
In addition to that, if the users want to know about the 
place more, they can visit the source blogs where the photos 
came from by touching the „visit blog‟ button on the menu.  
They can read and see more information and share thoughts 
about the place on the blogs. Through this, users can get 
information awareness. 
Figure 3. System flowchart 
( A )                                          (B) 
Figure 4. (A) Blurry photo by blowing a breath, (B) A photo wiped with a 
hand 
1) 
Spot Selection 
There are 20 spots in „Pimatgol‟. Selected spots were 
mostly popular restaurants in „Pimatgol‟, because they were 
well known street for restaurants for general public. Most of 
them have over 50 years of history, but some of them moved 
to a new building and others disappeared. 
2) 
Photo Selection 
We selected photos of this system manually. There are 
about 6 pictures in average for one spot. We put the word 
„Pimatgol‟ in web search engines like „Naver‟ and „Daum‟ 
which are the top two in Korea for searching for photos. And 
we only picked photos from personal blogs where the 
community members expressed their thoughts and emotions. 
We got necessary permits from the bloggers for using the 
pictures. The blogs only have photos from the year 2004, so 
we picked the best photos that show the exterior well. Also, 
172
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

the blogs that we picked include their information, memories 
and thoughts about „Pimatgol‟ which the other user can view 
and share their thoughts. 
IV. 
TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION 
We collect all the location information including latitude 
and longitude from „Google maps‟ for places that we picked 
for reconstruct based on their addresses. The two 
 
(A)                                     (B) 
Figure 6. (A) Map View, (B) Camera View 
different views in the „AR Window‟ are map view and 
camera view.  
Map view is based on the Google map and the camera 
view shows the current views with markers indicating the 
presence of photos of the past. SDK „Mapkit‟, a basic 
framework for i-phone, was used for the map view. Pin 
markers were assigned to the spots on the location 
information. For the camera view, we used an open library 
„ARKit‟. Location information was assigned as in the map 
view, and UIButton was designed. The size and direction of 
UIButton is updated in the camera view according to the 
user‟s current location and direction. 
For the blowing action, the microphone checks the decibel 
of the user‟s breath. When the decibel is over -5DB which 
means light breath, the screen will bring blurry past photos. 
Then, by wiping the blurry photo with fingers masking 
technique will make the photos clear.  
V. USING THE TEMPLATE 
Testers were selected randomly from near „Pimatgol‟. 
They were divided into two groups to compare the effects of 
different interactions. Each group consisted of thirty different 
users. First group (A) did multiple interactions like blowing a 
breath, wiping with a hand and touching buttons on a mobile 
phone. The second group (B) just touched the buttons on a 
mobile phone. There was no time limit, so that users can 
experience the AR Window as much as they wanted. We 
concentrated on how the multiple interactions affect interests 
and level of awareness of the users. 
A. User Interest 
We measured how much time they spend to explore the 
application, how many spots they visited, how many blogs 
they visited to get more information about the place and we 
measured the degree of testers‟ interests by measuring how 
many places they remembered.   
The first result for performing time showed that the 
average time for the first group (A) was 175 seconds and the 
second group spent 91 seconds. Even though, multiple 
interactions originally take more time to perform, 84 seconds 
of difference means that the users took much more time for 
exploring the past „Pimatgol‟ through the implicit 
interactions. 
 
Figure 7. Result of Performing Time 
The results for visiting places, the first group (A) was a 
little bit higher than the second group (B). Group A visited 
4.8 places in average. Group B visited 4.4 places in average. 
The result showed that multiple interactions affected people 
to visit more places. 
 
Figure 8. Result of visiting places 
For the results for visiting blogs, the first group (A) 
visited 2.3 blogs in average and the second group (B) group 
visited 1.7 blogs in average. A group who experienced 
various interactions had more interests on the place, so they 
visited the blogs where the photos came from. 
 
Figure 9. Result of visiting blogs 
173
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

The number of places remembered by the first group (A) 
was 3.7 places in average and the second group (B) 
remembered only 2.1 places in average. This showed that 
testers can remember more places through various implicit 
interactions than simple touching. While they experienced 
various interactions to see the photos, they were more 
affected by the places. 
 
Figure 10. Result of remembered places 
All the results from measuring interests showed that 
more than average experienced multiple interactions from 
the first group. These results showed that user who 
performed various metaphoric interactions like blowing a 
breath, wiping the window with their fingers were more 
interested on the place. The more involved interaction seems 
to have had much many positive effects on user interest. 
B. Level of Awareness 
Two questions were asked to two groups to compare the 
changed awareness on „Pimatgol‟.  
(1) How much money will you contribute for 
preservation of the „Pimatgol‟? 
(2) If you were the mayor of Seoul, how much do you 
agree to preserve the „Pimatgol‟? (in percent) 
 
Figure 11. Result of contribution 
 
Figure 12. Result of preservation 
From the result, we can see that the group who 
experienced multiple interactions was willing to contribute 
more money than the simple touch group. The first group 
was willing to contribute 38,000 Won for preserving the 
„Pimatgol‟ but the second group was only willing to donate 
12,000 Won which was significantly less than the first group. 
Also 89 percent of the multiple interactions group were 
willing to preserve the „Pimatgol‟, while 73 percent of the 
single interaction group agreed to preserve. It means that 
metaphoric multiple interactions raised the level of 
awareness on „Pimatgol‟ more besides the user interest. The 
metaphoric interactions reinforced people to remind the 
importance of historical and cultural site of „Pimatgol‟, so it 
made the testers to contribute more to preserve the place. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
We have presented the design of an AR application for 
digital reconstruction of „Pimatgol‟. Experiments in the site 
showed that multiple and implicit interactions of „window 
wiping‟ gave more entertainment and emotional effects on 
the user compared to simple operation of buttons. It also 
raised more awareness on the historical and cultural site by 
blowing a breath and wiping the screen with a finger like 
window wiping. Also, user can see the past scenes over the 
present ruins or newly constructed through past photos of the 
spot from other community member‟s blogs. Also user 
became more aware of the location through the map which 
showed where they were. In addition to that, user can get 
context awareness through their outdoor environment.  
Lastly, they got information awareness from texts and photos 
from the blogs of other community member on the place. 
Although the AR Window application should be improved 
further, especially by adding more sites and photos; it opened 
a novel way of digital reconstruction by raising the level of 
attention and affection to our historical and cultural site. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Azuma R., Baillot, Y., Behringer R., Feiner S., Julier S., and 
MacIntyre B.,  Recent advances in augmented reality, In: Computer 
Graphics and Applications, IEEE Volume: 21 page(s): (pp.34-47), 
2001. 
[2] 
Fritz, F., Susperregui, A., and Linaza, M.T., “Enhancing Cultural 
Tourism experiences with Augmented Reality Technologies”, In：
174
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

The 6th International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology 
and Cultural Heritage VAST , 2005. 
[3] 
ScanSearch Website,  http://www.scan-search.com/, May 2010. 
[4] 
Layar Website, http://www.layar.com/ May 2010. 
[5] 
Sekai Camera Website, http://www.sekaicamera.com/ May 2010. 
[6] 
Acid Crebiz Website, http://www.acidcre.biz/ May 2010. 
[7] 
Norman, D. A., The Design of Everyday Things. Doubleday: The 
Design of Everyday Things. Doubleday: (pp.46-48) New York, New 
York, 1990. 
[8] 
Ullmer B. and Ishii H., “Emerging frameworks for  tangible user 
interfaces”. IBM Systems Journal 39(3- 4), (pp.915-931), 2000. 
[9] 
Oviatt, S. L., “Multimodal Interface Research: A Science Without 
Borders,” In B. Yuan Huang & X.Tang (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
International 
Conference 
on 
Spoken 
Language 
Processing 
(ICSLP'2000), Vol. 3, (pp. 1-6). Beijing , 2000. 
[10]  Cheok, A., Goh, K., Farbiz, F., Fong, S., Teo, S., Li,Y., and Yang, X., 
Human Pacman: A mobile, wide-area entertainment system based on 
physical, social and ubiquitous computing. Personal And Ubiquitous 
Computing 8, 2. , Springer-Verlag, (pp. 71–81), May 2004. 
 
 
 
 
175
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

