A Digital Tabletop Tool for Teacher-Student Supervision to Support Student
Learning
Samgwa Quintine Njanka
Faculty of Computer Science
Østfold University College
Halden, Norway
email: samgwa.q.njanka@hiof.no
Shubodha Acharya
Faculty of Computer Science
Østfold University College
Halden, Norway
email: shubodha.acharya@hiof.no
Prameet Bhakta Acharya
Faculty of Computer Science
Østfold University College
Halden, Norway
email: prameet.acharya@hiof.no
Abstract - Effective integration of technology into teaching and
learning is becoming an essential competency for teachers.
General classroom lectures are important for understanding
the course material, but providing other opportunities like
well-structured individual or group supervision sessions for
students is indispensable. This will ensure the full mastery of
the
subject
matter
and
expand
the
scope
of
learning
experiences. Following a pilot demonstration of 15 students
and 3 supervisors, interviews were conducted and the feedback
showed the benefits of group supervision for these students.
Students
noted
many
positive benefits in support
of
a
collaborative learning environment using a digital platform,
while supervisors followed suit in the same perspective. This
article, therfefore, describes the use of a digital tabletop board
as
a
learning
platform
to
facilitate
individual/group
supervision
of
students.
After
establishing
the
design
requirements, we proceeded with prototyping, providing a
series of sketches illustrating how users might progress
through a task using the product under development and,
lastly, the finished product with two major functionalities:
notes taking and recording during a supervision session. The
prototype was tested and analysed. The users indicated that
the recording would help playback the supervision session.
Also, in terms of usability, the interface was perceived as not
different from that of the desktop paradigm, hence, user-
friendly. Also, in terms of usability, the interface was perceived
as not different from that of the desktop paradigm, hence,
user-friendly. Teachers, on the other hand, noted the website
created will provide notes or audio record for the students and
even serves as announcement platform from the supervisors to
the students on the class schedule. This would facilitate the
achievement of course objectives and would enhance learning.
Keywords – Digital tabletop; teachers; students; cooperation;
CSCW; CSCL.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The quality of education is a major concern of all
educational goals. Continuous support for students in
individual or group supervision sessions has been defined as
one of the most effective ways to improve and sustain the
quality of learning [1].
Fixed-time schedule classes may not be effective enough
for students to understand the whole lectures. However,
other means can be employed to tackle this issue; for
instance, organizing individual or group sessions with the
help
of a
guidance
counselor
or an
instructor.
The
supervision can take place in a convenient environment, be
it inside the classroom, library, maker space, or the lab.
Individual or group supervision sessions between a
teacher and students served to expand the scope of learning
experiences, providing several unique opportunities for
mentoring that are not available during general classroom
lectures. Supervision, according to Ogunsaju [12], is a way
of stimulating, guiding, improving, refreshing, encouraging
and overseeing certain groups by supporting them in their
learning process. It is a dual relationship, in which both
students and teachers should engage. However, if the
student and teacher do not engage in a cooperative way, the
supervision benefits would diminish. Thus, the learning
process will be undermined and both the teacher and the
students will waste their time [2].
With the rapid development of emerging technologies,
the integration of digital learning platforms has an influence
on
improving
learning
experience.
However,
during
supervision sessions, paper notebooks methods are usually
part of the process, and most of the communication is
handled verbally. Thus, in this paper, we explored the need
for a technology that can support cooperation in supervision
sessions among teachers and students and, consequently,
increase the learning possibilities of students. We designed a
digital solution and tested it. The respective findings are
presented in this paper. The paper is a work in progress and
more research will be done looking into cooperation and
technology in this individual encounter among students and
teachers and how to prompt learning and reduce waste of
time.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we describe the background of the study. In Section III,
we present the design process from data gathering to
designing the prototype. In Section IV, we present the
evaluation of the prototype and findings from participants or
potential users on the importance of the device during their
supervision sessions. Finally, we conclude in Section V
which links the major findings with the relevant literature of
the study.
II.
BACKGROUND
Students find it challenging to commit to verbal
information discussed with the teacher. The theory of
constructivism
believes
learners
construct
knowledge
individually or in groups based on prior experience or
repetition of new information. Also, knowledge is the
outcome of collaborative construction in a socio-cultural
context mediated by discourse. Learning is fostered through
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

interactive processes of information sharing, negotiation,
and discussion [4]. This theory acknowledges individual
differences and believes students can construct knowledge
through various learning resources and activities. Still, this
theory acknowledges collaborative learning with which
students can learn from each other as well as construct
correct and meaningful knowledge. In addition, teachers
remain facilitators in a constructivist learning environment
[5], hence, playing an important part in the construction of
knowledge
together
with
the
students.
Instead
of
a
paternalistic perspective, where the teacher leads and the
student executes, in this paper, we discuss for more
balanced power relations, especially during supervision
sessions as individual time among students and teachers,
being these individual students or students working together
in a group project. This perspective has been discussed in
Computer
Supported
Cooperative
Work
(CSCW)
and
Computer Supported Cooperative Learning (CSCL) [9].
Literature relating to class size is also important for this
study;
a
lecture
is
usually
a
large
class
containing
approximately 25-100 students at any time. During lectures,
learning
is
instructor-directed,
questions
may
be
encouraged,
but
discussions
are
kept
minimal
[6].
Therefore, the large size and the physical distance between
instructor and students could pose a challenge towards the
formation of a healthy teacher-student relationship. It is safe
to conclude that students learn very well and feel more
positive in smaller classrooms than large lecture halls. The
notion of supervision sessions in this regard cannot be
overemphasized because it further enhanced learning [7].
There has been a lot of activity in creating tools that
utilize learning analytics, with a focus on educational
technology [8].
The collaborative approach to education has been shown
to
develop
critical
thinking,
deepen
the
level
of
understanding, and increase shared understanding of the
course material [10]. CSCL facilitates collaboration by
using computer-mediated communication tools to enable
new
communication
methods
between
teachers
and
students. However, the nature of CSCL has to be taken into
account from the first planning stages when designing the
model because it can be a drawback instead of a benefit.
While there has been extensive research on the benefits and
drawbacks of collaborative learning approaches in higher
education [11], there has been less research on how the
choice of collaborative tools affects cooperative processes
and collaborative outcomes. This paper aimed at designing a
digital learning platform that students will find easy to work
with and that will further enhance learning.
III.
DESIGN PROCESS
In this paper, we explore how to facilitate learning in
supervision sessions through the help of technology. Thus,
we took an interaction design process approach to explore
the needs of students and teachers in supervision and then
designed a digital tool that could support and increase the
learning potential of such sessions. We describe the
interaction design process below.
A. Informing phase
As a primary source of data collection, we conducted
interviews with 15 undergraduate students and 3 professors
based on the challenges faced during a supervision session.
For the students, the interview aim was to find out how
often do they take supervision from their teachers, whether
they use technology during supervision sessions, and if
supervision is really important to them.
For the professors, the aim was to find out how often do
they supervise students and what spaces do they use, do
they keep track of progress on each student’s work during
supervision, what could be improved from their past
experience on technological perspective and, lastly, how do
they like to share the lesson of supervision session with the
student that could not attend the supervision session. A
consent form was signed from all the participants in the
study.
We found that students prefer to have more cooperative
supervision sessions that can integrate technology. The need
for technology should support easy access to lecture
materials. On the other hand, teachers want to improve their
supervision experience by replacing the old method of
chalk, talk, and paper experience with new technology.
They also stated that they embrace the notion of recording
the supervision session as a means for facilitating students
to remember by referring back to it.
B. Design
Based on the findings, we decided to design a tabletop
solution that could be used during supervision.
The top of the table would be an interactive screen in
which an application that can be used during supervision
could be started. The application we designed had the
following functionalities:
1.
A pen-based touch board where both the supervisor
and the students could write notes or make sketches
about things that are discussed during supervision.
This functionality would help to improve the current
situation of paper and chalk and, at the same time,
afford a more sustainable way of having these notes
in a common space, which will be later saved in the
students and teacher folder (Figure 1).
2.
Another important functionality is the recording
button which, if pressed, will record the sessions.
This is helpful in the situation when the students
forget about the verbal information, and maybe they
might not understand at the moment and want to
came back to it. By repetition of the recordings, the
student will have a higher chance of processing and
internalizing the information (Figure 1).
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

3.
Saving the notes on the cloud on specific folders for
the students will improve the situations when papers
are lost, and sometimes students do not have access
to them (Figure 2).
The idea of a tabletop interface was inspired by the
setting where supervision happens, namely, in a room
where all the students are sitting around the table together
with the teacher. Moreover, the tabletop metaphor which
covers the whole table area serves as a mean for
expanding the collaboration space among the student and
the teacher. While making schemas and writing on a
piece of paper is more or less a personal activity which
can be shared with others, in the case of a tabletop, this
surface is expanded. This helps in making the students
and teachers more equal during supervision and can
motivate cooperation.
C. Prototype
The prototype for the app was developed in ADOBE XD
and testing was done through the Wizard of Oz technique.
Figure 1. Interface for Note-taking and recording.
Figure 1 shows where both the supervisor and the
students could write notes, record, or make sketches about
things that are discussed during supervision.
Figure 2. Saving files /File locations.
Figure 2 indicates the process of saving the notes in
specific folders either on the device hard disk, cloud
(internet) or Tabletop (Website) during or after supervision.
Figure 3. Accessing files on Tabletop (Website).
Figure 3 indicates that, for students to have access to the
websites (Tabletop), they must log in with their username
and password.
D. Evaluation
A number of tests were conducted with a few students
and teachers to evaluate usability, accessibility, cooperation,
and learning enhancement.
We conducted observations in two supervision sessions
of one lecturer's office with 2 students at one time and one
student another time. We initially installed the prototype on
the lecturer's office tabletop. The users were briefed on the
basic functionalities of the prototype prior to usage. For
testing, we used the Wizard of Oz technique by installing a
projector that projected the application on the tabletop,
while one of the team members faked the touch-based
interaction with the tabletop. The idea of testing was not to
look into details of the solution, but focus on the user
experience and the set of functionalities that we had
integrated. The two sessions were video recorded, and hand-
written notes from the first author were taken on site.
Moreover, after the supervision, we interviewed in-situ the
teacher and the students regarding their experience with the
prototype in terms of cooperation during supervision. The
video recordings, the notes, and interview answers were
then analyzed to make sense of the user experience. The
analysis is in its initial phases, and the findings presented
below are based on the answers of the users regarding their
experience with the prototype.
IV.
FINDINGS
From the evaluation, we received a lot of feedback.
1)
Students - appreciated the recording functionality by
stating that, if you are not taking down notes, you can just
launch the audio recording to avoid being lost in the course
of
the discussion. Furthermore, the information on the
cloud will help students who could not make it for the
supervision.
2)
Lecturer –indicated that it would be beneficial to
have the possibility to post assignments in this group space
and make it work as a social platform for communication
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

with regards to announcements concerning supervision
schedule. In addition, the lecturer was asked to rate the
digital tabletop with regards to learning enhancement and
indicated that it serves as a collaborative platform whereby
students play an active role instead of being passive.
Generally, students currently find it challenging to
manage information either from the classroom lectures or in
an
individual
or
group
session.
Conceptualizing
and
designing a digital tabletop with the functionalities of note-
taking and recording can help enhance learning and
collaboration.
V.
DISCUSSION
The paper described how a digital tool was designed to
enhance cooperation in supervision sessions.
In conceptualizing the design space, an instructing
interaction type was used in this prototype, where users
issue instructions to the system. This can be done in several
ways, including typing in commands or selecting options
from menus in a windows environment. Literature indicates
that knowledge is constructed through prior experience or
repetitive studying of recorded materials and also when
students gather as groups. Learning is fostered through
interactive
processes
of
information,
negotiation
and
discussion.
Additionally, student and lecturer interaction is not only
confined to lecture rooms where the large classroom size
and the physical distance between lecturer and students
could pose a challenge towards the formation of a healthy
teacher-student relationship. Supervision sessions are often
offered. This setting contributes to motivating the students
and has an impact on learning.
A successful supervision session is the creation of a
cooperative
and
transformative
learning
environment
between the supervisor and the students. The supervisor
should guide and facilitate the students, allowing them to
create their own learning process as they move through the
phases of collaborative activities [13]. Supervisors should
give up some control, and students must take on more
responsibility so as to establish and nurture a collaborative
community of learners. This is where our prototype can
contribute. It can enhance the supervision experience by
increasing cooperation. Cooperation can further be the
foundation for learning. Our solution was designed mostly
as a proof of concept, and, through this paper, we want to
open up the discussion of technologies that can enhance
cooperation in supervisions.
In the future, we will continue exploring different kinds
of technological solutions that can support both cooperation
and learning during supervision.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Naz, R. N. Awan, and A. Nasreen, “A comparative study
of instructional supervision in public and private schools of
the Punjab,” Journal of Educational Research, vol. 12, no. 2,
pp. 53-267, 2009.
[2]
H. Borko and V. Mayfield, “The roles of the cooperating
teacher and university supervisor in learning to teaching,” vol.
11, no. 5, pp. 501-518,1995.
[3]
R. S. Earle, “The integration of instructional technology into
public education: Promises and challenges,” Educational
Technology, vol. 1, no. 42, pp. 5–13, 2002.
[4]
D. Jonassen, “Objectivism versus constructivism: Do we need
a new philosophical paradigm?,” Technology: Research and
Development, vol. 3, no. 39, pp. 5–14, 1991.
[5]
A.
Hirumi,
“Student-centered, technology-
environments
(SCenTRLE): Operationalizing constructivist approaches to
teaching and learning,” Journal of Technology and Teacher
Education, vol. 10, pp. 497–537, 2002.
[6]
G. V. Glass and M. L. Smith, “Meta-analysis of research on
class size and achievement,” Educational evaluation and
policy analysis, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 2-16, 1979.
[7]
M. L. Smith and G. V. Glass, “Meta-analysis of research on
class size and its relationship to attitudes and instruction,”
American Educational Research Journal, vol. 4, no. 17, pp.
419-433, 1980.
[8]
J. Il-Hyun, K. Dongho, and Y. Meehyun, “Analyzing the Log
Patterns
of
Adult
Learners
in
LMS
Using
Learning
Analytics,”
In
Proceedings
of
the
Fourth
International
Conference on Learning Analytics And Knowledge (LAK
’14). ACM, New York, NY, pp.183–187, 2014.
[9]
K. Rob, “Cooperation, coordination and control in computer-
supported work,” Communications of the ACM 34, no.12, pp.
83–88, 1991.
[10] D. W. Johnson and R. T. Johnson, “Making cooperative
learning work,” Theory Into Practice. vol. 2, no. 38, pp. 67–
73, 1999.
[11] P. Resta and T. Laferrière, “Technology in support of
collaborative learning,” Educational Psychology Review. vol.
1, no. 19, pp. 65–83, 2007.
[12] S.
Ogunsaju,
"Educational
Supervision
Perspective
and
Problem," 1983.
[13] W. E. Rowe, “Enhancing student learning experience through
group supervision using a digital learning platform,” Royal
Roads University, 2016.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

