Bonding of Flexible Mulitlayer Printed Systems based on PET-Substrates – An 
Investigation of Challenges and Promising Approaches 
Liane Koker1, Anu Paul1, Didem Kinay1, Jan-Hendric Rakebrandt2, Heino Besser3, Daniel Moser1, Martin 
Ungerer1, Ulrich Gengenbach1 
1Institute for Applied Computer Science  
2Institute for Applied Materials 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
e-mail: liane.koker@kit.edu 
 3Karlsruhe Nano Micro Facility  
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany  
e-mail: heino.besser@kit.edu 
 
 
Abstract — Flexible, thin and smart multilayer printed systems 
have a wide range of applications, reaching from human-
centred alarm systems to industrial applications like condition 
monitoring within the scope of Industry 4.0. During the 
production process for flexible mulitlayer printed systems, the 
bonding of the individual substrate layers is an important step. 
Thereby, the functionality of the components and lines printed 
onto the different layers must not be affected. In this paper, the 
challenges of the bonding process of flexible printed systems 
based on Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) substrates are 
demonstrated and possible approaches for bonding are 
introduced and compared to each other.  
Keywords – multilayer printed systems; bonding of PET; 
transmission laserwelding; direct thermal bonding; adhesive 
bonding; surface activation. 
I. 
INTRODUCITON TO PRINTED SYSTEMS 
A. Potentials of flexible multilayer printed systems 
The term of printed systems is used in the context of this 
paper for systems based upon thin polymer foils, called 
substrates, comprising printed components and conductive 
lines, in the following aggregated with the term “printed 
elements”. The ongoing development of functionalized inks 
opens the possibility to print a large variety of different 
materials onto varying substrates. Thereby, printing 
techniques are applied, that are being well established for the 
printing of color on paper, reaching from screen printing to 
inkjet printing [1]. 
One motivation for producing printed electronic systems 
is cost optimization. Using roll-to-roll techniques, the 
production of large quantities of printed materials is possible. 
Alternatively, existing products can be replaced by cheaper 
and therefore disposable printed systems [2]. Thereby, 
mainly single-layer systems are used. 
Here, another approach is taken [3]. Printing technologies 
offer the potential of producing multifunctional, highly 
integrated smart systems. The potential can be realized by 
printing task-specific elements onto one side of each 
substrate using different printing techniques. These single 
layers can contain electrical circuits, sensor elements, optical 
or fluidic components. One approach is to separate functions 
between layers (see Figure 1). In order to combine the layers 
and to enable interaction between the different domains, the 
single layers are bonded, resulting in a multilayer system. 
The use of flexible substrates allows for the production of 
flexible systems. 
Potential applications are diverse. When implementing 
sensors and wireless communication they reach from human-
centered to industrial applications. Examples for human-
centered alarm systems are illustrated in Figure 2. They 
include thin and nearly invisible smoke detectors, humidity 
monitoring on walls for mildew prevention or within smart 
plasters to prevent dehydration, e.g., of elderly people. 
Industrial applications of smart multilayer printed systems 
are conceivable for industry 4.0 and decentralized 
production, where condition monitoring of workpieces, 
machines and goods during manufacturing, transport and 
application is necessary [4]. Here, printing technologies can 
be used for generative production technology with tailor-
made customized monitoring systems, allowing for small 
production quantities down to a single piece. 
B. Setup and manufacturing  of multilayer printed systems 
For the setup of the printed systems described here, 
transparent 
flexible 
polyethylene 
terephthalate 
(PET) 
Optical layer 
Electro-optical layer 
Elektrooptischer  Layer
Optik Layer
Kommunikation
Controller Layer
Batterie-Layer
Konzept eines elektrooptischen Sensors
Elektrooptischer  Layer
Optik Layer
Kommunikation
Controller Layer
Batterie-Layer
Elektrooptischer  Layer
Optik Layer
Kommunikation
Controller Layer
Batterie-Layer
Konzept eines elektrooptischen Sensors
Communication layer 
Controller layer 
Battery layer 
 
Figure 1. Visualization of the setup of a multilayer printed system by 
the example of an electro-optical sensor (cp. [3]).   
 
 
Figure 2. Visualization of examples for human-centered alarm 
systems: dehydration sensors or other smart plasters, smoke detectors, 
humidity sensors for mildew prevention. 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Print and assemble lines 
and components on all 
layers 
 Bond 2nd layer 
Bond 3rd layer 
Multilayer printed 
System 
 Fill vias of 2nd layer 
Print and assemble lines 
and components on 1st 
layer 
Bond 2nd layer 
Print and assemble lines, 
components and vias of 
2nd layer 
Multilayer printed 
System 
Bond 3rd layer 
 
Figure 4. Investigated general production processes of multilayer printed systems: Printing and assembling of all layers and subsequent bonding (top) and 
bonding of empty substrates and printed layer(s) and subsequent printing and assembly (bottom). 
 Conductive adhesive 
Conductive ink 
PET Layers 
Conductive ink 
PET Layers 
 
Figure 3. Design of electric vias to interconnect two layers of printed 
systems by filling a hole with conductive ink (left) or overprinting a 
conical hole (right).  
substrates 
are 
used. 
In 
order 
to 
demonstrate 
the 
manufacturing feasibility, sheets of 150mm x 150mm are 
being processed, whereby the transfer to mass production 
techniques is considered. Conductive lines are printed on top 
of these substrates by using inks filled with metal particles, 
e.g., silver nano particles [5]. To print resistors, highly 
resistive inks containing, e.g., carbon particles are applied. 
Subsequently, the printed elements have to be sintered in 
order to evaporate the solvent of the ink. The particles get in 
contact to each other, going from a percolation-based 
conduction to forming of sinter necks and grain growth, 
ultimately leading to porous, metallic structure. Thermal 
sintering of silver nanoparticles occurs at temperatures of 
120°C to 150°C [6][7]. Investigated alternatives are flash 
light sintering or current sintering.  
In order to realize capacitors and field effect transistors, a 
stack of different materials has to be printed. Therefore, 
special inks have to be developed to realize the dielectric and 
the electrolyte [7][8]. For the time being, the printed 
components require large areas compared to conventionally 
manufactured surface mounted devices (SMD).  But they are 
very thin and flat and thereby flexible. In order to setup fully 
printed 
electronic 
circuits, 
the 
integration 
and 
interconnection of these printed components on one layer is 
necessary. This class of integration technique is called 
intralayer-integration [3]. It also includes the embedding of 
conventional components like silicon bare dies (see 
Figure 1). 
The second class is called interlayer-integration. It 
comprises the mechanical bonding of the layers as well as 
establishing electrical, optical and fluidic interconnections 
between the layers.  
Two approaches of the design for electrical vias are 
illustrated in Figure 3. The first approach is to print a full 
metal pad on the lower layer and a metal frame pad placed 
around a hole on the top layer. By filling the hole with 
conductive adhesive, the two metal pads are connected 
electrically. Disadvantageous are thereby the change of 
production techniques and the protruding of conductive 
adhesive over the level of the top layer.  Bridging steep-
walled holes with conductive ink is not possible due to the 
evaporation of the solvent during sintering, that results in a 
strong reduction of ink volume. In order to enable a 
continuous printing process and to avoid the use of 
conductive adhesive, it is necessary create conical holes. The 
metal area on the lower layer can now be electrically 
connected by printing a continuous conductive line on the 
top layer (see Figure 3 right). The realization of conical 
holes, however, is more elaborate than the one of steep-
walled holes. 
For the production of multilayer printed systems, two 
general processes are being investigated: 
1. 
Printing and assembly of all elements on the 
substrates and subsequent bonding of the printed 
substrates 
2. 
Succession of printing and assembly of elements 
on one layer, bonding of the subsequent layer and 
printing of elements on the top layer of the bonded 
stack 
Both processes are illustrated in Figure 4. The advantage 
of the first approach is the separation of production 
processes. Process parameters of printing techniques for 
different domains, like high sintering temperatures, do not 
affect the other layers. Theoretically, even the bonding of all 
layers in one step would be conceivable. The integration of 
vias, however, will require a layer-by-layer bonding process. 
Furthermore, the bonding of layers with assembled 
protruding components is hard to realize, since the bonding 
processes require a compression of the individual layers. 
This can be easier realized when using the second approach. 
The latter does also allow for both, printed and conductive 
adhesive vias, to be applied.  
In Section I, multilayer printed systems and the general 
processes for their production were introduced. In Section II, 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

bonding areas
via
conductive line
layer 1
3
2
 
Figure 6. Illustration of layout-dependent bonding procedure. 
 
Contact pad 
Conductive line 
 
 
Figure 5. Test structures of printed conductive lines. 
the requirements for the bonding process to join individual 
printed system layers are defined, a general approach for 
bonding is explained and the three favored bonding methods 
are presented. These are transmission laserwelding, adhesive 
bonding and direct thermal bonding. After the comparison of 
the bonding methods in Section III, the conclusion of this 
paper is drawn in Section IV.  
II. 
BONDING METHODS 
A. Requirements for the bonding process 
The objective of the bonding is the provision of a strong 
bond between the layers that allows for flexing of the final 
system without delamination. Thereby, the functionality of 
the printed system must not be affected by the bonding 
process. The flexibility of the bonded layers should be 
comparable to the flexibility of bulk material of equivalent 
thickness.  In order to enable the second bonding process, the 
printability of the surface must be preserved. Appealing bond 
quality, including smooth surfaces, is also aspired for the 
final systems. The preservation of transparency is desirable 
but not necessary, since optical elements will presumably be 
omitted during bonding. The bonding time is also 
considered, including all process steps that are necessary to 
bond the substrates, e.g., application of adjuvant bonding 
materials. The importance of the bonding time strongly 
depends on the batch size of the respective system. Further 
aspects are bonding costs and process complexity.  
For the investigation, PET Melinex ST 506 substrates of 
125 µm or 175 µm thickness are being used to ensure 
sufficient stiffness for substrate handling [9]. In future work, 
it is envisaged to reduce substrate thickness to enhance the 
flexibility of the layer stack. The substrates have a glass 
transition temperature of 78˚C [10] and a melting point of 
265˚C [9]. Due to the roll–to-roll manufacturing process, the 
thermal shrinkage of the substrate is anisotropic. 
In experiments with the different bonding techniques, 
first the parameters have to be determined that enable a 
sufficiently strong bond between the layers. The bond 
strength will be analyzed using T-peel tests in accordance to 
DIN EN ISO 11339. Afterwards, the possible damage of the 
bonding process on the printed elements is investigated for 
the given parameters. In order to determine the influence on 
conductive lines, for example, special standardized test 
structures were designed (see Figure 5). Their conductivity is 
measured before and after bonding. 
B. General approach 
The investigated bonding techniques can be classified as 
direct bonding and indirect bonding [11]. Adhesive bonding, 
using either liquid adhesives or lamination films, is a well 
established indirect bonding technique. For direct bonding, 
on the other hand, no additional material is added at the 
interface. One approach is to transfer thermal energy into the 
bond area – either localized or simultaneously over at the 
entire surface. Another possibility is to influence the polymer 
surface. Hereby, either solvent bonding techniques or 
different kinds of surface treatment and modification can be 
used. 
Due to the material and geometry of the given 
application, the three approaches that are further investigated 
and compared to each other are laserwelding, direct thermal 
bonding, if necessary in combination with surface activation, 
processes and adhesive bonding. 
In order to reduce bonding complexity and bonding costs, 
the aspired objective is to find a layout-independent bonding 
process, that can be equally applied to any printed system. If 
a negative impact of the bonding process on the printed 
structures cannot be avoided, however, a potential 
compromise solution is to omit the printed structures during 
the bonding process. The resulting setup is illustrated in 
Figure 6. The most important areas to be bonded are the 
outer substrate frame and the area around vias to increase via 
stability. Additional bonding areas must be defined in order 
to achieve the aspired bonding strength. The individual areas 
are staggered to avoid negative effects of stacking, like local 
stiffening or interferences of the bonding process with 
already bonded interconnections. It is obvious, that this 
approach will not only result in a loss of available element 
area, but also in extensive effort. Special bonding keep-out 
areas have to be included into the circuit design rules of the 
printed systems, and individual programming of bonding 
equipment is required for every layout. The flexibility, on the 
other hand, might be increased if only small areas of the 
substrates are bonded. The effects of the application of 
layout-dependent as well as layout-independent bonding will 
be analyzed for every investigated bonding technique.  
C. Transmission laserwelding 
Transmission laserwelding of two polymer parts is based 
upon heat generation in the joint area of the parts that are 
tightly clamped together [12][13]. Therefore, the laser light 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Laserspot 
Clearweld™-coated PET  
Blank PET substrates 
 
Figure 7. Laserwelding of Clearweld™-coated PET substrates. 
passes the upper part that is transparent for the wavelength of 
the laser. In the joint area, the laser light is absorbed and the 
absorbed energy results in heat generation. This leads to 
melting of the polymer surfaces and thus to bonding of the 
clamped parts. 
One approach to realize absorption of laser light in the 
joint area is to use lower bond parts that are absorbent for the 
laser light [13]. In order to weld two transparent polymer 
parts, special coatings like a thin sputtered carbon layer or 
Clearweld™ are applied at the bond interface [14][15]. 
Clearweld™ is a liquid that, once applied on a foil, quickly 
dries to a thin layer absorbing in the wavelength range of 
900 nm to 1100 nm. The use of fiber lasers with higher 
wavelength than infrared even allows laserwelding without 
additional coatings for a variety of thermoplastics [16]. Since 
the bond is formed between the molten surfaces of the 
thermoplastic polymers, the achievable bond strength is very 
high, up to the cohesive strength of the bulk material. The 
local transfer of heat leads to thermal stress and can result in 
deformation of the polymer parts. 
For the bonding of transparent PET foils that shall be 
used for the production of transparent multilayer systems, 
Clearweld™ is chosen as absorbing interface layer. The 
Clearweld™ can be easily applied by printing techniques or 
doctor blading, resulting in a thin uniform layer on the PET 
surface. During the laserwelding process, the greenish-
yellow Clearweld™ layer is consumed and the final bond is 
again transparent [12]. Both, the Clearweld™ application 
and the subsequent laserwelding process, can be applied 
either localized for layout-dependent design or over the 
entire area of the layers. For layout-dependent localized 
application of the Clearweld™, either masks, structured rolls 
or individually programmed printing processes can be 
applied. Similarly, the laserwelding can be applied layout-
dependent using masks or individual laser programming. 
In order to protect the printed elements, the Clearweld™ 
is applied to the lower, blank side of the top layer. Using the 
first general production process described in section I.A, the 
Clearweld™ is either applied before or after printing and 
assembly of all elements on one layer. If applied before 
printing, the Clearweld™ is exposed to heat and mechanical 
forces caused by sintering and handling processes that might 
damage the coating. During a Clearweld™ application after 
printing and assembly, on the other hand, the printed 
elements are exposed to handling forces. Protruding 
elements would impede a conformal coating.  Thus, the 
implementation of the second process is probably more 
advantageous. The coating is applied to an empty substrate, 
laserwelded to a lower printed layer and subsequently printed 
on and assembled. The main challenge is to preserve a 
printable surface by preventing deformation due to localized 
thermal stress intrusion. 
In first experiments depicted in Figure 7, the applicability 
of laserwelding on transparent PET substrates coated by 
Clearweld was demonstrated using a laserwelding machine 
built within the framework of the SMARTLAM project [17]. 
The aim of the current investigations is the definition of 
laserwelding parameters that enable suitable bond strength 
and do not affect the printed elements. 
D. Adhesive bonding 
For adhesive bonding, an intermediate layer of adhesive 
is applied to the surface of at least one bonding part. The 
bonding parts are then pressed together and the adhesive is 
cured. The associated reaction of linking the single 
monomers of the adhesive to form large molecules is called 
polymerization. Adhesives can be classified in accordance 
with the polymerization mechanism: polyaddition or chain 
reaction polymerisation and polycondensation or step 
reaction polymerization [18]. Curing is enabled or supported 
by processing conditions like elevated temperature, pressure 
or UV-irradiation [19]. Another approach is the use of two 
different components that start curing after being mixed 
together. Adhesive bonding can be used to bond similar or 
dissimilar bonding parts. If choosing a suitable adhesive 
matching with the bonding parts, very high bond strengths 
can be realized [18][19]. Though adhesive bonding is a 
well-established bonding method, the application of uniform 
layers of adhesive on large areas is challenging. The 
introduction of an additional material into a system might 
reduce the system stability, e.g., to temperatures and can be 
critical for medical applications. For optical applications, 
special gradient-index matched adhesives can be applied. 
One advantage of adhesive bonding is that the influence of 
uneven surfaces, e.g., due to protruding elements, can be 
compensated at a certain extent. 
There is a variety of adhesives designed for PET bonding 
(e.g. [20][21]). Using adhesive bonding for the large area 
substrates, the adhesive can be applied in form of a liquid 
film directly before the bonding process. Alternatively, the 
use of precoated PET foils containing a dry film of adhesive 
is possible. Methods of adhesive application are dispensing, 
doctor blading, dipping, spray-coating etc. or the use of 
adhesive films. Surface treatment can be applied in order to 
increase the wettability of the PET surface and thus the 
molecular forces between adhesive and substrate, leading to 
improved bond strength [18][22][23]. 
A possible impairment of the printed elements can be 
caused either by chemical reactions between printed 
elements and adhesive or supporting conditions like UV-
irradiation, or by mechanical stress during adhesive 
application. The latter can be omitted by the application of 
the adhesive only onto the lower, blank side of the top 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 Heated lamination rolls 
PET substrates 
 
 
Figure 8 Direct thermal bonding of PET substrates 
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT BONDING TECHNIQUES TO BE APPLIED FOR BONDING FLEXIBLE TRANSPARENT  PET SUBSTRATES CONTAINING 
PRINTED ELEMENTS TO SETUP MULTILAYER PRINTED SYSTEMS. ASSESMENTS OF THE DETERMINING FACTOR, REACHING FROM ++ AS VERY GOOD TO – FOR 
VERY BAD PERFORMANCE. 
 
Bonding technique 
Bond 
strength 
Bonding 
quality 
Bonding 
time 
Process 
complexity 
Bonding 
costs 
Flexibility of 
the system 
Trans-
mission 
Laser welding 
Layout-independent 
++ 
0 to + 
- 
0 to + 
0 
0 
-- to - 
Layout-dependent 
0 to + 
- to + 
- 
- to 0 
- to 0 
0 to + 
- to 0 
Adhesive bonding Layout-independent 
+ to ++ 
+  
- 
0 to + 
- to + 
--  
-- to 0  
Layout-dependent 
0 to + 
-- to 0 
- 
- to 0 
- to 0 
- 
- to 0 
Direct thermal 
bonding 
Without surface activation 
0 to + 
- to + 
++ 
++ 
++ 
0 
- to 0 
With surface activation 
+ to ++ 
+ to ++ 
+ 
+ 
0 to + 
0 
- to 0 
 
substrate or by using sensitive methods of application. The 
occurrence of chemical reactions has to be investigated for 
all types of ink being used for the production of a printed 
system, or has to be avoided by applying layout-dependent 
adhesive bonding techniques. Another aspect to be 
considered is that vias punched into the top substrate must 
not be filled by liquid adhesive. For layout-independent 
application, this can only be avoided by using pre-coated 
PET substrates allowing for punching via holes into 
substrate and coating. The lowest substrate is thereby not 
coated. When using pre-coated substrates for the first 
production process, special care must be taken during 
handling and preceding production steps in order not to 
damage the adhesive layer or to prematurely activate curing. 
E. Direct thermal bonding 
During direct thermal bonding, the two bond parts are 
heated and simultaneously pressed together. Usually, heated 
rolls are used to enable a high surface pressure of the bond 
area (see Figure 8). The combination of pressure and 
temperatures near or above the glass transition temperature 
leads to polymer softening in the bond area, enabling 
interdiffusion of polymer chains [11]. The achieved bond 
strength is very high, ideally reaching up to the cohesive 
strength of the bulk material. The required high 
temperatures, however, may cause deformation. 
When using the relatively simple process of thermal 
bonding in order to bond thin PET substrates, all elements 
are heated. A layout-dependent protection of individual 
areas during the bonding process is not possible. One 
approach to reduce the process temperature significantly is 
to activate the substrate surface before bonding. Surface 
activation methods include, amongst others, the use of 
coupling agents [24], ultraviolet, ozone and plasma surface 
treatment [25][26]. Depending on the activation procedure, 
a layout-dependent masking of the printed structures is 
conceivable during this process step. 
For both general bonding processes, all printed elements 
and mounted discrete components must withstand the 
bonding temperature and pressure, excluding the topmost 
layer, when using the second approach. Anisotropic thermal 
shrinkage and subsequent bending of the substrate must be 
prevented. The approach of first printing and assembling the 
individual layers, additionally leads to mechanical stress of 
the elements applied directly by the lamination roll. A roll-
based thermal bonding of layers containing protruding 
components is not possible.  
Due to the simplicity of the process, the thermal bonding 
will be further investigated, presumably in combination with 
surface activation methods. For first experiments, a thermal 
lamination machine (Dahle 70453) is used.  
III. 
COMPARISON AND DISCUSSION  
In Table 1, an overview of the three different bonding 
techniques that were described in the above sections is 
presented. Based upon the literature review and first 
experiments, estimates about the fulfillment of the main 
requirements of the bonding techniques are made. Thereby, 
some of the assumptions have to be further investigated in 
practical tests. 
With transmission laserwelding, very high bond strength 
can be achieved. This is reduced if only parts of the area are 
welded, using the layout-dependent approach. The bond 
quality has to be investigated, especially regarding the 
printability on the top surface. Due to the serial process of 
local heating, visible lines or patterns resulting from the 
scanning of the Laser beam have to be expected and local 
deformation might occur, leading to uneven surfaces or 
bending of the entire substrate. The Clearweld™ coating 
process step and the serial welding result in rather slow 
bonding time. The process complexity is low to medium. 
Layout-dependent programming of the welding machine or 
even localized coating increase complexity. The costs of 
Clearweld™ coating and laser machines are medium, extra 
programming time and/or the production of masks increase 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the costs. The flexibility of the system is not affected by the 
laserwelding process, the reduction of the transmission 
caused by visible lines or unused Clearweld™ coating has to 
be further investigated. Due to the high laser power that has 
to be introduced in order to melt the PET surfaces, an 
impairment of the printed elements must be expected in the 
bonded areas. 
Choosing the appropriate adhesive, very high bond 
strength can be realized by adhesive bonding. The reduction 
of bonded area in the layout-dependent approach reduces the 
overall strength. Applying the adhesive onto the entire area, 
good results can be achieved for the bond quality. Depending 
on the adhesion layer thickness, existing unevenness of the 
substrate surfaces might even be compensated. For layout-
dependent adhesive bonding, on the other hand, uneven 
surfaces have to be expected due to the local intrusion of an 
extra layer. The overall bond time, including the application 
of adhesive, possibly with preceding surface activation, 
bonding and curing is rather high. The complexity and thus 
the bonding costs strongly depend on the need of surface 
activation, choice of adhesive and method of adhesive 
application and curing. They are increased for layout-
dependent bonding due to programming or the use of masks. 
The flexibility is reduced due to the additional layer. The 
impairment of transmission depends on the choice of the 
adhesive. Possible damage of the printed elements due to 
chemical reactions of the ink with the adhesive have to be 
further investigated. 
Using direct thermal bonding, ideally very high bond 
strengths can be realized. Presumably, a preceding surface 
activation is necessary to achieve the desired bond strength 
and/or to reduce the process temperature. If thermal stresses 
can be avoided, the bond quality is expected to be good. The 
fast bonding process and the low process complexity result 
in relatively low bonding costs. Time, complexity and costs 
are significantly increased if the implementation of the 
additional processing step for surface activation is necessary.  
The flexibility of the system will not be affected by the 
bonding method. Minor or no interference of the 
transmission is expected.  At temperatures of 120°C or more, 
substantial influences of the bonding process on the substrate 
and the printed elements have to be expected.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, three selected bonding techniques were 
described that can be applied for bonding of transparent 
flexible PET foil substrates containing printed elements to 
produce multilayer printed systems. The techniques are 
transmission laserwelding of Clearweld™-coated substrates, 
adhesive bonding and direct thermal bonding, presumably in 
combination with a surface activation process.  It was shown 
that for all investigated bonding processes the approach of 
bonding a blank PET substrate on top of a printed layer or a 
stack of layers and subsequently printing the next layer on 
the blank substrate is preferable in comparison to printing all 
layers and subsequently bonding them. This conclusion leads 
to the requirement of preserving the printability of the 
surface of the bonded empty substrate during the bonding 
process. A comparison of the different bonding techniques 
shows, that all of them have the potential to be used for the 
present application if the appropriate bonding parameters can 
be found, enabling a strong bond and simultaneously keeping 
the functionality of the printed elements and the printability 
of the top surface. The current state of the investigation 
indicates that direct thermal bonding is the most promising 
approach due to its low complexity and relatively fast 
bonding time. The final decision, however, requires a 
comprehensive experimental investigation of the application 
of the different bonding techniques.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Helmholtz Association 
of German Research Centres (HGF) for supporting this 
work by program-oriented funding and the Ministry for 
Science and Art Baden-Württemberg for its funding within 
the scope of the Brigitte-Schlieben-Lange program (BSLP). 
Further thanks go to the Karlsruhe Micro Nano Facility 
(KNMF) for assistance with the laser welding tests and the 
colleagues from Thin Film Technology (TFT) at KIT for the 
Clearweld™ application.  
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Kipphan, Handbuch der Printmedien [translation from German: 
Handbook of print media]. Springer, 2000. 
[2] V. Subramanian et al., “Printed electronics for low-cost electronic 
systems: Technology status and application development” 38th 
European Solid-State Device Research Conference (ESSDERC 2008), 
2008,  pp. 17-24. 
[3] U. Gengenbach et al.; „Ein Baukastensystem für multifunktionale, 
mehrlagige, gedruckte Systeme [translation from German: A modular 
system for multilayer printed systems]“ Mikrosystemtechnikkongress 
in Karlsruhe (MST 2015), 2015. 
[4] A. Gilchrist, Industry 4.0 – The Industrial Internet of Things. Apress, 
2016. 
[5] J. G. Korvink, P. J. Smith and D.-Y. Shin, Inkjet-Based Micro-
manufacturing, Wiley–VCH, 2012. 
[6] M. Ungerer et al., “Analysis of the cross section of inkjet-printed 
conductive tracks on PET” The Tenth International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI 2017) Special, in 
this issue, 2017. 
[7] M. Mikolajek et al., “Direct Inkjet Printing of Dielectric 
Ceramic/Polymer Composite Thick Films”, Advanced Engineering 
Materials, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 1294-1301, 2015. 
[8] T. T. Baby et al., “A General Route toward Complete Room 
Temperature Processing of Printed and High Performance Oxide 
Electronics”,  ACS Nano vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 3075-3083, 2015. 
[9] Dupont Teijin Films. Datasheet Melinex ST 506, 2006. [Online] 
Available 
from: 
www.dupontteijinfilms.com/FilmEnterprise/Data 
sheet.asp?Result=Print&ID=269&Version=US 2017.02.28  
[10]  Dupont Teijin Films. Latest Developments In PolyesterFilm for 
Flexible electronics. 2004. [Online] Available from: http://people. 
ccmr.cornell.edu/~cober/MSE5420/page2/files/DTF%20PEN.pdf 
2017.02.28 
[11] C.-W. Tsao and D. L. DeVoe, “Bonding of thermoplastic polymer 
microfluidics”, Microfluid Nanofluid, vol. 6, pp. 1-16, 2009. 
[12]  R. Klein, Schweißen von Lasertransparenten Kunststoffen mit Laser 
[translation from German: Welding of laser transparent polymers with 
laser], 2008. [Online] Available from:  http://www.wolf-produktions 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

systeme.de/de/veroeffentlicht/technologieseminar/technologieseminar2
008/vortrag3.pdf 2017.02.28 
[13]  A. Roesner, A. Boglea and A. Olowinsky, "Laserdurchstrahlschwei-
ßen von Thermoplasten [translation from German: Transmission 
laserwelding of thermoplastics]"', Laser Technik Journal, vol. 5, no. 4, 
pp. 28-32, 2008. 
[14]  R. Klein, Laser Welding of Plastics: Materials, Processes and 
Industrial Applications. Wiley–VCH, 2011. 
[15]  W. H. Cawley, Use of Infrared Absorbers to Laser Weld Plastics, 
2007 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.clearweld.com/ 
edufiles/Use%20of%20Infrared%20Absorbers%20to%20Laser%20We
ld%20Plastics%20_2_.pdf 2017.02.28 
[16]  J. Brown, Transparent Laser Plastic Welding - Clear Polymer 
Bonding for Medical Devices, 2012 [Online] Available from:  
www.lpkfusa.com/articles/lq/Transparent_Lase_Plastic_Welding.pdf 
2017.02.28 
[17]  S. Scholz et al., "A modular flexible scalable and reconfigurable 
system for manufacturing of Microsystems based on additive 
manufacturing and e-printing" Robotics and Computer-Integrated 
Manufacturing, vol. 40, pp. 14-23, 2016. 
[18]  A. Baldan, “Adhesively-bonded joints and repairs in metallic alloys, 
polymers and composite materials: Adhesives, adhesion theories and 
surface pretreatment” J. of Materials Science, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1-49, 
2004. 
[19]  S. Ebnesajjad, Adhesives Technology Handbook. William Andrew, 
2008. 
[20]  DuPont Packaging & Industrial Polymers, Bonding ‘Unjoin-able’ 
Polymers, 
White 
Paper, 
2011 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
www2.dupont.com/Packaging_Resins/en_US/assets/downloads/white_
papers/Bonding_Unjoinable_Polymers_Lee_92011.pdf 2017.02.28 
[21]  Dymax, Ultra Light-Weld 3043 RPET & PET Rapid Bonder, 
Datasheet, 2013 [Online] Available from:  www.dymax.com/images/ 
pdf/pds/3072.pdf 2017.02.28 
[22]  E. Gonzalez et al., “Remote Atmospheric-Pressure Plasma Activation 
of the Surfaces of Polyethylene Terephthalate and Polyethylene 
Naphthalate” Langmuir, vol. 24, pp. 12636-12643, 2008. 
[23]  R. Wolf and A. C. Sparavigna, “Role of Plasma Surface Treatments 
on Wetting and Adhesion” Engineering, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 397-402, 
2010. 
 [24] C. Goh, S. Tan, S. Ngoh and J. Wei, “Surface Treatment of Poly-
ethylene Terephthalate (PET) Film for Lamination of Flexible 
Photovoltaic Devices” Energy Procedia, vol. 15, pp. 428 – 435, 2012. 
[25] T. Homola, L. Y. L. Wu and M. Cernakrnak, “Atmospheric Plasma 
Surface Activation of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) Film for Roll-To-
Roll Application of Transparent Conductive Coating” The Journal of 
Adhesion, vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 296-309, 2014. 
[26]  T. Tamai, M. Watanabe and K. Mitamura, “Modification of PEN and 
PET film surfaces by plasma treatment and layer-by-layer assembly of 
polyelectrolyte multilayer thin films” Colloid and Polymer Science, 
vol. 293, no. 5, pp. 1349-1356, 2015. 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-538-8
ACHI 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

