Modeling the Determinants of Medical Information Systems  
Usability in Saudi Arabia 
 
Majed A.  Alshamari and Mohamed E. Seliaman  
Department of Information Systems 
King Faisal University 
Hofuf , Saudi Arabia 
e-mail: smajed@kfu.edu.sa, mseliaman@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract—Saudi Arabia’s healthcare sector is rapidly moving 
towards fully automating medical records in all hospitals 
throughout the country to create the ability to have the medical 
information move from hospital to hospital as announced in 
ambitious e-health program. In spite of the wide adoption of IT 
systems in healthcare sector, very little limited research has 
been conducted to investigate health and medical information 
systems perceived usability within the Saudi context. This 
paper attempts to fill the gap in the literature of medical 
information systems usability by modeling the usability 
determinants of Medical Information Systems within the 
context of Saudi Arabia.  
Keywords-Usability testing; usability measures; medical 
system 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The role of Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) has shown significant impacts on most aspects of life 
in Saudi Arabia during the last decades. Both government 
and private sectors made huge investment in ICT 
infrastructures and have shown growing trend to adopt ICT 
as strategic enabler to leverage the efficiency and 
effectiveness of their processes. Saudi Arabia’s healthcare 
sector as an important example is rapidly moving towards 
fully automating medical records in all hospitals throughout 
the country to create the ability to have the medical 
information move from hospital to hospital as announced in 
ambitious e-health program under which about 220 hospitals 
and 2,000 Primary Healthcare Centers (PHCs) will be 
automated [1][2]. However, there are still several barriers to 
successful implementation of medical information systems 
[3][4].   
In spite of the wide adoption of IT systems in healthcare 
sector in many countries, criteria addressing usability are 
notably absent [5]. In this regards, the health-care industry 
faces various challenges and great pressures in order to adopt 
IT. The successful adoption and utilization can greatly lead 
to reduce process inefficiencies and health-care cost. In 
addition, health care quality can be also improved. However, 
having adopted IT in healthcare industry may lead to error-
prone and misuse by users "clinicians" [5].  Thus, testing and 
evaluating healthcare information systems usability can play 
a vital role in making such systems and reducing errors. 
Usability engineering methods tend to measure systems 
usability. It aims to shorten lifecycle of systems 
developments, improve quality of the systems and reduce the 
cost [6][7][8]. The requirements of a certain system usually 
depend on  its characteristics such as medical systems 
usually aims to achieve users' trust while working under 
pressure, accommodate users errors and very reliable, safe 
and accurate [9]. Failing to achieve the expected 
requirements can cause severe usability problems. For 
example, having a default value caused serious issues. This 
has been reported as a failure to enter a new dosage levels as 
the system did not prompt the user for the data [9]. Another 
reported example is that the poor usability is the given reason 
for having critical errors and may result to lethal implications 
[6][10]. In fact, significant hazard can be caused by poor 
usability [9]. Hence, it can be seen clearly the importance of 
having a usable medical system taking into account usability 
guidelines. However, in order to measure usability properly, 
usability measures of medical systems should be clearly 
identified and properly recorded.  An extensive review on  
existing usability measure and models is presented in [11].  
The current literature suggests that a "reasonable" 
usability is acceptable in medical systems, although others 
systems aim to achieve high level of usability. This can be 
seen due to the nature of medical systems. These types of 
systems prioritize different attribute such as safety, 
accurately and efficient as critical factors, whereas other 
types of systems such as e-commerce classify user 
satisfaction, effectiveness and learnability as critical factors 
[6][10]. The latest published medical usability standards 
attempt to control safe use. It has been classified as a critical 
standard for medical system usability [6][9]. Moreover, 
efficiency and error free use have been described to be 
success factor of Electronic Health Records (EHRs). 
Although, there are some commercial medical systems, they 
can not tailor all the needed specification of a certain clinic 
or a hospital [6].  
From measurement prospective, measuring medical 
system is a different from measuring other types of system. 
The reasons are: Firstly, medical system has a different 
nature of clinical work domain, such as multiple users 
sometimes are required to perform a task. Secondly, privacy 
and legal issues can be a significant obstacle [6].  Usability 
testing is usually recommended to be conducted naturally. In 
347
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

addition, poor measurement of system functionality and 
usability may lead to patient injuries and deaths [9].  Even 
most skilled users can be misled by user's interfaces if they 
do not follow specific design guidelines [9].  Furthermore, 
medical devices and systems have to be used effectively and 
safely, therefore their interaction and design should be 
considered when design and evaluate [6].  However, recent 
researches aim to provide usable health systems to enable 
their users to concentrate on their patients rather than the 
systems issues [6].  In addition, it has been reported that each 
dollar spent on usability can offer up to 30 dollar in systems 
investment. Usability is now a fundamental criterion to buy 
software [12]. 
In this paper, we attempt to fill the gap of the literature of 
medical information systems usability by proposing a set of 
customized usability measures for medical information 
systems in Saudi Arabia. Specifically, the objectives of this 
research are: to explore the current literature of medical 
information systems in Saudi Arabia, to propose a set of 
customized measures on medical information systems in 
Saudi Arabia, and to empirically examine the current 
usability issues of medical systems in Saudi Arabia through 
applying customized measures. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
Recently, there was a growing literature focus on 
healthcare information systems usability. Viitanen et al.  [13] 
used a national web questionnaire with nearly 4000 
physicians actively working in patient care in Finland.  They 
described three dimensions of clinical ICT system usability:  
compatibility between clinical systems and physicians’ tasks,  
the support for information sharing  and  collaboration in 
clinical work. Their results indicated several usability 
problems and deficiencies which considerably hindered the 
efficiency of clinical ICT use and physician's routine work.  
Kjeldskov et al. [14] conducted a usability evaluation 
with novice users when an electronic patient record system 
was being deployed in a large hospital. They repeated the 
evaluation After 15 months of system usage by the nurses in 
their daily work. Results show extensive use and experience 
with systems will not solve usability problems. 
Khajouei et al. [15] examined and compared the 
effectiveness of Cognitive Walkthrough (CW) and Think 
Aloud (TA) usability evaluation methods, for identifying 
usability problems. Their study involved two usability 
evaluators and 10 physicians were recruited to perform 
usability testing of a CPOE system (Medicator). Results 
from this study show that there is no significant difference 
between the performance of the CW and the TA methods in 
terms of number of usability problems identified and the 
mean severity of these problems.  They recommended a 
combination of methods is advised as the most appropriate 
approach for usability evaluation to avoid problems which 
can lead to potentially fatal consequences.  
Karahoca et al. [16] examined usability of two alternative 
prototypes for medical information systems using Nielsen’s 
heuristic evaluation and cognitive walkthrough methods. 
Their study is based on a case study of 32 potential users of 
medical information system prototypes. Their case study 
results confirmed the view that the usability evaluation 
results of iconic Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs) were 
better than those of non-iconic GUIs in terms of Nielsen’s 
heuristic evaluation, effectiveness and user satisfaction. 
Jaspers [17] presented an overview of the methodological 
and empirical research available on the three usability 
inspection and testing methods most often used for testing 
interactive health technologies: the heuristic evaluation, the 
cognitive walkthrough, and the think aloud.   
Horsky et al. [18] conducted  a research study to 
characterized and compared four  usability  evaluation 
methods used  during the design and pilot testing of new 
clinical documentation software. Their results reported that 
no single evaluation method outperforms others methods in 
detecting all or most usability problems. 
 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD  
This research is intended to identify the critical factors or 
determinants for measuring the perceived usability of 
Medical/Health Information Systems. By Medical/Health 
Information Systems we mean all types of computerized 
information systems developed for recording, processing, 
retrieving 
and 
managing 
patients’ 
medical/health 
information.  Based on an extensive review of relevant 
literature, eight usability measures were selected and 
included in the research investigation.  These measures are: 
Learnability, Safety, Trustfulness, Usefulness, Effectiveness, 
Efficiency, Satisfaction, and Productivity.  
 
A. Measurement Development  
This study is based on the survey questionnaire method 
for the purpose of collecting the required data.  The survey 
questionnaire tool used consists of three parts: the first part is 
designed to collect the participants’ demographic data, the 
second part is designed to get the participants’ rating of 
proposed factors, and last part is used to record participants’ 
attitude toward using Medical Information Systems.  
The survey questionnaire measurement tool included 34 
items forming 8 latent variables. Cronbach’s alpha was used 
for testing the internal consistency reliability of the scale. All 
constructs reported alpha value above the acceptable 
threshold of 0.7, except the learnability which reported a 
value of 0.59 ( see table 1) . This construct was removed and 
excluded from any further analysis. In addition, convergent 
validity of the constructs was tested using a principal 
component analysis. Only factors with eigenvalues greater 
than 1.0 and component loadings exceeding 0.5 were 
considered significant and hence kept for further analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
348
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE 1. RELIABILITY STATISTICS FOR THE CONSTRUCTS  
Construct 
N of 
Items 
Cronbach's 
Alpha 
Cronbach's Alpha Based 
on Standardized Items 
Learnability 
4 
0.597 
0.569 
Safety  
5 
0.798 
0.801 
Trustfulness 
4 
0.811 
0.811 
Usefulness 
4 
0.726 
0.728 
Effectiveness 
7 
0.840 
0.842 
Efficiency 
3 
0.822 
0.823 
Satisfaction 
2 
0.670 
0.670 
Productivity  
3 
0.748 
0.748 
B. The Study Sample  
A total number of (200) forms were distributed to 
medical staff working in public and private hospitals in 
Saudi Arabia.   Later, (104) survey questionnaire form were 
returned making a response rate of (52%). Five forms were 
excluded from any further analysis because of missing data. 
Hence, the remaining (99) valid filled survey forms were 
used in the analysis. The females represented a majority of 
the respondents (75.8%) indicating low participation from 
males.  The majority of respondents aged between 20 and 40 
years (77%). The data indicated that 26.3% of the 
respondents have no experience with any Medical 
Information Systems at all. In addition, 23 % reported less 
than one year experience with Medical Information Systems.  
While 54% of the respondents reported more than 6 years of 
experience with using computers, only 16% of the sample 
reported more than 6 years of experience with using Medical 
Information Systems (see Table 2). 
TABLE 2. DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESPONDENTS   
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS   
The analysis of this paper is based on average values of 
the responses for each factor to identify which factors can be 
considered critical for each usability measure. The factors 
with means exceeding or equal to 4.11 were recognized as 
critical factors.   
Based on this analysis, factors that were identified as 
critical for health information systems safety are: (1) 
personal information should be protected, (2) the system 
should explain the errors clearly, (3) the system should 
explain what to do when a problem faces users, (4) resources 
should be handled without any hazard, (5) the system should 
maintain a specific level of performance in case of being 
faulty.  According to results from Analysis of Variance 
(ANOVA), there is no significant difference between female 
ratings for this measure. But, this analysis reports a 
significant effect of the flow of experience with using 
computers on the respondents’ rating for the fifths item in 
this measure (p value=0.02).   
The factors that were identified critical for health 
information trustfulness are: (1) visual and text content 
should be easily understood, (2) the system should give clear 
user assistance in its operation, (3) the system should be 
clear in terms of its purpose and objectives, (4) the user 
should feel in control of the system product. According to 
results from analysis of variance (ANOVA), there is no 
significant difference between female ratings for this 
measure.  Also, there is no significant effect of the flow of 
experience with using computers or HIS on the respondents’ 
rating for the items in this measure.   
The factors that were identified critical for health 
information usefulness are: (1) the system should provide up 
to date and complete information, (2) the system should 
consume appropriate amount and types of resources when it 
functions, (3) unnecessary elements should be eliminated 
from the user interface without significant information loss, 
and (4) the user should customize system interface to his 
preferences.  
The factors that were identified critical for health 
information effectiveness are: (1) the system should be 
flexible for users to achieve their work goals and tasks, (2) 
the system should enable users to complete their work tasks 
accurately, (3) the system should be consistent in achieving 
different work tasks, (4) the system should provide the users 
with feedback on completing their tasks, (5) the system 
should provide the user with help to solve problems and 
recover from errors, and (6) the system should enable to 
complete their tasks with minimal number of errors.  
The factors that were identified critical for health 
information efficiency are: (1) the system should enable 
users to complete their work tasks timely, (2) the system 
should enable users to complete their work tasks with the 
available resources, and (3) the system should enable users to 
complete their tasks with minimal action.  
The factors that were identified critical for health 
information satisfaction are: (1) the system should be 
attractive to use and (2) using the system in performing the 
work tasks is pleasing.  Results from analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) did not report any significant difference between 
female ratings for this measure.  Also, there is no significant 
effect of the flow of experience with using computers or 
Measure 
Item  
Frequency  
Percentage 
Gender 
Female  
75 
75.8% 
Male  
24 
24.2 % 
Age  
 Between 20-30 
49 
49.5 % 
  Between 31-40 
27 
27.3 % 
  Between 41-50 
12 
12.1 % 
Over 50 
9 
9.1 % 
Missing  
2 
2.0 % 
Experience 
with 
Computer 
Less than a year 
8 
8.1 % 
1 to 6 years  
33 
33.3 % 
Greater than 6 years 
55 
55.6 % 
Missing  
3 
3.0 % 
Experience 
with any 
HIS 
No experience 
26 
26.3 % 
Less than a year 
23 
23.2 % 
1 to 6 years  
25 
25.3 % 
Greater than 6 years 
16 
16.2 % 
Missing 
9 
9.1 % 
349
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Medical Information Systems on the respondents’ rating for 
all items in this measure.   
The factors that were identified critical for health 
information productivity are: (1) the system should increase 
users’ productivity; (2) the system should enable users to 
complete their work tasks with the available resources, and 
(3) the system should enable users to complete their tasks 
with minimal loading time.  
In addition to identifying the critical factors of Medical 
Information Systems usability, the research also investigated 
the attitudes of the study subjects towards using Medical 
Information Systems and their behavioral intention to use 
such systems. The results reported an average rating of (4.2) 
for the three attitude used in the study. The sample subjects 
also reported an average of (4.0) as rating for the three 
variables used to measure their behavioral intention to use 
Medical Information Systems.  
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) results report a 
significant effect of flow of experience using computers on 
the sample reported attitudes towards using Medical 
Information Systems (p value=0.02).  
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION   
In this paper, an extensive literature review is conducted.  
A set of customized usability measures is defined.  A survey 
questionnaire tool is designed. A pilot study is conducted to 
assess the content validity, clarity and relevance of the 
survey questionnaire elements.  A revised version is 
administered to a sample of medical staff working in public 
and private hospitals. Preliminary results show that all 
proposed usability measures except those of learnability are 
considered critical and may influence the user’s intention to 
interact with the health information systems.  
In addition, the study findings indicate that the adoption 
of Medical Information Systems in Saudi Arabia is at its 
infancy stage; since more than 25% of the respondents have 
reported that they have no experience with any Medical 
Information Systems at all and more than 22 % reported they 
have less than one year experience with Medical Information 
Systems. 
In general, there is no significant effect of the personal 
characteristics of the study sample on their rating of the 
importance of the different identified determinants of 
Medical Information Systems usability measures, with the 
exception of flow of experience using computers which has 
shown a significant effect on the item: “the system should 
maintain a specific level of performance in case of being 
faulty”. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The author would like to acknowledge the support for 
this research provided by Deanship of Scientific Research: 
King Faisal University as a part of the research grant 
(#130090).   
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Alkraiji, T. Jackson, and I. Murray, "Barriers to the Widespread 
Adoption of Health Data Standards: An Exploratory Qualitative 
Study in Tertiary Healthcare Organizations in Saudi Arabia," Journal 
of medical systems, vol. 37(2), 2013, pp. 1-13.  
[2] M. M. Altuwaijri, "Supporting the Saudi e-health initiative: the 
Master of Health Informatics programme at KSAU-HS," Eastern 
Mediterranean Health Journal,  vol. 16(1), 2010, pp. 119-124. 
[3] B. Aldosari, “Rates, levels, and determinants of electronic health 
record system adoption: A study of hospitals in Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, 2014, In Press.  
[4] M. Khalifa, "Barriers to Health Information Systems and Electronic 
Medical Records Implementation. A Field Study of Saudi Arabian 
Hospitals",  Procedia Computer Science, vol.  21, 2013, pp. 335-342. 
[5] P. Edwards, J. Moloney, J. Jackoc, and F. Sainfort, “Evaluating 
usability of a commercial electronic health record: A case study,”  Int. 
J. Human-Computer Studies, vol. 66, 2008, pp. 718–728.  
[6] S. Kujala, “User involvement: a review of the benefits and 
challenges,” Behaviour & information technology, vol. 22(1), 2003, 
pp. 1-16. 
[7] R.G. Bias, D.J Mayhew, Cost-Justifying Usability. Morgan 
Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 1994. 
[8] C.G. Wolf, J. Karat, “Capturing what is needed in multi-user system 
design: observations from the design of three healthcare systems,” 
Proc. the 2nd conference on Designing interactive systems: processes, 
practices, methods, and techniques (DIS ’97), ACM,  August 1997, 
pp. 405-41, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.  
[9] S. Braun, "Usability for medical devices," Proc. IEEE Symposium on 
Product 
Safety 
Engineering, 
Oct. 
2005, 
pp. 
16-22, 
10.1109/PSES.2005.1529517. 
[10] R. Koppel, J.P. Metlay, A. Cohen, B. Abaluck, A. R. Localio, S. E. 
Kimmel, and B. L Strom,  "Role of computerized physician order 
entry systems in facilitating medication errors,” The Journal of the 
American Medical Association, vol. 293 (10), 2005, pp.1197–1203. 
[11] A. Seffah, M. Donyaee, R. B. Kline, and H. K. Padda, "Usability 
measurement and metrics: A consolidated model," Software Quality 
Journal, vol. 14(2), 2006, pp. 159-178. 
[12] N. Juristo, AM. Moreno, and M.I. Sanchez-Segura, “Analysing the 
impact of    usability on software design,” Journal of Systems and 
Software, vol. 80, issue 9, September 2007, pp. 1506-1516. 
[13] J. Viitanen, H. Hyppönen, T. Lääveri, J. Vänskä, J. Reponen, and I. 
Winblad, “National questionnaire study on clinical ICT systems 
proofs: Physicians suffer from poor usability,”  International Journal 
of Medical Informatics, vol. 80(10), 2011, pp. 708-725.  
[14] J. Kjeldskov, M.  B. Skov, and J. Stage, “A longitudinal study of 
usability in health care: Does time heal?,”  International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 79( 6), June 2010,  pp. 135-143. 
[15] R. Khajouei, A. Hasman, and M.W.M. Jaspers, “Determination of the 
effectiveness of two methods for usability evaluation using a CPOE 
medication ordering system,” International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, vol. 80( 5), May, 2011, pp. 341-350. 
[16] A. Karahoca, E. Bayraktar, E. Tatoglu, and D. Karahoca, 
“Information system design for a hospital emergency department: A 
usability analysis of software prototypes,” Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, vol. 43(2), April 2010, pp. 224-232. 
[17] M. W.M. Jaspers, “A comparison of usability methods for testing 
interactive health technologies: Methodological aspects and empirical 
evidence,”  International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 78(5), 
May,  2009, pp. 340-353. 
[18] J. Horsky, K. McColgan, J. Pang, A. J. Melnikas, J. A. Linder, J. L. 
Schnipper, and Middleton, “Complementary methods of system 
usability evaluation: Surveys and observations during software design 
and development cycles,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 
43(5), October 2010, pp. 782-790. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
350
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

