Influence of Relationship between Game Player and Remote Player on Emotion 
 
 
Masashi Okubo and Tsubasa Yamashita 
Dept. of Information Systems Design 
Doshisha University 
1-3 Tatara Miyakodani, Kyotanabe, Kyoto, Japan 
mokubo@mail.doshisha.ac.jp 
Mamiko Sakata 
Department of Culture and Information Science 
Doshisha University 
1-3 Tatara Miyakodani, Kyotanabe, Kyoto, Japan 
msakata@mail.doshisha.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— The main trend in video game playing is the move 
to collaborative from competitive styles. Additionally, the game 
system is no longer confined to a stand-alone video game 
machine, but opened to other players through the Internet, so 
the competitors and the cooperators in the video game’s world 
are not only programs, but also human beings. Over the 
internet, the players compete for a goal with their competitors 
in the competitive style game and obtain their goal together 
with their partners in the collaborative style game. Therefore, 
the game player cannot estimate the partner or enemy’s 
behavior, and the interest in the game doesn’t only depend 
upon the game itself but also on the partners’ and competitors’ 
behaviors. In this paper, we will investigate the influence of a 
partner or competitor on the performance and the state of 
mind of the game player. Another aspect of game playing is 
discussed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, who identifies ‘Flow’, in 
which a person is fully immersed in a feeling of energized focus, 
as a central experience for enjoyable something. It is said that 
a person can feel Flow when they recognize their skill is just 
enough to accomplish the task. We will investigate the game 
player’s state of mind based on Flow theory. As a result of 
some experiments, it will be shown that the player tends to feel 
good when the performance of their partner or enemy is 
almost as high as the skill of the subject. These experiments 
were performed by participants playing various video games, 
however, we think that the results of the experiment may be 
applied on the many and varied systems which support human 
motivation. 
Keywords; 
social 
game; 
video 
game; 
flow 
theory; 
collaboration; competition 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recently, because of the diffusion of the Internet into the 
home and onto hand-held devices, Network Games such as 
Social Games have become popular. Further, it is not only 
competitive type games in which the player brings down an 
opponent, but also cooperative type games in which the 
player obtains the goal in cooperation with online partners 
that have grown in popularity. In this study, we will 
investigate the influence of the difference between 
competitive and cooperative type games as well as the 
opponent’s effect on the primary player’s state of mind and 
his performance. 
The concept which is named Flow is widely 
acknowledged in Sociology. As mentioned previously, Flow 
is advocated by the social psychologist Csikszentmihalyi [1], 
and is the state in which a game player is fully immersed in a 
feeling of energized focus. A person can feel Flow in the 
condition, when he recognizes his skill level is just enough to 
accomplish the task, which may also be adjusted by changes 
in the challenge level as a player gains experience. We think 
that the video game player can feel Flow easily because the 
game player can raise his skill level by simply playing the 
game and the game system can raise the game level based on 
the player’s ability automatically. In this paper, we also wish 
to discuss the possibility of the game system which induces 
Flow on the player’s state of mind. 
Until now, many varied game systems have been 
developed and have succeeded in the video game market. 
Some researchers in this field have focused on motivating 
workers by using video games, and enhancing the elements 
of entertainment and game design that have this effect [2]. 
Other research has investigated the influence of a player’s 
skill and competitor’s behavior on the player from the 
viewpoint of brain activity by using fNIRS [3]. Still, other 
researches on game systems based on Flow theory have been 
performed using commercial games [4]-[6]. There is a 
possibility that another results were obtained with another 
games. And this study will also examine game systems and 
human computer interaction based on Flow theory. 
In this paper, the goal is to propose a game system which 
induces Flow and to experimentally measure this experience 
based on the influencing factors of game type (cooperative vs. 
competitive) and opponent’s ability (lower/equal/higher). It 
is difficult to control these situations by using the 
commercial game. Therefore, It is necessary to design the 
experimental game system in which the game situation can 
be controlled by the experimenter. In Section II, Flow theory 
is introduced, and the relation between the competitive type 
or cooperative type games and that theory is discussed. 
Section III describes the experimental system which allows 
the experimenter to control the game situation and the 
remote player’s skill, and experimental method to investigate 
the influence the remote player’s skill on the game player’s 
performance and state of mind. The experimental results are 
demonstrated in Section IV. Conclusions and future works 
are demonstrated in Section V. 
Eventually, we think the knowledge gained from this 
research can be utilized in various kinds of computers and 
machine interfaces.   
358
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
FLOW THEORY 
A. Overview 
Fig. 1 shows the model of flow state, which is advocated 
by Csikszentmihalyi. When the task challenge level, which 
means the difficulty of the task, is higher than the operator’s 
skill, he probably feels ‘Anxiety’ and/or ‘Stress’. Conversely, 
in the case that the challenge level is lower than the 
operator’s skill, he will feel ‘Relief’ and/or ‘Boredom’. In 
the case that the operator recognizes the challenge level is 
just right for his skill, he will feel ‘Flow’. Additionally, 
when both levels are high and well balanced, then he feels it 
more strongly. It is said that the components of ‘Flow’, are 
as follows [1],[7]: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Model of the Flow state [5]. 
 
• 
Clear goals (expectations and rules are discernible 
and goals are attainable and align appropriately with 
one's skill set and abilities). Moreover, the challenge 
level and skill level should both be high. 
• 
Concentrating, a high degree of concentration on a 
limited field of attention (a person engaged in the 
activity will have the opportunity to focus and to 
delve deeply into it). 
• 
A loss of the feeling of self-consciousness, the 
merging of action and awareness. 
• 
Distorted sense of time, one's subjective experience 
of time is altered. 
• 
Direct and immediate feedback (successes and 
failures in the course of the activity are apparent, so 
that behavior can be adjusted as needed). 
• 
Balance between ability level and challenge (the 
activity is neither too easy nor too difficult). 
• 
A sense of personal control over the situation or 
activity. 
• 
The activity is intrinsically rewarding, so there is an 
effortlessness of action. 
• 
A lack of awareness of bodily needs (to the extent 
that one can reach a point of great hunger or fatigue 
without realizing it). 
• 
Absorption into the activity, narrowing of the focus 
of awareness down to the activity itself, action and 
awareness merging. 
 
B. Flow model for competitive type video game 
In the case of video games or sports, the challenge level 
is replaced by the competitor’s skill. In other words, a well 
balanced level between the competitor’s skill and player’s 
skill may induce Flow on the player.  Fig. 2 shows estimated 
model of the mind state of the competitive type game with 
the competitor’s skill as the vertical axis instead of the 
challenge level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Proposed model of Flow state  (Competitive type). 
 
When the competitor’s skill level is higher than the 
player’s skill level, the player may feel ‘Anxiety’, 
‘Mortification’ and ‘Inferiority’. In the opposite case, he will 
feel ‘Composure’, ‘Superiority’ and ‘Dissatisfaction’. When 
their skill levels are almost equal, the player will feel Flow 
and ‘Volition’. Furthermore, player’s emotions will change 
with time. The emotions which are indicated in ‘( )’ show the 
player’s feelings after the interval has passed. 
 
C. Flow model for cooperative type video game 
In the case of the cooperative type game, the challenge 
level can be replaced by the cooperator’s skill. Fig. 3 shows 
the estimated model of the mind state in the cooperative type 
game with cooperator’s skill level as the vertical axis. When 
the cooperator’s skill level is higher than player’s skill level, 
the player may feel ‘Luck’ and ‘Impatience’. In the opposite 
case, he will feel ‘Boredom’. When their skill levels are 
almost equal, the player will feel ‘Volition’, ‘Relief’ and 
Flow. The emotions which are indicated in ‘( )’ also show 
the player’s feelings after the interval has passed. 
 
 
 
Anxiety 
Arousal 
Flow 
Apathy 
Boredom 
Relaxation 
Worry 
Control 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Skill level 
Challenge level 
High 
Low 
Opponent Skill level 
Player Skill Level 
Anxiety 
Mortification 
Inferiority 
(Impatience) 
Composure 
Superiority 
Dissatisfaction 
(Boredom -> Apathy) 
Flow 
Volition 
Relief 
High 
Low 
359
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Proposed model of Flow state (Cooperative-type). 
 
III. 
INFLUENCE OF RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PLAYER AND 
OPPONENT ON THE PLAYER’S PERFORMANCE AND EMOTION 
A. Experimental method 
To investigate the influence of the relationship between 
player and opponent on the player’s performance and 
emotion, we performed some sensory evaluations under 
various conditions. For that purpose, a simple calculation 
game was produced. Using this system, the subjects solve a 
numerical calculation under controlled conditions; the 
opponent is a competitor or a cooperator and the opponent’s 
skill level is high/even/low ability. The game is over when 
the 50 calculations are done by the subject and the opponent. 
After the game, we make subjects respond to a questionnaire. 
The subjects performed each of these conditions randomly.  
B. Experiment I (Competitive type game) 
First of all, the subject is asked to go into the room and to 
sit down on the chair in front of the PC shown in Fig. 4. 
Secondly, he is asked to solve some two-digit numerical 
calculations on the computer display for practice. After that, 
the experimenter lets the subject know that there is another 
subject in the next room, and he will compete with the 
competitor in solving the numerical calculations on the 
display.  The victory will be determined by the number of 
solved calculations. In fact, the competitor is the computer 
and the competitor’s skill is controlled based on the subject’s 
skill, which is measured in the practice round. The 
competitor’s skill (computer) is set to high ability, equal 
ability or low ability. It means the competitor’s calculating 
speed is twice, even or half of the subject’s calculating speed. 
In the experiment, the subject doesn’t know the competitor’s 
ability. Fig. 5 shows the G.U.I.: Graphical User Interface of 
experiment I. 
The numerical calculation is displayed on the left side, 
and the numbers of solved calculation of the subject and 
competitor are shown in the lower region in number form 
and in a bar graph on the right side. The subject competes 
with 3 opponents, and the order of competition is random. 
After each competition, the subject answers a questionnaire. 
The subjects are 15 male and female students in their 
twenties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Experimental setup. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  G.U.I. of experimental system (Competitive type). 
C. Experiment II (Cooperative type game) 
For Experiment II, a new set of 15 subjects were 
recruited. Experiment II is almost the same as I. However, 
the experimenter lets the subject know that there is another 
subject in the next room, and he will cooperate with them in 
solving the numerical calculations on the display. Fig. 6 
shows the G.U.I. of experiment II. The numbers of solved 
calculation of subject and cooperator are again shown in the 
lower region in number form and in a bar graph on the right 
side. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  G..U.I. of experimental system(Cooperative type). 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Opponent Skill level 
Player Skill Level 
Luck 
Impatience 
(Guilt) 
(Anxiety) 
Boredom 
(Anger) 
Flow 
Togetherness 
Volition 
Relief 
(Weariness) 
“Compete (or cooperate) 
with your next-door 
participant in solving the 
numerical calculation.” 
Computer 
Competitor 
Subject 
Cooperator 
Subject 
360
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
After each experiment, the subject intuitively plotted the 
point which indicated the relationship between the subject’s 
skill level and the opponent’s skill level on an empty graph 
in which the horizontal axis shows the subject’s skill level 
and the vertical axis shows the opponent’s skill level. Fig. 7 
and 8 show the accumulation of all subjects’ perceived 
comparative skill level entries. In Fig. 7 and 8, the black 
circles indicate the high ability opponents; the squares 
indicate the equal ability opponents and triangles indicate the 
low ability opponents. From these figures, it is clear that 
most subjects recognized the opponent’s ability exactly. 
Additionally, the white circles show the games that the 
subject thinks were the most interesting of the 3 levels. The 
star mark shows the center point of those preferred games. 
The subjects showed a tendency to prefer the game in which 
the opponent’s skill level is almost the same as the subject’s 
skill level in both conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Questionnaire result (Competitive type). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Questionnaire result (Cooperative type) 
Fig. 9 and 10 show the average solution times per one 
numerical calculation of all subjects. In these figures, the 
gray bar shows the most interesting game and the black one 
shows the others. These data are normalized by the solving 
time recorded in practice. All average times are lower than 
those recorded in practice with the most interesting games 
receiving even lower times than the others. Especially, in the 
competitive format, there is a significant difference at 5%, 
which indicates that the player performs best when he feels 
enjoyment or feels best when he performs well in a 
competitive environment. 
Fig. 11 and 12 show the emotions that the subjects felt in 
each game. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Average of response time (Competitive type). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Average of response time (Cooperative type). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Questionnaire results for subject’s feeling (Competitive type) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  Questionnaire results for subject’s feeling (Collaborative type) 
Computer 
High ability 
Even ability 
Low ability 
Delightful game 
Center of gravity 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Competitor Skill level 
Player Skill Level 
Computer 
High ability 
Even ability 
Low ability 
Delightful game 
Center of gravity 
High 
Low 
Low 
Cooperator Skill level 
Player Skill Level 
High 
Delightful game 
Other games 
Delightful 
 
Other games 
361
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In the case of the competitive game, the subjects tended 
to feel ‘Composure’, ‘Superiority’ and ‘Enjoyment’ when 
the opponents’ skill levels were lower than theirs. In the case 
of the cooperative format, they felt ‘Impatience’, ‘relief’, 
‘Enjoyment’ and ‘Boredom’. When the opponents’ skill 
level was higher than the subjects’ skill level, they tended to 
feel ‘Impatience’, ‘Inferiority’ and ‘Anxiety’ in the case of 
the competitive type. In the case of the cooperative type, they 
felt ‘Relief’ and ‘Enjoyment’ in addition to ‘Impatience’ and 
‘Guilt’. When the opponents’ skill levels were equal to the 
subjects’ skill levels, they tended to feel ‘Impatience’, 
‘Volition’ and ‘Enjoyment’ in both game types. From these 
results, it is possible to suggest that even the same game style 
can induce the various emotion states by controlling the 
situation. 
Fig. 13 and 14 show the emotions which are the top 3 in 
Fig. 11 and 12, on a graph which indicates the player’s skill 
level as the horizontal axis and the opponent’s skill level as 
the vertical axis. Comparing this to Fig. 2, we obtained 
almost the same result shown in Fig. 13. However, when the 
ability of the opponent is lower than that of the player, we 
expected the emotion ‘Dissatisfaction’, yet there aren’t so 
many subjects who selected this emotional state. In the case 
of the cooperative type game, when the opponent’s ability is 
lower or higher than the player’s ability, many subjects 
responded ‘Relief’ and when the opponent’s ability was 
lower, they tended to feel ‘Enjoyment’ contrary to 
expectations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  Flow model based on questionnaire result (Competitive type) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14.  Flow model based on questionnaire result (Cooperative type). 
The emotion ‘Enjoyment’ is chosen in almost all 
situations, except for the situation that the opponent’s skill is 
higher than that of the subject’s within the competitive type 
format. In the case of the cooperative type game, the subject 
tends to feel ‘Enjoyment’ and ‘Impatience’ in all situations. 
On the other hand, in the case of the competitive type, the 
difference emotions were induced by the opponent’s ability. 
When the ability of the opponent is equal to the subject’s 
ability in both cases, ‘Enjoyment’, ‘Impatience’ and 
‘Volition’ are selected. 
The results of the questionnaires based on the component 
of Flow are shown in Fig. 15 and 16, when the opponent’s 
ability is equal to the subject’s ability the highest score is 
obtained in both game types. They also indicated that the 
game player is able to enjoy playing most when the 
opponent’s skill is equal to the subject’s skill in any game. 
The situation in which the opponent’s ability is higher than 
the player’s ability ranks second in the case of the 
competitive type game, however it ranks lowest in the 
cooperative type game. From these figures, the condition 
when the opponent’s ability is equal to the subject’s ability 
can provide the sense of flow best to the subjects. Comparing 
these results with Fig.13 and 14, there is high possibility that 
‘Enjoyment’, ‘Impatience’ and ‘Volition’ are selected as the 
emotional elements of flow.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15.  Questionnaire result to the flow component (Competitive type). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16.  Questionnaire result to the flow component (Cooperative type). 
Anxiety 
Inferiority 
Impatience 
Composure 
Superiority 
Enjoyment 
Enjoyment 
Volition 
Impatience 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Opponent Skill level 
Player Skill Level 
Guilt 
Impatience 
Enjoyment 
Relief 
Impatience 
Boredom 
Relief 
Enjoyment 
Enjoyment 
Volition 
Impatience 
High 
High 
Low 
Low 
Opponent Skill level 
Player Skill Level 
362
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

If it is necessary for a game which provides the state of 
being crazy that the components of flow are high, that game 
has to provide the situation that creates the feelings not only 
‘Enjoyment’ but also ‘Volition’ and ‘Impatience’ on the 
user’s mind. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this study, to investigate the influence of game types 
and opponent’s ability on the player’s state of mind and 
performance, we developed a simple numerical calculation 
game system. Through use of this system, we performed 
some experiments under controlled situations. All subjects 
solved the calculations at a similar rate, except when 
factoring for the players’ recognition of the cooperator or 
opponents’ skill level. However, the subjects’ performance 
and emotions are different depending on the situation, which 
suggests that the video game system has an effect on the 
player’s emotional state. 
We have a plan to evaluate the influence on the player’s 
skill in the game with team on the player’s performance and 
state of mind. 
On the other hand, the experiments in this study were 
performed under a controlled video game situation. However, 
we think that the results of the experiment may be applied on 
the many and varied systems which support human 
performance, emotion and motivation.  We have another 
plan to construct the G.U.I. for operation system on the tablet 
pc and mobile phone, which will adapt the user’s skill and 
usage based on these experimental results.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Mihaly, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, 
New York: Harper and Row, 1990. 
[2] I. Kuramoto, K. Kashiwagi, T. Uemura, Y. Shibuya and Y. 
Tsujino. “Weekend Battle: an Entertainment System for 
Improving Workers' Motivation”, Proc. of 2nd International 
Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment 
Technology (ACE2005), pp. 43-50. 
[3] 
S. Tamakoshi, T. Takahashi, M. Terao, D. Sawai, A. Imanishi, F. 
Morimoto, A. Yagi and H. Katayose, “A study in the 
entertainment of fighting video game measured by fNIRS : a 
comparison vs. human and vs. computer”, IPSJ SIG Technical 
Report EC-3, (2006) in Japanese. 
[4] J. Takatalo, J. Hakkinen, J. Kaistinen and G. Nyman, ” 
Presence, Involvement, and Flow in Digital Games”, 
Evaluating User Experience in Games, pp.23-46, Springer. 
[5] D. Weibel and B.  Wissmath, “Immersion in Computer 
Games; The Role of Spatial Presence and Flow”, Int. J of 
Conputer Games Technology, Vol.2011, Article ID 282345, 
14pages,2011. 
[6] D. Weible, B. Wissmath, S. Habegger, Y Steiner and R. 
Groner, “Playing online games against conputer- vs. human-
controlled opponents: Effects on presence, flow, and 
enjoyment”, Conputers in Human Behavior 24 (2004), 
pp.2274-2291 
[7] C. Mihaly, Finding Flow: The Psychology of Engagement 
With Everyday Life. Basic Books, 1998. 
 
 
 
363
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

