Reflections on Participatory Design Practices in Public Sector IT Project 
Management 
Klaudia Çarçani  
Faculty of Computer Science, Engineering and Economics 
Østfold University College 
1757 Halden, Norway 
e-mail: klaudia.carcani@hiof.no 
Selda Gorovelli  
Deapartment of MBA and Business Management 
Rome Business School  
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: sgorovelli@eservicios.indra.es 
 
 
Abstract— Participatory Design (PD) is the field that 
stands by the principles of democratic design practices and 
user involvement in the design of technologies meant for 
them. PD is often critiqued as not finding its place in project 
management in private or public institutions, where 
technological innovation is constrained by time, costs, 
organizational rules, and, most important, outcomes. 
Conducting a critical reflective analysis guided by PD 
principles, we study in this paper if PD principles are present 
in Information Technology (IT) project management process 
in the public sector and provide some guidelines on how PD 
can contribute further to the process. Findings are presented 
as open discussion points that require further investigation 
and application in practice.  
 
Keywords- Participatory Design; IT project management; 
public sector. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Participatory Design (PD) is the field that stands by the 
principles of democratic design practices and user 
involvement in the design of technologies meant for them. 
PD emerged in the context of workers requiring more 
rights in decision-making about technologies in the 
workplace and developed into other contexts where 
marginalized user groups were given a voice and say in 
technology development [1]. Despite the noble aim, PD is 
often critiqued as not finding its place in private or public 
business settings, where technological innovation is 
constrained 
by 
time, 
costs, 
organizational 
rules, 
regulations, and, most importantly, outcomes.  
Both private and public sectors need to keep 
competitive advantage and growth by fostering innovation 
and sustainable development [2]. To do so, innovation and 
product development in the Information Technology (IT) 
world is driven by establishing projects. "Projects" are 
defined as temporary structures that aim to deliver 
outcomes within specific timelines, budget, quality, risk, 
and 
benefits 
[3]. 
Moreover, 
due 
to 
the 
compartmentalization of knowledge where specific 
companies/institutions/organizations specialize in offering 
specific services and products, achieving the project 
outcomes has shifted from exclusive internal development 
(R&D) to cooperation with external partners [4]. Hence, 
making IT sourcing projects a common business practice. 
While 
PD 
principles 
seem 
to 
align 
with 
multidisciplinary project management practices, the 
explorative nature of PD and the challenge that it adds to 
timelines seem to limit its usage.  
In the public sector, project management practices are 
common. However, these practices are subject to 
constraints dictated by rules and regulations. Additionally, 
there is a strong call in the public sector for citizens' 
involvement in every instance to represent their views 
better and increase the accountability for services 
delivered.  
Hence, in this paper, we question to what extent PD 
principles are applied in IT project management process in 
the public sector. We studied two cases in two different 
countries. Data was collected through official public 
document analysis, interviews, and minutes of meeting 
notes.  
Based on the data collected, we conducted a critical 
reflective analysis to what extent and how the principle of 
PD was present in the two-project studied. Based on these 
theoretically grounded reflections, in the findings, we 
present remarks for embracing PD in the public sector. 
These remarks should be further investigated in future 
research. 
Section 2 will initially present a theoretical background 
for our work, followed by the method we used for data 
collection and analysis in Section 3. Further, we present the 
results of our reflective analysis in Section IV and finally 
discuss the findings in relation to the theory in Section 5.  
We contribute to the body of knowledge for public sector 
IT project management and to PD and the discourse for its 
application outside of academia. 
II. THEORY 
In this section, we present the theoretical ground for 
this paper. We start by presenting PD, its principles, and 
what characterizes it as a research field. Then, we present 
the theories on public sector IT project management by 
starting with what project management is, what 
characterizes project management in the public sector and 
some of the latest discourses in public sector IT project 
management regarding participatory practices.  
A. 
Participatory Design  
PD is the field of research and evolving practice of 
design that propagates the relevance of users' involvement 
in the design of technologies meant for them [1]. It has a 
transformative agenda in building systems for and with 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
people [5]. PD stands by the principle of democratic 
participation and is concerned with the politics of design 
and users' participation in the design processes [6]. PD 
practitioners believe in the relevance of situational 
knowledge and the promotion of mutual learning as the 
only way to design adequate solutions that address real 
needs [7]. Mutual learning is a practice-driven concept 
representing sharing of values and knowledge in PD 
activities. Capturing situated knowledge and achieving 
mutual learning is conducted through choosing and 
applying the right techniques and tools that engage people 
in telling, making, and enacting [8].  
"Participatory design project is set up, so the users are 
enabled to take an active part in the activities and decisions 
through which new IT is designed and built." [9]. A PD 
perspective poses challenges in new projects, such as 
developing a complex technological solution and opening 
it for additional learning during design and after. Based on 
the concept of seeing-moving-seeing from Schon, 
Bratteteig and Wagner [10] defined participation as 
involving relevant stakeholders in choice creation, 
selecting among 
them, concretizing choices, and 
evaluating the choices. The design decisions should be 
reflected in the design result. Bratteteig and Wagner [11], 
in their discussion, argue that the design result can be the 
artifact developed that influences the context for which it 
was designed by contributing to changing existing power 
structures. Another PD result is to give users a voice – and 
a say, so they can assume power over their situation by 
participating in major design decisions that are visible in 
the artifact. Moreover, it is important to understand if the 
designed artifact presupposes (or suggests) changes of 
power structures in the use situation as a prerequisite or as 
an effect of using the artifact.  
Finally, reflecting on projects without being able to 
promote concrete change but sharing participants' insights 
and experiences is a key aspect of research and may, over 
time, contribute to the changes PD argues for. 
Hertzum and Simonsen [12] discuss PD application in 
organizational settings and propose an effects-driven IT 
development to pursue and reinforce PD when applied in 
commercial IT projects. This approach has three steps: 
specify 
effects, 
iterative 
prototyping, 
and 
pilot 
implementation. Whittle [13], with a similar approach, 
studies 6 PD projects in terms of outcomes and concludes 
that PD is much more focused on processing and would 
benefit if managing the process focuses on defining 
outcomes and keeping track of their deliveries. They also 
suggest that an Agile approach can contribute to PD to 
make the process leaner. Additionally, they state that while 
software development researchers have looked into PD to 
integrate its principles [14], scarce efforts (e.g., [15]) have 
been the other way around to reflect on agile PD practices. 
Ferrario, et al. [16] describe a project management 
framework for software engineering for "social good" 
where elements of agile and iterative development are 
integrated with actions research and PD principles. The 
process has four phases: prepare, design, build, and sustain, 
which move incrementally and promote partnerships and 
mutual learning among all relevant stakeholders by 
applying PD creative problem-solving techniques and 
delivering working prototypes that can be moved further to 
product development.  
 
B. 
Project Management and the Public Sector 
Project Management (PM) emerged in the mid-20th 
century, and since then, it has become a prevalent way to 
manage business activities. Project Management Institute 
(PMI) defines a "project" as "a temporary endeavor 
undertaken to create a unique result" [3]. A result could be 
a product, service, document, capability, deliverable, or 
outcome. Project types vary in terms of their level of 
complexity, technology uncertainty, pace, and novelty 
[17]. In technology-driven organizations, project types can 
be categorized based on the types of organizational change 
described by Orlikowski and Hofman [18]: planned or 
anticipated, 
emergent, 
and 
opportunity-based. 
The 
emergent and opportunity-based ones are defined as 
innovation projects [19]. 
Distinctive methodologies have been developed for 
conducting a project from the start till delivery (such as 
PMI, PRINCE 2, PM2, AMP, SCRUM etc.). These 
methodologies variate in focus, and while some can be 
descriptive (PMI), others are more prescriptive (PRINCE 
2) [20]. The study of Ghosh, et al. [21] shows that, in 
general, projects involve initiation, planning, execution (in 
distinct stages and iterations and by aligning with software 
design and development phases), controlling, and closing.  
User requirements and business justification drive the 
project. The stages of project management can be 
distinguished by the phases of product delivery involving 
design, building, and testing [21]. Each of the techniques 
has its strengths and drawbacks. For example, PRINCE 2 
has strength in framing the process but does not elaborate 
on the involvement of human resources and suitable 
techniques for project leadership and procurement issues. 
All methodologies propagate the necessity to tailor the 
project management based on the project needs, and in 
practice, the different project management approaches are 
merged. However, in each project, the following elements 
should be managed (PRINCE 2 ref): Time – When will the 
project be finished? Cost – Projects need to give a return 
on investment, and costs need to be controlled. Quality – 
Are products passing their quality checks, and will users be 
able to use the project product as expected when delivered? 
Scope – Is the scope clear to all stakeholders? Benefits – 
Expected benefits must be known, agreed and measurable. 
Risk – All projects have risk, so risk needs to be managed 
so the project has a better chance of succeeding. 
While the project management approach is commonly 
encountered in the private sector, citizens' demand for 
better public services and accountability for using 
taxpayers' 
funds 
incentivized 
the 
public 
sector 
organizations to apply this approach [22]. Moreover, with 
the digitalization of public services being a big part of 
governmental budgets, public organizations find many IT 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
projects over budget, behind schedule, and producing 
fewer benefits than expected [22]. 
Project management practices in the public sector are 
influenced by the necessity for accountability, legally 
regulated conduct, resource management, and the political 
motivation to deliver results within specific time limits 
[23]. Accountability is exercised toward a broad range of 
stakeholders, such as elected officials, various members of 
the government management structure, employees, 
citizens, special interest groups, and the media [23].  
The field of collaborative public innovation recognizes 
the necessity of collaboration among multi-actors and -
institutions. Each stakeholder contributes knowledge, 
imagination, 
creativity, 
resources, 
transformative 
capacities, and political authority [24].  
Citizens' involvement varies in regard to different 
conceptions of democracy and a certain mode of 
governance [25]-[29] such as: a) Traditional Public 
Administration (TPA) that position citizens as clients and 
relies on experts' perspectives to decide the agendas for the 
public sector services, b) New Public Management (NPM) 
that regards citizens as customers who can influence the 
public services by choosing to use them or opting out from 
them [23], and c) New Public Governance (NPG) where 
citizens are given a more active role as co-producer [24]- 
[25] and co-creators [26]. However, achieving such 
cooperation with citizens is challenging because the public 
administration mistrusts citizens' expertise and their 
motives [30]. Additionally, for citizens, it is time 
demanding. It usually attracts resourceful citizens, thus, 
lacking the perspective of the rest of the population.   
Agger and Lund [25] use the concept of co-innovation 
as an umbrella term for the involvement of citizens in 
public innovation in all stages as co-initiators, co-
designers, and co-implementers. In each phase, citizens 
can, as public consumers, engage more directly in 
producing new public services, thereby becoming the locus 
of value creation.  
Marketization has also influenced public sector IT 
service provision. Marketization refers to a broad span of 
arrangements where private sector organizations contract 
with public sector bodies to deliver a welfare service in 
exchange for public funds [31]. Marketization can be 
applied by contracting out public services to private 
companies or by promoting free choice reforms where 
citizens are given the right to choose between public and 
private providers of welfare services [32].  
Contracting in the public sector follows regulations on 
how to manage procurement to incentivize competitive 
advantage for all interested private companies. However, 
the procurement processes are usually rigid and, instead of 
promoting innovation, impede it. Lean Agile procurement 
applies principles and practices from design thinking and 
agile software development to propose changes to 
procurement and the contracting process between public 
and private to promote partnerships that can promote 
innovation [33].   
III. METHOD 
We collected data from two public IT project 
management cases, one in Albania and one in Norway. The 
cases were selected strategically to address different public 
sector IT project management practices representing a 
developing and developed country with established 
democracies and a free market.    
For Albania, we applied document analysis to map the 
process of IT project management in the municipalities. 
With that knowledge, we interviewed an expert in auditing 
such projects. The selected project was inspired by 
observing the changes in IT infrastructure in the 
municipality area and the aim of such infrastructure change 
to contribute to citizens' well-being.  
For Norway, the case selected was a project where the 
first author had been involved from the initiation phase as 
part of the project group. The project took a stand in 
applying a PD approach and involved the interaction of 
many stakeholders at different stages to deliver a public IT 
project within healthcare. The data collected consisted of 
documents, emails, and minutes of meeting notes from the 
whole process.  
Data analysis was done in three phases. Initially, we 
applied content analysis [34] with apriori codes from the 
project management phases presented in the literature: 
initiation, planning, execution, closing, and controlling. 
The result of this analysis is presented in section IV with 
the presentation of the cases.  
To assess the degree to which the PD approach was 
applied, in each case, we conducted a reflective practice 
analysis [35]. Reflective practice is "learning through and 
from experience towards gaining new insights of self and 
practice" [4]. Dewey [5] was among the first to identify 
reflection as a specialized form of thinking ignited by 
doubt, hesitation, or perplexity related to a directly 
experienced situation. In design, reflective practices have 
been commonly applied [36] and contribute to advancing 
knowledge. Initially, we reflected on how and to what 
degree the two main PD elements described in the literature 
were present in each case: a) participation – seen both in 
terms of mutual learning and power balance concerns and 
b) the PD design result. Then, we conducted a second 
round of reflections by looking across cases.  
IV. FINDINGS 
In this section, we initially present the findings regarding 
the project management lifecycle for both cases by 
describing in rich details what activities entailed in each 
case. Then we present our findings regarding the 
application of PD in public sector IT project management 
as critical reflections that end in proposed remarks on how 
to apply PD in such context.   
A. 
Case Vignettes 
Below we present the findings from our two case studies. 
Findings are organized based on the project management 
phases described in the Section 2.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
a) Safety Cameras (SC) 
As municipalities make up a large part of the public 
sector and have standardized and regulated processes they 
need to follow, we decided to study the project 
management process for municipalities in Albania. 
Specifically, we present the case of a project to install 
cameras around the city to guarantee citizens' safety and 
increase the chances for accountability in case of 
misconduct. We found that the municipality outsources 
most IT products or services projects. The project unfolded 
as below:  
Initiation phase – The Municipality has established 
practices to engage with citizens and identify prevailing 
needs in the community. This is done through reports or 
meetings. Different departments are responsible for 
different social aspects within their area of expertise. In this 
way, the municipality's experts in citizens' safety mapped 
the need to have a way to increase control in all the urban 
areas through the installation of safety cameras. This 
project brief and other project briefs were submitted to the 
Budget Committee. The projects are usually discussed in 
different working groups and prioritized by applying 
various criteria such as urgency, necessity, budget 
availability, and in compliance with the long-term plan that 
the municipality has. A budget proposal is presented to the 
municipal council. After due review and further discussion, 
the final budget for the year is approved. SC followed the 
same process. A budget estimation was approved to be 
applied in 4 months. 
Planning phase – A project work group was 
established, involving the citizen safety department as the 
project 
executive, 
a 
functional 
safety 
specialist 
representing the citizens' view, and a technical safety 
specialist 
representing 
the 
technical 
requirements. 
Together with the project manager, they started drafting the 
requirements. A procurement officer was appointed and 
joined the project group to help prepare the solicitation 
package - define sourcing strategy, evaluation criteria, and 
communication methods. Moreover, the project group 
worked on an initial plan and timelines for delivery. The 
budget estimation was revised once they knew more about 
the requirements for the cameras, both functionally and 
technically. The documents produced involved: Request 
for Proposal (RfP), product or service specifications, 
contract conditions, and bid evaluation criteria.  
The municipality bids are, by law, to be published on 
an official sourcing site for public institutions if they 
surpass a certain fund limit. The safety camera project was 
established and published there.  
 When the bidding was open, the procurement 
specialist received requests for more information from 
different potential suppliers. The answer was made 
available to everyone, and it was treated carefully not to 
allow disclosure of the company information without their 
consent. On the bid deadline, all offers received via mail 
were opened in a common meeting with everyone from the 
project group. Each project member assigned previously to 
the bid to be part of the evaluation committee was provided 
with the documents from each company. The evaluators 
had several meetings to discuss and endorse a winning 
company. The mayor made the final decision with the 
approval of the municipal council. The winner was 
announced on the municipality website. It was only after 
the contract signing that the project group would meet the 
supplier 
and, 
together 
with 
their 
plan 
for 
the 
implementation.  
 Implementation – The project started with a design 
phase where the supplier, in cooperation with the technical 
and functional experts in the project group, defined the best 
strategy to deploy the cameras around the city to fulfill the 
safety need. Different scenarios were discussed during the 
design. Additionally, the project group discussed the 
monitoring room and how that will be managed. Once the 
design was agreed upon, the installation phase started. This 
lasted for 4 months. Training was provided for the IT 
experts operating and maintaining the cameras. 
Monitoring and control – Many controlling entities 
were involved in the previously described phases. The 
project manager must report to the business owner (the 
citizens' safety department), the mayor, and municipal 
council. Other controlling and directing entities are the 
budget committee and the procurement officer. Regarding 
implementation, the project group controlled the deliveries 
from the supplier and reported to the adequate board 
entities regularly.  
b) Patient Healthcare Record (PHR) 
The aim of this project from the start was to investigate 
technological possibilities that would support patients in 
need of rehabilitation after Acquired Brain Injuries (ABI) 
to take control and get empowered in their rehabilitation 
process. A rehabilitation hospital offering specialized 
services to such patients in Norway initiated the project. 
They engaged with an academic institution to cover the 
needs and design exploration phase.  
Initiation Phase – The common initiative resulted in a 
PhD researcher funded by the academic institution who 
worked at the hospital to investigate the need for a 
collaborative tool between patients and healthcare 
practitioners to empower the patients throughout their 
rehabilitation process.  
The hospital and the academic institution shared an 
interest in participative methods and encouraging users (in 
this case, patients, and healthcare practitioners) to have 
their say in the design process, being service design of 
technology design. Two PD workshops with patients and 
two with healthcare practitioners were organized to 
investigate needs. Additionally, the PhD researcher spends 
circa 6 months conducting ethnographic studies and 
mapping existing practices at the hospital. The knowledge 
collected was then applied to organize two design 
workshops for patients and two design workshops for 
healthcare practitioners to reflect on existing practices and 
envision future solutions to help patient empowerment. As 
the design ideas highlighted the necessity to cooperate 
closely between patients and healthcare practitioners, two 
power-balanced PD workshops were organized with 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
patients and healthcare practitioners to envision the future 
solution and practices.  
Planning phase – The research and design (R&D) 
results were applied to ideate a project and apply for 
external funds to develop a technological solution to 
support the needs defined during the research phase.  
Innovation Norway (IN) is an institution jointly funded 
by the government and municipalities' budget. IN aims to 
incentivize business development that is profitable for the 
business and that contributes to society's needs to boost 
regional development. Public institutions can apply for 
funds for projects that can help them address a need and 
cooperate with the private sector to purchase the solution 
and academic institutions to contribute to research. 
Innovation Norge granted the project funds to the 
rehabilitation hospital to develop the technological solution 
envisioned.  
A project manager was assigned. A project group and 
project board were established. In the project group, 
representatives from the hospital (patient representatives, 
management representatives, IT experts that know the 
existing technologies), the researcher from the academic 
institution, and a representative from the funding 
institution were included. The project board involved all 
the relevant stakeholders that would contribute to decision-
making (each group was represented).  
The following project management process was 
recommended to follow. It included the following phases: 
Describing Needs; Market Dialogue; Bid; Development, 
and Implementation, as shown below:  
 
 
Figure 1: Process followed in PHR. 
 
The initial planning phase activity was to describe the 
needs. The project group worked jointly on the document. 
Once consolidated, the document was forwarded for 
approval to the project board. Once the project board 
accepted, a date for a market dialogue was published on the 
Norwegian official public procurement site. The market 
dialogue aimed to show the business the project's aim and 
the problem to be solved. The business could discuss with 
the hospital their current technologies and the extent to 
which they match their needs. The market dialogue agenda 
included a presentation of the project and an invitation for 
each potential supplier to two group workshops to discuss 
the project and the innovation possibilities the supplier 
could offer.  
The participants from the market dialogue were: The 
hospital 
(clinical 
and 
technical 
knowledge 
representatives), patients (patient representatives), the 
project manager, the procurement specialist, and the 
technology regulators in healthcare in Norway, which 
provide the platform on which this new solution should 
work.  
After the market dialogue, the needs were revised, and 
the final functional and non-functional requirements were 
described to be further published as an RfP on the public 
procurement site 'Doffin'. A date for a Bid Conference was 
assigned prior to publishing the bid. The conference 
addressed potential suppliers' questions regarding the bid 
and the documentation they needed to provide.  
Once the bid period was closed, the project group 
evaluated them in many discussion rounds and provided 
recommendations to the board to make the final decision.  
Implementation phase – The implementation phase 
started with a kick-off meeting between the project group 
and the selected supplier. Both parties discussed a plan for 
the implementation that would follow these stages: design, 
development, testing, further refinement, and final 
delivery. The first designs were delivered in March 2023, 
and the project is still ongoing. Thus, for the project 
closure, we do not yet have information. 
Monitoring and Control – The project was monitored 
and controlled by several mechanisms. In the initiation 
phase, the agreed PD approach was a control mechanism 
for the planned activities. Instead, in the following phases, 
the project management framework was used for 
monitoring and control. Moreover, the project manager 
continuously reported to the board for specific and routine 
decisions. Another control mechanism is the official 
procurement site that safeguards a fair procurement 
process. During implementation, the project team oversees 
the supplier's work and reports progress to the project 
board. Codes of conduct that regulate the relationship 
between patients and healthcare practitioners are 
considered during the testing phase.   
 
B. 
PD in public sector IT project management 
Here we will present the findings on how PD elements 
have been applied in the two projects we studied. We 
conclude the analysis with guidelines on how to increase 
the presence of PD in public-sector IT project 
management.  
 
a) Enhance user participation in the planning and 
implementation phase through PD methods 
In both cases, we found that some degree of 
participation was exercised in each phase of the projects. 
In the SC project, citizens were involved through 
established networks of engagement with citizens to 
evaluate ongoing needs. Similarly, patients' and healthcare 
practitioners' voices were represented in the identification 
and articulation of the needs to request external funds for 
the PHR project. The citizens' and users' representatives 
remained participants in the project and were involved in 
discussions with technology experts and possible suppliers. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
In the SC project, a technical expert was assigned to work 
on the project together with the citizens' representative(s). 
In the PHR project, the market dialogue brought the user 
needs to the business to discuss possible solutions.  
In both cases, the bidding process involved regulated 
information exchange with the bidders regarding asking 
questions and providing responses. In the PHR project, 
such exchange happened during the bidding conference. In 
each case, the procurement regulating authorities framed 
how participation was implemented.  
The implementation phase in the SC project involved 
the encounters between the technical experts and the 
supplier selected. Instead, in the PHR project, the supplier 
engaged again with end users in the prototype's evaluation 
and 
feedback-gathering 
phase. 
The 
way 
the 
implementation is organized depends on the final product 
and how the supplier organizes the work. Due to 
contractual binding, they are obliged to report back to the 
project group. It is up to the project group to organize how 
citizens or end users should be involved in the 
implementation phase. This was the case with the PHR 
project, where the experience of the project manager in PD 
approaches and the interest in participative practices led to 
public display evaluation not only for the board and higher 
management but also for end users.  
 Based on the above findings, we conclude that: The 
discourse on participation and relevant stakeholders' 
involvement should also be promoted during the planning 
and initiation phase. Tools and techniques from PD 
practices can be applied to promote co-design. Moreover, 
new PD techniques for project management in public 
sector digitalization initiatives should be explored. 
  
b) Promote Mutual Learning with Suppliers in 
Market Dialogue PD workshops 
Hearing the voice of users/citizens seems to be a well-
established practice in organizing project management 
work at the municipality. At the hospital, the same 
approach is present. However, our analysis shows that 
while policymakers and design experts learn from citizens, 
the learning is not mutual. Citizens are not involved in later 
stages where they can learn about design alternatives and 
possible technologies and eventually make their own 
decisions. Moreover, each actor in the planning phase 
represents a specific area of expertise. They engage with 
each other to draft the high-level requirement document 
presented in the bid. While some mutual learning happens 
in those instances, they are detached from the real setting 
where the knowledge of alternatives stands, the suppliers.  
In the PHR project, such a gap in mutual learning is 
filled by market dialogue. This allows the end users' 
representatives to sit with the possible suppliers to discuss: 
What is a viable solution with existing resources? What 
would the supplier be willing to do to engage in innovative 
solutions if the requirements are not covered fully by what 
is provided today? The market dialogue approach is open 
and does not infringe on any rule imposed by procurement 
regulation. It also allows the possibility of having an 
objective, quantifiable evaluation process later, while still 
providing a true participative venue for mutual learning 
and creating alternative visions.  
During the implementation process in the SC case, no 
more mutual learning is happening. This has a negative 
impact because citizens are not consulted on the design and 
implementation of the solution in practice. Thus, the 
supplier applies what they consider best and might lose 
sight of what the citizens need. Meanwhile, citizens not 
knowing how their needs were addressed and the benefits 
and risks that the technology brings can experience an 
unethical impact in the long run. Instead, in the PHR 
project, the design phase involved the discussion of the 
designs directly with the end users and higher management 
by using high-fidelity prototypes. While the project is 
ongoing, it is relevant that the evaluation of the prototype 
does not focus only on the look and feel and functionalities 
provided but is used to capture more in-depth and inherited 
issues of technology that should be cleared with the users, 
such as accountability, integrity, and accessibility of data.  
Based on the above findings, we conclude that: The 
market dialog provides the opportunity in sourcing IT 
projects to have both user and technology representatives 
to share knowledge and values, engage in co-design moves, 
and produce design alternatives. PD techniques and tools 
should be applied in the market dialogue. We will define 
this as market co-creation techniques and suggest using 
generative tools [4] that the suppliers can provide. 
 
c) Making "Power" a central theme to consider in 
each phase 
We found that the power dynamics discourse is the 
most underestimated PD principle in both projects. For the 
SC project, the discussion of power is inexistent. The 
municipality considers the elected representatives as 
guardians of democratic decisions that favor the majority 
that has elected them. In the PHR project, the discussion on 
power is deeply considered in the initiation phase. The final 
result addresses the power imbalance between patients and 
healthcare practitioners with the aim of patient 
empowerment. However, the power balancing has been 
more tacit during the process, counting on representatives 
having equal power during the project management 
process.  
Project 
management 
relies 
upon 
established 
organizational hierarchies and agreed-on processes to 
deliver on time and within budget. These hierarchies can 
create power imbalances if all actors' involvement are not 
treated equally.  
 Based on the above findings, we conclude that: The 
power discourse should be part of IT project management. 
It should become a central theme that is reflected upon in 
every phase and activity where different stakeholders 
engage. The discussion on power should be balanced with 
the necessity to follow the regulations that define the frame 
for some project management activities. That is why 
engagement with the possible suppliers during the market 
dialogue and not after the official bid is published provides 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
a practice that adheres to PD principles and follows project 
management regulations. 
 
d) Control and monitor the delivery of “PD results” 
In the municipality project, the design result addresses 
an issue that the citizens brought forward, and it is not in 
principle related to the empowerment of a marginalized 
user group. While the focus is on the result, the discussion 
on the solution's impact on marginalized user groups and 
how to make the solution suitable and understandable for 
every citizen category remains obsolete. Instead, in the 
PHR project, the design result is ideated based on PD 
principles. The project impacts empowering patients and 
giving them more control in their rehabilitation. The 
involvement of the PD expert as a project advisor 
contributes to highlighting all relevant stakeholders and 
involving them in the design process. The process adopted 
by IN also promotes PD project management. Moreover, in 
the project, power dynamics are actively considered and 
addressed, so the solution represents the views of everyone 
and creates the opportunity to have emerging new 
practices.  
Based on the above findings, we conclude that: The 
design result represents the user need in IT project 
management. However, that is not sufficient. Broadening 
the scope of the design result toward a “PD design result” 
can contribute to delivering more citizens’ friendly 
solutions and guarantee an ethical and responsible process 
and delivery. New methods should emerge in PD literature 
to become part of IT project management control and 
monitoring.  
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
PD is a field that stands by a bold commitment toward 
bringing voice to marginalized user groups and promoting 
equality and power balance in design [1]. PD can be 
applied to any context and strives to find methods, tools 
and techniques that promote engaged participation in 
projects from idea and vision to delivery [3]. Conversely, 
project management is driven by timelines, budgets, 
quality requirements, risks, benefits, and outcomes. 
Whittle [9] discusses six projects and states that PD 
researchers have not engaged with agile approaches and 
vice versa. This is true because compromising power 
balance for fast results is not a choice for PD, and 
compromising timelines for achieving the true power 
balance among stakeholders is not feasible in the face of 
resource limitations, existing organizational structures, and 
defined regulations that halt the project from delivering 
what is expected. These elements are even more present in 
public-sector IT project management [20].  
However, we found that in the public sector IT project 
management, PD practices are present. The degree to 
which participation is considered varies from the SC to the 
PHR project because PHR was initiated by embracing the 
PD approach, and it takes place in Norway, where PD 
emerged and the discussions on equality and power balance 
are strongly positioned in the public discourse [22]. While 
in the SC example, citizens are considered consumers of 
public services and are involved only in the co-initiation of 
the project, in the PHR project, they are treated more as co-
producers and contribute to co-design [24]-[26]. In a 
similar position are the private sector companies that 
contribute to the marketization of services [29] who also 
become just clients in the SC project and co-producers in 
co-design and co-implementation in the PHR project. We 
acknowledge that historical, cultural, and political 
differences between the two countries influence how the 
project management process is established.  
We argue that as agility has become a central theme in 
project management, participation and power dynamics 
should also be used as central concepts to revise the project 
management processes and profit from the benefits that a 
PD 
approach 
enables. 
Initiatives 
like 
lean-agile 
procurement and practices like the market dialogue(e.g., 
[30])  are adapting the design thinking approach to the 
project management world [10]-[12], but adding to this 
approach PD principles and PD techniques and tools can 
contribute to delivering projects that matter and are 
accepted by all end users. Moreover, it can contribute to 
projects that focus on the design of software used for 
cooperation [2].  
PD initiatives like the effect-driven PD [8][34] have 
raised the concern that PD should be driven by delivering 
benefits and contributing to achieving the desired effects. 
While the effect-driven PD provides a good framework as 
a high-level approach, the issue remains in finding 
techniques and tools that can be applied within the project 
management process and not burden the timelines and 
budgets of the project.  
The market dialogue is an example of a practice of 
mutual learning and if PD techniques and tools are applied 
to promote dialogue and engage in co-creation activities, 
the project will not only deliver but also drive innovation.  
However, in both fields, additional questions and 
remarks should still be explored, such as: who should 
organize the participatory activities, how to balance 
between existing hierarchical structures and the necessity 
to cooperate, how to make PD techniques and tools more 
efficient and delivery driven, and what tools and 
techniques are adequate for each phase of project 
management? What does participation mean in project 
management? To what extent is power balancing possible?  
Answering these questions requires PD and project 
management researchers to reflect on them in future 
research by exploring new practices or adapting the 
existing knowledge to co-flourish and contribute better to 
society. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. Robertson and J. Simonsen, "Participatory Design: an 
introduction," in Routledge international handbook of 
participatory design: Routledge, 2012, pp. 21-38. 
[2] 
S. Salomo, K. Talke, and N. Strecker, "Innovation field 
orientation and its effect on innovativeness and firm 
performance," Journal of product innovation management, 
vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 560-576, 2008. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
[3] 
 A. Guide, "Project management body of knowledge 
(pmbok® guide)," in Project Management Institute, 2001, 
vol. 11, pp. 7-8.  
[4] 
E. Enkel, O. Gassmann, and H. Chesbrough, "Open R&D 
and open innovation: exploring the phenomenon," R&d 
Management, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 311-316, 2009. 
[5] 
T. Bratteteig, Design for, med og av brukere: å inkludere 
brukere 
i 
design 
av 
informasjonssystemer. 
Universitetsforlaget, 2021. 
[6] 
F. Kensing and J. Blomberg, "Participatory design: Issues 
and concerns," Computer supported cooperative work, vol. 
7, no. 3-4, pp. 167-185, 1998. 
[7] 
F. Kensing and J. Greenbaum, "Heritage: Having a say," in 
Routledge international handbook of participatory design: 
Routledge, 2012, pp. 41-56. 
[8] 
E. Brandt, T. Binder, and E. B.-N. Sanders, "Tools and 
techniques: Ways to engage telling, making and enacting," 
in Routledge international handbook of participatory 
design: Routledge, 2012, pp. 145-181. 
[9] 
T. Bratteteig, K. Bødker, Y. Dittrich, P. H. Mogensen, and 
J. Simonsen, "Organising principles and general guidelines 
for Participatory Design Projects," Routledge international 
handbook of participatory design, pp. 117-144, 2013. 
[10] T. Bratteteig and I. Wagner, "Unpacking the notion of 
participation in participatory design," Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 25, pp. 425-475, 2016. 
[11]  T. Bratteteig and I. Wagner, "What is a participatory design 
result?," in Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design 
Conference: Full papers-Volume 1, 2016, pp. 141-150.  
[12]  M. Hertzum and J. Simonsen, "Effects-driven IT 
development: an instrument for supporting sustained 
participatory design," in Proceedings of the 11th Biennial 
Participatory Design Conference, 2010, pp. 61-70.  
[13] J. Whittle, "How much participation is enough? a 
comparison of six participatory design projects in terms of 
outcomes," presented at the Proceedings of the 13th 
Participatory Design Conference: Research Papers - 
Volume 1, Windhoek, Namibia, 2014. pp. 121-130. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2661435.2661445. 
[14] K. Kautz, "Investigating the design process: participatory 
design in agile software development," Information 
Technology & People, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 217-235, 2011. 
[15]  A. Tedjasaputra and E. R. Sari, "Pair Writing: Towards 
Agile Participatory Design," 2005: HCII. pp. 1-5.  
[16] M. A. Ferrario, W. Simm, P. Newman, S. Forshaw, and J. 
Whittle, "Software engineering for 'social good': integrating 
action 
research, 
participatory 
design, 
and 
agile 
development," presented at the Companion Proceedings of 
the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering, 
Hyderabad, India, 2014. pp. 520-523. [Online]. Available: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2591062.2591121. 
[17] D. Dvir, A. Sadeh, and A. Malach-Pines, "Projects and 
project managers: The relationship between project 
managers' personality, project types, and project success," 
Project Management Journal, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 36-48, 
2006. 
[18] W. J. Orlikowski and J. D. Hofman, "An improvisational 
model for change management: The case of groupware 
technologies," MIT Sloan Management Review, 1997. 
[19] C. Midler, C. P. Killen, and A. Kock, "Project and 
innovation management: Bridging contemporary trends in 
theory and practice,"  vol. 47, ed: SAGE Publications Sage 
CA: Los Angeles, CA, 2016, pp. 3-7. 
[20] S. Matos and E. Lopes, "Prince2 or PMBOK–a question of 
choice," Procedia Technology, vol. 9, pp. 787-794, 2013. 
[21] S. Ghosh, D. Forrest, T. DiNetta, B. Wolfe, and D. C. 
Lambert, "Enhance PMBOK® by comparing it with P2M, 
ICB, PRINCE2, APM and Scrum project management 
standards," PM World Today, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1-77, 2012. 
[22] W. Cats-Baril and R. Thompson, "Managing information 
technology projects in the public sector," Public 
administration review, pp. 559-566, 1995. 
[23] K. M. Rosacker and R. E. Rosacker, "Information 
technology project management within public sector 
organizations," 
Journal 
of 
Enterprise 
Information 
Management, 2010. 
[24] J. Torfing, "Collaborative innovation in the public sector," 
in Handbook of innovation in public services: Edward Elgar 
Publishing, 2013, pp. 301-316. 
[25] A. Agger and D. H. Lund, "Collaborative Innovation in the 
Public Sector–new perspectives on the role of citizens?," 
Scandinavian Journal of Public Administration, vol. 21, no. 
3, pp. 17-38, 2017. 
[26] J. Clarke and J. Newman, "Elusive publics: Knowledge, 
power and public service reform," in Changing Teacher 
Professionalism: Routledge, 2009, pp. 63-73. 
[27] D. 
Osborne, 
"Reinventing 
government," 
Public 
productivity & management Review, pp. 349-356, 1993. 
[28] J. Alford, Engaging public sector clients: From service-
delivery to co-production. Springer, 2009. 
[29] S. P. Osborne, Z. Radnor, and K. Strokosch, "Co-
Production and the Co-Creation of Value in Public 
Services: A suitable case for treatment?," Public 
Management Review, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 639-653, 
2016/05/27 2016, doi: 10.1080/14719037.2015.1111927. 
[30] B. E. P. Thapa, B. Niehaves, C. E. Seidel, and R. Plattfaut, 
"Citizen involvement in public sector innovation: 
Government and citizen perspectives," Information Polity, 
vol. 20, pp. 3-17, 2015, doi: 10.3233/IP-150351. 
[31] T. L. Brown and M. Potoski, "Transaction costs and 
institutional 
explanations 
for 
government 
service 
production decisions," Journal of Public Administration 
research and theory, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 441-468, 2003. 
[32] O. H. Petersen and U. Hjelmar, "Marketization of welfare 
services in Scandinavia: A review of Swedish and Danish 
experiences," 
Scandinavian 
Journal 
of 
Public 
Administration, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 3-20, 2014. 
[33] B. Nicoletti, Agile Procurement: Volume I: Adding Value 
with Lean Processes. Springer, 2017. 
[34] C. Erlingsson and P. Brysiewicz, "A hands-on guide to 
doing content analysis," African journal of emergency 
medicine, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 93-99, 2017. 
[35] J. Dewey, How we think: A restatement of the relation of 
reflective thinking to the educative process. DC Heath, 
1933. 
[36] D. A. Schön, Educating the reflective practitioner. Jossey-
Bass San Francisco, 1987. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

