Proposal and Evaluation of Kinect-based Physical Training System for
Special Needs Education
Hiroki Matsuda, Hidemi Yamachi, Fumihiro Kumeno
Department of Computer and Information Technology
Nippon Institute of Technology
Japan, Miyashiro
email: zuimu1010@gmail.com, yamachi@nit.ac.jp,
kumeno@nit.ac.jp
Kotomi Shiota
Organization for University Research Initiatives
Waseda Universityline
Japan, Totsukamachi
email: shiota@aoni.waseda.jp
Abstract- Microsoft Kinect is a motion sensing device for
video games with potential applications in rehabilitation or
physical
training
systems.
Many
studies
have
shown
the
effectiveness
of
Kinect-based
physical
training
systems,
particularly for promoting concentration and movement in
special needs education. However, the availability of such systems
in the special needs education field in Japan is currently very
limited. We developed a Kinect-based physical training system
for special needs education and provided it to schools for
evaluation. To clearly estimate the system efficacy, we developed
a motion analyzer utilizing the open-source software OpenPose.
Using the motion analyzer, we were able to evaluate the system's
efficacy. In this paper, we report an overview of the system and
the results of the evaluation.
Keywords-motion sensor; Kinect; physical training system; special
needs education; OpenPose.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, several motion sensor device types have been
developed for use in video game systems, such as the Nintendo
Wii Fit, Microsoft Kinect, and Leap Motion. These devices are
also useful for rehabilitation or physical training assistance
systems, and many research reports have been published on the
efficacy of such motion sensor devices.
Lange et al. reported that Kinect’s high accuracy of
tracking and feedback on performance was important in games
developed as rehabilitation tools for adults with neurological
injuries [1]. Kayama et al. focused on decreasing elderly adults'
dual-task ability as a risk factor for falls [2]. They developed a
game based on tai chi exercises using Kinect to improve dual-
task ability and evaluated the game over a 12-week period in
41 elderly individuals. They reported that the exercise was
effective in improving cognitive functions. Chang et al.
reported
that
the
Kinect-based
rehabilitation
system
significantly improved motivation for physical training and
exercise
performance
among
young
adults
with
motor
disabilities [3]. Bartoli et al. adapted an on-the-market, motion-
based touchless game for use with Kinect to assist the
education of five children with autism and confirmed the
efficacy of this teaching tool using standardized therapeutic
tests [4]. Fu et al. evaluated the efficacy of a Kinect-based
game system for the rehabilitation of 112 children with mental
disorders. They compared the children’s’ pediatric evaluation
of disability inventory scores before and after training [5] and
found significantly improved results.
Few studies have specifically studied the use of such tools
in the special needs education fields. Chang et al. compared the
effectiveness of the Kinect system and the high fidelity
OptiTrack optical system [6] and showed that Kinect was
effective enough as a rehabilitation tool for use in both clinical
and home environments. Altanis et al. also found that a Kinect
learning game was effective for children with gross motor skill
problems
and
motor
impairments
[7].
Boutiska
et
al.
successfully used a game called “Kinect Adventures” as an
auxiliary learning tool for teaching “Mnemonic Techniques” in
children with autism [8]. Freitas et al. developed a Kinect-
based motor rehabilitation game to analyze the evaluation
feedback from users to repeatedly inform appropriate upgrades
[9].
Kinect is most often used as a motion sensor device in such
studies because of its low cost and usage possibility without
extra attachment devices or markers. However, developing
effective Kinect-based rehabilitation systems is not easy. This
has led some researchers to use on-the-market games that
might discourage continued use by individuals with special
needs. Greef et al. discussed the efficacy of Kinect-based
games as rehabilitation tools for children with motor skill
problems [10], emphasizing that on-the-market games usually
revolve around competitions based on mastery skills. Hence,
on-the-market games for children with special needs may result
in feelings of exclusion. To provide interesting games for such
individuals,
they
recommend
developing
Kinect
games
designed
according
to
user
requirements.
Contrarily,
a
commercial suite of Kinect-based educational games known as
Kinems [11] already exists. These games are targeted at not
only typically-developing children, but also at children with
learning
disabilities.
Some
researchers
have
already
investigated the efficacy of these games. Kosmas et al.
provided empirical evidence that Kinems games enhance
motor performance in children with learning disabilities and
motor impairments [12]. Kourakli et al. conducted analyses in
inclusive classrooms at two primary schools with 20 children
having special educational needs. They concluded that these
games
have
a
positive
impact
on
children's
academic
performances
and
improve
their
cognitive,
motor,
and
academic skills [13]. Tsiakalou et al. also showed that Kinems
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

games can improve academic performance, motor skills, and
executive functions like short-term memory, problem solving,
concentration, and attention in children with special needs [14].
Some Kinems games have an embedded monitoring and
reporting system that provides teachers the ability to enrich the
quantity and quality of information about the children's specific
needs. Retalis et al. used Kinems in a study involving children
with ADHD learning disabilities [15] and found a statistically
significant pre- to post game improvement in their nonverbal
intelligence scores. Additionally, an in-depth examination of
learning and kinetics showed an improvement in the children’s
executive functions and cognitive skills.
The Japanese Ministry of Education (MEXT) actively
promotes
the
use
of
Information
and
Communication
Technology (ICT) devices as educational tools [16]. Several
studies related to special needs education have reported an
excessive use of notebook and tablet PCs for communication
training or rehabilitation; however, there is a limited mention
of motion sensor devices such as Kinect. On the National
Institute of Special Needs Education website [17], the
discussion about ICT devices and their applications in special
needs education does not include any information on motion
sensors [11]. In 2013, Microsoft Japan and Tokyo University’s
Research
Center of
Advanced
Science
and
Technology
collaboratively developed the observation and access with
Kinect (OAK) [12], a software that aims at supporting children
with severe disabilities by identifying their tiniest movements
and utilizing those as switches for electronic devices or
communication needs. Although OAK can also be used for
rehabilitation, it does not provide it's software development kit;
therefore, it is impossible to adapt its function to other
applications.
We developed a Kinect-based physical training system and
provided it to special needs education teachers in seven
classrooms of three schools for evaluation. Comments were
gathered from the teachers and users, and the system was
accordingly revised. Most comments were highly positive, and
many teachers reported that the system promoted unusual
physical movements that had not been previously seen among
the children.
Besides such positive evaluations, numerical data is still
required for evaluating the objective of the system. Numerical
data was obtained by comparing the player's skeleton positions
and the angles formed by connecting skeletons of two video
images presented with or without the system. For this analysis,
we developed a motion analyzer utilizing OpenPose [18], an
open-source software that provides human skeleton position
data from video images. We applied the system to a child with
motor skill problems and evaluated the data obtained from the
system.
Our design goals of this system is as follows.
For trainees (children with disabilities):
1. Inducing a trainee's motivation to move their body as
much as they can.
2. Making the training with the system enjoyable for
trainees.
3. Developing a trainee's potential ability of their
physical body motormovements.
For trainers (special needs education teachers):
1. Easy to use - no need for training before use the
system.
2. Easy to customize the system for each trainee
condition.
3. Easy to recognize the effect of the training.
Based on these goals, we evaluate our system and specify
the effectiveness and problems to be solved of the system.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we
provide an overview of the physical training system.
In
Section 3, evaluations and suggestions from several teachers
who have used the system are presented. In Section 4, we
describe an outline of the motion analyzer and the results
applied to a child with motor skill problems. Finally, we
provide
concluding
remarks
and
suggestions
for
future
prospects in Section 5.
II.
SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS
The Kinect-based system was developed to motivate
movement in children with autism and mental disorders who
are able to independently move around. The system displays a
video image of the player captured by the Kinect camera with
randomly allocated graphical targets, such as balls, other
shapes or animals, superimposed on the screen. When the
player touches a target, it disappears with a sound and a point
is awarded. The game lasts until all the targets have been
eliminated (Figure 1). To clearly identify the relationship
between the touching motion and target elimination, the target
changes its shape before disappearing. When Kinect recognizes
the player, red circles appear on the players hands. The game
can also be used without a finish point. For example, by
selecting the target-manipulate mode, players can hit targets
with a rock-shaped hand, break them with scissors, and catch
them with paper. In this mode, recognizable pictures, instead of
red circles, are displayed on the player’s hand (Figure 2(g)).
The game can be customized according to the training
purpose or the child’s needs. The customizable parameters are
listed below:

Number of targets (Figure 2(a))

Finish point

Target size (Figure 2(b))

Touch-area size (Figure 2(c))

Type of targets (Figure 2(d))

Size and position of target area (Figure2(e))

Body parts used for touching (head, right or left hand,
and right or left foot; Figure 2(f))
Figure 1. Application outlook
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

As shown in Figure 2(e), the user can change the size and
position of the area where the targets will appear. This function
allows the player to concentrate on a specific area and move
toward the area. The last parameter (Figure 2(f)) allows the
player to use only the left or right hand or all body parts to
touch the targets. These settings are saved as a text file for each
player and are retained for the next time they play.
III.
TEACHERS’ EVALUATION AND SUGGESTIONS
The Kinect-based physical training system was provided to
seven classes in three Japanese special education schools and
reports were gathered on its usefulness and popularity. There
were no questionnaires used because the evaluation criteria
were expected to be different depending on the disability
situation of each child, the aim of the session, and the
education method of each teacher. The collected comments are
given in the Appendix.
The teachers used large monitors, 50 inches or more, and
each practice was 10 to 15 minutes depending on children's
situation. The disability situations of the children of these
classes were as follows.
• Case 1 contained two children: Child A, aged 10 years, with
autism spectrum disorders and mild intellectual disability;
Child B with cerebral palsy.
• Case 2 contained five children aged 15 years, four with
developmental disability and one with autism
• Case 3 included five classes.
Class (1) contained .three children aged 15 years, with
intellectual and physical disability.
Class (2) contained three 3 children aged 3with cerebral
palsy.
Class (3) contained three 3 children aged 7 years with
severe multiple disabilities.
Class (4) contained one child aged 8 years with cerebral
palsy.
Class (5) contained one child aged 14years with muscular
dystrophy.
Here, we describe the teachers’ comments.
According to the comments in the cases 1, 2 and (1), (2),
(4), (5) of Case 3, children, who could move around by
themselves and recognize that the targets disappeared when
they touched them enjoyed the game intensely by extending
their arms, lifting them over their heads, or jumping. All
teachers commented that the children seldom used those
movements. In class 3 (2), there was one child who was so
energetic that he became exhausted. These comments show
that
the
game
system
successfully
induced
children's
motivation to move their body and most of them seemed to
enjoy the training.
However, the comment of Case 3 (4) (see Appendix)
identifies the difficulty of recognition of the target for a child
with milder disability. In Case 2 and Case 3 (3), there was also
recognition difficulty for children with severe disabilities. This
explains the suggestion of making the targets static and
showing them one at a time.
The first suggestion of Case 2 arises from the issue of
Kinect sensor. The first version of Kinect recognized two
people and the second version recognized six. But neither
could distinguish each person. In order to distinguish each
person frame by frame, we need to use markers of some kind.
(a) Number of targets
(b) Target size
(d) Touch-area size
(e) Types of targets
(e) Size and position of target area
(f) Parts of body used for touching
(g)Target manipulation modes
Rock: catch, Scissors: break, Paper: hit
Figure 2. System specifications
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The second suggestion of Case 2 pointed out that for hand
shapes to be recognized by Kinect, it is necessary to have the
hands face toward Kinect. This movement was one of the
difficulties faced by most of the children. Even if they can fold
their wrists, intellectual disability makes it hard to understand
the function of Kinect. Some children were unable to make the
scissor shape.
IV.
RESULTS ANALYSIS
It is challenging to compare motions made with or without
the system for evaluating the system performance. Although
Kinect can easily recognize the position of human skeleton
data, most special needs education schools and classes are not
in a situation to use Kinect anytime they want. Thus, in some
cases, we must use a video footage of the children's motion for
comparison of motions made with and without the system. To
help evaluate the system, we developed a motion analyzer that
can compare differences in motion between two videos. The
motion analyzer uses OpenPose, an open-source software that
recognizes human poses and reports skeleton position data.
OpenPose obtains position data from the base of the neck and
both sides of the hips in each video, and superimposes the
points by zooming from one to the other. Through this process,
OpenPose can calculate the motion angles of the shoulders,
elbows, or other joints and compare the difference in angles
between the two videos (Figure 3).
We used motion videos of a child with limb and trunk
dysfunction caused by cerebral palsy and hydrocephaly. He
also suffered from paralysis on the right half of his body. The
child underwent a calisthenics training with a teacher for a year.
This
calisthenics
training
is
very
popular
in
Japanese
compulsory education and it includes whole body basic
motions with familiar rhythm and the words. At the beginning
of the training, he could not move his body to the rhythm.
After training, he was able to move to the rhythm; however, his
ability
to
move
his
muscles
showed
no
improvement,
according to the teacher. The teacher used the Kinect system
with the child for 15 minutes per week from April to July 2017.
The two videos, with and without the system, were recorded in
July 2017. Based on the rhythm of the calisthenics training, we
fit the same timing of both video scenes. The motions with and
without the system that were compared are listed in Figure 4
(a)–(d), and the angles of the shoulders and elbows for each
motion are shown in TABLE 1. The “Standard” in TABLE 1
indicates the ideal angle for each motion and each percentage
indicates the standard angle.
Figure
4
(a)
depicts
that
the
child
showed
great
improvement in extending his arms upward. As observed in
(a) Exercise Pattern A:
Raise arms next to the ears
(b) Exercise Pattern B:
Arms at shoulder level
(c) Exercise Pattern C:
Arms swinging above the shoulders
(d) Exercises Pattern D:
Raising arms and standing on toes
Left: before, Center: after, Right: standard
Figure 4. Motions with and without the system
TABLE 1. ANGLES OF SHOULDERS AND ELBOWS
DURING EACH MOTION
Step 2:
OpenPose Output
Step 1:
Original videos
Step 3:
Motion Analyzer
Figure 3. Analysis process
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 4 (b), his motion also considerably improved, except for
his left elbow. However, as observed in Figure 4 (c) and (d),
better results were obtained with the system.
The results support that the system induced the child’s
active movements and performance. The teacher informed that
the child had never shown such extending actions before. In
this study, we focused only on the upper half of the child’s
body. In future studies, it will be necessary to expand the
analysis to whole body motion and to observe more number of
children. We also need to revise the system to record the
motion video and data directly.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We developed a Kinect-based rehabilitation system for
special -needs education and provided it to schools for
evaluation. In order to clearly estimate the system efficacy, we
also developed a motion analyzer utilizing the open-source
software, OpenPose. We then evaluated the effectiveness of the
system efficacy using this motion analyzer.
The Kinect-based physical training system was provided to
seven classes in three Japanese special education schools and
reports were gathered on its usefulness and popularity. Many
teachers rated the system as highly valuable for children with
disabilities. The feedback and suggestions offered by the
teachers provided insights into ways the system could be made
more effective and more popular.
We also developed a motion analyzer using the open-
source software OpenPose, which recognizes human poses and
reports their skeleton position data. Using the analyzer, we
analyzed videos of motions performed by a child with limb and
trunk dysfunction, with and without the rehabilitation system.
In most cases, the child’s motions improved upon Kinect-based
system usage. The child’s teacher reported never having seen
him make such movements before. It is clear that the system
induced these active movements in the child.
In this research, we only analyzed the upper part of the
body. In the future, we will need to analyze whole body
motion. Additionally, we applied and analyzed the system to
data for only one child. However, we have provided several
schools with the Kinect systems as we mentioned in Section 3.
We are going to request the teachers for gathering motion datas
and share the analysis results for improving the system better
and developing the best way of utilizing it.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Lange et al., “Development and Evaluation of Low Cost Game-Based
Balance Rehabilitation Tool Using the Microsoft Kinect Sensor,”
Engineering
in
Medicine
and
Biology
Society,
EMBC,
Annual
International Conference of the IEEE, pp.1831-1834, 2011.
[2]
H. Kayama et al., “Effect of a Kinect-based Exercise Game on
Improving Executive Cognitive Performance in Community-Dwelling
Elderly: Case Control Study,” 7th International Conference on Pervasive
Computing Technologies for Healthcare and Workshops. IEEE, pp. 362-
365, 2013.
[3]
Y. J. Chang, S. F. Chen, and J. D. Huang, “A Kinect-based system for
physical rehabilitation: A pilot study for young adults with motor
disabilities,” Research in developmental disabilities, pp. 2566-2570,
2011.
[4]
L. Bartoli, C. Corradi, G. Garzotto, and M. Valoriani, “Exploring
motion-based touchless games for autistic children's learning,” IDC '13,
Proceedings of the12th International Conference on Interaction Design
and Children, pp. 102-111, 2013.
[5]
Y. Fu, J. Wu, S. Wu, H. Chai, and Y. Xu, “Game System for
Rehabilitation Based on Kinect is Effective for Mental Retardation,”
In:MATEC Web of Conferences 22, 01036, 2015.
[6]
C. Y. Chang et al., “Towards pervasive physical rehabilitation using
Microsoft
Kinect,”
6th
International
Conference
on
Pervasive
Computing
Technologies
for
Healthcare
(Pervasive
Health)
and
Workshops, pp. 159-162, 2012.
[7]
G. Altanis, M. Boloudakis, S. Retalis, and N. Nikou, “Children with
Motor Impairments Play a Kinect Learning Game: First Findings from a
Pilot Case in an Authentic Classroom Environment,” Interaction Design
and Architecture(s) Journal - IxD&A, N.19, pp. 91-104, 2013.
[8]
E. Boutsika, “Kinect in Education: A Proposal for Children with
Autism,” Procedua Computer Science 27, pp.123-129, 2014.
[9]
D. Q. Freitas et al., “Development and Evaluation of a Kinect Based
Motor Rehabilitation Game,” Proceedings of SBGames, 2012, pp. 114-
153, 2012.
[10] K. J. F. Greef, E. D. Spek, and M. M. Bekker, “Designing Kinect games
to train motor skills for mixed ability players,” Games for Health:
proceedings of the 3rd european conference on gaming and playful
interaction in health care, pp. 197-205, 2013.
[11] Kinems Learning Games, http://www.kinems.com/ [retrieved: January,
2018]
[12] P. Kosmas, A. Ioannou, and S.Retalis, “Using Embodied Learning
Technology to Advance Motor Performance of Children with Special
Educational Needs and Motor Impairments,” European Conference on
Technology Enhanced Learning, EC-TEL: Data Driven Approaches in
Digital Education pp.111-124, 2017
[13] M. Kourakli et al., “Towards the improvement of the cognitive, motoric
and academic skills of students with special educational needs using
Kinect learning games,” International Journal of Child-Computer
Interaction, Vol. 11, pp. 28-39, 2017
[14] F.
G.
Tsiakalou,
“Teachers
exploring
the
potential
of
Kinems
movement-based learning gaming platform in 2 SEN schools in UK,”
Presented at the 11th Autism-Europe International Congress, organised
by The National Autistic Society in Edunburgh UK, pp.16-18, 2016.
[15] S. Retalis et al., “Empowering Children With ADHD Learning
Disabilities With The Kinems Kinect Learning Games,” European
Conference on Games Based Learning; Reading Vol. 2, pp.469-477,
2014.
[16] http://kyozai.nise.go.jp/ (in Japanese) [retrived: January, 2018]
[17] http://doit-japan.org/doat/oak/ (in Japanese) [retrived: January, 2018]
[18] https://github.com/CMU-Perceptual-Computing-Lab/openpose [retrived:
January, 2018]
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

APPENDIX

Case 1:
Child A: Aged 10 years; with autism spectrum disorders and
mild intellectual disability.
Child B: Aged 10 years; with cerebral palsy.
Teacher’s evaluation: Child A actively moved his body. While
aiming at targets, he checked his body position and
tried to touch them by his extending arms or jumping.
Because child B had palsy affecting his left arm, which
he usually does not use, his movement for touching
was limited. He enjoyed the game a lot.
Suggestions: To reduce clumsy body motion because of
disability, the children need synergetic motion
trainings for their hands and legs, for example, by
letting them touch static targets in turn.

Case 2:
Five children, four with developmental disability and one with
autism
Teacher’s evaluation:

It was clear that the child had visual field constrictions,
which was evident from his movement during the
game.

By projecting the large screen (120 inches), children
were well motivated.

Trying to touch targets made children careful about
their body positions.

Using animal picture targets drew more attention.

Children showed unusual motions like crouching down
or taking long strides toward left and right.

They played with more intention and for longer than
other activities.

Many children can play at the same time.

Suggestions:

When Kinect does not recognize a child, he is
confused.

For some children, making a rock, scissor or paper
hand is difficult, particularly the scissor hand.

Too many targets make it difficult for children to
concentrate on a specific one.

It would be useful to designate the positions and the
turns of the targets as they appear.

System preparation takes lot of time.

Case 3: Comments were obtained from 5 classes.
(1) Three children aged 15 years, with intellectual and physical
disability
Teacher’s evaluation:

Usually they tend to be inactive, but the game induced
them to move independently, extending their arms or
crouching down.

One child could not understand the causal relationship
between touching and disappearing targets; however,
when the animal picture targets were shown, he
understood the relation.
Suggestions:

By fully showing targets on the screen, we may be able
to find the child's gazing point and their visibility
range.
(2) Three children aged 3with cerebral palsy
Teacher’s evaluation:

They very eagerly played the game and one child got
exhausted.

The game was used once a week for 5 weeks. Children
became more active than before.
Suggestions:

No suggestions.
(3) Three children aged 7 years with severe multiple disabilities
Teacher’s evaluation:

They could not recognize the targets and just slightly
moved their hands.

It was difficult for them to notice whether they touched
the target or not.
Suggestions:

In order to make the targets easier to recognize, make
the targets blink or develop other strategies.

It is difficult for the children to concentrate on the
game if there are many things on the backdrop.

Making the targets appear one by one would help
children recognize each target.
(4) One child aged 8 years with cerebral palsy
Teacher’s evaluation:

The child actively played at first, but lost interest later.

Recognizing the target did not seem easy for her.
Suggestions:

Many such games should be developed.
(5) One child aged 14years with muscular dystrophy
Teacher’s evaluation:

He usually does not lift his arm above his shoulder, but
here, he lifted his arm over his head.

Changing the target site helps train children to move
their arms in various directions.
Suggestions:

No suggestions.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-616-3
ACHI 2018 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

