The Role of a Human Host Onboard of Urban Autonomous Passenger Ferries 
 
Leander Pantelatos, Mina Saghafian, Ole A. Alsos 
dept. of Design 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
Trondheim, Norway 
e-mail: leander.s.pantelatos@ntnu.no 
e-mail: mina.saghafian@ntnu.no 
e-mail: oleanda@ntnu.no 
 
 
 
 
 
Asun Lera St.Clair 
Group Technology and Research 
DNV  
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: asun.lera.st.clair@dnv.com 
 
Øyvind Smogeli 
Zeabuz AS  
Trondheim, Norway 
e-mail: oyvind.smogeli@zeabuz.com
Abstract— Zero-emission Urban Autonomous passenger 
Ferries (UAFs) is a promising concept to serve as flexible, cost 
effective and sustainable public transport utilizing urban 
waterways. The perception of users and their attitudes plays a 
vital role in acceptance and use of autonomous technologies. 
For UAFs to be accepted, there are more factors to consider 
beyond having a robust and mature technology. The public 
should perceive it as safe, trustworthy, and convenient to use. 
In the future, from a technical perspective, abandoning a 
human host onboard is possible when reaching a higher level 
of autonomy. To understand the consequences or implications 
of human host removal in the future, we need to understand 
the current influence of the human host onboard. This 
research aims to shed light on the role of the human host 
onboard in acceptance and use of the UAF, and the 
implications it has for implementing remote supervision of 
such a ferry. We address this through the analysis of a set of 
citizen engagement activities performed as part of an ongoing 
R&I project exploring trust in zero emission UAFs. The citizen 
engagement consisted of table discussions, VR mixed reality 
simulations, and in-situ trips in the fully functional 
autonomous ferry prototype milliAmpere2. The findings 
outline six sub-themes to define the significance of a human 
host onboard an UAF. The qualitative results show that the 
perceived importance of the presence of a human host onboard 
is decreasing throughout the sessions. This is in a non-linear 
fashion, and especially after the immersive sessions. The 
context of where and how the ferry trials were conducted, 
meaning short distance within enclosed waters and the use of a 
small UAF, allows for alternatives to the full-time onboard 
presence of a safety host to be discussed.   
Keywords-urban autonomous ferries; citizen engagement; safety; 
trust; acceptance; convenience; level of autonomy; remote 
supervision. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Autonomous technologies including unmanned ships in 
the maritime sector are gaining popularity due to their 
potential benefits, namely cost efficient, environmentally 
sustainable, and safe maritime transportation [1]. Currently, 
around 90% of the urban areas, including several of the 
largest cities in the world, are coastal [2]. With urban sprawl 
across the globe, urban population is expected to increase, 
thus requiring better integrated, sustainable, and more 
efficient modes of transport ensure the quality of mobility 
and life in urban spaces [3]. Battery powered zero-emission 
Urban Autonomous passenger Ferries (hereafter UAFs) can 
be a solution for future public transport in cityscapes. This 
solution has been partly explored as in for example the 
modular system Roboat in Amsterdam [4], the passenger 
service Captn Vaiaro in Kiel [5], and the AutoFerry project 
in Trondheim resulting in the prototypes milliAmpere1 
(mA1) and milliAmpere2 (mA2) [6]. Autonomous systems 
can be characterized by their Level Of Autonomy (LOA). 
Smogeli [7] has defined five levels of autonomy for UAFs 
specifically, ranging from manual operation (level 0) to full 
autonomy with remote support (level 5). Level five would 
imply the UAF to monitor itself and the passengers, make 
decisions and determine actions by itself, and asking for 
assistance when needed. The operation of the ferry within a 
fleet of several, is monitored by operators at a remote 
support centre, similar to an air traffic control centre in its 
structure. Local emergency response would handle any 
emergency situations occurring [7]. The prototype mA2 is 
currently operated at level 2 (onboard supervised autonomy) 
but aiming towards operating at level 4. Beside the 
technological development required to reach higher levels of 
autonomy, investigating user perceptions is important to 
understand various risks associated to UAFs. Goerlandt [8] 
rightfully highlights the importance of understanding publics 
risks and safety perceptions and risk communication. In the 
work of N. P. Reddy [9], societal communication is 
emphasised to establish trust related to the operation of 
autonomous systems. However, there is a gap in perceived 
benefits, concerns, and safety perception of autonomous 
solutions and specifically urban autonomous ferries, which 
motivated Goerlandt [3] to fill the gap by investigating user 
perceptions towards UAFs amongst the senior urban 
population in Halifax, Canada. A key finding there, was that 
increased levels of autonomy was supported, with the 
condition that an onboard operator would be present [3]. 
Both in the perspective of safety (personal and vessel 
related) and security (especially physical), an onboard 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

operator would alleviate those concerns [3]. As such, the 
onboard operator is the doorkeeper to introduce fully 
unmanned UAFs towards the higher levels 3-4 defined in 
[7].  
This paper seeks to explore the role of a human host 
onboard UAFs, and to discuss possible measures needed for 
a trustworthy operation of fully unmanned UAFs. The study 
is conducted through citizen engagement, where the 
participants would experience the fully functioning UAF 
prototype mA2. The use of an immersive VR mixed reality 
simulation, as well as the functioning prototype to explore 
and evaluate the user perceptions is, to the knowledge of the 
authors, a novelty in the given context.  
This paper is part of the TRUSST project – Assuring 
Trustworthy, Safe and Sustainable Transport for All. The 
primary objective of TRUSST is to innovate an integrated 
assurance framework, stemming from an interdisciplinary 
and 
socio-technical 
perspective. 
This 
project 
is 
a 
collaboration between DNV, as risk management assurance 
provider, Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
(NTNU) and Zeabuz, a spin-off company from NTNU 
seeking to introduce autonomous cost-cutting waterborne 
mobility solutions.  
As part of the citizen engagement objective, we have used 
a multimodal data collection method which will be described 
in section II. Quantitative and qualitative results are 
presented in section III. A discussion and presentation of 
future research concludes in section IV.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
This research was conducted through an exploratory 
approach due to the context novelty. The overall aim was to 
gain a deeper understanding of the public perception of 
UAFs. In this paper we will focus on the data regarding the 
significance of the human host onboard and the implications 
of removing the human host when progressing towards level 
4 (remote supervised autonomy), that was collected over the 
length of four sessions. The overview of the sessions design 
and the detail about the participants is presented next and can 
be seen in detail in appendix 1.  
A. The sessions 
Altogether 4 sessions (Figure 1) were conducted consisting 
of: 
1. Information and table discussions 
2. An immersive virtual mixed reality simulation of 
the ferry trial between Ravnkloa and Vestre 
Kanalkai (Figure 2, right) 
3. Real ferry trials with the autonomous prototype 
milliAmpere2 within the real context (Figure 2, left 
and middle) 
4. Reflective table discussions   
 
The sessions focused on the topics of safety, 
sustainability, and societal impact. The study was designed 
this way to both capture initial perceptions, but also to see 
how this would change after more knowledge and immersion 
with the overall concept. The arrangement of several 
workshops with some time in between was done to capture 
both immediate feedback and reflected answers. The citizen 
engagement activities were designed under the guidance of 
Missions Publiques [10], a professional citizen engagement 
consultancy. 
1) Table discussions: Before the first session a briefing 
was provided to the participants with basic information and 
some pictures of the UAF concept by Zeabuz. As soon as the 
participants arrived at the first session the first questionnaire 
(WS1-A) was handed out to capture the initial perceptions of 
the participants. This was followed by informative 
presentations on future possibilities for urban spaces, the 
technology, and a visualized user journey. Afterwards, four 
groups were formed for a table discussion. The table 
discussion was guided by large worksheets which contained 
a set of questions which are listed in the appendix 1. For 
each question the participants were asked to reflect on their 
own and note their thoughts on post-its. Then the post-its 
were posted on the big sheet and presented to the group, 
whereby a discussion arose naturally. A plenary presentation 
of the discussion concluded each question. During these 
plenary presentations the participants also had the chance to 
ask questions to the different stakeholders present. Each 
group was accompanied by a facilitator taking notes and 
keeping time. At the end of the session a second 
questionnaire (WS1-B) was handed out to capture changes in 
participant perceptions after the interactive session.  
2) 
VR Mixed Reality Simulation: In the second session 
the participants were offered to try a VR mixed reality 
simulation of mA2 in the canal. This was conducted with the 
use of two full-size mock ups of mA2 and thereby making it 
a tangible VR lab as described in [6]. Three different 
Figure 1: The four sessions of the citizen engagement. 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

scenarios were simulated as described in appendix 1. A 
facilitator was following the participant during the whole 
simulation and taking notes on behaviour, actions, and  
thoughts of the participant. After the simulations a 
questionnaire (VR) was handed out to capture the  
participants immediate thoughts. A focus group moderated 
by a facilitator concluded the session. An interview guide for  
the facilitator was prepared. The session was conducted in 
smaller groups (5-7 participants) spread over three different 
dates, where the participants could choose a preferred date. 
3) 
Ferry Trial: Following the same structure, the third 
session offered a real ferry trial with the prototype mA2 
(Figure 2), spread across three dates in smaller groups. The 
trials were divided in two parts, where the ferry crossed the 
canal without interventions in the first part, whereas in the 
second a leisure boat simulated traffic crossing the route and 
provoked mA2 to act. Two engineers onboard monitored the 
autonomous system during all the trails and answered 
questions the participants would have. Two facilitators noted 
behaviour, actions, and thoughts of the participants. It should 
be noted that the personnel on mA2 during the ferry trials 
would only partly play the role of a human host [3], or in the 
case of autonomous buses [12]. There was not a designated 
human host aboard. As in the VR session, a questionnaire 
(FERRY) was handed out and a focus group concluded the 
session.  
4) 
Reflective Table Discussion: Lastly, a reflective 
session with a similar structure as in the first session was 
conducted (appendix 1). Divided into smaller groups, a set of 
open-ended question were asked in order for the participants 
to reflect on and build recommendations for the further 
development of the UAF concept. The table discussions, 
conducted in the same manner as in session 1, were followed 
by plenary presentation of the recommendations discussed in 
the groups. At the end a final questionnaire (WS2) was 
handed out. 
B. Questionnaires 
Through the sessions five different questionnaires were 
handed out. The questionnaires consisted of both a 
quantitative and qualitative part. Some of the questions were 
repeated through several and even all the questionnaires. 
This allowed investigating how the different sessions would 
influence the participants. As the context was new, the 
questions were developed through brainstorming within the 
research team and inspired from earlier studies within the 
field of autonomous transportation such as [3], and a local 
study with an autonomous bus service in Trondheim 
conducted by the public transport company AtB in 2020 
[13]. The quantitative part consisted of 5-point Likert scale 
questions about safety, society and sustainability. The 
qualitative part consisted of open-ended questions where the 
participants were asked about thoughts, needs, expectations 
related to UAFs, in the light of the recent workshop. 
Appendix 1 gives an overview of the questionnaires and 
questions asked and analysed in this paper. 
C. Participants 
Due to the resource intensive nature of the study, the 
citizen engagement was designed for a maximum of 20 
participants. Altogether, 15 participants completed all four 
sessions who consisted of 47% women and 53% men. The 
age stretched from 19 to 64 years, with an average of 42 
years. An age-limit was set to 18 years. Emphasis was put on 
recruiting an adequate representation of the inhabitants of 
Trondheim already using public transport in the city centre. 
The recruitment was done through the recruitment office 
Nordic Viewpoint, based on a recruitment profile that was 
produced by the research team to ensure an adequate 
representation of the inhabitants. The recruitment profile 
included postal codes, use of public transport, gender, age, 
disabilities, education, and ethnicity. Additionally, a slight 
overrepresentation of young adults was granted due to the 
large student population in the city. The selection and 
transference of contact details of the participants was GDPR 
compliant. All participants were informed about the purpose 
of the study, and how data will be collected, processed, and 
stored, that participation would be voluntary, and that 
Figure 2: Prototype mA2 (left) (Photo: Ole Andreas Alsos), area of trials in Trondheim (middle) adapted from [11], VR mixed reality simulation (right) 
(Photo: Nicholas Lund). 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

confidentiality is ensured. The informed consent form, and 
data management has been approved by the Norwegian 
centre for research data (NSD) under project number 37623. 
III. 
RESULTS 
This section presents the results from both the 
quantitative and qualitative data obtained regarding a human 
host onboard an UAF. The quantitative results reflect on the 
trends observed and the qualitative section explains the 
themes observed in the dataset. 
A. Quantitative Results 
1) Commuting routines, previous experience, and 
perceptions of the participants: Most of the participants 
used the bus as a daily mode of transport for commuting 
with an average commuting time of 15 min. Initially, the 
interest for using new means of transport was generally high 
with an average of 4,67 within a five-point liker scale. Some 
of the participants had previous experience with an 
autonomous vessel/vehicle before (21%) which could relate 
to the trial of an autonomous bus in the city centre a year 
before (Øya Project) [13]. The participants had great initial 
interest in the topic of “self-driving transport” where 80% 
answered to be “very interested”. After the ferry trial almost 
all the participants answered “agree” to “very agree” to the 
question if they would like to travel with an autonomous 
ferry again. Only one participant did not answer the 
question.  
2) Perceived importance of a human host onboard: 
Before the first session the human host was perceived to be 
“important” to ”very important” by 40% of the participants, 
and 20% being “neutral” to the question (Figure 3).  This 
changed in a non-linear fashion through the sessions and at 
the end only 20% found the host to be at least “important” 
to have onboard (WS2). A larger share of the participants 
was uncertain (33%). Notably, the lowest importance for a 
human host was perceived after the VR session where only 
13% answered “important” contrasting 67% finding the 
matter to be “not so important” to “not important at all”.  
3) Perceived importance of other safety related 
measures: Further questions related to the human host and 
other 
safety 
related 
measures, 
obtained 
from 
the 
questionnaire after the last session (WS2), are presented in 
Figure 4.  Regarding certain time frames, 53% did at least 
“agree” that it is important that a human host is onboard in 
the evening and at night. The possibility to report deviations 
and problems, communication to the monitoring shore 
control centre, and camera surveillance onboard found great 
resonance by the participants. Interestingly, 60% did at least 
agree that it would be sufficient that a human host would be 
available on quay areas. Furthermore, most participants did 
not believe that the onboard presence of a human host 
would hinder any cyber threats towards the UAF. Here 
73,3% answered “do not agree” to “do not agree at all”.  
B. Qualitative Analysis 
All the notes collected during the workshops and all the 
responses were converted into text in one document. We 
applied thematic analysis [14] to the text to find the most 
important themes and subthemes regarding the human host 
onboard the autonomous ferry. The role of a human onboard 
a UAF was not explicitly defined to the participants through 
the sessions. A notable amount of the data collected, contains 
information regarding a human host aboard. 
The overarching theme in the data was the importance of 
the general perceptions of safety. The general perception of 
safety is an important antecedent to acceptance and use of 
the autonomous ferry in the long term. The decision to use 
the ferry depends on feeling safe as can be seen from this 
quote by one of the passengers: “my perceived safety must 
be taken care of!” This theme in turn consisted of several 
subthemes. These subthemes are various dimensions that 
together form the perception of safety, and they include the 
following:  
1) Contextual and the environmental factors onboard 
and around the ferry and the need for resilience: The 
perceived safety of the autonomous ferry depends on safety 
Figure 4: Percieved importance of other safety related questions. 
Figure 3: Percieved importance of a human host onboard 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

onboard and around the ferry. One of the key notions was 
mentioned to be “safety for all” when using the ferry.  The 
importance of a human host onboard is to ensure that the 
ferry trip goes smoothly and that the people on and around 
the ferry are safe. The context of a ferry is one of a floating 
platform on water, a closed space where one cannot run 
away if something happens, despite being in the open space 
of sea or canal. It was mentioned that the external 
environment of the ferry can also pose a threat if somebody 
decides to challenge the ferry and expose the ferry to 
danger. As such it was mentioned that we need a resilient 
system that will function despite any attempt to challenge it. 
Since the context of a ferry is one that is open to external 
threats while being an enclosed space – it is a context where 
people cannot escape – it is important that surveillance is in 
place. However, it was also mentioned that one might feel 
safer on board a ferry that has video surveillance rather than 
walking alone at night in the streets. The perceived safety of 
the passengers was mentioned to need further work. 
Interestingly the perception of the context changed 
throughout the workshops as one participant mentioned after 
the ferry trial that it was “safe because of the short distance, 
and it is possible to see both the start and the end”. This 
subtheme focused on external factors, but the most salient 
subtheme was about an internal challenge: the need to create 
social order and prevent unsafe behaviour of the passengers 
as presented next. 
2) The importance of human host onboard to create 
social order in certain time windows: This subtheme is the 
most prevalent one across the dataset and the focal point 
when it came to the importance of having a human host 
onboard. There were several references made to the need for 
a host to ensure social order and safety as an authority figure 
onboard. The participants believed that a human host is 
needed in the case of robbery, abuse, violence, for keeping 
peace onboard and ensure safety for everyone by preventing 
unsafe behaviour. Participants were mainly concerned that 
people will not respect order if there is no authority 
onboard. The threat posed by drunk people to themselves 
and to other passengers was a salient concern. They 
believed that drunk people and children need to be 
supervised onboard by a human host. The participants 
referred to a time-window where the human host would be 
even more important. Repeated references were made to not 
wanting to be alone at night, or after big festivals or football 
matches. For example, it was mentioned that “social safety 
is important to prevent unsafe behaviour and it is situation-
based, for example after a football match” and that “a 
human host is needed to control who will get onboard and 
who should not board the ferry. If that is not the case, then 
the ferry should provide an overview of the other 
passengers”. However, it was also mentioned that abusive 
conduct also happens in manned vehicles such as taxi and in 
a subway where the driver is also present but not able to 
respond fast. The data showed that people need video 
surveillance and quick spotting of potential criminal activity 
by land-based operators. One of the participants mentioned 
that “so long that there is video surveillance from a land-
based station, it is not needed to have a human host 
onboard”, while another participant believed that “one 
should be able to get help immediately and even with the 
possibility of pushing a button to get help, it is not clear 
how fast and how well you will be helped”. Another 
participant added that “it maybe even safer to travel with a 
ferry that has video surveillance than to walk alone at 
night”. After the ferry trial, having immersed with the 
concept, a participant stated that “regarding strangers, it is 
possible to choose not to board the ferry if there are 
passengers acting out. The distance is also short”. An 
interesting question that was raised was “whether the 
presence of human host could actually create a false feeling 
of safety” since what the human host could do in the face of 
danger and with respect to vigilance over everything, is 
limited. 
Although the most salient subtheme was the importance 
of a human host for intervening in the socially induced 
danger, and at specific times in the day/night, another 
important role of the human host was to intervene with other 
unexpected incidents and accidents. 
3) The role of human host in emergency situations, 
rescue, and evacuation: In cases of emergency, such as a 
passenger suddenly getting a heart attack, a human host can 
immediately intervene. The human host is the annotated 
responsible person when the unexpected happens. The 
participants expressed the need for a human host onboard if 
somebody falls overboard, if a life-threatening situation 
happened that would demand a short response time, and if 
an evacuation order should be placed and performed. 
However, it was also mentioned that “accidents also happen 
onboard of manned ships” and that the important thing here 
is that “people should get help very fast when in need”. 
According to the participants “a very good system would be 
needed onboard of the autonomous ferries to put out fire”. 
In addition to intervention in unexpected situations, the 
human host was important in offering ad-hoc services for an 
improved passenger experience. 
4) The importance of technical and ad-hoc services 
offered by human host: Human hosts can offer services that 
improve the passenger experience onboard the ferry. For 
example, they can make sure that onboarding and 
offboarding go well and control the number of passengers. 
Another point that was mentioned, was that the human host 
could offer services to the elderly passengers if needed. In 
addition to that, a human host could resolve technical issues 
should the ferry’s technical system fail. This can also 
improve the ferry trip experience for the passengers. This 
was mentioned to be “especially important for long term 
trips” and especially for the first trips, but not necessary 
after a few trips. A safety host is important to keep an 
overview of what is happening and intervene if needed, 
which was aligned with the notion of general perception of 
safety and dealing with the unexpected. It was mentioned 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

that “the human aspect must be in balance with the technical 
aspect” meaning that the perceived safety is still key despite 
having technical safety. It is expected that one should be 
able to trust that all the prerequisites for the trip are taken 
care of, and if so, then there is no need for human host as 
long as the ferry is remotely watched and operated. 
Furthermore, it was mentioned that it is difficult for a 
human host to always keep focus. Nevertheless, in times of 
higher traffic or higher risk, such as during the high season 
for tourism, it is better to have a human host onboard to 
ensure a better ferry trip experience. 
5) The need for gradual transition towards unmanned 
ferries: The participants emphasized the importance of a 
gradual transition from having a human host onboard 
towards an unmanned ferry. They mentioned that “the ferry 
should have the possibility to be steered manually by a 
human host” since a slow shift “will be more reassuring”. 
The data showed that at the start phase, the presence of a 
human host can help passengers to trust the ferry, and this 
was a necessity at the start up phases of having an 
operational autonomous, unmanned ferry. Also, when there 
is high traffic, it can be helpful to have a human host 
onboard. Passengers need to trust that the ferry have had 
time to build resilience towards various scenarios as can be 
seen from this quote: “the learning process for autonomous 
ferry is a long process for dangerous situations, and in the 
meantime, one wants to feel safe with a host onboard”. 
6) The importance of information and transparency in 
transition towards unmanned ferries: The participants 
expressed the need to understand and to see that the 
technology is safe. Since there will be no person steering the 
ferry, it will be essential to have good and clear information. 
Passengers need to be made aware of what the ferry is doing 
and why, as can be seen from this quote: “having sufficient 
information from people who have designed and made the 
system is very reassuring to know what is going on. This 
was specifically mentioned in retrospect to a ferry trial when 
the ferry’s sensors captured waves by its own thrusters as 
obstacles and stopped in its track. The participants 
mentioned that the engineers aboard informing about what 
was happening felt reassuring. In addition to that, people 
need to have information about onboarding and offboarding. 
Generally, the participants also mentioned in retrospect that 
the information obtained through the workshops increased 
their level of trust towards urban autonomous passenger 
ferries. Here trust may be simply better understanding rather 
than reliability. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The aim of this paper was to understand the 
consequences or implications of a human host on an UAF, 
and in what way a human host would shape the passengers’ 
perceived safety, trust, and convenience of UAFs. 
Furthermore, the aim was to understand the implications of 
a possible removal of a human host from an UAF.  To 
achieve this objective, we examined the role of a human 
host onboard UAFs with data collected as part of a citizen 
engagement consisting of four sessions of both theoretical 
and immersive parts. The data collection was targeted 
towards the participants’ perceptions of UAF in this context 
and followed them through the sessions. The data was 
subject to quantitative and qualitative analyses. The findings 
are discussed in the following. 
A. Quantitative 
Over time and throughout the session, the participants’ 
emphasis on the presence of a human host decreases in a 
nonlinear manner. The decrease could be associated with the 
repeated exposure and immersion with the technology that 
creates familiarity and trust to a certain degree. Although 
trust may be simply better understanding rather a proven 
reliability and predictability of the technology in operation. 
Particularly after the tangible VR simulation (VR), the 
importance of a human host was rated as “not so important” 
to “not important at all” by the majority of the participants. 
A possible explanation for this could be the increased trust 
in the system as the simulation was partly hardcoded and, in 
that sense, “fail proof”. Additionally, the VR simulation did 
not include other humans, and thereby social security 
aspects might not have been so evident. Furthermore, VR 
can be a novelty itself that can engage people in the mere 
experience  rather than the operational implications of the 
concept. 
This nonlinearity could be due to the group dynamics or 
the speculations and reflections as they are engaged in a 
novel situation and making sense of the technology itself 
and its implications for them and the society. Also, several 
participants claimed that they did not remember what they 
answered on earlier questionnaires, as several days where in 
between them. This in turn would make the participants 
answer on their current perceptions and experiences. The 
slight increase in the perceived importance of the human 
host during the ferry session (FERRY) can be explained by 
minor technical issues still present on the prototype. The 
presence of the personnel onboard, and the need for their 
interventions together with the information they provided to 
the participants, could have underlined the need of a human 
host in the transition towards fully unmanned UAFs. 
Furthermore, the emphasis on the importance of a 
human host was highlighted during later pm hours, and it 
became limited to the quay areas. Therefore, it is becoming 
temporally and geographically more limited. This can be 
seen in relation to the context where the trial was conducted 
within closed waters, and where both ends of the crossing 
were always in sight. The short distance to land where a 
human host is overseeing from the quay areas could be seen 
as sufficient to feel safe.  
The need for surveillance cameras onboard was 
highlighted, and even claiming that the ferry would be safer 
than the street at night. The accessibility to emergency 
response and the possibility to report any deviation to the 
responsible authority was highlighted at the end phase. 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Communication in real time to an onshore control centre, 
knowing about, and being able to manually stop the boat 
with an emergency button, were also mentioned as essential. 
This could reflect on people already trying to find 
alternatives for a human host and shows a belief in digital 
technology to substitute a human host. Given that the study 
was conducted in Norway, this seems to be a plausible 
explanation as the general society has adopted many digital 
solutions in the everyday life. Furthermore, people started to 
see the shortcoming of a human host in the modern times 
with respect to new threats, such as cybersecurity breach.  
However, this observed trend of how the participants 
think a human host could be restricted in its presence and 
replaced 
by 
features 
such 
as 
information 
screens, 
communication tools, remote monitoring, and surveillance, 
could be influenced by the workshop’s discourse itself; the 
framing of the research may have directed the participants 
thinking and reflections. 
B. Qualitative 
The context played an important role which sets this 
paper apart from that of [3]. His operational context was 
concerning longer distances (across the Bedford basin in 
Halifax, Nova Scotia) framing the case around the current 
human operated ferries of 24 m in length and a maximum 
capacity of 390 passengers aboard. This is very much in 
contrast with the context of the current case where the 
crossing was short and the terminals were visible from both 
ends with the use of a small UAF, making it less risky in the 
minds of participants. Nevertheless, the unexpected 
contextual, technological and social incidents still asked for 
the intervention of a human host onboard that could explain 
the what and why of the situation. Thus, the human host still 
played a role as a resilience anchor and the agent to provide 
transparency 
and 
situational 
awareness. 
Given 
the 
operational context of the study, the results indicate that a 
level 3 [7] would be perceived as trustworthy by the 
participants. In the related field of autonomous vehicles, the 
willingness to use public autonomous vehicles is increasing 
with the level of supervision [15]. In the context of 
autonomous buses in Trondheim, a study described by [12], 
several participants emphasized the need of a human host 
aboard mainly for security reasons. Interestingly the 
participants were found to demand a bus host even more 
after the physical trial, which is discussed to be because of 
operational situations where the bus host had to intervene, 
described in [12]. Arguably there are differences in the 
context and between water-based and land-based transport. 
As this specific study was conducted during no traffic in the 
canal, the land-based real-life studies would be more prone 
to a higher traffic complexity. The vulnerability of other road 
users, higher differences in speed between different between 
the autonomous bus and other vehicles, and complexity in 
the interaction between road users would arguably have a 
role to play in the perceived importance of an onboard 
human safety host.  
Technology 
acceptance 
extends 
to 
automation 
technology acceptance, and this requires that people trust the 
technology and suppliers. This process should happen over 
time and through a transitory period that allows people to 
evaluate if the technology is safe, reliable, and trustworthy. 
This is in line with [15] for instance, in the context of public 
autonomous buses, where transition from lower LOAs to 
higher LOAs must take place over time.  
Although people started to speculate about less human 
host presence, they still mentioned the need to know what is 
going on (transparency) and to be able to intervene 
(emergency button and real-time communication with 
onshore) which emphasizes that the principle of designing 
for human-in-the-loop even for higher LOAs, whether that 
‘human’ is the human host or the passenger, is still present. 
In the field of non-rail autonomous vehicles, [16] and [17] 
highlights that participants in their studies were interested in 
information and means to intervene. This reflects on a partial 
transition of responsibility from a human host to the 
passenger in the face of adversity. It is interesting to consider 
the legal and ethical implications thereof.  
This paper highlights that although the trend of 
automation in maritime and urban transportation is moving 
towards higher levels of autonomy, this transition, and the 
end result, which is a service that will be continually used by 
real end-users, can benefit from such participatory 
workshops and a co-creative design perspective. This can 
balance the technology-centred and human-centred schools 
of thoughts into creating a product and a process that 
considers both aspects, people and technology. 
C. Limitations and future research 
As an early study within the context of UAFs the paper 
seeks to investigate the role of a human host onboard. It is 
acknowledged that the study has several limitations.  
A first limitation is that the sample size of the population 
is very small (N=15). This was partly due to the resource 
intensive nature of four sessions with immersive components 
such as the VR experience and ferry ride only allowing for 
smaller groups. The sample is far too small to draw any 
significant conclusions, and the patterns observed should 
only be seen as preliminary insights which inspire more 
extensive future studies. A larger sample size would also 
allow for a closer investigation of how - age, gender and 
socio economical background would influence safety related 
perceptions. The second limitation is that the participants 
were only recruited from Trondheim, meaning that the 
findings might not be transferable to other locations 
However, given that this is a case study in a specific context 
some familiarity with the context is required. A further 
limitation is the recruitment, where the participants 
themselves signed up for the sessions in compliance with 
ethical standards. As seen in the results section, all the 
participants were “interested” to “very interested”, which 
might induce that the population has generally more positive 
perceptions towards autonomous transportation.  
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Some limitations are also seen in the research design. To 
have a set of four different sessions with both informative 
and immersive parts are seen as an opportunity to investigate 
how the perceptions develop through immersion beyond the 
initial ones. It also allows for investigating how different 
events and topics would influence the perception of the 
population. On the other hand, social group dynamics did 
occur potentially biasing the population towards positive 
perceptions. Another factor was the aforementioned 
technological framing with comprehensive explanations and 
insights into technological possibilities for such a ferry 
system. The nature of having several events did make the 
topics in the later discussions somewhat repetitive and some 
of the participants felt they had nothing more to add. A 
reduction in the number of sessions, and a more streamlined 
undertaking would be preferable.  
Beside mitigating the limitations above, future research 
should be expanded in both sample size and geographical 
context to confirm or challenge the findings of the current 
study. Furthermore, it would be of great interest to further 
explore the concerns of participants regarding safety and 
security onboard and specially safety at night, during 
festivals, and in emergency situations. This could be done 
through role play on the real ferry or VR simulations. An 
investigation of how age, gender and socio-economic status 
affects the demand for a human host aboard, would add 
further granularity to the research and this requires larger 
sample size to have valid and reliable findings. Within the 
context of enclosed water and small scale UAFs, a trial with 
no personnel aboard would be of interest. It is also 
recommended to angle further research into designing 
systems for the “passenger in the loop” in combination with 
a remotely located safety supervisor.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was sponsored by the Research Council of 
Norway (RCN), mainly through the project TRUSST 
(project number 313921), but also MAS (326676), MIDAS 
(331921) and SFI AutoShip (309230). The citizen 
engagement activities were designed by the project team in 
collaboration with NTNU Design Department and under the 
supervision of Mission Publiques (missionspubliques.org), a 
professional 
citizen 
engagement 
consultancy. 
The 
recruitment of the participants was done by Nordic 
Viewpoint (nordic-viewpoint.com/no/). The facilities at the 
NTNU Shore Control Lab were extensively used during the 
trials. The authors want to thank the reviewers for valuable 
comments and suggestions, and everyone contributing to the 
citizen engagement.  
REFERENCES 
[1] H.-C. Burmeister, W. Bruhn, Ø. J. Rødseth, and T. Porathe, 
“Autonomous 
Unmanned 
Merchant 
Vessel 
and 
its 
Contribution towards the e-Navigation Implementation: The 
MUNIN Perspective”, Int. J. E-Navig. Marit. Econ., vol. 1, 
pp. 1–13, Dec. 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.enavi.2014.12.002. 
[2] ‘Climate 
Change 
| 
UN-Habitat’. 
https://unhabitat.org/topic/climate-change (accessed Feb. 02, 
2023). 
[3] F. Goerlandt and K. Pulsifer, “An exploratory investigation of 
public perceptions towards autonomous urban ferries”, Saf. 
Sci., 
vol. 
145, 
p. 
105496, 
Jan. 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ssci.2021.105496. 
[4] ‘Roboat 
project’, 
https://roboat.org/. 
https://roboat.org/ 
(accessed Feb. 02, 2023). 
[5] ‘VAIARO – CAPTN’. https://captn.sh/en/vaiaro-englisch/ 
(accessed Feb. 02, 2023). 
[6] O. A. Alsos et al., “NTNU Shore Control Lab: Designing 
shore control centres in the age of autonomous ships”, J. 
Phys. Conf. Ser., vol. 2311, no. 1, p. 012030, Jul. 2022, doi: 
10.1088/1742-6596/2311/1/012030. 
[7] Ø. Smogeli, ‘Autonomous Urban Passenger Ferries – A New 
Mobility Mode in Need of Appropriate Regulation?’, in 
Autonomous Vessels in Maritime Affairs: Law and 
Governance Implications, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, In Press. 
[8] F. Goerlandt, “Maritime Autonomous Surface Ships from a 
risk governance perspective: Interpretation and implications”, 
Saf. 
Sci., 
vol. 
128, 
p. 
104758, 
Aug. 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ssci.2020.104758. 
[9] N. P. Reddy et al., “Zero-Emission Autonomous Ferries for 
Urban Water Transport: Cheaper, Cleaner Alternative to 
Bridges and Manned Vessels”, IEEE Electrification Mag., 
vol. 
7, 
no. 
4, 
pp. 
32–45, 
Dec. 
2019, 
doi: 
10.1109/MELE.2019.2943954. 
[10] ‘Missions 
Publiques’, 
Missions 
Publiques. 
https://missionspubliques.org/ (accessed Feb. 02, 2023). 
[11] ‘Gule 
Sider® 
Kart’. 
https://kart.gulesider.no/?zoomfb=15&centerfb=10.393195,63
.435975&maptypefb=aerial (accessed Feb. 02, 2023). 
[12] T. Stålhane, T. Myklebust, and I. S. Haug, “Trust and 
Acceptance of Self-Driving Busses”, in Proceedings of the 
31st European Safety and Reliability Conference (ESREL 
2021), 2021, pp. 2194–2201. doi: 10.3850/978-981-18-2016-
8_147-cd. 
[13] T. Myklebust, T. Stålhane, G. D. Jenssen, and I. S. Haug, 
“Trust Me, We Have a Safety Case for the Public”, in 
Proceedings of the 31st European Safety and Reliability 
Conference (ESREL 2021), 2021, pp. 2180–2185. doi: 
10.3850/978-981-18-2016-8_087-cd. 
[14] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in 
psychology”, Qual. Res. Psychol., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 77–101, 
Jan. 2006, doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa. 
[15] C. Goldbach, J. Sickmann, T. Pitz, and T. Zimasa, “Towards 
autonomous public transportation: Attitudes and intentions of 
the local population”, Transp. Res. Interdiscip. Perspect., vol. 
13, p. 100504, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.trip.2021.100504. 
[16] S. Nordhoff, J. de Winter, W. Payre, B. van Arem, and R. 
Happee, “What impressions do users have after a ride in an 
automated shuttle? An interview study”, Transp. Res. Part F 
Traffic Psychol. Behav., vol. 63, pp. 252–269, May 2019, doi: 
10.1016/j.trf.2019.04.009. 
[17] P. Fröhlich et al., “What’s the Robo-Driver up to?” 
Requirements for Screen-based Awareness and Intent 
Communication in Autonomous Buses’, -Com, vol. 18, no. 2, 
pp. 151–165, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1515/icom-2018-003.
 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Appendix 1: The agendas of the four sessions.  
Session 1 
Information and Discussion 
Session 2 
VR Experience  
Session 3  
Ferry trial 
Session 4:  
Reflection & 
recommendations 
Preread with information and 
visualization of the Urban 
autonomous ferry system before the 
session.  
 
Informative film on the the 
use of simulations.  
 
Ferry 
trial: 
between 
Ravnkloa 
and 
Vestre 
Kanalkai. Tour of the mA2.  
 
Informative presentation 
Dag McGeorge (DNV): 
Building an assurance case  
Questionnaire (WS1_A) at the 
very beginning of the session: 
 
QB1 
Age  
Sex 
Number of kids 
Have you read the preread? 
 
QB2 
How much time do you use to 
work/school?  
What mode of transportation do 
you use to work/school?  
What mode of transport do you use 
outside of work/school? 
How often do you use public 
transport?  
Have you tried an autonomous 
vehicle or vessel before?  
 
QB3 
How important is the following 
aspect to you (likert scale 1 (not 
important) - 5 Very important)):  
Human host aboard 
 
VR experience  
With the use of mockups and 
three different scenarios: (1) 
Sunny day without traffic (2) 
Snow, wind and thunder 
without traffic (3) Rain and 
Traffic 
 
Questionnaire 
after 
the 
ferry trial (FERRY), with the 
following 
questions 
analysed in this paper:  
 
QB10: I would like to try a 
UAF again (Idk, not agree at 
all, 
not 
agree, 
neutral, 
agree, very agree)  
 
QB6 Repeated 
 
QB3 Repeated  
 
QB7 Repeated  
 
QB8 Repeated  
 
QB9 Repeated  
 
Table discussions on 
reflections and 
recommendations for further 
development: 
 
What is positive?  
What should be reconsidered?  
What should be dropped or 
changed?  
 
Universal Design – How can 
the urban autonomous ferry 
become a mean of transport 
for all?  
 
Questionnaire after the VR 
experience (VR). With the 
following 
questions, 
analysed in this paper:  
 
QB6 Repeated 
 
QB3 Repeated  
 
QB7 Repeated  
 
QB8 Repeated  
 
QB9 Repeated  
 
Questionnaire 
after 
the 
session (WS2):  
 
QB11 
To what extent would you 
agree to the following 
statements? (likert scale 1 (do 
not agree at all) - 5 (Very 
agree)):  
 
Having a human host onboard 
an UAF is important to me.  
 
It is important that there is a 
human host onboard during 
the evening/night. 
 
It is sufficient that the host is 
available on 
Quay areas (but not onboard 
an UAF). 
 
There 
should 
be 
camera 
surveillance on board an UAF.  
 
Passengers must be able to 
access an emergency button to 
"stop" the UAF. 
 
Passengers must have access 
to a screen to be able to 
communicate with an operator 
at a shore control center who 
monitors the ferry. 
 
I am afraid that someone 
might hack/take control of the 
ferry 
if there is no human host 
onboard. 
 
It is important that passengers 
can easily both small and large 
deviations. 
 
QB3 Repeated  
 
QB6 Repeated 
 
QB7 Repeated 
 
QB8 Repeated 
 
QB9 Repeated 
 
Informative presentations: 
Hanna Maria van Zijp (Zeabuz): 
Possibilities for Urban spaces 
through UAFs 
Øyvind Smogeli (Zeabuz):   
The Zeabuz history 
Jon Arne Glomsrud (DNV): 
Information about the TRUSST 
project  
Leander Pantelatos (NTNU): 
 A user journey with the UAF.  
Debrief session after the 
ferry trial. 
The 
following 
questions 
were used as a guide to the 
facilitator 
 
How did you experience the 
ferry trial?  
 
Has your view on UAFs 
changed? – If so in what 
way? 
 
Was there anything that was 
uncomfortable?  
 
What are your thoughts on 
safety aboard the UAF?  
 
Did the experience influence 
your trust in the ability of the 
UAF to detect other traffic 
on the river?  
 
Do you have any thoughts on 
the design of the ferry? 
 
 
 
  
Table discussions on the topics of 
Safety, sustainability, and societal 
impact (only questions analysed in 
this paper are included here):  
 
What are your concerns regarding 
you as a passenger?  
 
How do you consider the 
importance of a human host aboard 
the UAF? 
 
What are your concerns regarding 
kayaks and other traffic on the 
canal? 
 
 
Debrief session after the VR 
experience  
The 
following 
questions 
were used as a guide to the 
facilitator 
 
How did you experience the 
virtual reality simulation?  
 
As 
how 
real 
did 
you 
experience the virtual realty 
simulation? 
 
Was there anything you 
experienced 
as 
uncomfortable?  
 
In the simulation, you were 
alone on the UAF. What 
thoughts do you have about 
this, versus being more 
people onboard, concerning 
safety? 
 
Did the experience affect 
your confidence in the UAF 
perceiving 
what 
is 
happening around it, in any 
way? 
 
Do you have any thoughts on 
the design of the ferry? 
Questionnaire (WS1-B) after the 
session:  
 
QB6 
What are your three most important 
thoughts after this Session?  
QB7 
What are your most important 
expectations towards UAFs? 
QB8 
What are your most important 
concerns towards UAFs? 
QB9 
What are your most important 
needs towards UAFs? 
 
QB3 Repeated  
 
 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

