A Literature Review: Form Factors and Sensor Types of Wearable Devices 
Dong Yeong Jeong, Sung H. Han, Joohwan Park, Hyun K. Kim, Heekyung Moon, Bora Kang 
Department of Industrial Management & Engineering 
POSTECH 
Pohang, South Korea 
{comnet924, shan, pkjhwan, emokubi, gomsak, purple31}@postech.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Wearable devices provide a new way to recognize 
the users context with high accuracy. Selecting suitable form 
factors and sensors are important to recognize users’ contexts. 
In this study, the form factors and sensor types of released, 
prototype, and concept products were explored. A total of 175 
literatures were collected and analyzed in terms of sensor and 
form factor. Thirty sensors were collected and classified 
according to measurands. Twenty-three form factors were 
listed by nine applicable body parts. 
Keywords-wearable device; form factor; sensor; body part. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Wearable devices can provide new ways of sensing 
users’ contexts [1]. Since they can be worn, wearable devices 
tend to have a higher context recognition rate than existing 
personal mobile devices [2]. For that reason, wearable 
devices can provide new functions based on context 
recognition to improve the usability and efficiency of 
services [3]. 
There are several body parts on which suitable wearable 
products can be worn. The wearable products can be 
classified into several “form factors.” These form factors are 
such wearable devices as necklaces and glasses. Form factors 
and sensors are used to develop wearable devices [4][5]. 
However, it is difficult to find papers discussing current form 
factors and sensors of wearable devices. 
In this paper, sensors and form factors of wearable 
devices are investigated based on a literature survey. Sensors 
are classified according to the measurands. Form factors and 
sensor types are listed according to their applicable body 
parts.  
II. 
METHOD 
Information on the released, prototype, and concept 
products was collected from journal papers, proceeding 
papers, news, and patents. A total of 175 literatures 
published between 2001 and 2013 were collected.  
Sensors were classified according to their measurands, 
based on the study of Richard [6]. Image/vision and gas 
sensors were added to the sensors found in the literatures.  
Form factors and sensors were listed according to their 
wearability on the body parts. The body parts are classified 
according to the kinesiological classification: head, neck, 
shoulder girdle, Trunk, arm, forearm, hand, pelvis, thigh, leg, 
and foot [7]. 
 
III. 
RESULT 
A. Sensor classification 
The sensors are classified into nine types (Table I). 
 
Photo sensor: sensor which detects characteristics of 
visible, infrared, and ultraviolet light. 
 
Image/vision sensor: sensor which identifies the 
visual pattern, shape, location, and movement from 
the image and video information. 
 
Electro-magnetic radiation sensor: sensor which 
detects the electro-magnetic waves. 
 
Electrical activity sensor: sensor which detects the 
electric properties of devices and the body. 
 
Magnetic field sensor: sensor which detects the 
magnetic field through the property of solid matter 
and voltage change. 
 
Gas sensor: sensor which recognizes the property of 
gas, and it measures the components, concentration, 
and pressure of the gas. 
TABLE I.  
SENSOR CLASSIFICATION 
Sensor Type 
Sensor 
Photo sensor 
· Free space optical communication 
· Proximity sensor 
· Photoelectric 
sensor 
· Pulse oximetry sensor 
· RGB/illuminance 
sensor 
Image/Vision 
sensor 
· Motion detection sensor 
· 3D depth camera 
· Eye-tracking 
sensor 
· Infrared camera 
· Vision/Image 
recognition 
Radiation sensor 
· GPS sensor 
· Near field communication module 
Electric sensor 
· EEG/EMG/ECG/EOG sensor 
· GSR sensor 
· AC current sensor 
· Capacitive sensor 
 
Magnetic sensor 
· Magnetic field variation sensor 
· Geomagnetic sensor 
Gas sensor 
· Gas component analysis sensor 
· Atmospheric pressure sensor 
· Humidity sensor 
Acoustic sensor 
· Microphone 
· Phonomyography 
Mechanical sensor 
· Pressure sensor 
· Gyroscope 
· E-textile 
· Acceleration sensor 
· Physical button 
 
Thermal sensor 
· Body temperature sensor 
· Heat flux sensor               
· Temperature sensor 
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Acoustic sensor: sensor which detects the sound 
waves of the dial tone, voice, and ultrasonic waves. 
 
Mechanical sensor: sensor which recognizes the 
physical movement and other mechanical properties 
of the human and the device.  
 
Thermal sensor: sensor which measures the size and 
flow of temperature. 
B. Form factors and sensors with body parts 
Form factors and sensor types were listed by their 
applicable body parts (Table II). There is no form factor 
found to be applicable to neck, shoulder girdle, and pelvis. 
The biggest number of form factors was related to the 
head. The smallest number of form factors was related to the 
arm, thigh, and leg. Module/clip, patch, clothes were used for 
various body parts. 
Mechanical sensors were combined with most form 
factors.  
TABLE II.  
FORM FACTORS AND SENSOR TYPE WITH BODY PART 
Body 
Part 
Form Factor 
Sensor Type 
Head 
Hat 
Image/Vision, acoustic, mechanical 
Helmet 
Image/vision, gas, mechanical 
Glasses 
Photo, image/vision, acoustic, mechanical, 
electro-magnetic radiation, magnetic field  
Headset 
Mechanical, image/vision, electrical activity, 
acoustic, photo, electro-magnetic radiation 
Earphone 
Photo, electrical activity, mechanical 
Ear Wrap 
Electro-magnetic radiation 
Trunk 
Necklace 
Image/vision, mechanical, acoustic, 
electro-magnetic radiation, electrical activity 
Chest Band 
Electro-magnetic radiation, electrical activity 
Belt 
Photo, electro-magnetic radiation, 
magnetic field, gas, acoustic, mechanical 
Bag 
Gas 
Arm 
Arm Band 
Electrical activity, magnetic field, 
mechanical, thermal 
Forearm 
Wristwatch 
Photo, image/vision, acoustic, thermal, 
electro-magnetic radiation, mechanical, 
electrical activity, magnetic field 
Bracelet 
Photo, image/vision, acoustic, thermal, 
electro-magnetic radiation, mechanical, 
electrical activity, magnetic field 
Hand 
Gloves 
Magnetic field, mechanical 
Stick 
Photo, electro-magnetic radiation, gas, 
mechanical, thermal 
Ring 
Photo, image/vision, electrical activity, 
acoustic, mechanical 
Thigh 
Robot 
Mechanical 
Leg 
Ankle Band 
Magnetic field, mechanical 
Foot 
Shoes 
Magnetic field, mechanical 
Socks 
Electro-magnetic radiation, electrical activity 
Whole 
body 
Module/Clip 
Image/vision, mechanical, electrical activity, 
electro-magnetic radiation 
Patch 
Photo, electrical activity, magnetic field, 
mechanical, thermal 
Clothes 
Photo, image/vision, electro-magnetic 
radiation, magnetic field, acoustic, 
mechanical 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Most form factors are related to terminal body parts: head 
[8], hand [9], forearm [10], foot [11], and leg [12]. It is easy 
to wear things on terminal body parts. There are also various 
signals that can be detected on terminal body parts easily. 
For example, the head is a useful location to detect the gaze 
direction, pulse, breath. The hand is useful to detect the pulse 
and the signal of user’s activity. The foot is useful to sense 
body pressure and walking pattern. 
Modules/clips form factors have been used to detect non-
physiologic signals that can be detected on any body parts 
[13]. The existing modules/clips can be transformed to 
another form factors using additional accessories [14]. 
Modules/clips [13], patches [15], and clothes were used 
when the wearable devices needed to capture signals in 
several body parts simultaneously [16]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper classified the sensors according to the 
measurands, and listed form factors and sensors according to 
various applicable body parts. Although, form factors were 
applicable to several body parts, most form factors were 
found on the terminal body parts. This paper helps the 
designers of wearable devices to understand the various form 
factors and sensor types. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. D. Rienzo, F. Rizzo, G. Parati, G. Brambilla, M. Ferratini, 
and P. Castiglioni, “MagIC system: A new textile-based 
wearable 
device 
for 
biological 
signal 
monitoring. 
Applicability in daily life and clinical setting,” In Engineering 
in Medicine and Biology Society, 2005, pp. 7167-7169. 
[2] J. Farringdon, A. J. Moore, N. Tilbury, J. Church, and P. D. 
Biemond, “Wearable sensor badge and sensor jacket for 
context awareness,” In Wearable Computers, October. 1999, 
pp. 107-113. 
[3] K. Hung, Y. T. Zhang, and B. Tai, “Wearable medical devices 
for tele-home healthcare,” In Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society, Vol. 2, September. 2004, pp. 5384-5387. 
[4] C. Loclair, S. Gustafson, and P. Baudisch, “PinchWatch: a 
wearable device for one-handed microinteractions,” In Proc. 
MobileHCI, 2010. 
[5] J. Scheirer, R. Fernandez, and R. W. Picard, “Expression 
glasses: a wearable device for facial expression recognition,” 
In CHI'99 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, 1999, pp. 262-263. 
[6] W. M. Richard, “A sensor classification scheme,” In IEEE 
Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency 
Control, Vol.2. UFFC-34, 1987, pp. 124-126. 
[7] J. E. Muscolino, Kinesiology, 2nd ed., Mosby, pp. 6, April 
1955. 
[8] M. Funk, A. Schmidt, and L. E. Holmquist, “Antonius: A 
mobile search engine for the physical world,” In Proceedings 
of the 2013 ACM conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous 
computing adjunct publication, September. 2013, pp. 179-182. 
[9] C. Amma, M. Georgi, and T. Schultz, “Airwriting: Hands-free 
mobile text input by spotting and continuous recognition of 
3D-space handwriting with inertial sensors,” In Wearable 
Computers (ISWC), 2012 16th International Symposium on, 
June. 2012, pp. 52-59. 
[10] M. D’Souza, T. Wark, M. Karunanithi, and M. Ros, 
“Evaluation 
of 
realtime 
people 
tracking 
for 
indoor 
environments using ubiquitous motion sensors and limited 
wireless network infrastructure,” Pervasive and Mobile 
Computing, Vol. 9 (4), 2013, pp. 498-515. 
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[11] J. Healey, “Gsr sock: A new e-textile sensor prototype,” In 
Wearable Computers (ISWC), 2011 15th Annual International 
Symposium on, June. 2011, pp. 113-114. 
[12] C. Strohrmann, H. Harms, G. Tröster, S. Hensler, and R. 
Müller, “Out of the lab and into the woods: kinematic analysis 
in running using wearable sensors,” In Proceedings of the 
13th international conference on Ubiquitous computing, 
September. 2011, pp. 119-122. 
[13] N. K. Taylor, E. Papadopoulou, M. Y. Lim, P. Skillen, F. R. 
Blackmun, and H. Williams, “Congestrian: monitoring 
pedestrian traffic and congestion,” In Proceedings of the 2013 
ACM conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing 
adjunct publication, September. 2013, pp. 1355-1358. 
[14] Fitbit 
one 
hompage. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.fitbit.com 
[15] T. Fahrni, M. Kuhn, P. Sommer, R. Wattenhofer, and S. 
Welten, 
“Sundroid: 
Solar 
radiation 
awareness 
with 
smartphones,” In Proceedings of the 13th international 
conference on Ubiquitous computing, September. 2011, pp. 
365-374. 
[16] R. Johnson, N. Bianchi-Berthouze, Y. Rogers, and J. van der 
Linden, “Embracing calibration in body sensing: using self-
tweaking to enhance ownership and performance,” In 
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint conference 
on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing, September. 2013, pp. 
811-820. 
 
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

