The European MobileSage Project –
Situated Adaptive Guidance for the Mobile Elderly
Overview, status, and preliminary results
Till Halbach Røssvoll
Norwegian Computing Center (Oslo, Norway)
till.halbach.rossvoll@nr.no
Abstract—MobileSage  is  an  AAL  project  with  the  goal  to 
provide particularly elderly people with relevant and useful 
multimodal guidance on demand, depending on the context, 
and in a personalized, adaptive, accessible, and usable manner. 
The  project  aims  to  increase  the  independence of elderly 
people  in  particular in  the  home  environment  and  during 
travel.  This  work  presents  the  project  and  its  two  main 
deliverables,  discusses  related  research,  summarizes 
preliminary results, and gives an outlook of anticipated results.
Keywords—AAL,  mobile,  application,  assistance,  help  on 
demand,  personalization,  adaptive,  accessible,  usable, 
multimodal
I.
 INTRODUCTION
Today’s society is flooded with a plethora of new tech­
nological devices. Although easy to use for newer genera­
tions, they are often unfamiliar to and can pose severe diffi­
culties for the elderly. This is why many senior citizens meet 
these ICT based solutions (Information and Communication 
Technology), such as automated ticketing machines, with 
anxiety.
At the same time, modern elderly live longer, they are 
healthier, more active, mobile, independent, and more de­
manding customers than ever before [1]. They are increas­
ingly looking for useful, user friendly and personalized ICT 
services that add value to their active and mobile life, and 
that can help them to stay active despite various impair­
ments. Here, MobileSage provides a timely approach and so­
lution. The project was started in July 2011 and ends by Jan­
uary 2014.
This article provides an update for a previous work­in­
progress paper [2] and is organized as follows: After the Eu­
ropean AAL Joint Programme has been introduced, related 
projects and research is discussed, before the MobileSage 
Project is presented together with its two main service deliv­
erables. After that, preliminary results are discussed, an over­
view of the way ahead is given, and finally the conclusion is 
drawn.
II.
THE EUROPEAN AAL PROGRAMME
The European Ambient Assisted Living Joint Programme 
(AAL JP) provides the settings for this ICT based innovation 
project targeting elderly individuals  [3]. The main goal of 
AAL is to improve “the quality of life, autonomy, participa­
tion in social life, skills, and employability of older people”, 
while service delivery enhancement and care costs reduction 
are secondary targets. MobileSage targets the program's third 
call, named ICT­based Solutions for Advancement of Older 
Persons’ Independence and Participation in the “Self­Serve 
Society” [4]. The Call considers both primary end­users (el­
derly individuals),  secondary users (family members, care 
givers), and  tertiary end­users  (NGOs, public authorities, 
companies, vendors).
III.
RELATED WORK
Before the development in MobileSage started, a litera­
ture study was carried out to get an update about state of the 
art in the field. The study revealed that there are few, if any, 
existing solutions witch the same scope as the project. Espe­
cially rare are related projects and solutions of this particular 
kind directed towards elderly and impaired users. However, 
the study showed that there are a number of recent and ongo­
ing international projects related in various ways to the top­
ics  addressed  by  MobileSage;  they  are  discussed  subse­
quently.
A number of international projects fall within the same 
scope. The APSIS4ALL Project is dealing with personaliz­
ing public digital terminals such as ATMs and ticket ma­
chines [5], where an adaptive interface and personalized in­
teraction is achieved by the human communicating with the 
terminal through a smartphone. In the ASK­IT Project, a 
framework has been developed that employs personalized in­
telligent agents for service provision and search for suitable 
semantics [6]. The MyUI Project is addressing specific user 
needs towards ICT products in general through adaptive per­
sonalized interfaces, and by recording user behavior and con­
text information in real­time [7]. GUIDE is a project to de­
sign tools and aids for developers to efficiently integrate per­
sonalization, user friendly interaction, and accessibility fea­
tures into applications  [8]. In the DIADEM Project, elec­
tronic/online forms were made adaptable to the cognitive 
skills of the user by monitoring user actions and tailoring the 
user interface based on these data [9]. The GPII Project is 
building a framework that allows to store universal user pro­
files in the cloud [10]. Later, the profile can be accessed to 
adapt the user interface of any device to a user's needs and 
preferences.
The  following  research  projects  are  related  to  Mo­
bileSage with regard to user interface matters. The aim of 
SNAPI was to develop a data format for the storage of user 
profiles, with a focus on smartcards and public digital termi­
nals [11]. In the GoldUI Project, elderly are offered a num­
479
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ber of cloud services which are deemed useful in the every­
day life [12]. The goal then is that these services can be ac­
cessed through a variety of platforms, including telephone, 
smartphone, tablet PC, TV, and radio.
The following research projects consider transportation. 
WayFiS is addressing the topic of travel challenges [13], in 
terms of a web based pre­planning service and a mobile ap­
plication, with route calculations, taking into account an indi­
vidual's desired physical activity, nutrition needs, necessary 
facilities along the route, and disease restrictions, while try­
ing to avoid inaccessible places. In Mediate, a number of cri­
teria and tools have been developed to measure accessibility 
in public transport, including accessible ticketing and infor­
mation  systems,  and  accessibility  information  of  public 
transport system in Europe [14]. In the Access2all Project, a 
number of guidelines, recommendations, roadmaps, and new 
research initiatives have been worked on [15]. The Ambien­
Net Project has developed an indoor location system based 
on intelligent infrastructure and a sensor network [16].
The  following  projects  concern  multimodality.  In  the 
HAPTIMAP Project, a cross­platform toolkit for the design 
of user interfaces incorporating haptics, audio, and video in­
put and output is being developed for retrieval, storing, and 
manipulation of geographic data [17]. In the course of the 
MAPPED Project, a mobile application has been developed 
that provides accessibility information on buildings, travel­
ing means like buses, trains, etc., combined with localization 
techniques  [18]. Finally, the HearMeFeelMe Project  [19] 
was aiming at replacing visual and textual information with 
audio, combined with touch­based interfaces for information 
access, all integrated in a mobile application employing near­
field technology to gather information about items to buy, 
such as food and medication [20].
IV.
OVERVIEW OF MOBILESAGE
The idea of MobileSage is to provide elderly with a per­
sonalized context­sensitive tool which provides relevant, ac­
cessible, usable, and multimodal assistance for carrying out 
and solving everyday tasks and problems in the self­serve 
society whenever and wherever they occur, just in time, or, 
on demand [21], [22]. As such, the system acts like a facilita­
tor of knowledge. The project addresses all the areas of inter­
est of the 3rd AAL Call, and it also accounts for the three 
aforementioned user groups.  MobileSage consists basically 
of two services, which are the main two deliverables of the 
project. They are called Help­on­Demand (HoD) Service and 
Content Management  (CM) Service.  Figure 1 shows the 
overall architecture and the major building blocks.
The content itself is fetched from the CM Service. There 
are no limitations regarding what kind of content can be fa­
cilitated, including manuals, usage instructions, and travel 
descriptions. It is anticipated that mainly secondary users 
will upload content to the CM Service as they are likely to 
have a direct interest in helping the primary users. However, 
it is expected that also tertiary users provide content. For in­
stance, a manufacture might regard it as advantageous to 
provide manuals for their ticket machines, or the railway op­
erator that runs these machines might do so. Even a munici­
pality might be interested in producing such help content as a 
special service for their citizens. Of course, there is nothing 
that prevents literate primary users from producing and mak­
ing help content available themselves through the CM Ser­
vice.
A.
Help­on­Demand Service
The Help­on­Demand (HoD) Service is a thick­client ap­
plication, a personal agent, running on a smartphone. Its 
main building blocks are built up in a service oriented man­
ner, see Figure 1. The user interacts with the Dialog Manager 
through the User Interface. The Dialog Manager utilizes the 
functionality provided by the Profile Service, which takes 
care of the user profile. Besides the user's personal prefer­
ences also the use pattern is stored there. The behavior of the 
user and actions in the User Interface are logged and ana­
lyzed by the Personalization Service which is responsible for 
adjusting the user profile accordingly.
Besides utilizing services provided as cloud services, the 
Dialog Manager is further in contact with the Reasoning Ser­
vice with the task to make an educated guess of the user's 
context. In order to do so, the Reasoning Service itself makes 
use of network services such as Media Service, Search Ser­
vice, Content Service, etc. The most important factor for de­
termining the user context is the current location. The Rea­
soning Service therefore gets help from the Localization Ser­
vice which has the responsibility to determine the user's loca­
tion with highest possible accuracy, based on technologies 
like A­GPS, WLAN, GSM/GPRS, and NFC, and triangula­
tion methods.
B.
Content Management Service 
The Content Management (CM) Service is organized as a 
cloud service and runs on a web server. A user who wants to 
produce  multimodal  content  uses  a  User  Agent  like  a 
browser to gain access to the service. The user interacts with 
the service's Dialog Manager, which in turn controls the User 
Interface. The main logic for handling the multimodal con­
tent lies in the Content Manager, which has a modular design 
to be able to add additional modalities in a simple way. Mo­
bileSage includes the modules Video, Audio/Speech, and 
Text, including Subtitles. The fabricated content is finally 
stored by the Content Service. It is also possible, though, to 
refer to content which is located elsewhere.
V.
CURRENT STATE AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS
Beta versions of the smartphone application and the web 
service have recently been released for evaluation purposes 
to complete the first development iteration. Currently, field 
trials with relevant user groups are being carried out in the 
three countries Spain, Romania, and Norway. The trials com­
prise mostly qualitative studies where the user has to solve a 
particular task, such as operating a coffee machine.
Another scenario involves a travel situation: A user has 
to find a ticket machine at a subway station, pay for a ticket, 
and find the right  subway platform. Appropriate content is 
found by means of NFC tags or QR codes placed out in the 
field, or by a user issued search with a particular search 
phrase. Both methods will initiate a geographically limited 
database  search for relevant content in the user's preferred 
languages and modalities. Available results are presented in 
the smartphone app for the user who can then in turn pick the 
one he/she thinks suits the context best, be it text, formatted 
text, audio, video, captioned video, images, etc.
480
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Results from these trials are going to be published in 
2013.  Concerning other publications, the  following project 
results have been published so far:
A.
Deliverable D2.1: User Needs Analysis
At the start of the project, user focus group work was 
conducted  in the  three  countries  Norway,  Romania,  and 
Spain to cover the needs of primary users [23]. The in total 
39 participants of the focus groups were selected to represent 
a broad range of parameters, including age (48 to 96), gender 
(24 female vs. 15 male), dis­/abilities (sensory and cognitive 
impairments), nationality (4 foreigners), and ICT experience 
and usage. The participants were given the description of 2 
scenarios. One scenario dealt with a travel situation, where a 
user was traveling in a foreign country, encountered lan­
guage problem, and had to cope with reduced vision. The 
other scenario comprised a challenge occurring in the home 
environment, where an elderly user faced the problem of un­
derstanding the technical manual of an electric household ap­
pliance.
The results from the focus group work show that the tar­
get group “elderly persons” indeed is a very heterogeneous 
group with a wide range of – partly opposite – needs and 
wishes. This applies also to the users' familiarity with ICT in 
general and mobile technology in particular, which ranges 
from none to professional users.
An in­debth discussion of the results is available in the 
respective deliverable [23].
B.
Deliverable D2.2: User Requirements Specification
The results from the user needs analysis were collected 
and formulated as user requirements [24]. The roughly 50 re­
quirements address the expectations of primary users to­
wards HoD and CM. An example of a user requirement is 
“The HoD Service shall have measures for privacy protected 
audio output”. The user requirements served as input to the 
process of formulating the first draft of the system require­
ments for the two main deliverables of MobileSage.
C.
Deliverable 2.3: System Requirements Specification for 
the Help­on­Demand System
This specification addresses the requirements towards the 
HoD application regarding the user interface, system func­
tionality, and input/output matters. Its informal parts also in­
clude user interface mockups [25]. An example of a system 
requirement is “An emergency button shall be shown on any 
screen of the application if the value for this feature has 
been set to 'on' in the user profile”. This deliverable serves as 
a set of instructions for the system development and integra­
tion.
D.
Deliverable 2.4: System Requirements Specification for 
the Content Management System
This specification addresses the requirements towards the 
CM Service regarding the user interface to the database, sys­
tem functionality, and input/output matters, including the 
data exchange with HoD and user interface mockups [26].
E.
HoD and CM software prototypes
As already mentioned, beta versions of the smartphone 
application and the web service have been released.
F.
Deliverable D 5.3: Market Analysis & Socio­Economic 
Impact and Potential 
This document gives an in­debth analysis of the market 
segments that are relevant for the HoD application, stake­
holders, and possible business models [27]. It also discusses 
similar products which already are on the market, and related 
projects.
VI.
OUTLOOK
The development process in MobileSage foresees multi­
ple iterations for the HoD and CM services, where one itera­
tion consists of the steps specification work, risk analysis, 
development and integration, and evaluation. The develop­
ment is user centric, meaning that users from the target 
Figure 1: System architecture for Help on Demand Service (left) and Content Management Service (right) with the network in between
481
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

groups are involved in each evaluation step, and that the de­
velopment starts with an analysis of the user needs. The idea 
is that the user requirements, which are a direct consequence 
of the user needs analysis, are “translated” to system require­
ments, and that the specification of those is refined in each 
development iteration based on the results from the previous 
user evaluation. Thus, deliverables D2.3 and D2.4 are ex­
pected to undergo several new revisions, as will the software 
prototypes. For an updated schedule and timeline, please re­
fer to the project's web site [21].
VII.
CONCLUSION
In this article, the AAL project MobileSage has been in­
troduced by presenting its two main service deliverables, as 
well as status and preliminary results, and an outlook on the 
road ahead. The work also briefly mentioned the AAL Pro­
gramme and discussed related projects and research.
The objective of MobileSage is to increase digital partici­
pation and involvement  by providing particularly  elderly 
people with relevant and useful multimodal guidance on de­
mand, depending on the context, and in a personalized, adap­
tive, accessible, and usable manner. As such, it addresses all 
of AAL's areas of interest. The project's overall goal is to sig­
nificantly increase the independence of elderly people in the 
home environment and during travel. It aims at stimulating 
people to help themselves and easing the production and 
availability of help content for just about anything. A first 
beta version of the services has already been released and is 
undergoing testing in Q4 2012, while the project itself is 
planned to last throughout 2013.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partly funded by the European Commission 
through  the  AAL  Programme,  the  Norwegian  Research 
Council, and National bodies in Spain and Romania. The au­
thor would like to thank the consortium members for their 
valuable contributions and all individuals involved in the 
user studies for their feedback.
REFERENCES
[1]   Metz D. & Underwood M., Older Richer Fitter. Identifying 
customer needs of Britain’s ageing population. Age Concern 
(2005)
[2]   Røssvoll T.H.. The European MobileSage Project ­­– 
Situated Adaptive Guidance for the Mobile Elderly. In Electronic 
Government and Electronic Participation, Joint Proceedings of 
Ongoing Research and Projects of IFIP EGOV and IFIP ePart 
2012 (2012)
[3]   AAL Association. Innovative ICT solutions for Ageing ­­ 
Ambient Assisted Living. http://www.aal­europe.eu/ (Last 
accessed: 2012­06­30)
[4]
 AAL Association. ICT­based Solutions for Advancement 
of Older Persons’ Independence and Participation in the 
“Self­Serve Society”. 3rd Call for Proposals (2010) 
[5]   APSIS4ALL Project Consortium. The APSIS4ALL  Project. 
http://www.apsis4all.eu/ (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[6]   ASK­IT Project Consortium. The ASK­IT Project. 
http://www.ask­it.org (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[7]   MyUI Project Consortium. The MyUI Project. 
http://www.myui.eu (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[8]   Guide Project Consortium. The Guide Project. 
http://www.guide­project.eu (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[9]   DIADEM Project Consortium. The DIADEM Project. 
http://www.project­diadem.eu (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[10]   GPII Project Consortium. The GPII Project. http://gpii.org 
(Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[11]   Snapi Project Consortium. The Snapi Project. 
http://www.snapi.org.uk (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[12]   GoldUI Project Consortium. The GoldUI Project. 
http://www.goldui.eu (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[13]   WayFiS Project Consortium. The WayFiS Project. 
http://www.wayfis.eu (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[14]   Mediate Project Consortium. The Mediate Project. 
http://www.mediate­project.eu (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[15]   Access2all Project Consortium. The Access2all Project. 
http://www.access­to­all.eu (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[16]   Abascal J., Sevillano J.L. & Artigas J.I., AmbienNet ­ 
Ambient Intelligence Supporting Navigation for People with 
Disabilities. Jornada de Seguimiento de Proyectos (2009)
[17]   HAPTIMAP Project Consortium. The HAPTIMAP Project. 
http://www.haptimap.org (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[18]   MAPPED Project Consortium. The MAPPED Project. 
http://services.txt.it/MAPPED (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[19]   Ervasti M., Isomursu M. & Leibar I.. Touch­ and 
Audio­based Medication Management Service Concept for Vision 
Impaired Older People. In IEEE International Conference on 
RFID­Technologies and Applications (RFID­TA) (2011)
[20]   Vastianos G., Kyriazanos D., Segou O., Mitilineos S. & 
Thomopoulos S.. Indoor Localization Using Passive RFID. In 
Proceedings of Signal Processing, Sensor Fusion, and Target 
Recognition (2011)
[21]   Sánchez V.. The MobileSage Project. http://mobilesage.eu 
(Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[22]   Solheim I. & Røssvoll T.H.. MobileSage Project Factsheet. 
http://nr.no (Last accessed: 2012­06­30)
[23]   Dale Ø.. MobileSage Deliverable D2.1: User Needs 
Analysis (2012), 
http://mobilesage.eu/public­documents/public­deliverables
[24]   Røssvoll T.H.. MobileSage Deliverable D2.2: User 
Requirements Specification (2012), 
http://mobilesage.eu/public­documents/public­deliverables
[25]   Curescu L., Anghelache I. & Røssvoll T.H.. MobileSage 
Deliverable D2.3: System Requirements Specification for 
Help­on­Demand Service (2012), 
http://mobilesage.eu/public­documents/public­deliverables
[26]   Røssvoll T.H. & Gracia V.A.. MobileSage Deliverable 
D2.4: System Requirements Specification for Content 
Management Service (2012), 
http://mobilesage.eu/public­documents/public­deliverables
[27]   Sánchez V. & Sánchez J.. MobileSage Deliverable D 5.3:
Market Analysis & Socio­Economic
Impact and Potential (2012), http://mobilesage.eu
482
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

