Simplified Customer Segmentation Applied to an Outbound Contact Center Dialer 
 
 
Telmo Ricardo Lopes Alberto, Pedro Mendes da Silva 
Research and Development 
Altitude Software 
Oeiras, Portugal 
{Telmo.Alberto, Pedro.Silva}@altitude.com 
 
 
 
Abstract— Contact centers are a critical link between 
companies and their customers. In this context, outbound 
dialing represents a major business area for many companies, 
as they often need to reach a very large number of customers 
by phone or other media. In this scenario, it becomes a 
necessity to prioritize which customers should be contacted 
first, probably according to their expected business value. In 
this paper, we will keep our focus on customer segmentation 
for an outbound contact center dialer. This implies targeting 
different sets of customers (customer segments), with distinct 
priorities and staff for each segment, while taking into account 
all the business objectives. Our proposal is based on extending 
our existing outbound contact center management system to 
provide support for simplified customer segmentation in the 
context of outbound dialing. This system provides an 
interactive interface for handling typical contact center 
business requirements. Our main focus is enhancing the 
system’s user experience, so that it allows the user to manage 
customer segments and dialing effectively, by using schedules, 
key performance indicators, multidimensional statistics, 
business 
segment 
prioritization, 
customer 
contact 
prioritization, and staffing management. Ultimately, we have 
shown how it was possible to enhance an outbound dialer with 
customer segmentation concepts, focusing on schedules, KPIs, 
multi-dimensional statistics, business segment and customer 
contact prioritization by business value, and staffing. Users of 
the new module find that their staff productivity and 
responsiveness to events regarding contact list quality has 
improved dramatically. 
Keywords-contact center; customer segmentation; dialer; 
near real-time business intelligence; business applications. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Contact centers represent one of the main interfaces 
between companies and their customers [1]. Many contact 
centers need a large specialized staff to handle all the 
communications with the customers. They are currently not 
limited to phone calls as in the past, and have extended their 
reach to other media, such as email, chat and social networks 
[2][3]. 
In contact centers, we usually have two types of 
interactions, inbound (originated from costumers) or 
outbound (initiated from inside the contact center) [4]. For 
example, an outbound contact center can be focused on 
dialing calls to a list of customers that have a debt to pay. 
The calls must then be delivered to contact center operators 
(also known as “agents”). 
The work in outbound contact centers can be divided in 
several Outbound Campaigns, which take lists of customers 
and a list of business rules and try to deliver interactions 
between the most adequate agents and the selected 
customers, according to specific business rules. 
Contact center management is a complex and demanding 
endeavor, with the need to connect business objectives, 
people and processes. Several business applications have 
been developed to handle this complexity and allow for 
optimized contact center management. 
Customer segmentation is mainly the action of dividing 
a customer base into smaller sets of individuals, similar in 
specific ways relevant to marketing. These segments, allow 
companies to allocate the most appropriate marketing 
resources to specific groups of customers, in order to 
maximize the financial value generated [18]. Examples of 
implementation of the concept can be found in [8][9]. 
In the past years, customer segmentation has become a 
very important business requirement regarding obtaining 
new 
customers 
and 
increasing 
customer 
retention. 
Following this trend, the need to somehow integrate this 
concept in customer relationship management (CRM) 
systems, in general [25], and in contact centers management 
systems, in particular, arose. The underlying goal is nearly 
always profits maximization. 
In this paper, we will focus on customer segmentation in 
the specific context of outbound contact center campaigns. 
Section 2 presents some details about our existing contact 
center management system. Section 3 details the customer 
segmentation concept. Section 4 describes how outbound 
campaign customer segmentation was integrated into our 
system, with the introduction of the Strategy Manager 
module. Section 5 presents some conclusions and future 
work. 
 
II. 
CONTACT CENTER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
Our previous research has been focused on developing a 
Contact Center Management System (Altitude uCI). A 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

general simplified overview of the current architecture can 
be found in Fig. 1.  
Our Contact Center Management System is responsible 
for handling all interactions and events between customers 
and contact center staff. The dialer is responsible for 
delivering interactions to agents, without them having to 
perform manual dials. It offers support for predictive dialing 
[4], always respecting legislation (by avoiding silent calls) 
and business objectives.  
All the contact center data (system tables, customer data) 
is stored in an external relational database management 
system (RDBMS).  Working on top of the external database, 
we have our own application specific built-in Online 
Analytical Processing (OLAP) engine [5]. This is needed for 
real-time monitoring, using OLAP dimensions and cubes, 
extra details about this can be found in [19]. 
Our system includes client applications, mainly web and 
desktop applications for the agents (the contact center 
operators), and a specific web application for contact center 
supervisors and managers, designed to monitor all contact 
center performance in real time and react according to it. It 
also allows the user to perform all the system configuration 
tasks, as well as requesting and visualizing reports.  
The link between the contact center and the customers is 
provided by the Public switched telephone network (PSTN) 
and by the Internet. PSTN provides the link for calls and 
faxes from/to customers, and the Internet provides 
interactions through social networks, chat, email, and VOIP 
(voice over IP). 
Our system enables contact center stakeholders to 
manage the contact center according to business goals, using 
business intelligence technology and concepts (BI). BI is a 
collection of decision support technologies for the enterprise 
aimed at enabling knowledge workers to make better and 
faster decisions [5]. 
A Key Performance Indicator (KPI) is a measure or 
metric that evaluates performance with respect to some 
objective. It is routinely used by organizations to measure 
both success and quality in fulfilling strategic goals [17]. 
 The system allows business users to track near real-time 
business KPI, using visual dashboards. Also, often those KPI 
are associated to specific goals, and trigger special events or 
actions, if the goal is either reached or failed. Some industry 
standard KPIs are built into the system (for example: 
Conversion Rate [6]).  
Contact Center 
Management 
System
Database
Dialer
PSTN
Internet
 
Figure 1.  General overview of our contact center management system 
III. 
CUSTOMER SEGMENTATION 
The concept of customer segmentation is a key 
marketing notion. The main goal of separating customers 
into different segments inside the same campaign is to be 
able to differentiate marketing activities towards these 
segments [7]. 
Extensive research has been done on customer 
segmentation (both in general and for specific fields), but, 
ultimately, it is up to the business manager to decide which 
parameters should be used to perform distinctions between 
customers and to decide at which segment each customer 
belongs. Depending on the goal, some simple criteria like 
gender, age group, geographical location, income, and 
previous sales are good indicators to be used when 
segmenting.  
For example, “expected profit greater than X” might 
define a segment. As most companies want to maximize 
profits (or some other quantity, for example, sales), 
marketers quickly realized that a segmentation should 
ensure that better customers are separated from the 
remaining customers [7]. The concept of customer lifetime 
value and fidelity is also mostly used in segmentation [8][9].  
Regarding the definition of which segments to use, and 
the attribution of customers between each of them, there are 
several techniques available. These techniques include K-
means (more details for this method can be found in [21]), 
Two Step, and Kohonen networks [20]. Statistical mixture 
models, like Latent Class Analysis (LCA), can also be used 
(a recent example of this method usage can be found in 
[22]).  
Customer segmentation techniques can be generically 
used for marketing purposes. Some consumer markets 
customer segmentation types include [20]: 
 
Value based.  
 
Behavioral. 
 
Propensity based. 
 
Loyalty based. 
 
Socio-demographic and life-stage. 
 
Needs/attitudinal. 
Industry-specific customer segmentation methodologies 
have been developed, which include data specific for each 
field. For example, for the banking industry, there are 
specific techniques for segmenting credit card holders and 
specific techniques for segmenting retail banking customers. 
This also applies to other industries, such as the retail 
industry, telecommunications industry, and the electrical 
power industry [20] [10]. 
In recent years, with the arrival of social media channels, 
the issue of customer segmentation in this new context has 
captured research attention. Issues include how to integrate 
and correlate all the new social data with data from other 
sources, for example, with market research data and 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) data, and also 
how to match social media identities with all that data 
already collected in the corporate databases [23][24]. In the 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

same field, we have seen an interesting proposal for 
automatic customer segmentation applied to social CRM 
systems [25]. 
A correct combination of customer segmentation with 
the right marketing options for each segment will lead to 
maximized profits. In the context of contact centers, the 
main goal is to optimize business results by choosing the 
right contacts to dial at the right time, maximizing the 
success/cost ratio of outbound campaigns.  
 
IV. 
STRATEGY MANAGER 
“Strategy Manager” is a component that tries to add 
simplified customer segmentation for outbound contact 
center dialers to our system. Visually, it is mainly composed 
of a visual dashboard (Strategy Center), a calendar (Strategy 
calendar), and a monitoring area. The user can control the 
dialer behavior by specifying which segments should be 
contacted first and which agents should handle the 
interactions. Near-real time information about the progress in 
each segment is available, so that the user can act upon it. 
Before the integration of this concept in our system there 
was no notion of business segment associated with a 
customer list. The only available option was to specify a 
Structured Query Language (SQL) filter applied directly to 
the database to select which customers are contacted while 
the filter is in place. Thus, the user could not monitor 
progress on each customer segment individually nor use a 
different staffing for each segment. Priorities between 
segments were also impossible to achieve without manual 
intervention. 
 
A. Strategy Center 
A matrix-like user interface control was selected after 
several design and usability test iterations. It was named 
“Strategy Center”, and is shown in Fig. 2. It is a dashboard, 
showing near real time important business information, and 
providing access to the business segmentation configuration 
operations. It is now an important part of our contact center 
management tool.  The matrix is mainly composed of three 
sections: 
Contact 
Lists
Business 
Segments
Strategy
cells
 
Figure 2.  Screenshot of the Strategy Center interface . 
 
 
 
Contact Lists: these are the matrix rows. They 
usually represent different lists of customers to be 
contacted. Normally, different contact lists represent 
different input files from customer list data sources. 
 
Business Segments: these are the matrix columns. 
These contain a filter to specify which customers 
from the existing contact lists should be contacted. 
 
Strategy Cells: these are the matrix cells, the 
intersections between business segments and contact 
lists. They represent the set of customers from a 
given contact list that match a business segment 
filter. 
 
With the help of several visual indicators, the user can, at 
each moment, in each matrix cell, monitor: 
 
How many customers were already contacted. 
 
How many customers were not yet contacted. 
 
If a matrix cell is being targeted (Started or 
Stopped). 
 
What is the status of all of the conditions that are 
currently being used to control the automatic running 
status of each cell (schedules and KPIs). 
More globally, in the matrix top and left cells, the user 
can also monitor how customers are distributed across the 
contact lists and business segments. Finally, the user can also 
monitor the dialing business performance and change the 
dialing strategy.  
 
B. Business Segments 
The main configuration parameter for a business segment 
is the segment filter. The filter is defined in the user 
interface, using logical operators, combining customer data 
fields which can range from demographic data (age, gender, 
income, etc.) to specific business fields (previous sales, 
customer category [11] , etc.). It is up to the user to define 
thoroughly which segments will fit best their business goals, 
and which customer attributes should be used in the filter to 
define their positioning.  
 
C. Dialer Management using Business-oriented Rules 
The user can fine-tune the dialer behavior by selecting 
different policies for each strategy cell. 
For each cell, there are two main operation modes, the 
manual and automatic modes: 
1) Manual mode: the dialing for a given cell is totally 
controlled by the user. The user manually selects the “Start” 
and “Stop” operations. 
2) Automatic mode: the dialing for a given cell is 
automatically controlled by one or a combination of 
conditions configured by the user, according to specific 
business strategies: 
a) Schedule: the period of time during which the 
customers from one cell should be contacted.  
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

b) KPI: the dialing for a given cell is controlled by the 
value and objective of a user-defined KPI.  
c) Maximum customers contacted: the dialing for a 
given cell is controlled by the value and objective of this 
built-in KPI. 
 
D. Monitoring 
It is possible to monitor the dialing process in real time, 
having individual performance data in every cell, and 
aggregated statistics for the contact lists and business 
segments. At each moment, we can tell how many customers 
were contacted (successfully or not) and how many are left. 
The 
monitoring 
operations 
are 
supported 
by 
a 
multidimensional data model [5].  
KPIs also enable the user to examine the performance of 
each cell at any time and whether the business objectives are 
being met, and dynamically respond accordingly. 
 Additionally, the user can access more real-time and 
historical indicators, with options to navigate to other 
monitoring screens containing tables or charts. Historical-
data reports are also available. 
 
E. Staffing 
It is often necessary to assign specific agents to specific 
business segments. For example, a debt collection contact 
center manager can decide to assign contacts with a larger 
debt to a set of highly skilled agents. Another example would 
be to segment customers by education level and let 
customers with a college degree be handled by agents with a 
college degree [12]. 
Strategy Center provides a mechanism for staffing, which 
includes assigning skills to agents and assigning skills to 
business segments. The system then matches the required 
agents to the assigned business segments. 
 
F. Business segment prioritization based on business value 
Different business segments can provide different 
expected business values. For example, consider an 
outbound contact center where a customer list is sorted in 
descending order by Customer Lifetime Value (LTV) and 
then split by percentile [13], as shown in Fig. 3. It is then 
expectable that each segment will have a different business 
value and that a user may want to target better valued 
business segments first. 
Considering 
this 
idea, 
operations 
have 
been 
implemented in the Strategy Manager so as to allow the user 
to set sequences of business segments to be dialed. When 
defining the sequence, the user also defines which business 
goals control the transition from one business segment to 
the next. 
 
 
 
Segment A
Segment B
Segment C
...
Segment N
High LTV
Low LTV
 
Figure 3.  Business segment prioritization based on LTV. 
G. Contact prioritization based on business value 
Even after customers are segmented, they can still have 
a different individual expected business value. For example, 
each customer can have a different expected lifetime value, 
as suggested in [9]. So, it may be useful to contact 
customers with the higher expected value first (Fig. 4).  
 
Segment A
Segment B
Segment C
...
Segment N
Low LTV
High LTV
Customer BV=100
Customer BV=96
Customer BV=90
...
Customer BV=10
 
Figure 4.  Contact prioritization according to business value. 
In order to satisfy this requirement, the Strategy Center 
provides an operation to sort the contacts by a user-defined 
business value, which can be derived from each contact’s 
attributes. 
 
H. Multi-channel 
As stated previously, contact centers are not restricted to 
telephony interactions and businesses find it important to be 
able to reach customers in multiple media [2][14]. Having 
this idea in mind, the Strategy Manager provides a 
mechanism to reach customers from a given segment 
through several media. 
For example, suppose a contact center manager wants to 
define that, for “Business Segment X”, after trying to reach a 
customer by phone by a maximum number of tries he should 
be reached by email instead. This behavior can be configured 
in Strategy Manager by defining a set of media rules for a 
given business segment. 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented a module that implements 
customer segmentation for outbound contact center dialers 
with a focus on business intelligence. We presented a 
Contact Center Management System (Altitude uCI), where 
the module was added, and provided an overview of 
customer segmentation concepts. We have shown how it was 
possible to enhance an outbound dialer with customer 
segmentation concepts, focusing on schedules, KPIs, multi-
dimensional statistics, business segment and customer 
contact prioritization by business value, and staffing. Some 
of our customers have been integrating their customer 
segmentation in the new “Strategy Manager” module, and 
their staff productivity and responsiveness to events 
regarding contact list quality has improved dramatically, as 
they can now monitor each segment’s quality in terms of 
dialing and sales success and change dialing priorities and 
staffing accordingly and in real-time. 
In the future, our research will be focused on enhancing 
the dialer with “best time to call a given customer” 
estimations, so that the probabilities of desired business 
outcomes are maximized. This may include classification 
modeling data mining techniques, possibly using decision 
trees (or other classification method) applied to the customer 
attributes, providing a classifier for call success or failure, in 
a given schedule [15]. In this scenario, the classifier also 
outputs a probability for “call success” for each customer. 
This probability output from the classifier can then be used 
to order customers by success likelihood. 
Additionally, 
automatic 
customer 
segmentation 
mechanisms will be addressed. These will allow a customer 
list to be automatically segmented, with minimal user input. 
For example, automatically segmenting (binning) customers 
based on LTV intervals. The user would only select the field 
where to perform the binning [20]. Another possibility will 
be to use unsupervised machine learning techniques, to find 
related customer segments. Namely, K-means, Two Step, 
and Kohonen networks techniques can be used to 
automatically find customer segments. Additionally, a 
decision tree classification method could be applied to these 
segments, in order to find a human intelligible description for 
each cluster, which is also usable as a filter in the Strategy 
Manager business segments [20].  
Adding more native support for marketing related 
customer segmentation types is also a future possibility. This 
would include support for segmentation types like Value-
Based Segmentation, Behavioral Segmentation, Propensity-
Based 
Segmentation, 
Loyalty 
Segmentation, 
Socio-
demographic and Life-Stage Segmentation integrated into 
the system, automatically guiding the user into finding the 
right segments and providing the corresponding filters to the 
Strategy Manager [20] [8][9]. 
The addition of marketing related customer segmentation 
concepts and processes for specific industries is also a 
possibility. Banking [20], telecommunications, and electric 
power industry [10] could be considered, among others. 
Better expressivity between business goals and KPIs may 
also be addressed, as proposed in the Business Intelligence 
Model research literature [16][17]. This may allow better 
business rules for prioritizing business segments. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by QREN (Quadro de 
Referência Estratégico Nacional). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Gans, G. Koole, and A. Mandelbaum, “Telephone call 
centers: 
tutorial, 
review, 
and 
research 
prospects”, 
Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, Vol. 5, 
No. 2, March 2003, pp. 79-141. 
[2] STRATECO, "Shaping tomorrow`s contact center: research 
on 
market 
trends 
& 
challenges 
- 
Germany" 
, 
http://online.altitude.com/germany-cc-market-survey-
availability , April 2013. 
[3] T. Weinberg, “New community rules:marketing in the social 
web“, O’Reilly, ISBN: 9780596804237, 2009. 
[4] P. Amaral, and M. Vital, “Predictive dialer intensity 
optimization using genetic alghoritms”, International Journal 
of Machine Learning and Computing, in press, 2013. 
[5] S. Chaudhuri, U. Dayal, and V. Narasayya, “An overview of 
business intelligence technology”,Communications of the 
ACM, Vol.54, No. 8, August 2011, pp.88-98. 
[6] H. Krause, and D. Arora, “Controlling-Kennzahlen - Key 
Performance 
Indicators: 
Zweisprachiges 
Handbuch 
Deutsch/Englisch 
- 
Bi-lingual 
Compendium 
German/English”, Oldenbourg Wissensch.Vlg, ISBN-10: 
348659690X, March 2010. 
[7] J. Jonker, N. Piersma, and D. Poel, “Joint optimization of 
customer segmentation and marketing policy to maximize 
long-term 
profitability”, 
Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications,Vol. 27 , Issue 2, August 2004,  pp. 159-168 
[8] C. 
C. 
H. 
Chan, 
“Intelligent 
value-based 
customer 
segmentation method for campaign management: a case study 
of automobile retailer”, Expert Systems with Applications, 
Vol. 34, Issue 4, May 2008, pp. 2754–2762. 
[9] S. Kim, T. Jung, E. Suh, and H. Hwang, “Customer 
segmentation and strategy development based on customer 
lifetime value: a case study”, Expert Systems with 
Applications, Vol. 31, Issue 1, July 2006,  pp. 101-107. 
[10] E. Carpaneto, G. Chicco, R. Napoli, and M. Scutariu, 
“Customer classification by means of harmonic representation 
of 
distinguishing 
features,” 
Power 
Tech 
Conference 
Proceedings, IEEE Bologna, Vol. 3,  June 2003,  pp. 7. 
[11] N. C. G. Campbell,  and M. T. Cunningham, “Customer 
analysis for strategy development in industrial markets”, 
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 4, Issue 4,  November 
2006, pp. 369-380. 
[12] R. Batt, “Strategic segmentation in frontline services: 
matching customers, employees, and human resource 
systems”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Human 
Resource 
Management,  Vol. 11,  No. 3,   June 2000,  pp. 540-561. 
[13] F. R. Dwyer, “Customer lifetime valuation to support 
marketing 
decision 
making”, 
Journal 
of 
Interactive 
Marketing,  Vol.11,  No.4,  pp. 6-13 , Fall 1997. 
[14] A. Payne, and P. Frow, “The role of multichannel integration 
in customer relationship management”, Industrial Marketing 
Management, Vol.33,  issue 6, August 2004, pp. 527–538. 
[15] I. H. Witten, and E. Frank, “Data Mining: Practical Machine 
Learning Tools and Techniques, Second Edition (Morgan 
Kaufmann Series in Data Management Systems)”, TBS, 
ASIN: B001DU6J6U, 2005.  
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[16] D. Barone, J. Mylopoulos, L. Jiang,  and D. Amyot,”Business 
intelligence model, ver. 1.0. Technical Report CSRG-607”, 
University of Toronto, March 2010. 
[17] D. Barone, L. Jiang, D. Amyot, and J. Mylopoulos, 
“Reasoning with key performance indicators”, Proceedings of 
the 4th IFIP WG8.1 Working Conference on the Practice of 
Enterprise Modeling (PoEM11), November 2-3 2011, pp. 82-
96. 
[18] G. R. Tirenni, "Allocation of marketing resources to optimize 
customer equity", Doctoral dissertation, University of St. 
Gallen, 2005. 
[19] P. M. Silva, E. Pereira, and T. Alberto, "Scalable contact 
center management with data partitioning and data 
integration", unpublished, 2004. 
[20] K. Tsiptsis, and A. Chorianopoulos,"Data mining techniques 
in CRM: inside customer segmentation", John Wiley & Sons, 
2011. 
[21] K. R. Kashwan, and C. M. Velu, "Customer segmentation 
using clustering and data mining techniques.", International 
Journal of Computer Theory & Engineering, Vol.5, Issue 6, 
December 2013, pp. 856-861. 
[22] F. Hamka, H. Bouwman, M. De Reuver, and M. Kroesen, 
"Mobile customer segmentation based on smartphone 
measurement", Telematics and Informatics , Vol. 31, Issue 2, 
May 2014, pp. 220–227. 
[23] P. Fennemore, A. I. Canhoto, and M. Clark, "An investigation 
of existing and emerging segmentation practices in online 
social media networks", Henley Centre for Customer 
Management,  December 2011. 
[24] A. I. Canhoto, M. Clark, and P. Fennemore, "Emerging 
segmentation practices in the age of the social customer", 
Journal of Strategic Marketing, Vol. 21, Issue 5, July 2013, 
pp. 413-428. 
[25] A. Czyszczoń, and A. Zgrzywa, "Automatic customer 
segmentation for social CRM systems", Computer Networks, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013. pp. 552-561. 
 
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

