Do the Number of Creators and Their Conversations Affect Re-Evaluation of a
Familiar Place in Making a Tourist Map?
Yoko Nishihara
Col. of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
email: nisihara@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp
Xinran Lin
Col. of Information Science and Engineering
Ritsumeikan University
Shiga, Japan
Ryosuke Yamanishi
Faculty of Informatics
Kansai University
Osaka, Japan
Abstract—In this paper, we analyzed the effect of the number
of creators and their conversations on making a tourist map as
re-evaluating a familiar place. It means we try to study about
collaborative decision making when mapping new places. We
conducted experiments to make tourist maps where the partic-
ipants described the tourist attractions as they actually walked
in a familiar place. We compared three types of maps: (a) made
by a single participant, (b) made by two participants without
any conversations, and (c) with conversations. It was found that
maps made by two participants with conversations had a higher
proportion of unrevealed tourist attractions but a lower amount
of tourist attractions than other maps. For these results, it seemed
that conversations might bring introducing unrevealed tourist
attractions to the conversation partner. Meanwhile, those also
might waste the thinking-up time about the tourist attractions.
Keywords-conversation analysis; tourist map; re-evaluation of
a familiar place; discovery of a tourist attraction; collaborative
decision making.
I. INTRODUCTION
People often refer to a tourist map that shows tourist
attractions to see when they go sightseeing. A tourist map can
be found in guide books, Web pages, and tourist information
centers in tourist places. People check the tourist map to know
the rough shape of a tourist place and ﬁnd tourist attractions.
Then, they plan a route to visit the tourist attractions they
are interested in and enjoy visiting them. A tourist map is
indispensable for sightseeing.
A well-known tourist place often has many tourist attrac-
tions or a few tourist attractions that cannot be missed. There-
fore, it is easy to enumerate the tourist attractions necessary for
creating a tourist map. On the other hand, a place where newly
promotes itself as a tourist place must begin with discovering
tourist attractions to be included in a tourist map. At this time,
it is necessary to re-evaluate a place whether the place has
spots valuable for a tourist map.
Even if a place is not currently a sightseeing place, the
place may have valuable spots known only by people familiar
with the place. We call such a spot an unrevealed tourist
attraction.
To discover unrevealed tourist attractions, the
help of people who are familiar with the place is necessary.
However, it may be difﬁcult for them to spontaneously list
spots that would be tourist attractions for others because they
are familiar with the place. We assume that (1) each individual
is inﬂuenced by his/her partner and can re-evaluate a place
to list spots as tourist attractions if two people look for
spots together instead of him/herself, and (2) the re-evaluation
will be conducted efﬁciently if they have conversations when
looking for such places. In this paper, we analyze the effects
of the number of people and their conversations on the re-
evaluation of a place in creating a tourist map. It means we
try to study about collaborative decision making [1], [2] when
mapping new places.
Many types of research are conducted to support tourism
using the voice of people. For example, location information
from microblogs is used to support tourism [3]. The previous
studies focus on judging whether a spot is a tourist attraction.
Our study focuses on analyzing the effects of the voice of
people to discover tourist attractions.
Shirozu et al. designed a workshop to establish a mechanism
that encourages people to deepen their awareness of their
place and make discoveries by changing their perceptions of a
familiar place and scene [4]. This study also asked participants
to walk around a familiar place, acquire knowledge of the
place, and create a tourist map. However, the present study
differs in that it focuses on the effects of the number of
people walking in a familiar place and the effects of the
presence/absence of conversations when walking together.
II. HYPOTHESIS TESTING EXPERIMENT
The main hypothesis of this paper is: “if a tourist map is
created by two people walking around a familiar place with
conversations, the map will be different from a map created
by a single person.” We break down the main hypothesis
into the four sub-hypotheses. (H1a): The number of tourist
attractions will be larger if two people create a tourist map
without any conversations than if a single person creates
it. (H1b): The number of tourist attractions will be larger
when two people create a tourist map with conversations than
when without any conversations. (H2a): The proportion of
unrevealed tourist attractions increases when two people create
a tourist map without any conversations, rather than a single
person creating it. (H2b): The proportion of unrevealed tourist
attractions increases when two people create a tourist map with
conversations than when without any conversations.
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. Examples of created tourist maps by Gr. A to C.
We used Google map (https://www.google.com/maps) to
make tourist maps.
A. Experimental procedures
We conducted experiments to verify the hypotheses as
follows. (P1) The experimenter instructs participants on how
to make a tourist map. (P2) The participants walk around a
place for 45 minutes and take photos of what they consider to
be tourist attractions. (P3) The participants upload the photos
to Google map, write the title and description of the photos,
and complete to make the tourist map.
The participants created a tourist map of the Biwako
Kusatsu Campus of Ritsumeikan University as a place that
did not have many famous tourist attractions. The participants
were 35 students who belonged to the campus for more than
one year. All of them were familiar with the campus.
The participants were divided into three groups: a partic-
ipant makes a tourist map alone (Gr. A, seven participants),
two participants make a tourist map without any conversations
(Gr. B, seven pairs, 14 participants), and two participants
make a tourist map with conversations (Gr. C, seven pairs,
14 participants).
B. How to judge whether a place is unrevealed
On the campus, there are facilities used for lectures, re-
search, administration ofﬁces, and so on. The participants
might list these facilities as tourist attractions. (1) If a spot
is a facility described on a campus map published by the
university, the spot should be regarded as a famous tourist
attraction that everyone knows well. (2) However, even a spot
is that mentioned above, if there is a description of personal
memories or impressions, a new perspective of enjoying the
spot will be added. In this case, the spot on the campus map
and the spot mentioned by a participant are considered to be
different. Therefore, it should be regarded as an unrevealed
tourist attraction is found in creating a map. (3) If a spot is
not described on the campus map, the spot should be regarded
as an unrevealed tourist attraction.
C. Experimental results
Figure 1 shows examples of created tourist maps by Gr.
A through C. Balloons on the maps indicate the tourist
attractions. Figure 2 illustrates examples of photos, titles,
and descriptions of the tourist attractions obtained from the
participants of Gr. C.
Figure 2. Examples of tourist attractions obtained by Gr. C
participants.
The averages of tourist attractions were 17.6 (Gr. A), 18.1
(Gr. B), and 10.3 (Gr. C). The average time for making a
tourist map was 32.1 minutes (Gr. A), 28.6 minutes (Gr. B),
and 22.1 minutes (Gr. C). The averages of the proportions of
unrevealed tourist attractions were 68.3% (Gr. A), 73.7% (Gr.
B), and 86.1% (Gr. C).
We found that the hypotheses H2a and H2b should be valid.
Note that a signiﬁcant difference was not obtained by statistical
testings. It is necessary to increase the number of experiments
in the future to conduct statistical analysis. We found that the
hypotheses H1a and H1b were not valid. This is because that it
took time to think about unrevealed tourist attractions, which
reduced the number of tourist attractions on the maps.
III. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we analyzed the effects of the number of
creators and their conversations on re-evaluating the familiar
place in making a tourist map as a collaborative decision
making study. We conducted experiments that participants
walked a familiar place and made a tourist map. We found that
when two participants made a tourist map with conversations,
the tourist map has more unrevealed tourist attractions than
that made by a single participant. However, the number of
tourist attractions on the maps with that settings was the
lowest among the three groups. For these results, it seemed
that conversations might bring introducing unrevealed tourist
attractions to the conversation partner. Meanwhile, the conver-
sations also might waste the thinking-up time of participants
about the tourist attractions. As a future work, we would
conduct interviews to deepen the ﬁndings.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Westendorf, O. Shaer, P. Varsanyi, H. Meulen, and A. L. Kun,
“Understanding Collaborative Decision Making Around a Large-scale
Interactive Tabletop,” Proc. of the ACM on Human-Computer Interac-
tion, Nov. 2017, pp.1-21.
[2] N. Mahyar et al., “Consesnsus: Visualizing Points of Disagreement for
Multi-criteria Collaborative Decision Making,” Proc. of Companion of
the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
and Social Computing, Feb. 2017, pp.17-20.
[3] B. Pat, Y. Kanza, and M. Naaman, “Geosocial Search: Finding Places
based on Geotagged Social-media Posts,” Proc. of the 24th International
Conference on World Wide Web, May 2015, pp. 231-234.
[4] N. Shirozu, S. Sakaguchi, M. Matsushita, and C. Hanamura, “Paradise
Scope: A Workshop for Stimulating a Student’s Viewpoint - a Trial
Practice of Shikakeology -,” Proc. the 6th International Conference on
Soft Computing and Intelligent Systems, and the 13th International
Symposium on Advanced Intelligent Systems, Nov. 2012, pp. 691-694.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-870-9
ACHI 2021 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

