 
The Impact of Player Experience on Enjoyment in Tablet Gaming 
 
Uttam Kokil  
College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Marietta, GA 30060, USA 
E-Mail: ukokil@kennesaw.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—In the field of human computer interaction design, 
player experience and game enjoyment components have not 
been clearly differentiated and they have often been used to 
indicate the same entity. To disentangle the two components, 
this study sheds light on the relationship between player 
experience and enjoyment in the domain of tablet gaming. This 
study emphasizes mainly on the analysis and findings portion by 
empirically illustrating that positive player experience was 
associated with a higher level of game enjoyment, whereas 
participants with negative player experience revealed their 
enthusiasm was dampened during gameplay, yet enjoyment was 
perceived to be somewhat enjoyable. In sum, game mechanics 
must produce a balance between positive and negative player 
experiences for the player to feel rewarded. 
 
Keywords-player experience; tablet gaming; game enjoyment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Game enjoyment is a terminology commonly used in the 
domain of gaming, yet its connotation is often unclear and 
vague with respect to player experience [1]. This knowledge 
gap leads to an investigation of the relationship between 
player experience and game enjoyment. In this study, it is 
hypothesized that positive player experience entails a higher 
level of enjoyment during mobile gameplay. In addition, the 
lack of understanding concerning the effect of positive and 
negative player experience on game enjoyment has given rise 
to the research objective of this study. Different types of 
games are designed to deliberately elicit specific kinds of 
emotions. 
Studies on player experience have shown that both positive 
and negative emotions lead to a positive player experience [2] 
[3]. For instance, it has been found that although a player 
elicits acute negative emotions during game activity, this may 
often give rise to a satisfying experience, adding to the overall 
game enjoyment [4][5]. Positive player experience is defined 
by the optimum level of enjoyment one derives during 
gameplay [3], as measured by the Presence Involvement Flow 
Framework (PIFF) instrument [6]. It has been discussed that 
negative affect can give rise to an “engaging player 
experience” [7][8]. It has also been shown that boredom and 
frustration states of the player can potentially lead to a 
negative player experience. Boredom occurs when the 
player’s skills surpass the challenge, and frustration occurs 
when the player’s skills do not meet the challenge [9][10]. On 
the other hand, tension and frustration add to the game 
challenges, factors necessary for an overall game play 
experience [11]. Apathy is a condition of low skill and low 
challenge. If game challenges exceed the player’s skill, it will 
give rise to anxiety. Keeker et al. [12] explained that negative 
emotions are purposely built into games. These negative 
emotions are often trailed by positive emotions, after the 
challenges are surpassed, which give rise to a pleasurable 
experience [2].  
In other domains, components such as perceived 
enjoyment, concentration, and perceived control have been 
exhibited to induce flow experience when it concerns 
purchase behaviors of online shoppers [13] and the use of 
instant messaging [14]. Non-immersive games can also lead 
to negative emotions such as anxiety, thereby generating a 
negative player experience [15]. Minimal research work has 
been done to examine the effect of negative player 
experience, also termed as negative frustration, in games [15] 
[16]. Game enjoyment is an important component of player 
experience; therefore, it becomes essential to understand the 
relationship between game enjoyment, positive and negative 
player experiences, among other confounding factors like 
emotions and flow. The purpose of the study is to disentangle 
the concept of the two components, player experience and 
game enjoyment, to obtain clearer definitions.  The aim is to 
examine the effect of positive and negative player experience 
on game enjoyment during gameplay.  The rest of this paper 
is organized as follows. Section II briefly describes the 
literature review. Section III justifies the methods, including 
the instruments used. Section III explains the data inspection 
procedures. Section IV explains the data inspection 
procedure. Section V elucidates the analysis and findings. 
Section VI provides a brief discussion and Section VII 
concludes the paper. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
The complexity of the game enjoyment phenomenon 
makes it challenging to measure as there are multiple direct 
and indirect constructs associated with it [17]. Those 
constructs (e.g., game flow, emotion, affect, engagement, 
motivation) have been used in game research studies to 
evaluate game enjoyment experience from different methods 
such as behavioral, psychological, and physiological 
perspectives. The focus on player experience research has 
been mostly geared towards positive experience while 
mentally taxing or distressful experiences are largely absent 
from the game literature [8]. Both negative and mixed player 
experiences are essential, the developments leading to such 
cumulative positive experiences are still unclear [18]. In fact, 
a positive experience may occur in situations where both 
negative and positive emotions are elicited simultaneously 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
thereby intensifying the entire experience or it may occur 
when positive emotions overcome negative ones [19]. In the 
gameplay context, only a few studies have been conducted to 
understand the transformational phenomenon of negative 
emotions into positive ones [20]. 
III. 
METHODS 
A first-person shooter iOS game with three levels was 
developed for the iPad. One hundred and eleven participants 
were invited to play the FPS iOS game on an iPad for 15 
minutes. In order examine the effect of positive and negative 
player experience on game enjoyment, two validated survey 
questionnaires PIFF [6] and Game Experience Questionnaire 
(GEQ) [21] were used to gather quantitative data for 
assessing 
player 
experience 
and 
game 
enjoyment, 
respectively following game play. The PIFF instrument 
comprises of two major constructs namely adaptation and 
flow. Adaptation is sub-divided into presence and 
involvement. Flow has two sub-categories - emotional and 
cognitive evaluation.  The following constructs were adapted 
from the GEQ instrument in particular positive affect, 
negative affect, flow and challenge. The player experience 
(PX) data were split into positive and negative PX based on 
the median value of 2.0 reported from the dataset. This 
implies that on a scale of 1–5, PX mean values greater than 
2.0 were considered positive PX, whereas mean values of 2.0 
or less were categorized into the negative PX group. In 
addition to PIFF and GEQ, the Self-Assessment Manikin 
(SAM) [22] questionnaire was used to measure subjective 
emotions. was administered after each game level was 
completed to evaluate valence and arousal of participants. 
The average values for valence and arousal were reported. A 
challenge-skill survey was administered to determine the 
channel of experience of participants following gameplay. 
IV. 
DATASET INSPECTION 
This section explains how the data collected by the above 
PX and GEQ instruments were first inspected. Player 
experience (PX) data were dichotomized into two groups 
(low PX and high PX). An informal analysis of the dataset 
using boxplots showed that there were no extreme outliers 
(Figure 1).  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Low and high player experience boxplots 
 
• 
The sample size of the high PX group (n=65) was larger 
than that of the low PX group (n=46), and they both 
appeared to be normally distributed, without extreme 
skewness. The assumptions of linear regression analysis 
were verified.  
• 
There was a linear relationship between the independent 
and the dependent variable as reflected by the 
scatterplots below in Figures 2 and 3, respectively. 
• 
The residuals of GEQ dataset were normally distributed, 
as illustrated in the histogram below (Figure 4). 
• 
There was independence of observations, as determined 
by the Durbin-Watson statistic [34]: 1.712 for 
GEQ_positive and 1.854 for GEQ_negative. Values close 
to 2.0 indicate that observations are independent. 
• 
There were no extreme outliers. 
• 
The residuals of the regression line were for both 
GEQ_negative and GEQ_positive were normally 
distributed. 
The 
mean 
and 
standard 
deviation 
approximated to zero and one, respectively. 
• 
The data showed signs of homoscedasticity as the 
variance of the errors (residuals) were constant across all 
the values of the independent variable. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Scatterplot of negative PX and GEQ 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Scatterplot of positive PX and GEQ 
 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
  
 
Figure 4. Histogram of GEQ Residuals 
 
V. 
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS 
It was confirmed that mean values of positive player 
experience (µ=3.21±0.031) and negative player experience 
(µ=2.50±0.038) were statistically significantly different from 
each other.  
To examine the hypothesis, a regression analysis was 
conducted between (i) positive player experience and game 
enjoyment (ii) negative player experience and game 
enjoyment. 
 
(i) Regression Analysis between positive player experience 
and game enjoyment 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Scatterplot of GEQ_positive vs. PX_positive 
 
A regression test was used to predict game enjoyment 
(GEQ) from the independent variable, positive player 
experience group (PX_positive). Positive player experience 
significantly predicted game enjoyment, F (1,107) =10.741, 
p < 0.05, R2 = 0.091’.  There was a moderate, significant and 
positive relationship between the explanatory variable 
PX_positive, and the dependent variable, GEQ, with a 
Pearson’s coefficient of r = 0.302. The guidelines provided 
by Cohen (1988) were followed for the coefficient value r 
(0.1< \r\ < 0.3: small correlation; 0.3< \r\ <0.5: moderate 
correlation; \r\ > 0.5: large correlation).  It was deduced that 
positive player experience had an impact on game enjoyment. 
The Scatter plot (Figure 4) shows a positive correlation 
between the explanatory variable (PX_positive) and the 
dependent variable (GEQ_positive), as the value of game 
enjoyment can be predicted using the equation, as in 
 
y=2.33 + 0.17*x, 
(1) 
where y = GEQ_positive and x = PX_positive. It is inferred 
from the scatterplot (Figure 4) that higher values of game 
enjoyment are associated with higher level of positive player 
experience. 
 
(ii) Regression Analysis between negative player experience 
and game enjoyment  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Scatterplot of GEQ_negative vs. PX_negative 
 
A regression analysis was used to predict game 
enjoyment (GEQ_negative) from the independent variable, 
negative player experience group (PX_ negative). Negative 
player experience significantly predicted game enjoyment, F 
(1,111) =3.679’, p<0.05, R2=0.032’. There was a weak, 
significant (borderline significant p=0.058) and negative 
relationship (as expected) between the explanatory variable 
PX_ negative, and the dependent variable, GEQ_ negative, 
with a Pearson’s coefficient of r = -0.179’. It is deduced that 
higher values of negative player experience are associated 
with lower values of game enjoyment. The slope of the graph 
in Figure 5 suggested that the level of game enjoyment 
decreased as participants felt more negative player 
experience during gameplay. As predicted, the regression 
analysis revealed that higher values of positive player 
experience were associated with higher values of game 
enjoyment (Figure 5). The findings also confirmed that as 
negative player experience increased, the level of game 
enjoyment experienced by participants decreased (Figure 6). 
Since the relationship between negative PX and game 
enjoyment attained a borderline significant level of p=0.058, 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
it was considered that a relationship between the two 
variables exist, with a negative gradient. This explains that as 
negative player experience increases, the level of game 
enjoyment drops. 
VI. 
DISCUSSIONS 
The dataset gathered from the PIFF instrument [6] to 
measure player experience (PX) was dichotomized into two 
groups, negative PX and positive PX based on the median 
value reported. An experience can be considered either 
positive or negative [23]. Player experience in this study is 
defined as a holistic interpretation of the meaningful 
experiences participants acquire as a result of product 
interaction [24]. It is tantamount to Norman’s [25] three 
levels of emotional design theory whereby the reflective level 
has a symbolic connotation, signifying the feelings and 
thoughts after using a product. 
The results of the hypothesis support that positive player 
experience gives rise to a higher level of enjoyment whereas 
negative player experience decreases the enthusiasm of the 
players, thereby diminishing the degree of game enjoyment. 
There is evidence of a significant correlation between 
reflective level (player experience) and game enjoyment. 
Researchers have related enjoyment in digital games as a 
pleasurable experience resonating with hedonic values, 
which triggers our mood and synchronizes our emotional 
responses [26][27][28]. 
In this study, a number of participants who self-reported 
negative valence (displeasure) and high arousal during 
gameplay 
using 
the 
Self-Assessment 
Manikin [22] 
instrument also experienced a moderate level of game 
enjoyment. This is in line with the explanation provided by 
game researchers that the development of negative emotion 
often arises during a challenging activity and is trailed by a 
“positive emotional spike” [2] (p. 1023) when this challenge 
is overcome by the players [12][29] and furthermore the 
sensation of suspense and followed by relief is experienced 
[36]. Hence, the enjoyment can originate from both positive 
and negative emotions, a phenomenon felt as player 
experience. Even though negative emotions can give rise to 
game enjoyment, it is found that positive player experience 
induces relatively higher level of game enjoyment. 
On the other hand, negative player experience may 
originate during the following events: a player does not 
experience the activity challenging enough during gameplay 
that can match individual skill level; a player is not fully 
absorbed or immersed in the game [21]. In addition, 
“attention focus” is another factor that relates to the degree a 
player is absorbed in a game [32]. If a game is perceived to 
be difficult to play, it causes negative frustration among game 
players, leading to negative player experience. Not every 
game player experiences flow or arousal during game play. 
Besides flow, there are other channels of experience such as 
anxiety, apathy, and arousal [33]. Each channel was 
established based on the ratio of skill and challenge that each 
participant reported. Transiting into the boredom and apathy 
channels of experience may have led to a negative player 
experience [33]. The findings from the challenge-skill 
questionnaire empirically reports a relatively low mean value 
for perceived game enjoyment when participants transited 
into the boredom (µ=2.708) and apathy (µ=2.604) channels, 
as compared to arousal (µ=2.796) and flow (µ=3.111). This 
indicates that both flow and arousal states can yield in optimal 
experience in the case of a first-person shooter game. 
Conversely, game technology can also act as a barrier, 
provoking negative affect among novice and intermediate 
level players, especially if they cannot accomplish certain 
goals adequately, thereby diminishing the degree of 
perceived game enjoyment. The new contribution of the 
hypothesis empirically demonstrates that positive player 
experience is associated with a higher level of game 
enjoyment whereas negative player experience subdues the 
intensity of game enjoyment.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study has empirically provided evidence that positive 
player experience contributes to a relatively higher level of 
game enjoyment, which in turn can result into flow or optimal 
experience. Similarly, a deep level of engagement during 
gameplay can lead game players into the arousal channel. 
Negative frustration should be minimized as it can trigger 
negative player experience during gameplay. On the other 
hand, both positive and negative emotions play significant 
roles in game play as they both give rise to a positive player 
experience, leading to game enjoyment. Therefore, a balance 
between positive and negative experience may contribute to 
a rewarding gameplay. Future work could benefit from mixed 
methods research by employing both qualitative and 
quantitative methods to understand the balance of positive 
and negative emotions on player experience. In addition, a 
clear definition of negative player experience is mandated in 
the domain of touch screen gaming and additional research is 
mandated on its associated components. It is important to 
obtain deeper understandings on the dynamics of negative 
player experience and the portion of it that can be turned into 
positive experience to derive optimal game enjoyment.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author thanks Katherine Taylor for editing the paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. D. Mekler, J.A. Bopp, A. N. Tuch, and K. Opwis,"A 
systematic review of quantitative studies on the enjoyment of 
digital entertainment games," In CHI 2014 Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
26 April-01 May 2014, pp. 927-936. 
[2] R. L. Hazlett, “Measuring emotional valence during interactive 
experiences: Boys at Video Game Play,” Proceedings of CHI 
2006 - Novel Methods: Emotions, Gestures and Events, 22-27 
April 2006, pp. 1023–1026. 
 [3] J. A. Bopp., E. D. Meckler, and K. Opwis, “Negative Emotion, 
Positive Experience? Emotionally Moving Moments in Digital 
Games,” Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 7-12 May 2016, pp. 2996-
3006. 
[4] A. Bartsch, P. Vonderer, R. Mangold, and R. Viehoff, 
“Appraisal of emotions in media use: Toward a process model 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
of meta-emotion and emotion regulation,” Media Psychology, 
vol. 11(1), pp.7–27, 2008. 
[5] C. Jäger and  A. Bartsch, “Meta-Emotions,” Grazer 
Philosophische Studien, vol. 73, pp. 179–204, 2006. 
[6] 
J. 
Takatalo,“Psychologically-based 
and 
content-oriented 
experience in entertainment virtual environments,” Ph.D. 
Thesis, University of Helsinki, 2011. 
[7] M. Montola, "The positive negative experience in extreme 
role-playing," Nordic DiGRA Proceedings of the 2010 
International DiGRA Nordic conference: Experiencing games: 
games, play and players, 16-17 Aug 2010,vol. 9,  ISSN 2342-
9666., pp. (n/d). 
[8] M. Birk, I. Iacovides, D. Johnson and R. Mandryk, “The False 
Dichotomy between Positive and Negative Affect in Game 
Play,” Proceedings of the CHIPLAY’15 Annual Symposium 
on computer-human interaction in play, pp. 799-804. 
[9] J. M. Hektner, J. A Schmidt, and M. Csikszentmihalyi, 
Experience Sampling Method: Measuring the quality of 
everyday life. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage publications, 2007. 
[10] D. D. Reese, “Introducing Flowometer: A CyGaMEs 
Assessment Suite Tool. In Gaming and Cognition: Theories 
and Practice from Learning Sciences, R. van Eck, Ed. Hershey, 
PA: Information Science Reference (IGI Global), 2010, pp. 
227–254. 
[11] K. M. Gilleade and A. Dix, “Using Frustration in the Design of 
Adaptive Videogames,” Proceedings of the 2004 ACM 
SIGCHI International Conference on Advances in computer 
entertainment technology, 03–05 June, 2004, pp. 228–232. 
[12] K. Keeker, R. Pagulayan, J. Sykes, and N. Lazzaro, “The 
untapped world of video games,” Proceedings of the CHI 2004 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
24–29 April, 2004, pp. 1610-1611. 
[13] M. Koufaris, “Applying the Technology Acceptance Model 
and Flow Theory to Online Consumer Behavior,” Information 
Systems Research, vol. 13, issue 2, pp. 205-223, 2002. 
[14] Y. Yan, R. M. Davison, and C. Mo, “Employee creativity 
formation: the roles of knowledge seeking, knowledge 
contributing and flow experience in Web 2.0 virtual 
communities,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 29, issue 
5, pp. 1923–1932, 2013. 
[15] C. Jennett, et al., “Measuring and defining the experience of 
immersion in games,” International Journal of Human 
Computer Studies, vol. 66, pp. 641-661, 2008. 
[16] A. Nylund and O. Landfors, “Frustration and its effects on 
immersion in games,” Master’s thesis, Umeå University, 
Sweden, 2015. 
[17] E. Matthews, G. Matthews, and  J.E. Gilbert, “ A framework for 
the assessment of enjoyment in video games,” M. Kurosu 
(Ed.), HCI 2018, LNCS 10903, pp. 460–476, 2018. 
[18] E.D.Mekler, S.Rank, S.T.Steinemann, M.V. Birk, and 
I.Iacovides, "Designing for emotional complexity in games: 
The interplay of positive and negative affect," CHIPLAY'16 
Extended Abstracts, Austin, TX, USA, 16–19 October.  
[19] S.Fokkinga and P. Desmet, “Meaningful mix or tricky conflict? 
A categorization of mixed emotional experiences and their 
usefulness for design,” Proc of the 8th International Design and 
Emotion Conference, pp. 1–14, 2012. 
[20] T.Marsh and B. Costello, “Experience in serious games: 
between positive and serious experience,” Proceedings of the 
Serious Games Development and Applications, pp. 255–267, 
2012 
 [21] W. IJsselsteijn, K. Poels, and Y. A. W. de Kort, “The Game 
Experience Questionnaire: Development of a self-report 
measure to assess player experiences of digital games,” 
Eindhoven: TU Eindhoven. Technical Report, FUGA 
Deliverable D3.3., 2008. 
[22] N. M. Bradley and P. Lang, “Measuring emotion: the self-
assessment Manikin and the Semantic Differential,” Journal of 
Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, vol. 1, pp. 49-
59, 1994. 
[23] S. Steinemann, “Positive and Negative Experiences in Games 
for Change - Does Feeling Bad Make You A Better Person?” 
Presented at CHI PLAY 2015 Workshop on the False 
Dichotomy between Positive and Negative affect in Gameplay, 
London, United Kingdom. 
[24] J. Forlizzi and K. Battarbee, “Understanding experience in 
interactive systems,” Proceedings of the 5th conference on 
Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, 
and techniques, 01–04 August 2004, pp. 261–268. 
[25] D. Norman, Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) 
Everyday Things. New York, NY: Basic Books, 2004. 
[26] T. Grodal, “Video games and the pleasures of control,” in 
Media entertainment: The psychology of its appeal, D. 
Zillmann and P. Vorderer, Eds. New Jersey: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, 2000, pp. 197-212. 
 [27] L. Reinecke and S. Trepte, “In a working mood? The effects of 
mood management processes on subsequent cognitive 
performance,” Journal of Media Psychology, vol. 20, pp. 3-14, 
2008. 
[28] B. De Schutter and J. A. Brown, “Digital Games as a Source of 
Enjoyment in Later Life,” Games and Culture, vol. 11, pp. 28–
52, 2016. 
[29] N. Ravaja, T. Saari, M. Salminen, J. Laarni, and K. Kallinen, 
“Phasic emotional reactions to video game events: A 
psychophysiological investigation,” Media Psychology, vol. 8, 
pp. 343- 367. 2006. 
[30] C. Klimmt, “Dimensions and Determinants of the Enjoyment 
of Playing Digital Games: A Three-Level Model,” Digital 
Games Research Conference, Utrecht University, 2003, pp. 
246-257. 
 [31] T. Zhou and Y. Lu, “Examining mobile instant messaging user 
loyalty from the perspectives of network externalities and flow 
experience,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol.  27, issue 2, 
pp. 883-889, 2013, 2011. 
[32] E. Brown and P. Cairns, “A grounded investigation of game 
immersion,” Proceedings CHI 2004 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 24–29 April, 2004, 
pp.1297-1300. 
 [33] K. Poels., Y. de Kort, and W. A. IJsselsteijn, “It is always a lot 
of fun! Exploring Dimensions of Digital Game Experience 
using Focus Group Methodology,” Proceedings of ACM 
Futureplay 2007, 15–17 Nov 2007, pp. 83–89. 
[34] J. Durbin and G. S. Watson, “Testing for Serial Correlation in 
Least Squares Regression II,” Biometrika, vol. 38, pp. 159 –
178, 1951. 
 
. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

