An Analysis of Independent Living Elderly’s Views on Robots 
A Descriptive Study from the Norwegian Context 
Diana Saplacan, Jo Herstad, Zada Pajalic* 
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo;  
*Faculty of Health Studies, VID Specialized University; 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: {diana.saplacan; jo.herstad}@ifi.uio.no; {Zada.Pajalic}@vid.no;
 
 
Abstract—This study illustrates the independent living 
elderly’s (≥65 years) views on robots. The data was 
documented through audio recordings of interviews, photos, 
and written logs. The analysis was done through qualitative 
manifest and latent content analysis. The results of the analysis 
were sorted into three categories: aging during the 
technological renaissance, domestic robots, and the elderly’s 
expectations of robots. The overall resulted theme was: 
integrating robots in the elderly’s everyday life. The results 
were discussed through the lenses of the Sense-of-Coherence 
(SOC) theoretical construct and its belonging elements: 
comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness. The 
relevance of this paper contributes to giving an understanding 
of the domestic robots’ requirements specifications and the 
elderly’s expectation of human-robot interaction. 
Keywords-robot; 
comprehensibility; 
manageability; 
meaningfulness; healthy aging; independent living elderly; 
Norway; Sense-of-Coherence (SOC) theory; salutogenesis; 
elderly; human-robot interaction, domestic robots. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We were interested in this study to investigate how robots 
are seen by the independent living elderly, before integrating 
the robots in their homes. Specifically, the study aimed to 
illustrate the elderly’s (≥65 years) views on robots. The 
research question addressed in this study was: what is the 
elderly’s understanding of robots, and how can these be 
better integrated into their daily lives?  
Studies show that western countries face an increase in 
individuals’ lifespan, and this, in turn, puts pressure on the 
healthcare systems [1]. Non-digital personal health records 
have been earlier widely used [2]. However, lately, the 
elderly prefer to live independently in their homes. To 
support the elderly’s independent living, various welfare 
technologies have been used. In the past years, robots for 
supporting independent living got special attention [3][4]. In 
general, most of the elderly have a hard time accepting and 
learning new modern technologies.  At the same time, earlier 
research shows that the elderly are not interested in devices 
designed especially for their age group [5]. However, 
modern technologies often let the elderly feeling they cannot 
keep up with those; their design does not always suit the 
elderly. For instance, a study from the U.K. talked about the 
mismatch between the technologies and services that are 
available for supporting the elderly’s needs and their real 
needs [6]. The authors mean that, for designing and 
providing better technologies, we first need to understand in-
depth the elderly’s needs [6]. 
Further, Koelen et al. [7] say that in the next couple of 
years, it will be not only vital aging in place, i.e., aging in the 
home of choice, but also “healthy aging.” According to 
Eriksson [8], every individual, even those considered 
healthy, might have moments when they feel ill. 
Furthermore, there are still uncertainties about how robots 
could accommodate aging in place since these technologies 
are still in development. Moreover, we are still not sure how 
these technologies could be better integrated into the 
elderly’s homes since they already have a hard time 
accepting the existing technologies.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. This section 
continues by giving a background on this study. Section II 
presents the theoretical construct of Sense-of-Coherence 
(SOC) and its elements of comprehensibility, manageability, 
and meaningfulness. Section III presents our data collection 
and analysis methods, the setting of the study, and the 
participants. Section IV presents our findings. Section V 
continues with a discussion by using the theoretical construct 
and its elements presented earlier in Section II. Section VI 
presents the conclusion. Acknowledgments close the paper. 
A. Background 
This study is part of the Multimodal-Elderly Care 
Systems (MECS) project. MECS aims to develop 
knowledge around a caring safety robot alarm for the 
elderly. The elderly are defined as old adults (≥ 65 years), 
according to gerontology [9][10]. The insights gotten during 
this study are intended to contribute to the design of the 
MECS safety alarm robot. However, before going further, 
we want to define the concepts of a robot as a welfare 
technology. 
Welfare is defined as something doing or being well 
[11]. Within the Nordic countries, The Nordic Welfare 
Center describes the notion of welfare technology as 
technology either compensating due to a disability or 
supporting it [12]. This definition of welfare technologies 
includes: “assistive devices, consumer goods, home 
adaptation solutions, educational equipment, tools” [12]. 
Among such examples, there are games consoles used for 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

rehabilitation and physical therapy, mobile care systems, 
smart home environments, and automation solutions, robot 
vacuum cleaners, and safety alarms connected to a 
healthcare system. Amongst these technologies, a safety 
alarm robot can be considered as a welfare technology of 
the future. A robot is defined as a programmable machine 
that can conduct a complex set of actions on its own 
[13][14]. The term was coined from the Czech “robota” in 
the ’20s and had the meaning of “forced labor” [13]. Robots 
are similar to other types of modern technologies, 
wearables, or personal devices. Besides, this type of welfare 
technology also has the motion element which is needed to 
be taken into consideration [15].  
We have seen that the digitalization of care services for 
the elderly can be done with wearable sensors and through 
self-monitoring devices, or personal safety alarms. While 
body sensor networks are considered intrusive and often not 
readily accepted, users would instead opt for self-
monitoring devices [16]. These include ambient intelligence 
techniques [17], such as wearables, or mobile devices, as 
shown in Chiauzzi et al., Petersen et al., and Laidlaw et al. 
[18]–[20]. Besides, personal alarms are usually used in the 
form of bracelets or pendant alarms. For instance, almost 
20% of the total safety alarm installations used in the U.K. 
were necklace alarms [6]. Very few of these or other devices 
were actively used by the elderly [6]. However, these types 
of alarms can be effective in detecting falls among the 
elderly, if these are used effectively [21]. It seems like the 
elderly use of this type of assistive living technologies is 
often done in wrong ways, such as pressing the button of a 
pendant alarm when feeling lonely instead of when needing 
medical help [6]. These types of devices also are often not 
used when showering, while most of the falls amongst the 
elderly happen while they shower.  
Moreover, these types of devices are not afforded by 
some of the users, whereas for some, other alternatives 
should be considered when personal devices are likely to be 
misused, or not used at all [21]. One alternative is the use of 
robots, through “connected and secure assistive robots 
ecosystems” [22]. However, introducing robots in the 
homes of the elderly requires scrutiny, both of the user and 
the current use of modern technologies, of the home context, 
and of the technology itself. Previous studies show that a 
few robots for the independent living elderly are available 
on the market, whereas the use of robots in homes has 
excellent potential and could prolong independent living 
[23][24].  
Furthermore, Norway, a welfare state, has its 
healthcare system partially subsidized by the government 
[25]. For instance, elderly people that are over 90 years old 
and may live in nursing homes cost the state around 800 000 
Norwegian crowns (NOK) per year (ca 84 000 euros, or 
98 000 US dollars) per individual [25]. However, only half 
of the elderly wish to live in such nursing homes, while 
some choose to stay in their own homes, and others wish to 
move in accommodation facilities for the elderly [25]. 
Furthermore, according to Ramm [26], at the start of 2013, 
13% of Norway’s population was 65 years old or older, 
whereas, by 2050, this percentage is forecasted to increase 
to 21%.  
In addition, a similar study of quantitative nature was 
performed in Norway. The study was based on 1000 phone 
survey interviews lasting, on average, about 13-14 minutes 
each [28]. The focus of the research was mainly on the use 
of Information Communication Technologies (ICT’s) and 
did not include any questions regarding robots [28]. 
Helsevakta (eng. Health Watch, HW) is another example of 
a project that was created for investigating the challenges 
that are met in healthcare [29]. The study was performed in 
Trondheim, Norway showing so far that the Norwegian 
healthcare system was not prepared for the upcoming 
demographic challenges, such as an increasing number of 
the elderly [29]. Extensive empirical qualitative studies on 
integrating robots in the homes of the independent living 
elderly, from the Norwegian context, have not so far been 
identified.  
II. 
THEORETICAL LENSES 
We chose to discuss our findings through the theoretical 
lenses of Aaron Antonovsky’s work [30]. The theoretical 
construct was chosen to discuss the findings. Antonovsly 
was a sociologist that challenged the pathologic view on 
healthcare, focusing on salutogenesis [29][30]. Salutogenesis 
is viewed as a health promoter [32]. His theoretical model is 
based on the Sense-of-coherence (SOC) of an individual. He 
defined it as: 
 
“a global orientation that expresses the extent to which one has 
a pervasive, enduring though dynamic feeling of confidence that 
(1) the stimuli, deriving from one’s internal and external 
environments in the course of living are structured, predictable 
and explicable; (2) the resources are available to one to meet the 
demands posed by these stimuli; and (3) these demands are 
challenges, 
worthy 
of 
investment 
and 
engagement” 
(Antonovsky, 1987, p. 19 in Super et al. [33]).  
 
The theoretical construct includes three elements: 
comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness. 
Comprehensibility, as an element of SOC, is illustrated as 
the motivation behind the challenge of coping with the 
situation at hand. Manageability is depicted as the 
availability of resources to cope with the situation, whereas 
meaningfulness is represented as understanding the 
challenge [30]. The theoretical construct, however, was 
developed to reflect on how one can deal with life stressors 
[33]. We borrowed these concepts for this study since robots 
are seen as assistive technologies for independent and 
healthy living. We argue that having such lenses when 
designing and integrating these technologies in the elderly’s 
home, could be beneficial for reflecting over the process of 
understanding their views on technologies. The concepts are 
also beneficial to understand the acceptance of modern 
technologies by the elderly.  
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

There are a few studies that have the same salutogenic 
perspective on health using Aaron Antonovky’s theory. 
According to [32], studies based on this theoretical construct 
seem to be quantitative, and just a few qualitative ones are 
available. Some similar studies are from Lahttiranta et al. 
[34][35]. Another similar study is from Svaneus [36], where 
the author takes the approach towards health as “homelike 
being-in-the-world.” The author also asserts that this 
perspective on modern technologies can be made visible 
through medical technologies [36] – in our case, the robots 
used in the homes of independent living elderly. We argue 
that it is essential to make visible the salutogenic approach 
inbuild in a safety alarm robot for the elderly. Moreover, yet 
again, the question we ask is: how do they understand the 
concept of a  robot, in order to better integrate it into their 
daily lives? 
III. 
METHOD 
The present study had a qualitative inductive research 
design. Next, we present the study context, participants, and 
data collection. 
A. Study context 
The study was performed in the southern-east part of 
Norway, in the area of Oslo. Norway has a population of 
approximately 5.2 million inhabitants [37], where the 
elderly represent about 14.6% of this number [38]. In Oslo, 
the capital area, live about 660 000 inhabitants. This study 
has been performed in a subarea of the old Oslo district 
area. The district has a total population of roughly 53 000, 
out of which nearly 3000 are senior citizens over 67 years 
old. Some of these citizens have home-care; some live in the 
nursery cares, whereas some live in accommodation 
facilities for the independently living elderly. The 
accommodation facilities usually include apartments that 
can be rented individually by the elderly, or together with 
their partner. The facilities also include a reception available 
24/7, where at least two personnel staff are available at all 
times. The facilities also include a gym, a restaurant 
available for non-residents, an open area where various 
social events are taking place, and a library. The building is 
equipped with various sensors: WiFi, light and heating 
sensors, motion sensors, but also tablets installed in each of 
the apartments. The residents can use computer tablets, for 
instance, for seeing the menu available at the restaurant in 
the building, ordering food, or navigating the Internet. 
Similar 
studies 
have 
been 
performed 
in 
such 
accommodation facilities, but none of them involving robots 
[39]–[44].  
B. Participants 
The participants in this study were recruited through an 
accommodation facility, which has 91 apartments. Ninety 
(90) residents were living as of April 2017. Fifty-two (52) 
of them were females, with an average age of 84, and 38 
males, with an average age of 80. The residents were 
spending at the time, on average, around 577 days, in the 
accommodation facility – according to an internal 
document.   
Sixteen 
participants 
participated 
in 
three 
group 
interviews and one pilot interview. Four researchers 
involved in this project (two senior researchers and two 
junior researchers, including the authors SD, HJ) had a 
meeting with the two management representatives at our 
partner organization, before the first two group interviews. 
We documented the meeting through a log report, followed 
by a visit of the junior researchers (including author SD) at 
the elderly’s facilities, and a presentation about the project 
held for the elderly and the employees (including the 
authors SD, HJ). Some of the elderly signed up for the 
group interviews at the presentation, whereas others joined 
during the presentation itself. The participants were self-
selected, i.e., entered the study based on voluntary choice. 
For the third group interview, the elderly were informed 
approximately one month before the activity, and they 
participated, this time as well, voluntarily. The third group 
interview was part of a half-day workshop. Two of the 
participants taking part in the first group interviews also 
took part in the third group interview.  
The participants’ background was mixed: they have 
worked in the public sector (library, university, military, 
other public authorities), arts and handcraft, and industry 
(including office work that requires the use of computers, 
but also factory work). All were over 67 years old, with ages 
ranging up to 90 years old. Some of the participants used 
walkers and some wheelchairs. During the interviews, they 
explained that several of them experienced balance 
problems, and they sometimes fall. Three hundred five 
(305) falls were reported amongst all the facility’s residents 
between 2015-2017. Other health-related issues pointed out 
were: impaired or weak vision and hearing and memory 
loss. Table I below gives an overview of the participants and 
their background experience with computers. 
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW PARTICIPANTS. 
# 
Gender 
(Female F, 
male M) 
Age 
Comment on the participants’ work 
experience (Not available N/A) 
1 
F 
>65 
Public sector 
2 
F 
84 
Arts and Craft 
3 
M 
81 
Arts and Craft 
4 
M 
>65 
Worked with computers. 
5 
F 
94 
Private- and public sector. Worked with 
computers. 
6 
F 
>65 
Public sector 
7 
F 
90 
Private sector 
8 
F 
>65 
N/A 
9 
F 
>65 
She worked previously in the private sector. 
10 
M 
>65 
N/A 
11 
M 
>65 
N/A 
12 
M 
>65 
N/A 
13 
F 
89 
Public sector. 
14 
M 
>65 
Public sector. 
15 
M 
>65 
Public sector. 
16 
F 
90 
Public sector. She had experience with 
computers before. 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

C. Data collection  
Our primary data gathering method was group interviews. 
A research interview aims to develop an understanding of 
the investigated phenomena surrounding the persons and 
situations in their contexts and social reality [45]. All three 
group interviews were semi-structured. All the interviews 
included 
some 
demographic 
questions, 
where 
the 
participants were asked to share, based on free will, their 
name, age, and background. Moreover, the interviews 
contained questions regarding the participants’ familiarity 
with digital technology, including smartphones, computers, 
and robots. The author (SD) has also participated in multiple 
meetings, one public discussion, together with the author 
(HJ). Further, we give details on group interviews one and 
two, a pilot interview that took place after the first two 
group interviews, and a third group interview. The pilot 
interview and the third group interview was based on the 
findings first two group interviews. Some photos from the 
group interviews are illustrated in Figure 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Sample photos from group interviews 1 and 3. 
All the details regarding the group interviews and the 
pilot interview are available in Table II below. 
TABLE II.  OVERVIEW OF THE DATA COLLECTION. 
Group 
interview # 
 Number 
of 
participants and 
their gender 
 
Time 
for 
data 
collection 
Type 
and 
duration 
of 
data collected  
1 
5 females, 
2 males 
Spring 2017 
Interview 
60 
minutes, Photos 
2 
2 female 
3 males 
Spring 2017 
Interview 
60 
minutes, Photos 
1 
Individual 
Pilot  
1 female 
Spring 2017 
Interview 
60 
minutes, Photos 
3 (part of a 
half-day 
workshop) 
1female 
2 males 
Spring 2017 
Interview 
45 
minutes, Photos 
 
Total 
16 participants (9 
Female 
and 
7 
Males) 
 
D. Analysis 
 
The textual data was fully transcribed. The author (SD) 
has listened to the audio recording and written logs for the 
two parallel-group interviews, and the pilot interview, 
immediately after those took place, to help her remember 
better the context. She also took unstructured notes during 
the first and third group interview. After listening through 
the transcriptions, the authors have discussed their 
understanding of the data, making the analysis more 
reliable. The data was transcribed verbatim and was coded 
through open-coding. The authors have later decided to 
leave the data for a while before coming back to it. At this 
stage, both conscious and unconscious reflection took place. 
After a few months of an incubation stage, we have chosen 
to analyze the data by using qualitative manifest and latent 
content analysis [46]. The analysis was performed through 
the following steps: first, the whole transcripts were read 
through several times to get a sense of the content. The next 
step was decontextualization of text with the identification 
of meaning units. We identified in total (n= 132) meaning 
units. The next step was condensation and coding of 
meaning units (n = 13).  The systematic grouping of codes 
to sub-categories and categories, with reflective discussions 
with the aim of the study as the base, was performed 
together by authors (SD, PZ). The analyzing process 
towards the formation of categories was the result of 
manifest content analysis. The latent analysis started with 
the reading of the transcript again and trying to capture what 
text was talking about. The result of the final step was the 
theme “Integrating robots and welfare technology in the 
elderly’s everyday life.” The process between the group 
interviews is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Overview of the process. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

E. Ethical considerations 
The project was conducted accordingly to the ethical 
guidelines from the Norwegian Center for Research Data 
(NSD) Ref. Nr: 50689). This work was performed on the 
Services for Sensitive Data (TSD) facilities, owned by the 
University of Oslo, Norway, operated and developed by the 
TSD service group at the University of Oslo, IT-Department 
(USIT). The participants were self-selected. The participants 
were given detailed information about the study, and they 
could withdraw at any time without giving any explanation 
and without any consequences for them. All the participants 
willing to participate signed informed consent before taking 
part in the study. 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
A. Integrating welfare technology in the everyday life of 
the elderly 
The overall theme of this study that emerged is: 
“Integrating welfare technology in the elderly’s everyday 
life.”. The theme comprises the elderly’s daily experiences 
with personal devices (smartphones, computers) and modern 
technologies used in homes (sensors in a smart home, semi-
autonomous robots). In general, the use of personal devices 
by the elderly would be minimal and limited to their needs, 
such as using internet banking, for checking the account 
balance. Some of the participants did not own a smartphone, 
and some even a mobile phone, but a fixed home phone. 
Only a few of the participants owned both a smartphone and 
a tablet. These participants were also those who were highly 
interested in the use of modern technologies and to 
influence rules or policies, at some level. They were often 
engaged in other types of organizations for the elderly. 
Although some of them were highly engaged with this type 
of personal devices, the majority had limited knowledge 
about the use of robots in homes. The general impression 
was that they could not follow up with the fast development 
of technologies. In general, they felt left out, as one 
participant expressed it: “for me, it goes too fast… for me, it 
goes too fast… I cannot keep up with it.. unfortunately“.  
The findings also showed that, besides the fast 
technological advancements, the elderly need to keep up 
with, the authorities need to develop legislation accordingly, 
at the same pace, in order to have a functioning and 
inclusive society. They viewed this as especially important 
when trying to introduce domestic robots in their homes. 
Detailed results are presented descriptively, as follows.  
B. Aging during the technological renaissance 
We started by asking the participants to talk about their 
relationship to the use of modern technology (e.g., 
computers, tablets, and smartphones) in their homes. The 
majority of the participants answered that they use modern 
technologies for checking their bank account balance – 
internet banking was a common motivation for using 
computers. Regarding the autonomous technology used in 
homes, they would recognize this type of electronic 
technology from the building they were living in, as it has 
light and motion detection sensors.  
The majority would describe their interactions as being 
limited to computers for writing emails and checking the 
account balance, TV, phone (home phone, mobile phone, 
smartphone), and printers. However, one of the participants 
expressed a high interest in ”everything new.” This 
participant also used more advanced terms that their peers 
did not know about, such as cloud computing and bitcoin. 
Bitcoin, for instance, had to be explained by one of the 
female participants to others as “valuta in the cloud.” The 
same participant confessed that she uses modern technology 
for solving crosswords, sending emails, search on Google, 
and using Facebook.  
Regarding the price of modern technologies, such as 
robots, the elderly found those expensive. Hence, they did 
not recognize themselves as being the right target-
group/consumer group. They were also reluctant to robots 
that are big due to taking too much space in their 
apartments, usually consisting of a small living room 
integrated with an open kitchen, a small bedroom, and a 
bathroom. Robots were viewed by them in general as 
inferior, subordinates to people, as one participant says: “he 
is just a robot.” Specifically, companion robots, such as an 
AIBO robot, were not interesting enough for the 
participants, as they were “nothing to cuddle with,” as one 
participant described it. They rated robots from a cost-
benefit 
perspective, 
always 
seeking 
a 
practical 
perspective/benefit. However, they admitted that such a 
robot could decrease some of the feelings of loneliness. The 
participants agreed that a companion robot could supply 
some daily dialogical interaction-when they do not have 
anyone else to talk to.  
Four of the participants (two males and two females) 
pointed out that they cannot follow and keep up with the fast 
development of modern technology, feeling surpassed. They 
expressed 
feelings 
of 
hopelessness, 
exclusion, 
and 
technological illiteracy, as one of them pointed out:  
 
“I feel like I am in another world, you know.. I do not know so 
much about these things we discuss now… and this has to do 
with the [world] we grew up within… a different one, yes. What 
I mean is that we start getting so old, that there is so much 
surpassing us. We are not able to keep up the pace. However, 
the authorities do not take this into account.”  
 
In general, they felt anxious about dealing with modern 
technologies, due to fear of doing something wrong, or 
failure. This, despite the majority that was willing to learn 
about modern technologies. In this sense, they mentioned 
that having an own pre-understanding and familiarity 
towards those (e.g., having used modern technologies 
before), and a clear objective of the use, as one points out: 
“When I should learn something new, I am asking – what’s 
the point?”, is imperative. They also specified that they 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

often rely on help from their family members (children and 
grandchildren). However, to trust a robot, they mentioned 
that they need to have some control over it. They suggested 
that this could be done through, for instance, control via 
voice recognition. One female participant pointed out that 
such a safety alarm robot would make her feel safe in 
situations where they do not have the safety alarm wristband 
on them, such as when using the shower. The robot should 
also have predictable ways of moving in order to feel safe 
around it. 
C. Domestics robots 
At the start of the discussions, the participants did not 
know “what a robot is" and said that they had seen robots 
only on TV. However, immediately after starting the 
conversation about the robots, they were wondering if an 
autonomous vacuum cleaner or a lawnmower is counted as 
robots. They found this type of home appliances, so-called 
domestic robots, more familiar for them, and could place 
them in their understanding. However, some of them were 
familiar with industrial robots: robots that are used in 
factories and robots used in hospitals.  
Their description of the robots used in homes fitted under 
the description of assistive and servant robots, as a female 
participant points out, about what a robot should do:  
 
“To fix the TV when it gets stuck. Or the computer when something 
went wrong. It would have been nice to have such a robot for 
this”. Another participant explained: “The robots have to have a 
practical aim. I think many feel ill and do not have the energy to 
bring food from downstairs... This could be something a robot 
could do.”  
 
When we showed pictures of various robots, we also 
showed pictures of companion robots. It was clear that the 
elderly sought some practical attributions of the robots, and 
they were less interested in safety alarm robots. The 
majority of the participants agreed that the robots need to 
have some practical function for them to use those. Only 
one participant brought attention to the implications of 
introducing such a robot in their homes, such as potentially 
reducing their physical activity. Regarding the appearance 
of a robot versus the functionality, it was a difference 
between the female and male participants: whereas for the 
female participants, the robot appearance was necessary, for 
the male participants were not. However, both female and 
male participants agreed that functionality is more important 
than appearance.  
Among the functionalities of the domestic robots, they 
named that they would like to have semi-autonomous robots 
(e.g., servant robots, assistive robots) that help them clean or 
wash the floor. To be able to interact with the robot via 
voice recognition, and specifically being able to interact in 
Norwegian, were essential for the participants. Physical 
interaction, such as having a stop button, was also vital to 
them. The feedback received from the robots should be, 
according to them, auditive, visible, and visual, as they have 
learned from their interaction with the industrial robots, i.e., 
signalizing with red and green blinking lamps.  
Besides these types of functionalities, robot navigation 
within the elderly’s homes has also been discussed. The 
participants found problematic the robot-human encounter, 
especially if they had to move with the help of a walker, or a 
wheelchair. They were also concerned about the obstacles 
they had in their homes, such as furniture. Some of the 
participants compared the behavior of a robot when 
navigating inside the home, with the driving of a car – the 
robot should behave in a similar fashion when encountering 
humans.  
D. The elderly’s expectations of the legislation and 
regulations around robots  
The participants pointed out some expectations regarding 
the well-functioning of laws and regulations in practice. For 
instance, one female participant gave an example where the 
laws and regulations at a national level do not always match 
on an organizational level. She ended: “It is not ready… the 
laws are not ready yet.. for these.. which is quite 
advanced.”. The same participant, in a later interview, says 
that, although the laws and regulations are not fully 
developed, they still have to adapt to the use of modern 
technology, because “the authorities do not allow 
resignation.” In addition to their perceived control regarding 
laws and regulations, the participants also expressed the 
need for having autonomy over the robot itself.  
Although the focus of the MECS project is around 
developing a safety alarm robot, for the majority of the 
participants, it seemed important that the robot would help 
them with physical activities in homes.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
 
Integrating robots in the homes of the elderly should be 
done gradually, where the acceptance of these technologies 
is taken into consideration. Studies support this idea, saying 
that these types of technologies cannot be introduced only 
when the elderly need extensive care [47]. Moreover, 
domestic robots, such as care robots, should not be 
introduced in the home of the elderly, solely to reduce 
society’s care burden with the aging of the population, as 
shown by [48]. However, integrating robots in their homes 
means 
that 
these 
technologies 
also 
need 
to 
be 
comprehensible, manageable, and meaningful, for the 
elderly. We base further our discussion on the SOC from 
Aaron Antonovsky earlier described (Section 2).  
A. Comprehensibility and manageability of robots in the 
homes of the elderly 
This study shows that the majority of the participants 
used modern technology for simple everyday tasks, such as 
checking the bank account balance. However, not many of 
them felt that they were skilled enough to using these 
technologies. This indicates that the elderly do have limited 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

comprehensibility of these technologies. They were familiar 
mostly with robots used in the industry. 
Moreover, they were unsure if an autonomous vacuum 
cleaner or a lawnmower are also robots. This indicates their 
limited understanding (comprehensibility) of domestic 
robots. They also considered using in-motion technologies, 
such as robots, only if this type of technology had a 
practical benefit. This indicates that they sought some 
manageability in those. 
A study showed that people are afraid of interacting with 
technology that they do not understand [49]. While the 
participants mentioned the importance of using their natural 
language in the interaction with robots, Sciutti et al. [49] 
emphasize the importance of mutual understanding: not only 
concerning language, but the robots should consider the 
people around them. In literature, robots are being portrayed 
as agential actors with emotions and autonomy [50]. If we 
strictly refer to a robot, a robot is autonomous through, for 
instance, independently moving around. In this case, the 
additional element to be considered and understood by the 
elderly is the motion element. This adds to the complexity 
of the manageability of a robot. After all, a care robot, an in-
motion technology, would be a new element in the elderly’s 
homes that will move around. Facilitations and adjustments 
of the home, to adapt the robot would probably need to be 
made. This is nevertheless a question of autonomy: of the 
person him- or herself, and the technology. In the case of in-
motion technologies, such as robots, the elderly may loose 
from his-/her autonomy if they cannot master the robot. 
Further, the participants also indicated that they could 
not keep up with the technological advancements, as they 
often were afraid of doing something wrong when they 
interact with it. To be able to interact independently with 
such systems, they suggested being able to interact with the 
robots via voice recognition. Moreover, they specifically 
suggested that this should be available in their mother 
tongue, Norwegian. This indicates that such systems should 
be manageable by them, in their mother tongue 
(manageability). At the same time, studies recommend that 
it should be of high priority to make scalable care systems 
that support voice recognition [1]. They recommend 
systems that are socially aware, but at the same time, that do 
not need the user to interact with the system continuously 
[1]. 
Moreover, another study showed that the robots used in 
hospitals were expected to be able to talk [51]. However, 
even advanced build-in ways of interactions, such as 
talking, may still not lead to the acceptance of a robot [51]. 
Based on the findings presented in this study, we consider 
that this point is also valid for robots used for supporting the 
elderly's independent living in their own homes.  
Further, introducing new emerging technology for health 
monitoring in the home may change the relationship 
amongst people interacting with them [1]. This type of 
system may have implications beyond the intended use [1]. 
For the elderly to feel well, it also needs to be considered 
the broader context of use, including the need for social 
connectivity [52]. The need for voice interaction could be 
one aspect of social exchange. However, as one study 
shows, people may tolerate robots in different ways, 
depending on the context [51]. Robots, for instance, used in 
hospitals in different settings, were viewed as: “an alien, a 
hospital worker, a colleague, a machine, or a mixture of 
these” [51]. 
In the same way, this is confirmed by the current study: 
a robot that would be able to talk might be easier understood 
by the elderly. However, being able to interact with the 
robots through voice does not guarantee that domestic 
robots will be accepted. Although they may be manageable 
by the elderly, it does not mean that it also will be 
meaningful for them. However, for integrating these types 
of technologies, it is not enough to be comprehensible and 
manageable. These also need to be meaningful.  
B. Meaningfulness in the robots for the elderly 
“When I should learn something new, I am asking – 
what is the point?” asked one of the participants. Besides 
finding the welfare technologies and robots useful for their 
health monitoring, the elderly also need to find them 
meaningful. Older adults need to be motivated and get 
enough time to learn how to use new digital tools [53]. 
Further, the elderly seem to dislike devices that are “off-
putting,” i.e., reminding them of medical instruments and 
monitoring instead of feeling personal and appropriate for 
their dis-/un-ability (Lehoux et al. in Procter et al. [6]). We 
have also seen that technologies can support aging in place, 
through monitoring [52]. However, this solution is 
somehow limited: monitoring is supporting in the first place 
the caregiver, not the elderly [52]. Integrating these 
technologies in their homes also means that they should be 
meaningful for the elderly in the first place.  
The present study showed that the participants were 
familiar with domestic robots, such as semi-autonomous 
vacuum cleaner, and lawnmower robots. The functionality 
of robots was more important than appearance, but the 
appearance 
had 
some 
importance 
for 
the 
female 
participants. When it comes to robot appearance, literature 
often discusses the anthropomorphic robotic looks [50][54] 
[55]–[58]. The literature also talks about the notion of the 
uncanny valley, defined as the look of a robot that may set 
expectations on its functionality as well [59]. Further, an 
early study since 2004 was conducted about the use of 
robots in professional settings on how people would 
collaborate on tasks with human-like vs. machine-like 
robots [54]. The study concluded that the participants felt 
more responsibility when using a machine-like robot, as 
they saw it more as a tool that helps them fulfilling a task 
[54]. Furthermore, studies show that human-like robots 
were preferred in stressful or complex situations, where the 
participants have to delegate responsibility due to stress and 
work overload, but also where such robots could 
perform/process better and faster than a person [54]. At the 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

same time, functionality and appearance are interconnected. 
We have shown that the elderly saw the robots mostly as 
servant robots and that the robots that looked more 
humanoid-like were “nothing to cuddle with,” as one 
participant said. If a safety alarm robot would be designed 
as a machine-like robot, this, on the other hand, could 
potentially put more responsibility on the elderly as they 
would feel more responsible towards the robot. However, 
they seem to find servant robots more meaningful.  
Studies talk about the “domestication” of technology 
when integrating it into daily lives [53]. To be able to 
manage these technologies and give them meaning, the 
elderly seem to adapt them to their own. Small details of the 
devices’ design are significant for the configurability and 
adaptability of the devices’ to the elderly’s individual needs 
[6]. For instance, bricolage is often used to adapt to 
technological devices to individual needs [6]. This is a way 
of domesticating and integrating the technology in their 
homes, in such a way that it becomes meaningful for them. 
According to [53], domestication is a prerequisite for 
integrating technological devices in the elderly’s daily lives. 
This is also talked about sometimes as appropriation. 
Procter et al. [6] suggest the possibility of customizing the 
technology itself as a solution to this.  This could perhaps 
contribute to some degree to the meaningfulness of the 
robots and yet ease the integration of those in their homes.  
C. Integration of robots viewed through the Sense-of-
Coherence 
‘The authorities do not allow resignation,’ as the elderly 
specified 
about 
adopting 
new 
robots. 
However, 
comprehensible, manageable, and meaningful welfare 
technologies and robots seem to be still not enough for 
achieving consistency, e.g., a sense of coherence. These 
should also be aligned with political legislation and 
regulations. Developing policies by promoting the sense of 
coherence is done in time, but it requires synergies amongst 
individuals, groups, organizational- and societal levels [60]. 
Earlier, the emphasis on the alignment between technologies 
and governmental regulation was put through the (technical) 
standardization. Such an example is enabling the exchange 
of patient records all over Europe (Read in Hanseth et al. 
[61]). The technology was, at the time, predicted to have a 
vast potential to improve the Norwegian health care system 
[61]. 
Further, The Norwegian Social Ministry has since early 
2000, a salutogenic approach on elderly home care: they 
listed 16 regulations regarding the quality of life and well-
being for the elderly [62]. Amongst the listed prioritized 
areas were:  autonomy, self-worth, and ways of living. 
However, at the time, this referred to homecare (comp. to 
independent living). Besides, in a Norwegian report from 
2011 [63], it is pointed out that welfare technology should 
support, amongst others, self-help, independence, having 
own control despite eventual impairments [63]. This was in 
line with the Active Ageing framework from 2002 [64]. 
Active Ageing was at the time defined as: ‘[…] the process 
of optimizing opportunities for health, participation, and 
security in order to enhance the quality of life as people 
age.’ [64]. However, ‘healthy aging’ replaced the old term 
framed in 2002 and is the new framework for 2015-2030 
[65]. The new policy focuses on the diversity of people, 
independently of their health status (whether considering 
them healthy or not). Light et al. [66] supports this 
indirectly by addressing the technologies as enabling, 
instead of ‘assistive.’  The authors also say that this 
approach will ease tensions amongst national policies.  
Finally, in the independent living accommodations for 
the elderly, based on our empirical data, it seems we still 
deal with the same issues: political, institutional, and 
standardization issues. As another participant pointed out, 
“It is not ready… the laws are not ready yet.. for this.. 
which is quite advanced”. While the global or national 
standards are already there, we still lack standardization that 
prioritizes less knowledgeable users, such as independent 
living elderly with reduced ICT literacy. With the 
integration of new living technologies, such as in-motion 
robots, in the elderly’s homes, we should perhaps consider 
SOC. We argue that the elderly could achieve a greater 
SOC, as a result of an increased comprehension, 
manageability, and eventually meaningfulness of robots. 
This could facilitate the integration of these technologies in 
their homes. We also admit that there might be other 
individual or external factors that contribute to SOC.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this work, we have presented views of the elderly on 
robots. To analyze the data, we have used a qualitative 
inductive approach by using the content and latent manifest 
analysis method. The analysis resulted in three categories: 
aging during the technological renaissance, domestic robots, 
and the elderly’s expectations of legislation and regulations 
on robots. The overall resulted theme was integrating robots 
in everyday life. We have later discussed our findings 
through the lenses of the SOC theory and its concepts of 
comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness. 
Through this study, we have contributed to the 
understanding of the integration of robots in the homes of 
the elderly. We have brought concrete examples of how the 
elderly seek to understand (comprehend) and to be able to 
manage welfare robots. We also drew attention upon the 
importance of having meaningful technologies for them – 
that are not only useful (for them and their caregivers).  
Further, studies show that in the coming years, people 
will not only live longer but also be more preoccupied with 
their “meaning, purpose, and well-being” in their later 
stages of life, while “looser family ties” will be more 
common [67]. This may yet put more pressure on the 
welfare system provided by the society’s public services 
[67]. As the authors show, this “self-empowering” care 
approach for the elderly, in Norway, is predicted to be 
mostly home-based, but enabled by governments, through 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

municipalities, vendors of welfare technologies, and 
residents and their families [67]. In another study, it is 
explained that the population aging, as a global 
phenomenon, would be addressed through “home-based 
care and multidisciplinary care,” by meeting the demands of 
the elderly for living longer at home [68]. However, aldeen 
Al-Halhouli et al. [69] notified that while “smart house 
systems” are taking shape, the elderly “do not have extra 
time to learn new technologies” [69]. We have argued in 
this paper that we should consider the elements from SOC: 
comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness, for 
better integration of robots in the independent living 
elderly’s homes.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We wish to heartfully thank our project funders-The 
Research Council of Norway IKT Plus Program (Grant 
agreement no: 247697); our project partners and the 
participants; the project manager, J. Tørresen; colleagues T. 
Schulz, and R. Soma for our time at KO++; and the master 
students V. Søyseth and M. Søyland.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. E. Bardram, C. Bossen, and A. Thomsen, “Designing for 
transformations in collaboration: A study of the deployment 
of homecare technology,” in Proc. of the 2005 International 
ACM SIGGROUP Conf. on Supporting Group Work, New 
York, NY, USA, 2005, pp. 294–303. 
[2] D. Detmer, M. Bloomrosen, B. Raymond, and P. Tang, 
“Integrated personal health records: transformative tools for 
consumer-centric care,” BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak., vol. 
8, p. 45, Oct. 2008. 
[3] D. Fischinger et al., “Hobbit, a care robot supporting 
independent living at home: First prototype and lessons 
learned,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 75, pp. 60–78, Jan. 2016. 
[4] S. A. McGlynn, S. Kemple, T. L. Mitzner, C.-H. A. King, and 
W. A. Rogers, “Understanding the potential of PARO for 
healthy older adults,” Int. J. Hum.-Comp. Stud., vol. 100, pp. 
33–47, Apr. 2017. 
[5] A. Light, T. W. Leong, and T. Robertson, “Ageing well with 
CSCW,” in ECSCW 2015: Proc. of the 14th Euro. Conf. on 
CSCW, 19-23 Sep. 2015, Oslo, Norway, Springer, Cham, 
2015, pp. 295–304. 
[6] R. Procter et al., “The day-to-day co-production of ageing in 
place,” CSCW, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 245–267, Jun. 2014. 
[7] M. Koelen, M. Eriksson, and M. Cattan, “Older people, sense 
of coherence and community,” in The Handb. of Salutogen., 
M. B. Mittelmark, S. Sagy, M. Eriksson, G. F. Bauer, J. M. 
Pelikan, B. Lindström, and G. A. Espnes, Eds. Cham: 
Springer Intern. Pub., 2017, pp. 137–149. 
[8] M. Eriksson, “The Sense of Coherence in the salutogenic 
model of health,” in The Handbook of Salutogenesis, M. B. 
Mittelmark, S. Sagy, M. Eriksson, G. F. Bauer, J. M. Pelikan, 
B. Lindström, and G. A. Espnes, Eds. Cham: Springer Intern. 
Pub., 2017, pp. 91–96. 
[9] P. B. Baltes and J. Smith, “New frontiers in the future of 
aging: from successful aging of the young old to the dilemmas 
of the fourth age,” Gerontology, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 123–135, 
Apr. 2003. 
[10] D. Field and M. Minkler, “Continuity and change in social 
support between young-old and old-old or very-old age,” J. 
Gerontol., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. P100-106, Jul. 1988. 
[11] OED, “welfare, n.,” OED Online. Oxford University Press, 
2017, Retrieved Feb. 2020. 
[12] Nordic Centre for Welfare and Social Issues, “Welfare 
technology.” Nordic Centre for Welfare and Social Issues, 
Retrieved Feb. 2020. 
[13] OED, “robot", Oxford Dictionaries | English. Oxford 
University Press, 2017, Retrieved Feb. 2020. 
[14] E. Oborn, M. Barrett, and A. Darzi, “Robots and service 
innovation in health care,” J. Health Serv. Res. Policy, vol. 
16, no. 1, pp. 46–50, Jan. 2011. 
[15] D. Saplacan and J. Herstad, “A quadratic anthropocentric 
perspective on feedback - Using proxemics as a framework,” 
Conf. Proceed. of BritishHCI 2017, Sunderland, U.K., pp. 1-
6, Jul. 2017. 
[16] J. M. Alcalá, J. Ureña, Á. Hernández, and D. Gualda, 
“Assessing human activity in elderly people using non-
intrusive load monitoring,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 2, , p. 351-
368, Feb. 2017. 
[17] G. Acampora, D. J. Cook, P. Rashidi, and A. V. Vasilakos, 
“A survey on ambient intelligence in healthcare,” Proc. IEEE, 
vol. 101, no. 12, pp. 2470–2494, Dec. 2013. 
[18] E. Chiauzzi, C. Rodarte, and P. DasMahapatra, “Patient-
centered activity monitoring in the self-management of 
chronic health conditions,” BMC Med., vol. 13, pp. 1-6, Apr. 
2015. 
[19] M. Petersen and N. F. Hempler, “Development and testing of 
a mobile application to support diabetes self-management for 
people with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes: a design 
thinking case study,” BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak., vol. 
17, no. 1, pp. 1-10, Jun. 2017. 
[20] R. Laidlaw et al., “Using participatory methods to design an 
mHealth intervention for a low income country, a case study 
in Chikwawa, Malawi,” BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak., vol. 
17, pp. 1-12, Jul. 2017. 
[21] K. Johnston, K. Grimmer-Somers, and M. Sutherland, 
“Perspectives on use of personal alarms by older fallers,” Int. 
J. Gen. Med., vol. 3, pp. 231–237, Aug. 2010. 
[22] P. Caleb-Solly, “A brief introduction to … Assistive robotics 
for independent living,” Perspect. Public Health, vol. 136, no. 
2, pp. 70–72, Mar. 2016. 
[23] S. Bedaf, G. J. Gelderblom, and L. De Witte, “Overview and 
categorization of robots supporting independent living of 
elderly people: What activities do they support and how far 
have they developed,” Assist. Technol. Off. J. RESNA, vol. 
27, no. 2, pp. 88–100, 2015. 
[24] S. Bedaf and L. de Witte, “Robots for Elderly Care: Their 
Level of Social Interactions and the Targeted End User,” 
Stud. Health Technol. Inform., vol. 242, pp. 472–478, 2017. 
[25] Samfunnkunskap.no, 
“Welfare 
state” 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Retrieved Feb. 2020. 
[26] J. Ramm, “Health and care. Use of services among the 
elderly,” ssb.no, 2013. [Online]. Retrieved Feb. 2020 
[27] D. Slettemeås, “Eldres bruk av digitale verktøy og internett: 
En landsdekende undersøkelse av mestring, støttebehov, 
motivasjon og hindringer,” Deltasenteret, Statens Institutt for 
frobruksforskning (SIFO), 5–2014, Jun. 2014. 
[28] B. A. Farshchian, T. Vilarinho, and M. Mikalsen, “From 
episodes to continuity of care: a study of a call center for 
supporting independent living,” CSCW, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 
309–343, Jun. 2017. 
[29] A. Antonovsky, “The salutogenic model as a theory to guide 
health promotion,” Health Promotion International, vol. 1, 11 
vols. Oxford University Press, Great Britain, pp. 11–18, 1996. 
[30] C. Benz, T. Bull, M. Mittelmark, and L. Vaandrager, “Culture 
in salutogenesis: the scholarship of Aaron Antonovsky,” 
Glob. Health Promot., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 16–23, Dec. 2014. 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[31] S. Suominen and B. Lindstrom, “Salutogenesis,” Scand. J. 
Public Health, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 337–339, Jun. 2008. 
[32] S. Super, M. a. E. Wagemakers, H. S. J. Picavet, K. T. 
Verkooijen, and M. A. Koelen, “Strengthening sense of 
coherence: opportunities for theory building in health 
promotion,” Health Promot. Int., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 869–878, 
Dec. 2016. 
[33] J. Lahtiranta, J. S. S. Koskinen, S. Knaapi-Junnila, and M. 
Nurminen, “Sensemaking in the personal health space,” Inf. 
Technol. People, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 790–805, Nov. 2015. 
[34] J. Lahtiranta and J. S. S. Koskinen, “Electronic health services 
for cardiac patients: a salutogenic approach,” Finn. J. EHealth 
EWelfare, vol. 5, pp. 96–93, 2013. 
[35] H. 
Dreyfus, 
Being-in-the-world: 
A 
Commentary 
on 
Heidegger’s Being and Time, Division I. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, 1991. 
[36] F. Svenaeus, “The relevance of Heidegger’s philosophy of 
technology for biomedical ethics,” Theor. Med. Bioeth., vol. 
34, no. 1, pp. 1–15, Feb. 2013. 
[37] ssb, “Next million reached set to be the fastest,” ssb.no, 2017. 
[Online]. Retrieved Feb. 2020. 
[38] Statistics Norway, “Population,” (Statistik sentralbyrå, ssb.no, 
17-Nov-2016. [Online]. Retrieved Feb. 2020. 
[39] S. G. Joshi, “Designing for capabilities: A phenomenological 
approach to the design of enabling technologies for older 
adults,” 2017. 
[40] A. Woll, “Use of welfare technology in elderly care,” 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2017. 
[41] S. G. Joshi and T. Bratteteig, “Assembling fragments into 
continuous design: On participatory design with old people,” 
in Nordic Contributions in IS Research, 2015, pp. 13–29. 
[42] S. G. Joshi and T. Bratteteig, “Designing for prolonged 
mastery. On involving old people in participatory design,” 
Scand. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 28, no. 1, Jul. 2016. 
[43] S. G. Joshi, “Designing for experienced simplicity. Why 
analytic and imagined simplicity fail in design of assistive 
technology,” Int. J. Adv. Intell. Syst., vol. 8, no. 3 and 4, pp. 
324–338, Dec. 2015. 
[44] R. B. Rosseland, “Exploring movement-absed rhythmic 
interaction with senior citizens,” University of Oslo, 
Department of Informatics, Faculty of mathematics and 
natural sciences, Oslo, Norway, 2018. 
[45] M. Dalen, Intervju som forskningsmetode: en kvalitativ 
tilnærming, 2. utg. Oslo: Universitetsforl, 2013. 
[46] U. H. Graneheim and B. Lundman, “Qualitative content 
analysis in nursing research: concepts, procedures and 
measures to achieve trustworthiness,” Nurse Educ. Today, 
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 105–112, Feb. 2004. 
[47] S. A. Ballegaard, J. Bunde-Pedersen, and J. E. Bardram, 
“Where to, Roberta?: Reflecting on the role of technology in 
assisted living,” in Proc. of the 4th Nordic Conf. on HCI: 
Changing Roles, New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 373–376. 
[48] A. Vercelli, I. Rainero, L. Ciferri, M. Boido, and F. Pirri, 
“Robots in elderly care,” Digit. - Sci. J. Digit. Cult., vol. 2, 
no. 2, pp. 37–50, Mar. 2018. 
[49] A. Sciutti, M. Mara, V. Tagliasco, and G. Sandini, 
“Humanizing Human-Robot Interaction: On the importance of 
mutual understanding,” IEEE Technol. Soc. Mag., vol. 37, no. 
1, pp. 22–29, Mar. 2018. 
[50] E. Cheon and N. M. Su, “Configuring the user: ‘Robots have 
needs too,’” in Proc. of the 2017 ACM Conf. on CSCW and 
Soc. Comp., New York, NY, USA, pp. 191–206, 2017. 
[51] S. Ljungblad, J. Kotrbova, M. Jacobsson, H. Cramer, and K. 
Niechwiadowicz, “Hospital robot at work: Something alien or 
an intelligent colleague?,” in Proc. of the ACM 2012 Conf. on 
CSCW, New York, NY, USA, pp. 177–186, 2012. 
[52] Y. Riche and W. Mackay, “PeerCare: supporting awareness 
of rhythms and routines for better aging in place,” CSCW, 
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 73–104, Feb. 2010. 
[53] J. Meurer, C. Müller, C. Simone, I. Wagner, and V. Wulf, 
“Designing for sustainability: Key issues of ICT projects for 
ageing at home,” ECSCW 2018, pp. 1-44, 2018. 
[54] P. J. Hinds, T. L. Roberts, and H. Jones, “Whose Job is It 
Anyway? A Study of Human-robot Interaction in a 
Collaborative Task,” Hum-Comput Interact, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 
151–181, Jun. 2004. 
[55] J. Fink, “Anthropomorphism and human likeness in the 
design of robots and Human-Robot Interaction,” in Soc. Rob., 
S. S. Ge, O. Khatib, J.-J. Cabibihan, R. Simmons, and M.-A. 
Williams, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 199–208, 
2012. 
[56] F. Eyssel, D. Kuchenbrandt, S. Bobinger, L. de Ruiter, and F. 
Hegel, “‘If you sound like me, you must be more human’: on 
the interplay of robot and user features on human-robot 
acceptance and anthropomorphism,” in Proc. of the 7th annual 
ACM/IEEE intern. conf. on HRI, pp. 125–126, 2012. 
[57] C. Bartneck, D. Kulić, E. Croft, and S. Zoghbi, “Measurement 
instruments for the anthropomorphism, animacy, likeability, 
perceived intelligence, and perceived safety of robots,” Int. J. 
Soc. Robot., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2009. 
[58] K. Yogeeswaran et al., “The interactive effects of robot 
anthropomorphism and robot ability on perceived threat and 
support for robotics research,” J. Hum.-Robot Interact., vol. 5, 
no. 2, pp. 29–47, Sep. 2016. 
[59] M. Mori, “The uncanny valley [From the Field],” IEEE 
Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 98–100, Jun. 2012. 
[60] M. Eriksson and M. B. Mittelmark, “The Sense of Coherence 
and its measurement,” in The Handbook of Salutogenesis, M. 
B. Mittelmark, S. Sagy, M. Eriksson, G. F. Bauer, J. M. 
Pelikan, B. Lindström, and G. A. Espnes, Eds. Cham (CH): 
Springer, pp. 97-106, 2017. 
[61] O. Hanseth, K. Thoresen, and L. Winner, “The politics of 
networking technology in health care,” CSCW, vol. 2, no. 1, 
pp. 109–130, 1993. 
[62] T. Bratteteig and I. Eide, “Becoming a good homecare 
practitioner: Integrating many kinds of work,” CSCW, vol. 
26, no. 4, pp. 563–596, Dec 2017. 
[63] Norwegian Government Security and Service Organisation 
(G.S.S.O), “Innovation in care (Original Title: Innovasjon i 
Omsorg),” NOU (Norway’s public investigations), Oslo, 
Norway, 2011:11, 2011. 
[64] WHO, “Active ageing: a policy framework,” World Health 
Organization, 2002, Retrieved Feb. 2020. 
[65] WHO, “What is Healthy Ageing?,” Ageing and life course, 
2018. [Online]. Retrieved Feb. 2020. 
[66] A. Light et al., “What’s special about aging,” ACM 
Interactions, vol. 23, Number 2. pp. 66–69, 2016. 
[67] B. Bygstad and G. Lanestedt, “Expectations and realities in 
welfare technologies: A comparative study of Japan and 
Norway,” Transform. Gov. People Process Policy, vol. 11, no. 
2, pp. 286–303, Apr. 2017. 
[68] H. Arai et al., “Toward the realization of a better aged society: 
Messages from gerontology and geriatrics,” Geriatr. Gerontol. 
Int., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 16–22, Jan. 2012. 
[69] A. ’aldeen Al-Halhouli et al., “LEGO Mindstorms NXT for 
elderly and visually impaired people in need: A platform,” 
Technol. Health Care Off. J. Eur. Soc. Eng. Med., vol. 24, no. 
4, pp. 579–585, Jul. 2016. 
 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

