Designing Personal Health Records for Cognitive Rehabilitation 
Klaudia Çarçani 
Faculty of Computer Science 
Østfold University College 
Halden, Norway 
email: klaudia.carcani@hiof.no 
 
Miria Grisot 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
email: miria.grisot@uio.no 
 
Harald Holone 
Faculty of Computer Science 
Østfold University College 
Halden, Norway 
email: harald.holone@hiof.no
Abstract—Personal Health Records (PHRs) are digital tools that 
give people the possibility to have access and control over their 
health data. They are usually used in situations when the patient 
is home or in casual encounters between the patient and the 
healthcare practitioner. Current related literature does not 
discuss much in terms of PHR usage in hospitals and possible 
implications for designing such PHRs. In this paper, we present 
the case of cognitive rehabilitation in a rehabilitation hospital. 
Patients in rehabilitation should take a leading role in their 
treatment as a prerequisite for more beneficial rehabilitation. 
We have analyzed the cognitive rehabilitation case and present 
a set of six design implications for designing a PHR for the 
patients in cognitive rehabilitation during their time at the 
hospital. We discuss these implications from a Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) perspective, where the 
PHR has been conceptualized as hybrid information spaces 
compounded by personal and Common Information Spaces 
(CIS). We found, that in cognitive rehabilitation, an important 
element for designing a PHR is its role not only in creating the 
possibility of sharing information between the patient and the 
healthcare practitioners, but, at the same time, offering some 
mechanisms for coordination between them as an incentive of 
recognizing patients work in the division of labor and helping 
the patient take more control over his/her rehabilitation.     
Keywords-PHR; 
cognitive 
rehabilitation; 
coordination 
mechanisms; patients empowerment; CIS. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Personal Health Records (PHRs) are defined as “digital 
tools that allow people to access and coordinate their lifelong 
health information and make appropriate parts of it available 
to those who need it” [1]. PHRs emerged from the need of 
patients to take control of their health information and 
contribute to it [2]. Commonly, patient health information has 
been stored in Electronic Medical Records (EMR), which are 
used by healthcare practitioners to facilitate the management 
of patient’s treatment and also as a cooperative tool with other 
healthcare practitioners [3]. However, despite an increasing 
requirement in health policies in recognizing patients’ role as 
being active participants in their care, patients still do not have 
access to EMRs and their own health information. Often, the 
only way they get access is by obtaining a paper copy of their 
records. Thus, patients collect paper documents and create 
their own big paper folder that they usually bring over in 
consultations. This practice has limitations in terms of how the 
information is stored, retrieved, and shared. In response to 
these limitations, PHRs emerged around two decades ago to 
give patients the possibility to have access to their health data 
and also be able to generate more health information that they 
can share with whoever they want.  
PHRs have been discussed in the literature under different 
lenses, and different types of PHRs have been developed. The 
CSCW field has contributed to increasing the understanding 
of the cooperative work in healthcare and introducing a set of 
digital artifacts that facilitate cooperation [4], offering in this 
way, better services to the persons in need. From a CSCW 
perspective, the PHR is a collaborative tool between patients 
and 
healthcare 
practitioners. 
The 
PHR 
has 
been 
conceptualized as an information space of a hybrid nature [5]- 
[7] representing a tool that integrates personal and 
interpersonal/common information spaces. In this paper, we 
follow this line of work and are interested in both the design 
of PHRs and their conceptualization as collaborative tools. 
Therefore, we address the following research question: “How 
to design a PHR for cognitive rehabilitation?” and “How can 
this contribute to conceptualize PHRs?” 
Specifically, we analyze the collaborative use of a PHR in 
the hospital context, while patients are still hospitalized. PHRs 
are mostly designed to support the collaboration between the 
patient and health practitioners when the patient is home or 
when s/he has casual encounters with the healthcare 
practitioners. We argue that, in order to support collaborative 
work in the hospital context, the PHR needs to be designed 
differently. In addition, we also argue that PHRs need to 
accommodate the specific needs of the patient's clinical 
problem. Hence, in this paper, we identify and discuss 
implications for the design of a PHR in the case of patients in 
cognitive rehabilitation in a rehabilitation hospital. In this 
context, patients have to actively participate in care practices 
(not only receive care). Cognitive rehabilitation is a special 
rehabilitation program that is usually offered in rehabilitation 
hospitals to patients who suffer from some cognitive 
impairments after Acquired Brain Injury (ABI) caused mainly 
from stroke or accidents [8]. We have investigated the 
cognitive rehabilitation process in the Cognitive Unit (CU) of 
a rehabilitation hospital in Norway and defined a set of 
implications for the design of a PHR in such a setting. We 
discuss the PHR design implications in relation to the current 
conceptualization of PHRs within CSCW research and 
contribute to a better understanding of such tools.   
In Section II, a description of our main concepts is 
presented. Section III gives an overview of how the data was 
collected and analyzed. Section IV is a detailed presentation 
of the practice of cognitive rehabilitation as a summary of our 
empirical study. Section V presents a set of implications for 
designing a PHR used in cognitive rehabilitation grounded in 
our empirical findings. In Section VI, we discuss the 
implications for design with a more conceptual perspective 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

drawn from the existing conceptual discussion of PHRs in 
CSCW.  
II. 
CONCEPTUAL GROUNDING 
In this section, we present more in-depth the main 
concepts for this paper. Initially, we present PHRs and how 
they have been defined and described in the literature. Further, 
we present how PHRs have been conceptualized in CSCW as 
a hybrid information space. Moreover, we focus on the CIS as 
a concept and finally describe the concept of coordination 
mechanisms as a parameter of CIS and relevant for our 
discussion later in the paper.  
A. Personal Health Records 
PHRs have been defined generally as Internet-based, 
lifelong health records that are controlled by the individual 
and are meant to promote the individual's engagement in his 
or her health and healthcare [1]. PHRs should be controlled by 
the patients who should as well enter at least part of the 
information. Davidson et al. [1] in a PHRs literature review 
found that there are different types of PHRs. One type of 
PHRs are those tethered to EMR. In that conﬁguration, part of 
the PHR information is provided and maintained by 
healthcare providers. A patient can access the EMR and 
mostly read through the information, but it is usually not 
common to have the possibility to edit or change the data in 
the EMR, even when that is needed, required, and liable for 
the patient. This does not mean the patient will access the 
EMR and change the description of their diagnosis. However, 
the patient can contribute by describing more details about 
his/her situation, which will then help the doctor make a better 
diagnosis.  Other type of PHRs are those fully controlled by 
patients, who enter and maintain their own health data [1]. 
This health data can be brought over to be discussed with the 
healthcare practitioners during consultations, and the 
collaboration and interaction happen outside of the PHR. 
Another type are PHR platforms/ecosystems. They are 
supposed to be a mix between standalone PHRs and tethered 
to EMR PHRs, but with a distinction to be untethered from a 
specific healthcare provider. PHR platforms are supposed to 
give the patient the freedom to use the PHR independent of 
where s/he is receiving the treatment. An example of PHR 
platforms from the Norwegian healthcare has been described 
by Vassilakopoulou et al. [7]. Helsenorge.no is a patient 
platform where the patient can find part of his/her health data 
arriving from different health settings. The aim of 
helsenorge.no is to give patients a space/platform where they 
can find health data such as diagnosis (epicrise), have the 
possibility to communicate electronically with their General 
Practitioner (GP), check their vaccine history, their medicine, 
etc. and possibly more services in the future.  
PHRs are considered to have the potential to contribute to 
patients' empowerment by implying changes in the way 
healthcare is delivered and give patients the possibility of 
being more involved and getting more control over their care 
[2]. However, their usage is still low, and there is limited 
research on how PHRs can empower the patients in having 
more control and being involved in their care.  
Creating PHRs is associated with multifaced socio-
technical problems attributed to their role of connecting 
multiple parties and social actors [9]. From a patient 
perspective, a PHR is valuable for accessing information and 
sharing health information with the ones s/he wants. From a 
healthcare practitioner perspective, the usage of a PHR could 
contribute to better coordination with the patient and the 
possibility to access information that surpasses organizational 
boundaries.  
B. PHR as Hybrid Informations Spaces 
Researchers in CSCW have been discussing how to 
conceptualize PHRs. Cabitza
 
et al. [6] argue that 
conceptualizing PHRs as tools that can just support the flow 
of information mitigates their full potential to be more 
collaboration and communication oriented. Thus, they suggest 
framing PHRs as hubs where patients and healthcare 
practitioners meet to enhance a collaborative relationship. 
Cabitza et al. [6] have defined the concept of InterPersonal 
Health Record (IPHR) as a hybrid electronic record that 
merges the typical EMR and PHR related features that aim at 
enhancing “relationships, communication, and collaboration 
between citizens/patients and their healthcare practitioners” 
[6]. The emphasis on the interpersonal aims to highlight the 
involvement in the management of care of both patients and 
healthcare providers. Cabitza and Gesso [5] describe 
MEDICONA as an example of an IPHR. MEDICONA 
implements the concept of a shared record among different 
user types, in addition to electronic messaging [5] and is 
described as an IPHR. Further, they discuss how the IPHR can 
be conceptualized as a CIS, where patients and healthcare 
practitioners can access the information that they need 
regarding health management in a common space. This 
conceptualization is compatible with Lahtiranta et al.  [10] 
health spaces defined as collaborative information space for 
patients and health providers, which are not limited only to 
healthcare-related encounters.  
Unruh and Pratt [11] identify a set of functional 
requirements for an information space designed explicitly for 
patients’ cooperation with clinicians. They define explicit 
representations and increased interaction as a way that CIS 
can facilitate cooperation between patients and their 
clinicians.  
Recently, Vassilakopoulou et al. [7] have conceptualized 
PHRs as information spaces of a hybrid character. They state 
that “PHR can be more than a private tool, serving as CIS that 
straddles work and non-work contexts, bringing together 
participants – patients and professionals – in a collaborative 
relation”. Thus, considering PHR as personal information 
space (serving sensitive health information management 
need) and CIS (stressing the cooperative dimension of the 
patient- healthcare practitioners’ relations). They have 
analyzed and discussed two cases of a PHR: a) MyHealth, 
which gives the possibility to the patient to access and store 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

personal health information, and supports electronic 
exchanges between patients and healthcare providers. 
Moreover, it offers connections to several existing systems 
and the possibility for other applications to connect and extend 
the core functionality [7], and b) MyBook, which facilitates 
information sharing between the patient and his/her GP [7]. 
The cases described, such as MEDICONA, MyHealth, and 
MyBook, 
are 
examples 
of 
PHRs 
which 
facilitate 
communication, awareness through records, and collaboration 
based on the information shared in the common space. 
However, this literature considers mainly cases when the 
patient is outside of the hospital and has only occasional health 
encounters with the healthcare practitioner. The literature on 
PHRs has not yet addressed the use of PHRs in 
hospital/clinical context. In this context, it is assumed that 
patients do not need to have access to their health data as they 
are in close contact with clinicians. However, as patients are 
asked to cooperate/work together with clinicians (and not just 
receive care), they also need tools that enable them to take up 
this role. Thus, the case described in this paper contributes to 
the conceptualization of PHRs in a hospital setting in a context 
where the patient has to actively participate in the care 
practices (not only receive care).    
C. Common Information Spaces 
In CSCW, PHRs have been defined as CIS or hybrid 
information spaces. While personal information spaces refer 
to patients' individual needs in managing health information 
that is personal to them, the concept of CI has been discussed 
in CSCW. In this subsection, we will present a deeper 
understanding of CIS as a concept.  
CIS is a conceptual framework in CSCW which highlights 
the relationship between actors, artifacts, information, and 
cooperative work [12]. The aim is to provide an analytical tool 
that can inform developing systems that can support 
cooperative work [12].  
CIS “encompasses artifacts that are accessible to a 
cooperative ensemble as well as the meaning attributed to 
these artifacts by the actors” [12]. In cooperative work 
settings, actors are interdependent. This requires that they 
coordinate who is doing what, when, and why [13]. Thus, 
what is called articulation work takes an important role. 
Articulation work as the supra type of work, which is 
necessary for the division of labor [12][14], can be facilitated 
by the usage of artifacts or mechanisms of interaction [15]. 
According to Schmidt and Bannon [12], CIS is necessary for 
distributed cooperative work to maintain some form of shared 
and locally and temporally created understanding about 
objects in the CIS. 
An important characteristic of CIS is the openness and 
closure and the need for a balance between the malleability of 
information and the need for some closure to allow for 
translation among communities. In making this possible, a 
balance of interpretations among different webs of 
significance (as called by Bossen, representing people from 
different groups) is needed [13]. Hence, CIS requires a new 
type of articulation work, which makes possible the 
coordination of interpretations.  
In healthcare, there are some examples of CIS, such as 
[16] in which the influence of the physical position of artifacts 
used in a CIS in a hospital is investigated. In [17], CIS were 
investigated in emergency teams in hospitals.  
Bossen [13] describes seven parameters of CIS such as the 
degree of distribution; the multiplicity of webs of significance; 
the multiplicity and intensity of means of communication; the 
level of required articulation work; the web of artifacts; the 
immaterial mechanisms of interaction and the need for 
precision and promptness of interpretation. Bossen [13] as 
well build his analysis of CIS in a hospital ward.    
A relevant parameter for this paper is the “web of artifacts” 
described as material mechanisms of coordination to make 
possible cooperation among the distributed actors and having 
a better overview of the state of the work possible. Based on 
this definition, a PHR as a material artifact in the hand of the 
patient in which the patient can communicate, collaborate, 
cooperate with the healthcare practitioners, is a mechanism 
which materializes a CIS between the patient and healthcare 
practitioners. 
In the literature, different types of artifacts that support a 
CIS are described. Bossen refers to the web of artifacts as 
material coordination mechanisms by referencing to 
coordination mechanisms as defined by Schmidt and Simonee 
[15]. However, Bannon and Bødker [18] have discussed that 
what is defined as boundary objects from Star and Strauss [19] 
can be as well used as a means for sharing items in the CIS. 
Thus, another type of web of artifact in CIS. The concept of 
boundary objects and coordination mechanisms have 
differences, as discussed in [20].  In this paper, we are 
particularly interested in coordination mechanisms and will 
get back to this concept in our discussion.  
D. Coordination Mechanisms  
Coordination mechanisms have been defined [15] as “a 
specific organizational construct, consisting of a coordinative 
protocol imprinted upon a distinct artifact, which, in the 
context of a certain cooperative work arrangement, stipulates 
and mediates the articulation of cooperative work to reduce 
the complexity of articulation work of that arrangement.” 
Thus, coordination mechanisms are artifacts which aim to 
reduce the complexity of the division of labor in a cooperative 
work setting and make cooperation possible. The concept of 
the coordination mechanism, as defined, describes a material 
artifact. This approach has been considered narrow by Bossen 
[13], who emphasizes that organizational structures and 
division of labor also facilitate coordination of work since 
they explicate who does what and when. Hence, as another 
parameter of CIS, Bossen lists the immaterial mechanisms of 
interaction for these other constructs, which facilitate 
articulation of cooperative work. Coordination mechanisms 
aim to coordinate activities among semi-autonomous actors 
who should have a certain level of consensus in order to get 
the job done [20].  
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The PHRs that have been described in the literature as CIS 
[5]  2
 [ 1] [22] or hybrid information spaces [7] show mostly 
cases of artifacts that offer a space where the information is 
shared, and communication and collaboration are supported, 
thus resembling coordination mechanisms. However, they 
lack an aspect of a more cooperative relationship between the 
patient and the healthcare practitioners, where the patient has 
an active role in his/her care by taking over tasks and work in 
the division of labor. Moreover, cases of CIS discussed in 
healthcare [13][16] [17] are mostly focusing on hospital 
wards and describing the need for sharing information among 
healthcare practitioners. The patient’s voice and visibility in 
the process lacks. Hence, in this paper, we describe, in the next 
section, a case of a hospital ward where the CIS also involves 
the patient. Moreover, the requirements for a PHR are not only 
communication and sharing information but entering a 
cooperative relationship where the patient and the healthcare 
practitioners supporting him/her are interdependent on each 
other.    
III. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE COGNITIVE REHABILITATION 
EXISTING PRACTICES 
We studied the process of cognitive rehabilitation in the 
CU of a rehabilitation hospital in Norway. The unit is 
specialized exclusively for offering cognitive rehabilitation. 
Cognitive rehabilitation is a special rehabilitation program 
that is offered to people that suffer from cognitive 
impairments after an Acquired Brain Injury (ABI). ABI is 
brain damage acquired after birth. The causes of ABI can be 
“from a traumatic brain injury (i.e., accidents, falls, assaults, 
etc.) and non-traumatic brain injury (i.e., stroke, brain tumors, 
infection, poisoning, hypoxia, ischemia, metabolic disorders 
or substance abuse)”. The cognitive rehabilitation aims to 
support the patients in therapeutic manners, thus, either 
improving his/her functions in daily life or helping the patients 
to find alternative ways for compensating the lost functions 
through additional aids. Rehabilitation, as defined by the 
Norwegian 
Health 
Authorities 
[23], 
requires 
a 
multidisciplinary team that works together with the patient 
during rehabilitation. The multidisciplinary team involves 
different healthcare practitioners.  
In 
our 
study 
in 
cognitive 
rehabilitation, 
the 
multidisciplinary team is usually compounded by the medical 
doctor, a nurse, an occupational therapist, a physiotherapist, a 
psychologist, a social worker, and a speech therapist.  This 
team assists the patient throughout the 5 five weeks of 
rehabilitation at the hospital.  Each offers specialized care to 
the patient based on their domain of knowledge.  
Rehabilitation is based on the goal-setting theory. This 
theory is defined broadly as a process in which the patient and 
members of the multidisciplinary team agree on a set of 
rehabilitative goals to be achieved during the rehabilitation 
program [24]. Goal-setting is not only an administrative tool, 
but it is considered a clinical intervention [24]. It has been 
shown that setting personal goals increases the possibilities of 
behavior change by increasing motivation (the desire to act in 
a particular way) [25].  
In the CU, the rehabilitation process is built based on the 
goal-setting theory. Thus, a patient, in collaboration with the 
multidisciplinary team, has to decide on a set of goals that s/he 
wants to work with during rehabilitation. Goals are mostly 
long term. As the time stay at the hospital is only for five 
weeks, the patient and the multidisciplinary team during the 
first week should agree on the things to prioritize for those five 
weeks and decide on a set of sub-goals for each main goal. 
The sub-goals should be SMART (Specific, Measurable, 
Achievable, Realistic, and Timely). As rehabilitation targets 
the increase in the patient’s functional level in his/her daily 
life, the involvement of the patient in defining the 
rehabilitation goals is essential. The first week at the hospital, 
the patient meets with all the members of the multidisciplinary 
team one by one. In the ideal scenario, the patient comes 
already with a set of predefined goals, written by 
himself/herself. However, in many cases, the patient is not 
able to define his/her rehabilitation goals, and the 
multidisciplinary team members should help him/her. If the 
patient is not cooperating with the team, it is a risk that not 
relevant and specific goals would be set, and the result of the 
rehabilitation will be mitigated. The refining of goals comes 
together with the definition of a set of interventions that the 
patient would go through at the hospital to be able to achieve 
the goals. Interventions are defined as “an act performed for, 
with or on behalf of a person or population whose purpose is 
to assess, improve, maintain, promote or modify health, 
functioning or health conditions” [26]. It is absolutely relevant 
to the involvement of the patient in the process, so the patient 
later understands why s/he is doing different activities at the 
hospital.  
The goals, respective sub-goals, and the interventions for 
each sub-goal are stipulated in a document called the goal plan 
document. This document is originated in the hospital EMR 
as part of the patient record. The goal plan is conceptualized 
to be shared with the patient as the main document of 
coordination between the team and the patient in 
rehabilitation. The document is designed to show the goals, 
sub-goals, and interventions, the team member that is 
responsible together with the patient for a specific 
intervention, and some more mechanisms that can help keep 
track of how the patient is advancing during rehabilitation. As 
the document is in the hospital EMR, the patient cannot access 
it. So, a printed version is given to the patient from the start. 
The electronic document is then shown during a meeting 
where all the multidisciplinary team, the patient, and if willing 
any of the patient’s kin would go through the goals and agree 
on the final version. The final version will then be printed out 
and given to the patient.  
During the time at the hospital, the patient receives a 
weekly plan every beginning of the week. The weekly plan 
involves all the activities that the patient should do during the 
week. The weekly plan is not part of the patient records in the 
EMR. It is maintained in a shared word document and printed 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

out for each of the patients. If changes are made, the team 
member that implements the change can print another version 
or, in some cases, the patients write over the paper. The 
activities in the weekly plans should relate to any of the 
interventions in the goal plan and consequently contribute to 
the patient's sub-goals. This connection is very important to 
be highlighted for the patient as part of his/her rehabilitation 
process. However, the restriction that the current procedure 
and materiality of the artifacts imposes is not exploring the 
whole potential. 
When the five weeks of rehabilitation are finished, the 
patient returns home. S/he can continue rehabilitation by 
his/her own or receives additional help from local 
rehabilitation therapists. The plan on how the patient should 
continue rehabilitation home has been made since s/he was at 
the hospital. The therapists at the hospital have established 
some connections with local therapists. It is important that the 
patient continues training with rehabilitation goals and sub-
goals and keeps us with respective interventions as taught at 
the hospital. 
IV. 
METHODS 
A. Data collection 
The data that we have analyzed for this paper has been 
collected in two phases under the umbrella of the same project 
called “Patient Empowerment in Cognitive rehabilitation 
through the use of technology”, which is a joint research 
initiative between a rehabilitation hospital and a university 
college in Norway.  
Initially, as part of the initiative in boosting patients' 
involvement in their rehabilitation, the hospital decided to 
redesign the goal plan document and the procedures 
surrounding it. To redesign the document, a Participatory 
Design (PD) approach with workshops was taken in April-
May 2018. First, the first author of this paper facilitated three 
workshops with a total of 10 patients, asking how to redesign 
the goal plan document (Figure 2) to make them want to 
engage more in their rehabilitation (more in detail this has 
been reported in another publication [27]). Second, the first 
author of this paper organized two PD workshops with the 
multidisciplinary team at the CU (20 participants). The 
healthcare practitioners were presented with a list of 
requirements from the patients' workshops and were invited to 
discuss these requirements and propose a new design of the 
document which would fulfill patients’ requirements and, at 
the same time, fit within their routines and procedures. With 
the data collected, a redesigned document (as shown in Figure 
2) was launched in June 2018 and has been in use ever since. 
Data collected where audio recordings of the workshops and 
designs of the new goal plan version from each of the 
participants. All participants signed a consent form before the 
workshops, and the data collected has been stored in safe 
locations at the hospital premises.  
In the second phase, ethnographic observations of the 
rehabilitation process at the CU from an extended period of 6 
months, August-December 2018, were conducted. Together 
with the CU management, we decided that for the 
ethnographic observations, the researcher (first author here) 
should shadow each of the health practitioners in the 
multidisciplinary team for a short period of time. This would 
minimize the stress of the patients and would give us the 
possibility to investigate the illness journey of more patients. 
The first author shadowed two occupational therapists 
respectively for 4 and 3 working days (8 hours shift during the 
day shift because in the afternoon most of the patients would 
go in their homes and no rehabilitation activities were planned 
at the unit)  and participated in activities with 12 patients, one 
nurse for 6 days and met 5 patients, one physiotherapist for 4 
days and met 8 patients, one speech therapist, one social 
worker for 4 days and met 8 patients and one psychologist for 
1 day and met 1 patient. Handwritten notes where taken while 
observing. These notes where expanded with details at the end 
of each day when transcribed digitally. Digital notes were 
saved in a folder in the safe hospital network that the first 
author can access through an encrypted laptop given by the 
hospital. The staff member asked the patients for consent 
before the researcher would participate in any patient-staff 
meeting. This was documented by signing a consent form.  
B. Analysis 
Overall, a qualitative interpretative research approach [28] 
was adopted. First, the data collected were analyzed with the 
aim of defining a list of implications for designing a PHR for 
patients in cognitive rehabilitation. Second, reflections on 
these implications with the theoretical lenses of hybrid 
information spaces [7] were conducted. The principles 
defined by Klein and Myers [28] were used to do an 
interpretive analysis of the data collected in the two phases 
described in the previous section. We describe the process 
more in detail below. 
Initially, the first author analyzed the audio-recorded data 
from the workshops and the designs of the patients and staff.  
Considering that the design requirements that emerged during 
the workshops were focused on the redesign of the goal plan 
document, which is a patient health record, the first author 
interpreted them with the perspective of possible design 
implications for a PHR. Moreover, the implications for design 
that emerged during the first iteration of interpretative analysis 
were supplemented and refined while analyzing notes from 
the observation period. The first author used a grounded 
theory approach to analyze the observation notes and defined 
a set implications for designing a PHR in cognitive 
rehabilitation in a hospital. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 1. A translated version of the goal plan document before the 
redesign. 
 
The list of implications was then discussed and refined 
with the other two authors who took a critical stance toward 
the findings. In the discussion, we (the three authors) reflected 
on implications for design, which were considered desirable 
for both the patients and staff. 
V. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN FOR A PHR IN 
COGNITIVE REHABILITATION 
The case of cognitive rehabilitation in a rehabilitation 
hospital and, to a certain extent, rehabilitation in general 
either in the hospital or in the local communities has its own 
specificities. Below we present a list of implications for 
designing a PHR for cognitive rehabilitation.  
1) Enhance the existing shared artifacts – The goal plan 
document and the weekly plans are an example of artifacts 
that are already implemented at the hospital and support 
cooperation and coordination between the patient and the 
multidisciplinary team, as presented in Section III. These 
artifacts are special to the rehabilitation process and the 
organization of care based on the goal-setting theory. From 
our data, we found that patients and the multidisciplinary 
team consider the goal plan an important element of the 
rehabilitation. Thus, designing a PHR for cognitive 
rehabilitation at the hospital should take into consideration 
these good practices in place and enhance the experience. 
The goal plan document is compatible with the definition 
of PHRs, as stated in Davidson et al. [1]. With goal-setting as 
not only an administrative tool but as a clinical intervention 
[24], the document represents a health record that is supposed 
to be controlled by the individual and is meant to promote the 
individual's engagement in his/her health and healthcare [1]. 
The goal plan document is a limited version of a PHR as the 
patient cannot directly generate information (write goals or 
add appointments suggestions in the weekly plan), and every 
change in the health record is mediated by health 
professionals. Control allocation has been defined as a design 
tension when designing PHRs by Vassilakopoulou et al. [7]. 
However, the goal plan is still a special and good practice in 
clinical rehabilitation where the patient is supposed to not 
only receive care but co-construct care together with the 
multidisciplinary team. The team and the patient consider 
problematic that the goal plan is in the EMR of the hospital. 
The paper version that is given to the patient limits the 
options for using the goal plan. In the workshop and during 
observation, all the team members and the patients pointed to 
the need for digitalizing the goal plan and giving control to 
the patient. One other important insight is that the team would 
like a PHR for the patient, but they as well require this PHR 
to be tethered to the EMR [1] to avoid double work in 
reporting.   
2)  Implement elements of coordination – During the 
workshops, we found from both the patients and the team that 
when defining goals, the best scenario would be to see the 
patients themselves writing their rehabilitation goals. In this 
scenario, the multidisciplinary team would check the goals 
the patient has defined, then discuss them with the patient in 
a meeting. During the meeting, the staff participating would 
then change the goals based on what is discussed with the 
patient. The patient could then access the document and make 
additional changes. Finally, both team and patient, if agreed, 
would sign the final version of the goals during the so-called 
‘goal meeting’.   
 
However, during observations, we found that the patient 
involvement in defining his/her goals is mitigated because 
s/he doesn’t have direct access to the goal plan. The team 
compensates for the lack of patient involvement, but this can 
influence the result of the rehabilitation.  
 
An Occupational Therapist during an in-situ interview 
stated that “an important aim of the treatment is to increase 
patients' knowledge on how to set rehabilitation goals and get 
to know which activities they can do to achieve the goals”. 
Thus, rehabilitation is not only a matter of giving a service to 
the patients, but it is about increasing patients’ health-literacy 
as a way to achieve self-management of their own condition. 
As a way to give patients more control over their 
rehabilitation and increase health literacy, we found that 
patients and the team members consider relevant assigning 
patients a role in the division of labor of the treatment and 
make this explicitly stated. 
 
PHRs give people the possibility to look into and generate 
some of their health data and as well communicate and 
Figure 2. The redesigned goal plan document. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

collaborate with a healthcare practitioner [1]. From the 
analysis of our data, we find that a PHR in cognitive 
rehabilitation should support not only common information 
and communication but also a cooperative work relationship 
between the patient and the multidisciplinary team. Hence, 
the PHR should facilitate the tasks that the patient should do 
and coordinate these patient’s tasks with the tasks of the 
healthcare practitioners.  
3) Support different representations – As stated above, 
rehabilitation goals can be divided into sub-goals, and for 
each sub-goal, there is a set of interventions. This tree 
structure is seen differently by the patient and the 
multidisciplinary team perspective. For the patients, the 
rehabilitation goals relate to the need for functioning in 
everyday life and should be articulated in that way. For the 
multidisciplinary team, the decision on rehabilitation goals 
and interventions is influenced by rehabilitation theories 
[29]-[31]. Thus, different representations of the same 
information are needed. During the PD workshops, we found 
that a classification of goals as defined by the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF) 
[32] (as in Figure 1) was preferred more from the team. 
However, patients in workshops expressed that they did not 
relate to the classification of goals based on ICF and that “did 
not make sense” to them. One patient said, “is easier.. I want 
to have my goals, sub-goal and interventions… is that 
simple”. Hence, designing a PHR for cognitive rehabilitation 
while the patient is at the hospital requires that the health 
information shared with the patient should be explicitly 
represented in a way that the patient can understand.   
 
The case of a representation of a health record in a format 
that relates more to healthcare practitioners is very common. 
PHRs should surpass this downside of the current way of 
delivering healthcare and support an explicit representation 
of the information for the patients – in a way that facilitates 
how they interpret the information. The label of this 
implication for design is adapted from Unruh and Pratt [11]. 
Such an implication for design is not unique to cognitive 
rehabilitation, but it is of extreme relevance in the case of 
cognitive rehabilitation due to the cognitive impairments that 
the patients in this patient group face.   
4) Integrate 
elements 
that 
can 
support 
enhanced 
interactions – “We want to be asked how we feel in relation 
to our rehabilitation goals every week,” said one of the 
patients in the workshops. While at the hospital encounters 
between the patient and healthcare practitioners is quite 
intense, our participants in the workshops expressed that they 
would 
like 
to 
have 
more 
encounters 
with 
the 
multidisciplinary team where they can share their opinion on 
how rehabilitation is progressing. It is relevant to consider 
this when designing a PHR that supports cognitive 
rehabilitation. The PHR should integrate elements that can 
support the patient to have their say in rehabilitation and 
share their feedback with the multidisciplinary team.  
 
However, in interactions, the two sides that should 
interact should agree. We found that the team agrees that 
more interactions with the patient to ask about their 
perception of achieving goals would benefit the patient. This, 
however, would require changes in their routines, and they 
cannot be overwhelmed with data and consultation sessions 
(in analogy with Tang and Lansky [33]). For example instead 
of asking the patient every week on how they feel the PHR 
can support the patient to enter this information every week 
in his/her health data and be able to have maybe a meeting of 
discussing the information saved in the PHR every second 
week with one from the multidisciplinary team members. The 
interaction with the team will increase as the patient is giving 
feedback. Moreover, the encounter between the patient and 
the team member would be more meaningful as the 
discussion can be facilitated by the information kept track in 
the PHR on which both sides have agreed and share a 
common interpretation.  
 
Thus, in cognitive rehabilitation, a PHR that can support 
and enhance interactions is needed. Moreover, the PHR 
should be flexible enough to support the negotiation of these 
interactions.  This implication for design is more specific to 
the case of using PHRs in hospitals where the patient has 
more possibilities of encounters with the healthcare 
practitioners.  
5) Facilitating for personal spaces and having the 
possibility to negotiate boundaries for cooperation and 
coordination – We found that patients’ rehabilitation is 
individual. A PHR that aims to support the patient in 
cognitive rehabilitation should take into consideration the 
possibility of adapting to specific health information needs 
for the patient. During the workshops, patients expressed that 
they would like to have the possibility to keep notes and 
possibly share some of these notes later with the nurse or 
someone from the multidisciplinary team. During the 
observations, we saw patients writing and personalizing the 
goal plan and weekly plans, as well as other health 
information given at the hospital. The PHR should offer the 
patient this additional functionality to enable personalization 
that can fit the need for personal information spaces.  
 
However, a patient’s private space is challenged by the 
need 
for 
cooperation 
and 
coordination 
with 
the 
multidisciplinary team. For example, before setting the goals, 
patients are asked about their life. They receive a file that 
aims to find out more about their life before and after injury 
in the attempt to define better rehabilitation goals. Patient 
information, in this case, can be private, and the patient 
decides how much to put on the common space. However, 
not sharing part of this information would undermine the 
collaboration with the team and the definition of better 
rehabilitation goals. Thus, a PHR for cognitive rehabilitation 
in hospital should create the possibility for the patient to a) 
have personal spaces b) have the possibility to negotiate the 
boundaries of public and private spaces of information shared 
and decide where the boundaries stand and c) integrate 
elements that would motivate patients in expanding 
boundaries when the discloser of the information can 
improve rehabilitation.  
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

6) Support continuity after the hospitalization period – This 
requirement surpasses the boundaries of the hospital, but it is 
necessary to bring up because continuing the rehabilitation 
therapies started at the hospital is determinative for 
rehabilitation success.  
The rehabilitation is more related to what Wagner et al. 
[34] describe as the patient's Self-Management and 
Behavioral Change Support, which needs support for 
continuity. The patient should have the possibility to continue 
using a goal plan when moving from the hospital to home. 
Also, the patient should have the possibility to carry his/her 
own medical history from the time at the hospital and share 
that further with others that s/he considers relevant such as 
kin or local rehabilitation specialists. This is relevant since, 
in rehabilitation, the patient is not ‘cured’ once s/he leaves 
the hospital. Continuity of care is very important in the 
rehabilitation journey. The rehabilitation is considered 
finished when the patient achieves a desirable level of 
function [23].  
Finally, the PHR design implications listed here are 
recommended for the case of cognitive rehabilitation in a 
rehabilitation hospital. The first two implications for design 
are special for cognitive rehabilitation. Instead, design 
implications 3-6 are not exclusive for a PHR in cognitive 
rehabilitation, but they have become specifically relevant for 
a PHR in cognitive rehabilitation. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION: A CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING OF A 
PHR IN COGNITIVE REHABILITATION 
PHRs are considered tools that facilitate patients’ 
involvement and give them more control over their health 
information [2]. Moreover, a PHR shows the invisible work 
that the patient does in managing his/her personal health 
records [7]. Our case shows that this is especially important in 
rehabilitation, where the patient should have higher control 
over his/her health information, be actively involved, and 
become the one leading his/her own rehabilitation. This is not 
only a need but a necessity for the success of rehabilitation 
[29]. Thus, PHRs are tools that can make a difference in the 
outcome of the care for patients that have passed the acute 
phase and are in need of rehabilitation. This paper contributes 
to the design and construction of a PHR in cognitive 
rehabilitation specifically, but we also present insights that 
can be relevant in rehabilitation in general. While in the 
previous section, we described a set of implications for design 
that should be taken into consideration in designing a PHR for 
cognitive rehabilitation based on the analysis of our empirical 
case, in this section, we will take a more conceptual 
perspective and discuss the conceptual implications of our 
study.  
A. Hybrid Information Spaces  
Vassilakopoulou et al. [7], in their paper, have argued for 
a conceptualization of PHRs as hybrid information spaces 
serving personal health information management needs 
(private information spaces) and facilitating information 
sharing between patients and healthcare professionals (CIS). 
We argue that a PHR designed for patients in cognitive 
rehabilitation also works as a hybrid information space as it is 
partly personal and partly common. We discuss these two 
aspects in the following subsections.  
1) PHR in cognitive rehabilitation as a CIS - Cognitive 
rehabilitation involves several actors from different 
disciplines working together with the patient in an 
interdependent cooperative relationship and using a series of 
artifacts to facilitate their collaboration and interpretations. 
While the multidisciplinary team members have a high level 
of awareness of the other webs of significance in the team (so 
a nurse is aware of what an occupational therapist does), the 
situation differs for the patients. Due to the patients’ 
challenges in cognition, there is a higher need for 
interpretative articulation work despite physical closeness 
[18]. Thus, in this setting the CIS includes a) the information 
that is stipulated in the goal plan b) the information that the 
patient receives from each of the multidisciplinary team 
members as part of the rehabilitation therapies and c) the 
information the patient generates during rehabilitation such 
as notes or patient journey stories which are then shared with 
the team. The patient and the multidisciplinary team member 
have to interpret this information shared in the common space 
in order to do their part of the work.  
Two coordination artifacts [13] are used to facilitate the 
sharing of the information in the common space between the 
patient and the multidisciplinary team: the goal plan 
document and the weekly plan. However, patients and the 
team have different needs for their interpretative work. The 
team has a higher understanding of the information. 
However, they as well are new in the CIS, which is created in 
the case of a new patient. Thus, they need to put more effort 
into interpreting the patient's individual and personal needs 
and goals.  In rehabilitation, there are artifacts in place for 
sharing common information. Thus, enhancing the practice 
of these existing artifacts by moving from paper to digital 
should be considered when designing the PHR. Our findings 
show that a PHR needs to be a flexible tool in order to 
facilitate the interpretation of the common information. For 
instance, changes in CIS openness and closeness is important 
to adapt to each of the patients' requirements regarding the 
continuity of their rehabilitation and integration with 
information from other rehabilitation settings (outside of the 
hospital).  
2) PHR in cognitive rehabilitation as a Personal 
Information Space - The rehabilitation process is individual 
and closely related to the specifics of the patients. A patient 
receives 
personalized 
information 
regarding 
his/her 
rehabilitation. One of the most important requirements is that 
patients are able to construct personal interpretations of this 
information that they can use on their own to continue 
rehabilitation. Providing the patients with a tool that 
facilitates the personal health information management based 
on their individual needs is of a strong relevance in 
rehabilitation where the increased awareness of patients 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

toward their rehabilitation treatment is the core part of the 
treatment itself.  
Thus, our findings show that in addition to supporting and 
enabling a common space for information sharing, the PHR 
should also be designed for personalization.  
B. PHR in cognitive rehabilitation as a coordination 
mechanism  
Coordination of activities, as described above, is relevant 
in rehabilitation. Having a CIS would give access to the same 
information, but it will not make sure that this will be used in 
a 
cooperative 
way 
between 
the 
patient 
and 
the 
multidisciplinary team. For example, when defining the 
rehabilitation goals, a PHR conceptualized as a CIS will give 
the possibility to have the goals shared. However, it will not 
guarantee that these goals would be written or initiated by the 
patient. To create a cooperative procedure that would support 
the process of rehabilitation and give patients a more explicit 
role in their rehabilitation, the PHR should integrate a 
requirement that the patients write the first version of the 
rehabilitation goals, and then the team looks at it and maybe 
approves the goals. Bossen [13] has described a set of 
parameters of CIS. Among the parameters are the web of 
artifacts, described as mechanisms that support the 
cooperation and facilitate interpretations in the CIS [18]. 
Bossen [13] further refers to this as coordination mechanisms 
described by Schmidt and Simonee [15]. Coordination 
mechanisms are not only means for sharing items in a CIS. 
They have the characteristics of supporting the coordination 
of activities in a cooperative setting where cooperative work 
between interdependent actors is happening. We have 
described coordination mechanisms in Section 2.D. In 
analogy to the characteristics of coordination mechanisms, 
the actors that are seeking cooperation - the patient and the 
multidisciplinary team - are interdependent in rehabilitation. 
They are as well interdependent in defining the goal plan and 
keeping track of activities during rehabilitation. Moreover, 
consensus is required between the patient and the team in 
order to do the interventions in rehabilitation. Thus, in 
cognitive rehabilitation, coordinating activities is needed in 
addition to accessing the CIS.  
So, designing a PHR in cognitive rehabilitation accounts 
for a coordination mechanism between the patient and his/her 
multidisciplinary team. This will contribute to making 
explicit the patient contribution in his/her rehabilitation, 
increase the level of awareness regarding the activities that 
happen as part of his/her treatment, and as well influence 
patient’s health literacy, involvement, participation in 
decision-making, and self-management.  
Hence, we conclude that a PHR in cognitive rehabilitation 
can be conceptualized as a hybrid information space [7]. 
However, within the hybrid information space, our findings 
also show that the PHR should also work as a coordination 
mechanism [15] that recognizes the patient's position as part 
of the division of labor, supports the process of rehabilitation, 
and empowers the patient. The PHR as a coordination 
mechanism would vary based on the diagnosis, patient's 
ability, the scale of willingness to be involved in his/her 
treatment, and the medical practitioners' commitment to 
supporting the patient. How much coordination and on what 
tasks the patient can take charge should be considered in 
individual cases. However, starting by discussing and 
recognizing the PHR as a coordination mechanism 
contributes to making the patient role in his/her care more 
active than just the receiver of care. A feeling of involvement, 
even in small tasks, will increase the perceived 
empowerment. The conceptualization of the PHR as a 
coordination mechanism also puts the burden on the staff as 
an important element in the coordination. Thus, the patient 
can feel safer and not left alone.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented the case of cognitive 
rehabilitation. We defined a set of implications for design of 
a PHR for a patient in cognitive rehabilitation such as: 
Enhance the existing shared artifacts; Implement elements of 
coordination; Support different representations; Integrate 
elements that can support enhanced interactions; Facilitating 
for personal spaces and having the possibility to negotiate 
boundaries for cooperation and coordination; Support 
continuity after the hospitalization period.   
Moreover, we discussed the design of a PHR for cognitive 
rehabilitation in hospitals under the current conceptualization 
of PHRs within CSCW as hybrid information spaces 
compounded by personal information space and CIS. We 
conclude that a PHR in cognitive rehabilitation can be 
conceptualized as a hybrid information space [7]. However, 
its development as a coordination mechanism that recognizes 
the patient's position as part of the division of labor will 
support the process of rehabilitation and empower the patient. 
The analysis of our case also contributes to the design of 
PHRs in the context of the hospital. Cognitive rehabilitation 
represents a very special case of hospitalization. Thus, as part 
of our future work, we want to investigate further if the 
implications for design for this specific case of 
hospitalization can be replicated in other cases or not. 
Moreover, the implications for design presented in this paper 
will be the bases for developing a PHR for cognitive 
rehabilitation as part of an inter-regional funded project by 
2021. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. J. Davidson, C. S. Østerlund, and M. G. Flaherty, “Drift and 
shift in the organizing vision career for personal health records: 
An investigation of innovation discourse dynamics,” 
Information and Organization, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 191-221, 
2015/10/01/, 2015. 
[2] C. Pagliari, D. Detmer, and P. Singleton, “Potential of 
electronic personal health records,” BMJ, vol. 335, no. 7615, 
pp. 330-333, 2007. 
[3] J. E. Bardram and C. Bossen, "A web of coordinative artifacts: 
collaborative work at a hospital ward," Proceedings of the 
International ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting 
group work, pp. 168-176, 2005. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[4] G. Fitzpatrick and G. Ellingsen, “A Review of 25 Years of 
CSCW Research in Healthcare: Contributions, Challenges and 
Future Agendas,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW), vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 609-665, 2013. 
[5] F. Cabitza and I. Gesso, "Trying to Fill the Gap between 
Persons and Health Records," Proceedings of the International 
Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and 
Technologies, vol. 5. SCITEPRESS: Science and Technology 
Publications Lda, pp. 222-229, 2014. 
[6] F. Cabitza, C. Simone, and G. De Michelis, “User-driven 
prioritization of features for a prospective InterPersonal Health 
Record: Perceptions from the Italian context,” Computers in 
Biology and Medicine, vol. 59, pp. 202-210, 2015. 
[7] P. Vassilakopoulou, M. Grisot, and M. Aanestad, “Between 
Personal and Common: the Design of Hybrid Information 
Spaces,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), 
vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1011-1038, 2019. 
[8] S. Sunnaas. "Sunnaas Rehabilitation Hospital – a way 
forward," 
retreived: 
02/2020; 
https://www.sunnaas.no/Documents/Brosjyrer/Sunnaas_Reha
bilitation_Hospital_a_way_forward.pdf, 2013. 
[9] D. W. Simborg, “The limits of free speech: the PHR problem,” 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 
16, no. 3, pp. 282-283, 2009. 
[10] J. Lahtiranta, J. S. Koskinen, S. Knaapi-Junnila, and M. 
Nurminen, “Sensemaking in the personal health space,” 
Information Technology & People, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 790, 
2015. 
[11] K. T. Unruh and W. Pratt, "The Invisible Work of Being a 
Patient and Implications for Health Care:“[the doctor is] my 
business partner in the most important business in my life, 
staying alive.,” Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference 
Proceedings, vol. 1. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd, pp. 
40-50, 2008. 
[12] K. Schmidt and L. Bannon, “Taking CSCW seriously,” 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 1, no. 1-
2, pp. 7-40, 1992. 
[13] C. Bossen, "The parameters of common information spaces: 
The heterogeneity of cooperative work at a hospital ward," 
Proceedings of the 2002 ACM conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work, pp. 176-185, 2002. 
[14] A. Strauss, S. Fagerhaugh, B. Suczek, and C. Wiener, “Social 
organization of medical work,” Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1985. 
[15] K. Schmidt and C. Simonee, “Coordination mechanisms: 
Towards a conceptual foundation of CSCW systems design,” 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 5, no. 2-
3, pp. 155-200, 1996. 
[16] P. G. Scupelli, Y. Xiao, S. R. Fussell, S. Kiesler, and M. D. 
Gross, “Supporting coordination in surgical suites: physical 
aspects of common information spaces,” Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, pp. 1777-1786, 2010. 
[17] Z. Zhang, A. Sarcevic, and C. Bossen, "Constructing Common 
Information Spaces across Distributed Emergency Medical 
Teams," Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on 
Computer 
Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
and 
Social 
Computing, pp. 934-947, 2017. 
[18] L. Bannon and S. Bødker, "Constructing common information 
spaces," Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Springer, Dordrecht, 
pp. 81-96, 1997. 
[19] S. L. Star and A. Strauss, “Layers of silence, arenas of voice: 
The ecology of visible and invisible work,” Computer 
supported cooperative work (CSCW), vol. 8, no. 1-2, pp. 9-30, 
1999. 
[20] K. Çarçani and H. Holone, “Boundary Objects or Coordination 
Mechanisms?,” Selected Papers of the IRIS, vol. 9 (2018). 4, 
2019. 
[21] F. Cabitza and C. Simone, “Computational Coordination 
Mechanisms: A tale of a struggle for flexibility,” Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 475-
529, August 01, 2013. 
[22] F. Cabitza, “Remain Faithful to the Earth: Reporting 
Experiences of Artifact-Centered Design in Healthcare,” 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 20, no. 
4, pp. 231-263, October 01, 2011. 
[23] LOVDATA, "Regulations on habilitation and rehabilitation, 
individual plan and coordinator," 14/04/2019, M. o. J. a. E. 
Planning, ed., 2019. 
[24] D. T. Wade, "Goal setting in rehabilitation: an overview of 
what, why and how," SAGE Publications Sage UK: London, 
England, 2009. 
[25] J. J. Evans, “Goal setting during rehabilitation early and late 
after acquired brain injury,” Current opinion in neurology, vol. 
25, no. 6, pp. 651-655, 2012. 
[26] WHO, "International Classification of Health Interventions 
(ICHI)," 2018. 
[27] K. Çarçani and H. Holone, “Participatory Design “Method 
Story”: The Case of Patients Living with Mild Acquired 
Cognitive 
Impairments,” 
ACHI 
2019, 
The 
Twelfth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, Athens, Greece. IARIA, pp. 210 to 217, 2019. 
[28] H. K. Klein and M. D. Myers, “A set of principles for 
conducting and evaluating interpretive field studies in 
information systems,” MIS quarterly, pp. 67-93, 1999. 
[29] B. A. Wilson, F. Gracey, J. J. Evans, and A. Bateman, 
“Neuropsychological rehabilitation: Theory, models, therapy 
and outcome,” Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
[30] B. A. Wilson, “Towards a comprehensive model of cognitive 
rehabilitation,” Neuropsychological rehabilitation, vol. 12, no. 
2, pp. 97-110, 2002. 
[31] E. C. Haskins, K. D. Cicerone, and L. E. Trexler, “Cognitive 
rehabilitation 
manual: 
Translating 
evidence-based 
recommendations into practice,” ACRM Publishing, 2012. 
[32] WHO, "International Classification of Functioning, Disability 
and Health (ICF)," 2011. 
[33] P. C. Tang and D. Lansky, “The missing link: bridging the 
patient–provider health information gap,” Health Affairs, vol. 
24, no. 5, pp. 1290-1295, 2005. 
[34] E. H. Wagner, B. T. Austin, and M. Von Korff, “Organizing 
care for patients with chronic illness,” The Milbank Quarterly, 
pp. 511-544, 1996. 
         
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

