Semiautomatic Evaluation of Websites Usability 
 
 
Eva García, Antonio García, Luis de-Marcos, Salvador Otón, José-Ramón Hilera 
Computer Science Department 
University of Alcalá 
Alcalá de Henares, Spain 
eva.garcial@uah.es, a.garciac@uah.es, luis.demarcos@uah.es, salvador.oton@uah.es, jose.hilera@uah.es 
 
 
Abstract - This paper presents a semiautomatic evaluation 
method of usability in websites. Expert review is done in this 
case using a template based on the ISO 9241-151 guidelines 
that provides numerical and graphical results. Such results 
permit to observe the aspects of usability that are missed on 
the evaluated website. This template has many applications as 
it can be used both to evaluate websites and to teach heuristic 
evaluation method for students who are studying subjects of 
usability. 
Keywords - Usability evaluation; usability guidelines; 
heuristic evaluation; web usability 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Usability is one of the most important features to 
consider when making systems that have large audiences, 
which need to operate in an intuitive system, without prior 
training or direct support [1]. In addition, usability is the 
second most important problem (just after security) for the 
acceptance of systems by users [2]; so, it must not be omitted 
when developing computer systems. However, currently 
there are few tools to help automating the process of 
usability evaluation. 
The aim of this paper is to show a new way of 
semiautomatic heuristic evaluation [3] of websites. For this, 
we have developed a spreadsheet template with guidelines to 
evaluate, which are organized into groups, and each of them 
is given a value based on a certain scale. When the scores of 
all guidelines are filled, a result will be obtained showing the 
more problematic aspects in relation to the usability of the 
evaluated website. 
In this case, the heuristics are based on guidelines 
provided by ISO 9241-151 [4]. This standard is specifically a 
part of the ISO 9241 family of standards, which began 
publication in 1997 under the title “Ergonomics of human-
system 
interaction” 
and 
provides 
requirements 
and 
recommendations related to the attributes of the hardware, 
software and environment that contribute to usability and 
ergonomics underlying principles. 
Part 151 in particular, is titled “Guidance on World Wide 
Web user interfaces” and provides guidance for user-
centered design of web interfaces in order to increase 
usability. Web user interfaces are aimed to all Internet users 
and to closed user groups such as members of an 
organization, customers or suppliers of a company or other 
specific user communities. 
User interfaces of different types of user agents such as 
web browsers or additional tools such as web authoring tools 
are not directly aimed in this part of ISO 9241, although 
some of the guidelines could be applied to these systems as 
well. 
Web user interfaces can be presented in a personal 
computer, in a mobile system or in any other device 
connected to the network. While the recommendations 
contained in this part of ISO 9241 are applied to a wide 
range of technologies available in front-end, web interfaces 
design of mobile devices or smart devices may require 
additional guidance. 
A new way of semiautomatic heuristic evaluation of 
websites is proposed here. To do this, Section II describes 
the design of the template, i.e., groups that are designed to 
bring together the guidelines, the scale that has been used to 
evaluate each guideline, the content of the template and how 
can results be interpreted. In Section III, template is applied 
to several websites and obtained results are presented in each 
case, as well as a comparison of them. Finally, some 
conclusions and future research are presented. 
II. 
TEMPLATE DESIGN 
To evaluate in a semiautomatic way the usability of a 
website, a spreadsheet template has been created from an 
existing one created by the company Userfocus, available at 
[5]. The original template consists of 247 guidelines created 
by the company, grouped in nine categories: home page 
usability, task orientation, navigation and IA, forms and data 
entry, trust and credibility, writing and content quality, page 
layout and visual design, search usability, and help, feedback 
and error tolerance. 
The new template (Figure 1) proposes a significant 
improvement over the previous one, including new 
guidelines from ISO 9241-151 standard. These guidelines 
have been put together in new groups, also different from the 
original template, and also taking into account the sections of 
ISO 9241-151 standard. 
In addition, the rating scale for each guideline has also 
been modified to take more realistic the scoring system. 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A. Designed groups 
As mentioned earlier, the guidelines of the template are 
based on ISO 9241-151. This standard consists of the 
following sections: 
1. 
Scope 
2. 
Normative references 
3. 
Terms and definitions 
4. 
Application 
5. 
A reference model for human-centered design of 
World Wide Web user interfaces 
6. 
High-level design decisions and design strategy 
7. 
Content design 
8. 
Navigation and search 
9. 
Content presentation 
10. General design aspects 
 
 
Figure 1.  Overview of the template showing a category with scored 
guidelines. 
Only Sections 7 to 10 have been taken into account for 
the template, because they are the only evaluable guidelines 
for a website already developed. This is because Sections 1 
to 5 contain general information about the ISO and Section 6 
contains high level decisions and design strategies, so they 
will only be applicable to websites that are still in 
development but not for those that have already been 
developed. 
Guidelines for evaluating usability have been divided 
into several groups according to the different sections of the 
ISO 9241-151 listed above, but with an exception: Section 8 
has been divided into two parts, as in the ISO the aspects of 
navigation and search are put together in the same section, 
and it is preferable to evaluate separately the navigation and 
the search of the website. 
Therefore, sections that the template finally contains are 
as follows: 
1. 
Content design: it is about everything related to the 
conceptual 
model 
of 
content, 
content 
objects 
and 
functionality. 
2. 
Navigation: it deals with issues related to the 
structure and components of the navigation. 
3. 
Search: it is about the aspects related to search 
terms on a web page. 
4. 
Content presentation: it treats the aspects related to 
the design of a web page, links design, interaction objects 
and text design. 
5. 
General design aspects: the guidelines of this group 
aim to be designed for a culturally diverse and multilingual 
use, and provide help and make web user interfaces error 
tolerant. In addition, it cares about the names of the URLs, 
the time of downloading, designing with independence of 
input devices, etc. 
Each one of these groups will be a category in the 
spreadsheet template, and each category includes the 
guidelines for the subject matter that group. 
B. Rating scale 
Original template had a scale of integer values between -
1 and +1, i.e., the possible values that could be given to each 
guideline were: 
 
 -1: Guideline is not satisfied. 
 
  0: Guideline is not totally satisfied (it is partially 
satisfied). 
 
+1: Guideline is satisfied. 
If guideline is not satisfied, in the original template the 
value should be left blank. This way is not very intuitive, and 
it does not allow intermediate values when a guideline is 
almost completely satisfied or it hardly satisfies. 
To improve this system of evaluation of the guidelines, 
our template uses the Likert scale [6]. This is reasonable 
since guidelines consist of a title (which is what appears in 
the template and corresponds to a section of the ISO), but 
also an explanation (available within the ISO), which sets out 
statements that should be satisfied. 
To do this, it is necessary that the scale has an odd 
number of levels. It should be noticed that the guideline may 
not be applicable. Due to this reason, a 5-level scale (with 5 
categorical variables) has been chosen, i.e., the possible 
values that can be given to each guideline are: 
 
 -2: Strongly dissatisfied. 
 
 -1: Dissatisfied. 
 
  0: The guideline is not applicable. 
 
+1: Satisfied. 
 
+2: Strongly satisfied. 
C. Template content 
The template consists of 7 categories or sections, of 
which the last five correspond to designed groups that have 
been explained in Section 2.1. The categories that make up 
the template are: 
• 
Instructions: it contains instructions for using the 
spreadsheet workbook and to properly fill the 
template. To do this, the values that can be assigned 
to each guideline are explained, i.e., the rating scale 
discussed in Section 2.2. 
• 
Results: after filling in all the scores of the 
guidelines, it will be necessary to see this category 
for interpreting the obtained results. This category 
consists of a table summarizing the results for each 
set of guidelines, as well as a chart where results of 
the previous table can be graphically seen. 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

• 
Content design: it is the category corresponding with 
the design group called “Content design”. 
• 
Navigation: it is the category corresponding with the 
design group called “Navigation”. 
• 
Search: it is the category corresponding with the 
designed group called “Search”. 
• 
Presentation: it is the category corresponding with 
the designed group called “Content presentation”. 
• 
General design: it is the category corresponding with 
the designed group called “General design aspects”. 
D. Interpretation of results 
In the category “Results” of the template, results of the 
evaluation of the website can be interpreted. This will have a 
table that identifies, for each of the designed groups, the 
following information: 
• 
Raw score: it is the addition of the scores of each of 
the guidelines of the group in question. 
• 
#Questions: it is the number of guidelines that are 
evaluated in the group in question. Guidelines that 
are not rated are not taken into account (but there 
should not be any, because all values must be filled) 
nor those that contain a 0 (because in that case 
guideline is not applicable). 
• 
Score: it is the score in percentage terms, i.e., it gives 
an idea of the degree of compliance with a given set 
of guidelines. Its value can vary between -100% (if 
none of the guidelines of designed group is satisfied) 
and +100% (if all guidelines of the designed group 
are completely satisfied). It is calculated as follows: 
 
∑



·
· 100 
(1) 
where n is the number of guidelines of the group in 
question, and vi is the rated value to each of the 
guidelines. 
• 
Overall score: it is the overall score in terms of 
percentage, i.e., it gives an idea of the degree of 
general compliance with the guidelines and, 
therefore, of the ISO 9241-151. It is the average of 
the scores obtained in the score categories. 
In addition to the results table, this section contains a 
radar chart that helps getting a quick idea of the general 
usability of the website evaluated: 
• 
The larger the shaded area, best usability. In a 
general way, a website has a good usability when the 
score of each section is at least 50%. A 30-50% 
range means a reasonable usability and a score under 
the 30% means that the website has a poor usability. 
• 
The higher the scale of the graph, best usability 
average score. 
• 
The angles in the chart represent each of the 
designed groups as described in 2.1, so that the 
greater the score has an angle, better usability will 
have the corresponding group. 
III. 
REAL APPLICATION 
The tool is created for helping the heuristic evaluation, 
since several evaluators are involved in the heuristic 
evaluation but the template can only be filled by a single 
evaluator at a time. The idea is that each assessor completes 
the template on his own, and then pooling the results to issue 
a final report. This report is the only document the user will 
receive, because it is written in an easy to understand 
vocabulary for the user, so the evaluation sheets will not be 
shown to the user, because they contain technical vocabulary 
that he or she could not understand. 
To demonstrate the operation of the template as a 
heuristic evaluation method, we have chosen two websites 
where it has been applied: a website that has been evaluated 
negatively and one that has been evaluated positively. To 
check the capabilities of the template, evaluations have been 
carried out by an usability expert who has experience in web 
interfaces (as recommended by Nielsen [7] to identify most 
of the problems). 
A. Example of website evaluated positively 
The site chosen for this section has been the London 
transport website [7]. After conducting the heuristic 
evaluation with the template, results obtained can be seen in 
Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Table of results of the heuristic evaluation of the London 
transport website. 
As it can be seen in that figure, the main conclusions can 
be drawn are: 
• 
The best evaluated group is the navigation group, 
with 88%, indicating that the website navigation is 
very good. 
• 
The worst rated group is the search group, with 56%, 
indicating that there would be desirable to improve 
the website search system. 
• 
The final average score is 70%, so that we can 
deduce that the website usability is quite good. 
B. Example of website evaluated negatively 
The site chosen in this case was that of an Atlanta 
restaurant guide (http://www.restaurantguideatlanta.com/). 
After conducting a heuristic evaluation with the template, we 
got the results that can be seen in Figure 3. 
As shown in the figure below, the main conclusions 
obtained are: 
• 
The best evaluated group is the general design 
aspects group, with 28%, indicating that these 
aspects can be even improved. 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

• 
The worst rated group is the content presentation 
group, with -41%, indicating that in this respect the 
website is quite poor. 
• 
The final average score is -12%, so that we can 
deduce that the usability of the website can (and 
should) be improved significantly. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Table of results of the heuristic evaluation of the website of 
Atlanta restaurant guide. 
C. Comparison of the results of example 
To compare the results of the example, it is best to 
observe the charts of both websites generated by the template 
(Figure 4) after performing the heuristic evaluation of them. 
As shown in the figure below, there are considerable 
differences in charts: 
• 
The shaded area is higher in the first chart than in the 
second one, indicating a better general usability of 
the website. 
• 
The scale of the first chart varies between 0% and 
100%, while the second chart scale varies between -
50% and 50%. This indicates that in the first chart 
the average score of usability is greater than in the 
second chart. 
• 
In the first chart, navigation is highlighting, followed 
by the content design and general design aspects, 
and it can be seen that the aspects that can be 
improved are the search and the content presentation. 
• 
In the second chart highlights the low overall score, 
especially as regards the content presentation. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Graphic results of the usability evaluation of the London 
transport website (left) and Atlanta restaurants guide (right). 
Comparing these results with those obtained in Sections 
III.A and III.B, same conclusions can be drawn when 
observing both the table and the chart obtained from the 
template, although it is easier and faster to get a general idea 
of the usability of a website by looking at the chart. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Once proposed and introduced the modifications in the 
original template, and having considered some websites to 
compare the results obtained, we can deduce that this is a 
valid method for semiautomatic evaluation of websites 
usability. We will carry out a comparative experiment with 
this template and the original, so we will be able to deduce 
the real benefits of the improvement. 
One of the advantages of using this template is that it is 
fulfilling a very important standard of web usability; and 
another advantage is that it is a semi-automated method, 
since the expert introduces values he deems appropriate and 
the template calculates the percentages of compliance of the 
guidelines and returns results with which to draw 
conclusions easily. However, it also has the disadvantages 
inherent to the heuristic evaluation, among which are the 
following: evaluators should be experts in usability and, if 
possible, be familiar with the type of interface that is being 
evaluated [8], and must have multiple evaluators [9] (which 
is expensive). 
As future research we plan to adapt the guidelines of the 
ISO 9241-151 to mobile devices, i.e., research what 
guidelines can be used to heuristically evaluate the usability 
of websites viewed from mobile devices. Once this is done, 
the template will be modified and adapted to be used to 
evaluate the usability of mobile websites according to ISO 
9241-151. We will also design a method to collect the results 
of the evaluation of all experts and achieve a common result. 
Finally, we will try to automate the evaluation of some 
guidelines and analyze some user’s behavior patterns, like 
extracting the link structure of a website and obtaining the 
link graph according to a predefined ruleset, and then 
analyzing the behavior of the user while navigating. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is funded by the FPI research staff 
education program of the “Junta de Comunidades de 
Castilla-La Mancha”. Authors also want to acknowledge 
support from the TIFyC research group and the Computer 
Science Department of University of Alcala. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Gafni, “Quality Metrics for PDA-based M-Learning 
Information Systems”, in Interdisciplinary Journal of E-
Learning and Learning Objects, vol. 5, 2009, pp. 359-378. 
[2] J. Buranatrived and P. Vickers, “An Investigation of the 
Impact of Mobile Phone and PDA Interfaces on the Usability 
of Mobile-Commerce Applications”, Proc. 
IEEE 5th 
International Workshop on Networked Appliances, 2002, pp. 
90-95. 
[3] J. 
Nielsen, 
“Heuristic 
Evaluation”. 
http://www.useit.com/papers/heuristic 
(last 
access: 
2011/09/06). 
[4] ISO 
9241-151:2008. 
“Ergonomics 
of 
human-system 
interaction. Part 151: Guidance on World Wide Web user 
interfaces”. 
Organization for Standardization. Geneve, 
Switzerland, 2008. 
[5] Userfocus, 
“Expert 
Review 
Checkpoints”. 
http://www.userfocus.co.uk/pdf/ExpertReviewCheckpoints.xl
s (last access: 2011/09/06) 
[6] R. Likert, “A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes”, 
in Archives of Psychology, vol. 140, pp. 5-53. New York, 
1932 (cited by J.T. Cacioppo and G.G. Berntson, 
“Relationship Between Attitudes and Evaluative Space: A 
Critical Review, With Emphasis on the Separability of 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Positive and Negative Substrates”, in Psychological Bulletin, 
vol. 115, No. 3, pp. 401-423, 1994). 
[7] “Transport for London”, http://www.tfl.gov.uk (last access: 
2011/09/06) 
[8] J. Nielsen, “Finding usability problems through heuristic 
evaluation”, Proc. SIGCHI conference on human factors in 
computing systems, pp. 373-380, Monterey, CA, USA, 1992. 
[9] J. Nielsen and R. Molich, “Heuristic evaluation of user 
interfaces”, Proc. SIGCHI conference on human factors in 
computing systems: Empowering people, pp. 249-256, 
Seattle, WA, USA, 1990. 
 
 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

