Travel Experience Cards: Capturing User Experiences in Public Transportation 
 
Alma L. Culén, Maja van der Velden and Jo Herstad 
Department of Informatics, Group for Design of Information Systems 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
Emails: {almira, majava, johe}@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract— The paper presents a Travel Experiences 
Card (TEC) set, produced as a tool to understand user 
experiences in public transportation. The card set allows 
exploration of diverse user experiences, from preparing 
travel to arriving at the destination. The set is designed 
using images taken during participant observation and 
photographic documentation of public transportation 
experiences. Two ways or working with the card set are 
proposed, one based on forced association technique and 
the other on focus event tool. These allowed for the 
breadth and the depth of exploration, respectively. We 
tested the cards in one pilot workshop to fine-tune it as a 
tool, and then applied it in two workshops in order to 
evaluate its usefulness. We used three important 
experiences for users of public transportation: safety, 
joy, and arriving on time. We found that the method was 
useful for eliciting rich responses from our participants, 
and for understanding the ecology of experiences. We 
also consider the process of designing the card set, and 
its evaluation, to be of relevance. 
 
Keywords—service design; interaction design; experience 
design; customer journeys; experience design cards. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Service Design (SD) has gained popularity as an 
approach to modern business, design research and design 
education [1]. Like Human Computer Interaction (HCI), SD 
is a multidisciplinary field. It gained momentum with the 
introduction of design thinking [2]–[5] some years ago. 
Many interaction designers have moved into service design 
field [6], and some HCI designers, including user 
experience designers, are now involved in the design of 
services and related research. The evolvement of service 
design also sparked strong interest in user experience (UX) 
with services and ways of working with those experiences. 
In service design, the term customer experience design is 
understood as a holistic concept, which integrates all aspects 
of the service. The service may be provided by one or more 
companies, but is considered as one service, as long as the 
customer experiences the service as one [7]. Of course, 
every encounter with a product or a service that we use is an 
experience. Heterogeneity, as a characteristic of the service, 
is a consequence of both the diversity in delivery by a 
provider and the diversity of people experiencing a service. 
Customer experience design strives to craft experience that 
matter and to control a number of factors that shape that 
experience [8]. The more positive the experiences are, the 
more loyal the customers will be to the service provider [9].  
This has, ultimately, consequences for the company’s long-
term competitive advantage, as well as on the shaping of 
values in business other than profit.  
Designing good public transportation services is neither 
a small task nor an inexpensive one. It may be so that 
“Being able to profit from innovation is a major incentive to 
invest in innovation activities regardless of the type of 
innovation” [10]. However, service innovation and design, 
including customer experience design, depend to a much 
larger degree on collaboration with external parties [11]. 
Among 
those 
parties 
are 
universities 
and 
design 
communities aiming at increased benefits for the society as 
a whole, not just profit. More and more frequently, 
customers, or users, as we will also call them, are given a 
stronger voice in the design of services, and service design 
is often characterized by close work with users and users’ 
involvement in design processes.  
In this paper, we continue looking at ways of improving 
user experiences with public transportation. In [12] and 
[13], we have considered design for increased visibility of 
travelling information and ways of gathering and analysing 
data containing users experiences with the system. In this 
paper, we take a different approach. We consider using 
service design and user experience design approaches to 
describe customer journeys and sets of related experiences.  
Our concern is that of methodology: 1) how to engage 
users in discussions around services and experiences in 
ways that can promote “good” service and experience 
design, and 2) how to make use of a “good” tool, such as 
cards, which are frequently used in HCI [13]. In line with 
Clathworthy’s approach [15] to service innovation, we have 
designed a tool, a set of travel experience cards, to help us 
gather relevant information about user experiences while 
travelling.  
The card set addresses all stages of the travel with public 
transportation, from planning the trip to arrival to 
destination. The purpose of the tool is to provide data on 
user experience in initial phases of new service design. The 
tool was tested in a pilot workshop, then re-adjusted and 
applied in further two workshops. The set could be used to 
create customer journeys, address touch points the journey 
contains, and experiences between the touch points. We 
have particularly focussed on the latter. The goal of those 
two workshops was to evaluate the card set as a tool, 
primarily for its usefulness. The paper reports on the results 
regarding the evaluation of the tool.  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we 
provide background material on service design, customer 
journeys, touch points, experience design, and introduce the 
ecology of experience. In Section III, we present our case, 
the development of the Travel Experience Card (TEC) set 
and a way of using it. Section IV provides discussion on the 
use, and usefulness of TEC. Section V concludes the paper 
and addresses the future work. 
II. 
CUSTOMER JOURNEYS AND ECOLOGY OF EXPERIENCE 
Service design and customer experience design draw on 
methods from various fields; several of these methods are 
familiar to HCI researchers, such as scenarios, role-playing, 
personas, card sorting, focus groups, and observations. We 
therefore provide definitions for those methods that HCI 
researchers may be less familiar with. Service design uses 
more explorative ways to challenge problem areas, in 
contrast to HCI design with its more analytic and positivistic 
approach [16]. In this section we define the main service 
design concepts we use in the paper. 
Defining services is challenging, as there exist multiple 
and competing views. For the purposes of this paper, we 
view a service as an exchange between a service provider 
and a user in a particular moment of time and space. 
Lavrans and Polaine [6] define service ecology to be a 
diagram of all the actors affected by a service and the 
relationships between them, displayed in a systematic 
manner. Using service design as an approach to design of a 
service implies: “…designing services that are useful, 
usable and desirable from the user perspective, and 
efficient, effective and different from the provider 
perspective.  ... service design takes holistic approach in 
order to get an understanding of the system and the different 
actors within the system”, [1, p. 3]. 
Service design may be considered as “design for 
experiences that happen over time, and across different 
touch points”, a definition given by Clathworthy [15].  
A. Customer Journeys 
Customer journey is one of the most effective tools in 
service design. It is similar to storyboards and use cases in 
HCI, helping to visualize a service in an organization or 
company. In [16], Koivisto explains customer journeys as 
follows: “Services are processes that happen over time, and 
this process includes several service moments. When all 
service moments are connected, the customer journey is 
formed. The customer journey is formed both by the service 
provider’s explicit action as well as by the customer’s 
choices”.  
We consider customer journeys to be formed not only by 
service moments, but also include all the experiences within 
and between those moments and user’s responses to those 
experiences.  
B. Touch Points 
A customer journey is comprised of touch points, the 
service moments as described by Koivisto [16], or nodes in 
a visual, graphical representation of a journey. A touch point 
forms a link between the provider and a customer, and as 
such, is the origin of customer experiences with service in 
question. Touch points form one of the three pillars of 
service design [17, p. 142]. 
While touch points are a fundamental part of service 
design and a starting point in re-design of services, we 
consider the intervals between them to be important for user 
experience design. 
C. Understanding travel experiences and their ecology 
 An approach to understanding experiences may be that 
of Nardi and O’Day [18], who use the term ‘information 
ecology’ to describe an interrelated system of people, 
practices, values, and technologies within a particular local 
environment.  This ecology approach, applied to service 
ecology [6], and the framework for studying user 
experiences while interacting with technology developed by 
Forlizzi and Battarbee [19], shaped our theoretical 
perspective. “Experiences and emotions are not singular 
events that unfold without a relationship to other 
experiences and emotions”, [19]. 
Building forth on these understandings, we define 
ecology of experiences as an interrelated, scalable set of 
experiences along a particular customer journey. In this 
paper, the context for creating customer journeys is that of 
travelling with public transportation. 
D. Service Design Cards 
A good tool for helping to address touch points in the 
initial stages of service development is a set of service 
design cards, see [14]. Clathworthy provides six different 
use contexts for the cards and evaluates the cards related to 
their intended function.  The cards were found to help with 
team building in cross-functional teams. Further, they were 
found to be helpful in assisting with the analysis and 
mapping of existing situations, generating ideas for new 
solutions or approaches, needs elicitation and facilitation of 
communication.  
III. 
DEVELOPMENT OF TRAVEL EXPERIENCE CARD SET 
The service design cards described above provided the 
inspiration for the user TEC set. The modified card set was 
recently successfully used in another project [20].  
Tangible objects, such as cards, and the images depicted 
on them, are known to facilitate visual thinking and help 
with finding a common language for communication within 
groups of people with diverse backgrounds. The common 
understandings are built through negotiation and discussion 
of associations and concepts related to images [21], some of 
good examples of use of cards can be found in [22], [23].  
We next describe: 
 
Design of the TEC set 
 
How can TEC set be used 
A. Design of the TEC set 
We started from the perspective of being users of public 
transportation ourselves. We used participatory observation 
and photographic documentation [24] to record our own and 
other travellers’ experiences. Armed with cameras, two of 
the authors went traveling and collected a large amount of 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

pictures documenting what they considered to be 
meaningful moments representing public transport traveling 
experiences of various kinds.  
The next step was to map their customer journeys and 
sort the images of experiences [14] according to touch 
points on the journeys. However, we found out that it would 
be more meaningful to consider segments of all customer 
journeys. All users of public transportation plan their 
journey in some way. Perhaps the starting touch point for 
the journey is a smart phone app. The next touch point may 
be purchasing the ticket on the smart phone, or walking to 
the tram. Whatever touch points on a particular journey are, 
they all consist of the subset of the steps shown in Fig. 1. 
These steps are: planning the trip, making sure one has a 
valid ticket, arriving to a stop, embarking, traveling (this can 
be interrupted by, for example an accident, a ticket control, 
or other forms of disruption), disembarking, perhaps 
repeating some of the steps if transfer was needed, arriving 
to a final station and arriving to a final destination. The 
images for the cards in Fig. 1 were not home-made, rather 
found on the net, intentionally somewhat different in style 
than the images we collected. A purple colored stripe was 
used to further differentiate these cards. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Cards with purple stripe represent segments of a trip  
The images collected as representations of touch points 
and user experiences in public transportation were then 
sorted into categories corresponding to the segments of 
customer journeys. There were too many cards in each 
category. We reduced the number of images by selecting 
images perceived to be meaningful for everyone, or 
choosing one image among several that best represented the 
user experience (the photographers were not part of this 
process).  One or two words were chosen for each image 
and typed on red background. The first set of TEC cards 
was thus made, consisting of two different types of cards, 
those representing segments of the customer journey, and a 
mixture of touch points and experience cards.  
In order to ensure that images convey appropriate 
experiences and that the text is suitable, we have done 
quick-and-dirty user testing: we have simply shown the 
cards and asked two students, who are public transportation 
users, what they see on cards and if words match what the 
image conveys.  At this stage, we did not want a perfect set 
of cards, but rather, the one that that was open for 
modifications and additions. We, for example, chose not to 
make separate cards for embarking and disembarking, even 
though one of our testers suggested it. We wanted to see if 
distinctions in experiences between these two segments 
were important for users. If they were, separate cards would 
be designed for the final set. 
B. How can TEC Set be Used?  
The set of experiences on a customer journey 
representing a trip using public transportation is very rich. 
In order to start understanding how to use them and what we 
can expect to learn from the use, we decided to choose a 
small set of experiences and focus instead on the use of 
cards as a tool for working with selected user experiences 
effectively.  Three experiences were proposed as workshop 
themes:  safe travel, arriving in time, and joy while 
traveling. These were chosen on the basis of the experiences 
collected during the participatory observation phase. The 
purpose of using these three experiences was to find ways in 
which the cards could best be used, in order to gather and 
understand information that could serve as the basis for 
designing better travel experiences. We did not study these 
experiences themselves. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Touch point cards, such as a smart card, and experience cards, 
such as feeling safe, as they relate to the trip segment Station.  
There are two components to the TEC card set: the TEC 
cards and the TEC tools. Tools are the ways in which the 
cards are used in working with users. We have worked with 
two tools.  The first TEC tool is based on the forced 
association concept, and is carried out in relation to every 
card representing a segment of the journey. This amounts to 
nine rounds of forced associations, as there are nine cards 
describing the segments; Fig. 1. Thus, experiences of safety, 
joy and being on time, each explored in one workshop, were 
considered across all segments of a journey. A summary of 
the workshop results can be found in Table 1.  
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I.  
USING TEC TO LEARN ABOUT EXPERIENCES 
Stage 
Experience 
Safe 
Joy 
On time 
Plan 
the trip 
Getting the 
right 
information 
Coffee 
Planning 
software 
works 
Having 
choices 
Sitting 
comfortable 
Access to 
maps 
Sheltered 
Nice view 
Not crowded 
Cleanliness 
Information 
about 
destination 
Access to 
maps 
Buy ticket 
online/app 
saves time 
Having 
ticket ready 
Valid 
ticket 
Getting the 
right ticket 
Feeling safe 
paying for 
the ticket 
No line-ups at 
ticket machine 
Working card 
reader/Feedba
ck from reader 
Convenient 
location 
Hassle-free 
app 
Fast service 
No line-ups 
at ticket 
machine 
Find the 
ticket 
reader 
Working 
card 
reader/Feed
back from 
reader 
Buy e-
ticket while 
already in 
buss/train 
Charged 
mobile 
phone 
Station 
Finding your 
way 
Physical 
safety 
Feeling safe 
No waiting 
No crowd 
Good coffee 
Frequency of 
departures 
No special 
users (no baby 
carriages, no 
wheelchairs) 
Cleanliness 
No smoking 
Find platform 
easily 
Access to 
toilet 
Protected from 
bad weather 
Find 
platform 
Map of 
station/metr
o 
Impossible 
to hear 
information 
via 
speakers 
Information 
about 
destination 
Information 
for visually 
impaired 
Information 
about 
disruptions 
Stage 
Experience 
Safe 
Joy 
On time 
Ticket 
control 
Aggressive 
behavior of 
ticket 
controllers 
Having a valid 
ticket 
No disruption 
Disruption 
Make you 
miss your 
stop 
Embark 
 
/Dis- 
embark 
Validity of 
the ticket 
Getting in 
the right 
buss/tram 
etc. 
Getting off 
the right 
stop/station 
Driver greets 
travelers 
Easy to get 
in/out 
No crowd 
Too 
crowded to 
get in 
Delay 
because of 
children, 
people with 
bicycles or 
stroller, 
people in 
wheel 
chairs 
Travel 
Fellow 
travelers 
Sexual 
harassment 
and other 
violence 
Enough space 
Fast 
No crowd 
Information 
about 
destination 
Feelings safe 
Drivers (?) 
Charging 
battery 
Wifi access 
Disruptions 
Dis-
ruption 
The 
unknown 
Speakers that 
work 
Waiting area 
Emergency 
exit 
relevant 
information 
Information 
via 
speakers 
Emergency 
exit 
Arrival 
Stop 
Finding way 
to 
destination 
Mind the gap 
Finding way 
to destination 
Maps 
No 
crowd/strollers 
Recycling of 
garbage 
Access to 
toilet 
Map about 
location 
Finding 
way out of 
the station 
Valid ticket 
to get out 
of station 
Working 
card reader 
Ruter app 
to check 
route to 
destination 
 
Arrival 
des-
tination 
Feeling safe, 
street crime 
Being on time 
Price (of 
getting to 
destination) 
Time 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 3.  The cards in use. The cards depicting experiences and touch 
points are used in conjunction with every segment of the trip, addressing 
just one kind of experience at the time. 
The process of association required about an hour each 
time, with 3-5 participants; see Fig. 3. We needed to use 
convergent and divergent conversations, opening up for 
stories, reflections and memories, but also sense making of 
these, now collective, experiences.  
The second TEC tool we called the focus event. A 
specific, significant event from a person’s life, related to the 
use of public transportation, is placed in the focus of 
discussion. By significant, we mean an event that is out of 
the ordinary, either positive or negative. For example, losing 
a wallet on a city bus, with driver’s license and a whole lot of 
other important documents, would be significant. The cards, 
both segment and experience/touch points, relevant for a 
focus event are found and their influence on the event is 
discussed. The focus event is based on the same experience 
as the rest of the workshop in which it is used. The process 
around the focus event takes approximately 5 minutes per 
event. Again, we were interested in evaluating usefulness of 
cards for exploring experiences and services related to such 
events.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The first workshop was a pilot workshop where the three 
authors took time to try different versions of tools, to discuss 
how it feels to work with touch points and user experiences 
vs. segments of the journey and user experiences. The 
protocol that we decided on was to go first through the 
experience of safety in public transport by forced association, 
followed by a discussion related to a focus event. The 
subsequent workshop on joy as an experience in public 
transportation was done with two of the authors and three 
users of public transport, two of them PhD students, and the 
third a master student in design, use and interaction study 
program. The last workshop on arriving on time included the 
authors, and two students, one PhD and one master student in 
the same program. 
A small number of participants were involved in the 
workshops, but they all had a solid background in both user 
experience design and various methods of working with 
users, including co-design, participatory design and user-
centered design. This is relevant because most of them have 
worked with similar methods before and could give 
qualified opinion about the tool, both from the direct 
experience of using the cards themselves and from their 
prior experiences of working with users. We felt that five 
participants with such background were sufficient for giving 
us the feedback on the TEC set and the tools we chose (the 
forced association and the focus event) to address TEC’s 
perceived usefulness for design of better user experience 
when taking public transportation. 
A. On the use the cards in workshops 
The workshops with our participants started with 
explanation of the goal of the workshop, the TEC set, and 
what it is to be used for in the future. We then asked the 
participants to focus on what gives them, as users of public 
transportation experience of joy or arriving on time. During 
the workshop on joy, it became clear that we were missing 
several experience cards: weather, space, valid ticket, toilet, 
charging battery, time, and price of ticket. During the 
workshop on arriving on time, experiences that help users, or 
are a hindrance to reaching their final destination on time 
were considered. During this exercise two new experience 
cards were proposed: ticket control and event. Ticket control 
was perceived as both a segment card and an experience 
card. The event experience card refers to large events, such 
as sports championships and matches, in which large crowds 
of people use public transportation. During these events it is 
often impossible to arrive on time.  
By constructing common understanding and meaning 
giving to the cards, for the entire length of the trip, we found 
that a number of combinations of experiences have emerged 
as important.  For example, a card with a term ‘crowd’ was 
used extensively. It was related to several segments (station, 
ticket, embarking and disembarking and traveling) to both 
feeling of lack of safety, lack of joy and danger of being late. 
One of the participants then mentioned that there is really 
nothing one can do with this knowledge. This started a whole 
discussion on the strategies that people use to avoid crowds. 
At the end of the discussion, all participants agreed that, 
actually, there are opportunities for making things better by 
design.  
The same conclusion was reached regarding the use of 
cards to address focus events. We illustrate this with two 
examples. One participant told a story of a woman who had a 
very unpleasant experience on the train. She never enjoyed 
taking public transportation again, and never took trains very 
early in the morning or late in the night. The card that she 
held while talking about the experience is ‘feeling safe’, 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

‘feeling safe’, depicting station in dusk, empty, and not 
giving the feeling of being safe; see Fig. 2. 
 The second example had to do with embarrassment over 
being caught without valid ticket and blaming several touch 
points involving technology that were not working properly 
at the time. In both cases, cards representing related 
experiences were found and participants considered 
frequency of such events, their impact on people’s lives, 
possible design solutions etc.  
B. Vocabulary 
It was important for the participants to understand the 
TEC cards. Only then could they really engage in working 
creatively with them. As it was not possible to have a card 
representing each individual experience, the terms describing 
the cards were chosen with care. We found out that some 
cards needed to be broad enough to allow for several 
different interpretations.  Others, as for example ‘ticket’ 
needed further specification: valid ticket and price of ticket 
were the requests from our participants. There was also a 
suggestion to further specify attributes relevant to the 
validity of the ticket, such as the visibility of information.  
C. User’s comments 
After each workshop, a few minutes were set aside for 
asking the participants about their experience with the TEC 
cards. One of the participants (male, 39) said: They were 
good to get the conversation going and explore different 
topics in a quick and easy manner. Another participant told 
us: The images put you kind of into a memory lane. When I 
look at the station card, I remember my own station and I 
can feel the experiences. They make me more aware of the 
things I should think of. I would never come up with as 
many examples of experiences as we jointly did (female, 
27). Asked whether it was boring to repeat forced 
association technique, the participants agreed that it was a 
good experience, connecting the detailed pictures around 
each segment card into a larger picture which was more 
relevant: This was actually a learning experience for me 
(female, 26). 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Understanding user experience is important in design of 
interactive products and services. People’s experiences with 
public transportation, even with a single touch point, such as 
ticket validation, are very different. Heterogeneity makes 
working with user experiences challenging.  
The TEC set was found to respond to this challenge 
adequately. Heterogeneity remained visible, yet a common 
understanding of experience one focused on during the 
workshop emerged.  
The size and the feel of cards were found to be 
satisfactory. Part of their appeal was attributed to images. 
The images were taken out in the field, but were generic 
enough to easily evoke memories of many diverse 
experiences. The other part of the appeal was tangibility of 
the cards. They served as tangible pointers to experiences, 
evoking memories and facilitating conversation about 
experiences. They enabled rich communication, in depth 
when working with focus events, and in breadth when 
working with forced associations across all segments of a 
customer journey. Our focus was not on re-designing 
services at this time, yet, many ideas and thoughts that 
emerged on during the workshops would be worth pursuing 
further. 
While these conclusions are in line with previously 
published work and thus not revolutionary, we hope that we 
have explained the process of creating the tool and its 
evaluation (by users of public transportation, with good 
understanding of design processes) in such a manner that it is 
inspirational. This method of creating a set of cards for 
studying user experiences is rather fast and fun. The set can 
be used to understand a range of experiences in a given 
context of use, both in breadth and in depth, identifying clear 
design and innovation opportunities. 
We have tested a small number of TEC tools (forced 
association and focus event) and we will further explore 
other possible tools. Our future work also includes 
scalability, and different application areas. In terms of 
scaling, we are interested in two types. The most obvious one 
is to use the experience cards in much a larger setting, with 
large number of users. However, we are also interested in 
understanding the scaling of experiences themselves, how 
they become larger and larger until the small ones are 
forgotten. Finally, we want to bring this method into other 
application areas, such as service innovation and customer 
experiences in the library, or with young patients in 
transition from children’s hospitals to adult ones.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J.-V. Nisula, “Searching for definitions for service design - 
what do we mean with service design?”, ServDes 2012, Co-
Creating Services, 2012, pp. 171–175. 
[2]  R. L. Martin, Design of business: Why design thinking is the 
next competitive advantage. Harvard Business Press, 2009. 
[3] T. Brown, “Design thinking,” Harward Bus. Rev., vol. 86(6), 
2008, pp. 84–95. 
[4] T. Brown, Change by design: how design thinking can 
transform organizations and inspire innovation. HarperCollins 
Publishers, 2009. 
[5] A. L. Culén and M. Kriger, “HCI in IT-facilitated Business 
Innovation: a Design Thinking Perspective,” in Proceedings 
of HCII 2014, in press. 
[6] A. Polaine, L. Løvlie, and B. Reason, Service design: from 
insight to implementation. Rosenfeld Media, 2013. 
[7] L. G. Zomerdijk and C. A. Voss, “Service Design for 
Experience-Centric Services,” Journal of Service Research, 
vol. 13 (1), 2009, pp. 67–82. 
[8] J. Teixeira, L. Patrício, N. J. Nunes, L. Nóbrega, R. P. Fisk, 
and L. Constantine, “Customer experience modeling: from 
customer experience to service design,” Journal of Service 
Management, vol. 23, no. 3, 2012, pp. 362–376. 
[9] J. J. Garrett, “Customer Loyalty and the Elements of User 
Experience,” Design Management Review, vol. 17, no. 1, 
2006, pp. 35–39. 
[10] P. Hurmelinna-Laukkanen and P. Ritala, “Protection for 
profiting from collaborative service innovation,” Journal of 
Service Management, vol. 21, no. 1, 2010, pp. 6–24. 
[11] H. W. Chesbrough, “Why Companies Should Have Open 
Business Models,” MIT Sloan Management Review, vol. 48, 
no. 2, 2007, pp. 22–28. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[12] M. van der Velden, A. L. Culén, J. Herstad, and A. Atif, 
“Networked Visibility: The case of smart card ticket 
information,” ACHI 2013, The Sixth International Conference 
on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 2013, pp. 
228–233. 
[13] M. van der Velden and A. L. Culen, “Information Visibility in 
Public 
Transportation 
Smart 
Card 
Ticket 
Systems,” 
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, 
vol. 6, no. 3 and 4, 2013, pp. 188–197. 
[14] G. Rugg and P. McGeorge, “The sorting techniques: a tutorial 
paper on card sorts, picture sorts and item sorts,” Expert 
Systems, vol. 22, no. 3, 2005, pp. 94–107. 
[15] S. Clatworthy, “Service innovation through touch-points: 
development of an innovation toolkit for the first stages of 
new service development,” Int. J. Des., vol. 5, no. 2, 2011, pp. 
15–28.  
[16] S. Holmlid, “Interaction design and service design: expanding 
a comparison of design disciplines”, Nordes, 2007, pp. 1–8. 
[17] S. Miettinen and M. Koivisto, Designing Services with 
Innovative Methods. Univ. of Art and Design Helsinki, 2009. 
[18] B. A. Nardi and V. O’Day, Information ecologies: using 
technology with heart. MIT Press, 2000. 
[19] J. Forlizzi and K. Battarbee, “Understanding experience in 
interactive systems,” in Proceedings of the 5th conference on 
Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, 
and techniques, 2004, pp. 261–268. 
[20] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini “Find a Book! Unpacking 
Customer Journeys at Academic Library”, ACHI 2014, The 
Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions, 2014, ThinkMind Digital Library, 
www.thinkmind.org. 
[21] E. Blevis, E. Churchill, W. Odom, J. Pierce, D. Roedl, and R. 
Wakkary, “Visual Thinking & Digital Imagery,” CHI ’12, 
2012, pp. 2715–2718. 
[22] C. M. Barnum and L. A. Palmer, “More Than a Feeling: 
Understanding the Desirability Factor in User Experience”. 
CHI ’10, 2010, pp. 4703–4716.  
[23] M. Sunnari, L.  Arhippainen, M. Pakanen, and S. Hickey, 
“Studying User Experiences of Autostereoscopic 3D Menu on 
Touch Screen Mobile Device”. Proceedings of the 24th 
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference, 2012, 
pp. 558–561.  
[24] M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing ethnographies. London: SAGE, 
2007. 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

