Validating Usability Heuristics for Augmented Reality Applications for Elderly 
Users 
Anna Nishchyk, Norun Christine Sanderson, Weiqin Chen 
Department of Computer Science 
Faculty of Technology, Art and Design, Oslo Metropolitan University 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: anna.nishchyk@oslomet.no, norun-christine.sanderson@oslomet.no, weiqin.chen@oslomet.no 
 
Abstract— Literature has shown that Augmented Reality (AR) 
technologies can positively influence older people’s quality of 
life. However, to achieve its potential, we need to ensure the 
usability of AR for elderly users. One of the most common 
usability evaluation methods is testing a product towards 
heuristics. Usability heuristics are also used to guide the 
interface design to improve usability. Unfortunately, the well-
known general usability heuristics do not consider aspects 
specific to AR technologies as well as elderly users’ needs. 
Therefore, there is a need to develop and validate heuristics 
specifically tailored for AR for elderly users. In our previous 
study, we developed a set of usability heuristics for elderly 
users and validated it by collecting feedback from usability 
experts. In this study, we have further validated the heuristics 
by asking designers/developers to use them for creating an AR 
application prototype. The results show that the heuristics are 
useful in the design phase of creating usable AR applications 
for elderly users. According to the participants, it can also be 
used in other phases of the application development cycle. 
Keywords-augmented reality; elderly; usability; heuristics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Augmented Reality (AR) technologies can help the 
elderly to increase their quality of life, enhance their care and 
autonomy, develop social interactions, and improve their 
overall wellbeing [1]. However, to achieve these potential 
benefits, we need to ensure the usability of AR applications 
for elderly users [2][3]. Usability is overall an important 
aspect in designing technologies for older people [4]. Due to 
age-related difficulties, most elderly experience challenges 
using Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) 
[5]. Thus, this group of users has specific usability needs and 
requires special attention [6]. For instance, modern game 
interfaces often use sounds, lights, and colors that are 
pleasant for younger users but often cause an adverse 
reaction from older users [7]. 
Heuristic evaluation is a common recognized method for 
testing the usability of ICT systems [8][9]. In addition, using 
heuristics as a guide for interface design to improve usability 
is a commonly adopted practice [10]. Unfortunately, well-
known generic sets, such as Nielsen’s heuristics [11], do not 
address characteristics specific to some types of ICT [9]. For 
instance, AR has certain hardware features, safety and 
privacy issues, and high importance in the surrounding 
environment [8]. That is why there is a need for new sets of 
heuristics that cover features specific to particular 
technologies [12]. All of the above-mentioned AR 
characteristics, as well as the specific needs of elderly users 
[6], need to be considered by new usability heuristics 
[8][13]. 
In our previous paper, we developed a set of usability 
heuristics for AR systems for elderly users [14]. However, it 
should not be the end of the process once heuristics for a 
specific domain are proposed, further validation needs to be 
conducted [12]. According to the systematic review by 
Nurgalieva et al. [15], only 11.5% of the selected papers 
reported validating the developed guidelines and heuristics. 
At the same time, the rest of the studies did not include the 
validation stage. That is why we have validated the 
developed heuristics through the expert judgment method 
[16] (interviews with AR experts with industrial and 
academic backgrounds). However, it should be further 
validated to ensure the quality of the set of heuristics and its 
applicability for creating usable AR. 
Usability heuristics are commonly used for evaluating the 
usability of products, with most studies validating their 
effectiveness for this purpose. Despite this, designers also 
widely use usability heuristics to guide their design 
decisions. That is why, in this research, we have further 
validated the developed set of heuristics by using it to design 
an AR application interface and gathering feedback from the 
designers and front-end developers about the usefulness of 
the heuristics. 
This paper has the following structure. Section 1 
introduces the importance of usability heuristics specifically 
tailored for AR and elderly users. Section 2 reviews related 
work on AR usability and methodologies for new heuristics 
development. Section 3 describes the methods used for the 
validation of previously developed heuristics. Section 4 
presents the study's results, including the prototype design 
created by the participants and their feedback on the set of 
heuristics. Section 5 discusses the results and implications of 
our findings and compares them with the reviewed literature. 
This paper's main contribution is presented in section 6, and 
it states that the developed set of usability heuristics can help 
to create usable AR applications for elderly users. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The following section presents a review of the related work 
on usability heuristics for AR and older users, along with the 
methodologies for developing and validating new heuristics. 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A. Usability Heuristics 
Usability evaluation of AR applications needs to address 
certain technological aspects specific to AR, such as 
hardware, its features, and potential limitations; privacy, 
safety issues, and related concerns that might appear due to 
using of cameras and video in users’ environment; the 
importance of users’ surroundings as a part of application 
interface; ease and comfort of use [8]. 
Several studies have focused on AR usability and 
presented new developed sets of heuristics or usability 
checklists tailored or adapted to AR specifics, including 
some aspects listed in the paragraph above. Franklin et al. 
[17] 
presented 
heuristics 
adopted 
for 
collaborative 
distributed AR systems and validated with a case study 
method. Another study focused on mobile AR usability and 
mapped and adapted Nielsen’s heuristics to the specific 
features of AR home design applications [18]. Derby and 
Chaparro [13] created and validated a usability heuristics 
checklist for AR and Mixed Reality applications. Guimaraes 
and Martins [19] adapted the ISO 9241-11 [20] and Nielsen’s 
heuristics and presented a checklist for AR usability 
evaluation. Yet, none of the studies mentioned above have 
focused on elderly users’ usability needs. To our knowledge, 
only a few studies investigated AR usability in elderly users’ 
context. Liang [2] developed general AR design principles 
for elderly users, however, they focus only on mobile AR 
[21]. 
In our previous study [14], we developed a set of 
usability heuristics that focuses on elderly users and 
considers aspects specific to AR applications. The developed 
set can be used as guidelines for creating AR systems for 
older people and heuristics for performing usability 
evaluation of existing AR applications. 
B. Validation methodologies 
When we discuss establishing new usability heuristics for 
a specific domain, two recommended methodologies are 
commonly used in the studies: [22] and [16]. Quiñones et al. 
[16] also mentioned other proposed methodologies for the 
heuristics development [12][23][24][25][26]. However, they 
do not provide a defined approach for validating the 
developed heuristics [16]. They also lack a comprehensive 
description of the formal steps involved in the development 
process [16].  
Both Quiñones et al. [16] and Rusu et al. [22]  
recommended methods for validating the new developed 
heuristics. Rusu et al. [22] recommended evaluating the set 
of heuristics against Nielsen’s heuristics in specific case 
studies. The authors recommended evaluating the same 
system with one group of experts using the new set of 
heuristics and a second group using Nielsen’s heuristics and 
comparing the results. Quiñones et al. [16] recommended 
three methods of heuristics validation. First, using heuristics 
evaluation to compare the new heuristics with a control set of 
traditional heuristics. The second method is to involve 
experts and ask for their feedback on the developed set. And 
a third one is to compare the results of the heuristic 
evaluation with the developed set with the results of user 
testing. However, in both cases, the authors perceived the 
heuristics as a tool only for usability evaluation and proposed 
the methods of heuristics’ validation for this purpose only. 
Nurgalieva et al. [15] mentioned two other methods of 
heuristics validation that have also been used in research: 
first, designers using the proposed guidelines to design 
applications and giving feedback, and second, end-user 
testing of the applications developed following the 
guidelines. 
III. 
METHOD 
The process of heuristics development [14] was inspired 
by the eight-step methodology [16] and included a 
systematic literature review and interviews with usability 
experts. The developed set contains 55 heuristics divided 
into six categories: User involvement, Cognitive and 
physical load, Usability and accessibility, Privacy, Hardware, 
and Gamification. Eighteen heuristics have supplementary 
information added as a note to clarify the meaning of the 
heuristic. 
We propose further validating the developed set of 
heuristics by using it to design and develop an AR 
application and 
then 
gathering 
feedback 
from 
the 
designers/developers about the set’s usefulness. We have 
involved three experts (P1-P3) that work with frontend 
design and development and have usability and elderly 
users’ needs knowledge and experience with AR. The 
participants were recruited by contacting IT companies by 
email. More detailed information about the participants’ 
work experience is presented in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
INFORMATION ABOUT THE PARTICIPANTS.  
Information 
Participants 
P1 
P2 
P3 
Type of work 
Front-end 
developer 
and UX 
designer 
Front-end 
developer, has 
experience with 
design tasks 
UX designer 
specializing 
in user 
research 
Years of experience 
4.5 
9.5 
4 
Experience with AR 
Yes, as a 
user 
Yes, as a 
developer 
Yes, as a 
designer 
Usability knowledge 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Experience 
designing for and/or 
testing with elderly 
No 
experience, 
but has 
knowledge 
of elderly 
users’ 
needs 
No experience, 
but has 
knowledge of 
elderly users’ 
needs 
Included 
elderly in 
user testing 
 
First, the participants received the task instructions that 
specified: the user group of the project (elderly people), the 
product that needs to be produced (augmented reality 
application for performing physical exercises), the exercise 
that needs to be included in the game (move the hands over 
the head during 30 seconds), game scenario (the users need 
to imagine that there are flying over a canyon) and the task 
that the participants need to complete (create a prototype of 
an AR application with 3-5 interface sketches using the set of 
heuristics). The participants did not get instructions on how 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
to proceed with the task since we wanted to make the task 
closer to a real design/development project. We also wanted 
to see how the participants would approach the heuristics and 
how they would work with them. 
The participants were supposed to choose a hardware 
technology for the project. They had three options: a 
smartphone (mobile AR), a combination of Microsoft Kinect 
and TV, and a head-mounted device. The participants were 
also asked to make notes throughout the process and mark 
heuristics that were especially helpful or/and influenced their 
prototypes and overall results. 
Within a week after the task instructions were sent, the 
interview sessions with the participants were arranged. The 
interviews were semi-structured, and their purpose was to 
discuss participants’ experiences with the task and collect 
their feedback on the set of heuristics. Each interview session 
lasted approximately one hour. The interviews were audio-
recorded, and notes were taken during the process. In 
addition, during the sessions, the interviewer went through 
the notes of the participants together with them and asked 
clarifying 
questions. 
The 
recorded 
interviews 
were 
transcribed and analyzed by creating inductive semantic 
codes and categories using the conventional approach to 
content analysis [27]. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
We interviewed three participants, each focusing on a 
different hardware device (P1 – Microsoft Kinect and TV, 
P2 – smartphone (mobile AR), P3 – head-mounted device). 
All the participants independently chose the following way 
to proceed with the task: first, quickly looked through the list 
of heuristics; then made initial prototypes; after that, went 
through the list again more carefully, paying attention to the 
details, checking if the prototypes were compliant with the 
heuristics and, if not, made corresponding changes in the 
process. 
The interview sessions demonstrated that the participants 
found the task interesting and engaging. All of them 
expressed a positive attitude toward the set of heuristics.  
The remaining section is organized based on the 
categories established through the content analysis. 
A. The design of the prototype made by the participants 
The participants made several changes to their initial 
prototypes to make them compliant with the heuristics. For 
instance, in accordance with the heuristic number 31, “Use 
representative figures and icons that the user can distinguish 
and differentiate. Note: Elderly people may not be familiar 
with many standard Internet icons, so, when possible, to use 
short text, use it instead of an icon” P1 added a text to a 
button “Back” in the interface sketches to make the purpose 
of the button clearer for the users (Figure 1). 
Based on the heuristic number 15, “Use large fonts and 
virtual objects,” P1 reduced the number of elements on the 
screen in each sketch and made them and the text even 
bigger than in the initial sketches. To make the prototype 
compliant with the heuristic number 39, “Ensure the 
transparency of information regarding content privacy, data 
collection, and its purposes,” P1 added a section “About” 
and later decided to include it in the package of the product 
since it could be difficult to read a lot of text from the screen. 
P1 has also decided to make the base version of the app 
available without an internet connection, based on the 
heuristic number 5 “Consider the greater care needs of the 
residents and the institutional infrastructure (e.g., internet 
accessibility).” 
 
Figure 1.  A sketch of Participant 1 with the added text "Back" to the 
button. 
P2 added a navigation bar with text instead of buttons 
with icons to make the sketches more consistent following 
heuristic number 29, “The system and its response and user 
interface should be consistent in appearance and behavior, 
predictable, clear, and transparent,” and heuristic number 31, 
“Use representative figures and icons that the user can 
distinguish and differentiate. Note: Elderly people may not 
be familiar with many standard Internet icons, so, when 
possible, to use short text, use it instead of an icon”. Based 
on section 2 of the heuristics’ set “Cognitive and physical 
load” and the heuristic number 9 “Design the interface to 
enable the user to focus on the actual task and reduce the 
cognitive overhead needed to interact with the application”, 
P2 added a possibility to play the game without a login. P2 
made the text on the sketches bigger, based on the heuristic 
15, “Use large fonts and virtual objects.” P2 decided to add 
video instructions instead of pictures to make it easier to 
understand the instructions and added a possibility to repeat 
the video (Figure 2), based on the heuristic 8 “Сonsider older 
adults' individual needs and skill levels” and heuristic 
number 28 “When relevant, provide guidance (including 
visual instructions) in a step-by-step manner.” 
 
Figure 2.  A sketch of Participant 2 with the video instructions. It has a 
text field on the top of the screen, followed by a video content and 
navigation bar at the bottom. 
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
P3 decided to reduce the number of elements on the 
screen in each sketch and made the design more 
minimalistic, based on the heuristic number 9 “Design the 
interface to enable the user to focus on the actual task and 
reduce the cognitive overhead needed to interact with the 
application” and heuristic number 13 “Consider that virtual 
elements hide real content.” P3 also added a two-players 
mode to support the social aspect of the game and increase 
users’ motivation to exercise (Figure 3), based on the 
heuristic number 51 “Consider adding an optional multi-
player mode, since playing together with family or friends 
can motivate elderly users to start and continue playing.” 
During the interview, P3 mentioned that they also should add 
“Back” buttons to each screen. 
 
Figure 3.  A sketch of Participant 3 with different game modes. 
B. Applicability 
All participants agreed that some heuristics should be 
used before sketching the interface, and some will be used 
later in the development process. Participants 1 and 2 also 
discussed that heuristics cover tasks typically related to the 
work of different roles in the team, such as UX researcher, 
UX designer, front-end developer, hardware developer, and 
product manager. 
P2 stated that the set overall is very good for the 
refinement stage and can be a good checklist, while P3 noted 
that the set is a good start for the research and design process 
and usability testing at the end of the project. 
C. Understandability 
Overall, all the participants stated they had no issues 
understanding the heuristics. P3 said that the set is well 
structured, mostly understandable, and turned out to be 
useful for creating a usable AR application for the elderly. 
The majority of the heuristics were also understandable. 
They did not cause any confusion and were easy to use and 
apply. All the participants agreed that the additional notes for 
some of the heuristics were highly helpful and explained 
some details that needed to be clarified with the notes. The 
only heuristic that raised some questions and was unclear to 
2 out of 3 participants (P1 and P2) is heuristic number 7: 
“Involve and stimulate older adults’ social networks.” Both 
participants perceived it as a recommendation to incorporate 
multiple players mode, however, the intended meaning was 
to incorporate the social networks of older adults into the 
research and design process. Participants suggested that 
adding an additional note clarifying this heuristic could 
prevent misunderstanding and improve understandability. 
P2 claimed that all the heuristics are well decoupled, 
even though some of them are overlapping, for instance: 
heuristic number 11, “Users should be able to accomplish a 
task with minimal interaction steps; avoid “unnecessary” 
interventions by the user” and heuristic number 24 “Menu 
navigation and general navigation within the application 
should be logical, with clear and minimal steps.” However, 
the participant stated that it is not a disadvantage of the list: 
“The heuristics are talking about the same issue, but they 
cover it from different angles.” 
D. Familiarity and novelty 
P2 stated that some of the heuristics were common 
knowledge for an experienced UX designer, but still, having 
them in the set as a reminder and a part of a checklist that 
needs to be completed is good. P1 agreed that some 
heuristics were evident for a designer, such as those that 
concern the interface's simplicity, logical navigation, screen 
brightness, and big text (the participant mentioned that it 
mainly concerns category 3. Usability and Accessibility). 
However, P1 also highlighted that this set of heuristics is a 
good checklist and “nothing needs to be cut.” P3 mentioned 
that some of the heuristics are familiar from more general 
usability heuristics and guidelines, however, it also contains 
heuristics more specific for elderly people that are not 
mentioned in other lists. 
There were also things the participants hadn’t considered 
relevant for the prototype before reading the heuristics. For 
instance, P1 claimed that they would not think about the 
higher importance of outdated technology consideration for 
the elderly (heuristic number 33); the greater care needs of 
the elderly residents and the institutional infrastructure 
(heuristic number 5); older adults’ privacy needs and 
concerns (heuristic number 38) and most privacy heuristics 
overall (category 4 – Privacy); also, a need to consider 
specific conditions of older adults living environments 
(heuristic number 3). Overall, P1 highlighted that the 
heuristics that are specific for elderly users were the most 
useful ones. P2 mentioned that they wouldn’t think about the 
support the user’s procedural and semantic memory to 
enhance the learnability and usability of the interface 
(heuristic number 25). 
E. Context and hardware 
P1 also commented on the heuristics that concern 
hardware. They mentioned that it is not always possible to 
develop hardware in the project, or even sometimes choose 
it, so designers and developers do not always have an 
influence on the hardware. 
There was also a heuristic that got different feedback 
from the participants. P2 and P3 found the heuristic number 
13, “Consider that virtual elements hide real content.” very 
useful since they designed for hardware that “projects” the 
computer-generated elements on the real content. While for 
P1, who was covering the Microsoft Kinect and TV 
hardware, this heuristic was not useful at all. 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Overall, the participants provided useful feedback 
demonstrating the usefulness of the developed set of 
heuristics for creating usable AR applications for elderly 
people. The set includes general information about usability 
in the form of a well-structured checklist with decoupled and 
understandable heuristics, and, according to the participants, 
is important to have. Moreover, it also includes heuristics 
specific to AR technologies and elderly users, which the 
participants found the most useful. Based on participants’ 
feedback, the set of heuristics is useful for the starting point 
of the research and design process, as well as for the 
refinement stage of the project and usability testing at the 
end. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Previous studies demonstrated that well-known general 
heuristics do not cover all the aspects specific to AR 
applications [8], and there is a need to create a set of 
heuristics that consider AR specifics [12], such as hardware, 
surrounding environment, privacy, security and comfort of 
use 
[8]. 
All 
these 
aspects 
were 
considered, and 
recommendations towards them were included in the 
developed set of usability heuristics [14]. The set has a 
separate section covering potential privacy issues and 
proposed solutions. The study participants expressed that 
heuristics concerning privacy were valuable and important to 
consider. P1 stated that a designer might not be aware of the 
older adults’ special privacy needs and concerns. Regarding 
the surrounding environment, most participants highlighted 
the importance of the heuristic number 13, “Consider that 
virtual elements hide real content,” which covers an issue 
specific to AR that combines a real environment with 
computer-generated elements [1]. 
The developed set of heuristics considers AR hardware. 
It has a dedicated section covering guidelines that can help to 
overcome potential issues related to AR hardware, for 
instance, comfort and safety of use, consider the weight of 
the wearable devices and time of use, consideration of 
existing elderly aids, and different input and output devices. 
However, the participants' feedback did not include much 
information about their opinions and attitude toward this 
category of heuristics. P1 commented that a project often 
predetermines hardware, and designers and front-end 
developers mostly do not have an influence on the hardware 
decisions. That is why P1 did not find this section of 
heuristics particularly useful for the design of AR 
applications. The other participants did not have many 
comments about the heuristics from this section. This might 
be due to the fact that none of the participants had experience 
working on a project in which hardware was developed as an 
in-house solution. 
The developed set of heuristics is trying to cover 
recommendations for all types of AR hardware devices, even 
though they can have some differences [1]. The interview 
with participants demonstrated that some heuristics are only 
relevant for some types of AR but not others. The heuristic 
number 13, “Consider that virtual elements hide real 
content,” was very useful for mobile AR and AR with a 
head-mounted display since these types of AR “project” 
virtual elements on the users’ surroundings. While P1, who 
focused on the Microsoft Kinect and TV hardware, did not 
find this heuristic relevant. 
Research has also shown that elderly users have specific 
usability needs [6], so the developed heuristics included 
recommendations for this user group. The results of the 
study demonstrated that the heuristics that were explicitly 
focused on elderly users were found the most useful by the 
participants and helped them to adjust the created prototypes 
to elderly users’ needs. Examples of these heuristics include 
consideration of elderly users’ environment, particular 
privacy concerns, and a higher focus on outdated 
technologies. 
A. Limitations 
One of the study’s limitations is the small number of 
participants. However, they performed an extensive task, 
developing and adjusting prototypes of an AR application 
interface using the heuristics and providing thorough 
feedback about the process and the set of heuristics. Their 
design has also covered all types of hardware devices. 
Another limitation is that the task that participants 
received was covering only the initial design phase of a 
project. Therefore, they provided us with low-fidelity 
prototypes, while the heuristics covered more stages, 
including user research, hardware decisions, and some parts 
of front-end and back-end development. However, during the 
interview sessions, we gathered participants’ feedback on all 
heuristics considering the AR prototype, including those that 
did not apply to the initial design phase. 
In addition, not all participants had experience designing 
for and testing with elderly users, which may have limited 
the findings of the study. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this study, we aimed to validate the set of usability 
heuristics for AR for elderly users by creating an AR 
prototype by design and front-end development experts. The 
participants were asked to prototype an AR application 
interface using the set of heuristics. After they had completed 
the prototypes, interview sessions were arranged to collect 
participants’ feedback on their experiences using the set of 
heuristics. Overall, the participants expressed a positive 
attitude towards the heuristics and stated its usefulness, ease 
of use, and understandability. The set of heuristics was found 
to be a good checklist that can be used at different stages of 
the AR design and development process.  
In the future, it is important to validate the heuristics for 
the whole AR development process. In addition, the 
effectiveness and usefulness of the heuristics should be 
evaluated 
with 
a 
user 
study 
to 
investigate 
how 
designers/developers following the heuristics can influence 
the usability of an AR application. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. N. Lee, M. J. Kim, and W. J. Hwang, “Potential of 
augmented reality and virtual reality technologies to promote 
wellbeing in older adults,” Applied sciences, 9(17), pp. 3556, 
2019, doi:10.3390/app9173556. 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[2] S. Liang, “Establishing Design Principles for Augmented 
Reality for Older Adults,” 2018, Sheffield Hallam University 
(United Kingdom), 2018. 
[3] T. C. Endsley et al., “Augmented reality design heuristics: 
Designing for dynamic interactions,” Proceedings of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 2017 Annual 
Meeting, 2017, Sage Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 
pp. 2100-2104, doi:10.1177/1541931213602007. 
[4] A. d. Lima Salgado, L. Agostini do Amaral, R. P. d. Mattos 
Fortes, M. Hortes Nisihara Chagas, and G. Joyce, 
“Addressing mobile usability and elderly users: Validating 
contextualized heuristics,” International Conference of 
Design, User Experience, and Usability, 2017, Springer, pp. 
379-394, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-58634-2_28. 
[5] D. E. Chisnell, J. C. G. Redish, and A. Lee, “New heuristics 
for understanding older adults as web users,” Technical 
Communication, 53(1), pp. 39-59, 2006,  
[6] M. S. Al-Razgan, H. S. Al-Khalifa, and M. D. Al-Shahrani, 
“Heuristics for evaluating the usability of mobile launchers 
for elderly people,” International Conference of Design, User 
Experience, and Usability (DUXU 2014), 2014, Springer, pp. 
415-424, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-07668-3_40. 
[7] J. Marin, E. Lawrence, K. F. Navarro, and C. Sax, “Heuristic 
evaluation for interactive games within elderly users,” 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED’11), 2011, 
pp. 130-133,  
[8] J. L. Derby and B. S. Chaparro, “The Challenges of 
Evaluating the Usability of Augmented Reality (AR),” 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 
Annual Meeting, 2021, SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los 
Angeles, CA, pp. 994-998, doi:10.1177/1071181321651315. 
[9] D. Quiñones and C. Rusu, “How to develop usability 
heuristics: A systematic literature review,” Computer 
standards 
& 
interfaces, 
53, 
pp. 
89-122, 
2017, 
doi:10.1016/j.csi.2017.03.009. 
[10] R. Langevin et al., “Heuristic evaluation of conversational 
agents,” Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors 
in 
Computing 
Systems, 
2021, 
pp. 
1-15, 
doi:10.1145/3411764.3445312. 
[11] C. Jiménez, C. Rusu, S. Roncagliolo, R. Inostroza, and V. 
Rusu, “Evaluating a methodology to establish usability 
heuristics,” 2012 31st International Conference of the Chilean 
Computer Science Society, 2012, IEEE, pp. 51-59, 
doi:10.1109/SCCC.2012.14. 
[12] S. Hermawati and G. Lawson, “Establishing usability 
heuristics for heuristics evaluation in a specific domain: Is 
there a consensus?,” Applied ergonomics, 56, pp. 34-51, 
2016,  
[13] J. L. Derby and B. S. Chaparro, “The Development and 
Validation of an Augmented and Mixed Reality Usability 
Heuristic Checklist,” International Conference on Human-
Computer 
Interaction, 
2022, 
Springer, 
pp. 
165-182, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-031-05939-1_11. 
[14] A. Nishchyk, N. C. Sanderson, and W. Chen, “Elderly-
centered usability heuristics for Augmented reality design and 
development,” Universal Access in the Information Society, 
unpublished,  
[15] L. Nurgalieva, J. J. J. Laconich, M. Baez, F. Casati, and M. 
Marchese, “A systematic literature review of research-derived 
touchscreen design guidelines for older adults,” IEEE Access, 
7, 
pp. 
22035-22058, 
2019, 
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2898467. 
[16] D. Quiñones, C. Rusu, and V. Rusu, “A methodology to 
develop usability/user experience heuristics,” Computer 
standards 
& 
interfaces, 
59, 
pp. 
109-129, 
2018, 
doi:10.1016/j.csi.2018.03.002. 
[17] F. Franklin, F. Breyer, and J. Kelner, “Usability heuristics for 
collaborative augmented reality remote systems,” 2014 XVI 
Symposium on Virtual and Augmented Reality, 2014, IEEE, 
pp. 53-62, doi:10.1109/SVR.2014.31. 
[18] A. Labrie and J. Cheng, “Adapting usability heuristics to the 
context of mobile augmented reality,” Adjunct Publication of 
the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface 
Software 
and 
Technology, 
2020, 
pp. 
4-6, 
doi:10.1145/3379350.3416167. 
[19] M. D. P. Guimaraes and V. F. Martins, “A checklist to 
evaluate 
augmented 
reality 
applications,” 
2014 
XVI 
Symposium on Virtual and Augmented Reality, 2014, IEEE, 
pp. 45-52, doi:10.1109/SVR.2014.17. 
[20] I. O. f. Standardization, ISO standard: Ergonomics of human-
system interaction — Part 11: Usability: Definitions and 
concepts.,  [cited 2023 February 28], Available from: 
https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:9241:-11:ed-2:v1:en. 
[21] J. L. Derby and B. S. Chaparro, “Use of Augmented Reality 
by Older Adults,” International Conference on Human-
Computer 
Interaction, 
2020, 
Springer, 
pp. 
125-134, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-50252-2_10. 
[22] C. Rusu, S. Roncagliolo, V. Rusu, and C. Collazos, A 
Methodology to establish usability heuristics, in ACHI 2011 : 
The Fourth International Conference on Advances in 
Computer-Human Interactions. 2011. 
[23] A. Yeratziotis, D. Pottas, and D. Van Greunen, “A three-
phase process to develop heuristics,” 13th Annual Conference 
on World Wide Web Applications, 2011, pp. 14-16,  
[24] M. Hub and V. Čapková, “Heuristic evaluation of usability of 
public administration portal,” The International Conference 
on Applied Computer Science, 2010, pp. 234-239,  
[25] F. F. Franklin, Usability Heuristics for Collaborative 
Augmented 
Reality 
Remote 
Systems. 
Heurísticas 
de 
usabilidade para sistemas colaborativos remotos de realidade 
aumentada. 2014, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco. 
[26] B. Lechner, A. Fruhling, S. Petter, and H. Siy, The chicken 
and the pig: User involvement in developing usability 
heuristics, in Nineteenth Americas Conference on Information 
Systems. 2013: Chicago, Illinois. p. 3263-3270. 
[27] H.-F. Hsieh and S. E. Shannon, “Three approaches to 
qualitative content analysis,” Qualitative health research, 
15(9), pp. 1277-1288, 2005, doi:10.1177/1049732305276687. 
 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

