Autonomic Nervous Activity Estimation Algorithm
with Facial Skin Thermal Image
Tota Mizuno, Shunsuke Kawazura,
Kota Akehi, Shogo Matsuno,
Kazuyuki Mito and Naoaki Itakura
Department of Informatics Graduate
School of Informatics and Engineering
The University of Electro-Communications
Chofugaoka, Chofu, Tokyo 182-8585
Email: mizuno@uec.ac.jp, k1430023@edu.cc.uec.ac.jp,
a1540001@edu.cc.uec.ac.jp, m1440004@edu.cc.uec.ac.jp,
mito@se.uec.ac.jp and ita@se.uec.ac.jp
Hirotoshi Asano
Department of Electronics and Information
Engineering, Faculty of Engineering,
Kagawa University
Hayashi-cho 2217-20, Takamatsu,
Kagawa 761-0396, JAPAN
Email:asano@eng.kagawa-u.ac.jp
Abstract—The aim of this study was to achieve the absolute
evaluation of mental workload (MWL) by proposing a novel
algorithm for the evaluation and estimation of autonomic nervous
activity with facial thermal imaging. Innovation in Information
and Communication Technology(ICT) has resulted in workers
experiencing an increasing mental workload, which is caused
by using the computer. In our research group we have studied
a method to evaluate and estimate autonomic nervous activity
using facial thermal imaging as measured by infrared thermog-
raphy. Previous methods extracted the forehead and nose as
a method for performing the evaluation and estimation using
the temperature difference. However, this approach does not
consider the area. The proposed method enables parts or areas
of temperature change other than the nose to be captured. This
presents the possibility of accurate evaluation and estimation at
levels that are more sensitive than the conventional method. In
addition, there is the possibility of absolute evaluation by using
one thermal image of the face. We also examined whether further
high-precision evaluation and estimation would be possible. Our
results showed the proposed method to be a highly accurate nasal
skin temperature (NST) evaluation method compared to results
obtained in previous studies.
Index Terms—Facial thermal image; Nasal skin temperature;
Mental work-Load.
I. INTRODUCTION
Innovation in the area of ICT has resulted in workers
experiencing a higher mental workload (MWL) [1] caused
by using the computer. Although an appropriate MWL has
health beneﬁts for human beings, long-term excessive MWL
can cause fatigue and lead to a drop in concentration, thereby
leading to human errors and creating a health hazard. It is
therefore very important for workers to evaluate their MWL,
in terms of preventing and reducing human errors and the
associated health hazard.
A previous study used estimation methods based on psy-
chological, behavioral, and physiological evaluations to assess
the MWL [2]–[12]. Psychological evaluations are based on the
use of questionnaires or similar methods. Behavioral evalua-
tions involve the assessment of work results and performance,
for example, whereas the methods used for physiological
evaluations use electrophysiological signal indices or methods
such as these. In particular, the use of physiological indices for
evaluation purposes enable researchers to perform assessments
objectively and quantitatively and in real time. In addition,
physiological indicators have excellent features that can be
detected by way of the involuntary reaction of the unconscious.
In general, physiological indices are often used as an indication
of autonomic nerve activity derived from indicators such as the
heart rate, respiration, blood pressure, myoelectric properties,
and electroencephalogram (EEG) measurements.
These physiological indicators are used to evaluate au-
tonomic nervous activity, which provides an estimation of
MWL. However, when recording these bioelectric signals it
is necessary to use mounted electrodes, for example, and this
may cause difﬁculties when applied in the actual workplace.
Prompted by the need to overcome these difﬁculties,
our research group has been studying a method based on
the use of facial thermal imaging as measured by infrared
thermography [12]–[24]. This method extracts the forehead
and the nose from the facial thermal image to determine the
temperature difference by using the nasal skin temperature
(NST) to evaluate and estimate the autonomic nervous activity.
The advantage of using NST is that, unlike the measure-
ment of electrophysiological indicators, the method obviates
the need to attach sensors; hence, it is possible to measure the
MWL by using low-bound and non-contact methods. However,
this method uses time series data and is a relative evaluation
based on the comparison of resting and task loading; thus,
providing feedback of the results of the analysis is time
consuming.
Therefore, we have investigated the evaluation of the phys-
iological mental state to determine the MWL by using a heat
image of the skin temperature of the whole face, as measured
by infrared thermography. This method enables temperature
changes of areas other than the nose to be captured. Therefore,
it is possible to perform the evaluation and estimation more
262
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Fig. 1. Experimental system.
Fig. 2. Experimental protocol.
accurately and more sensitively than with the past technique.
In addition, the possibility of absolute evaluation by a single
thermal image of the face exists.
Previous studies of ours led to the development of a
high-precision method based on the histogram of the skin
temperature of the entire face. However, the MWL evaluations
were not necessarily accurate, because different shooting an-
gles could cause a reduction in the accuracy of temperature
measurements. Thus, we suggest the use of a large end
portion of the face by using an appropriate thermographic and
photographic angle. Evaluation results that include the end
portion of the face have been shown to be less accurate [25]–
[27].
The objective of this study was to perform an absolute
evaluation of MWL, by considering an algorithm for the
evaluation and estimation of the autonomic nervous activ-
ity. Therefore, we examined the possibility of further high-
precision evaluation and estimation.
II. EXPERIMENTS
Experiments were carried out to acquire facial thermal
images (FTIs) of the different MWL states. We required
subjects to carry out a consuming MWL task.
A. Experimental protocol
Fig.1 shows the experimental system. Thermal images were
taken when a subject solved the mental arithmetic calcula-
tion. An infrared thermography device (ViewOhreIMAGING
XA0350) was placed at a distance of 1 m horizontally from
the nose of the subject. The thermal image size was 320 ×
240 pixels, and the sampling period was 1 s. A PC display
and numeric keypad were placed upon the desk. Fig.2 shows
the experimental protocol.
Subjects rested for 3 min, in a sitting position. After
this initial rest period, subjects began the mental arithmetic
calculation task and continued this task for 10 min as MWL.
Fig. 3. Example of Visual Analogue Scale.
After completion of the task, subjects again rested for 3 min,
thereby completing the experiment. The calculation involved
the addition of two integers, each of which was between 10 and
99. The subject inputs the answer of the calculation displayed
on the PC by using the numeric keypad. The calculation is
displayed for 3 s. After 3 s, the following calculation will
display on the PC, regardless of whether the subject answers
the calculation within 3 s. Seven facial thermal images as
physiological indices at 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 min after resting
are taken during the experiment. Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)
was used as psychological indices. Fig.3 shows an example
of VAS. Subjective senses and feelings can be measured by
marking a position on 10cm long scale characterized by a
pair of opposite words or phrases at the both ends. This
method is featured with little individual differences in the un-
derstanding of the description, and shorter time to perform the
measurements. In this study, four pairs of words for VASs were
employed. There were“ Unpleasant-Pleasant ”,“ Distracted-
Concentrate”,“Pleasant-Unpleasant”and“Fatigue-Vigor”.
The subjects were four healthy adults from 22 to 27 years
old who were well rested the night before the experiment.
B. Results and Discussion
First, we examined the estimated possible face area of the
autonomic nervous activity. It shows the thermal image before
and after mental arithmetic calculation task load in Fig.4.
The task takes into account that the temperature in the
vicinity of the nose and lips changes signiﬁcantly. In addition,
according to previous studies [3], those parts of the face that
require the camera to use a large shooting angle do not provide
accurate temperature measurements. Therefore, as shown in 4,
regions of the face that exclude the end portion of large faces
and which have a suitable camera imaging angle ( (a) whole
face excluding the hair, (b) the eyes and the area between the
eyes and downwards, only, and (c) the nose and mouth) can
be used for the analysis.
Next, an analysis region is extracted from seven different
thermal images of the state of the acquired MWL, and were
investigated with the average of the regions (a) and (b) to
determine the change. Fig.6 shows the average value and
the standard deviation of the time series data of the average
temperature of each subject.
Although there are differences in the average temperature
of each subject, the standard deviation is within 1[Celsius].
Large variations were observed in the average temperature of
the whole area due to the inﬂuence of the MWL load. As the
blood ﬂow is expected to ﬂow to the nose and in the vicinity
of the lips depending on the MWL, we considered the blood
ﬂowing to the entire face to remain unchanged. As a result,
the average change in temperature was considered to be less.
263
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Fig. 4.
Thermal image before and after mental arithmetic calculation task
load.
Fig. 5. Analysis region (a) whole face which does not include the hair, (b)
the inside of the eyes, only (c) nose and mouth) and the analysis region.
III. PROPOSED AUTONOMIC NERVOUS ACTIVITY
ESTIMATION ALGORITHM
We are aiming for absolute MWL evaluation by obtaining a
single face thermal image. This study proposes an algorithm to
reproduce autonomic nervous activity, with the aim of absolute
MWL evaluation by using a single thermal image of the face.
As our study is based on the average temperature of the
entire region that undergoes little change due to the MWL,
we propose an algorithm to estimate the autonomic nervous
activity.
Fig. 6. The average value and the standard deviation of the time series data
of the average temperature of each subject.
A. Method of calculating the estimated value
The average of the entire area was calculated by plotting
the temperatures in the region, after which the sum of the
difference in the region was calculated. This temperature
change due to changes in the autonomic nervous activity was
examined to determine whether it is a possible measurement.
The calculation formula of the average temperature and the
temperature difference in each area are obtained using the
following equation:
F(x, y) =
n
∑
i=0
(T − Xi)2
(1)
where T is the average temperature, Xi is a temperature value
for each pixel in the region, and n is the number of pixels in
the area. By squaring the reference and the difference of the
temperature, the effect of the sign is taken into account. We
evaluated the MWL using the estimates obtained for each of
the three regions shown in Fig.5.
B. Evaluation method
1) General correlation between mental state and physiolog-
ical indices (Evaluation method 1): We investigated the gen-
eral relationship between the mental state and each proposed
physiological index by comparing the psychological indicators
and physiological indices that underwent change as a result of
the imposed calculation problem tasks to determne the MWL.
The correlations between VAS and each of the physiological
indices were determined by Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient
using the mean values of all subjects.
2) (Evaluation method 2): In this case, we investigated the
relationship between the mental state and each proposed phys-
iological index within the subject by using multiple regression
to determine the variations between the psychological indica-
tors and physiological indices. We used VAS as the outcome
variable, and each physiological index and the subjects as
predictor variables. Subjects were treated as categorical factors
using a dummy variable with eight degrees of freedom. The
value from the t test for the regression slope of VAS was used
264
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I
RESULTS OF THE ANALYSIS.
to determine the probability of the analysis. The magnitude
of correlation coefﬁcient between VAS and each physiological
index within subjects was calculated as the square root of (sum
of squares for VAS)/(sum of squares for VAS + residual sum
of squares). The sign of the correlation coefﬁcient was given
by that of the regression coefﬁcient for VAS.
C. Results and Discussion
Table 1 lists the results of the analysis. Evaluation method
1 found signiﬁcant correlation between some VAS and each
physiological index. In particular, the correlation of Pleasure-
Unpleasure was observed. These results show that the NST
obtained by the proposed method, is high hedonicof the
general relationship of psychology. Next, evaluation method 2,
in particular, also showed a signiﬁcant correlation of Pleasure-
Unpleasure. Other statistically signiﬁcant differences, includ-
ing the Pleasant-Unpleasant correlation of VAS items was also
observed. This showed that the value is lower than the NST.
Thus, within subjects, the correlation that was statistically
determined using the proposed method was higher than that
obtained with the evaluation method using the NST of previous
studies.
IV. CONCLUSION
The aim of our work was to perform the absolute MWL
evaluation by using a single thermal image of the face. Thus,
we proposed a novel algorithm to estimate the autonomic
nervous activity. The results showed our proposed method to
be highly accurate compared to the NST evaluation method
proposed in previous studies.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Haga, ”Theory and measurement of Mental Work-load,” Japan Pabu-
lication Service, 2001.
[2] A. Murata ,”Measurement of mental workload by heart rate variability
indexes,” Japan Ergonomics Society,28(2), pp.91-99, 1992.
[3] K. HIRAYANAGI, K. IWASAKI, S. KANDA and K. YAJIMA, ”An
experimental study on the measurement and assessment of mental work-
load(MWL),” Japan Ergonomics Society, pp.251-259, 1996.
[4] T. MIYAKAWA, T. YOSHIDA, R. KUBOTA, H. IKEDA,” Development
of the mental workload evaluation method,” Human interface : proceed-
ings of the Human Interface Symposium , Human interface : proceedings
of the Human Interface Symposium
[5] R. Tokunaga, T. Hagiwara , S. Kagaya and Y. Onodera , ”Effects of
Talking through Cellular Telephone on Driving Behavior,” Japan Society
of Civil Engineers No.17 pp995-1000, 2000.
[6] H. MATSUNAGA and H.NAKAZAWA, ”Relation between Mental Work-
load and Satisfaction Measures Evaluated from EEG,” The Japan Society
of Mechanical Engineers 66(648), 2884-2890, 2000.
[7] M. KARASHIMA, T. YAMAZAKI, ”A study on the relationship between
the time pressure by time constraints and the time estimations,” Japan
Ergonomics Society 39(1), 30-37, 2003.
[8] H. Zenju , A. Nozawa, H. Tanaka and H. Ide ,”The Estimation of
Unpleasant and Pleasant States by Nasal Thermogram,” The transactions
of the Institute of Electrical Engineers of Japan. C, A publication of
Electronics, Information and System Society 124(1), 213-214, 2004-01-
01.
[9] H. Kaname, I. Kenichi, K. Shougo, Y. Kazuyoshi ,”An experimental study
on the measurement and assessment of mental workload(MWL),” Japan
Ergonomics Society, 32(5),pp.251-259, 1996.
[10] I. Hiroo Quantitative evaluation of mental work by thermography. The
Society of Instrument and Control Engineers Vol.24, No.2, pp107-111,
1988.
[11] K. Mitsuhiko, Y. Tomoyuki ,”A study on the relationship between
the time pressure by time constraints and the time estimations,” Japan
Ergonomics Society, Vol.39, No.1, pp30-37, 2003.
[12] K. Hioki, A. Nozawa, T. Mizuno and H. Ide , Physiological Evaluation
of Mental Workload in Time Pressure. The transactions of the Institute
of Electrical Engineers of Japan. C, A publication of Electronics, Infor-
mation and System Society 127(7), 1000-1006, 2007-07-01.
[13] A. Nozawa, T. Mizuno, H. Ide, H. Asano and S. Nomura, ”Evaluation of
the Effect of Intermittent Mental Work-Load by Nasal Skin Temperature,”
The transactions of the Institute of Electrical Engineers of Japan. D, A
publication of Electronics, Information and System Society Vol.J93-D,
No.4, pp.535-543, 2010.
[14] A. Nozawa, S. Tomono, T. Mizuno and H.Ide ,”Detection of Fight
or Flight Reaction on Facial Skin Thermogram using Spatio-Temporal
Spectrum Differential Analysis,” T.IEEJ Trans.FM, 126(6), pp.470-477,
2006.
[15] R. Sakamoto, A. Nozawa, H. Tanaka, T. Mizuno and H. Ide,” Evaluation
of the Driver’s Temporary Arousal Level by Facial Skin Thermogram,”
Effect of Surrounding Temperature and Wind on the Thermogram. The
transactions of the Institute of Electrical Engineers of Japan. C, A
publication of Electronics, Information and System Society 126(7), 804-
809, 2006-07-01.
[16] K. Hioki, A. Nozawa, T. Mizuno and H. Ide, ”Physiological Evaluation
of Mental Workload in Time Pressure,” The transactions of the Institute
of Electrical Engineers of Japan. C, A publication of Electronics, Infor-
mation and System Society 127(7), 1000-1006, 2007-07-01.
[17] T. Mizuno, S. Nomura, A. Nozawa, H. Asano and H. Ide, ”Evaluation of
the Effect of Intermittent Mental Work-Load by Nasal Skin Temperature,”
IE-ICE, J93-D(4), pp.535-543, 2010.
[18] Advanced Industrial Science and Technology - Institute for Human Sci-
ence and Biomedical Engineering,” Handbook of Human measurement,
Asa-kura publisher, 2003.
[19] T. Mizuno, N. Nakategawa, Y. Kume, ”Color inﬂuences on human beings
evaluated by nasal skin temperature,” IArtiﬁcial Life and Robotics, Vol.16,
Issue 4, pp 519-522, 2012.
[20] Bashar A. Rajoub, and Reyer Zwiggelaar, ”Thermal Facial Analysis for
Deception Detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, Vol. 9, No. 6, pp.1015-1023, June 2014.
[21] Sarun Sumriddetchkajorn, Armote Somboonkaew, Tawee Sodsong, It-
thipol Promduang, Niti Sumriddetchkajorn, and Thawatchai Prada-in,
“ Simultaneous Analysis of Far Infrared Signals From Periorbital and
Nostril Areas for Nonintrusive Lie Detection: Performance From Real
Case Study,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 33, No. 16, pp.3406-
3412, August 2015.
[22] Dvijesh Shastri, Manos Papadakis, Panagiotis Tsiamyrtzis,Barbara Bass,
and Ioannis Pavlidis, “ Perinasal Imaging of Physiological Stress and Its
265
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Affective Potential,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, Vol. 3,
No. 3, pp.336-378, 2012.
[23] Sophie Jarlier, Didier Grandjean, Sylvain Delplanque, Karim N’Diaye,
Isabelle Cayeux,Maria Ine´ s Velazco, David Sander, Patrik Vuilleumier,
and Klaus R. Scherer, “ Thermal Analysis of Facial Muscles Contrac-
tions,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp.2-9,
2011.
[24] Brian R. Nhan and Tom Chau, “ Classifying Affective States Using
Thermal Infrared Imaging of the Human Face,” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 57, No. 4, pp.979-987, April 2010.
[25] S. Kawazura, H. Asano, A. Nozawa, M. Uchida, N. Itakura, K.
Mito and T. Mizuno, ”Estimation of the autonomic nerve activity with
facial thermogram,” 2014 11th international Conference on Electrical
Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information
Technology, CD-ROM Advanced Techniques in Applications, DSP and
Hardware Design, No.1320, May 14-17, 2014, Thailand.
[26] T. Mizuno, S. Kawazura, H. Asano, K. Mito, Y. Kume and N. Itakura,
”Evaluation of the autonomic nerve activity using facial thermal image,”
The Twentienth International Symposium on Artiﬁcial Life and Robotics
2015 (AROB 20th ‘15),PID3158279, 2015, Japan.
[27] T. Mizuno, T. Sakai, S. Kawazura, H. Asano, K. Akehi, S. Matsuno, K.
Mito, Y. Kume and N. Itakura, ”Facial Skin Temperature Fluctuation by
Mental Work-Load with Thermography,” The International Conference on
Electronics and Software Science (ICESS2015) Proceedings pp. 212-215,
2015, Japan.
266
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

