Inversus 
The Sensitive Machine 
 
Luís Leite 
IT / FEUP 
Porto, Portugal 
luis.grifu@gmail.com 
Verónica Orvalho 
IT / FCUP 
Porto, Portugal 
veronica.orvalho@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—Inversus is a digital interactive installation that 
explores the relationship between user actions with common 
objects: lamps, speakers and fans. It is an interactive machine 
that shifts the conceptual understanding a user traditionally 
has about a specific object, making people wonder: why should 
a lamp be used only to illuminate? In fact, lamps, speakers or 
fans are commonly used as output interfaces, imagine now, 
what would happen if we turn the output into an input 
interface? This machine explores an inversion on this 
relationship by using lamps as light sensors, speakers as 
pressure sensors and fans as blowing sensors.  
Keywords-HCI; 
audiovisual 
instrument; 
DIY; 
user 
experience; interactive installations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Electronic devices are designed in general with a specific 
function. Today, many electronic devices are getting smarter 
with generic purposes, sensing the environment to respond to 
all kinds of inputs providing a wide range of capabilities. 
Devices that are designed for one main purpose can be used 
with a different one depending on the user intention. One can 
use a smart television to make a phone call, or use a smart 
phone to watch television. There is a shift in the way devices 
and objects are designed and in the way users relate to them. 
We live in a sensorial age where sensors are included in 
every day objects. But, instead of replacing all the objects 
and devices with smart new ones, we might try to recycle 
them. With the “Do It Yourself” (DIY) approach, ordinary 
people have the power to change and be creative to find new 
uses for their old devices.  Our project challenges 
participants to discover and explore new applications for 
traditional one-purpose machines. Inversus, encourage the 
participants to rethink the original functionality of the objects 
into other potential uses, searching for new capabilities and 
combinations. [1] 
Inversus is a sensitive machine that captures human 
interaction to produce sound and visual kinetics. It is a 
performing instrument that gives life to a mechanical flower, 
which spins when someone blows into the machine 
producing an animated shadow similar to the shadow 
puppetry effect (Figure 1). A virtual marionette lives inside 
the machine that reacts to the pressure of four sensitive pads; 
this marionette is rigged with virtual strings that are mapped 
to the pads that make them squash and stretch producing 
animation, like pulling the strings from a marionette. Based 
on human interaction the machine generates animation in the 
physical and in the virtual space in the mechanical and in the 
digital domain enhancing the user experience.  This audio-
visual instrument made from a washing machine spins a 
physical colorful wheel after sensing the interaction, mixing 
all the media elements as a metaphor for the real washing 
machine. Users are familiar with these common objects and 
recognize their original function, but when they start 
interacting with Inversus they realize that it as a different 
purpose. They experience a strange reaction to a familiar 
object and explore its new potential making a dialog with the 
machine.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents the design principles and describes how 
the idea was developed. Section III describes the 
implementation of the system and framework. Section IV 
addresses the impact of the interaction in participants. 
Section V presents the conclusion. 
II. 
DESIGN 
The idea of building a machine from recycled materials 
was influenced by the toy hacking spirit and by an ecological 
thinking. Inversus was designed based on the way we play 
musical instruments with three types of interaction: i) 
striking a drum with the hands, ii) moving the hands above a 
theremin, iii) blowing air to a flute with the mouth. These 
gestures were adapted to present distinct interaction 
experiences based on the sensitivity of each sensor divided 
into three categories: Touch – by touching the color pads the 
Figure 1 – 3D simulation of the machine with the shadow of the flower 
projected on the wall. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

user triggers sounds that respond to the pressure (like playing 
drums) and animates a virtual marionette that reacts to the 
pressure and represents the mechanical body; 
Motion – by moving user hands above Light Emitting 
Diodes (LED) it produces a continuous sound (sound keeps 
playing until the hand moves away from the LED) similar to 
the interaction with a theremin instrument; 
Blow – by blowing a fan, the user changes the frequency 
of sounds and spins a mechanical flower producing a shadow 
animation in the wall that represents the organic body.  
In our methodology we searched for electronic materials 
that could be recycled into sensors. And although we did not 
seek total accuracy the diversity of the sources brought 
variable results. Our challenge was to create a balance 
between all the sensors and build an instrument that could be 
played by any user distinguishing the sensitivity in the 
different interaction methods. 
Inversus was made from the fowling recycled materials: 
the chassis of a washing machine was used to build the case 
and to provide a link to familiar objects; the pressure sensors 
were made with piezoelectric from small speakers; LED´s 
from toys were used for building the light sensors; the 
blowing sensor was made from a computer fan.  In this way 
all the objects were employed with a different purpose from 
their original design.  
 
Figure 2 – Orthographic top view from the connection sketch with the input 
sensors and the output motor. 
 
Using LED´s as photodiodes we can build low-cost light 
sensors [2]. A LED is basically a P-N junction, an interface 
between two types of semiconductor material that conducts 
electricity in two different sides. If a photon (light particle) 
penetrates the region around the P-N junction it can 
potentially interact with one of the atoms transferring it´s 
energy into the atom´s electron creating an electron hole pair. 
The electric field across the region causes a tiny current to 
flow, known as the photo current. Because the junction area 
of the LED is small the result current is also small. Adding 
up photocurrents over time makes the diode look like a 
capacitor and will increase the result current.  
 
III. 
MACHINE DEVELOPMENT 
To implement this solution we used the Arduino 
microcontroller, which provides configurable pins making it 
possible to change the direction of the current flow. We 
wired up the LED´s to the Arduino connecting the anode 
(positive) of the LED to a digital pin and the cathode 
(negative) to an analog pin (Figure 2). First, we charge up 
the capacitor by making the anode negative and the cathode 
positive in a short amount of time. Then, we take a reference 
measurement, reading the analogue voltage and waiting for 
the photocurrent to be integrated. Finally, the voltage is 
measured again and subtracted from the reference value. 
LED´s are sensible to thermal noise and are not precise as 
light sensors, in particular in dark environments. A 
potentiometer was included to calibrate the sensitivity of the 
LED´s to increase the accuracy of the readings face to the 
light environment. For pressure sensing, we used a 
piezoelectric element [3] from small speakers attached to 
foam pads [4]. Foam is a good material to attenuate the 
pressure impact and to expand the area of interaction. We 
connected the “piezos” through resistors and diodes to the 
analog 
input. 
The 
musical 
note 
velocity 
increases 
proportionally to the pressure that is made in the pads like in 
a real drum. The blowing sensor was a PC fan connected 
with two-wires, one connected to the ground and the other 
connected to the analog input. Based on the blowing 
strength, two DC motors increase or decrease the rotation of 
a mechanical flower and of a colorful wheel.   
Our framework is based on serial and network 
communications that link hardware to software. Sensor 
readings from Arduino are mapped to control and note 
messages via MIDI protocol, used in musical-based 
applications, and sent through the serial port. Messages from 
the serial port are then routed to a virtual MIDI port using the 
software 
hairless-midiserial 
that 
allows 
MIDI-based 
applications to capture the messages. The messages are then 
mapped to Ableton Live, a sound application that triggers 
and shapes the sound. To route the messages into animation-
based applications, we use the visual programming 
environment Pure Data to convert the MIDI protocol into 
Open Sound Control (OSC) network protocol, which is 
available in many multimedia applications. The OSC 
messages are then received in Animata, a real-time 
animation software, and mapped to a skeleton of a virtual 
marionette that reacts to the pressure of the Pads. 
 
IV. 
INTERACTION 
We design Inversus to generate an emotional response to 
participants, motivating them to play and discover 
cognitively the interrelations between their actions and the 
result in the environment. 
By providing a multisensory experience the participants 
have the feeling of embodiment in the interaction with the 
machine, which is enhanced by the relationship between 
action, cognition and the environment  [5]. The distinct 
interaction methods presented in this installation provided an 
opportunity to understand how users establish their 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

communication with an unknown interface. We used some 
design conventions, such as shape, color or spatial 
distribution of the controllers that provided some interaction 
clues.  
 
 
Figure 3 – Inversus installation presented in a art exhbition: Cheia, Póvoa 
do Varzim, Portugal. 
Inversus was available for public interaction in two 
artistic exhibitions during two months (Figure 3). About 300 
people attended the event. We performed a pilot study with 
10 participants. We observed in detail the participants 
interaction 
and 
behavior 
with 
Inversus. 
From 
the 
observations, we detected interesting trends in embodiment 
interaction [6] that open new lines for further research. We 
found that most of the participants took some time to analyze 
the device before trying it, beginning their interaction by 
touching the pads seeking a relationship between the strength 
of their actions and the intensity of the sound and animation. 
After this understanding, most of the users that were 
observed moved their attention into the blinking LED´s by 
touching them. And although, not touch sensitive the light 
occlusion occurs producing an effect in the environment 
inducing the user in how to interact, establishing a relation 
between their hand position and the sound and the light of 
the LED. Participants approached the fan wheel in the last 
stage using their hands, and again, the effect produced in the 
environment pointed to the correct way of interaction. 
Changing their interaction behavior and by blowing to the 
fan, they realize that the fan wheel spins faster producing a 
more intense modification in sound, as well as making the 
mechanical flower to spin, producing a shadow animation in 
the wall. After the explorative phase and knowing how the 
interface works, participants expanded to a multimodal 
interaction combining the controllers like playing drums. By 
making it´s own cognitive observations and by establishing 
relations between their actions and the environment the 
participants become embodied with the a strange interface. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This interactive installation demonstrates how to “hack” 
electronic components used as output devices found in 
everyday objects and applied them as input devices in a 
different application domain. Recycling technology in an 
innovative way presents interesting challenges to users that 
can increase the feeling of empowerment and can contribute 
to novel interaction methods and applications. Two examples 
of the diversification of use of specific purpose technology 
can be found in game controllers such as the adaptation of 
the Nintendo WII remote as a low-cost interactive 
whiteboard [7], or in the adaption of Microsoft Kinect as a 
3D scanner [8]. 
Inversus challenges the participants to interact with a 
machine that looks familiar, but presents unknown options 
and functions. It gives the participant the possibility to re-
think the interaction fundamentals behind everyday objects. 
The participant is invited to discover the relations between 
the input sensors and the audiovisual output, and to realize 
the sensitive capabilities of inverted devices from recycled 
materials. As a result of the interaction experience, we hope 
to instill in the participants the desire to explore and create 
new communication challenges by re-defining the concept, 
usage and interaction mechanism of common objects. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partially funded by FCT Fundação para a 
Ciência e Tecnologia (BD/51799/2011), Instituto de 
Telecomunicações, Faculdade de Engenharia, Universidade 
do Porto. Thanks to Marcelo Lafontana, Sílvia Fagundes, 
Rui Torres, Leonel Cunha and Jacqueline Fernandes.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. Blum, "Digital Interactive Installations: Programming Interactive 
Installations Using the Software Package Max/MSP/Jitter."  VDM 
Verlag, 2007. 
[2] 
S. E. Hudson, "Using Light Emitting Diode Arrays As Touch-
sensitive Input and Output Devices", Proc. of the ACM Symposium 
on User Interface Software and Technology, NY, USA, 2004, pp. 
287–290. 
[3] 
J. Noble and N. Joshua, "Programming Interactivity: A Designer's 
Guide to Processing, Arduino, and Openframeworks", O'Reilly 
Media, Inc, Sebastopol, USA, 2009. 
[4] 
Mschaff, “Ardrumo: Mac OS X Virtual MIDI Interface for Arduino 
Prototype 
Boards”, 
Mschaff. 
[Online]. 
Avaiable 
from: 
<http://inivent.com/ardrumo/> 2014.11.15 
[5] 
A. N. Antle, “Lifelong Interactions: Embodied Child Computer 
Interaction: Why Embodiment Matters”, Interactions, vol. 16, no. 2, 
NY, USA, 2009, pp. 27–30. 
[6] 
P. Dourish, "Where The Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied 
Interaction",The MIT Press, Cambridge, USA, 2001. 
[7] 
J. Lee, "Low-Cost Multi-point Interactive whiteboards Using the 
Wiimote.", 
Johnny 
Chung 
Lee. 
[Online]. 
Avaiable 
from: 
<http://johnnylee.net/projects/wii/> 2014.11.20 
[8] 
S. Izadi, et al., “KinectFusion: Real-time 3D Reconstruction and 
Interaction Using a Moving Depth Camera” , Proc. of the ACM  
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, NY, USA, 
2011, pp. 559–568. 
 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

