Reassessing the Effect of Videoconferencing
Features on Trust in Triadic Negotiations
Siavash Kazemian
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
kazemian@cs.toronto.edu
Cosmin Munteanu
Dept. of Systems Design Engineering
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Canada
cosmin@taglab.ca
Gerald Penn
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
gpenn@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract—Globalization, lingering threats of pandemics and
ever-increasing travel costs have made videoconferencing a neces-
sary tool in many environments, ranging from corporate meetings
with potential clients who may not have met previously, to
mediated negotiations between antagonists who must necessarily
remain at a safe distance. This raises several questions about how
videoconferencing affects the efficiency, fairness and trust that is
desired of negotiations. Significant research has been conducted
on the effectiveness of video-based collaborative environments,
and more recently, on how one specific aspect of trust called
credibility develops in videoconference-mediated, collaborative,
one-on-one social dilemmas. Much less is known, however, about
how typical videoconferencing features affect the full spectrum
of trust-connoting attributes that are known within the social
science literature, or outside the idealized confines of two-
party social dilemmas. We report here the results of a broader
experimental investigation that has exhibited significance across
other dimensions of trust (dependency and expectancy), both
objectively and subjectively, in the presence of more videocon-
ferencing features than just video (chat and screen sharing), and
in a realistic three-way negotiation. We make recommendations
for designers, administrators, and corporate decision makers with
regard to appropriately using these features in videoconferencing
systems.
Index Terms—videoconferencing; trust; technology-mediated
negotiation; chat systems; shared displays.
I. INTRODUCTION
Videoconferencing is often used in settings where partici-
pants do not know each other well, and yet need to engage
in sensitive transactions. These transactions invariably require
some degree of trust, often involve negotiations as part or all
of the transaction, and at times also involve the sharing of
documents and presentations, or the collaborative editing of a
document, such as a license agreement.
Often such meetings are asymmetrical, for example two
participants from a large company, each of them being situated
in a different location, engage by videoconference with a third
potential client who is located in yet another place. Many
videoconferencing systems support text-chat functionality that
can allow for back-channel private communications in these
cases. But there must still be at least some degree of trust. It
has been argued that trust is more difficult to establish through
computer-mediated communication (CMC) than through face-
to-face communication when it lacks body language and other
cues that are used to build trust [1]–[4]. It is widely assumed
that streaming live video of the participants will mitigate this
problem to some extent. Does it? What about in relation to
other features, such as display-sharing or chatting?
The answer turns out to depend on what we mean by “trust”
and which CMC features we intend to use. The two studies
presented here evaluate three features of videoconferencing
systems — all by now staples of that industry — in terms
of their effect on several dimensions of trust. They do so,
furthermore, in a more realistic setting than a two-party social
dilemma — by now, the staple of HCI studies of trust.
Social dilemmas, such as the well-known prisoner’s dilemma
problem, pit two or more players against each other in a task
in which the pursuit of rational self-interest by every player
leads to an outcome that is worse than if they pursue some
other coordinated strategy that contradicts their self-interests.
By contrast, our studies involve a realistic, three-party business
negotiation, in which participants had competing interests, the
outcomes of the negotiation were not a zero-sum game, and
the negotiated settlements (or “deals”) were not necessarily
symmetrical. Triadic and higher-order interaction effects have
been argued [6] to be essential to understanding the dynamics
and formation of social networks. Trust has been shown to be
a key potential factor in keeping certain triadic, collaborative
problem-solving activities on track in the face of lapses in
mutual understanding [7]. This paper attempts to revisit earlier
experimentation on trust in CMC in view of these more recent
developments.
This paper demonstrates that there are significant differences
that emerge in risk tolerance and in other dimensions of trust
through variations to affordances that are independent of the
presence of video. These other dimensions are significantly
impaired by the addition of private chatting functionality
and significantly enhanced by screen-sharing functionality.
Earlier work on video-enhanced versus audio-only interfaces
has found the provable benefits of adding high-quality video
or viewrange-expanded video to be less straightforward to
quantify. Ours is also among the very few studies to date to
have observed significance in an objective measure of trust
(specifically, risk tolerance) other than efficiency. These results
were observable because of a controlled experimental design
that eschews social dilemmas and embraces a fuller conception
of trust that is already pervasive within the social sciences.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. RELATED WORK ON THE CHOSEN AFFORDANCES
Video itself has already received a fair amount of attention.1
The two most closely related studies to what we undertake
here are those of Bos et al. [8] and Teoh et al. [9], both
of which we shall consider in detail presently. The former
concerned videoconferencing relative to three alternatives; the
latter compared two different videoconferencing views.
In qualitative studies [10], video has been argued to “build
trust and relationship,” and even to discourage deception [11].
Where measured, the frame rate of the video seems almost
totally irrelevant, on the other hand; even showing the other
parties’ faces occasionally in a series of still images is enough
to achieve the same effect [12].2 Another study [14] used a
social dilemma game to investigate potentially trust-improving
warm-up activities, such as casual introductory interactions by
email, visual identification through photos and reading dossiers
of personal information. Of these, visual identification was
found to be the most significant by far.
As for related work on chatting and screen-sharing, there
have been other studies of chat systems apart from Bos et
al.’s [8], e.g., [15], but they likewise consider chat in the
absence of video and audio, or, in one exceptional case,
speech synthesized from text chats [16]. This is mainly a
reflection of their age; we consider video and audio now
to be a minimum baseline that any software for negotiation
would incorporate. In other studies, chat, where it is present
at all, often augments at least one of video or audio. One
study [17] compared face-to-face communication with text
chat in both low-interdependence tasks like brainstorming
and high-interdependence tasks like negotiation, and found
openness and trust to be beneficial to the highly interdependent
task. They also found that a wide “temporal scope” in the
relationships of participants (i.e., how long they had known
each other) mitigates the difference between face-to-face and
text-chat communications. Another [18] conversely observed
higher levels of trust emerging from both video-mediated and
chat-mediated brainstorming tasks than from similarly medi-
ated negotiation tasks. Studies of shared workspaces (called
“shared displays” in the literature, although this does not refer
to streaming video broadcasts) are comparatively rare. One
study [19] observes that shared displays may create a false
sense of shared data validity in certain collaborative work
environments.
III. RELATED WORK ON TRUST
In one respect, our present study continues a thread of
HCI research that is perhaps epitomized by Bos et al. [8],
1An earlier body of research had attempted to disabuse technologists of
the proposition that videoconferencing can ever be a direct replacement
for face-to-face meetings [5]. Those studies did not vary the interaction
mode settings of a videoconferencing system, however. Instead they looked
to shortcomings in both needs assessment methods and the argumentation
surrounding promised reductions in business-related travel to draw their
conclusions, taking the technology of videoconferencing itself to be a fait
accompli.
2From the standpoint of security and deception prevention, on the other
hand, photos of models have been found to impair participants’ abilities to
identify trustworthy e-commerce sites [13].
who studied differences in trust as outcomes of a two-person
social dilemma resolved through videoconferencing, a three-
way phone call or text chatting software, relative to a face-to-
face topline. Their subjective, Likert-scaled measures of trust
are based on Butler [20], together with correlations of those
subjective measures to ultimate aggregated payoff. Statistically
significant correlations, as a function of the communication
modality, were calculated to group payoff (0.53), self-ratings
of trustworthiness (0.69) and self-ratings of consistency (0.61).
The trust responses were found to have the same profile of
pairwise differences as group payoff. There are important
differences in baseline selection relative to our study; the
alternatives used by [8] were either a phone call or text chat-
ting, but not even audio with chatting. Even today, audio with
chatting is still a very common CMC setup for low-bandwidth
communication. Otherwise, this was a very thorough study, but
a study based upon only one dimension of trust.
A. What is Trust?
Our own five-dimensional view of trust is based upon
the instrument that Alston [21] selected in a study of trust
in technology-driven organizations, called the Organizational
Trust Index [22], although for clarity we will use less domain-
specific terms for the dimensions: expectancy trust, depen-
dency trust (which, following [23], we take to be synonymous
with risk tolerance3), credibility trust, empathy and compe-
tence.4
Butler’s [20] account of trust, upon which the measures
of trust in [8] are based, is by contrast entirely affective.
This kind of trust might better be called trustworthiness, i.e.,
a partly emotive, entirely human-centred account of what
makes people trustworthy, such as, for example, their status as
authority figures in a society. This is not atypical of treatments
of trust found in the behavioural sciences literature (e.g.,
[25]). When studying features of communication-mediating
technology, however, the design of the experimental scenario
should reflect instead on the trust requirements of the situation
or context in which the communication takes place.5 In addi-
tion, as Wierzbicki [23] argues, the technology should, to the
extent possible, be rooted in an entirely rational or what he
terms “cognitive” view of trust in order to be computationally
realizable. CMC technology should not strive to be inert, in
other words, but rather to be an intelligent component of
the communication channel. But in these negotiations, the
communications technology is not cast in the role of a would-
be human participant. It silently enables and mediates.
Our own multi-dimensional view has allowed us to calculate
similar correlation scores to those of Bos et al. [8], but further-
3This view of risk considers tolerance to be a contextually variant resultant
state, which is conditioned over time by experience dealing with other actors.
An alternative view is adopted by [24] in which certain individuals are
inherently more risk-prone than others. They find this alternative to correlate
positively with an individual’s construal of self as being defined by his or her
relationships.
4The OTI’s terms are openness/honesty, identification, reliability, concern
for employees, and competence, respectively.
5See, as an example, Riegelsberger et al.’s [4] taxonomy.
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

more to do so for each dimension of trust independently. Very
few previous CMC studies take trust to be multi-dimensional
(versus being a desirable primitive alongside other positive
attributes of communication, such as fairness, openness, etc.).
Although it would certainly be an overstatement to claim that
there is universal agreement in the social sciences literature
on what “trust” means, there has been a growing awareness
within management science since Butler’s [20] early work on
the subject that trust is in fact multi-dimensional. Alston [21]
(p. 30) went so far as to include the ability to measure multiple
dimensions of trust as one of four selectional criteria for her
survey instrument, alongside validity and ease of completion
within less than 10 minutes. One finds this sentiment outside of
management science as well. Mitchell and Zigurs alone have
found 10 unequivocally distinct definitions of trust in other
literature [26]. See also Uslaner [27] on the multidimensional
nature of trust resulting from factor analysis of trust surveys.
Any CMC research that has claimed to measure primitive
“trust” according to any single definition, no matter which
definition they select, has in some sense failed to capture what
trust really is.
B. Social Dilemmas
Teoh et al. [9] is a rare exception of a CMC study that
does recognize trust as multi-dimensional, but it is still based
upon a two-personal social dilemma. They were interested
in removing the experiential bias that earlier comparisons to
face-to-face communication had not satisfactorily addressed,
as well as in evaluating the effect of varying amounts of visual
information through a combined video/audio/chat interface
across two different types of tasks, creative and negotiating.
There found a generally greater amount of trust using a wider
camera angle,6 but which type of task exhibited greater trust
depended on the specific dimension of trust measured.
Social dilemma games, which have been used by numerous
CHI/CSCW papers on the topic of trust over the last 25 years,
e.g., [14]–[16], [29], [31]–[34], have been widely criticized
in the social sciences literature as inadequate for the study
of trust because, inter alia, the only cause for distrust in a
classical social dilemma game is the fear of defection. This
fear can be equated with the negation of commitment trust.
Social dilemma games are convenient because they are
abstract, zero-sum games, in which it is comparatively easy
to conduct controlled experiments. Nevertheless, they are not
representative of a great many real negotiations. In the case of
Teoh et al. [9], the choice of a dyadic social dilemma tragically
prevented them from measuring objective risk tolerance. The
ecological setting of the negotiations we use in our study
is very similar to theirs, and among our several objective
measures of trust are their measures of time to completion
and fairness of payout. As will be seen below, the only one
in which we found significance was risk tolerance. Fairness
6Other papers have studied the use of multiple cameras and camera angles
[29], and the relative merits of listener-controlled versus speaker-controlled
video cameras [30].
of payout has elsewhere been observed to improve in video-
conferencing negotiations when the tasks are more difficult or
have more competing trade-offs, and when less information is
exchanged per conversational turn [34].
Indeed, most previous work with social dilemmas has fo-
cussed on dyadic (two-person or two-group) social dilemmas,7
in which there is generally no opportunity to measure any kind
of trust apart from credibility trust because blame is so readily
assignable to the other party.
IV. RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES
The main goal of our research was answering the question
of whether videoconferencing features, such as chat and screen
sharing, influence the (by definition, measurable) attributes of
deal-making and the outcomes of multi-party negotiations. In
particular, we are interested in the following attributes and
their outcomes: participants’ trust in each other, their tolerance
for risk, the perceived and real (i.e., time-elapsed or turn-
counted) efficiency of the negotiation, participants’ sense of
equity (we shall call it; more precisely, it is distributive fairness
[23]:p.16) and transparency. All of these attributes pertain to
the aforementioned five dimensions of trust from the OTI [21].
To answer these research questions, we formulated several
inter-related hypothesis schemata H(Y), where Y is a variable
ranging over (e)fficiency, (r)isk tolerance, (c)redibility trust
and e(x)pectancy trust. In addition, we formulated hypothesis
subschemata relating to the chat function Hc(Y) and the screen
sharing function, Hs(Y):
H (e): Participants’ efficiency is affected by the videocon-
ferencing features available for use. Public and private chat
leads to decreased perceived and real efficiency of the meeting
negotiation (Hc(e)). Screen sharing (Hs(e)) leads to increased
perceived and real efficiency.
H (r): Participants’ tolerance for risk is affected by the
videoconferencing features available for use, with public and
private chat leading to decreased risk tolerance (Hc(r)) and
screen sharing (Hs(r)) leading to increased tolerance.
H (c): Other participants’ perceived credibility is affected
by the videoconferencing features available for use, with
public and private chat leading to decreased perceived trans-
parency (Hc(c)) and screen sharing (Hs(c)) leading to in-
creased transparency.
H (x): Perceived expectancy trust among participants dur-
ing negotiations is affected by the videoconferencing features
available for use, with public and private chat leading to
decreased perceived equity (Hc(x)) and screen sharing (Hs(x))
leading to increased equity.
Our hypothesized positive sentiment towards screen sharing
followed from [19] and our expectation that screen sharing
would likewise create a sense of transparency during negotia-
tions.
7See, however, [15] for a pioneering exception, in which a non-anonymized
electronic mailing list was evaluated against a face-to-face baseline in six-
person social dilemmas. [35] also observes the effects of group formation on
trust in three-person groups.
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

As for the presence of text chat, Birnholtz et al. [36]
proposed that it can provide a sufficient situational awareness
for completing collaborative problem-solving tasks without
necessarily ensuring a complete understanding of the situation.
Lee and Tatar [7] showed that, in those same activities, trust
could be a key factor in keeping the task on track in the
face of lapses in mutual understanding. [7] also showed that
dyadic orientations can emerge within a triad that lead to
different criteria of understanding among different pairs of
participants. Turning instead to triadic negotiation activities,
we hypothesized that dyadic sub-orientations would still exist
(although we have not tested this hypothesis directly), and
therefore that the availability of text chat in the interface
would likely lead to a situational awareness of being excluded
from one of those dyads that would be sufficient only to
causing a breakdown in trust. Because the situations that we
constructed are not zero-sum games, this would not be a
foregone conclusion; it would say something very contingent
about the dynamics of group orientations, negotiation tasks
and trust.
V. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
In order to test our hypotheses, we designed a within-
subjects study in which participants were exposed to differing
subsets of interaction modes, in an official, group-meeting
scenario. Three student participants and one mediator negotiate
over the inclusion of various facilities into a new recreation
centre that will be built on our university’s campus.
A. Participants
The study was conducted using 72 students (32 female and
40 male), grouped into 24 meeting groups. All participants
were undergraduate and graduate students from various dis-
ciplines at the same university. While the maximum age was
45, the median age was 25, with 80% of the participants being
between the ages of 18 and 27.
B. Independent Variable
Video Only (VO) — a baseline setting available to all modern
videoconferencing systems, consisting of two-way voice and
video interaction.
Video+Chat (VC) — the Video-Only setting augmented with
a chat interface for exchanging text messages (and no screen
sharing). Text messages can be “broadcast” to all participants
or sent privately to a single party. There is no defined limit
to the lengths of the text messages, although the 33-character
width for the chat column would make it awkward for trans-
missions of more than a paragraph in length. Figure 1 shows
the videoconferencing system with these features enabled.
Video+Screen (VS) — the Video-Only setting augmented
with H.239 dual-stream screen-sharing (and no text chatting8).
The screen-sharing feature is capable of annotating content
and highlighting text on the screen to bring the attention of
8A single setting in which all three were available was not investigated in
order to avoid confounds from participant preferences and selection of non-
audio/video affordances, due to more than one being available.
Fig. 1.
The videoconferencing system, displaying participants video feeds,
the list of participants, and the chat panels (private and public). For privacy
considerations, participants’ faces have been blurred.
Fig. 2.
The videoconferencing system, displaying participants video feeds,
the list of participants, and the screen sharing feature. Private and public chat
were not functional for this condition.
other participants to it, and also features a “content-slider” that
allows viewers to slide back and forth in past time, indepen-
dently of the presenter’s current state of presentation. Figure 2
illustrates the screen-sharing feature of the videoconferencing
application.
All three conditions were rendered using a popular com-
mercial videoconferencing system that runs an IETF Session
Initiation Protocol stack (SIP) on a remote server, and broad-
casts streaming, high-definition (720p at 30 frames per second)
H.264 video, G.722.1 (“Polycom”) audio and other content
between browser-based Java clients that each run on their
own Windows desktop computer. The overall system requires
1 Gbps channel capacity.
C. Task
In both studies, each participant in the experimental trials
plays the role of a student representative for one of the large
extracurricular societies on campus, who negotiates on behalf
of their society for the facilities of a new recreational centre
that will be built at the university. Depending on the facilities
chosen, there is also the risk of a tuition increase, which
subjects must balance against the desirability of the facilities.
Given that our subjects are students, this task is ecologically
valid because of its direct pertinence to their lives on campus.
D. Allocation of Roles and Experimental Conditions
These experiments call for a repeated-measures (within-
subjects) design in order to account for the natural variance
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

that exists in human-subject interaction styles and negotiating
abilities. Each experimental session or trial consists of a
meeting with four participants. The governing council student
representative, an interactor who ran the experiment, was the
same in every trial and served as a moderator. The other
three participants, the human subjects, participated in their
roles as student representatives. The moderator was trained
to not intervene in negotiations, and was only active in the
initial phase of each trial (describing the task and outlining
the scenario, namely the facilities to be discussed and the
student groups whose interests were at stake), and as a voting
facilitator.
Each group of three human subjects participated in three
negotiating sessions with each other (and the moderator), one
for each setting of the interaction mode. Every human subject
negotiated with the same two other human subjects in his/her
three trials, with no other participants added or removed.
A Latin square design of size three was chosen to randomize
the order in which participant groups were exposed to the three
settings of the independent variable [37]. 8 squares were used
in both studies, but not the same squares. The two studies
were run independently in order to avoid the exponential
increase in time and expense that would have resulted from a
single, size-five grid, but the two size-three grids do at least
share one common variable setting (VO). The squares were
designed so that: (1) each setting of an independent variable
was matched with one of three negotiation scenarios an equal
number of times, and (2) each of the three scenarios appeared
in some position in the sequence given to each group of three
participants.
The three scenarios are defined by the three societies
represented in their negotiations:
1) athletic society, graduate students’ society, MBA stu-
dents’ society
2) arts society, athletic society, undergraduate students’
society
3) Christian students’ society, health-and-fitness society,
undergraduate students’ society.
The two societies that appear in more than one scenario
(athletic and undergraduates) appear in either instance with
different rankings and different tuition-increase judgements.
E. Measures and Instruments
For the purpose of comparing the effect of each interaction
mode setting, we followed [23] in eliciting a range of both
subjective user perception judgements and objective perfor-
mance measures that instantiated and integrated our multiple
dimensional scales of trust.
These two types of data were collected and measured for
each9 experimental condition in both studies. We used a metric
9To maintain ecological validity, the scenarios were not altered in order
to “force” participants to use the features that were enabled/disabled for
each conditions. As such, participants were free to make use of all features
available for each condition: the chat feature was extensively used by all
three participants in only 10 of the undiscarded 22 meetings of the video
study, while the screen sharing feature was used by all participants in 13.
conjoint analysis [38] on a triadic variant of the actor-partner
interdependence model [39], in which each actor evaluates
both other partners together. This relies on no individual
appearing in more than one group.
1) User perception data: We asked participants upon com-
pletion of each of the three meeting tasks (one for each ex-
perimental condition) to indicate their agreement to statements
related to their perception of trust, and the degree of trans-
parency, efficiency, and equity in the meetings. Agreements
were represented on a 5-point Likert scale, from 1 for strongly
disagree to 5 for strongly agree. The statements included:
1) “I could trust the other participants,”
2) “The other participants were exchanging important in-
formation that I could not see,”
3) “The other participants were withholding information
from me,”
4) “The other participants disclosed all relevant information
during the meeting,”
5) “I feel that I completed the task in its entirety,”
6) “The other participants were effective negotiators,”
7) “I had the tools necessary to complete the task effi-
ciently,”
8) “I had to work under pressure,”
9) “It was difficult to understand the voices of the other
participants,”
10) “The settlement that we reached was fair to all parties,”
11) “I was able to participate actively in the meeting,”
12) “The other participants dealt with me fairly,”
as well as a general question related to the interface: “I found
the interface intuitive and easy to use.” Each statement was
rephrased to a statement of the opposite polarity independently
with 50% probability to control for bias in the wording.10
Statements were also presented in a randomly selected order.
2) Objective performance data: Our research focus was on
measuring participants’ attitudes and perceptions with respect
to various trust-like attributes. As such, most of the data
collected were subjective in nature. However, participants’
willingness to engage in transactions that are riskier with
respect to the potential for a fairer payout for them is often
cited as an indicator of trust [23]. Since, during negotiations,
our participants had to advance proposals based on preferences
and risks that were assigned to them for each of the facilities
(illustrated in Table I), we collected their aggregated tolerance
for lower- or higher-risk facility selections. The process for
selecting facilities and factoring in the risks is outlined in
Section V-F. The value for the aggregate risk tolerance of a
given session was calculated as the total number of times any
10The exception is statement (7), in which the modals “necessary” and
“efficiently” were combined in a single statement so that the topic would not
be overrepresented in the questionnaire. From among this statement and two
rephrasals:
• “I was unable to find all of the information I needed on the interface,”
and
• “The task required a great deal of effort.”
one was independently selected with 33.3% probability.
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I
AN EXAMPLE RANKED LIST OF FACILITIES, TOGETHER WITH
ASSESSMENTS OF WHETHER THEY WOULD RISK A TUITION HIKE.
Facility
Rank
Risk of Tuition Hike
Weight Room
1
No
Swimming Pool
2
No
Physiotherapy Centre
3
No
Grad Student office
4
Yes
Cafeteria
5
No
Library
6
Yes
Rentable Office Space
7
Yes
Meeting Rooms
8
No
Virtual Stock Market
9
No
of the four facilities chosen by consensus appeared at risk of
a tuition hike in any participant’s facilities table.
In addition to risk tolerance, we instrumented the experi-
ment to collect objective data on the disparity in the prefer-
ence rankings of the facilities ultimately agreed upon by the
negotiations, a measure of fairness or equity. Performance-
related efficiency measures, such as time to reach a set-
tlement and number of voting rounds needed to agree
on a settlement, were intrinsically available and thus also
incorporated into our analysis.
F. Balance Conditions
The tables of ranks and risks that were provided to subjects
were balanced so that, in a single session: (1) the ranks of
each facility were all different on the three tables, (2) the
sum of the ranks of any facility was constant, depending
on its classification as high importance (sum = 18), medium
importance (sum = 15) or low importance (sum = 12; the
importance of the facilities was not disclosed to subjects), (3)
every society’s top-ranked facility was assigned no risk of a
tuition hike in its own table, but a risk of a tuition hike in
the tables of the other two subjects in the same scenario, (4)
every society’s third-ranked facility was assigned no risk of
a tuition hike in its own table, and in the table of one other
subject in the same scenario, but a risk of a tuition hike in
the table of the third subject, and (5) every society’s second-
ranked facility was assigned no risk of a tuition hike in the
tables of all three subjects in the same scenario. These balance
conditions ensure that some negotiation is required, but that a
best solution (consisting of the three second-ranked facilities
plus one other) and several near-best alternatives are always
available, without resorting to a zero-sum game (as in [9],
[10]). Unlike [9], in particular, these balance conditions do not
entail that the sum of ranks is always the same, which would
preclude our computation of risk tolerance (see below), as the
removal of any facility would result in a constant reduction in
payout.
This aspect of our design is also important because our
coordinated use of facility rank and risk (in our sense of a
tuition-hike) actually decouples our framing of risk (in the
sense of the dependency trust dimension of Wierzbicki’s scales
[23]) into the threat of a realized loss (in the form of a tuition
increase) plus the possibility of an unrealized gain (of desirable
facilities being incorporated into the recreational centre), thus
addressing, and possibly neutralizing, the bias that either could
exert by itself on human risk assessment [40]. It furthermore
does so without the use of exogenous auxiliary hypotheses
(as in [14]) that may inadvertently convey the impression to
participants that their decisions are less consequential or less
precise in their effects.
G. Rounds of Voting
Successive rounds of voting were conducted until the par-
ticipants converged on a choice of 4 facilities (each receiving
3 votes), or until 30 minutes had elapsed for the session. Of
the 24 groups (=72 sessions) that we convened, 22 reached
consensus in all three of their sessions. The data for the 2
meetings without consensus were discarded.
The potential for multiple rounds of voting in the exper-
imental design is also important, as it fundamentally differ-
entiates the structural incentives inherent to this task from
those inherent to social dilemmas, which are generally one-
shot, highly symmetrical contests, in which both parties must
simultaneously act as both potential trustors and potential
trustees. The multiple proposals that can be advanced during
negotiation, together with potentially multiple rounds of voting
makes trust more amenable to analysis as a signalling problem
[4]. Ongoing discussions between rounds of voting also create
ample opportunities for constructive verbalization about trust
and distrust. This has been recommended (again by [4])
as a means of addressing their third dimension, sources of
vulnerability. The only vulnerability that players face in social
dilemmas is the possibility of defection, which is oversimplis-
tic.
It must be conceded, however, that the potential for multiple
rounds of voting was largely underutilized. Of the sessions
that ever reached a certain conclusion, 64% terminated after
one vote, and 35% terminated after 2, leaving only 1% with
more than 2 rounds of voting. On the other hand, there was
a substantial amount of verbalization. Of the 129 sessions in
the 43 groups across both studies that always reach consensus,
29 (14 from the video study) included pejorative comments
relating to trust (mainly complaints of being left out of
the discussion, accusations of defection and statements of
incredulity), and 36 (24 in the video study) included positive
comments relating to trust (mainly affirmations that a recent
proposal is fair to everyone, approving statements about the
outcomes of previous agreements, and comparative arguments
that a participant should agree to a current proposal because
they had agreed to a similar one earlier).
H. Procedures
Subjects were first screened to confirm their student status
and that they were unacquainted with the other two subjects
in their group. The two studies were run in non-overlapping
sequence (video study first) and no student participated in both
studies.
Prior to the commencement of the first session, subjects
were indoctrinated into the setting in which all of the fictitious
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

negotiations took place. Each participant was informed that
they would play a different character in each of the three
sessions. Each character has a name, and the participants
were required to address each other in each session by
their character’s name in that session. Participants were also
informed that the university would act upon the consensus that
they established, and that their re-election as student society
representatives would depend crucially on the outcomes of the
negotiation. This creates realistic (but fictional) social risks on
top of those that pertain to the negotiation’s direct outcomes.
Participants were seated in separate offices on the same
floor of an academic building, each of which was equipped
with office furniture and a desktop computer running the
videoconferencing system. Between sessions, participants took
on the roles of new characters from new student societies, but
did not switch office spaces.
In each session, the moderator allowed discussion to take
place for about 10 minutes, provided the other participants
with some positive reinforcement for their efforts and sug-
gested that they vote after another 5 minutes of discussion.
After each round of voting, the results of the voting were
announced, and, in case the votes were overdispersed, the
moderator would select the 5 or more facility choices that
received the highest numbers of votes, and encourage more
discussion about these, excluding the other facilities from
consideration. The moderator never cast a ballot. Note that
while the top-ranking facilities were announced, the ballots
of individual participants were not, and there were always
three voting participants. Again, without the use of exogenous
hypotheses, the presence of a third voter allows us to avoid
certain attribution of loss in almost every case. Certainly
attributable loss is another common shortcoming cited of two-
player social dilemma games, as this is often not the case in
real negotiations either. At the same time, the presence of a
third participant allows pairs of participants to “gang up” in
settings where private chatting is available.
At the conclusion of the final ballot in each session, a
written post-meeting questionnaire was distributed for each
participant to answer by themselves. At the conclusion of the
third session’s post-meeting questionnaire, an additional post-
experimental questionnaire was distributed to gather additional
comparative user perception data and demographic informa-
tion, followed by an experimental debriefing.
I. Data Analysis
In order to test our hypotheses, the most suitable statistical
test for this within-subjects design is a repeated-measures
multilinear model (MLM), a generalization of ANOVA [41]
common to quantitative research on the actor-partner indepen-
dence model of trust [39], that includes an explicit variable for
group-level effects, as there almost certainly will be interac-
tions between individual subjects in the same negotiations.11
11Because no two groups shared an individual, we also speculatively cal-
culated an ANOVA by modelling each group as an individual with subjective
preference scores equal to the average of its three individuals’ scores. The
results of that analysis were not substantially different from the MLM analysis
presented here.
The exception is the objective performance data, which can
only be calculated at the group level. For these, we used
a simple repeated-measures ANOVA as implemented by the
PAST system [42]. F-tests in the MLM were approximated
with the Kenward-Roger method using the pbkrtest library in
the R programming language [43]. All tests were evaluated
assuming a size of α = 0.05 for the null hypothesis’s rejection
region, and all post-hoc Tukey tests were calculated using a
Bonferroni correction quotient. No other transformations were
applied to the data. We tested the data for homoscedasticity,
but also computed a non-parametric test, Wilcoxon’s signed-
rank test, and χ2 scores in order to confirm the validity of
the F-scores obtained. We also calculated simple descriptive
statistics for each setting of the independent variables.
VI. RESULTS
Synopsis: Most of the hypotheses Hc(Y) and Hs(Y) are
confirmed by the experimental results. The analysis of both
the objective and subjective data collected from the experiment
suggests that chat, particularly private chat, does not facilitate
a positive environment for conducting negotiations in an eq-
uitable, transparent, and risk-free manner (hypotheses Hc(Y)).
However, some of these negative effects are reversed when
participants use screen sharing as their main collaborative
features. Screen sharing also contributes a somewhat positive
boost to the efficiency of the negotiations (hypotheses Hs(Y)).
All the subjective data were collected as participant agree-
ment or disagreement with various statements on each post-
treatment questionnaire as previously detailed in Section V-E.
Our goal was to analyze how each experimental treatment
condition (that is, chat or screen sharing) influenced the
deal-making attributes of the whole meeting vs. the baseline
treatment (video only), yet the subjective data was collected
individually for each participant.
A. Efficiency
Several post-experiment questions elicited participants’ im-
pressions of how efficiently the negotiations proceeded. The
MLM on some of the efficiency-related statements shows a
significant relation between the videoconferencing features
and participants’ perceptions of efficiency (F(2,130)=3.77,
p=0.03, and averages illustrated in Figure 3(a) for the “I was
able to find all of the information I needed on the interface”
statement), confirming hypothesis H(e). Post-hoc Tukey tests
showed significant differences both between the screen sharing
condition (VS) and the video only treatment (VO; p=0.01) and
between the chat condition (VC) and VO (p=0.03), thus con-
firming both sub-schemata Hs(e) and Hc(e). The assessment,
“I had the tools necessary to complete the task efficiently,”
was marginally significant across treatments (F(2,130)=2.56,
p=0.08) but the other subjective assessments of efficiency (“I
feel that I completed the task in its entirety,” “The other par-
ticipants were effective negotiators”) did not show significant
differences. Similarly, objective measurements of efficiency,
such as meeting duration (viz. time to completion), did not
exhibit statistical significance across treatments.
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 3. Responses to the statements: (a) “I was able to find all of the information I needed on the interface,” (b) “The other participants were exchanging
important information that I could not see,” and (c) “I felt that the settlement we reached was fair to all parties,” averaged for each of the three experimental
conditions: VS (Video+Screen sharing), VC (Video+Chat), and the baseline VO (Video only), along with (d) the risk tolerance value. The variance of the risk
tolerance is large, but correct. The effect size was calculated as small (0.030), but significant above Cohen’s threshold of 0.01.
B. Risk Tolerance
A main objective measure used in the study was the
participants’ tolerance for risk. Each participant negotiated
under a certain set of preferences for facilities that were
to be selected, and a set of tuition fee increases. These
increases were presented as yes/no “rumours” of increases
to avoid a temptation to simply perform addition on precise
tuition increments when determining the overall merit of a
proposal. To quantify the risk taken by participants during
negotiations, we have tallied for each session the number of
times any of the four facilities chosen by consensus appeared
at risk of a tuition hike in any participant’s facilities table.
As indicated in Section V-D, these tables were not identical
across participants, both in the preferred rank of facilities
and in the rumoured tuition fee increase. Participants were
prohibited from divulging their preferred ranks, but they were
allowed to reveal the rumoured tuition increase if needed to
move the negotiations along. There were several permutations
possible in which participants could have settled for facilities
that were favourably-ranked (in the top third of their tables),
yet these permutations carried different tuition increase risks.
As such, the aggregated risk number was an objective measure
of participants’ willingness to opt for a riskier selection of
preferred facilities in exchange for a settlement that was
somewhat optimal for all participants.
The MLM on the aggregated risk numbers indicates
a statistically-significant relation between videoconferencing
features and participants’ tolerance for risk (F(2,42)=3.271,
p=0.048, and averages illustrated in Figure 3(d)12), thus
confirming hypothesis H(r). The sub-schema Hc(r) was also
confirmed — a Tukey post-hoc test shows that using chat led to
participants being less willing to take risks than when using
only the video (p=0.01). Screen sharing did not exhibit any
influence on participants’ risk tolerance as compared to the
baseline feature.
C. Credibility Trust
Several statements on the post-treatment questionnaires
were related to transparency or obscurity of the negotiations.
Of these, the analysis for the answers to the most salient one
12The substantially greater variance in this figure is due to the group-level
calculation of objective scores, because of which there is a smaller sample
size.
(“The other participants were exchanging important informa-
tion that I could not see”) indicate a statistically-significant
strong influence of the videoconferencing features on partici-
pants’ perceived transparency of negotiations (F(2,130)=9.73,
p < 0.01, averages in Figure 3(b)), thus confirming H(c).
Pairwise Tukey post-hoc tests reveal that chat had a negative
influence on transparency compared to both screen sharing and
basic features (p < 0.01 for both).
The statement “The other participants were withholding
information from me” also exhibited a significant influence by
the chat condition on participants’ perceptions of transparency
(F(2,130)=4.06, p=0.02), strengthening the confirmation of
Hc(c). The statement, “The other participants negotiated with
me honestly,” was marginally significant over the different
treatments (F(2,130)=2.54, p=0.08) but other statements that
were less-obviously connected to transparency (e.g., “I was
able to understand the motivations of the other participants”)
did not exhibit any statistically significant variations.
D. Expectancy Trust
An important aspect of any negotiation is to have all
participants engaged equitably and fairly in discussions, and
to reach a mutually beneficial compromise. It relates to trust
for the same reason that fairness does (see above). In our
study we asked participants if they felt that “the settlement
that we reached was fair to all parties.” The MLM analysis
on the agreement/disagreement answers shows that these were
significantly affected by the videoconferencing features, thus
confirming hypothesis H(x) (F(2,130)=3.43, p=0.04, averages
in Figure 3(c)). Tukey pairwise comparisons show a significant
differences (p=0.046) between the effect of screen sharing
(VS) and that of both chat (VC) and video only (VO). While
the separate hypothesis sub-schema Hc(x) was not confirmed
independently, the confirmation of H(x) together with the
situation of average responses for VO between VS and VC
suggests that chat may have a negative effect on the equity of
the negotiation while screen sharing may provide the opposite.
The other equity-related statements (such as “I was able to
participate actively in the meeting” or “The other participants
dealt with me fairly”) did not exhibit any significant results,
perhaps attributable to the overall civilized environment and
respectful behaviour of all participants (which may not be
always reflected in real-life negotiations).
We also measured equity objectively through a max-min
difference, computed by summing the ranks (in the given
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

preference tables) of the facilities chosen by each participant,
and then subtracting the smallest of these sums from the
largest. It was also not found to have been influenced by the
videoconferencing features.
E. Empathy and Competence Trust
No subjective elicitations in the dimensions of empathy or
competence trust showed statistically significance.
F. Stated Trust
We also directly elicited a subjective judgment on trust
itself (“I could trust the other participants”), upon which
influence by the videoconferencing features was found to
be marginally significant (F(2,130)=2.73, p=0.069), with a
post-hoc Tukey comparison pointing to video plus chat (VC)
as the outlier (p=0.02). Following Bos [8], we calculated
correlations using Kendall’s tau between this judgement and
the others, finding values ranging between -0.43 and +0.58,
with the highest correlates all indicating expectancy trust, and
the lowest (anti-)correlations all belonging to the negative
indicators of credibility.
VII. DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN
The analysis of post-condition questionnaire answers indi-
cates that in several cases the hypothesis schemata Hc(Y) hold
true. This suggests that, in general, chat is a feature that leads
to an observed decrease in risk tolerance for participants, as
well as to a decrease in credibility trust, expectation trust and
stated trust. This is most likely attributed to the possibility
for private chatting since negotiations could be conducted si-
multaneously between ad-hoc pairs of participants with private
chat. We can thus state that private chat in videoconferencing
systems can be detrimental to participants’ risk tolerance,
credibility trust, stated trust and their perception of
fairness. This prompts us to recommend that:
Designers and administrators of videoconferencing
systems disable private chat by default for partici-
pants engaged in negotiations.
An interesting future direction is the investigation of appro-
priate ways to enable or disable private chat, and establishing
who has control over such decisions.
As outlined in Section VI, the addition of screen sharing
led to a relative increase in perceived efficiency, but not
to a significant decrease in actual time to completion. It
also led to a relative increase in expectancy trust over the
video-only baseline, but not to a significant increase in the
objective equity of the outcome. While we did not test screen-
sharing in the absence of a mug-shot video interface in either
study, it is worth underscoring that the observed benefits did
accrue on top of whatever might have been conferred by
videos of the other participants. We can thus state that screen
sharing improves the subjective experience of efficiency
and fairness. Therefore, we recommend that:
Designers and administrators of videoconferencing
systems consider enabling access to screen sharing
features for participants in negotiations.
Where does this leave video? Earlier studies that used
two-person social dilemmas generally had no opportunity to
measure any kind of trust apart from credibility trust. This
is in stark contrast to the addition of screen sharing, for
which benefits accrued on top of whatever video may have
added, and to the elimination of chat functionality, which
the presence of video and audio alone was incapable of
ameliorating in any of the several affected categories of trust.
Video almost certainly does provide other, marginal, non-trust-
related advantages, such as improved vocal intelligibility due
to modal enhancement, as well as perceived efficiency due to
increased engagement. But it is due to the broader conception
of trust in our studies’ design that we have been able to
observe a wider range of significant benefits and detriments
from screen-sharing and chat functionality. The presence of
video, it appears, is by no means the end of the conversation
about videoconferencing.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Many real-life situations involve multi-party negotiations
that cannot be reduced to a zero-sum situation or a social
dilemma; instead, the range of outcomes can vary from
convergence on one of several possible compromises to an
outcome that is very favourable for some participants at the
expense of others. Increasingly, such negotiations are carried
out by videoconference. To this extent, our experimental setup
replicated this real-life situation and thus provided ecological
validity to our analysis, as the experimental task was designed
to be relevant and familiar to our pool of participants (students,
discussing tuition fee hikes and facilities). On the other hand,
participants were aware of the role-playing aspect of the
experiment, and while most were engaged and passionate
about selecting facilities, the lack of real-life stakes may have
toned down some of the results, such as equity and how
participants treated each other fairly.
This paper evaluated the effect that two ubiquitous features
of videoconferencing systems (chat and screen sharing) have
on trust, relative to video. They were conducted in a business-
like setting in which three participants had competing inter-
ests in a negotiation, with possible outcomes ranging from
significant disparity between participants’ share of the final
settlement to a relatively fair, albeit slightly sub-optimal, deal
for all participants. This setting is more realistic than the
typical two-party social dilemma that is so often used as a
setting for studying trust in videoconferencing systems.
At the same time, our findings provide a very relevant in-
sight into triadic group activities, where the research emphasis
has generally been on collaborative problem-solving. Future
work should include conversational analysis of realistic group
negotiation tasks such as the one pursued here, in order to
explore the potential links between interface affordances and
group dynamics, such as the dyadic sub-orientations found
by [7], more thoroughly. A potential limitation of the present
study was the presence of the moderator; triadic negotiations in
the absence of a moderator may respond differently to changes
in the affordances of the conferencing interface.
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The analysis of our experimental results uncovered evidence
of significantly negative and positive effects that chat and
screen sharing have on various aspects of trust that distin-
guish them from the presence of video alone. These findings
provide useful information for designers, administrators, and
decision makers about the appropriate setting for the use of
videoconferencing features. Future work should extend this
analysis to other settings, such as remote, mobile or home-
based participation in meetings. This is of great interest to
designers of mobile and tablet-based conferencing systems,
where it is understood that one or more participants do not
have access to a full-featured application.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the Canadian Network
Centre of Excellence in Graphics, Animation and New Media
(GRAND) and Avaya.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Whittaker and B. O’Conaill, “The role of vision in face-to-face and
mediated communication,” in Videomediated Communication, 1997.
[2] N. D¨oring, Sozialpsychologie des Internet: Die Bedeutung des Inter-
net f¨ur Kommunikationsprozesse, Identit¨aten, soziale Beziehungen und
Gruppen. Hogrefe, Verlag f¨ur Psychologie, 1999.
[3] A. Mitra, “Trust, authenticity, and discursive power in cyberspace,”
Comm. ACM, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 27–29, 2002.
[4] J. Riegelsberger, M. A. Sasse, and J. D. McCarthy, “The researcher’s
dilemma: evaluating trust in computer-mediated communication,” Intl.
J. Human-Computer Studies, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 759–781, 2003.
[5] C. Egido, “Videoconferencing as a technology to support group work:
a review of its failure,” in Proc. CSCW, pp. 13–24, ACM, 1988.
[6] Z. Fang and J. Tang, “Uncovering the formation of triadic closure in
social networks,” in Proc. IJCAI, pp. 2062–2068, 2015.
[7] J.-S. Lee and D. Tatar, “Sounds of silence: Exploring contributions to
conversations, non-responses and the impact of mediating technologies
in triple space,” in Proc. CSCW, pp. 1561–1572, ACM, 2014.
[8] N. Bos, J. Olson, D. Gergle, G. Olson, and Z. Wright, “Effects of four
computer-mediated communications channels on trust development,” in
Proc. CHI, pp. 135–140, ACM, 2002.
[9] C. Teoh, H. Regenbrecht, and D. O’Hare, “Investigating factors influenc-
ing trust in video-mediated communication,” in Proc. OZCHI, pp. 312–
319, 2010.
[10] W. Standaert, S. Muylle, and A. Basu, “Assessing the effectiveness of
telepresence for business meetings,” in Proc. 46th Hawaii Intl. Conf. on
System Sciences (HICSS), pp. 549–558, IEEE, 2013.
[11] J. T. Hancock, J. Thom-Santelli, and T. Ritchie, “Deception and design:
The impact of communication technology on lying behavior,” in Proc.
CHI, pp. 129–134, ACM, 2004.
[12] T. Mvumbi, F. Kundaeli, Z. Manzi, K. Williams, and H. Suleman, “An
online meeting tool for low bandwidth environments,” in Proc. Annu.
Conf. South African Institute for Computer Scientists and Information
Technologists, pp. 226–235, 2012.
[13] J. Riegelsberger, M. A. Sasse, and J. D. McCarthy, “Shiny happy people
building trust?: Photos on e-commerce websites and consumer trust,” in
Proc. CHI, pp. 121–128, ACM, 2003.
[14] J. Zheng, E. Veinott, N. Bos, J. S. Olson, and G. M. Olson, “Trust with-
out touch: jumpstarting long-distance trust with initial social activities,”
in Proc. CHI, pp. 141–146, ACM, 2002.
[15] E. Rocco, “Trust breaks down in electronic contexts but can be repaired
by some initial face-to-face contact,” in Proc. CHI, pp. 496–502, ACM,
1998.
[16] C. Jensen, S. D. Farnham, S. M. Drucker, and P. Kollock, “The effect
of communication modality on cooperation in online environments,” in
Proc. CHI, pp. 470–477, ACM, 2000.
[17] B. J. Alge, C. Wiethoff, and H. J. Klein, “When does the medium
matter? Knowledge-building experiences and opportunities in decision-
making teams,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro-
cesses, vol. 91, no. 1, pp. 26–37, 2003.
[18] X. Sun, Q. Zhang, S. Wiedenbeck, and T. Chintakovid, “Gender differ-
ences in trust perception when using IM and video,” in CHI Extended
Abstracts, pp. 1373–1378, ACM, 2006.
[19] B. T. Kane, P. J. Toussaint, and S. Luz, “Shared decision making needs
a communication record,” in Proc. CSCW, pp. 79–90, ACM, 2013.
[20] J. K. Butler Jr, “Toward understanding and measuring conditions of trust:
Evolution of a conditions of trust inventory,” J. Management, vol. 17,
no. 3, pp. 643–663, 1991.
[21] F. Alston, Culture and Trust in Technology-Driven Organizations. CRC
Press, 2013.
[22] P. Shockley-Zalabak, K. Ellis, and R. Cesaria, “Measuring organizational
trust: trust and distrust across cultures.,” in The Organizational Trust
Index, IABC Research Foundation, 1999.
[23] A. Wierzbicki, Trust and Fairness in Open, Distributed Systems.
Springer, 2010.
[24] M. K. Lee, N. Fruchter, and L. Dabbish, “Making decisions from
a distance: The impact of technological mediation on riskiness and
dehumanization,” in Proc. CSCW, pp. 1576–1589, ACM, 2015.
[25] J. K. Burgoon and J. L. Hale, “Validation and measurement of the fun-
damental themes of relational communication,” Communication Mono-
graphs, vol. 54, pp. 19–41, Mar. 1987.
[26] A. Mitchell and I. Zigurs, “Trust in virtual teams: Solved or still a
mystery?,” ACM SIGMIS Database: the Data Base for Advances in
Information Systems, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 61–83, 2009.
[27] E. M. Uslaner, “Measuring Generalized Trust: In Defense of the ‘Stan-
dard’ Question,” in [28], pp. 72–82.
[28] F. Lyon, G. Mollering, and M. Saunders, eds., Handbook of Research
Methods on Trust. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2011.
[29] D. T. Nguyen and J. Canny, “Multiview: improving trust in group video
conferencing through spatial faithfulness,” in Proc. CHI, pp. 1465–1474,
ACM, 2007.
[30] J. MacCormick, “Video chat with multiple cameras,” in Proc. CSCW,
pp. 195–198, ACM, 2013.
[31] E. Bradner and G. Mark, “Why distance matters: effects on cooperation,
persuasion and deception,” in Proc. CSCW, pp. 226–235, ACM, 2002.
[32] J. P. Davis, S. Farnham, and C. Jensen, “Decreasing online ’bad’
behavior,” in CHI Extended Abstracts, pp. 718–719, ACM, 2002.
[33] L. E. Scissors, A. J. Gill, K. Geraghty, and D. Gergle, “In CMC we
trust: The role of similarity,” in Proc. CHI, pp. 527–536, ACM, 2009.
[34] W. Dong and W.-T. Fu, “One piece at a time: why video-based
communication is better for negotiation and conflict resolution,” in Proc.
CSCW, pp. 167–176, ACM, 2012.
[35] P. Slov´ak, P. Nov´ak, P. Troubil, P. Holub, and E. C. Hofer, “Exploring
trust in group-to-group video-conferencing,” in CHI Extended Abstracts,
pp. 1459–1464, ACM, 2011.
[36] J. P. Birnholtz, T. A. Finholt, D. B. Horn, and S. J. Bae, “Grounding
needs: Achieving common ground via lightweight chat in large, dis-
tributed, ad-hoc groups,” in Proc. CHI, pp. 21–30, 2005.
[37] R. E. Kirk, Experimental Design: Procedures for the Behavioral Sci-
ences. Brooks Publishing, USA, 1995.
[38] R. Priem and A. Weibel, “Measuring the decision to trust using metric
conjoint analysis,” in [28], pp. 212–225.
[39] D. L. Ferrin, M. C. Bligh, and J. C. Kohles, “The actor–partner inter-
dependence model: a method for studying trust in dyadic relationships,”
in [28], pp. 189–198.
[40] D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, Judgments under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge University Press, 1982.
[41] D. C. Howell, Fundamental Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences.
Nelson Education, 2016.
[42] O. Hammer, D. Harper, and P. Ryan, “Past: Paleontological statistics
software package for education and data analysis,” Palaeontologia
Electronica, vol. 4, pp. 1–9, 2001.
[43] U. Halekoh and S. Højsgaard, “A Kenward-Roger approximation and
parametric bootstrap methods for tests in linear mixed models–the R
package pbkrtest,” J. Statistical Software, vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 1–30, 2014.
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

