Probing Privacy in Practice  
Privacy regulation and instant sharing of video in social media when running 
Joakim Karlsen and Susanne Koch Stigberg 
Department of Computer Science 
Østfold University College 
1757 Halden, Norway 
{joakim.karlsen, susanne.k.stigberg}@hiof.no  
Jo Herstad 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
0372 Oslo, Norway 
johe@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract— This paper examines privacy as something people 
do, seeing privacy as a constant negotiation of technical and 
social aspects of technology use. To be able to examine privacy 
aspects of live video sharing on social media, we have designed 
and deployed a technology probe in amateur running events. 
The findings suggest that audio wouldn’t be shared a lot in this 
context, since it captures audible signs of fatigue. Further, it 
seems that sharing of performance indicators are problematic, 
so it is more likely that the probe would be used to mediate the 
general experience of taking part in a running event. Lastly it 
seems that very few would be comfortable with immediate 
sharing and would like to have the option of removing 
recordings and control its recipients. Overall, we find that 
when confronted with new mediating information technologies, 
people are quickly able to re-negotiate their privacy 
boundaries, using earlier experience with similar technologies. 
Keywords- privacy; instant sharing, social media; video; 
mobile interaction.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Privacy involves a broad range of concerns within 
legislative practices, social practices, cultural differences and 
digital and urban/domestic architecture. The activities of 
regulating our personal space, closing and opening doors, 
avoiding and seeking others, are privacy performed in 
practice. As our everyday life is performed with electronic 
networked services, this is increasingly a concern both for 
the HCI research community and the public at large [1].   
Bellotti and Sellen [2] identified a set of challenges 
pertaining to privacy in digital pervasive environments as a 
result of separating the users activity and the site of its 
effects in digital media spaces. Agre [3] has written 
extensively on privacy concerns and digital technologies, in 
particular advocating privacy as an issue not simply of 
individual needs, but something that arises from social roles 
and relationships. In this perspective, privacy is a culturally 
embedded and changing practice of everyday living. 
However, there is limited empirical research on “doing” 
privacy as an on-going negotiation of technical and social 
aspects in everyday situations, with some exceptions [4].  
To get a deeper understanding of the privacy aspects of 
one particular context, sharing live video on social media 
while running, we have conducted two explorative field 
studies using what Hutchinson et al. [5] has coined a 
“technology 
probe”. 
Our 
technology 
probe 
enabled 
participants in two running events to capture and share video 
on Facebook by opening and closing their hand. To be able 
to analyze and discuss the results of probing this context, we 
have revisited Palen and Dourish [6] work on privacy and 
information technology. In their perspective, the user’s 
choice of sharing or not sharing his / her first-person feed 
with a larger group, can be framed as a constant negotiation 
of his / her privacy boundaries, a “process where people 
optimize their accessibility along a spectrum of “openness” 
and “closedness” depending on context.” [6]. According to 
them a “genre of disclosure” is a stable and recurrent social 
practice where representations enabled by technology use are 
met with certain expectations. When these are broken 
privacy concerns are raised. Technology has the ability “to 
disrupt or destabilize the regulation of boundaries” [6].  
Our technology probe, a video recording and live 
streaming device for use in a public setting, have challenged 
our users to negotiate their privacy boundaries in this 
context. The aim of this study has then been to investigate 
how users participating in running events negotiate their 
disclosure, identity and temporal privacy boundaries when 
using a technology probe for instant sharing of video on 
Facebook and to examine how this is a re-negotiation of 
previously experienced genres of disclosure.  
After a brief summary of related work, we will explicate 
the framework of “genres of disclosure” in Section 2, before 
describing in Section 3, how we have probed the running and 
sharing context by making a fully working technological 
probe and deploying it in a real world setting. We will 
continue with a summary of our findings in Section 4, and in 
Section 5, we will discuss several patterns in how the privacy 
boundaries has been negotiated by our users. Lastly we will 
discuss how these patterns can be seen as re-negotiations of 
boundaries set up by earlier experiences with similar 
technologies. 
A. Related work 
The technology probe developed in this study has 
similarities with both sports-tracking and life-logging 
technologies, and researchers interested in these fields have 
to some extent discussed privacy concerns with these 
technologies. The use of tracking devices for training and 
fitness purposes is common, but mostly for private purposes. 
But when these applications are networked and become more 
similar and/or integrated with other social media platforms 
people may experience expectations of joining and sharing 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[7][8]. Ojala and Saarela [8] categorize the motivation for 
joining and sharing into:  
• 
get feedback and guidance 
• 
get content of others 
• 
reputation and status 
• 
comparing results 
Other studies have pointed out the importance of social 
support and accountability, as strong motivational factors to 
share exercising data [9][10]. Deborah Lupton has identified 
self-improvement as the main motivational factor for self-
tracking [11], and has developed five “modes of tracking”, 
that include a private mode, but also pushed, communal, 
imposed and exploited modes [11]. The exploited mode 
raises privacy concerns and “refer to the ways in which 
individuals’ personal data (whether collected purely for their 
own purposes or as part of pushed, communal or imposed 
self-tracking) are repurposed for the (often commercial) 
benefit of others.  
Privacy concerns have been raised by wearable 
computing and life-logging pioneer Steve Mann [12]. Data 
from logging your own life, can according to him, be 
misused by other people, government and media. He 
problematizes that history becomes a “freezer not a dustbin”, 
something that can have negative social consequences. Two 
recent studies have investigated privacy aspects of life 
logging using wearable cameras, from the life-loggers 
perspective [13] and from the bystander perspective [14]. 
From the life-logger perspective, people preferred to manage 
privacy in situ, as a result of the perceived sensitivity of the 
context. Most of the users in the reported study were 
concerned about the privacy of bystanders [13]. From the 
bystander perspective, people reported indifferent or 
negative responses to being recorded by a wearable camera. 
Many users expressed interest in being asked for permission 
and in devices for blocking the recording [14].  
Generally, users are aware of privacy issues with sharing 
information on social media [8][9], and tend to prefer a 
friends-only social media profiles [15]. When digital media 
sharing crosses boundaries into public domains, both 
intentionally and unintentionally, users are less able to 
control their identity [16].  
II. 
PRIVACY 
In 1890, Warran and Brandeis [17] published their 
seminal article “the right to privacy” where they write:  
Instantaneous photographs and newspaper enterprise 
have invaded the sacred precincts of private and domestic 
life; and numerous mechanical devices threaten to make 
good the prediction that ‘what is whispered in the closet 
shall be proclaimed from the housetops’ (ibid).   
From these early discussions on the conditions for 
protecting privacy and ways of regulating privacy by law, 
there is an increasing focus on privacy as our everyday lives 
are partly performed online. The list of mechanical devices 
could today be extended to electronic devices that capture, 
store and potentially distribute dynamic information from the 
peoples context, such as audio, video, location and biometric 
data. Palen and Dourish [6] have proposed a framework for a 
nuanced understanding of privacy in a networked world. 
Their framework builds on the seminal work of Altman 
[18][19], and identifies three boundaries that are central to 
the negotiation of more or less openness and closedness.   
The first and most basic boundary is the disclosure 
boundary, that is, what information to reveal or keep from 
others. For example, should I share this picture of my new 
bulldog on the net, or should I keep it for myself?   
Secondly, the identity boundary is defined by the role 
taken on by the user. A user can for example represent an 
organization, such as the member of the dogs rights 
organizations, or represent herself personally.  
Finally, the temporal boundary is about the effects of 
persisted information. Unintended recipients can interpret the 
information left behind in a networked system at a later time, 
and there is little or no way of controlling the interpretation 
of information, or the context in which it is interpreted. For 
example, the article about dogs right in your local newspaper 
or social network you shared in 2007, discussing a city plan, 
can be read and interpreted in 2016 in a very different 
discussion about the housing of dogs. 
One of the most important insights from Altman’s work 
is that privacy is not a static set of rules, but rather a dynamic 
process, a constant negotiation depending on the situation.   
In other words, privacy is something that is actively 
negotiated and performed. Grudin [20] puts this in the 
context of situated action, which is what allows the constant 
negotiation just described:  
Why then the uneasiness, the widespread attention to 
privacy?  It may reflect an awareness at some level of 
something more fundamental than privacy that is being 
challenged:  The steady erosion of clearly situated action. 
We are loosing control and knowledge of the 
consequences of our actions, because if what we do is 
represented digitally, it can appear anywhere and at any 
time in the future.  We no longer control access to 
anything we disclose [20]. 
Indeed, where are the boundaries of situated action when 
the information about the situation is broadcasted with 
networked technologies? With viewing privacy through the 
framework proposed by Palen and Dourish [6] as an activity, 
something that users “do” and negotiate instead of “have a 
right to”, there is a possibility of gaining insights into ways 
that this is practiced.  
III. 
PROBING 
Technology probes as defined by Hutchinson et al. [5] 
are simple, flexible, adaptable technologies deployed to find 
out about the unknown. Probes are not prototypes and should 
be used in the early stages of projects to investigate new 
perspectives that can constrain and open future designs [21]. 
Technology probes support playful interactions with new 
technology in new contexts and provoke participants’ 
reactions [22]. 
Hutchinson et al. designed technology probes with three 
goals in mind:  
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

• 
understanding the needs and desires of users in real-
world setting  
• 
field-testing the technology 
• 
inspiring participants and researchers to think about 
future technology and its use 
Studies have deployed technology probes, focusing on 
only one or several of these three research goals. In [23], 
simple step counters are used as ready-made technology 
probes to study teenagers’ motivation for exercising and to 
find out important lessons for the design of future devices. In 
[24], technology probes are applied to measure and assess 
texting and updating functionality of situated displays. In 
[25], a mobile technology probe is designed to better 
understand if and when intimate couples desire to hold hands 
when apart. 
Similar to [25], we have designed a mobile technology 
probe. Our research goal is to understand privacy with 
instant video sharing on social media while running. We 
have tried to create a realistic situation for users to 
experience instant video sharing in practice. To make sure 
that we were able to probe for privacy concerns in our 
research design, we have strived to design the probe to be 
simple, wearable and robust, something that is especially 
important for intimate, mobile context [25]. 
A. Hardware and Software 
Our technology probe in Figure 2, consists of two parts: a 
mobile phone for recording and sharing videos to Facebook 
and a sport glove that functions as a remote control for the 
mobile phone. We fitted the glove with a flex-sensor and a 
wearable Arduino mini-processor called LilyPad. Flex-
sensors are a form of resistors that change their resistance 
depending how hard they are bent. The LilyPad can detect 
these changes and transform the analogue resistance values 
to integer values. In the probe, these values are sent via 
Bluetooth to a mobile phone. The application on the phone 
maps the values to specific functions. Single or multiple 
fingers can be fitted with sensors, and this setup can support 
detection of many different hand gestures. In our study, we 
needed two functions, on and off, mapped to recording and 
sharing video on Facebook, so we only fitted one sensor to 
the middle finger on the glove. All technical components 
were hidden inside the glove. A red recording led was the 
only visible part and the glove appeared as a normal sport 
glove from a distance.  
B. Design 
“Probes are meant to collect usage data, but if users are 
deterred from using them because of their appearance, design 
should become a priority” [25]. Studies have shown that the 
wearability of the smart phone is not optimal for interactions 
on the move, for example running and walking [26][27]. To 
improve wearability of the phone we made careful design 
choices regarding placement of the phone, how the users 
should interact with the phone and the mapping between 
these interactions and the phones functions for recording and 
sharing video.  
1) Placement: The first set of design choices concerned 
the placement of the phone while running. Gemperle et al. 
[28] recommend placing larger and heavier devices on non-
moving parts of the body throughout the movement. To be 
able to capture video in a first person perspective, the phone 
needs to be positioned on the front of the body directed 
forward. We solved these requirements by mounting the 
phone in a neoprene hip belt with a see through pocket 
facing forward. 
2) Interactions: Secondly we addressed the problems 
with touchscreen interactions while running. These 
interactions are in effect not possible in this situation, 
without disturbing the running experience. Users often have 
to stop to look at the screen and press a button [27]. We 
aimed to design a more unobtrusive input mode using a 
sports glove with movement sensors.  
3) Mapping: The last design choices concerned the 
mapping of gestures to functionality. Rico and Brewster 
[29] recommend using gestures that are familiar in feeling 
or appearance. For our technology probe the start and stop 
recording functions need to be mapped to suitable hand 
gestures. They should be simple enough to perform while 
running and they should not have other predefined 
meanings. Simple hand gestures that we observed during the 
design process were making a fist, tapping fingers together, 
open hand, spread fingers, waving right/left. We ended up 
tying distinct hand gestures metaphorically to the mapped 
functions;  
• 
hand open (record and share) 
• 
hand closed (stop recording and sharing) 
C. Deployment 
We deployed the probe in two running events taking 
place in Strömstad, Sweden on November the 8th and 
Wolfen, Germany on December the 28th, 2014. The three 
main criteria for choosing the events were that they had good 
3G coverage, they were accessible to the researchers and that 
they were semi-professional with medium distance tracks (5 
and 10 km). We recruited three participants for the first field 
trial and three for the second, from local sports clubs and 
directly at the events. We paid their registration fee and they 
received a 10€ flower present card for participating. In Table 
1, we have listed the participants with age, gender and 
experience with sports tracking and social media. 
TABLE 1. PARTICIPANTS 
# 
Event 
Age 
Gender 
Sports 
Tracking 
Social 
media 
#1-1 
Strömstad 
30s 
Male 
Yes 
Moderate 
#1-2 
Strömstad 
30s 
Female 
Yes 
Active 
#1-3 
Strömstad 
40s 
Female 
Yes 
Moderate 
#2-1 
Wolfen 
20s 
Male 
Yes 
Moderate 
#2-2 
Wolfen 
20s 
Male 
Yes 
Moderate 
#2-3 
Wolfen 
20s 
Female 
Yes 
Moderate 
 
In Strömstad, the researchers met up one hour before the 
start time at 12 pm. The first half hour we registered the 
informants for the 5km track and checked the probes. Until 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the start at 1 pm we fitted the technology to the individual 
participants and gave them brief explanations of how they 
could use it. They tried out the gestures, and at the same time 
we calibrated the on / off thresholds to their hand 
movements. We explained how the video they were going to 
record was shared on Facebook. The informants used from 
24 to 34 minutes to complete the track and from 1:45 pm we 
conducted semi-structured interviews with each of them. We 
had prepared a set of guiding questions focusing on the 
participants’ experience of instant video sharing using the 
probe in regard to negotiating their privacy boundaries. 
In Wolfen, we followed the same procedure as in 
Strömstad, with some small differences. The race started 
earlier at 10 am, and one of the participants chose to run the 
10km track. 
We used open coding to analyze the collected data 
independently from each other, followed by a collaborative 
session, were we resolved small differences and agreed on 
the main findings. 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
All six participants, in the two separate field studies, 
expressed that the events were well organized and as they 
expected. It seemed that they felt at home in what they saw 
as small and friendly happenings. Figure 1 shows runners in 
Strömstad just before the start. The participants were more or 
less competitive or serious about the races, but all six said 
they enjoyed the experience. It didn’t seem that participating 
in the study by using the technological probe, took away 
from their participation in the events themselves. In the 
following we denote the participants using two digits, the 
first for the event and the second for participant (#event-
participant).  
When it came to placement of the probe as shown in 
Figure 2, the most competitive of the three in the first field 
study #1-1, thought that the extra weight of the smartphone 
and belt on the chest was bothersome. He said the belt wasn’t 
tight enough so it moved enough to irritate him. In the 
second field study one participant mentioned that it is 
important that the belt was positioned right. For him the belt 
was strapped on too low and he had to move it up while 
running. The other four participants in the two field studies 
did not report that they were bothered at all, and said they 
forgot about the placement of the mobile phone after a short 
while.  
All six participants said that the hand gestures were easy 
to perform and appropriate for controlling the video stream.  
It is very natural to extend the hand. […] so to turn it on 
with that is better than using a closed hand. #1-1 
There is no middle way. Either you open or you close 
your hand. This simple. #2-1  
None of the participants proposed an alternative hand 
gesture that could have worked better for this purpose. All of 
them said they “forgot” the interface after a while, but they 
all kept on using it and continued recording video throughout 
the races. 
A. Privacy Boundaries 
The participants had few reflections on how “being a 
camera” in public can be problematic to others.  
No I did not think about them [other people]. Do I need 
to think about them? #2-3  
They recorded a lot when they had people nearby, in the 
starting area especially, and also when they were running 
almost alone. 
1) Disclosure boundary: Their attention was on when 
the camera should be turned on, the framing of the image 
and what sounds were recorded. Three of the participants 
had a competitive focus during the races and turned on the 
camera when they improved their position. 
…I thought it was funny when I ran down the hill, 
because I am really fast at running downhill, then I 
usually overtake many of the other runners. So I turned 
on the camera on top of the hill, then let go… and 
thought this was really fun. #1-1  
Participants #1-2, #1-3 and #2-3 were concerned about 
the framing of the image. The first said that she was worried 
because she is short, and that she filmed only the road and 
nothing else. The second said she tried to keep a dangling 
headphone-wire away from the camera. The third was 
worried about her hands swinging in front of the camera. 
Figure 3 shows two screenshots from the captured video. 
Most of the participants were acutely aware of the sound 
captured when recording. Participant #1-1 gave comments 
intended for a listener. Participant #1-3 said she was really 
worried about recording heavy breathing and other audible 
 
Figure 1. Starting any minute 
 
 
Figure 2. The equipment 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

signs of fatigue. Participant #1-2 turned the camera off 
because she needed to say something she didn’t want anyone 
to hear. She felt that the sound was more important than the 
image.  
…one thinks about, yes, first and foremost what one 
says, for what one sees can’t be influenced. But what one 
says, I thought about that a lot. #1-2  
Participant #2-3 hadn’t been aware of the audio and was 
embarrassed afterwards because she talked a lot with other 
people while recording.  
2) Identity boundary: All participants expressed that 
sharing video from participating in a sports event on social 
media could be positive for their image.  
It wouldn’t matter if some of this were published, 
because then people would see that I am active and… 
yes, I have to admit that this appeals to me, it lowered the 
threshold for… the social. #1-1  
Participants #1-1, #1-3, #2-1, #2-2 were skeptical though, 
and related that they rarely exposed themselves in this way. 
Participant #1-1 and #1-3 said that sharing from sports 
activities could be seen as bragging, and they would be 
careful of coming across as betters on social media. They 
both expressed irritation with other people sharing their 
training activities on Facebook.  
…when people share training logs, I have cycled 70km 
for example, deserving beer and taco, then I think this is 
bragging. #1-1  
But both these informants were more positive to sharing 
if the content were without tracking information.  
I think, yes - sharing a film, that’s nice, but sharing how 
far you have run, how fast and all that, that is for me, not 
others. Film is fun of course, that could be amusing. #1-3  
In contrast to the skeptical participants, informant #1-2 
and #2-3 said they loved to share from activities they 
participate in, including sports, and that they saw no 
problems with using the probe to do this.  
Yes, I share a lot, also from sports activities. I love 
running so this is nothing strange. #1-2  
It was cool. It is a new way to communicate with friends. 
Facebook is made to share things. #2-3 
 
 
Figure 3. Screenshots from captured video 
3) Temporality boundary: When it came to what the 
participants wanted to happen with the shared videos from 
the event, they answered differently. Participant #1-1 said 
that he wanted control of the videos. He would have 
preferred to have them sent to his private inbox for editing 
before they were published. The most likely thing he would 
make is a “best of” edit from the competition. But when the 
videos were already published he was not certain what to 
do.  
…to me it is unpleasant that the videos are out there, then 
I can just ask for them to be deleted. Except when I cross 
the goal line or something. I’ll see about that. #1-1 
Both participants #2-1 and #2-2 wanted to keep the 
videos on their computers. Participant #2-1 didn’t mind 
having them online since he is in good shape. In contrary to 
this, participant #2-2 wanted them removed or shared with 
selected friends only. Participant #1-2 didn’t see any 
problems with the videos being published. She expressed no 
desire to erase them and hadn’t really thought of this as a 
problem. She said that maybe someone would look at them, 
maybe not. Participant #1-3 was more skeptical, but was also 
comforted by the videos limited appeal. She was more 
worried about the audio of her huffing and puffing.  
…if it is interesting to others then it can be out there, but 
I don’t know if that is the case. I don’t know that 
[laughs]. If it is a video, where I reveal myself, for 
example with breathing and puffing in the background, 
then I think I would have removed it. #1-3  
Participant #2-3 said she would keep the videos that are 
fun and remove videos less interesting to others.  
It depends, how they look. So if there is anything funny, 
for example when Lars passes me, if this was good, when 
I would keep it online and write a comment under. #2-3 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
When it came to running the events the participants had 
different agendas, but they participated according to what 
was expected of them. They followed the logic of the event, 
the instructions from the organizers, ran the designated track 
and put effort into the running according to physical 
capabilities. They related to their time and rank in the race 
and happily received their prizes. None of them did anything 
that could be conceived as “outside” the social obligations of 
the events themselves. None of their actions were “out of 
place” [30]. The wearing of and interaction with the 
technological probe seemed to be unobtrusive to the 
participation in the event and the participants quickly 
understood the function of the technology and the mapping 
between gestures, actions and feedback.  
A. Negotiating openness / closedness 
When using the three privacy boundaries to understand 
the results of this study it is evident that the participants 
negotiated these boundaries differently. There are findings 
from the trials that point towards openness, and some that 
point towards closedness. It is important to note that the 
privacy boundaries are negotiated together. It is difficult to 
consider one boundary without taking the other two into 
account.  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The first, and maybe the most interesting pattern we see, 
mostly concerning the disclosure boundary, is related to 
sensing. None of the participants thought that the first-person 
image was problematic, but several of them were more 
concerned with the audio. Both talking and audible signs of 
exhaustion were mentioned as problematic to share with 
others. It seems that the first person view, where the 
participant was not visible in the image, was conceived as 
less private than the audio. The users understanding of the 
video image recorded by the probe facilitated more openness 
and their understanding of the nature of the audio triggered 
privacy concerns and more closedness. An interesting 
follow-up study would be to repeat the experiment with the 
camera mounted so that the runner could be part of the 
image. 
The second pattern, mostly related to the disclosure and 
identity boundary, is about what the participants chose to 
record and their explanations of why they did so. We see two 
main stories told, with emphasis on the competition and with 
emphasis on the experience. Three of the participants 
recorded when something interesting happened in the 
competition, for instance overtaking other runners in the 
race. The other three didn’t care much about this aspect, but 
recorded what they thought was interesting like nice scenery 
or social interactions. This pattern seems to point towards 
openness, all participants recorded a lot and with some 
narrative intentions. The interviews seem to indicate that the 
reason for this was that the probe didn’t record and share any 
performance indicators, like pulse and speed. The recordings 
were not revealing their standing in the race or other precise 
measures of performance. This seemed to be important to the 
participants independent of how well they performed in the 
race. It seems that quantitative measures of their 
performance would have triggered more privacy concerns 
and lead towards more closedness. 
The third pattern, mostly related to the temporality 
boundary, is the participants’ wish to have control of the 
recordings. The decision they had, of turning the recording 
on and off, was not enough. All the participants except one 
wanted to be able to delete unfavorable or boring recordings 
before or after they were published to Facebook. Most of the 
participants wanted to share the recordings with a selected 
group of people if they could, controlling not only what they 
shared but also with whom. These findings seem to indicate 
that the participants were uneasy about the immediate and 
indiscriminate sharing done by the probe, pointing towards 
more closedness. But at the same time many of the 
participants were intrigued by the experience with the 
technological probe. It seems that they were open to 
experimenting with the format as long as they could have the 
option of removing recordings afterwards and have more 
control of their recipients. This is relatively easy to do on a 
social media platform like Facebook and this finding points 
in the direction of openness. Maybe the participants would 
be inclined to share more easily as a result of more 
experience with the probe. 
B. Re-negotiation of privacy boundaries 
The concept of “privacy genre” is mainly a descriptive 
term, since genres are historically situated as social practice. 
In our study we have developed a probe that gave our 
informants experience with new technology, exploring what 
could be called a proto-genre, but not a genre. The sharing 
of live video on Facebook while running is not 
exceptionally new or outlandish, but still not something that 
many people do as part of their everyday activities. So what 
we have been probing is mainly how people are able to 
negotiate privacy boundaries when using new and not 
commonly 
used 
information 
technologies. 
In 
this 
perspective, we have found that people rely heavily on 
previous experience with similar technologies when 
negotiating privacy boundaries “fresh”. They rely on earlier 
and established genres of disclosure related to, in our case 
combinations of sports tracking, photography and social 
media. In this study, we were surprised by how quickly and 
consciously this process was undertaken by our informants, 
and how efficiently new boundaries where negotiated 
building on old. At the same time, we found that unfamiliar 
aspects of the proto-genre articulated by the probe, triggered 
the most intense and partly unresolved negotiations of 
privacy boundaries; the clearest example being the 
recording and live sharing of “first-person” sound.  
These findings attest to the usefulness of the concept of 
genre of disclosure both as an analytical tool but also as a 
perspective useful when designing and exploring mediating 
technologies. People’s practical everyday experience with 
negotiating privacy, framed and understood as a social 
situated dynamic, can give good guidance of what will 
trigger privacy concerns and what will not. This study is an 
initial exploration of designing and deploying technology 
probes to investigate privacy concerns with mediating 
technologies. Our results indicate that technology probes 
can be designed to disrupt or destabilize existing genres of 
disclosure, giving researchers the opportunity to study these 
closer, mining the interstices between them.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we have explored privacy concerns with 
instant sharing of video in social media. To understand the 
co-dependent technical and social aspects of instant sharing 
and privacy, as framed by the concept of “genres of 
disclosure” [6], we have developed a technological probe 
and conducted two field studies at running events in Sweden 
and Germany. In each field study three participants were 
fitted with a working probe sharing video instantly to 
Facebook by opening and closing the hand. The probe 
performed according to the intentions of the research design, 
opening up for investigating privacy in practice. 
The findings suggest that audio wouldn’t be shared a lot 
in this context, since it captures audible signs of fatigue. 
Further, it seems that sharing of performance indicators are 
problematic, so it is more likely that the probe would be used 
to mediate the general experience of taking part in a running 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

event. Lastly it seems that very few would be comfortable 
with immediate sharing and would like to have the option of 
removing recordings and control its recipients. Overall, it 
seems that people, when using new mediating technologies, 
rely heavily on earlier experience with similar technologies 
when negotiating the privacy boundaries, emphasizing the 
historically situated nature of privacy in practice. 
We believe that probing wearable technology in the field 
has been important for this study, and see how our findings 
open up for further studies with similar mediating 
technologies, in other mobile contexts. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Dourish and K. Anderson, “Collective Information 
Practice: Emploring Privacy and Security As Social and 
Cultural Phenomena,” Hum-Comput Interact, vol. 21, no. 3, 
Sep. 2006, pp. 319–342. 
[2] V. Bellotti and A. Sellen, “Design for Privacy in Ubiquitous 
Computing Environments,” in Proceedings of the Third 
European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work 13–17 September 1993, Milan, Italy ECSCW ’93, G. 
de Michelis, C. Simone, and K. Schmidt, Eds. Springer 
Netherlands, 1993, pp. 77–92. 
[3] P. E. Agre and M. Rotenberg, Technology and Privacy: The 
New Landscape. MIT Press, 1998. 
[4] P. Kumar and S. Schoenebeck, “The Modern Day Baby 
Book: Enacting Good Mothering and Stewarding Privacy on 
Facebook,” in Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on 
Computer 
Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
& 
Social 
Computing, New York, NY, USA, 2015, pp. 1302–1312. 
[5] H. Hutchinson et al., “Technology Probes: Inspiring Design 
for and with Families,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2003, pp. 17–24. 
[6] L. Palen and P. Dourish, “Unpacking ‘Privacy’ for a 
Networked World,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2003, pp. 129–136. 
[7] R. Ling, “From ubicomp to ubiex(pectations),” Telemat. 
Inform., vol. 31, no. 2, May 2014, pp. 173–183. 
[8] J. Ojala and J. Saarela, “Understanding Social Needs and 
Motivations to Share Data in Online Sports Communities,” 
in Proceedings of the 14th International Academic MindTrek 
Conference: Envisioning Future Media Environments, New 
York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 95–102. 
[9] S. A. Munson, E. Krupka, C. Richardson, and P. Resnick, 
“Effects of Public Commitments and Accountability in a 
Technology-Supported Physical Activity Intervention,” in 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2015, 
pp. 1135–1144. 
[10] R. Teodoro and M. Naaman, “Fitter with Twitter: 
Understanding Personal Health and Fitness Activity in Social 
Media.” in ICWSM, 2013. 
[11] D. 
Lupton, 
“Self-Tracking 
Modes: 
Reflexive 
Self-
Monitoring and Data Practices,” Social Science Research 
Network, Rochester, NY, SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 
2483549, Aug. 2014. 
[12] S. Mann, “Wearable computing: a first step toward personal 
imaging,” Computer, vol. 30, no. 2, Feb. 1997, pp. 25–32. 
[13] R. Hoyle et al., “Privacy Behaviors of Lifeloggers Using 
Wearable Cameras,” in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM 
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous 
Computing, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 571–582. 
[14] T. Denning, Z. Dehlawi, and T. Kohno, “In Situ with 
Bystanders of Augmented Reality Glasses: Perspectives on 
Recording 
and 
Privacy-mediating 
Technologies,” 
in 
Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, 
USA, 2014, pp. 2377–2386. 
[15] F. Stutzman and J. Kramer-Duffield, “Friends Only: 
Examining a Privacy-enhancing Behavior in Facebook,” in 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 1553–
1562. 
[16] S. Lindtner, J. Chen, G. R. Hayes, and P. Dourish, “Towards 
a Framework of Publics: Re-encountering Media Sharing and 
Its User,” ACM Trans Comput-Hum Interact, vol. 18, no. 2, 
Jul. 2011, pp. 5:1–5:23. 
[17] S. D. Warren and L. D. Brandeis, “The Right to Privacy,” 
Harv. Law Rev., vol. 4, no. 5, 1890, pp. 193–220. 
[18] I. Altman, “The Environment and Social Behavior: Privacy, 
Personal Space, Territory, and Crowding.,” Brooks / Cole 
Monterey, CA, 1975. 
[19] I. Altman, “Privacy Regulation: Culturally Universal or 
Culturally Specific?” J. Soc. Issues, vol. 33, no. 3, Jul. 1977, 
pp. 66–84. 
[20] J. Grudin, “Desituating Action: Digital Representation of 
Context,” Hum-Comput Interact, vol. 16, no. 2, Dec. 2001, 
pp. 269–286. 
[21] W. W. Gaver, A. Boucher, S. Pennington, and B. Walker, 
“Cultural Probes and the Value of Uncertainty,” interactions, 
vol. 11, no. 5, Sep. 2004, pp. 53–56. 
[22] C. Graham and M. Rouncefield, “Probes and Participation,” 
in Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on 
Participatory Design 2008, Indianapolis, IN, USA, 2008, pp. 
194–197. 
[23] H. M. Edwards, S. McDonald, and T. Zhao, “Exploring 
Teenagers’ Motivation to Exercise Through Technology 
Probes,” in Proceedings of the 25th BCS Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction, Swinton, UK, 2011, pp. 104–
113. 
[24] D. Fitton, K. Cheverst, M. Rouncefield, and A. Dix, 
“Probing technology with technology probes,” in In Equator 
Workshop on Record and Replay Technologies, 2004. 
[25] S. O’Brien and F. “Floyd” Mueller, “Holding Hands over a 
Distance: Technology Probes in an Intimate, Mobile 
Context,” in Proceedings of the 18th Australia Conference on 
Computer-Human Interaction: Design: Activities, Artefacts 
and Environments, New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 293–
296. 
[26] J. Bergstrom-Lehtovirta, A. Oulasvirta, and S. Brewster, 
“The Effects of Walking Speed on Target Acquisition on a 
Touchscreen Interface,” in Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Human Computer Interaction 
with Mobile Devices and Services, New York, NY, USA, 
2011, pp. 143–146. 
[27] J. Marshall and P. Tennent, “Mobile Interaction Does Not 
Exist,” in CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 2069–
2078. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[28] F. Gemperle, C. Kasabach, J. Stivoric, M. Bauer, and R. 
Martin, “Design for wearability,” in Second International 
Symposium on Wearable Computers, 1998. Digest of Papers, 
1998, pp. 116–122. 
[29] J. Rico and S. Brewster, “Gestures All Around Us: User 
Differences in Social Acceptability Perceptions of Gesture 
Based Interfaces,” in Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile 
Devices and Services, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 64:1–
64:2. 
[30] S. Harrison and P. Dourish, “Re-place-ing Space: The Roles 
of Place and Space in Collaborative Systems,” in 
Proceedings of the 1996 ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work, New York, NY, USA, 1996, 
pp. 67–76. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

