Experiments and Applications of Support System for Caregivers
with Optical Fiber Sensor and Cleaning Robot
Junko Ichikawa and Norihiko Shinomiya
Graduate School of Engineering
Soka University
Tokyo, Japan
Email: shinomi@ieee.org
Tetsuya Kon
Core System Japan Co., Ltd.,
Tokyo, Japan
Email: con@core-system.jp
Abstract—This research aims to propose a supporting system
with sensor network technology and cleaning robots to alleviate
workload of caregivers in welfare facilities. Our focus is to
reduce the labor load of nurses that has increased with elderly
population growth. On the basis of the system requirements
clariﬁed from a site survey in a nursing facility, this paper
proposes an integration method of sensors that keeps monitoring
situations in a facility and cleaning robots that can approach an
incident location detected by the sensing system to conﬁrm safety
of facility residents.
Keywords–monitoring system; sensor network; cleaning robot;
nursing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Global society has encountered the serious problem of
aging nowadays. Especially, the number of over 65 years old
Japanese citizens has been monotonously rising since 1950 and
accounted for more than 25% of its population in 2013 [1].
The demand for nursing home care has also been increasing
in accordance with the growth of senior citizens.
In Japan, the number of facilities that support elderly
people is over 25,000 sites, and group homes account for
about 47% [2]. The group home is a facility where caregivers
stay overnight and look after the elderly with senile dementia.
In recent situation, each caregiver needs to take care of
approximately 10 elderly people during nighttime because of
the increase in facility residents. However, this situation is
likely to be difﬁcult for caregivers to give enough attention
to accidents in a whole facility.
In order to solve the lack of nurses, video monitor systems
in group homes have been developed. Caregivers can monitor
elderly people behavior through cameras installed in living
rooms, bathrooms and entrances 24 hours a day, every day of
the year. However, such a monitoring system directly displays
and records private behavior with image and sound. Thus, this
invasive surveillance would make elderly people stressed [3].
On the other hand, the use of sensor network is conceived
as a solution that can prevent such invasive surveillance. Sensor
networks can indirectly retrieve environmental information by
setting many sensor nodes. Nonetheless, sensor systems can
faultily recognize a normal situation as an emergency because
they only gather indirect information such as pressure. For
instance, something falling on the ﬂoor can be regarded as
a fall of an elderly person, and this incorrect report confuse
caregivers. Thus, another technique is needed to conﬁrm a
reported situation by sensor networks.
Use of robots in the care ﬁeld has attracted much attention.
The Ministry of the Economy, Trade and Industry in Japan
began Robotic Care Equipment Development and Introduction
Project that aims at alleviating burden of caregivers in 2013.
This project supports development of robotic care equipments
for monitoring systems in nursing facilities. According to the
Ministry, these systems need a robot which possesses data
communication and sensing functions to notify an accident to
the care takers [4]. Such a robot is expected to collect more
detailed information, which cannot be detected only with wired
sensor networks because it can move and conduct interactive
safety conﬁrmation process with facility residents.
Hence, this research proposes a Support System for Care-
givers (SSC) with optical ﬁber sensors and a cleaning robot,
which can monitor behavior of elderly people and notify
caregivers of an emergency without violating their privacy.
The goal of our system is conﬁrmation of safety of an elderly
person using optical ﬁber sensors and a consumer-electronics
robot instead of image sensors such as a video camera.
In addition, the system identiﬁes the place where a facility
resident falls down, and informs caregivers of the situation of
the resident.
In Section II , some works of daily life monitoring system
for the elderly are described. In Section III, some requirements
are analyzed based on our hearing researches to caregivers. In
addition, the overview of our support system for caregivers and
system components are presented in Section IV. Furthermore,
in Section V, the prototype system is tested, and we explain
experiment results.
II.
RELATED WORK
In order to assist the elderly to safely spend their daily life,
some monitoring systems have been proposed. For example, a
homecare monitoring system is proposed by Bourennane et.
al. [5]. The research suggests that the utilization of multi-
sensor networks realizes behavior observance of an elderly
person, who lives alone at home. Due to the observance,
the proposed system provides the alert function in case of
dangerous accidents. However, this research does not suppose
the use of such a system in welfare facilities where many
elderly people inhabit.
20
Copyright (c) The Government of Junko Ichikawa, 2015. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I. Data of visited nursing facility
Residents
100
Occupancy rate
100 %
Caretakers (day)
10
Caretakers (night)
5
Living quarters
two-story
Private rooms (quad)
14
Private rooms (double)
22
Another instance is a monitoring system in group homes
[3]. The paper suggests a method to monitor facility residents
with videos and install such equipments into the group homes.
Nevertheless, the use of cameras is hesitated in terms of
privacy problems. Moreover, such a camera system cannot be
sited in bathrooms where accidents such as tumble frequently
occur.
Both the proposed systems partly solves the problems in
care of the elderly; however, a support system that considers
the use in facilities where many incidents simultaneously hap-
pen and privacy issues is required. Thus, this paper proposed
the support system, which is to ﬁnd an abnormal behavior of
residents in welfare facilities and prevent invading privacy of
the elderly.
III.
SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR CAREGIVER
This section summarizes some requirements for SSC that
gained from our hearing researches to caregivers. This section
also discusses necessary elements for the systems based on the
requirements.
A. Assumed Situation
In this research, welfare facilities which fulﬁlls the follow-
ing conditions is assumed to be the location where our system
works. One of conditions is that the facility takes care of senior
citizens all day and night. Additionally, a capacity of sickbed
is comparatively large.
B. Factual caregivers’ burden from site surveys
We interviewed caregivers who have been working at a
nursing facility, and table I shows the overview information
about the facility. Additionally, this facility has a sensor
network system, which involves a pressure sensor and an
infrared radiation sensor in the private room to detect the
elderly falling down or moving away from the bed.
The survey indicates that welfare facilities using sensor
networks face the following problems related to the increase
of health care burden of caregivers. One of problems is false
detection of sensors, and the other problem is that caregivers
have a huge amount of work beside nursing. Whenever a
false detection by sensors occurs, caregivers would feel both
physical and mental burden because caregivers should conﬁrm
safety of residents by visiting a private room each time.
Furthermore, we have identiﬁed that caregivers have a lot of
work other than nursing such as cleaning, managing health
information and planning the care. Furthermore, work during
night is harder than one during daytime because a smaller
number of caregivers are in the facility senior at night. The
interviewees stated that they did not have enough time to take
after each resident because of their workload.
C. System Requirement
From the above interview, this section clariﬁes some re-
quirements for our system. First, the function to conﬁrm false
detection is needed because the conﬁrmation process forces
nurses to spend much extra time and confuses them. Another
requirement is a function to reduce workload besides nursing.
The interviewees listed cleaning, recording health information
and scheduling care plans as their major extra work for them.
In those three kinds of works, healthcare information systems
developed by Fujitsu [6] and ND software [7] provide solutions
to record health information and care planning. Thus, this
research focuses on reduction of burden caused by cleaning.
IV.
PROTOTYPE OF SSC
This section presents details of system components, such as
sensor device, network management, SSC manager and robot
in our prototype system.
A. System Overview
Our system presupposes a situation that an elderly person
suddenly would fall down on the ﬂoor, and caregivers might
not become aware of the accident because they may work
at a separated place distant from the point of the incident.
Moreover, it is expected to reduce the burden of care such
that caregivers have to keep their eye on elderly people all
day long and get ready for rushing over to them whenever
they need care.
This support system involves sensors embedded in a ﬂoor
to detect the fall which can be identiﬁed by more than two
sensors continuously retrieving pressure over certain time
interval. Also, a robot with a touch sensor is required to
conﬁrm the safety of an elderly person. Figure 1 shows the
system overview of support system for caregivers. An agent
of Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) regularly
observes the state of sensors and sends a trap ID to a manager
in case of detecting the elderly falling down. The manager
constantly retrieves the information and monitors a behavior
of an elderly person. When the manager recognizes the fall,
it speciﬁes a route to the incident location and sends the
commands for a robot to act on the routing information. After
the robot moves toward the location and arrives at the goal,
it generates a beep to check if the elderly person retains
consciousness. The robot sends the state information to the
manager according to the touch sensor pushed by the elderly
in response to the beep. Then, the manager notiﬁes caregivers
about the abnormal situation.
B. Sensor Device
The system uses sensor technologies to detect the accident.
Generally, wireless sensor networks are set to observe the
motions such as falling [8]. A wireless sensor gathers a lot
of information to distribute the sensor nodes among a wide
area. However, wireless sensor networks need to supply an
electric power to all sensor nodes. Therefore, sensors which
do not need to be supplied power are suitable for our system.
One of the prospective sensors is the hetero-core spliced
optical ﬁber sensors, and a structure of the sensor is shown
21
Copyright (c) The Government of Junko Ichikawa, 2015. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Caregivers
Manager
SMNP agent
②Trap ID
⑦Notiﬁcation
①Pressed sensors
④Safety 
conﬁrmation
⑤Response
⑥Report
Optical ﬁber sensors
③Routing 
information
Robot
Figure 1. System component diagram.
Hetero-core portion
Light loss
Media 
Converter A
SNMP 
agent
SNMP 
manager
Media 
Converter B
TX
RX
Hetero-core spliced 
optical ﬁber mat sensors
①Pressed sensor
  Trap
②
Figure 2. Structure of hetero-core spliced optical ﬁber sensor.
in Figure 2. It is composed of two single mode transmission
ﬁbers. One ﬁber is cut in two, and the other which has a smaller
diameter is inserted between cut ﬁbers. The spliced potion
is called hetero-core portion. When the hetero-core portion
is bent from outside by pressures, light waves leak into the
cladding region. The hetero-core portion of an optical ﬁber
sensor can work as a sensor by measuring the light leakage.
Furthermore, plural hetero-core sensors are distinguished by
changing light leakage of each of the sensors. We carried out
an experiment in order to check whether the sensors were
correctly distinguished. In this experiment, two sensors are
pressed at a minute intervals, and a combination of sensor
states is detected. The states were recognized by the difference
in loss shown in Figure 3.
C. SSC Manager
An SSC manager fulﬁlls two types of roles: detecting the
state of sensors and routing for robot.
1) Detecting the State of Sensors by SNMP: One of the
roles of SSC manager is to detect the state of sensors, which is
realized by using Optical Sensory Nerve Network (OSN) with
hetero-core spliced optical ﬁber sensors. OSN is a network
that realized communication and sensing simultaneously, and
it uses SNMP to manage sensor network equipments and
distinguishes the sensor states by trap [9][10].
Figure 4 shows the component of sensor network manage-
ment system. First, the media converter (A) generates light
which went through sensors, and the media converter (B)
receives the light. Then, an SNMP agent measures the optical
loss and issues trap to an SNMP manager. The manager can
detect the sensor pressed location to check the trap because the
trap previously was set to a threshold voltage per each sensor.
The SSC manager regularly analyzes the sensor information
provided by an SNMP agent that observes state of each
sensor and detects an emergency. If the SSC manager ﬁnds
the situation, it calculates the route and sends the routing
information to the robot.
Figure 3. Identiﬁcation of sensor states.
Hetero-core portion
Light loss
Media 
Converter A
SNMP 
agent
SSC 
manager
Media 
Converter B
TX
RX
Hetero-core spliced 
optical ﬁber mat sensors
①Pressed sensor
  Trap
②
Figure 4. Sensor states detection by SNMP.
2) Routing of Robot: The SSC manager also has a routing
function to give a route to a robot. In order to calculate the
path, the manager generates a grid graph by Java Universal
Network/Graph Framework (JUNG) as shown in Figure 6.
This framework is an open source library for Java in order
to analyze and visualize the structure of graphs. Furthermore,
a shortest path algorithm that has been studied in the ﬁeld of
graph theory is adopted. The algorithm is a solution to obtain a
path with the minimum weights from a given source vertex to
a destination vertex in a graph consisting of vertices and edges.
After the calculation, the manager creates and sends a set of
command to robot in order to move it toward the destination.
D. Robot
The system uses a robot to conﬁrm safety for the elderly in
order to reduce misinformation of the sensor and to alleviate
the labor load of caregivers. The following is the requirements
for a robot that is suitable for our system.
First, an appearance of the robot does not offend a user, and
any cameras are not attached on the robot. Furthermore, the
robot can autonomously move or can be controlled remotely.
In order to conﬁrm safety, the robot has beep function and
a touch sensor. Finally, it needs to be equipped with vacuum
cleaner function.
As a robot which fulﬁlls these requirements, a vacuum
cleaning robot, such as Roomba [11] is likely to be selected.
Recently, Roomba has penetrated in general households; thus,
it is easily conﬁgured in our system. Roomba designed simply
that does not threaten the elderly. Additionally, it can beep
sounds as its alert, and a bumper is installed on ahead of the
body, which is used as a button in our system. Besides, though
it autonomously moves around rooms in it’s cleaning mode, its
22
Copyright (c) The Government of Junko Ichikawa, 2015. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

wait
standby
run
clean
conﬁrm
push [clean]
push [stop]
start
ﬁnish
send command
stop
rescue
rescue stop
Figure 5. State diagram of Roomba.
G
S
G
S
Sensor detecting the elderly
Sub Goal (relay point)
G Goal point
S Start point
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6. Generated logical map by manager.
movements are able to be controlled by programs from remote
locations. Figure 5 shows the state diagram of Roomba in our
supporting system.
V.
EXPERIMENT RESULTS
This section explains results of SSC trial experiment,
examining the sensor management and robot control function.
At ﬁrst, points which the robot stops and changes direction
on are shown as white node in Figure 6. In the experiment
of robot control function, we use 3 mats that sensors are
embedded in. When more than two adjacent sensors would
respond, the manager could judge the exact place as the
accident location which is shown as gray nodes in Figure 6(a).
Then, the manager sets both the current place of the robot as
a start point and one of the pressed sensors as a goal point as
shown in Figure 6(b). Additionally, the manager calculates a
path between the start and the end, and Figure 6(c) shows the
relay points. Finally, the SSC manager sends the robot a set
of commands on a path to a relay point, and the robot moves
along the commands as shown in Figure 7.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper proposes a support system for caregivers, which
uses an optical ﬁber sensor and a cleaning robot. This system
aims to monitor the elderly without the use of video recording
in order to prevent privacy invasion. The hetero-core ﬁber
sensors and a vacuum cleaning robot enable our system to
detect fall of an elderly person accurately. However, the
experiment is not considered to lessen the gap between a
calculated route and an actual moving route of a robot, which
is a remaining issue of this study.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Figure 7. Routing control of Roomba.
REFERENCES
[1]
Cabinet Ofﬁce, government of Japan. Statistics and analysis of
population aging in japan in 2013. [retrieved: August, 2014]. http:
//www8.cao.go.jp/kourei/whitepaper/w-2014/zenbun/26pdf index.html
[2]
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, government of Japan. Survey
of number of elderly supporting facility in 2012. [retrieved: August,
2014]. http://www.mhlw.go.jp/toukei/list/24-22-2.html
[3]
T. Sugihara, T. Fujinami, and R. Takatsuka, “An analysis of problems on
development and installation of mimamori-care support camera system
for persons with dementia in group home,” Sociotechnica, vol. 7, 2010,
pp. 54–65.
[4]
Ministry of the Economy, Trade and Industry of Japan. Revision
of the four priority areas to which robot technology is to be
introduced in nursing care of the elderly. [retrieved: September, 2014].
http://www.meti.go.jp/english/press/2014/0203 02.html
[5]
W. Bourennane, Y. Charlon, F. Bettahar, E. Campo, and D. Esteve,
“Homecare monitoring system: A technical proposal for the safety of
the elderly experimented in an alzheimer’s care unit,” IRBM, vol. 34,
no. 2, 2013, pp. 92–100.
[6]
FUJITSU.
Hope
wincare-v2.
[retrieved:
September,
2014].
http:
//jp.fujitsu.com/solutions/medical/products/archive/wincarev2/
[7]
NDSoftware.
Nursing
care
supporting
software
honobono
next.
[retrieved: September, 2014]. http://www.ndsoft.jp/next/kinou kyotaku.
html
[8]
A. Stefano, A. Marco, C. Paolo, L. Janet, and V. Alessio, Monitoring
of Human Movements for Fall Detection and Activities Recognition in
Elderly Care Using Wireless Sensor Network: a Survey, 2010.
[9]
L. S. Goh, K. Watanabe, and N. Shinomiya, “Feasibility evaluation of
multi-point sensing for hetero-core spliced optical ﬁber sensor using
internet-based protocol.”
IEEE ICST, Dec 2013, pp. 569–572.
[10]
N.
Abe,
Y.
Hanada,
N.
Shinomiya,
and
Y.
Teshigawara,
“A
demonstration
of
sensing
and
data
communication
in
optical
sensory nerve network with hetero-core ﬁber optics sensors,” IEICE
Technical Report. USN, vol. 107, no. 294, Oct 2007, pp. 67–71.
http://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/110006453275/
[11]
iRobot. Roomba. [retrieved: June, 2014]. http://www.irobot-jp.com
23
Copyright (c) The Government of Junko Ichikawa, 2015. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

