Development and Promotion of Educational Materials on Human-Centered Design
Jun Iio
Chuo University,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8478, Japan
Email: iiojun@tamacc.chuo-u.ac.jp
Ayano Ohsaki
Advanced Institute of Industrial Technology,
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 140-0011, Japan
Email: ohsaki-ayano@aiit.ac.jp
Rika Waida
JVC KENWOOD Design corporation,
Setagaya-ku Tokyo 158-0097, Japan
Email: waida-rika@jvckenwood.com
Abstract—Human-Centered Design (HCD) is the design principle
that focuses on the users of services, systems, or products. The
idea of HCD was proposed more than two decades ago, and
it has been widely adopted in the Information Technology (IT)
and design industries. However, entry-level educational materials
are needed to increase the popularity of the concepts among
consumers and students who study engineering and industrial
design. The Human-Centered Design organization (HCD-Net) is
a speciﬁc non-proﬁt organization that promotes the concept of
HCD in the Japanese industry. It has a Working Group (WG)
whose members have been tasked to develop the required entry-
level educational materials on HCD and to promote them to the
industry. This paper describes some of its activities. As per the
HCD cycle itself, we distinguish between the development and
the promotion of the materials. The results of their efforts have
been of great value to the people who have to teach the HCD
concepts to newcomers.
Keywords–Human-centered
design;
Educational
materials;
HCD cycle.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Human-Centered Design (HCD) is the concept of a design
process where the designers design their services, systems,
or products focusing on the users of them. That is, HCD is
considered as the user-oriented design process. The concept
of HCD was proposed more than two decades ago, and it was
standardized by the International Organization for Standard
(ISO) as ISO 13407 in 1999. Also, it was integrated into ISO
9241 in 2010 (ISO 9241-210:2010), adding the concept of User
eXperience (UX). Subsequently, it has been updated to ISO
9241-210:2019 in 2019 [1].
In Japan, a non-proﬁt organization, the Human-Centered
Design Organization (HCD-Net), was established in 2004
[2]. HCD-Net aims to assemble knowledge on HCD and to
promote methods and skills regarding HCD. Due to their long-
term efforts, the concept of HCD has been widely adopted
among experienced engineers, especially in Information Tech-
nology (IT) and design industries. However, it is still not
popular among consumers. Surprisingly, and unfortunately,
even students who study engineering and industrial design are
not so familiar with the HCD concepts [3]. Therefore, entry-
level educational materials are needed for training newcomers
to perform in accordance with HCD processes.
Although there are many training services, educational
materials, books, and seminars for the higher-level training
on HCD activities, unfortunately, we have few items that
can be used as the educational material for introducing basic
knowledge of HCD. Hence, entry-level educational materials
on HCD are needed.
Several Working Groups (WGs) were established in HCD-
Net to ﬁll the gap between entry-level and high-level education
due mainly to the lack of educational materials. The members
of these WGs have been actively working to achieve their
goals. “The fostering teachers WG” was established in June
2016, and it meets monthly for face-to-face discussions. In
addition to the meetings, several events have been held by the
WG and the work has been actively progressing [4]–[7].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
2, we present the basic idea of the HCD process. In Section
3, literature reviews are described. In Section 4, the WG’s
strategies are illustrated. Then, in Section 5, we discuss how
the HCD process worked in the WG ’s activities and the value
of the educational materials delivered as their work. Finally,
we conclude in Section 6.
II.
THE HCD PROCESS
Before explaining the WG’s activity further, we describe
the basic idea of the HCD process to better understand the
character of the WG’s work.
The HCD standard is a process standard, i.e., the standard
deﬁnes several processes to realize an efﬁcient design from the
viewpoint of a user. The general phases of the HCD process
can be explained with the following steps: (quoted from [8]).
1)
Specify context of use: Identify who the primary users
of the product, why they will use the product, what
are their requirements and under what environment
they will use it.
2)
Specify Requirements: Once the context is speciﬁed,
it is the time to identify the granular requirements
of the product. This is an important process which
can further facilitate the designers to create story-
boards, and set important goals to make the product
successful.
3)
Create Design solutions and development: Based on
product goals and requirements, start an iterative
process of product design and development.
4)
Evaluate Product: Product designers do usability
testing to get users’ feedback of the product. Product
evaluation is a crucial step in product development
which gives critical feedback of the product. The
important point is that this cyclical process must be
repeated several times to satisfy the service level of
the users’ requirements.
WG members are in charge of creating the entry-level
materials and of training the trainers who can teach the basic
concepts of HCD by using their materials. The fact that their
activities themselves were based on the concept of HCD should
447
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1. The WG’s activities along with the concept of HCD deﬁned in the
ISO 9241-210.
be noted; that is, the designing process of their products
was as follows: 1. Properties of trainees were assumed and
speciﬁed. 2. Educational materials were designed for them.
3. The prototype of materials was evaluated by providing it
in several trials of seminars. 4. After that, the educational
materials were updated according to the feedback from the
previous steps. Figure 1 illustrates the processes deﬁned by
ISO 9241-210 and the cases adopted to WG’s activities in
each step, respectively.
III.
LITERATURE REVIEW
As the concept of HCD is more widely recognized, HCD
education is gathering more and more interest from engineers
in various ﬁelds. Instructors in this ﬁeld are paying special
attention to how to teach UX concepts. Some case studies
in universities and professional training colleges have been
reported. However, it still remains unclear how to help new-
comers understand HCD in the real business ﬁeld.
Ito et al. [9] reported their implementation of the e-learning
course on the basics of HCD. They were working for a
computer-electronics manufacturer, and their e-learning course
was intended to prevent miscommunication regarding user
interfaces among the employees. It was a good example of
HCD education conducted in the enterprise.
Gonzalez et al. [10] surveyed 140 students who were
members of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
(HFES) and analyzed 40 UX job postings. The results show
that there is a discrepancy between the skills the UX industry
expects students to have, and the skills HFES promotes for
a career in UX. They recommended a focus on increasing
HFES’s relevance to students interested in future UX careers.
Vorvoreanu et al. [11] also reported on the UX education for
undergraduate students at university.
The concept of “design thinking” is a similar idea to UX
design. Wrigley et al. [12] focused on surveying the design
thinking education provided as Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs). MOOCs are open to the public and most can be
participated in for free via the Internet. Therefore, anyone who
wants to learn about design thinking can acquire the knowledge
by accessing the courses presented on their web-sites.
Dirin and Nieminen [13] studied the relevance of User-
Centered Design (UCD) education to a mobile application de-
velopment course implemented in a university. They analyzed
the feedback from students and concluded that UCD education
had a signiﬁcant role in the development and improvement of
students’ capabilities on consulting and user study research.
We can ﬁnd many other cases where HCD or UCD
processes were introduced to education programs in various
ﬁelds; Adam et al. [14], Organ et al. [15], and Carter et al.
[16] reported cases in health and medical education, Harvey et
al. [17] reported a case in fashion education, Wilson et al. [18]
discussed the possibility of applying the UCD approach to the
training environment for aircraft maintenance personnel, and
Bowie and Cassim [19] argued for the HCD methodology in
contemporary communication design education. These papers
reveal the presence of a potential need for HCD education in
various domains.
Additionally, there are some studies on designing or eval-
uating a curriculum by incorporating HCD processes similar
to our approach, in creating their educational materials. Altay
[20] pointed out that there is a similarity between the learner-
centered approach in education and the user-centered approach
in design disciplines. Altay illustrates this by adopting a user-
centered approach within the human factors course as one of
the learner-centered instructional methods. Reich-Stiebert et al.
[21] explored robot design education by means of the HCD
approach. They investigated students’ preferences regarding
the design of educational robots and evaluated the course
according to the results. Chen et al. [22] reported on the results
of evaluating the curriculum using a method of creating student
personas in the ﬁeld of resource engineering education.
IV.
THE WG’S STRATEGIES
The starting point for the WG’s activities was the textbook
published as the ﬁrst of the HCD book series. Based on
the contents of the book, the WG considered two strategies;
one was to develop presentation slides and guidebooks as the
educational materials, and another was to foster trainers who
could provide seminars to newcomers who were not familiar
with HCD.
Under these strategies, the WG created two prototypes
of the educational materials for engineers and salespeople.
Furthermore, some simulated seminars were conducted to
acquire feedback and opinions to brush-up the materials.
A. Educational Materials for Engineers
The ﬁrst target was newbie engineers who were not familiar
with the concept of HCD. The WG published a beta-version of
the presentation slides in June 2017, after several discussions
by the WG members. After collecting some feedback, the
materials were updated, and version 1.0 of the educational
materials were published in May 2018.
The presentation materials have 42 slides, which are in-
tended for conducting a seminar of approximately one-and-a-
half hours. An overview of the contents is as follows:
1)
Case studies
2)
The concept of human-centered design
3)
Usability
4)
Introducing the HCD cycle
448
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

5)
Appendix (good practices)
Figure 2 shows some examples of the educational materi-
als. The upper left of the ﬁgure is the cover page, the upper
right shows an example from the case studies, the lower left
illustrates the HCD cycle, and the lower right is the cover of
the appendix.
As it can be seen from the small icon at the corner of
the cover page (see the upper left of Figure 2), the materials
are published under the license of Creative Commons (CC
BY-NC-SA 3.0). Therefore, everyone can share, redistribute,
modify, and create deliverables based on this product, if they
follow the conditions deﬁned by the CC-license. This licensing
strategy is especially helpful for future trainers, who the WG
also wants to encourage because those educators are allowed
to modify educational materials as they like.
Figure 2. Examples of the presentation slides for training engineers.
B. Educational Materials for Salespeople
After ﬁnishing the creation of the entry-level educational
materials on HCD for engineers, the WG started a discussion
on another version of the educational materials. The members
of the WG considered that the people in the front ofﬁce
who had contact with their customers had to know the HCD
concepts. Especially in the case of ‘business to business
(B2B),’ such businesses require customers’ understanding and
cooperation. Hence, the WG decided on salespeople as the
next target for education on the idea of HCD.
At the beginning of the preparation work, the WG invited
some salespeople and producers who were using HCD pro-
cesses and worked directly with their customers in their daily
business activities. The WG members had several interviews
with them to get to know their mental thought processes,
how they worked with their customers, etc. Also, they invited
salespeople who did not know the HCD to attend an entry-
level HCD lecture, so that the discussions could be fruitful for
both sides.
Although the base materials were those for engineers,
minor modiﬁcations were made to the original ones. There
were two signiﬁcant changes; one is that the thoughts of the
customer-orientation investigation were introduced instead of
the case studies. The other was that the discussion on the
positioning of the HCD was added before the conclusions. The
latter part also mentions the User eXperiences (UX), because
the UX is also a key topic for discussing HCD-related issues
with customers. The overview of the contents for salespeople
is as follows:
1)
Considering the view of the customer-oriented
2)
The concept of the human-centered design
3)
Usability
4)
Introducing the HCD cycle
5)
Positioning of the HCD
6)
Appendix (good practices)
The education materials of the HCD for salespeople were
released in May 2019 (version 1.0).
C. Guidebooks
In addition to providing the presentation slides, the WG
also supplies a guidebook on how to conduct efﬁcient training
on HCD. Generally, it is not easy to run seminars along with
the presentation materials when they were created by other
individuals. Therefore, guidebooks to run training courses for
trainers using two versions (for engineers and salespeople) of
educational materials are also provided.
Figure 3. Examples of the guidebook for training engineers.
Figure 3 shows some examples of the guidebook for
the educational materials for training engineers. The left of
the ﬁgure is the cover page, the middle shows the table-of-
contents, and the right shows one of the instructional pages.
As it can be seen on the right in Figure 3, the instructions
are described for all presentation slides. The guidebook helps
novice trainers by giving some additional information on how
to teach the topics, etc. All the educational materials (presen-
tation slides) and complementary guidebooks are uploaded to
the server hosted by HCD-Net. These can be downloaded from
[23] (for engineers) and from [24] (for salespeople).
D. Simulated Seminars (Trial Events)
To evaluate the prototype of the educational materials and
lectures, the WG held ﬁve simulated seminars. Table I shows
a list of trial events ofﬁcially announced by HCD-Net.
TABLE I. THE LIST OF TRIAL SEMINARS.
ID
Target
Version
Date
Participants
1
Engineer
alpha
Mar 4, 2017
18 pros and beginners
2
Engineer
beta
Aug 29, 2017
10 pros and beginners
3
Engineer
ver. 1.0
May 25, 2018
21 pros and beginners
4
Salesperson beta
Jan 19, 2019
18 pros and beginners
5
Engineer
& Sales-
person
Modiﬁed
Dec 19, 2019
26 (mainly) beginners
449
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The target of the ﬁrst three seminars (ID 1, 2, 3) was the
version for engineers. Lectures based on the alpha version,
the beta version, and version 1.0 were examined in each trial,
respectively. The next one (ID 4) was for salespeople. At
that time, the beta version of lectures for salespeople was
conﬁrmed. We asked for HCD professionals to participate
in those trials (from ID 1 to ID 4). Therefore, we could
hear various opinions from not only beginners but also from
professionals. Furthermore, the trial seminars were helpful
for those professionals because most of them were in charge
of human resource development, and they had motivation to
take the contents of the entry-level workshops back to their
companies.
V.
DISCUSSIONS
As described in the previous section, the WG created the
educational materials and the guidebooks in accordance with
the HCD processes. In this section, the compliance with such
methods, and the values of the WG’s products are discussed.
A. How the HCD Process Worked in the WG’s Activity
Looking back, in this section we consider how the four
steps in the HCD cycle were applied to the WG’s activities.
We recall that the HCD cycle has four steps: specifying context
of use, specifying requirements, creating design solutions and
development, and evaluating products.
1) Specify Context of Use: As we described in the intro-
duction of this paper, our study aimed to create entry-level
educational materials and to encourage the instructors who
present the training in their organizations. Considering the
situations and experiences of each WG member [4][5], the
WG decided on engineers as the ﬁrst target group of trainees,
and then salespeople as the second target group of trainees.
2) Specify Requirements: Because the educational mate-
rials are essentially designed to accompany the explanations
of the textbook, the important part of the WG’s work was
to decide which components should be selected. Furthermore,
the course time was considered very short. At the beginning of
the WG’s discussion, it made the assumption that the entry-
level education on HCD would be conducted in one or two
hours. Therefore, the members tried to not make the contents
of the materials too complicated. Also, the members discussed
what the participants of the lectures would consider important
for their studies and their future careers. That is one of the
essential points of the WG’s activity in the view of the HCD
concept.
3) Create Design Solutions and Development: The WG’s
process for making the materials was iterative, requiring at
least two cycles.
The ﬁrst cycle started with the prototype of the educational
materials for engineers. The product was ﬁrstly published in its
beta version. The WG then collected feedback and comments
at the trial seminars (see Section 4.4). After that, the materials
were published as version 1.0, and currently, it has been
updated to version 1.1.
The second cycle was based on the ﬁrst one. The prototype
of materials for salespeople was started from the latest version
of that for engineers, and then updated according to the WG’s
interviews and feedback from trial seminars. It was published
as the beta version, and updated to version 1.0, as well.
4) Evaluate Product: Evaluation by the potential users is
a very important process in the HCD cycle. In the WG’s
activities, the members also considered it the principal process.
As described previously with the trial events run to evaluate the
materials during the design phase, the WG remained focused
on the evaluation process.
The WG’s main work in 2019 was the evaluation, improve-
ment, and investigation of which organizations were really
utilizing their materials. Several new members, who were users
of the materials, joined the WG in 2019. The educational
materials and the guidebooks were updated according to the
results of interviews conducted with them and feedback from
questionnaires.
B. Value of the Educational Materials
The aim of the WG was to prepare entry-level educational
materials and to foster instructors who can teach newcomers
not yet familiar with the concept of HCD. Therefore, by
providing the educational materials, it tried to ﬁll the gap
between newbies and experienced engineers, designers, and
salespeople.
A review from Amazon’s sales listing of the textbook states
that: “It is not easy to understand only by reading. It will
be worth reading if some lectures were provided using this
book as its textbook.” We had to agree with this comment.
Hence, our decision to provide lectures on the entry-level HCD
knowledge with these materials and guidebooks.
During the work conducted in 2019, the WG collected
several opinions and impressions of the products from the
new members. All of them mentioned that it was useful, but
there was still some room for improvement. As the materials
were provided under the CC-license, the users could modify
the contents, so that it could become suitable for their own
courses.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The members of the human resource development WG,
which was set up in HCD-Net to implement the entry-level
educational materials on HCD and to foster lecturers who can
train newcomers in each organization, have been working ac-
tively during recent years. This paper described their activities
and provides an overview of their results. The most signiﬁcant
feature of their work was the fact that their outcomes, that
is, the HCD educational materials themselves, were designed
according to HCD processes.
The educational materials they created are intended for
two different target groups; one for engineers and another for
salespeople. Firstly, the training materials for engineers were
designed. After that, based on the ﬁrst prototype, the revised
ones for salespeople were created. Guidebooks for conducting
the training were also created to accompany the educational
materials to make it easier for the lecturers to present these
materials.
The WG’s main activities in 2019 were conducting inter-
views with the users, delivering questionnaires to them, and
improving the educational materials according to the feedback,
as described in the last part of Section 4.1. However, more in-
depth analysis of the feedback remains to be done as part of
their future work.
Several evaluations were conducted as part of the HCD
cycles. In particular, we carried out a series of simulated
seminars and interviews with users of the prototype versions.
450
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

However, the lectures using these educational materials should
be more widespread if we want to let the HCD concepts
penetrate into all of the industries. More and more promotions
will be needed, and they remain our future work. Furthermore,
more evaluations to improve educational materials should be
conducted. It will be an ongoing task as part of the WG’s
future activities.
REFERENCES
[1]
“ISO 9241-210:2019 Ergonomics of human-system interaction – Part
210: Human-centred design for interactive systems,” https://www.iso.
org/standard/77520.html, [retrieved: Sep, 2020]
[2]
Z. Liu, “User Experience in Asia,” Journal of Usability Studies, vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 42–50, 2014.
[3]
B. B. Hong, E. Bohemia, R. Neubauer, and L. Santamaria, “Design
for Users: The Global Studio,” The 20th International Conference on
Engineering and Product Design Education (E&PDE18), London, UK,
6–7th September, 2018.
[4]
H. Yasu et al., “Framework of Education to Promote HCD among
Organizations, — Learning from Case Studies —,” Bulletin of Human
Centered Design Organization, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 13–19, 2016.
[5]
H. Yasu et al., “Framework of Education to Promote HCD among
Organizations — Proposal and Evaluation on Action Plans for Each
Trainee —,” Bulletin of Human Centered Design Organization, vol. 13,
no. 1, pp. 19–24, 2017.
[6]
R. Waida et al., “Teaching Materials of HCD Introductory Course
for Practitioners – Activities of Making the Beta Version,” Bulletin of
Human Centered Design Organization, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 24–28, 2018.
[7]
A. Kambayashi et al., “Teaching Materials of HCD Introductory Course
for Practitioners: Activities of Ofﬁcial Version for Engineers and the
Beta Version for People in Contact with Customers,” Bulletin of Human
Centered Design Organization, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 9–14, 2019.
[8]
“User-centered design,” From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. https:
//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User-centered design, [retrieved: Sep, 2020]
[9]
J. Ito, A. Ikegami, and T. Hirayama, “Practice of Promoting HCD
Education by a Consumer Electronics Manufacturer,” M. Kurosu (Ed.):
Human Centered Design, HCII 2009, LNCS 5619, pp. 594–600, 2009.
[10]
C. A. Gonzalez, M. Ghazizadeh, and M. Smith, “Perspectives on the
Training of Human Factors Students for the User Experience Industry,”
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 1807–1811, 2014.
[11]
M. Vorvoreanu, C. M. Gray, P. Parsons, and N. Rasche, “Advancing UX
Education: A Model for Integrated Studio Pedagogy,” Proceedings of
the Computer Human Interaction, CHI 2017, May 6–11, Denver, CO,
USA, 2017, DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025726
[12]
C. Wrigley, G. Mosely, and M. Tomitsch, “Design Thinking Education:
A Comparison of Massive Open Online Courses,” The Journal of
Design, Economics, and Innovation, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 275–292, 2018.
[13]
A. Dirin and M. Nieminen, “Relevance of UCD Education to Software
Development – Recommendation for Curriculum Design”. Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on Computer Supported Education
(CSEDU 2016), no. 2, pp. 112–120, 2016.
[14]
M. Adam, S. A. McMahon, C. Prober, and T. B¨arnighausen, “Human-
Centered Design of Video-Based Health Education: An Iterative, Col-
laborative, Community-Based Approach,” Journal of Medical Internet
Research, vol. 21, no. 1:e12128, 2019. DOI: 10.2196/12128
[15]
D. Organ et al., “A systematic review of user-centred design practices
in illicit substance use interventions for higher education students,” Eu-
ropean Conference on Information Systems 2018: Beyond Digitization –
Facets of Socio-Technical Change, Portsmouth, UK, 23–28 June. 2018.
[16]
J. Carter, Y. J. Bababekov, and M. D. Majmudar, “Training for our
digital future: a human-centered design approach to graduate medical
education for aspiring clinician-innovators.” npj Digital Medicine, vol.
1 no. 1, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-018-0034-4
[17]
N. Harvey, P. Ankiew, and F. van As, “Fashion design education: effects
of users as design core and inspirational source.” Proceedings PATT 37:
Developing a knowledge economy through technology and engineering
education, pp. 203–211, Malta, 3–6 June. 2019.
[18]
C. Wilson, W. Bennett Jr., S. Guarino, K. Bove, and T. L. Cain,
“Applying a User-Centered Design Approach to Developing Game-
Based Training Environments for Aircraft Maintainers,” End-User Con-
siderations in Educational Technology Design, pp. 217–238, 2018. DOI:
10.4018/978-1-5225-2639-1.ch01
[19]
A. Bowie and F. Cassim, “Linking classroom and community: A
theoretical alignment of service learning and a human-centered design
methodology in contemporary communication design education,” Edu-
cation as Change, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 126–148, 2016.
[20]
B. Altay, “User-centered design through learner-centered instruction,”
Teaching in Higher Education, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 138–155, 2014. DOI:
10.1080/13562517.2013.827646
[21]
N. Reich-Stiebert, F. Eyssel, and C. Hohnemann, “Exploring University
Students ’ Preferences for Educational Robot Design by Means of
a User-Centered Design Approach,” International Journal of Social
Robotics, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-019-00554-7
[22]
K. C. Chen et al., “Creating a Project-based Curriculum in Materials
Engineering,” Journal of Materials Education, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 37–44,
2009.
[23]
Human Centered Design Organization, “HCD training materials for
engineers ver. 1.1,” https://www.hcdnet.org/hcd/column/materials 01/
hcd-1177.html [retrieved: Sep, 2020]
[24]
Human
Centered
Design
Organization,
“HCD
training
materi-
als for salespeople,” https://www.hcdnet.org/hcd/column/materials 01/
hcd-1307.html [retrieved: Sep, 2020]
451
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-761-0
ACHI 2020 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

