Coupling Artificial Neural Networks and Genetic Algorithms in Redesigning 
Existing Cities for Flood Resistance 
Gene Oliver Cruz1, Florencio Ballesteros, Jr.1, Ariel Blanco2 
1Environmental Engineering Graduate Program 
2Department of Geodetic Engineering 
University of the Philippines 
Quezon City, Philippines 
gene_cruz@yahoo.com, {balleste, acblanco.updge}@gmail.com   
 
 
Abstract – Cities are becoming more vulnerable to natural 
hazards due to increasing concentration of urban population 
and resources as well as to changing weather patterns caused 
by climate change.  Adding to the aggravation of urban 
vulnerability is the socio-economic conditions of its population.  
More often, the poor are those who are severely affected and 
have no economic means to recover.  Eventually, the local 
government takes the responsibility of providing services to 
restore and rehabilitate affected communities.  This impacts 
the cities’ economic base by reducing their ability to grow and 
raise revenue.  In order to minimize economic losses caused by 
a disaster, it is important to assess the communities’ 
vulnerabilities and plan ahead before a disaster strikes.  This 
paper explores the use of neural networks and genetic 
algorithms as support tools for an integrated urban 
development and disaster risk reduction planning and decision 
making. 
Keywords-artificial neural networks; genetic algorithms; 
land use; disaster preparedness. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Disaster risk is a key threat to dense urban spaces as 
evidenced by events in the past [1].  Experiences of the 
United States of America from the devastation of Hurricane 
Katrina in 2005 only revealed that even in highly developed 
countries, 
buildings 
and 
infrastructure, 
flood 
risk 
preparations and well-resourced emergency services can be 
overwhelmed.  Such concern is not an indication of climate 
change yet but rather a proof of vulnerability of urban areas 
and settlements to extreme weather events [2].  Disaster risk 
arises when hazards interact with physical, social, economic 
and environmental vulnerabilities.  Disasters, often, hold 
back urban development and impact the economic base of 
urban areas by reducing their ability to grow and maintain 
carrying capacity.  Urban areas, particularly in developing 
countries, are faced with the challenges brought about by 
climate change.  It is foreseen that a significant amount of 
residential developments will be required which would shape 
future spatial patterns of these urban areas.  It is, therefore, 
important that the direction of spatial pattern and climate 
change adaptation of urban infrastructures are planned [3].   
Lately, there has been a gradual awakening to the fact 
that disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation are 
not separate specialized fields of activity alongside poverty 
reduction and sustainable development efforts.  The growing 
concerns on the impacts of climate change bring about the 
importance of integrating land use planning, disaster 
management and climate change to address disaster risk 
issues holistically [4].  One of the things that link them is 
their common need to understand livelihoods and obstacles 
to people gaining access to what is needed to stabilize their 
livelihoods 
and 
make 
them 
hazard 
resistant 
[5]. 
Understanding spatial and temporal processes of urban 
development and its corresponding social-environmental 
consequences deserve serious study due to its direct and 
imminent impacts on human beings [6].  This study explores 
an integrated urban land use and disaster risk reduction 
approach proposing the use of evolutionary computing 
algorithm for a holistic planning and decision making 
process. 
The paper is presented as follows: Section II discusses 
the rationale behind the proposed research.  Section III 
presents the temporal and geographic scope.  Section IV 
outlines the research methodology which is divided into four 
major activities.  Last, since the research is still in progress, 
this section presents initial results and challenges faced in 
doing the research. 
II. 
RELEVANCE 
In the past, land use management and disaster risk 
management were treated as almost, if not completely, two 
separate disciplines.  The gradual recognition of their 
relationship to the city’s economic growth and development 
prompts interest to integrate the two fields.  Current 
integrated approach, if there is any, is usually manual and 
subject to the whims of the planners and decision makers 
requiring subjective consideration of various characteristics 
of the city.  
 Numerous studies exist on computer supported land use 
simulation [6][7][8][9][10] but approaches that specifically 
consider disaster management aspects are rare.  The 
research proposes an automated integrated analysis of land 
use and disaster risk through processing of geospatial and 
statistical data to better understand and assess the city’s 
current and future state which aids in effective planning and 
decision making.  The proposed approach views disaster 
mitigation as an integral part of land use management that 
does not only addresses the current requirements of the city 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

but also the effects of such decisions on shaping future land 
use patterns and communities’ vulnerability. 
III. 
SCOPE 
Metro Manila is the primary core of Philippine politics 
and commerce.  It is a result of integrating seventeen 
previously distinct territories which includes Marikina City 
located at the eastern border.  Marikina City is consist of 
sixteen communities or barangays and is regarded as a 
highly urbanized first class city.  It has high exposure 
though to recurring floods due to its proximity to Pasig and 
Marikina rivers.  In 2009, the city was inundated by 
torrential rains brought about by Typhoon Ketsana 
damaging properties and claiming lives.  Since then, the city 
has been active in disaster mitigation and preparedness.    
Marikina City is selected as a case study for assessing the 
effectiveness of the proposed integrated approach.  Using 
historical empirical data consisting of the site’s physical and 
socio-economic attributes for the past twenty years with a 
ten year interval, future land use pattern is simulated at an 
interval of ten years considering the boundary effects of 
surrounding cities and municipalities.   
Vulnerability indices of barangays are also measured 
using same data sets with the assumption that vulnerability 
degrades as urban growth is realized.  While simulating 
future land developments, the study also examines the 
effects of such development to the vulnerability of the 
barangays to flooding over time.  The study then proposes a 
physical arrangement of barangays resulting to lesser 
vulnerability. The results from this simulation can be 
considered during planning for both land development and 
disaster mitigation. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
The study is divided into four parts: 1) assessing the 
vulnerability over time, 2) developing a land use model and 
simulating future land use patterns, 3) optimizing the 
resilience of predicted land use against flooding, and 4) 
conducting sensitivity analysis and determining effects of 
controlling attributes on future resiliencies. Figure 1 
illustrates the framework of the research design. 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) [7] and Genetic 
Algorithms (GA) [12] are used in this study due to their 
capability of capturing the complexity, non-linearity, 
heterogeneity, and at times, chaotic and unpredictable 
behaviour of both urban growth and community resilience. 
These can accommodate and process volumes of data and 
identify which of these data are significant.  Initially, the 
study focuses on loosely linking ANN and GA.  Each 
method is independently performed on individual platforms 
with the intention of integrating them seamlessly in a form a 
program simulation.   
A. Land Use Simulation Model 
This subsection undertakes the development of a land use 
simulation model that defines the probability of land use 
transition.  Historical empirical data are used to determine 
the 
relationship 
between 
site 
attributes 
and 
urban 
development.  To achieve this, the geographic map of 
Marikina City is initially broken down into acceptable grid 
or cell sizes (e.g., 50 meter by 50 meter grid).  Future state or 
development level of each cell is predicted by considering 
both its current site attributes and development state 
(residential, commercial, industrial, etc.) and of its 
neighboring cells.  Collectively, the cells generate the 
predicted land use pattern of the city.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Research Methodology 
 
Geographic Information System (GIS) data layers of site 
attributes (S’n) influencing land use change such as socio-
economic data (e.g., population growth, population density, 
etc.) and physical characteristics (e.g., slope, proximity to 
infrastructures, etc.) from three epochs or periods (1990, 
2000 and 2010) of Marikina and its neighboring areas are 
collected and processed for purposes of data clean-up, 
conversion and extraction of data layers.  Physical attributes 
related to geographic proximity and accessibility are also 
extracted using GIS software (e.g., ArcGIS) [10] common 
analysis functions such as buffer and overlay.  Socio-
economic statistics are also entered into the software as a 
data layer.  There are two ways in handling the historical site 
attribute for training.  One approach is to assume that 
development proceeds based on historical trends. The other 
approach is to modify the data following a set of planning 
criteria [7]. 
 
 
Weighted 
parameters 
Alternate 
Projection 
Result Optimization 
GA 
Improved 
Vulnerability  
Sensitivity Analysis 
Result Generation 
Future 
Projection 
Vulnerability 
Assessment 
Training & Calibration 
Simulation 
Site Attributes 
Weighted 
parameters 
ANN- CA 
GIS Datasets 
Data Analysis 
Vulnerability 
Assessment 
 
Data Collection 
Literature Review 
Socio-economic & 
physical attributes 
 
• Methods  
• Background 
 
Research Objectives 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ANN is employed in determining parameter values for 
the transitions rules of the proposed land use model.  There 
are two parts of developing the model: training by ANN and 
simulation by Cellular Automata (CA) [6][7], as illustrated 
in Figure 2.  The neural network is composed of three layers: 
an input layer, a hidden layer and an output layer.  The input 
layer has n neurons representing n site attributes obtained 
from GIS.  Similarly, the hidden layer has n neurons.  The 
output layer has only one neuron indicating the development 
probability.  At each iteration stage, the neural network 
determines the development probability based on the input 
site attribute.  The algorithm derived from ANN is used for 
CA simulation. 
In order to achieve the best generalization, the data sets 
are split into three parts [8]: 
• 
The training set which is used to train the neural 
network, and its error is minimized during training; 
• 
The validation set which is used to determine the 
performance of a neural network on patterns that are not 
trained during learning; and, 
• 
The test set which is meant for checking the overall 
performance of a neural network. 
 
 
Figure 2. Simulation of urban form using ANN based CA model [7] 
Historical data of 1990 and 2000 are used as training data 
to calibrate the neural networks.  Training or learning is then 
stopped when the validation set error reaches its minimum.  
After concluding the learning phase, the net should be finally 
checked with the third data set – the test set, i.e., actual land 
use of 2010.  CA simulations are carried out for the three 
periods so that land use transitions can be compared and 
evaluated against the actual development of 2010. 
ANN is employed to estimate the development 
probability at each iteration stage of the CA simulation.  The 
existing variables of a cell and its neighboring cells are the 
input values and the neural network determines the 
development probability at the output layer at each iteration 
stage.  Before keying the values into the neural network, 
variables are scaled to treat them as equally important inputs 
and to make them compatible with a sigmoid activation 
function [7].  The parameters or weights are significant in 
defining the final signals.  Back propagation algorithm is 
adopted as an iterative learning procedure to minimize the 
error function.  In this process, the parameters undergo 
continuous adjustments by comparing the calculated outputs 
against desired outputs [9][10][11].   
A random seed number, an arbitrary constant determined 
through trial and error, is determined and used to initialize 
the weights.  The errors, computed as the difference between 
calculated and desired output neuron, are propagated 
backwards to refine the weights.  The adjustment of the 
weights is iterated or repeated until such time that the errors 
are within the acceptable thresholds.  This completes the 
training process of the neural network making it ready for 
simulation.  
Another consideration of this study is to validate also the 
results against two major analytical characteristics of spatial 
analysis: spatial autocorrelation and spatial heterogeneity 
[11].  Once training is completed and appropriate weights are 
obtained, the data are entered and processed into the neural 
network based CA simulation model.  The model is 
implemented in a GIS platform by integrating neural 
network and GIS.  A graphical result of the model is 
presented in GIS format. 
B. Vulnerability Assessment of Current and Future Land 
Use Change 
Spatial planning with the aid of GIS has also been 
regarded as becoming one of the most important tools in 
disaster risk reduction.  Spatial data, together with non-
spatial ones, can be analyzed in obtaining information on geo 
hazards and  hazard prone areas which can be used as 
planning and decision making tools. 
Using a “weighted average” technique, vulnerability 
assessment of Marikina’s barangays is performed to provide 
insights on the historical trend of their vulnerability.  Socio-
economic variables are processed into weighted variables 
using data analysis software (e.g., MATLAB) and used in 
establishing vulnerability index over periods of time.  The 
results are then compared and validated against other risk 
assessment models.  Using the same method, vulnerability of 
the predicted land use pattern is measured.  The predicted 
pattern is also superimposed into a geo hazard map to 
determine which settlements would likely be affected.  Its 
vulnerability is assessed using parameters such as loss of life, 
property, livelihood and infrastructure. 
C. Alternative Future Land Use Change Scenario 
Using GA, a proposed urban arrangement having the 
lowest possible vulnerability is generated using a cost fitness 
function as a chromosome.  Desired result is achieved 
through crossover, selection and mutation of its best 
attributes and producing a desired attribute. The method is 
similar to Charles Darwin’s evolution of species by survival 
of the fittest whereby a new individual evolves by the 
crossover of genetic information of two parents. 
The measured vulnerability is compared against current 
vulnerabilities to determine whether there is significant 
improvement on the communities’ resilience.   
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

D. Sensitivity Analysis 
Since proposed arrangements are machine generated 
results, there is a need to validate and assess their practicality 
following land use planning principles.  A sensitivity 
analysis is performed by controlling or altering attributes as a 
representation of current city planning or remediation by 
entering the modifications into the simulation model.  The 
results provide insights to planners and decision makers on 
the relationship of attributes and the effectiveness of existing 
measures to reducing communities’ vulnerabilities. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The study is currently on-going.  Historical data have 
been collected from the cluster of cities and municipalities 
which includes Marikina City, Quezon City, San Mateo, 
Antipolo City, Cainta and Pasig City.  As expected, 
obtaining complete, up to date and accurate data poses a 
challenge.  This is primarily due to the inability of the local 
government to retain historical information, particularly in 
the 1990s where computers were not yet widely used to store 
data.  Most documents were kept in hard copies and retained 
for a certain period of time, for example, five years after 
which these are disposed.  As a result, additional work is 
carried out in tracing back historical land use pattern through 
differentiating available data sets and focusing only in areas 
where changes occurred.  
The number of parameters or attributes to be considered 
in land use planning and disaster risk management is 
abundant.  Some of these attributes take first precedence over 
the others and some of these attributes may not be significant 
at all.  For a human to process all available information, it 
would take much time and effort and by the time results are 
derived new sets of change have occurred.  The research 
intends to verify the usability of identified problem solving 
methods in obtaining valuable information for planning and 
decision making in an integrated holistic approach.   
The research also recognizes that the computational 
requirements may be extremely resource consuming.  As 
such, the research intends to further investigate in the future 
the use of other computational methods to compare which 
are more efficient. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Hochrainer and R. Mechler, “Natural disaster risk in Asian 
megacities: A case for risk pooling?”, Cities,  vol. 1, issue 28,  
February 2011,     pp. 53-61. 
[2] S. Huq, S. Kovats, H. Reid, and D. Satterthwaite, “Editorial: 
Reducing risks to cities from disasters and climate change”, 
Environment and Urbanization, vol. 19, no. 1, April 2007, pp. 3-15, 
http://eau.sagepub.com/content/19/1/3 [retrieved: February 2014]. 
[3] K. Otto-Zimmerman (ed), 2011, Resilient Cities: Cities and 
Adaptation to Climate Change Proceeding of the Global Forum 2010, 
Local Sustainability 1, SpringerScience+Business Media, Dordrecht 
[4] B. Bajracharya, I. Childs, and P. Hastings, “Climate change 
adaptation through land use planning and disaster management: Local 
government perspectives from Queensland”, Refereed paper 
presented at 17th Pacific Rim Real Estate Society Conference 
Climate change and property: Its impact now and later, 16-19 January 
2011, Gold Coast,  pp. 1-16. 
[5] B. Wisner, “Are We There Yet? Reflections on Integrated Disaster 
Risk Management after Ten Years”, Journal of Integrated Disaster 
Risk Management, vol. 1, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1-14,  Published online: 
30/04/2011. 
[6] Y. 
Liu, Modelling Urban Development with Geographical 
Information Systems and Cellular Automata, CRC Press / Taylor 
Francis Group, Boca Raton, Fl. 
[7] A. G. Yeh and X. Li, “Urban Simulation Using Neural Networks and 
Cellular Automata for Land Use Planning”, Advances in Spatial Data 
Handling: 10th International Symposium on Spatial Data Handling, 
9-12 July 2002,   pp. 451 -464. 
[8] C. M. Almeida, J. M. Gleriani, E. F. Catehon, and B. S. Spares-Filho, 
“Using neural networks and cellular automata for modeling intra-
urban land use dynamics”, International Journal of Geographical 
Information Science, vol. 22, issue 9, pp. 943-963. 
[9] C. M. Almeida and J. M. Gleriani, “Cellular Automata and Neural 
Networks as a Modelling Framework for the Simulation of Land Use 
Change”, Anais XII Simposio Brasileiro de Sensoriamenti Remoto, 
Goiania, Brasil, 16-21 April 2005, INPE, pp. 3697-3705. 
[10] O. Okwuashi et al., “GIS Cellular Automata Using Artificial Neural 
Network for Land Use Change Simulation of Lagos, Nigeria”, 
Journal of Geography and Geology, vol. 4, no. 2, May 2012,           
pp. 
94-101, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/jgg.v4n2p94 
[retrieved: 
February 2014]. 
[11] D. Triantakonstantis and G. Mountrakis, “Urban Growth Prediction: 
A Review of Computational Models and Human Perceptions”, 
Journal of Geographic Information System, vol. 4, no. 6,       
December  2012, pp. 555-587, doi: 10.4236/jgis.2012.46060 
[retrieved: February 2014] 
[12] V. P. Bongolan, F. Ballesteros, K. A. Baritua, and M. J. Santos, 
“Prioritizing the Components of Vulnerability: A Genetic Algorithm 
Minimization of Flood Risk”, EGU General Assembly, Vienna, 
Austria 2013, 7-12 April 2013.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

