Virtual Reality Environment for Presenting Al-Qatt
Al-Asiri Saudi Art
Abeer S. Al-Humaimeedy
Department of Software Engineering
King Saud University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
abeer@KSU.EDU.SA
Alhanof S. Alolyan
Department of Software Engineering
King Saud University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
437203004@STUDENTS.KSU.EDU.SA
Areej Al-Wabil
College of Engineering
Alfaisal University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Areej@mit.edu
Khalid W. Alzamil
King Abdul-Aziz & his Companions Foundation for Giftedness and Creativity
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
kwzamil@gmail.com
Ghada AL-Hudhud
Department of Information Technology
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
galhudhud@ksu.edu.sa
Abstract—Virtual museums digitally exhibit art and heritage
using virtual reality technology. Such projects are unique in
including the past, present, and future. They are teaching the
past heritage using modern-day technology to communicate with
the future generations. Al-Qatt Al-Asiri is the traditional art of
interior wall decoration done by women in the Southern Region
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA). In 2017, this art has been
inscribed on the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible
Cultural Heritage of Humanity. This paper presents the work
conducted towards the development of a virtual museum of Al-
Qatt Al-Asiri art, within the framework of the user-centered
design and evaluation methodology for virtual environments.
The proposed virtual museum simulates the real-world museums
found in the Assir region in the South of KSA. Moreover, it
adds gaming elements by providing rooms for colouring and
storytelling.
Index Terms—Al-Qatt Al-Asiri, virtual reality, virtual museum,
Saudi heritage, culture heritage
I. INTRODUCTION
Saudi Arabian arts and heritage are increasingly being
recognized in local and global context. The 2030 vision of
Saudi Arabia proposed establishing more museums to promote
Saudi Arabian arts and heritage [1].
Museums play a key role in promoting the cultural heritage
of a country and exhibiting it globally. However, physical
museums are restricted by their geographical places, and
burden with their enormous budgets. Therefore, the solution of
virtual museums was proposed to resolve these issues. Virtual
museums are inexpensive and are not geographically restricted.
This kind of museum uses the technology of virtual reality to
simulate physical objects into a nonphysical computer-based
environment [2]. Visitors of these museums use virtual reality
devices to interact with their computer-based environment.
In line with the 2030 vision of Saudi Arabia and using the
virtual reality technology, we propose in this paper a virtual
museum for Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art (which shall be shortened to
VMQA for the remainder of this paper). Al-Qatt Al-Asiri is
a traditional art of interior wall decoration done by women
in the Southern Province of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
(KSA). In 2017, this art was the first Saudi art to be inscribed
on the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural
Heritage of Humanity [3].
Using virtual environments as exhibition halls for national
culture is not new. It was used to explore the Ancient Egyptian
heritage [4], to simulate the Italian Drama Theatre from the
19th century [5], and to conduct virtual tours to the famous
Louvre Museum in Paris [6]. However, few such museums
have been implemented for Saudi heritage like the work
proposed in [7] and [8]. To the best of our knowledge, the
VMQA project is the first to exhibit Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art in a
virtual environment.
VMQA gives a chance for Saudi Arabian art and culture to
be exposed to a whole new audience of people to observe,
and with the continuation of such products Saudi Arabian
art can be taken to a new, international standard, which may
give encouragement to the development of new Saudi Arabian
artists in the next generation, and will further encourage a
surge of tourism to the country to see the historic sights it has
to offer, further enhancing and growing Saudi economy.
This paper presents the work conducted to develop a virtual
museum of Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art, within the framework of the
user-centered design and evaluation methodology for virtual
environments. The proposed virtual museum simulates the
real-world museums at Assir region at the southern region
of KSA. In addition to the exhibition hall for Al-Qatt Al-
Asiri art, and for the purpose of enhancing visitors’ experience,
VMQA provides two rooms for colouring and storytelling. In
the colouring room, visitors will be able to colour some of Al-
Qatt Al-Asiri’s most famous patterns, and in the storytelling
room, visitors will engage in a three-dimensional experience
which tells the story behind Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art.
Currently, the proposed virtual museum will be a standalone
virtual reality software that can be downloaded on PCs which
imply with the proposed virtual reality software and hardware
specifications. In future work, we will provide a lighter web-
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Fig. 1: Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art [9]
based version of the museum to reach even more visitors
around the world.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: section
II introduces Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art, section III explores the
related work, section IV explains the design development
process and the validation process of VMQA, and section V
concludes the paper and suggests future directions for VMQA.
II. BACKGROUND
The focus of this paper is on the development aspects of
VMQA. However, in this section, we introduce Al-Qatt Al-
Asiri art to justify the importance of dedicating a virtual
museum for it. Al-Qatt Al-Asiri is the traditional art of interior
wall decoration conducted by local housewives in the Southern
region of KSA, see Fig. 1.
It is unknown exactly when Al-Qatt art started. However,
field trips to Assir region discover the art at houses aged
three years all the way to four hundred years [10]. Moreover,
travellers to the Assir region like Cornwallis [11], Tamizier
[12], and Philby [13], have documented the existence of this
art since 19th century. In 2017, this art was the first Saudi
art to be inscribed on the UNESCO Representative List of the
Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity [3].
To decorate walls of houses in the Assir region, a group of
women gather and work under the supervision of an expert
female artist [14]. Women express their passion and feelings
using patterns and colours. They use brushes made from the
hair of goats’ tails tied with a wooden stick [14]. Colours are
extracted from natural elements - for example, the white colour
(called Gypsum) is made from many layers of lime taken from
surrounding mountains. The green colour is extracted from
grass, while blue colour is taken from the Indigofera Tinctoria
plant (called Nela) and colours are restricted to: white, black,
Fig. 2: The symbols of Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art [15]
blue, green, yellow and red. These traditional colours were
used until 1970’s, and after that, women of Assir started using
modern colours [14].
The painting process starts by sketching the pattern outlines
with black, then filling them with other colours. The patterns
could have many shapes such as Al-Banat, Al-Ariash, Al-
Mharib, and Al-Rokon - see Fig. 2. Each shape has a specific
position in Alqatt patterns. Some of them have meanings - for
instance, it is believed that Al-Banat symbolizes a female and
Al-Ariash represents plants.
Al-Qatt art structure is characterized by straight shapes
instead of curves. The local citizens of Assir explain that this
is inherited from the texture of Arab-Islamic art [14].
III. RELATED WORK
The concept of virtual museums was first introduced by
Andr´e Malraux [16], and it includes all type of virtual
museums. Virtual museums can be a collection of simple
two-dimensional images in a website or a complex three-
dimensional experience in a virtual environment using sophis-
ticated devices [17].
In the literature, there is a considerable number of virtual
museums research. The aspects of designing a virtual museum
varies depending on the nature of the virtual museum. Virtual
museums could be proposed to allow visitors to live a past
experience like the virtual Italian Drama Theatre Museum
[5] which reconstructs the Italian drama theatre from the
19th century. Visitors are welcomed by Meneghino the virtual
guider who accompanies visitors and tells them the story of
the theatre. The same concept was used in a more recent
project, called Viking VR [18]. In this project, the visitors
live the virtual experience of being in one of the four Viking
encampments designed for this project and are told the story
of how the Vikings changed life for people in Britain.
Another type of virtual museums is the one that allows
visitors to conduct virtual online tours to real-world museums
via internet like the Louvre Museum tour [6]. Recently, Google
Arts & Culture has teamed up with the most famous museums
around the world to provide virtual tours to them [19].
Virtual tours could be provided inside museum to interact
with historical artefacts and learn more about them, as has
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

been implemented at the Archaeological Museum in Milan,
to educate visitors about Egyptian funeral objects [4]. In both
projects, visitors can interactive with the exhibited objects by
zooming and rotating, and they can read a full description
about any chosen object. In these projects, the design process
concentrates on building the historical artefacts database.
The other type of museums is a mixture of the two previous
types, like the Soviet History museum [20]. In this museum,
they simulate the Ruijin city red culture heritage and implant,
and also provide the option to search the historical objects of
this period of time.
As aforementioned, few virtual museums have been pro-
posed for Saudi heritage and art. The most know endeavours
are the virtual tours to Saudi historical places [7] and Bas-
moca [8]. Basmoca is the name of the Saudi artist Basma
Alsulaiman’s virtual museum for contemporary art [8]. In this
museum the artist, Basma, virtually exhibits her collection
and allows visitors to interact with the paintings and the art
objects. Basmoca also provides a platform for multiple visitors
to simultaneously present at the museum to communicate and
to discuss art issues.
The other project is the endeavour of the Saudi Commission
for Tourism and National Heritage (SCTH) to allow the
visitors of its website to conduct virtual tours to the most
known tourism spots and historical places in KSA [7]. Visitors
can see the places in the map and read a short description about
them.
In our project (VMQA), we exhibit Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art
in a virtual environment. VMQA will be a mixture type
museum, where visitors can live the virtual experience by
moving around the virtual halls and explore the exhibited
artworks of Al-Qatt Al-Asiri. Visitors can also interact with
these works of art to learn more about them by clicking the
museum guider who will companion visitors during their tours.
Additionally, for the sake of enhancing visitors’ experience,
VMQA provides two rooms for colouring and storytelling. In
the colouring room, visitors will be able to colour some of
Al-Qatt’s most famous patterns and in the storytelling room,
visitors will engage in a three-dimensional experience which
tells the story behind Al-Qatt art. The designing and validation
process for this project will be presented in the next section.
It is essential to present the local artefacts via virtual
museums to promote the country local heritage and make it
easy access via the internet. VMQA contributes in boosting
tourism in Saudi Arabia by providing a virtual environment
which allows visitors to explore Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art.
IV. USER-CENTRED DESIGN AND EVALUATION PROCESS
In this section we present the design and validation pro-
cesses of VMQA based on the user-centered software develop-
ment methodology [21] and with insights from the structured
development process of virtual environments [22].
We develop the VMQA following the user-centered soft-
ware development methodology. The framework of this
methodology consists of several rounds of systematic user
and software requirements (elicitation, documentation, and
validation). Each round clarifies the software requirements and
refines the prototype functionalities based on the feedbacks
of the previous rounds and the input from the software
stakeholders who usually include the product owners, and
representative end-users.
The framework of the user-centered software development
methodology as suggested by Tromp et al. [21] consists of five
stages: domain analysis, requirements elicitation, requirements
analysis, requirements specification and software building.
With insights from the structured development process of
virtual environments [22], we adopt these stages and structure
them following top-down approach to be: problem definition,
requirements elicitation, requirements specification, software
building, deployment and verification. We further divide the
software building stage into five iterations (prototype, recep-
tion, tour, storytelling and coloring), each iteration consist
of three stages: detailed design, implementation and testing.
Therefore, in our project the design and validation process
starts by defining the project’s problem. Then, the require-
ments are collected and analyzed before defining the software
specification. This is followed by five rounds of detailed
design, implementation, and testing. At the end, the final
product is deployed and verified.
The details of these stages are presented in the next subsec-
tions.
A. Problem Definition and Requirements Elicitation
The problem was clearly defined in previous sections.
Requirements for this project were collected by conducting
several interviews with artists, specialists, and representative
end-users and one co-design workshop (details is at Section
IV-D). In addition, a field trip was conducted to Al-Raqdi
Museum for Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art [9] in the Assir region.
Relying on the collected set of requirements and taking in
consideration the virtual museum standards by the Institute for
Cultural and Natural Artistic Heritage- LEM projects [23], the
software context and scope were shaped. In addition, a draft
of the museum floorplan was proposed - see Fig. 3.
The proposed museum floorplan consists of five areas:
1) The lobby hall which represents the entrance to the
museum - see region 1 in Fig. 3.
2) The garden pathway, which contains a garden that con-
tains the famous plants in the region, in particular the
one used for extracting colours - see region 2 in Fig. 3.
3) The main exhibition hall (which represents the hall of
the museum that exhibits the collection of Al-Qatt Al-
Asiri artworks) - see regions 3 and 4 in Fig. 3. In this
hall, visitors will accompany by a ‘guide’ character,
sketched in Fig. 4. This character is responsible for
providing help to visitors during their stay at the main
exhibition hall.
4) The storytelling room, where the museum narrative (Ms.
Fatima) tells story of Al-Qatt art using animation and
three-dimensional models - see region 5 in Fig. 3.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Fig. 3: Floorplan of the VMQA
Fig. 4: The design of the museum guide
5) The colouring room, where visitors will be able to colour
some of Al-Qatt’s most famous patterns - see region 6
in Fig. 3.
Based on the suggested floorplan we also propose five user
scenarios for each area as follows:
1) Scenario 1: The user (visitor) launches VMQA by click-
ing on the software icon on the PC desktop. The user
wears the virtual reality glass, holds the right controller
in their right hand, and holds the left controller in their
left hand . They read the pop-up museum instructions
message and press any button on the controllers to start
their tour at VMQA. The user looks around the lobby
hall. If they start moving, the museum sitemap appears
on the hall’s ground. The user moves to the front, to the
right and to the left to explore the lobby hall. The user
reaches the garden pathway. The user can stay at the
lobby hall or enter the garden pathway where Scenario
2 starts.
2) Scenario 2: The user crosses the lobby hall using the
right and left controllers, and stands at the front of
the pathway. They see the pathway to the main hall.
Using the right and the left controllers, the user can
move through the pathway. The pathway has an indoor
garden which has famous plants in the region on one
side, in particular the ones used for extracting colours.
The wall on the other side has descriptions of each of
the garden plants. The user looks around the pathway.
The user moves to the front, to the right and to the left to
explore the garden pathway. The user reaches the main
exhibition hall. The user can stay at the garden pathway,
return to the lobby hall, or enter the main exhibition hall
where Scenario 3 starts.
3) Scenario 3: The user crosses the pathway using the right
and left controllers, and stands at the front of the main
hall. At this point, the user meets the museum guide.
The guide accompanies the user during their stay at the
main exhibition hall in order to provide help to then.
The user looks around the main hall. The user moves to
the front, to the right and to the left to explore the main
hall and observes the Al-Qatt artwork. If the user steps
near a piece of artwork, the guide will offer to describe
it to them. The user also can ask the guide for other
types of help, like the museum’s instructions. The user
can stay at the main exhibition hall, return to the garden
pathway, enter the storytelling room where Scenario 4
starts, or enter the colouring room where Scenario 5
starts.
4) Scenario 4: The user crosses the main exhibition hall
using the right and left controllers, and stands in the
front of the storytelling room. At this point, the user
meets the museum’s narrator Ms. Fatima. Ms. Fatima
tells the story of Al-Qatt art using animation and three-
dimensional models for the user. The user can stay at
the storytelling room, or return to the main hall.
5) Scenario 5: The user crosses the main exhibition hall
using the right and left controllers, and stands in the
front of the colouring room. At this point, three different
patterns of Al-Qatt art appear and the user can choose
one of them to colour. The user can change colours using
the colour palette. The user can stay at the storytelling
room, or return to the main hall.
During any of these scenarios, the user can immediately exit
the museum by clicking on the EXIT button on controllers.
A confirmation message appears and the user can press OK
using the controller buttons.
B. Requirements Analysis and Specification
In requirements analysis phase we organize, analyze, and
validate the collected requirements following the scenario-
based approach explained in [22].
First, we designed the form in Fig. 5 which is a scenario-
based requirement gathering form inspired by Table 15.2 in
[22]. We use this form to group the requirements based on the
defined scenarios in Section IV-A, and to ensure that they are
complete, clear, linked, and verifiable. To illustrates how this
is achieved please see Fig. 6 which presents the requirement
form for Scenario 2. The requirements in these forms are used
to document the final set of the software functional and non-
functional requirements. Based on the requirements document,
VMQA specification can be defined in terms of software
goals, and user tasks. In our project, different techniques such
as storyboards, requirements decision tables and interaction
models are used to define VMQA software specification.
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Scenario x
1. Place: area x (hall\room).
2. Function: What is carried out in this area?
3. Goals: What are the goals of the current function?
3.1 Position: Where is the mu-
seum visitor standing at the be-
ginning of this scenario?
3.2 Operational: What are the
requirements of this scenario?
4. Evaluation: How should we evaluate that the goals are
achieved?
Fig. 5: Requirement gathering form
Scenario 2
1. Place: area 2, the garden pathway of VMQA.
2. Function: Learn about the famous plants in the Assir region.
3. Goals:The visitor shall be able to identify 10-15 plants from
Assir region, in particular the ones used for extracting colours
for Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art.
3.1 Position:The visitor stands at the front of the pathway, and
see through.
3.2 Operational:
• The visitor shall be able to step into the pathway area
using controllers.
• The visitor shall be able to move to the front in the
pathway area using both controllers.
• The visitor shall be able to move to the left in the pathway
area using the left controller.
• The visitor shall be able to move to the right in the
pathway area using the right controller.
• The visitor shall be able to move to the back in the
pathway area using the left controller twice or the right
controller twice.
• The visitor shall be able to look around the pathway with
a 360-degree view from where they stand.
• The visitor shall be able to recognize the shape and the
colour of the plants in the indoor garden.
• The visitor shall be able to see a picture of each plant in
the indoor garden and read a description about it on the
wall opposite to the indoor garden.
• The visitor shall be able to exit the pathway area to the
lobby hall if they reach the border between the two areas.
• The visitor shall be able to exit the pathway area to the
main exhibition hall if they reach the border between the
two areas.
4. Evaluation:
• The visitor shall be able to link between the plants in
the indoor garden and their descriptions on the opposite
wall.
• The visitor shall be able to identify the name, shape, and
purpose of each of the 10-15 plants in the indoor garden.
• The visitor shall be able to identify the plants which are
used for extracting colours for Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art.
• The visitor shall be able to know which controller to use
to move.
• The visitor shall be able to identify the area that they are
standing on and all adjacent areas.
Fig. 6: Garden pathway scenario requirements
C. Software Building
As mentioned in Section IV, the software building stage is
planned to be carried out in 5 iterations. In this section, we
show how we build on the output of the previous sections and
define the detailed design, implementation, and testing of each
iteration of the project as follows:
a) Iteration 1: prototype: To implement the preliminary
prototype, we first project the 2D floorplan, presented in Fig.
3, into a 3D floorplan - see Fig. 7a. Secondly, we use the
Autodesk AutoCAD software [24] to digitize it - see Fig. 7b.
After that, we use the SketchUp Pro software [25] to generate
a 3D coloured model of this floorplan - see Fig. 7c. Finally, we
use the same software to produce a 3D animated prototype of
the museum, and we use the VR plugin within the SketchUp
Pro software to enable the VR glass and controllers.
We test the design prototype by conducting a co-design
workshop. A number of experts were invited to the workshop
to validate the prototype and submit their feedbacks using
surveys; the detailed of the workshop well be explained in
the next section.
b) Iteration 2: reception: Iteration 2 covers the imple-
mentation of scenarios 1 and 2. In these scenarios, it has been
mentioned that if visitors start moving at the lobby hall, the
museum sitemap appears on the hall’s ground. Moreover, it
has been mentioned that the pathway has an indoor garden
which contains the most famous plants from the region on
one side and their picture and descriptions on the other side.
Therefore, to implement these scenarios we need to design
the sitemap, the plants, and the plants pictures. In addition,
the old floorplan design presented in Fig. 3 should be altered
to reflect the collected comments during the testing phase of
iteration 1.
This is accomplished by using Photoshop software and
Wacom painting toolkit [26] to design the museum sitemap
and the plants pictures - see Fig. 8, and by using Sketchup to
design the plants. To design the plants, we first imported the
pants as a block then we modified it to the proposed shape. Fig.
9 shows an example of the designing process of the Adenium
obesum (desert rose) plant [27].
Fig.10 demonstrates the modification process of the old
floorplan design presented in Fig. 3. Fig. 10a presents the new
design of the floorplan , Fig. 10b shows the new measurements
of the museums internal walls. Fig. 10c shows the 3D coloured
model of the new floorplan.
All the designed objects are converted to interactive objects
and imported into the Unity software [28] to make them alive
objects at the virtual museum environment.
c) Iteration 3: tour: Iteration 3 covers the implementa-
tion of scenario 3. In this Scenario, it has been mentioned
that visitors first greeted by the museum guide. Visitors move
around to explore Al-Qatt artworks on the walls and observe
Al-Qatt art pieces at the main hall. If the visitors step near a
piece of artwork, a description of this artwork will appears.
Therefore, we need to design Al-Qatt artworks and Al-Qatt
art pieces. The museum guide was sketched before in Fig. 4
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a) 3-D floorplan sketch
(b) 3-D floorplan draw
(c) 3-D floorplan model
Fig. 7: Iteration 1: Prototype implementation
(a) The sitemap appears on the lobby floor
(b) The plant pictures appear on the side wall
Fig. 8: sitemap and plant pictures design
(a) The real picture of the Adenium obesum
(b) Adding flowers to the imported model
(c) Adding the Adenium obesum stem to the
imported model
Fig. 9: The design of the Adenium obesum
To draw AL-Qatt artworks on the walls of the main exhi-
bition hall we use Photoshop software and Wacom painting
toolkit [26] - see Fig. 11. Each wall represents a house or
tribe in Assir [14] region.
Moreover, the main exhibition hall exhibits four pieces from
Alraqadi museum [9] -see Figure 12. SketchUp was used to
design these pieces.
At the end of the implementation phase of iteration 3, all
the designed objects are converted to interactive objects and
imported into the Unity software [28] to make them alive
objects at the virtual museum environment.
d) Iteration 4: Storytelling: Iteration 4 covers Scenario
4. In this scenario, it has been mentioned that visitors first
meets the museum’s narrator Ms. Fatima and then Ms. Fatima
tells the story of Al-Qatt art using animated pictures.
Ms. Fatima is designed using sketchUp. A sketchUp block
was used as a start, then this block was modified to the
proposed shape. Fig. 13 shows the steps of designing Ms.
Fatima.
The designed items are imported to Unity software [28]
to make them interactive objects and add them to the virtual
museum environment.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a) The modified floor plan
(b) Measurements of the museum internal walls
(c) The new 3-D floorplan model
Fig. 10: The new floorplan
Fig. 11: AL-Qatt artworks
Fig. 12: Al-Qatt art pieces
e) Iteration 5: Colouring: Iteration 5 implements Sce-
nario 5. In this scenario, it has been mentioned that a pattern
of Al-Qatt art appears and the visitor can start colouring it.
The user can change colours using the colour palette.
The pattern of Al-Qatt art was drawn using Photoshop then
it was imported to Unity software to implement the colouring
process. Fig. 14 demonstrate the colouring process. First the
user chooses the colour - see Fig. 14a, then s/he shouts the
colour on the pattern to colour the targeted area - see Fig 14b.
This finishes the implementation phase of iteration 5 which
was the last iteration in the project. The next section explains
the testing process which was conducted to ensure the correct-
ness of the project implementation.
D. Testing
In this section we present the testing techniques used to
verify the correctness of the virtual museum.
To test the design prototype, we conducted a co-design
workshop. A number of experts with diverse backgrounds were
invited to validate the prototype. We presented our work and
collected their feedbacks using surveys, and the discussion
during the workshop was also very useful.
The co-design workshop involved subject-matter experts
from various domains, including Dr. Salma Al-Zaid, Vice-
Dean of Humanities Departments and Assistant Professor in
the Department of Art Education, Dr. Abeer Monadher, Vice
Chair of Curriculum & Instruction Department at KSU, who
is interested in and is a researcher in Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art,
Dr. Dafra Al-Shahri, Vice Chair of Archaeology Department
at KSU and Princess Rukaya Al Saud, an artist interested in
Al-Qatt Al Asiri art.
After studying the notes in the surveys and organizing
the reflections from the workshop, two modifications were
suggested:
1) To make the lobby hall wider, because the tight design
of the lobby hall will restrict the movement of virtual
visitors.
2) To change the walls of the main exhibition hall from
carved walls to straight walls, because straight walls are
more suitable to exhibit Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art patterns.
3) To remove the displaying edges in the main exhibition
hall to give a space for visitiors to more around in the
hall.
The new floorplan after applying these changes was previ-
ously shown in Fig. 10.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

(a) The sketchUp block
(b) The proposed shape
(c) The coloured shape
Fig. 13: The design of Ms. Fatima
(a) Visitor pointed at a colour
(b) Visitors shout the colour on the targeted area
Fig. 14: Colouring room
As aforementioned, VMQA was developed in five iterations.
After each iteration the outcomes are tested firstly by conduct-
ing unit testing to ensure that the implementation is correct,
and secondly by conducting usability testing to ensure the
practicality and the validity of the design.
After the completion of each iteration we integrate its
outcomes with the outcomes of its predecessor and then
apply down-top integration testing to ensure that the integrated
version is correct.
At the end, we first conduct a system testing to prove that the
final software performs as designed, and secondly we carried
out a comprehensive usability testing to ensure that the final
product meets the user expectation.
In the following we explain briefly each of these testing
techniques. Interested reader can refer to [29] for more details.
• Unit testing is defined as a type of testing where each
main function in the software is tested separately. The
result of the unit testing usally presented in table contains
the name of the function, the inputs, the excepted output,
actual output. If the expected output is the same as the
actual output then the unit testing is passed successfully.
• Integration testing is defined as a type of testing where
software modules are integrated logically and tested as a
group. This testing is carried out by testing the functions
that only work if the two modules are integrated.
• System testing is defined as as a type of testing where
a complete, integrated system is tested. The purpose of
this test is to evaluate the system’s compliance with the
specified requirements.
• Usability testing is defined as as a type of testing which
conducted to evaluating a product by testing it with
representative users. Typically, during a test, participants
are given realistic scenarios to complete while observed
by researchers. This helps to highlight any gaps in the
market that can be taken advantage of and illustrate where
to focus design effort.
Due to the interactive and entertainment nature of the
virtual museum this lies an importance on the results of the
comprehensive usability testing. Therefore, we devoted the rest
of this section to present the process and the result of the
usability testing.
The usability testing was conducted on participants who
can use virtual reality toolkits and interested in the art of
Al-Qatt and in the rang of 7 – 55 years. 10 participants are
observed in every iteration and 40 are observed during the
comprehensive usability testing. In each iteration the usability
tests were monitored by recording the desktop screen using
an outside camera. The visitors feedbacks were collected via
paper-based surveys and tasks sheets.
The average time taken by visitors to complete the reception
areas (lobby and pathway) is 40 seconds with no system errors
observed. The average time taken to complete the reception
areas, tour area and storytelling area is around 3 minutes, with
also no system errors observed. The average time taken to
complete the reception areas, tour area and storytelling area is
around 3.5 minutes. The average time inside colouring room
is vary depending on visitors preferences of colouring speed
and amount.
Finally, validate all functions of the project we held a
usability testing at King Saud University campus. The number
of participates was 40 and they were faculty, students and
staff with different ages and experiences. Participates were
monitored by recording the desktop screen using an outside
camera. The average time taken by participates to finish the
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Fig. 15: Participants responses chart
whole museum is 3 minutes, with no system errors observed.
The visitors feedbacks were collected via paper-based surveys
and tasks sheets. In these surveys, the visitors were been asked
questions which cover all the main functions of the museum,
and they should answer by YES or NO. Fig. 15 shows the
percentage of visitors answers.
Its worth to mention that the comments on the virtual
museum tours conducted by the different visitors were in
general very positive. However, visitors provided us with
some recommendations such as adding background music and
drawing arrows on the floor to show museum flow paths.
V. NEXT STEPS AND CONCLUSIONS
Al-Qatt Al-Asiri is the traditional art of interior wall
decoration conducted by women in the Southern region of
the Saudi Arabia. This paper presented the work conducted
towards the development of a virtual museum of Al-Qatt Al-
Asiri art, within the framework of the user-centered design
and evaluation methodology for virtual environments. This
framework consists of a number of iterations which involve
end-users in the software design and evaluation processes. At
this stage of the project, we completed the virtual museum
of Al-Qatt Al-Asiri art with all its details. The software
requirements were collected and the system design was built
then the museum was implemented and tested on reasonable
number of users.
VMQA is still an ongoing project. The next phase will be to
add a second virtual museum for the art of the middle province
of Saudi Arabia (Najd) houses. The final aim of the project
is to end up with a collection of virtual museums for each
province in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Government, “Vision2030 report (english version),” https://www.
vision2030.gov.sa/media/rc0b5oy1/saudi vision203.pdf, 2016, accessed
on 2019-4-20.
[2] “Virtual reality,” in Oxford Dictionaries.
Lexico.com, 2013, accessed
on 2019-4-20. [Online]. Available: https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/
definition/virtual reality
[3] UNISCO, “12.com- decisions,” https://ich.unesco.org/doc/src/ITH-17-
12.COM-Decisions-EN.docx, 2017, accessed on 2019-4-20.
[4] S. G. Barsanti, G. Caruso, L. Micoli, M. Covarrubias, and G. Guidi, “3d
visualization of cultural heritage artefacts with virtual reality devices,”
ISPRS - International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing
and Spatial Information Sciences, vol. XL-5/W7, pp. 165–172, 08 2015.
[5] S. Valtolina, S. Franzoni, P. Mazzoleni, and E. Bertino, “Dissemination
of cultural heritage content through virtual reality and multimedia
techniques: A case study,” in 11th International Conference on Multi
Media Modeling (MMM 2005), 12-14 January 2005, Melbourne,
Australia, Y. P. Chen, Ed. IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 214–221.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/MMMC.2005.36
[6] “Louvre
museum,”
http://musee.louvre.fr/visite-louvre/index.html?
defaultView=rdc.s46.p01&lang=ENG, accessed on 2019-4-20.
[7] “Saudi commission for tourism and national heritage (scth),” https://scth.
gov.sa/E-Services/Pages/VirtualToursGuide.aspx, accessed on 2019-4-
20.
[8] “Basma
alsulaiman’s
virtual
museum,”
https://www.basmoca.com/
virtualgallery, accessed on 2019-4-20.
[9] A. Museum, https://www.instagram.com/alraqdi.museum/, accessed on
2019-4-20.
[10] Ghithan Ali Jrais, Studies in Recent History of Assir, 1st ed.
Alawaifi
Advertising, Jeddah, KSA, 2002, arabic book.
[11] Kinahan Cornwallis, Asir before World War I : a handbook.
Oleander,
New York, 1976.
[12] Maurice Tamisier, Voyage en Arabie : s´ejour dans le Hedjaz, campagne
d’Assir.
L. Desessart, Paris, 1840, french book.
[13] Harry St. John Bridger Philby, Arabian Highlands.
New York: Cornell
University Press, New York, 1952.
[14] H. Al-Hababi, “The art of women in ’asir (saudi arabia),” AAS working
papers in social anthropology, vol. 25, pp. 1–8, 01 2012.
[15] ShadaHomes, “Symbols of al-qatt al-asiri art,” Al-Qatt Al-Asiri Art
Workshop, 2018, conducted in Jeddah, KSA.
[16] Andre Malraux , Le Musee Imaginaire.
Gallimard Folio Essais, 1996.
[17] S. Styliani, L. Fotis, K. Kostas, and P. Petros, “Virtual museums,
a survey and some issues for consideration,” Journal of Cultural
Heritage, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 520 – 528, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1296207409000880
[18] G. Schofield, G. Beale, N. Beale, M. Fell, D. Hadley, J. Hook,
D. Murphy, J. Richards, and L. Thresh, “Viking VR: Designing a
virtual reality experience for a museum,” in Proceedings of the 2018
on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2018, DIS 2018, Hong
Kong, China, June 09-13, 2018, I. Koskinen, Y. Lim, T. C. Pargman,
K. K. N. Chow, and W. Odom, Eds.
ACM, 2018, pp. 805–815.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196714
[19] “Google arts & culture virtual tours,” https://artsandculture.google.com/
partner?hl=en, accessed on 2023-4-14.
[20] C. Donghui, L. Guanfa, Z. Wensheng, L. Qiyuan, B. Shuping, and
L. Xiaokang, “Virtual reality technology applied in digitalization of
cultural heritage,” Cluster Computing, pp. 1–12, 2017.
[21] J. G. Tromp, C. V. Le, and T. L. Nguyen, “User-centered design and
evaluation methodology for virtual environments,” in Encyclopedia of
Computer Graphics and Games., N. Lee, Ed. Springer, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08234-9\ 167-1
[22] R. M. Eastgate, J. R. Wilson, and M. D’Cruz, “Structured development
of virtual environments,” in Handbook of Virtual Environments -
Design, Implementation, and Applications, Second Edition., K. S. Hale
and K. M. Stanney, Eds.
CRC Press, 2014, pp. 353–389. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1201/b17360-20
[23] A. Nicholls, M. Pereira, and M. Sani, “Report 1 – the virtual
museum,
the
learning
museum
network
project,”
LEM
-
The
Learning
Museum,
Tech.
Rep.
ISBN
978-88-97281-03-0,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://online.ibc.regione.emilia-romagna.it/I/libri/
pdf/LEM report1 theVirtualMuseum.pdf
[24] “Autodesk
autocad
software,”
https://www.autodesk.com/products/
autocad/overview?term=1-YEAR&tab=subscription,
accessed
on
2023-4-14.
[25] “Sketchup pro software,” https://www.sketchup.com/products/sketchup-
pro, accessed on 2023-4-14.
[26] “Wacom painting toolkit,” https://www.wacom.com/en-us/discovery/
edit/professional-results, accessed on 2023-4-14.
[27] “Wikipedia: Adenium obesum,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adenium
obesum, accessed on 2023-4-14.
[28] “Unity software,” https://unity.com/, accessed on 2023-4-14.
[29] K. Naik and P. Tripathy, Software Testing and Quality Assurance: Theory
and Practice, 2nd ed.
Wiley Publishing, 2018.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

