Discovery and Involvement for an Efficient Universal Learning Object Interface  
Marina Puyuelo, Mónica Val, Pedro Fuentes-Durá and Hugo Barros da Rocha 
Dept. Graphics in Architecture, Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain 
e-mail: mapuca@ega.upv.es 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a work in progress whose 
objective is to develop design criteria for the interface of a 
Universal Learning Object, based on an open, free web service.   
The main purpose of this website is to display different 
technologies and techniques for discovery learning about 
architecture and heritage sites. It is central to consider usability 
and accessibility factors so that this website can target a wide 
diversity of users. Previously, criteria about the learning method 
were established. The contents to provide a hands-on 
pedagogical framework were also defined using 3D production 
and representation tools. This short paper presents the part of 
the project pertaining to the definition of a graphic interface for 
this website, which has to combine contents based on the use of 
tools and technologies, such as 3D printing or Laser cutting. The 
main result of the project will be an efficient set of learning tools 
for learning by making, reaching success through involvement. 
Keywords-Accessibility; Interaction; Requirements; Tools; 
Usability; Graphic design. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Technologies reshape the way we learn and, even more, 
the societal motivation about learning experiences. The new 
learning trends are disruptive [1][2] as they increase the 
diversity and the development of new learning tools and 
scenarios to learn, and they are faced with the challenge to 
prove their worth. Massive open online courses (MOOCs) are 
playing a remarkable role in the autonomous and online 
learning [3]. 
The new learning experiences are learner-centered and 
take on the challenge of participatory design involving 
different areas (workplace, schools, home, leisure, etc.) and 
targets. Also, some changes are reducing certain people skills 
(for instance time management, patience and memory) as 
dependency on technology increases. Accordingly, several 
issues regarding participatory design have been explored [4], 
including the influence of technology on people and the 
impact of people on technology, the interest in the continuous 
development of technology, the consequences on wealth and 
job conditions, and human learning. Some theories support 
active and efficient participation in the development of 
learning resources and materials. This is a way to emphasize 
knowledge acquisition and the relevance of the process, like 
the multidisciplinary and collaborative work itself. 
Some of the most promising technologies since the 
nineties are Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality 
(AR/VR), which, combined, produce what is called Mixed 
Reality (MR) [4]. Both are used frequently nowadays in 
training simulations, branching scenarios, and serious games. 
Augmented Reality (AR) focuses on the intersection between 
two realities and is characterized by the combination of real 
and virtual elements in an interactive and simultaneous space 
and time [5]. The use of these technological systems is an 
established trend in the case of cultural heritage and 
museums. Displaying historical reconstructions that are 
impossible to visit, showing their historical timeline and other 
graphic reconstruction projects aimed at teaching are some 
examples of its better-known applications [6]. 
Other platforms promote autonomous and online 
learning, including various resources and themes. For 
instance, Khan Academy produces short lessons in the form 
of YouTube videos, supplementary practice exercises, and 
materials for educators. All resources are available to the 
website users and become a set of online tools that help to 
learn. It has an inviting layout with clear categories for 
different elements and users. Another kind of learning 
website is Wolfram Alpha, an online service that answers 
factual queries directly by computing the answer from 
externally sourced data. It covers a wide range of topics with 
minimalistic interface design, and it takes a step further in 
technical computing systems and encyclopedias [7][8]. 
A different example of an interface is the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) education 
website, very focused on the robust content and the quality of 
the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics 
(STEM) learning proposal. The amount of information 
overwhelms the reader and the layout is cluttered. Navigation 
is confusing and the black color (space) is not helpful [9]. 
Pappas [10] has recently published wise and concise 
guidelines for developing experiential knowledge and 
learning resources with AR/VR technologies, to make 
learning more productive, innovative and fun. They are: 
Understand your target audience to satisfy their needs; 
Design a memorable story (hypothetical situation or real-life 
experience) that addresses their concerns and their needs; 
Present solutions in an effective way; Develop an AR/VR 
experience by keeping detailed and well-planned product 
documentation; Care about the post-production stage 
reusable and adaptable, and arrange the essential minimum 
equipment to support the e-learning resources (workstations, 
head-mounted displays, mobile devices, visual and audio. 
Although it is a time-consuming development with a costly 
investment, an online learning object has the potential to 
boost the learning return on investment (ROI) with more 
flexibility. Moreover, gaining expertise in this field can now 
help and in the future of technical tasks and deliverables, 
especially when using alternate technologies wisely and 
seamlessly integrating them into the course/web design. 
This paper is structured as follow. Section II presents the 
background of the project. Section III describes usability and 
accessibility approaches for the website’s interaction, some 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

research on way-finding and graphic communication. It helps 
to understand the way we see and organize our perception to 
answer to the stimuli. Section IV describes the basic proposed 
definition of a standard interface with the conceptual design 
of the starting wireframes. In the final section, some 
conclusions and further work are presented. 
II. BACKGROUND OF THE PROJECT 
Research is carried out by a multidisciplinary team of the 
Universitat Politècnica de València (Spain) based on the idea 
of developing a universal learning object to be used in 
heritage interpretation. In other words, the objective is the 
design of a learning object which can be accessed in different 
ways, and also contains built-in opportunities to experiment 
with the contents, both natural and cultural heritage. The aim 
is the creation of something new, by the combination of 
existing concepts and adapting some products to another 
function. 
The proposed design wants to achieve a relevant 
combination of three merging technological areas, implying 
disrupting innovation.  
First, the development of an open digital platform with 
virtual elements related to a site or building. The free access 
to online contents is more innovative than the learning 
platform itself. This is a crucial point for an ideal integration 
into different systems and contexts of active learning, e.g. 
educational centers, cultural interpretation sites, and informal 
learning.  
Second, the use of augmented and virtual reality, both in 
a real expansion, and the inclusion of digital 3D models in 
specialized 3D repositories free of charge, in virtual 
classrooms, or online repositories [11]. Based on graphic 
representations, this project intends to create new supports 
and tools, which trigger new relationship models fostering 
reality and knowledge.  These “models” must be researched 
in the immediate future, as they are new means of 
communication, 
for 
the 
purpose 
they 
symbolize. 
Simultaneously, these now available means and technologies 
facilitate an increase in accessibility and interaction with 
multiple contents within the cultural and heritage scope. 
Numerous recent studies have identified the benefits of using 
mixed reality in applications and the gamification principles 
(use of game design elements in non-game contexts and 
activities.) This is the central focus of many creative 
industries, resulting in a new breed of smart education and 
heritage applications [12]. At the same time, we are 
witnessing the introduction of (purely virtual) 3D into the 
consumer market as well, namely stereoscopic television 
screens, photo frames, games, and tablets. 
Third, the assumption of the maker culture (or subculture) 
as a technology-based extension of do it yourself (DIY) 
culture, with elements of the hacker perspective. Additive 
and subtractive manufacturing production tools (especially 
laser cutting) facilitate creating new devices, as well as 
tinkering with existing ones. That means new opportunities 
for new teaching practices in a range of subjects and 
educational settings, from primary education to interpretation 
and to higher education [13]. There is a fast-growing 
community of people who use Rapid Prototyping to produce 
things in small numbers at home, using peer-to-peer networks 
to exchange their prototypes and designs. 3D Printing would 
provide a more holistic appreciation of the produced objects, 
but it requires the development of basic guidelines of the 3D 
offered for printing. 
Figure 1 is a generic visual organizer of the learning 
object contents. The center is the focus (a specific heritage 
 
Figure 1. Architecture accessibility contents diagram. 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

site), and a set of structured resources support comprehension 
and help understand the rhetoric, where way-finding is a 
primary element. This visual organizer displays the 
functional elements potentially used. This is interesting 
because it helps to overcome the challenge of making 
multidimensional 
learning 
formats 
compatible. 
This 
combination of adaptable stimuli facilitates multiple 
approaches to the educational contents which it offers. 
Some experimentation will be necessary to test the quality 
of the results, the autonomy of the users and the impact on 
learning. The designs will be tested with 
user’s 
questionnaires and assessed with the help of experts focus 
groups. The big point is how to combine activities and 
specific technologies to obtain tangible outcomes and other 
exploratory representations. To solve this question, this paper 
presents a work in progress whose goal is to develop a very 
intuitive Universal Learning Object website interface for 
autonomous, varied experiences for a Hands-on approach to 
knowledge. 
III. USABILITY AND ACCESSIBILITY CRITERIA  
The usability is the extent to which a product can be used 
by specified users to achieve specified goals effectively, 
efficiently and with satisfaction in a specified context of use. 
The usability of a system is based on the identification and 
placement of their components. A clear and simple layout 
will probably have the right impact on the user. How we 
move around is defined for the way-finding [14] provided for 
a specific environment.  
From the point of view of website accessibility, it will be 
essential to make it understandable, usable and practical for 
all users, which is not an easy task. The guidelines adopted as 
an International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
standard [15], have been updated by the World Wide Web 
Consortium (W3C) (Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
(WCAG) [16] establishing success criteria to be satisfied by 
web applications or websites. To quantify the accessibility of 
a website, a standard has been created based on three levels 
of compliance connected to a list of criteria [17]. 
Following these criteria, the success of websites can be 
verified online using evaluation tools. In general, these online 
evaluation tools are web applications that allow the user to 
enter the uniform resource locator (URL) of the website to be 
tested, in order to obtain an assessment report, which includes 
the verified accessibility requirements, those which are not 
verified (requiring manual assessment), errors found, and 
warnings. However, not all the tools have the same way of 
making available the execution of different activities and of 
getting particular results. The design of this website interface 
has to address this.  
The aim of this “learning object” is to encourage the 
general public to approach knowledge for building things and 
resources, and determining which are better suited to them.  
The design and development of this interface to explain a 
topic should reasonably accommodate a broad range of 
diverse users, favoring levels of appropriate training, 
including individuals with disabilities. The design will 
benefit people with low literacy and new and infrequent 
users. Following this idea, a preliminary scheme with four 
phases is proposed (Figure 2), where each tool is independent 
of the rest, allowing the use of its deliverables and actions 
separately. A previous phase of general information acts as a 
door for the other three described below. 
Increasingly, more people in society are using and 
participating via keyboards, screens, telephone handsets, 
smart cards, etc., so it is possible to communicate efficiently. 
Young people, people with good manual dexterity, good 
 
Figure 2. Four phases preliminary scheme. 
 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

eyesight and good hearing are daily users of many interfaces. 
However, for people who have any disability, including 
dyslexia and other mental limitations, access to this sort of 
information may not only be difficult, but impossible [18]. 
As providers of a free system, in order to make significant 
progress in accessibility, we will need to adopt a ‘design-for-
all’ perspective. Also, it will be necessary to build the 
prototype to pilot the different utilities with different groups 
of users. 
As designers in this “learning object” we should consider 
cognitive ergonomics [19] in the product-development 
process. Cognitive ergonomics analyze the interaction of 
each person with cognitive artifacts (which demand a mental 
process) taking into account the cumulative effect of 
expertise. 
Some cognitive processes involved in play activities are 
very similar to those involved in learning: motivation, 
meaning, repetition, self-regulation and abstract thinking. 
Through design, the website will enable the use of a 
significant amount of easy-to-do activities and a wide range 
of interactions while allowing the tailoring of the different 
learning 
needs. 
The 
preliminary 
wireframe 
should 
immediately show the graphic design, which identifies 
unmistakably the interface. The areas proposed are the 
following: 
Basic Documentation. Different kinds of representations 
of general information are presented to the user who wants to 
approach the topic using multiple tools.  
Interactive Design. At this level, there are other sorts of 
representations: virtual models, animations and tangible 
elements to be produced. Users may perform in different 
ways, adapting the format of the available means to support 
their own experience and knowledge.  
Miscellanea Maker production. It includes tools that 
allow the user to personalize designs and produce functional 
elements about the topic. 
IV. COMMUNICATION IN LEARNING PLATFORMS. GRAPHIC 
DESIGN AND WAYFINDING FOR TASKS AND TOOLS 
As explained at the beginning, there is a growing number 
of online platforms, and the majority of them expose their 
functionality through graphics and pictograms. Obviously, 
the tendency is to offer more functionality using technologies 
through these websites and, as touchscreens become more 
common, it is essential that they are designed for everyone’s 
ease of use. Also, the information that the tools include in 
response to the requests will be more accessible for all or for 
more cases and formats of the results.  
The central aspects of the proposed wireframes for the 
system will be simplicity and the association between 
pictograms and results. The main characteristic of this 
interface is the simplicity to find both the available resources 
and the goal of the proposed activities. This is crucial because 
the different working elements are interrelated. Each activity 
implies two approaches: the analogical technique of 
constructive tasks and the symbolic logic of graphic 
representations [20]. 
Since the point is to show relevant architectures, we 
raised three types of approaches which are essential for a 
global comprehension: the contextual presentation as part of 
a particular landscape; the organization as a space to discover 
by moving around rooms, levels, etc., and the volumes as in 
a building site. In all cases, for the sake of simplicity, they are 
presented using pictograms connected with the result to 
achieve. In a general sense, we are interested in the “quality” 
of the visual communication and its relationships with the 
human experiences as explained by the Gestalt Theory [21]. 
Gestalt, as a “living thinking” discipline, gives us a series of 
observations located in experiments with human subjects that 
could have applications in the design of this Learning Object. 
Clearly, it is difficult to combine all these ideas and unify 
the input parameters to create an interface where the tools are 
part of the content to learn. Participation in the creation of the 
results or the resources is part of the process, depending on 
who is the user. Authors of this paper are working on creating 
a universal interface proposal, using some graphic 
technologies, and producing a result with a self-descriptive 
structure, based on one’s own experience [6][11]. 
The solution proposed here is to include in a knowledge 
base, at each wireframe, the explicit relation accessibility-
result (Figure 3), both visual and tactile, based on semantic 
and iconographic relations, capable of helping to determine 
the equivalence between possibilities for knowledge. 
Another problem that arises by combining results is the 
possibility of inconsistencies between the results of different 
tools for the same accessibility requirement. For example, a 
tool can determine that the success criterion 1.1.1 is satisfied 
because all images have alternative text, whereas another 
more advanced tool could determine that the goal is not 
satisfied. 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
This is a work in progress that intends to provide a design 
solution to the interface of a learning platform based on the 
use of different technologies and tools. The site will allow to 
 
Figure 3. Scheme proposed to develop the wireframe and design 
of the buttons to establish simple activity-result relations. 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

create and experience tangible models, compositions and 
resources related to a particular topic. No other learning 
platform has been found to solve this hands-on approach.  
The expected results are in line with the previous work by 
Kort et al. [22], which highlighted the existence of an 
interaction between emotion and learning. Their claim, 
supported by research, is that feelings of amazement, 
satisfaction, curiosity, hope, and inquiry are good emotions 
that facilitate a higher level of learning. A hands-on approach 
also shows that learning improves when using, creating and 
manipulating tangible elements, and many subjects in 
education use commonly tactile models in their teaching.  
We believe in the impact of positive reaction on 
individual engagement and multidimensional constructs. It is 
also expected that this “Learning Object” may be useful to 
connect different subjects or courses which are often isolated 
in education programs at school (arts, technology, history, 
etc.). The variety of activities involved can be seen as a means 
to create a flow situation when using this learning module. 
The idea is to increase the learner’s participation (not a mere 
involvement) in design activities and decisions, combining 
experiences and resources. 
All the activities proposed have been developed/applied 
previously by the authors of this paper. Similar elements have 
been applied in other areas, such as 3D maps, tactile models, 
and distributed learning object repositories. This experience 
is an advantage for the implementation of the proposed 
architecture for the case of this Universal Learning Object in 
an accessible website.  
The next step will be to build a prototype of the website, 
including these activities and tools, to make a research-
through-design approach, and to use it. Knowledge will 
always gain from testing. The designs will be tested with 
users’ questionnaires and assessed with the help of experts 
focus groups. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This paper is part of the research project ‘Innovación y 
Diseño de recursos y contenidos de sustrato gráfico para la 
interpretación 
y 
la 
educación 
inclusivas_INDICO”, 
supported by the Generalitat Valenciana in the AICO 
program (Ref /2017/046). 
We would also like to thank our technical assistant María 
Carrillo, for her work in the design and development of the 
deliveries from the “Learning Object”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Dygert, “Thinking Out Loud: Disrupting Employee 
Development,” 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://dygertthinkingoutloud.blogspot.com/2017/08/disrupting
-employee-development.html. [Retrieved: January, 2019]. 
[2] T. Haak, “6 Trends in Learning and Development | HR Trend 
Institute,” 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://hrtrendinstitute.com/2017/12/04/6-trends-in-learning-
and-development/. [Retrieved: January, 2019]. 
[3] D. Otto, A. Bollmann, S. Becker and K, Sander, “It’s the 
learning, stupid! Discussing the role of learning outcomes in 
MOOCs,” Open Learning: The Journal of Open, Distance and 
e-Learning, vol. 33, nº 3, 2018, pp. 203-220, DOI: 
10.1080/02680513.2018.1486183 
[4] P. Milgram and F. Kishino, “A Taxonomy of Mixed Reality 
Visual Displays,” IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. E77–D, 1994, 
pp. 1321–1329. 
[5] R. T. Azuma, “A Survey of Augmented Reality Navigation,” 
Presence Teleoperators Virtual Environ., vol. 6, no. 4, 1997, 
pp. 355–385. 
[6] M. Puyuelo Cazorla, M. Val Fiel, L. Merino Sanjuán, and F. 
Felip Miralles, “Virtual Representations and Other Technical 
Resources for Access to Cultural Heritage,” EGA Rev. 
expresión gráfica Arquit., no. 17, 2011, pp. 164–173. 
[7] “Khan Academy | Free Online Courses, Lessons &amp; 
Practice.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.khanacademy.org/. [Retrieved: January, 2019]. 
[8] “Wolfram|Alpha: Computational Intelligence.” [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.wolframalpha.com/. 
[Retrieved: 
January, 2019]. 
[9] F. Wild, “For Students,” 2015. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.nasa.gov/audience/forstudents/index.html. 
[Retrieved: January, 2019]. 
[10] C. Pappas, “How To Develop AR/VR eLearning Resources: A 
7-Step Guide - eLearning Industry,” 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://elearningindustry.com/develop-ar-vr-elearning-
resources-step-guide. [Retrieved: January, 2019]. 
[11] M. Puyuelo Cazorla, P. Fuentes-Durá, and M. Val Fiel, “From 
information to knowledge. Building new learning strategies in 
heritage field through graphics and new technologies,” in XVI 
International Forum Le Vie dei Mercanti: World Heritage and 
Knowledge, 2018, pp. 1108-1117. 
[12] M. Ioannides, J. Martins, R. Žarnić, and V. Lim, “Advances in 
digital cultural heritage: International Workshop”, Funchal, 
Madeira, Portugal, June 28, 2017, Revised selected papers. 
[13] L. Armesto, P. Fuentes-Durá, and D. Perry, “Low-cost 
Printable Robots in Education,” J Intell Robot Syst, vol. 81, 
2016, pp. 5–24. 
[14] D. García Moreno, “Diseño de sistemas de orientación 
espacial. 
Design 
of 
spatial 
orientation 
systems,” 
in 
Accesibilidad universal y diseño para todos: arquitectura y 
urbanismo, 2011, ISBN 978-84-88934-47-5, págs. 36-57, 
Colegio Oficial de Arquitectos, 2011, pp. 36–57. 
[15] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
40500:2012 Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 
2.0. 2012, p. 2. 
[16] “Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.w3.org/TR/2018/REC-
WCAG21-20180605/. [Retrieved: January, 2019]. 
[17] N. Fernandes, R. Lopes, and L. Carriço, “An Architecture for 
Multiple Web Accessibility Evaluation Environments,” 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 206–214. 
[18] J. M. Gill, Accessibility for Visitors who are Blind or Partially 
Sighted: How Technology Can Help. London: Royal National 
Institute of Blind People, 2007. 
[19] C. Moreno Muñoz and F. Jeno Hernández, “El aporte de la 
ergonomía cognitiva perceptual en la comunicación de los pro-
ductos. The contribution of perceptual cognitive ergonomics in 
the communication of products,” Publicitas Comun. y Cult., 
vol. 4, 2016, pp. 27–34. 
[20] A. Findeli, “Rethinking Design Education for the 21st Century: 
Theoretical, Methodological, and Ethical Discussion,” Des. 
Issues, vol. 17, no. 1, 2001, pp. 5–17. 
[21] J. Moszkowicz, “Gestalt and Graphic Design: An Exploration 
of the Humanistic and Therapeutic Effects of Visual 
Organization,” Des. Issues, vol. 27, no. 4, 2011, pp. 56–67. 
[22] B. Kort, R. Reilly, and R. Picard, “An Affective Model of the 
Interplay between Emotions and Learning: Reengineering 
Educational Pedagogy-Building a Learning Companion. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT '01). IEEE 
Computer Society, 2001, 43-46. 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

