Design of Information-Sharing Media Based on Observation of Reading and 
Writing Behavior on Message Boards within Large Organizations 
Kanayo Ogura 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Iwate, Japan 
e-mail: ogura_k@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Ryotaro Hoshi 
Quick Corporation 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: hoshi-ryotaro@919.jp
 
Abstract—To provide an unconventional means of information 
sharing within large organizations such as universities and 
companies, we set up a whiteboard information-sharing space 
within our university and observed and analyzed users’ writing 
and reading behavior. As a result, we designed and implemented 
an electronic bulletin board that clearly segregates topics, 
provides space for replies, changes the posting display period 
according to the status of replies, and has a mechanism to make 
less important information as inconspicuous as possible. From 
an experiment with our electronic bulletin board, we confirmed 
that users were able to use the board to continuously post and 
reply to messages. Our notable achievement is that we have 
implemented the advantages of the analog world, which were 
revealed through the observation of reading and posting 
behavior on the whiteboard, into a system that is the digital 
world. 
Keywords; information sharing; electronic bulletin board; 
observational study;  user study. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There are people around us who have already solved their 
own problems. Casual conversations with those people often 
contain useful information. However, because we generally 
spend most of our time in a small community, such as a 
laboratory in a university or a department in a company, we 
do not have many opportunities to share information with 
people outside of our own community. In fact, a survey [1] on 
information sharing opportunities at universities shows that 
opportunities to ask questions and seek advice from friends 
and seniors are decreasing year by year. The reason for this 
could be that as students move up through the grades, they 
spend more time on research activities and spend more time 
in their laboratories. In other words, as mentioned above, they 
spend more time in the small community of the laboratory. 
To solve this problem, there may be means of information 
sharing within each organization. For example, Slack can be 
used for each department [2] and group LINE for each 
laboratory [3]. However, the information-sharing forums 
provided by organizations are often used by bosses and 
supervisors as one-way places for sending out information. 
Therefore, community members have the impression that the 
information sharing space is a formal place. This makes it 
difficult to share information beyond the boundaries of 
departments and school grade. In addition, communities for 
information sharing prepared by individuals are often 
subdivided into close-knit groups over time and cease to 
function as a community. 
To provide an unconventional means of information 
sharing in large organizations such as universities and 
companies, we set up an information sharing space using a 
whiteboard in our university, and we observed and analyzed 
users’ writing and reading behavior. On the basis of the results, 
we designed and implemented an electronic bulletin board as 
an information sharing medium, and we discuss its 
effectiveness and usefulness. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes 
related works. Section 3 describes an observational study of 
the set-up of the whiteboard. Section 4 describes the design 
policy of the electronic bulletin board based on the results of 
the study in the previous section. Section 5 describes an 
observational experiment to verify the effectiveness of the 
designed electronic bulletin board. Section 6 summarizes this 
work and discusses future prospects. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
There have been many studies on information sharing. 
Nishimoto et al. [4] are known for their research on the 
promotion of information sharing in large-scale organizations. 
In their system, a person who has a transponder, a device that 
automatically sends a signal when it receives a different signal, 
approaches a large display in a shared space, and a question 
registered in advance by the person is displayed. This 
facilitates information sharing with users of the shared space 
who happen to see the question. The advantage of their system 
is that it is a system that does not require information providers 
to register their information with the system in advance, while 
general knowledge management software requires them to 
register their information with the system. However, their 
system has the disadvantage that users with transponders need 
to stay in the shared space for a long time to actively share 
information. 
Snowdon et al. [5] performed another study on 
information sharing within a large organization. They propose 
a recommendation system that semi-automatically displays 
filtered information on the basis of user comments and 
feedback for each post. One of the features of their system is 
that it gives users a more organic impression by randomly 
arranging the posted information when it is displayed. When 
they actually operated their system, they found that the 
contents of the posts were often suited to the characteristics of 
the organization, but only some users posted, and not a wide 
range of users contributed. 
On the other hand, The Notification Collage [6] is an 
information sharing system used within small communities. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

This system aims to share information not with individuals but 
with the community as a whole by allowing people in a small 
community to post their daily discoveries to the system. In this 
system, posted information is not displayed in a list as in a 
general chat tool but is arranged randomly as in an analog 
bulletin board. The Notification Collage can be used from 
both large displays and personal terminals. However, most of 
the users post and browse from their personal terminals, so 
there have been few opportunities to use the large display. 
In this study, we propose a message board like that 
installed in many railroad stations in Japan as a means of 
sharing information that can be used by anyone without the 
need for users to stay at that location. We set up a whiteboard 
in our university that users can freely write on and read 
information from. On the basis of observing users’ writing and 
browsing behavior on the whiteboard, we design an electronic 
bulletin board that encourages information sharing among 
people in the same organization. 
III. 
OBSERVATION OF WHITEBOARD POSTING AND 
READING BEHAVIOR 
As mentioned earlier, to realize information sharing that 
incorporates the advantages of message boards, we set up a 
whiteboard in our organization for approximately two months 
and observed posting and reading behavior. The purpose was 
to examine the characteristics of information sharing behavior 
on the whiteboard and the requirements for an electronic 
bulletin board. 
A. Overview of observations 
We installed whiteboards in the corridors on the second 
and third floors of our faculty building in our university (see 
Figure 1) for about two months. The reason is that these 
locations are conspicuous to students who are on their way to 
the student hall building where the cafeteria and store are 
located and to the common lecture building where many 
lectures are held. We used the term “bulletin board” except 
when it was necessary to distinguish between a message board 
and a bulletin board. The reason is that our use of the term 
“message board” could have given the impression that it was 
a place for one-way transmission of information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Campus plan of our university and locations of whiteboards 
[Red circles indicate locations (2nd and 3rd floor)]. 
We set up a whiteboard with a pen and an eraser (see 
Figure 2). We posted a sign next to the whiteboard explaining 
that “this whiteboard is a place for students to write questions 
and answers about student life” in order to create an 
environment where interaction among students is likely to 
occur. When two days had passed since students filled in the 
whiteboard, or when the board was 80% full, we removed the 
oldest entries from it.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Installed white board. 
 
To collect data to be used to analyze information sharing 
behavior, we took pictures of the entries on the board every 
weekday evening. From these pictures, we manually 
transcribed the contents written on the board, and organized 
the contents of the writings and their relationships with other 
writings (related topics, question-answer relationships, etc.).  
Furthermore, we conducted a questionnaire survey of all 
students at our university at the end of the observation period. 
We also posted a notice on the board warning students that 
their entries were to be used only for academic purposes, and 
that if they did not agree to the use of their entries, they were 
not to post on the board. 
B. Observation results 
 In this part, we focus on 3 interesting aspects of posting 
and reading behavior on the board: the format of the board, 
the continuity of topics, and the reading and writing by 
multiple people. 
1) Influence of display format 
When the whiteboard was first set up, we expected that 
writing and replies would be more active if there was no fixed 
area to write on, such as one reserved with a dividing line. 
Therefore, when the whiteboards were first installed, there 
was nothing written on them except for an example at the top. 
To compare the influence of nothing being written on the 
board and of the board having a fixed writing area, we set up 
a 2×7 grid on the board about a month and a half after it was 
set up. To indicate that each grid was prepared for writing 
about a single topic, we put a “Q” mark in each grid, which 
means question. A few days later, the “Q”s in the right column 
were replaced with “A”s by students other than ourselves (see 
Figure 3).  
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 3. Whiteboard with questions in left column and replies in right 
column. 
 
As a result, there were 16 entries. Of these, 11 were replies 
to the “Q” mark. The number of 16 posts on this day was the 
highest number of posts per day. We assume that the reason is 
that the topics were clearly delineated and that there was 
enough writing space for the replies. Therefore, we will design 
an electronic bulletin board that has a separate area for writing 
topics and a space for replies. 
2) Continuation of topics 
 As mentioned earlier, we periodically deleted posts. 
However, when a post received a reply and the topic was 
continued, the deletion period was extended for two days 
from the new reply. Since we deleted only on weekdays, there 
were topics posted for longer than usual because they fell on 
a Saturday or a Sunday. They continued to receive replies 
after more than 10 days had passed. Therefore, we will 
change the deletion period on our electronic bulletin board 
according to the status of replies to each topic. 
3) Writing and reading by two or more people 
      During the observation period, we frequently observed 
several people reading the whiteboard, as shown in Figure 4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Multiple people writing on whiteboard. 
    In some cases, we observed multiple people filling in the 
whiteboard (that is, only one person was actually filling in the 
whiteboard, while the topic was being discussed by multiple 
people). This is a situation not seen in online communication 
such as chat rooms or electronic bulletin boards. We believe 
that it is important to take advantage of the benefits of analog 
communication, as in this case, to activate information 
sharing. Therefore, we envision an electronic bulletin board 
that can be set up in a shared space and be written on and read 
by multiple people, instead of from individual PCs. 
C. Results of questionnaire responses 
 After the observation period, we conducted a questionnaire 
survey of all students at our university. The purpose was to 
gather information that could not be obtained from the 
observation, such as the attributes of the whiteboard users and 
their motives for writing on the whiteboards, as well as to 
gather information on features that should be incorporated 
into our electronic bulletin board. There were 208 responses. 
In this paper, we discuss the handling of unimportant 
information and the presentation of the posting period. 
1) Dealing with less important information 
  In response to the questionnaire question “Have you 
obtained necessary information or new findings from this 
whiteboard?”, 58.2% of the respondents answered “No.” The 
reasons were “I found it difficult to understand which 
information was important because there was too much 
unimportant information (44.8%),” “I felt the quality of the 
answers was low (22.9%),” and “I found it difficult to 
understand which information was important because there 
were many invitations to join club activities (9.5%).” There 
were also several responses that said, “There was a lot of 
unimportant information, so I thought I could post any topic 
I wanted.” During the observation of the whiteboard, we left 
unimportant information and invitations to club activities as 
they were to facilitate posting. From the results of this survey, 
we will proactively address less important information on our 
electronic bulletin board. One approach is to limit the number 
of replies to only one so that the less important information 
is less noticeable to the user. Another approach is to 
demonstrate on the board how long a post will remain to 
avoid less important information being displayed for a long 
time. 
2) Duration of display of posts 
 As already explained, during the observation period, we 
periodically deleted posts. Since we did not indicate the 
posting period on the board, we received a request in the 
survey to clarify when posts would be deleted. However, 
users may be confused if they are directly informed of the 
time remaining until deletion. Therefore, we would like to 
add the following new feature to our bulletin board that 
informs users of how much time has elapsed for their posts 
by the shade of color of the text. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV. 
DESIGN OF ELECTRONIC BULLETIN BOARD SYSTEM 
FOR INFORMATION SHARING 
     We designed an electronic bulletin board system using a 
large display based on the results of observations of writing 
and reading behavior on the whiteboard described above. In 
this section, we provide an overview of the electronic bulletin 
board system we designed and explain the features of our 
system. 
A. Outline of electronic bulletin board system 
As mentioned above, we assume that our electronic 
bulletin board system will use a large display to allow multiple 
users to post and view information. We also assume that users 
can only post to our system from a keyboard connected to the 
display terminal (Raspberry Pi 4). From our observation that 
replies are more active when topics are clearly segmented, we 
will arrange posts and replies so that they are in pairs.  
Figure 5. UI of electronic bulletin board (whole). 
 
In addition, to display as many topics as possible on the 
display, the posts are arranged in a grid (see Figure 5). Also, 
an area is reserved for writing where no posts exist. The initial 
design envisioned a 4×4 grid of posting areas, but we decided 
to increase the font size in a 3×3 grid so that posts can be 
viewed from a distance. As shown in Figure 5, the UI screen 
is a single slide, and the screen changes to a slide show every 
minute. Moreover, if there is no space to post, users can move 
to another screen using the toggle buttons on the left and right 
sides of the screen to find a space where no posts have been 
made and post a message.  
Figure 6. Posting area (Upper row: Post, Lower row: Reply to post). 
 
The grid-like posting area is divided into upper and lower 
rows, with posts displayed in the upper row and replies in the 
lower row (see Figure 6). If there are multiple replies, replies 
that have been displayed for less than 12 hours or that have 
been labeled as “good” by other users are displayed first. 
B. Feature function: Reaction to posts and display time 
Users can react to posts and replies (one per post) by 
clicking the “good” and “bad” reaction buttons. When a user 
reacts to a post, he/she can do so from both the post area and 
the reply area. In the case of replies, the user can react only 
from the reply area. 
We also set a display period of 5 days for each post. If a 
post receives a “good” reaction, the display time is extended 
for 12 hours. If there is a reply to a post, the time is extended 
for 24 hours. If there is a “bad” reaction to a post, the time is 
reduced to 24 hours. Furthermore, if the number of “bad” 
reactions to each reply exceeds a threshold value, the reply is 
not displayed.  
TABLE I. TEXT COLOR SHADING CHANGE 
Days 
Intensity 
More than 3 days 
1.0 
Less than 3 days 
0.9 
Less than 2 days 
0.8 
Below 1 day 
0.6 
Less than 12 hours 
0.5 
Less than 6 hours 
0.4 
 
In addition, to address the opinion in the survey that “it is 
difficult to know when a post will be deleted,” we have 
incorporated a function to gradually lighten the color of the 
text as the end of the display period approaches (see Table 1). 
V. 
EXPERIMENT 
 An experiment was conducted for about four months (two 
months were during the summer vacation) to check the usage 
of our electronic bulletin board.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Installed electronic bulletin board and its surroundings. 
 
 We set up our bulletin board (see Figure 7, the large 
display is our bulletin board) in front of our university store. 
We received 70 posts and 134 replies in about 4 months. 
A. Number of posts 
 Since summer vacation at our university started soon after 
the board was installed, the number of posts per day was 
small. However, after vacation, we found that there were up 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

to 14 posts per day and almost no days without posts. The 
reason for this is that the electronic bulletin board is located 
in front of the cafeteria and the store of our university, and 
the number of students staying in this area has increased since 
the summer vacation ended and classes started. 
B. Number of posts per time of day 
In terms of the number of posts and replies by time of day, 
we found that most posts were made at around 12:00 and 
16:00. The reason for this may be that there is a lunch break 
at 12:00, and many students stop by the store after 16:00 
during after-school hours. However, more people stopping by 
means more people watching. We consider the increase in 
posts in this situation to be unexpected in light of what is 
called social embarrassment [7], in which people become less 
likely to act because they are being watched by others. To 
investigate why this happened, we conducted field 
observations and observed that several people were using the 
board together as mentioned above. This is a situation that 
does not exist in online interactions. 
C. Reply to posts 
 In the whiteboard observation, replies to posts were 
concentrated in the first week after posting. However, in this 
experiment, replies continued for about two weeks to one 
month. We think that the reason for this is that the duration 
of the display period was extended due to there being 
continuous replies. 
D. Use of reaction buttons 
 The number of reactions was 60 good ones and 8 bad ones. 
At first glance, the reaction button seemed to be utilized, but 
in reality, it was used only for specific topics and thus not 
widely used. Therefore, the bad button was often used for 
meaningless posts, and there were no cases where the posting 
period was shortened. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 In this paper, we designed and implemented an electronic 
bulletin board for information sharing in a large organization, 
based on the results of whiteboard observations, and 
confirmed its usage. From the results of the observations, we 
used a display format that clearly segregates topics, provides 
space for replies, changes the posting display period 
according to the status of replies, and has a feature that makes 
unimportant information as inconspicuous as possible. In 
addition, we considered it important for our system design to 
incorporate the advantages of the analog world, which allows 
users to post and read together with others in the same space. 
For this reason, our system is not closed to the Internet, but 
can be accessed from both the Internet and the analog space 
through a large display. From an experiment, we confirmed 
that users are able to continuously post and reply to messages 
using the electronic bulletin board. Our notable achievement 
is that we have implemented the analog advantages revealed 
by our observations into an IT system in the digital world.  
 On the other hand, it is difficult to say from the results of 
this experiment that all users were actively using our system. 
While many users read our electronic bulletin board, we 
recognize that there are users who cannot post even if they 
want to because they are afraid of being seen by others. 
   We plan to further analyze the results of the experiment and 
add more user-friendly functions in the future. We also intend 
to improve our system so that users can easily post from their 
personal mobile devices. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Japan Association of Private Colleges and Universities. White 
Paper on Student Life at Private Colleges and Universities 
2018. 
[online]. 
Avairable 
from 
: 
https://www.shidairen.or.jp/topics_details/id=2040 
2023.04.06. (in Japanese) 
[2] Slack Technology Inc. Inspiring stories, real Slack customers. 
[online]. Available from : https://slack.com/customer-stories 
2023.04.06. 
[3] J. Chutrtong and W. Chutrtong, “Science Students’ Acceptance 
to use LINE Application in Laboratory Subject,” International 
Journal of Information and Education Technology, vol.10, pp. 
227-231, 2020. 
[4] K. Nishimoto and K. Matsuda, “Informal Communication 
Support Media For Encouraging Knowledge-Sharing And 
Creation In A Community,” International Journal of 
Information Technology & Decision Making (IJITDM), World 
Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 411-426, 
2007. 
[5] D. Snowdon and A. Grasso, “Diffusing Information In 
Organizational Settings: Learning From Experience,” CHI '02: 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pp. 331-338, 2002. 
[6] S. Greenberg and M. Rounding, “The notification collage: 
posting information to public and personal displays,” CHI '01: 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pp. 514-521, 2001. 
[7] R. Edelmann,  “Social Embarrassment: An Analysis of the 
Process,” Journal of Social and Personal Relationships,  vol.2, 
no.2, pp. 195-213, 1985.
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

