Physical Therapy Intervention Through Virtual Reality in Individuals With 
Balance Disability: a Case Study 
 
Audi Mauro 
 Barrozo Amanda Lavagnini 
Perin Bruna de Oliveira 
 Dept. Physical Therapy / University of Marilia 
UNIMAR 
Marília –Brasil 
mauroaudi@unimar.br 
aamandaalb@hotmail.com 
bruna_net_eu@hotmail.com 
Braccialli Lígia Maria Presumido 
Sankako Andréia Naomi 
 dept. Special Education / University Estadual Paulista 
UNESP 
Marília- Brasil 
bracci@marilia.unesp.br 
asankako@yahoo.com.br 
 
 
Abstract—Balance is an ability found in most of the human 
activities and it is essential under a functioning view. When 
balance is impaired due to any brain injury, several tools 
may be used for its treatment. One of them is virtual reality, 
a tool which allows individuals to make use of their senses 
and natural movements during virtual games in order to 
promote interaction on a virtual environment. This study 
was performed with a volunteer from the neurology section 
of Universidade de Marília (Unimar) physical therapy clinic 
under ethics parameters, and its purpose was to measure the 
balance of an individual with traumatic brain injury who 
was involved in a treatment with use of virtual-reality games. 
An Xbox kinect® console was utilized for this intervention, 
and the selected games required the use of many physical 
abilities, including balance. The tests were recorded on 
video, and pictures were analyzed by two researchers and 
three evaluators. Score data from each game were obtained 
during the process. The data analysis was quantitative in 
relation with game scores and qualitative in relation with the 
test pictures. The results obtained from the analysis of the 
balance tests were: (a) in romberg’s test with eyes open and 
eyes closed there were not significant changes; (b) in 
sensitive romberg’s test there was improvement in balance 
with support in both legs; (c) in dynamic balance test there 
was improvement in balance during the straight-line walk. 
In the statistical analysis of game data friedman’s variance 
was found in three levels of significance (p): for each 
sequence in the seven days of attendance the results were 
p=0.0367, p=0.0281 e p=0.0136; it was considered as p<0.05 
what affected significantly the performance of the volunteer.  
According to the results observed in the study, it was 
concluded that virtual reality as a therapeutic media 
provided improvement of the volunteer’s physical balance. 
Keywords-physical therapy; balance; virtual reality.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
The balance or postural stability is the condition in 
which every force acting over the body is balanced so that 
the center of mass stays within the stability borders in the 
limits of the bases of support [1]. Balance is a 
sensorimotor function that ensures permanently the 
dynamic postural stability [2]. In the opinion of postural 
stability, also defined as balance, is the ability of having 
control over the center of mass in relation with the base of 
support [3]. 
 
 
Balance can be static, when a body stays stable in a 
given position, or dynamic, when it is able to advance 
through an intentional movement without losing balance 
[4]. 
In order to obtain postural control and then postural 
stability, a body needs to create and apply forces. 
However, the central nervous system (CNS) requires an 
exact image of where the body is in the space and if it is 
still or in movement. The nervous system performs that 
through the following systems: vestibular, visual, and 
somatosensory, primarily proprioceptive mechanism and 
cerebellum which manages constantly every motor activity 
of the body and compares movements intended by the 
motor cortex with the updated sensory information that 
receives and regulates the quality of motor movements [5]. 
That instability is the lack of ability for correcting the 
displacement of a body during its movement in space [6]. 
There are three media in daily life in which balance can be 
disturbed: by an external force applied to the own body 
through the movement of the base of support, or by 
internal forces applied during a self-initiated movement 
[7]. Any obstruction at controlling the segmental alignment 
and activating, coordinating and measuring muscular 
activity effectively can impair postural stability. 
Balance is essential for independence in daily 
activities. Impairments in postural control that produce loss 
of stability has a profound impact in daily life for 
individuals 
with 
neurological 
pathology. 
The 
consequences of impairment on stability include loss of 
functional independence, increase of disability prevalence, 
and falls [3][7]. 
The ability of keeping a static position provides a lesser 
challenge for a patient’s balance, whereas dynamic 
activities are more challenging since the center of mass is 
more displaced. Therefore, the program of rehabilitation 
for balance training must have exercises with progression 
of kinetic chain, exercises with eyes open and closed, 
progression of stable-to-instable bases, self-perturbation by 
external perturbation, single-to-multiple plans, and single-
to-multiple movements [8]. 
There are also studies that demonstrate the benefit of 
other therapies in the treatment of balance disorders such 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

as hydrotherapy [9], equine therapy [10], isostretching 
[11], pilates [12]. 
Studies on virtual reality (VR) took place in the 1960s, 
not successfully, then since 1980 they began to be 
strengthened and became even more popular in the 
beginning of 1990 with digital technology and the 
popularization of digital games [13]. 
The term VR was created to define virtual worlds 
developed with the utilization of high technology in order 
to convince users that they are in another reality. It enables 
the integration between user and virtual environment. So, 
there is an experience of immersion and interaction based 
on tridimensional graphic images generated by computer. 
The VR allows a user to utilize perceptions from our five 
senses [14]. 
VR can be defined as a computing simulation that 
enables to re-create real environments where a subject is 
able to interact with the game, to experience and simulate a 
real environment [15]. 
VR provides a unique media appropriate for the 
creation of several requirements for an effective 
intervention of rehabilitation, and can be provided in a 
functional, intentional and motivating context [16]. 
Virtual environments are created with the purpose of 
rehabiliting individuals with disabilities, and it aims to 
recover the motor ability and cognitive functions. It is a 
therapy provided for patients who have some brain injury, 
phobias, autism, traumatic brain injuries, brain paralysis, 
and in the prevention of falls and accidents with the elderly 
[17]. 
It is Schiavinato et al. [18] have reported an important 
effect in the rehabilitation provided by VR, i.e., a 
possibility where the patient interacts with a virtual 
environment, and this interaction provides an immediate 
feedback by the patient, because he has positive immediate 
responses of the efficacy of his/her movements. Then 
his/her brain is stimulated to be adjusted to the game, and 
makes the corrections necessary so that the patient has a 
good performance in the game. This enables competitivity, 
and the patient begins to make good efforts. 
The Balance Rehabilitation Unit (BRU) is an 
equipment which allows handling balance disorder, 
primarily the vestibular ones. It utilizes 3D glasses that re-
create situations that cause dizziness in the user and work 
on visual stimulation, perception of deepness, direction 
and movement speed, stimulating the maintenance of body 
balance [19]. 
The utilization of VR in rehabilitation, when compared 
with treatments using other technologies, has several 
advantagens such as the opportunity of experience of real 
situations in an illustrative environment that encourages 
the active and individualized participation of a subject who 
practice movements being performed later in the real 
world. It also provides an amusing environment that 
creates a high level of motivation for the acquisition of 
knowledge and learning [17]. 
The VR can be utilized in the treatment of 
vestibulopathy since the physical movements performed 
during the therapy reorganize the harmonious functioning 
between visual, vestibular and somatosensory systems, 
promoting visual stabilization during the movements of the 
head. This repetitive training associated with neuronal 
plasticity makes the recovery of body balance and 
vestibular compensation possible [20]. 
The purpose of this study was to measure balance of an 
individual with traumatic brain injury who underwent a 
treatment with virtual-reality games. 
The present work is subdivided in sections. Section II 
contains the research methods used. Section III presents 
how the procedures were realized and which materials 
were utilized. Section IV presents the results and explains 
the way they were analyzed. In Section V, we present the 
discussion, comparing with the results from other authors. 
And, finally, Section VI presents the conclusion of this 
work. 
  
II. METHODS 
 
The study was issued and approved by University of 
Marilia (UNIMAR) Research Ethics Committee, and 
followed Brazilian and International Regulations and 
Guidelines, especially Brazilian Health Board Resolutions 
no. 196/96 and Supplementary, protocol no. 341. 
A volunteer from neurology section at UNIMAR 
Physical Therapy Clinic, male, 30 years, who underwent a 
conventional physical therapeutic assessment performed 
by researchers in the last term of Physical Therapy 
undergraduate course, took part in the study. The volunteer 
had a clinical diagnosis of traumatic brain injury secondary 
to a car accident. 
The accident occurred in January 31st, 2010, and the 
volunteer was hospitalized during 48 days, from which 31 
days he was in an Intensive Therapy Unit (ITU), and 17 
days in an outpatient room. While at ITU he had been into 
a coma and underwent a procedure with invasive 
mechanical 
ventilation. 
During 
the 
period 
of 
hospitalization he was put a cervical collar due to a 
fracture in the third cervical vertebra, underwent a facial 
drainage, had bronchoaspiration, and had two episodes of 
pneumonia. The patient had a hospital discharge in March 
19th, 2010. 
One month after the discharge the patient initiated a 
therapeutic treatment at UNIMAR Physical Therapy 
Clinic, where he followed attending up to later April 2011. 
In this period there was a significant progression in 
sequels. The patient has any former pathology, has no use 
of medication, no use of tobacco or alcohol. He has a 
moderate limitation in daily activities which require a 
higher level of body balance such as play soccer. The 
volunteer is a college student and he is temporarily retired 
from his professional activities. 
There were not found force, skeletal or joint changes, 
muscular 
atrophy, 
tonus, 
profound 
or 
superficial 
sensitivity, or rough coordination at the physical 
examinations. Changes in static and dynamic balance, and 
dysdiadochokinesia in the right upper member were the 
only motor alterations. 
The volunteer underwent magnetic resonance imaging 
examinations through which a small area of gliosis by 
brain contusion in the right temporal-occipital transition, 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and sequels from diffuse axonal injury in brain regions 
(corpus callosum, bilateral brain peduncle, and right lower 
brain peduncle) were diagnosed in the outcomes from 
recent examinations, previous to the beginning of the 
therapy. 
A LG 29’’ TV, a Xbox 360° Kinect console and Kinect 
Adventures game, a Sonic 12.1 megapixels digital camera, 
a support tripod and simetrograph were utilized in the 
therapy.  
 
III. PROCEDURES 
 
The procedures of this case study were divided into 
stages consisting of: First Assessment, Therapeutic 
Intervention Protocol, and Final Assessment. 
The 
volunteer 
was 
assessed 
initially 
through 
Romberg’s test as per O’Sullivan, which is used to 
evaluate static balance. In this test, the patient was 
instructed to stand erect and feet positioned together, arms 
hanging along the body. The patient had three minutes 
before the beginning of the test for postural adjustment. 
The test was performed in three stages: with eyes open, 
with eyes closed, and unipedal right stance, then left 
stance, hereby called Sensitive Romberg. A simetrograph 
was used in order to support the test. 
A straight-line walk test was used to assess dynamic 
balance. This test was performed by the patient walking 
over a 5.7 m straight line in the floor so that the calcaneus 
of one foot was in front of the ankle of the other foot. He 
walked the line three times, back and forth; the first time 
was not considered for analysis. 
All tests were recorded in video with a digital camera 
supported by a tripod. The camera was in a position 2.50 
meters of length away from the simetrograph and at 79 cm 
of height in the Romberg’s test. In the walk test it was at 
80 cm of length and 79 cm of height. 
 
In relation to therapeutic intervention protocol, an 
Xbox Kinect console with Kinect Adventures game and a 
29’’ TV were used for the intervention. This console 
captures movements performed by the user, reads them 
and then sends kinetic movement signs to the virtual 
reality; this console does not require joypads or any device 
to play. Games were not therapeutic and had background 
music. The distance between the console and the 
participant were always the same, adjusted by the console 
sensors. Two games were selected for the therapy: Reflex 
Ridge, where the virtual scenario was a platform running 
through trails, and the participant was required to jump, 
knee and avoid obstacles in the way; and Rally Ball, where 
he should make movements to catch balls using hands and 
legs along with side displacements as a goalkeeper. He 
also should destroy floating boxes with the same balls. 
Both games have basic, intermediate and advanced 
levels. Each level had three different game, i.e. each game 
had a total of nine mini-games. At each attendance the 
volunteer played Reflex Ridge first, then Rally Ball. He 
was requested to play one basic-, one intermediate-, and 
one advanced-level mini-game from each DVD. Twenty 
one attendances were performed, with a sequence of three 
different games in each attendance. After three days the 
sequence was repeated, in a total of 7 attendances with 
each sequence. The sequences were: Mover, Dodger and 
Olympian; Collector, Wrangler and Shapeshifter; and 
Cruiser, Slingshotter and Speedster. 
The game that provided more data for the collection 
was selected for data analysis: Reflex Ridge. Data were 
collectedon number of total obstacles, number of fails at 
trying to overcome obstacles, game time and score. The 
intervention lasted one month and two days, and four 
attendances per week were performed in this period, with 
therapy time of approximately 25 minutes. Initial and final 
blood pressures were measured in every attendance, since 
it was a therapeutic attendance. There were not intervals 
during each therapy, and the volunteer had only short rests 
due to the time spent to select a new game. 
The volunteer underwent the same tests of first 
assessment one day after the end of attendances, performed 
in the same site and with the same equipment. 
The data analysis was quantitative in relation with 
game scores and qualitative in relation with the test 
pictures. The results obtained from the analysis of the 
balance tests were: (a) in Romberg’s test with eyes open 
and eyes closed there were not significant changes; (b) in 
sensitive Romberg’s test there was improvement in 
balance with support in both legs; (c) in dynamic balance 
test there was improvement in balance during the straight-
line walk. 
IV. RESULTS 
 
An imaging qualitative analysis was performed by 
recording for static and dynamic balance tests, as per table 
1. Tests were recorded on video at assessment and 
reassessment. Then relevant parts were selected and edited 
for analysis. Both researchers assessed individually the 
edited parts and took notes considering parameters that 
aimed the purpose of the study. Following this analysis, 
they observed common findings and found some 
conclusions. In order to assure the common outcomes 
obtained, the video recordings were submitted to three 
evaluators who were not informed about the study, and the 
validation of the conclusions obtained by the researchers 
was accepted if most of the evaluators observed the same 
outcomes. 
 
TABLE 1. IMAGING ANALYSIS OF BALANCE TESTS 
THROUGH 
 
CATEGORY SUBCATEGORY 
 
   OUTCOME 
STATIC 
BALANCE 
ROMBERG 
WITH EYES 
OPEN 
ASSESSMENT 
“mild deviation” 
REASSESSMENT 
“mild deviation” 
ROMBERG 
WITH EYES 
CLOSED 
ASSESSMENT 
“mild deviation” 
REASSESSMENT 
“mild deviation” 
SENSITIVE 
ROMBERG 
ASSESSMENT 
“left leg: regular 
balance 
right leg: poor 
balance” 
REASSESSMENT 
“left leg: fairly 
normal balance 
right leg: good 
balance” 
DYNAMIC 
BALANCE 
STRAIGHT-LINE 
WALK 
ASSESSMENT 
“regular balance, 
high deviation” 
REASSESSMENT 
“good balance” 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In the statistical analysis of game data, Friedman’s 
variance (Fr) [21] was found in three levels of significance 
(p): for each sequence in the seven days of attendance the 
results were p=0.0367, p=0.0281 e p=0.0136; it was 
considered as p<0.05 what affected significantly the 
performance of the volunteer, as per Table 2. 
 
TABLE 2. PATIENT’S SCORE IN EACH SIMULATION 
GAME IN 7-DAY PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENTAND 
FRIEDMAN’S VARIANCE (FR) 
 
The results showed a progressive increase in the score 
in the proposed games every day, noting improvement of 
the individual's performance. 
 
V. DISCUSSION 
 
The balance disability indicated in volunteer’s 
outcomes is due mostly to a TBI affecting one of the areas 
responsible for balance control, the cerebellum. It can be 
observed through the diagnosis of the imaging magnetic 
resonance, 
previously 
addressed 
in 
methodology. 
However, as the cerebellum was not the only structure 
affected, according to the diagnosis, it was decided to 
adopt an overall treatment for balance disorders and TBI. 
Physical therapy for patients with TBI shall be 
instructed for a functional performance of concrete tasks in 
daily life, as well as leisure activities. In this study games 
were utilized requiring from the player the execution of 
activities similar to daily life activities, leading him to 
carry them out in a pleasurable way [7]. 
One of the main purposes of rehabilitation by using VR 
is to provide tasks which require from patient repeated 
movements involving processes of different sensory 
modes, such as sight, touch, hearing, and proprioception. 
They provide quantitative and qualitative improvements in 
daily activities, and increase its functions, improving 
independent quality of life [16]. 
The games selected for the volunteer had many 
repeatable movements, such as jumping, avoiding 
obstacles, kneeing and making side evasions. At each 
therapy the volunteer himself observed he could perform a 
new movement, unable in the previous attendance. In 
addition, he better performed a given movement in the end 
of treatment due to repeatability. Repeatability has shown 
a strong aspect in this kind of therapy.  
 The adaptation with movements required in the game 
occurred quickly because the movements were similar to 
those required in the volunteer’s daily life, besides being 
repeatable. The difference was that, in the game, the 
movements were reproduced in a virtual scenario, a new 
situation for the volunteer, and they required a high level 
of attention, concentration and effort. The adaptation with 
the console system, which does not require devices, was 
very good; it was also one of the factors that attracted the 
volunteer, since it was a different resource for someone 
who had been performed physical therapy one year ago 
and was used to traditional equipment. 
The exploration of virtual environments by individuals 
with different disabilities provides new approaches that are 
impossible to be performed usually. Even the volunteer 
stated in an interview that he liked the therapy because, 
besides using the mind, he had to do movements with his 
own body [17]. 
The adaptation of games and its accessories by the 
patient in order to fulfill the purposes given in the routine 
of a rehabilitation process is a decisive factor for the 
success of this approach. By submitting the patient to a 
game as a part of his/her treatment, we assure a continuing 
involvement between the patient and his/her routine of 
rehabilitation [22]. 
The significant involvement of the volunteer with the 
therapy was also a positive factor for the improvement. 
Every time he could not perform a given movement or 
achieve a score, he turned that into an encouragement for 
the next session. And every time he could improve his 
results, it was a point of overcome. Many applications 
utilizing VR provide opportunities for individuals to take 
part in new and rewarding experiences [16]. 
The VR can promote the recovery of body balance 
through a program of repeatable and active physical 
exercises which involve the eyes, head, body, or physical 
maneuvers performed by the patient. It aims to stimulate 
the vestibular system and to enhance CNS neuroplasticity. 
The virtual reality games chosen for the therapy involved 
repeatable movements of the eyes, head, and body, 
improving balance [23]. 
A study of four cases of spinocerebellar ataxia showed 
improvement in motor coordination and postural balance 
with virtual reality use [26]. 
The study of nine children, aged 4 to 6 years, referred 
to physical therapy with developmental coordination 
disorder, participated in 10 game-based intervention 
sessions, it was concluded that children seemed to be 
motivated and to enjoy the interaction with the VR 
environment and VR games seemed to be beneficial in 
improving the children's motor function[27]. 
A study performed by Schiavinato et al. [18] that 
utilized Nintendo Wii as a VR tool with a 24-year female 
patient with early onset cerebellar ataxia, gait ataxia, and 
balance deficiency has shown results such as improved 
balance and higher independence in her daily life 
activities. 
The study showed that the equilibrium, distribution 
plantar pressure and the teste Time Up and Go (TUG),  
measured the patient with cerebral palsy spastic diparesis 
the participant type this case study, were influenced 
positively the Nintendo Wii game systems with accessory 
Balance Board [28]. 
Another study performed by Doná, Santos & Kasse, 
with an 82-year female diagnosed with right-deficient 
vestibular syndrome, multisensory changes, sudden 
deafness, complaints on lack of balance, chronic vertigo, 
history of falls, who underwent a therapy with BRU has 
shown results such as improvement in functional body 
balance, quality of life, and functional ability [19].  
Game 
Level 
Day 
1 
Day 
2 
Day 
3 
Day 
4 
Day 
5 
Day 
6 
Day 
7 
Statistical 
Outcome 
Mover 
Basic 
90 
131 
109 
144 
141 
134 
133 
Fr=13,428 
p=0,0367 
Dodger 
Intermediate 
124 
204 
214 
256 
237 
284 
280 
Olympian 
Advanced 
159 
196 
286 
271 
238 
325 
358 
Collector 
Basic 
218 
217 
246 
243 
224 
239 
259 
Fr=14,142 
p=0,0281 
Wrangler 
Intermediate 
443 
454 
489 
456 
535 
538 
558 
Shapeshifter Advanced 
455 
494 
491 
531 
528 
563 
564 
Cruiser 
Basic 
176 
202 
183 
219 
217 
234 
253 
Fr=16,035 
p=0,0136 
Slingshotter 
Intermediate 
204 
187 
228 
241 
259 
266 
266 
Speedster 
Advanced 
265 
294 
307 
328 
340 
350 
329 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The aim of this study was to investigate the role of VR 
using video game to the improvement of postural control 
in a chronic stroke survivor and the protocol resulted in 
higher amplitude of sway in x and y for both eyes open 
and eyes closed condition, and a higher area of sway in 
both conditions too [25]. That is consistent with the study 
performed. 
It is Barcala et al. [24] performed a study in which 
balance was assessed in 12 hemiparetic patients who 
underwent a balance training with Wii Fit software. They 
were divided into two groups: a control group had only 
conventional physical therapy for one hour, and the other 
group had physical therapy for thirty minutes and thirty 
minutes of Wii Fit training. Results indicate that either the 
control group or the Wii Fit group had a better control of 
static and dynamic balance, and the researchers concluded 
that the use of devices had significant outcomes in balance 
rehabilitation for hemiparetic individuals, what may 
represent one more therapeutic resource. 
According to the studies mentioned above, the 
utilization of VR brought good outcomes to the 
participants. This was also observed in this study since the 
volunteer had improvement in his body balance. 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
 
According to the results observed in the study, we 
concluded that VR as a therapeutic media has made 
improvements in the volunteer’s body balance possible. 
The participant showed increased scores in all games 
proposed, improving their performance. 
At our clinical practice, the use of VR has 
demonstrated itself successful. 
Since it is still considered a new therapy in the 
rehabilitation, several studies can be exploited, in relation 
to motivational aspects, appropriate therapy time, data 
about the participant's functional performance, if the VR 
is most effective when applied alone or in combination 
with other conventional therapies.  
Finally, a broad research field can be explored to the 
continuity of this work. 
 
    
  REFERENCES 
 
[1] S.B. O'Sullivan, “Evaluation of motor function.” In: S. B. 
O'Sullivan and T. J. Schimitz, “Physical Therapy: Evaluation and 
Treatment,” 4rd ed., vol.1. Barueri: Manole,  2004, pp. 177-212.   
[2] P. Perrin, and L. Francis, “Mechanisms of human balance: 
functional exploration, application to sports and rehabilitation,” 
São Paulo: Andrei, pp. 43-44, 1998. 
[3] A. Shumway-Cook, and M.H. Woollacott, “Motor control: 
theory and practical applications.” 3rd ed., vol.1. Barueri: 
Manole, 2010, pp. 73-116.   
[4] E.R. kandel, J.H. Schwartz, and T.M. Jessell, “Principles of 
Neuroscience,” 4rd ed., vol. 2. Barueri: Manole, 2003, pp. 301-
328. 
[5] F.B. Horak, and C. Shupert, “Role of the vestibular system in 
postural control,” In: S. J. Herdman, “Vestibular Rehabilitation,” 
2rd ed. Barueri: Manole, 2002. pp.25-51. 
[6] R. Caixeta, “Postural instability and falls in the elderly,” In: 
L.H.H. Hargreaves, “Geriatrics,” Brasilia: Special Secretariat for 
Editorações and Publications, pp. 467-486, 2006.  
[7] J.H. Carr, and R. Sheperd, “Neurological rehabilitation: 
optimizing motor performance,” 2rd ed., vol.1. Barueri: Manole, 
2008, pp. 65-67. 
[8] M. Dutton, “Orthopaedic Physiotherapy: examination, 
evaluation and intervention,” 2er ed. Vol.1. Porto Alegre: 
Artmed, 2010, pp 17-46. 
[9] S.M. Resende, C.M. Rassi, and F.P. Viana, “Effects of 
hydrotherapy in balance and prevent falls in the elderly,” 
Brazilian Journal of Physical Therapy, vol.12, n. 1, pp. 171-172, 
2008. 
[10] P.M. Tacani, and M. Marques, “Therapeutic Vaulting: 
balancing 
performance 
in 
individuals 
with 
neurological 
disorders,” Brazilian Journal of Health Sciences, n. 14, pp. 68-
122, 2007. 
[11] V.V. Monte-Dof, P.A. Ferreira, M.S.de Carvalho, J.G. 
Rodrigues, C.C Martins, and D.H. Iunes, “Effect of isostretching 
technique in postural balance,” Therapy and Research. São Paulo, 
v.16, n. 2, pp.137-42, 2009. 
[12] B.G.S. Rodrigues, S.A. Cader, E.M. Oliveira, O.V.N.B. 
Torres, and E.H.M. Dantas, “Assessment of static balance in 
elderly post-training with pilates method,” Brazilian Journal of 
Science and Movement, vol. 17, no. 4, p. 25-33, 2009. 
[13] L.C. Meneguette, “Virtual Reality and experience in space: 
immersion, phenomenology, technology.” [Paper presented at the 
College Pontifical Catholic University of São Paulo to obtain the 
title of Master of Science] São Paulo: Pontifical Catholic 
University of São Paulo, pp.54-73, 2010. 
[14] E.F.S. Montero, and D.J. Zanchet, “Virtual Reality and 
Medicine,” Surgical Brasileira Acta, vol.18. n. 5, pp.489-490, 
2003. 
[15] C.P. Perez-Salas, “Virtual Reality: Contribution to Real Un 
Evaluación la y el Treatment.- Personas con Intellectual 
Disability,” Psychological Therapy, vol.26. n. 2, pp. 253-262, 
2008. 
[16] H. Sveistrup, “Motor rehabilitation using virtual reality,” 
Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilation, n.1 (1), vol. 10.  
pp. 45-46, 2004. 
[17] L. Cardoso, R.M.M. Costa, A. Piovesana, J. Carvalho, H. 
Ferreira, M. Lopes, A.C. Crispim, L. Penna, K. Araujo, L. 
Paladin, R. Sancovschi,  R. Mouta, and G. Brandão, “Use of 
virtual environments in the rehabilitation of patients with brain 
injury from stroke and TBI,” [Brazilian Congress of Health 
Informatics, p. 256, 2006]. 
[18] A.M. Schiavinato, C. Baldan, L. Melatto, and  L.S. Lima, 
“Influence of Wii Fit balance in patients with cerebellar 
dysfunction: a case study,” Journal of the Health Sciences 
Institute, Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 50-52, 2010. 
[19] F. Dona, F.B.C. Santos, and C.A. Kasse, “Rehabilitation of 
body balance by virtual reality in the elderly with chronic 
peripheral vestibular disease,” Brazilian Journal of Medicine, vol. 
67, pp. 15-23, 2010. 
[20] A. Zanoni, F.F. Ganança, “Virtual reality in vestibular 
syndromes,” Brazilian Journal of Medicine, vol. 67, suppl.1, 
pp.37-43, 2010. 
[21] S. Siegel, and Jr N.J. Castellan, “Nonparametric statistics 
for the behavioral sciences,” 2ª ed. Porto Alegre: Artmed; p. 
448, 2006.  
[22] R.S. Dias, I.L.A. Sampaio, and L.S. Taddeo, “Physical 
Therapy Wii X: The introduction of the play in the rehabilitation 
of patients in physical therapy process,”[Brazilian Symposium on 
Games and Digital Entertainment, p.153, 2009]. 
[23] P.R. Santos, A. Meek, C.F. Ganança, A.P.B.A. Pires, N.W. 
Okai, and T.S. Pichelli, “Vestibular rehabilitation with virtual 
reality in patients with vestibular dysfunction,” ACTA ORL, 
vol.27, n. 4, p.148-52, 2009. 
[24] L. Barcala, F. Colella, M.C. Araujo, A.S.I. Salgado, and C.S. 
Oliveira, “Analysis of balance in hemiparetic patients after 
training with the Wii Fit program,” physiotherapy in Moviment, 
Vol 24, No. 2. pp. 337-343, 2011.  
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[25] S. L. Pavão, N. V. da Costa Sousa, C. M. Oliveira, P. C. G. 
Castro, M. C. M. dos Santos, "The virtual environment interface 
as in post-stroke rehabilitation: a case report". Fisioter. 
mov. [online]. 2013, vol.26, n.2 [cited  2014-01-29], pp.455-462. 
ISSN 
0103-5150.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S0103-
51502013000200022. 
[26] B. S. Zeigelboim, S. D. de Souza, H. Mengelboim, H. A. G. 
Teive and P. B. N. Liberalesso, “Vestibular rehabilitation with 
virtual reality in spinocerebellar ataxia,”Audiol. Commun. Res. 
[online].2013, vol.18, n.2 [cited 2013-10-18],   pp.143-147.   
ISSN   2317-6431.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S2317- 
64312013000200013. 
[27] T. Ashkenazi, P. L. Weiss,  D. Orian and Y. Laufer, “Low-
cost virtual reality intervention program for children with 
developmental coordination disorder: a pilot feasibility study,” 
Pediatr Phys Ther, vol.25.(4), pp.142-177, United States, 2013. 
[28] L. J. P. da Fonseca, M. Brandalize, and D. Brandalize, 
“Nintendo Wii in rehabilitation of patients with cerebral palsy - 
a case report,” Arq. Ciênc. UNIPAR Health, Umuarama, vol. 16. 
no. 1. pp. 39-43. January / April 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

