On the Mesurement of  Mental Models for Interface Design 
 
 
Ryota Mori 
Department of Life Science 
Nagano Prefectural College 
Nagano City, Japan 
e-mail: mori@nagano-kentan.ac.jp 
 
Toshiki Yamaoka 
Department of Design and Information Science 
Faculty of Systems Engineering 
Wakayama University 
Wakayama City, Japan 
e-mail: yamaoka@sys.wakayama-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—The purpose of this paper is to provide a 
measurement of user's thought process after discussing the 
experiment with "degree of formed mental model", which 
involves a logical thinking. We studied 42 people based on 
questionnaire to measurement mental models. This method 
helped understanding the potential effectiveness of mental 
model measurement. 
Keywords-mental model; interface; cognition. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We describe a method for measuring already formed 
mental models. The cognitive properties of people and 
interface designing for them are discussed in this paper. 
An interesting approach is presented in this research. We 
would like you to pay attention to the operating side of the 
mental model system. This research is peculiar from the 
standpoint of supporting the operating side as a necessity in 
the constitution of a society [1]. 
It is necessary to apply the new method in the solution of 
usability problems. These problems in the system depend on 
mental model for 80 % [2]. Mental model is the dominant 
factor that determines the properties of usability. Mental 
model varies significantly according to cues on the interface. 
It is important for user that the amounts of information of 
user interface design on product is reduced. 
It is assumed that mental model approach plays an 
important in an interaction between the users and the 
machines. When investigating accidents that happen in 
socio-technical systems, such as a lack of consideration of 
human factors generally occurs at the stage of designing the 
system and its operation. Mental model systems can cause 
accidents by two or more factors (the complexity and the 
unexpected error of the system) coming in succession. 
Therefore, micro-ergonomics [3] exist as a methodology to 
solve various problems concerning systems and the people 
who inhabit them. 
The definition of mental model are described as follows. 
Mental model is an eagerness and willingness to do 
something or the reason why a people wants to do something. 
To determine motivation, the motivation and guarantee 
factors are needed. But, the guarantee factor is not referred to 
our research. 
The mental model system refers to the set, the 
organization, the system, and the mechanism of elements for 
an organic relation of two or more elements affecting each 
other, and the settlement as a whole to function. 
Many studies have been conducted on the correlation 
between mental model and cognition [4][5]. Many 
conventional studies have discussed the results of game or 
puzzle, used with logic [6][7]. 
One of the oldest subjects still discussed now is "what is 
the thinking process on products?" [5]. However, the past 
studies have not answered the question of their thought. A 
user interface evaluation has not been performed in detail 
with the proper amounts of cues for users. Few systematic 
studies have been reported on the user’s thinking.  
In general, designing by the use of labeling as a cue on 
the products is a failure [7]. But, when operating a machine, 
we have used label by the buttons as an important cue. We 
could predict the action of machine by the use of labels on 
the interface. 
Usability testing is the most effective evaluation through 
which one can know if the designer provided the right model 
to users [2]. But then, usability testing is costly, and the 
user’s stress and cognitive load increases with an increase in 
testing time. Usually, we do not know about users formed 
mental models and how user’s mental models matched 
designer’s models. 
It is important that designer’s model is consistent with 
user’s model. A high degree of formed mental model means 
that user formed a correct model. We have to understand 
human as a component of the system; in a word, a participant. 
Therefore, it is necessary to measure the people's mental 
model to understand the internal structure of the system. 
How to help a user to form a correct model is provide cues 
such as affordability, mapping, and straight for the user. 
Formed mental model is determined by 9 factors [4]. 
Questionnaires based on these factors have been designed; 
the degree of formed mental models is identified using these 
questionnaires [5]. 
However, this approach cannot explain how the users’ 
mental models were built, until a user interacts with a 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

product. Moreover, to clarify it, getting interaction 
interpretation takes some time. To avoid these problems, we 
have devised a new method by using a quantitative 
evaluation. 
The purpose of this paper is to discuss an approach which 
quickly evaluates the degree of formed mental model and the 
interface design suitable for peoples' mental model, while 
considering the cognitive properties of a user when using an 
interface. Aside from helping the reader in the pencil - and - 
paper solution of problems, the analytical skill, which this 
paper aims at developing, may be useful in special situations. 
This paper will not go into detailed logic analysis, presuming 
the reader is familiar the reader will be familiar with the 
people’s memory and thought perception. We discuss a 
situation which assumes the people are not very familiar with 
the control procedure of electrical appliances. 
We have to comprehend the circulation of information. To 
do so, it is necessary to understand the relation of elements 
that prevent forming a mental model. Therefore, a survey 
was conducted at the interaction field. It is a possible 
approach that we can get a degree formed mental model. The 
measurements of mental model were performed according to 
the procedure described as follows.  
 
II. 
METHOD 
A mental model survey using a questionnaire and a 
structured interview were executed. 
The questionnaire prepared by the measurement of mental 
model was conducted on the user in a lecture room at the 
college. This is an analysis system that measures the factors 
of Japanese mental models and converts them to an index as 
numerical values.  
The following two points (Figure 1) are enumerated as the 
main points of the idea [8]. Functional model is a kind of a 
sequential plan in operating machines, such as, “do A, then B, 
then C”, and so on. Structured model is a selective type of 
plan in doing machines, such as “if B is the D, do that”. 
 
A
B
C
D
d1 d2
Functional model
Structural model
A
B
D
d1
d2
A
B
C
 
Figure 1.  Mental model 
C (components) level (Figure 2) is related to Structural 
model. “Choices” is key for good user interface (terms, 
visual cue are important). 
P (process) level is related to Functional Model. Terms, 
visual cue are important (special operation such as long press, 
dual press) (Figure 2). 
C
P
 
Figure 2.  C level and P level 
The mental model is operated based on the above-
mentioned two points. It evaluates 13 question items in 
stages. 
In order to understand the structure of the mental model, it 
is necessary to clarify contradictions between elements that 
prevent the effectiveness of the mental model.  
We used the method based on memory of colors and 
auditory recollection in order to gather accurate information 
for our research,. The procedure is described as follows. 
We performed interviews with 42 people (2 males, 40 
females); the participants ranged in age from 20-22 in Japan. 
We only got to interview 42 people. We asked Nagano 
Prefectural College to find people for our survey. All 
participants are pursuing studies in life science as either a 
major or minor. 
A structured interview was conducted with the participants. 
The questions consisted of product categories, such as faucet, 
calculator, alarm clock, kitchen timer, etc. 
The questionnaire form, pens, and pencils were distributed. 
First, we chose the user or subject at random. We explained 
about objects and rules of the interface to each person, and 
then practiced once with them.  
We demonstrated one example interface so as to 
familiarize the subject with the object and rules of interface 
sheet; the subjects operated by the themselves (Figures 3-15). 
After the questionnaire was completed, the forms were 
collected. 
The measurement employed real interface picture. In 
Figures 9-11, the subject guesses the operation of their mock 
product. This is followed by a brief statement of the reason 
for their choices.  
In Figures 13-15, the subject follows the same procedures 
as in Figures 10-12. The subject is asked why they guessed 
their particular buttons.  
In Figures 4 and 5, the subject must guess one specific 
button from the complete deck. These functions are arranged 
in a designer’s pattern. Figure 6 has only 6 labels facing up.  
The procedure is described as follows. 
We said, “Please write the procedure shown below  
[ A ] →[ + ] →[ B ] →[ --- ]”. 
Task 1:“Which direction to turn handles to get hot water?” 
Task 2:“Show the procedure” 
2-1: 2 + 3   
2-2: 1000(yen) + tax 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

2-3: √4 + 2 
Task 3: “Show the procedure” 
3-1: 2 + 3 
3-2: 2 × 3 
Task 4: “How to set the time? Please change 2:17 to 
11:45” 
Task 5: “What is “reset”?” 
Task 6: “How to set the time?” 
Task 7: “How to set the time?” 
After doing with each subject, we showed them three 
versions of a mock interface design that we created, which 
combines television, radio, and alarm clock. Our intention 
was to analyze the subject’s various procedures when asked 
to perform any given task on our interface designs.  
As in Figures 10, 11 and 12, the subject guesses one 
specific button from those facing down. We said, “Guess the 
numbers of the one or three mock buttons facing down and 
state the reason behind your choices. Besides, there are 12 
buttons with labels facing down.” 
The interfaces are designated as task 8 or 11, 9 or 12, and 
10 or 13. Subjects numbered the sheet to check starting from 
first and going to the end.  
The experimenters randomly distributed one of two 
surveys to 42 members of an undergraduate class. 42 of the 
subjects completed a survey on the “functionality of control 
buttons on a product”. 
Designer’s model on the interface was set to the 
procedure on the task 9 and 12; “power” button to “channel” 
button, “TV/radio” button to “channel” button. 
Task 8 or 11; “Please image on the air. Listen to the news 
program by the use of the radio. How do you operate when 
listening or doing the radio?” 
Task 9 or 12; “Please image on the air. Listen to the news 
program by the use of the TV. How do you operate when 
watching or doing the TV show?” 
Task 10 or 13; “How do you operate when setting the 
alarm clock at am 6:30.” 
The surveys contained a series of graphics representing 
control buttons. The labeled product group was asked to 
complete the same survey to determine if product controls 
were uniformly understood, as well as to provide a 
comparison with the No-labeled group. 
The participants were asked to write down the function of 
each button next to the graphic.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Faucet 
 
Figure 4.  Calculator1 
 
Figure 5.  Calculator 2 
 
Figure 6.  Alarm clock  
 
Figure 7.  Kitchn timer 
with tax 
without tax 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 8.  Alarm clock1 in the hotel (No label) 
 
Figure 9.  Alarm clock2 in the hote 
 
 
Figure 10.  Setting the radio (No label) 
 
Figure 11.  Setting the TV (No label) 
 
Figure 12.  Setting the alarm clock (No label) 
 
 
Figure 13.  Setting on the radio 
 
Figure 14.  Setting on the TV  
 
Figure 15.  Setting on the alarm clock 
 
III. 
RESULT 
As a result, the formation of a mental model was 
observed for these interfaces at each task. 
In task 1, 100% of the people guessed everything 
correctly. In task 2_1, 88% of the People guessed correctly. 
Cues were due to understand the direction to warm water. 
User’s habit caused incorrect mental models to be formed. 
In task 2_2, the mental model measures 90%. The other 
58% use the correct pattern to guess the correct model in task 
2_3. The other 42% did not use the correct pattern to guess 
the correct model. In task 2, this appears to use practice 
procedure; “√” button to “4” button. 
In 
task 
3, 
almost 
all 
the 
subjects 
answered 
inappropriately. 
The 
mental 
model 
measures 
50%. 
Participants could not practice because of no knowledge 
about the device. 
In task 4, 95% of the people guessed correctly at C level. 
The other 3% of the people guessed correctly at P level. The 
mental model measures 49%. 51% did not use the correct 
pattern to guess the correct model. Participants could not 
realize how many times they pushed the button; “mode / set” 
button. 
In task 5, the mental model was determined to be 88%. 
The other 12% did not use the correct pattern to guess the 
correct model. We almost could found means on how to use 
it; “reset” button. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In tasks 6 and 7, the measures of No-label and label were 
determined to be 52% and 56%, respectively. It seems that 
this result did not depend on labeling for a mental model. 
In tasks 8-13, the degree of formed mental model of 
labeling interface is larger than that of no label interface. It is 
probable that mental model was formed by the cues with 
labeling.  
These results showed that when trying to guess the 
buttons rather than using their logic, they used their intuition, 
or they followed their instinct. Frequently, interface rules 
escaped their memory by themselves. The rate of correct 
answer is determined by these factors: the number of button 
and the alternatives. 
Tasks 8-10 and tasks 11-13 show the rate of correct 
answer cue or alternative of each case in the mock interface, 
for example, the investigation revealed that 30 out of 42 
subjects acted correctly. The rate of information was 
obtained by changing from the amount of cue. These results 
show that there is a marked increase in the rate of incorrect 
answers. The characteristics of such cues are assumed to be 
the origin of the increase of rate.  Considering the previous 
results, this result was expected. 
 
TABLE I.  TASKS 1～7 
1
2_1
2_2
2_3
3_1
3_2
4
5
6
7
C level 100
100
95
44
100
100
95
88
29
12
P level 100
76
85
72
0
0
3
75
100
100
88
90
58
50
50
49
88
52
56
Task
 
 
TABLE II.  TASKS 8～10 
8
9
10
C level
48
40
0
P level
90
88
-
69
64
0
44
total
Task
 
 
TABLE III.  TASKS 11～13 
11
12
13
C level
71
60
31
P level
77
100
15
74
80
23
59
total
Task
 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
This research aims to clarify an essential problem of the 
mental model, and to present a plan for its solution. The 
measurement approach to determine a solution based on this 
case was examined. User’s mental model is reflected in that 
result. However, increasing the accuracy of method requires 
increasing many case studies. 
Each of the 42 people selected played with ourselves and 
on their own. These results provided evidence that people 
have an illogical jump or mistakes. People might think that 
truth may exist, but they maintain that if it does, the mental 
model is incapable of attaining it. Humans may be  
narrow-minded and refuse to consider certain alternatives 
only because these alternatives do not meet their 
prejudgements assumptions about what is and what is not 
worth pursuing. 
In our experiment, from the results in Figures 10-15, one 
can see that the people adjusted better to the pattern based on 
habit rather than their pattern. In other words, they did not 
adjust to a pattern. Moreover, the people save their cognitive 
resource, and have the characteristics called as “fixed action”. 
When we changed from a pattern to another, with many 
buttons faced down, this caused a lot of stress for the 
subjects when having to guess the process in the pattern. The 
maximum amount of inappropriate cues indicates that the 
people’s thought process is over the allowable maximum of 
cognition and they get an illogical jump. This should be the 
optimum amount cue.  
This allowed us to further evaluate the functionality of 
our designs and understand how and why our subjects make 
certain decisions. By designing a product that is basic and 
easy to use based on our finding reduces the amount of stress 
on the mind, and makes it easy for the person to use. 
We, however, have to think it over relate a trust, emotion, 
expectation, situation, human-relationship, etc. Human-
computer interaction which should be accompanied by the 
appearance of mental model cannot be observed in the user’s 
brain. In the future, this may provide a different result. 
Another case requires a more detailed discussion.  
This measurement provided a reasonably good method 
for such assessments. The method offers many advantages 
over the conventional method. Applications include on-site 
testing of paper prototyping. 
The mental model approach allowed us a glimpse into the 
mind of our subjects - that is, we were able to understand 
their mental model when faced with the decision making 
which is in fact one of the most important factors of 
universal design itself. Therefore, it was crucial that we 
guess the logic behind each person’s thought process.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In conclusion to our research on decision making using 
the mental model check sheet, our results showed that people 
have illogical thinking when making a guess based on their 
mental model. It is likely that people would guess illogically, 
so in order to support their decision making we should 
design an interface that is suitable for this age group. In order 
to be successful with interface design, we must assess user’s 
decision making. For the findings in our research, we 
proposed a method and gave an answer to this problem based 
on a concept "thinking or thought". This new proposal 
Task 
C level 
P level 
Task 
C level 
P level 
Total 
C level 
P level 
Task 
Total 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

suggests "How to design for user" on the interface design of 
products.  
We confirmed that our process had the effective to 
provide values. This method contribute to the improvement 
of the usability of interface. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Mori and T. Yamaoka, “Grasping the Use of Products on 
Elderly People and Their Mental Models with A Mock 
Interface Design”, Japanese Society for the Kansei 
engineering, vol. 8, no.1, pp. 185-195, 2008 
[2] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering, Academic Press. San Diego 
CA, 1993. 
[3] N. A. Stanton and M. S. Young, Guide to Methodology in 
Ergonomics: Designing for Human Use, CRC Press, 2002 
[4] T. Doi, S. Tominaga, T. Yamaoka, and N. Yukiko, “The 
Elements for Structuring the Mental Model in Operation of 
User Interfaces,” Japanese Society for the Science of Design, 
vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 53-62, 2012. 
[5] T. Doi, K. Ishihara, and T. Yamaoka, “The Proposal of the 
Level of Mental Model Building Measurement Scale in User 
Interface,” Japanese Society for the Science of Design, vol. 60, no. 4, 
pp. 69-76, 2013. 
[6] D. Gentner and A. L. Stevens, Mental Models, Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale New Jersey, 1983. 
[7] N. 
A. 
Donald, 
The 
Design 
of 
Everyday 
Things,  
Doubleday/Currency. New York, 1988. 
[8] J. Preece, Human-Computer Interaction, Reading MA, 
Addison-Wesley, 1994. 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

