The Iterative Design and Evaluation Approach for a Socially-aware  
Search and Retrieval Application for Digital Archiving 
 
Dimitris Spiliotopoulos 
Innovation Lab 
Athens Technology Centre 
Athens, Greece 
d.spiliotopoulos@atc.gr 
Dominik Frey 
Documentation and Archives 
Suedwestrundfunk 
Baden-Baden, Germany 
dominik.frey@swr.de 
 
Ruben Bouwmeester 
New Media, Innovation 
Deutsche Welle 
Bonn, Germany 
ruben.bouwmeester@dw.de 
Georgios Kouroupetroglou, Pepi Stavropoulou 
Department of Informatics and Telecommunications 
University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
{koupe; pepis}@di.uoa.gr 
 
Abstract—Designing user interfaces involves several iterations 
for usability design and evaluation as well as incremental 
functionality integration and testing. This paper reports on the 
methodological approach for the design and implementation of 
an application that is used for search and retrieval of socially-
aware digital content. It presents the archivist view of 
professional media organizations and the specific requirements 
for successful retrieval of content. The content derived from 
the social media analysis is enormous and appropriate actions 
need to be taken to avoid irrelevant and/or repeated social 
information in the displayed results as well as over-
information. The archivist feedback reveals the way humans 
address the social information as presented in the form of 
metadata along with the archived raw content and how this 
drives the design of a dedicated search and retrieval 
application. 
Keywords-search and retrieval user interfaces; social 
network information; archiving; preservation; user interface 
design; usability 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Social Media provide a vast amount of information 
identifying stories, events, entities that play the crucial role 
of shaping the community from continuous user involvement 
[2,3,4]. This work reports on the design and development of 
a socially-aware search and retrieval application that has the 
main goal of enabling archivists and researchers to retrieve 
archived web content based on semantic information derived 
from social media. Social media categories (SMC) cover 
almost all existing social media networks that information 
can be harvested from [1]. This information can be 
categorized according to type (multimodal: text, video, 
sound, picture) and role players (agents, users, opinion 
leaders) and actual semantic meta-data (entities, opinions on 
entities, etc.). The aim is to design a user interface that uses 
an engine for semantic analysis taking into account several 
modalities (plain text, sound, image, video), social media 
crawling, contextual search fusion and archivist usage 
requirements. The interface is the means to accessing the 
vast amount of information that can be archived. This work 
is ongoing and the findings of the pilot user testing and 
evaluation provide indications on how the semantic analysis 
of the social media information can be integrated to the 
design methodologies for user interfaces resulting in 
maximization of user experience in terms of social 
information involvement. The following sections describe 
the motivation and related work, the initial design 
considerations and the user evaluation that resulted in 
updated requirements for the next iteration phase of the 
design. 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
There are several approaches and applications in the 
recent years for digital archiving. However, these approaches 
mostly specialize in the archiving process itself without 
taking into account the actual impact of the archived 
information to the world. The need for leveraging the 
wisdom of the crowd for selecting the optimal content for 
future preservation has been stressed by digital libraries and 
the broadcasting world [5]. Concrete requirements for 
reporting the peoples’ opinions on important events and 
associating them with candidate content pages for have been 
laid out. These stress the important role of the social media 
for such task. Harvesting the opinions of the people and 
enabling the retrieval of such social information for the 
future generations will provide a unique eye in the history 
and preservation of events. It also validates the selection of 
the content appropriate for archiving based on the impact of 
the recorded information that was reported in it. A way of 
gathering and analyzing such information from the web and 
building innovative ways to retrieve it was, therefore, a 
crucial requirement for the above process. 
Earlier works treat archives independently of any 
externally provided social information but allow for manual 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

or semi-automatic annotation of the relational tags between 
items [6]. Such applications are in effect annotation 
interfaces rather than search and retrieval. And for such tasks 
there were formal models used for the annotation procedure 
[7]. The approach discussed in this paper goes beyond 
simple consideration of either an interface for search and 
retrieval of archived documents or social network dedicated 
interface. It is a dedicated interface for archived documents 
that are heavily enriched with social web metadata as 
analyzed and ingested data derived from social media. 
The task before us was to design an innovative interface 
that would use the semantic information to satisfy complex 
queries as well as provide semantically enriched views of the 
archived document information. In order to do that, the user 
feedback was collected to refine the design considerations. 
III. 
INITIAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
The requirements for the search and retrieval of 
semantically analysed archived content were considered on 
the domain, content use and interaction levels. As it can be 
seen, the social web content integration and the raw data and 
their relations were a key to this exploration. 
A. Domain-specific Requirements 
Domain-wise there are certain needs for specific use 
within organizations. Media organizations have journalists 
that retrieve selected data on events, topics and entities for 
articles or documentaries that are under production. Those 
data need to be as complete as possible and provide a variety 
of sources and other related articles. 
B. High-level Requirements 
In the broadcasting world, collections of information 
targeting a common set of topics and events are called 
“campaigns”. 
Examples 
of 
campaigns 
span 
from 
generalized, large size, long-time types like “The EU 
financial crisis” to the more focused, short-lived types like 
“EU Summit 2012” or “Presidential Primaries 2012”. The 
former may span several years, the latter only a few months. 
Taking the above into consideration, a main functionality for 
our initial design approach is continuity of data collection 
and archiving. The scheduled crawled sets and analysis 
should span the entire campaign both in terms of time as well 
as in terms of social network content provision. Activity 
should be monitored and data collected accordingly. The 
sub-campaigns should correlate to the main campaign that 
they are supposed to belong to. The users should be able to 
retrieve information from all relevant archives and continuity 
of the semantic analysis should be preserved throughout the 
campaign search and retrieval process. 
The database plays an important role in the architecture 
of such application, as it provides the storing, indexing and 
retrieving functionality for all the data collected and utilized 
by the archivists for the refinement process and searched 
upon by the generic users. As such, it is expected to support 
various types of data, handle updates and accommodate 
many types of queries. 
The required functionality of the database is defined by 
its interaction with the search and retrieval user interface.  
The database is expected to store: a) the original web 
content fetched by the crawler during for specific campaigns, 
b) metadata, meaning the extra attributes that are derived 
from the application aware crawling (e.g. author information, 
#retweets for a tweet etc.). The database should be able to 
answer quantitative as well as qualitative related queries 
posed by the archivists to further guide the filtering and 
retrieval processes. All end-users must be able to navigate 
through the stored content by posing queries that concern 
either the annotated meta-data or the semantic information 
derived from the analysis of the social content. 
C. Non-functional requirements 
Usability testing in our case required the study of users 
preferences towards the social media derived information. 
Semantic analysis results have enriched the archived content 
with semantic descriptions and tags that include entities 
(persons, locations, dates, etc.), events, topics, opinions on 
them, trending, cultural dynamics and more. Each web 
document may include several pieces of semantic 
information that may or may not be useful to the archivist or 
end user that would search and retrieve. Before proceeding 
with mockup design, experimentation has taken place in 
order to derive knowledge on the user perspective. Results 
from experimentation with fusing and visualizing social 
content 
with 
semantically 
driven 
context-sensitive 
information were derived [8]. Based on them, the mockups 
have been designed so that the socially aware semantic 
information would fully complement the search results. The 
users have indicated that opinions from social networks were 
considered fundamental to their understanding of the impact 
of searched web content. Furthermore, the semantic meta-
data were integrated to the design of the interaction flow, so 
that users may facet and filter their search by using several 
levels of semantic content as well as prominent traditional 
information such as social network source information. 
IV. 
THE PROTOTYPE 
Iterative design process from the start to the 
implementation of the first prototype was followed from the 
initial design requirements gathering (made via wire-
framing) to the mockup user environment, to the online 
prototype. The mockups were constructed based on the three 
types of information from the functional specifications 
(Search filtering, Core content, Social content) and the non-
functional specifications described above. The initial 
experimentation was on the observation of the user 
perception of processed content (filters, tag clouds, paths), 
direct content (item descriptions, authors, dates, type of 
modality) and social content (opinions, trends, semantics, 
entities, events).  
Based on the above, low fidelity mockups were created 
for the web retrieval interface. Those were subsequently 
evaluated for the core functionalities (filtering of results, 
follow-up search, result visualization) as well as usability 
(user approach to semantic search, information load, user 
effort, acceptance). The initial evaluation resulted in the set 
of specifications laid out by professional users (archivists, 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

broadcaster researchers). This specification was used for the 
first version of the application prototype. 
The 
prototype 
itself 
used 
real 
data 
from 
the 
#greekfinancialcrisis (Twitter) as the main social web source 
as well as crawled web pages using as parameters the entities 
that were identified from the #greekfinancialcrisis text 
analysis. The raw content and the semantic metadata were 
indexed in Solr. Free text search as well as query enabled 
semantic search comprised the search functionality. The 
returned results were web resources that matched the search 
string. The users were able to view the search results in the 
main content frame. The results had distinct indicators on the 
opinion and trending values for each web resource. 
Dynamically created facets were provided for refinement of 
the results. Each result was, in fact, web page from the raw 
content archives. The content that could be viewed were not 
the original web pages themselves but descriptive data taken 
from them, such as title, initial description text, source, 
author. That view was enriched with lists of named entities 
(people, organizations, locations, etc.), events, and opinions 
derived from the text analysis. Furthermore, data from the 
most relevant tweets were provided where the users could 
use to see the following: 
 
Timeline showing the opinions of the Twitter 
authors on the entities contained in the web page 
 
Lists of positive and negative tweets on the entities 
of the web resource 
 
V. 
REFINING THE GOALS 
The prototype was used for the user evaluation which, 
itself, had the main purpose of monitoring the usage in order 
to construct and validate updated user requirements 
A. Application specifications 
A screenshot of the prototype is shown in Figure 1. The 
points of interest are pointed out by the highlighted numbers 
and included the following: 
 
Single semantic search (Fig.1 point 3) 
 
Advanced search 
 
Refine search  
 
Dynamic filtering via faceting (Fig.1 point 4) 
 
Sorting (by modality, by source SMC) (Fig.1 point 
5, 6) 
 
Item viewing properties and derived functionalities: 
o 
Modality views (all, text, image, video, sound) 
o 
Social Media related information per item 
(current opinion, trending, latest tweets, source 
SMC) 
o 
Text/image 
analysis 
related 
information 
(entities, events) 
o 
Tag cloud support for major entities/events for 
quick refinement 
o 
SMC and text/image analysis items with linked 
specific functions (preliminary functions include 
search refinement, new search) 
 
Figure 1.  
Search results for semantic search within a political domain. 
 
 
Generic viewing properties: 
o 
Recent searches 
 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

o 
Recent campaigns  
o 
Latest news (promotional, user-specific) 
Also, as highlighted in Figure 1, main placeholders and 
associated functions or visual elements we clarified: 
 
User login and application logo 
 
Top level menu reserved for high level functions 
 
Search box (also toggling single and advanced 
search) 
 
Dynamic filtering via facets 
 
Main results page with modality sorting tabs 
 
SMC filtering (results are filtered by selecting Social 
Media icons - toggling) 
 
Timeline view enablement button 
The item results page (Fig. 2) provides all retrieved 
information about an archived web resource. The standard 
information includes: 
 
Title 
 
Details 
 
Date 
 
Provider 
 
Format 
 
Description 
The semantic information includes and is presented to the 
user as: 
 
 
 
the identified associated entities 
 
the identified events and topics 
 
a tag cloud of entities derived from items that 
include the entities/events of currently web resource. 
 
The related events of the current identified event (if 
any) 
 
the latest tweets that contributed the major entities 
and opinions for the current web resource 
 
the major twitter accounts that contributed to the 
above 
 
the timeline that shows the positive-negative social 
network input regarding the associated entities 
(currently only for Twitter for the first prototype) 
 
the lists of positive and negative Tweets for the 
above 
B. Evaluation 
The early prototype that was build based on the previous 
feedback and specification has been evaluated by the 
professional end-users in order to refine the goals of the 
application based on the archivist/broadcaster workflow. So, 
in that respect, usability was measured qualitatively rather 
than quantitatively and was guided by specific search and 
retrieval scenarios.  
 
Figure 2.  
Web object – an archived web page enhanced with semantic information 
 
 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Evaluation scenarios were created and deployed for 
novice users. The expert archivists performed free search 
actions aiming for in-depth social information research on 
specific content that they knew already. The scope of the 
evaluation was to enable validation of present functionalities 
as well as requests for extensions. Another task was to rank 
the types of semantic information from highly relevant to 
irrelevant for as many queries as possible.  
Those data are fed to the facet ranking algorithm, so that 
the dynamic facet selection options are optimized. Table 1 
provides an overview of the elements of the prototype testing 
that were evaluated. 
TABLE I.  
EVALUATION OF THE PROTOTYPE APPLICATION 
Actions 
Evaluation consolidated overview 
Expected results 
Validation 
Extension 
query 
Single and advanced query 
Yes 
Yes 
filter 
Facetting/filtering search 
Yes 
No 
single page 
Viewing a web page 
No 
Yes 
 
This evaluation provided an updated set of specifications 
from the point of usability in terms of system interaction but 
unavoidably that would be dependent on actual content. The 
new specification requirements include: 
 
Ability to search for campaigns (top page 
functionality) based on campaign tags or description. 
 
Latest/popular campaigns 
 
Tag cloud that displays campaign keywords. 
 
Campaign overview (characteristic entities, events, 
SMCs, opinions) 
 
Campaign information (ID, logo, title). 
 
Information on volume of social/semantic data 
 
Types of result presentation (list, timeline, map) 
 
Connection to Wayback machine. 
The next iteration will involve the advanced prototype with 
vast amount of semantic data attached to the archived pages 
that should be tested both functionally and for usability.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper reported on the design and testing issues for 
an application for socially-aware web archiving. Important 
findings on how archivists and researchers view the social 
information and how that is integrated to their research 
workflow have been identified. So far, the social/semantic 
information is used to guide the search and retrieval process 
by a large margin. More than 80% of the content used comes 
from social networks. That shows how important that 
information is for web archiving and how that information 
provision can be optimized from a dedicated application 
interface. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described here was partially supported by the 
EU 
ICT 
research 
project 
ARCOMEM: 
Archive 
Communities 
Memories, 
www.arcomem.eu, 
FP7-ICT-
270239. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
ARCOMEM: Archive Communities Memories, www.arcomem.eu, 
FP7-ICT-270239 [retrieved: February, 2013]. 
[2] 
K. 
Church, 
J. 
Neumann, 
M. 
Cherubini, 
and 
N. 
Oliver, 
“SocialSearchBrowser: A novel mobile search nd information 
discover tool”, Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Intelligent User Interfaces, ACM, 
2010, pp. 101-110. 
[3] 
J. Golberg and M. Wasser, “SocialBrowsing: Integrating social 
networks and web browsing”, Proc. ACM CHI2007 Conf. Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, April 28 – May 3, 2007, San Jose, 
USA. pp. 2382-2386. 
[4] 
M. De Choudhury, S. Counts, and M. Czerwinski, “Identifying 
Relevant Social Media Content: Leveraging Information Diversity 
and User Cognition”, Microsoft Research, ACM, 2010. 
[5] 
G. Schefbeck, D. Spiliotopoulos, and T. Risse, “The Recent 
Challenge in Web Archiving: Archiving the Social Web”, 
International Council on Archives Congress, 20-24 August 2012, 
Brisbane, Australia. 
[6] 
M. Agosti and N. Ferro, “A formal model of annotations of digital 
content”, ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 26(1), 
pp. 3:1–3:57. 
[7] 
C. Kohlschütter, F. Abel, and D. Skoutas, “A Novel Interface for 
Exploring, Annotating and Organizing News and Blogs Articles”, 
Proc. 3rd Annual Workshop on Search in Social Media (SSM 2010), 
co-located with the ACM WSDM 2010 Conference, 3rd February, 
2010, New York City, USA. 
[8] 
D. 
Spiliotopoulos, 
E. 
Tzoannos, 
P. 
Stavropoulou, 
G. 
Kouroupetroglou, and A. Pino, “Designing user interfaces for social 
media driven digital preservation and information retrieval”, Proc. 
13th Int. Conf. on Computers Helping People with Special Needs, 11-
13 July, 2012, Linz, Austria, pp. 581-584, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
31522-0_87 
 
 
 
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

