Participatory Design Fictions: Supporting Ethical Awareness in the Digitalisation of 
Smart Cities' Critical Infrastructure  
Joakim Karlsen, Klaudia Carcani, Susanne Koch Stigberg  
Department of Computer Science and Communication,  
Faculty of Computer Science, Engineering and Economics 
Østfold University College 
1757 Halden, Norway 
{joakim.karlsen, klaudia.carcani, susanne.k.stigberg}@hiof.no  
 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates participatory design fictions 
as a method to involve citizens in the digitalisation of smart city 
critical infrastructures. By this we contribute to the topic raised 
by the call for papers to ACHI-COCREATE, to investigate how 
to make processes of digitalisation accessible to everyone. Based 
on the observations in one workshop organized for this purpose 
in a project aiming to install digital water meters in a mid-sized 
Norwegian city, we find that that participatory design fictions 
show promise in supporting citizen participation and the 
discussion of ethical considerations of making cities smarter 
with the help of Information and Communications Technologies 
(ICT). We find that it is important to prepare design fictions 
that heed the basics of storytelling as applied in journalism, to 
make the story both relevant and provoking. Further, we find 
that if city officials with professional knowledge of the project 
at hand participates, more rules of engagement and prepping is 
needed to make sure that they leave enough room for 
speculation. Even though the citizens participating in the 
workshop had little knowledge of digital water meters 
beforehand, the design fictions enabled them to quickly identify 
ethical concerns with how the data from these could potentially 
be misused.  
Keywords- design fiction; smart cities; participatory design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the last decades, the development of Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT) is changing our cities. 
Machine learning, the Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) are promising to make our cities smarter [1]. 
From a technology perspective, ‘a smart city is considered a 
city with a high presence of ICT applied to critical 
infrastructure 
components 
and 
services’ 
[2]. 
The 
digitalisation 
of 
critical 
infrastructures 
is 
opening 
opportunities for better services for the community and its 
citizens, but at the same time raises concerns regarding an 
increased possibility for monitoring and observing citizens’ 
behaviours. Involving people in discussing issues concerning 
them is a core democratic value, which should also be at the 
centre of smart city projects. Citizens do not have a clear 
picture of the opportunities, challenges, and consequences of 
introducing smart city technologies. While some benefits are 
predicted from the start, others take shape in use. It would be 
in both citizens and local authorities benefit to find ways to 
discuss how smart city technologies can improve the quality 
of living and at the same time negotiate how risks of such 
infrastructures should be mitigated. 
Participatory Design (PD) is a field of research which 
investigates how users' can be involved in the design of 
technologies meant for them [3]. PD has promoted citizens' 
genuine participation in the discussion, design, and 
envisioning of new ICT solutions and services. By involving 
citizens and giving them a voice, local authorities can make 
environments and technologies more useful and useable. To 
this end, Ruiz presents a participatory governance model 
aiming to establish a sustainable development path for the 
design and implementation of public services delivered 
through IoT in smart cities [4]. Bratteteig and Wagner discuss 
how citizens have been involved in design activities for urban 
planning [5]. There is a lack of studies, however, regarding 
citizens' involvement in discussing possible upgrades in 
critical infrastructures to achieve smarter cities. Thus, in this 
paper, we present a study of using a PD approach, utilizing 
design fictions, to enable citizens in the discussion of 
digitalizing of critical infrastructure – more specifically, the 
water supply system. By this, we contribute to the topic raised 
by the call for papers to ACHI-COCREATE, to investigate 
how to make processes of digitalisation accessible to 
everyone.  
In the following, we initially present the theoretical 
grounds for this work. Then, we describe the case and present 
our findings concerning citizens participation in the 
workshop. After a discussion of these findings, we conclude 
by offering some valuable insights on the use of participatory 
design fictions to reinforce smart city initiatives that strive to 
digitally transform critical infrastructures in a responsible and 
empathetic manner.  
II. 
THEORY 
To ground the work theoretically, we initially need to 
clarify how we conceptualize Critical Infrastructure (CI). CI 
is a common term used at the political level to refer to lifeline 
systems, which greatly influence public welfare and 
economic 
prosperity 
[6]. 
CI’s 
include 
energy, 
telecommunication and ICT networks, water, food and 
agriculture, healthcare and public health, financial systems, 
civil administration, public, legal order and safety, national 
monuments and icons, commercial facilities, critical 
manufacturing, and the defence industry base [7].  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Decision making in governing CI’s has been the domain 
of policy makers and within governmental settings [8]. We 
argue that citizens should be involved in the discussion of 
evolving CI’s and by this raise ethical considerations and 
awareness in the population [9]. In rich and democratic 
countries, the legal right of access to government information 
based on openness and accountability has been established 
decades ago, but sometimes such rights are eclipsed in favour 
of competing government interests [10]. The involvement of 
citizens in the development of CIs has been mostly explored 
in relation to the concept of smart cities. Smart cities have 
been defined as cities that promote the digitalisation of CIs to 
improve citizens quality of life. According to Albino et al. [1], 
the main themes that has been addressed when citizens has 
been involved in the design of CIs for smart cities is 
management of common resources [8], environmental 
awareness and sustainability [11], safety and privacy [11]– 
[13].  
A. Participatory Design  
PD is an approach that provides a framework for 
technology development with a focus on securing 
participation from all involved parties in all parts of the 
process [12]. PD stands by a set of principles that define the 
field [13]. A core principle is to secure democratic practices 
by equalizing power and to give everyone a voice. Another 
one is to foster mutual learning in building new knowledge 
and values by finding ways of working that emphasize 
engagement, expressiveness, negotiation, and problem 
solving. An aim in this is to support the co-creation of 
alternative visions or future scenarios involving the 
technologies and services addressed. To enable mutual 
learning and envisioning alternatives, adequate tools and 
techniques are needed. PD can be described as a family of 
design practices that come with a variety of toolboxes. Tools 
and techniques are commonly adapted, combined and 
extended and should be appropriated to the design [14]. In the 
case of involvement of citizens in developing CI’s, the 
principle of mutual learning and building alternative visions 
becomes particularly challenging. Thus, we investigate how 
participatory design fiction could enable citizens to actively 
participate in the process. 
B. Participatory Design Fiction  
In PD, scenario based techniques are commonly used. 
Brandt et al. [14]  discuss the role that scenario-based design 
has in enabling envisioning future alternatives as well as in 
reflection and learning [15]. Using storytelling and critical 
design as resources, design fiction is a design practice that 
aims to explore and critique possible futures [14] by creating 
speculative and often provocative scenarios told using 
designed objects. It is a way of facilitating and promoting 
debates as explained by the futurist Scott Smith: ‘... design 
fiction as a communication and social object creates 
interactions and dialogues around futures that were missing 
before. It helps make it real enough for people that you can 
have a meaningful conversation with’ [15]. Design fiction has 
been used in PD for enabling participants engagement when 
it comes to cases of complex technologies [16], [17] or 
vulnerable user groups [18], [19]. Design fiction is built on 
fictional stories that represent the creation and construction of 
possible future worlds, in relation to the actual world [20] and 
they present possible worlds that have specific accessibility 
criteria [21]. 
Muller and Liao [16] have categorised four types of design 
fiction that can be employed in PD to envision future AI 
technologies.  
• 
Fictions as probes to elicit user needs by asking 
questions to users regarding values they perceive in 
the story or experience.  
• 
Fictions as theatre where users are encouraged to 
change the story to critique and change a proposed 
user experience.  
• 
Fictions as participatory constructions where users 
are encouraged to write the stories themselves by 
introducing a narrative transformation.   
• 
Fictions as group co-creations where the users are 
encouraged as a group to engage in hands on 
activities that contribute to co-creation of stories.  
In the following, we explore design fictions that combine 
elements of all four of these categories, attesting to the 
dynamic, malleable, and playful properties of the method. The 
emphasis in our case will be design fictions as a door opener 
to democratic, open, and emergent discussions of digitalizing 
CIs in smart city projects.       
III. 
METHOD 
In the following, we will describe how we have collected 
and analysed data from a workshop organized to shed light on 
how participatory design fictions can be used to involve 
citizens in the development of CIs. The workshop was part of 
a larger project aiming to install water meters with real-time 
data sensors in every household in a mid-sized city in 
Norway, to monitor, regulate and tax water consumption (the 
smart water project). The outcomes of the increased visibility 
of water consumption on the level of individual households 
may be positive or negative for citizens, but until this study, 
they had not been involved in the discussion. The aim of our 
research was to give the citizens a voice and a chance to be 
heard, regarding the further digitalisation of the city’s water 
system. The local authorities were interested in understanding 
the citizens' perspectives on the potential opportunities and 
threats presented by the installation of such water meters and 
welcomed the research initiative. They valued the opportunity 
to go beyond traditional methods like surveys and focus 
groups, to enable genuine, comprehensive, and accountable 
citizen involvement in the project.  
The workshop brought together citizens and key 
stakeholders from the city administration who had expertise 
in the smart water project. Design fictions were created to 
raise the three key themes related to smart city development, 
as presented in the literature: safety, sustainability, and 
privacy. The workshop was organised by a team consisting of 
a representative from the city, an expert in the field of water 
infrastructure and digitalisation and three PD experts (the 
authors of this paper). To ensure broad citizen participation in 
the workshop, the city issued an open call on their website 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

promising a compensation of 500 NOK for participating in 
the workshop. The call was designed to reach a diverse cross-
section of the population, and citizens were asked to provide 
information on their age, gender, education level, and area of 
residence. This helped us select a group that represented the 
city's population and ensured that multiple perspectives were 
included in the workshop. In total, 19 citizens responded to 
the call. Based on the inclusion criteria and a first come first 
served approach, we selected 12 participants who met the 
desired demographic characteristics.  
The workshop lasted for 1,5 hours and the participants 
were divided into three groups. Each group was seated at a 
round table together with a representative from the city with 
expert knowledge related to the smart water project (see in 
Figure 4). Participants were equipped with printed materials 
and one of the PD experts moderated the workshop by guiding 
the groups through the design fiction scenarios. We collected 
audio recordings from each table and all the material outputs 
made. While city experts and citizens participated in the 
workshop, representing different perspectives in the project, 
the PD experts took the role of PD facilitators, preparing and 
moderating the workshop.  
To analyse the data collected during the workshop, we 
conducted an inductive thematic analysis of the audio 
recordings and the created outputs individually. Afterwards, 
we discussed and compared our coding of the data related to 
each category. We identified recurring themes and patterns in 
the data to gain a deeper understanding of the perspectives 
and experiences of the workshop participants. We developed 
thematic maps [22] for each category and discrepancies in the 
coding were discussed and resolved. To ensure anonymity, 
the groups’ voice recordings were assigned pseudonyms, as 
detailed in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  PARTICIPANT PSEUDONYMS USED FOR CODING  
Group One 
Group Two  
Group Three 
Roger (expert) 
Hans (expert) 
Camilla (expert) 
Per 
Odd 
Lise 
Leif 
Anne 
Gunhild 
Trine 
Kari 
Ahmed 
A. Design Fiction in practice 
In the workshop, participants explored three main themes, 
as suggested by Albino et al. [1], in our case, related to the 
introduction of digital water meters:  
• 
Security: The data generated from digital water 
meters can help citizens to increase the safety of their 
households by controlling water leaks and misuse.  
• 
Sustainability: Water is a shared and scarce resource 
raising the dilemma of balancing individual water 
needs with the need of the whole community served 
by the water system. 
• 
Privacy: Water meters can monitor and record 
detailed data of citizens’ water usage. The usage of 
IoT systems in homes has been discussed closely to 
security and privacy issues [23]– [25].  
The overall aim of the workshop was to raise citizen’s 
awareness of and engagement with these themes by bespoke 
design fictions. In the following, we present each fiction with 
accompanying questions and tasks. 
1) Security 
This design fiction proposes how monitoring water 
consumption can provide security for values and property in 
the city. We tell a story about how a citizen suddenly receives 
a SMS from the city stating that there probably is a water leak 
at in their home (shown in Figure 1). The participants get a 
copy of the SMS and must decide how this should be handled.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Security design fiction scenario 
Questions based on the scenario: 
• 
What should happen if digital water meters detect a 
water leak? 
• 
Should there be a service so residents can request that 
the water be turned off? 
• 
How do residents and the city agree that the problem 
has been solved? 
• 
Complete the sentence: If the digital water meter 
detects a possible water leakage… 
2) Managing scarce resources 
This design fiction raises how sustainable water 
consumption needs to be governed by the city in a situation 
with severe water shortage during an unusually hot summer 
(see Figure 2). The participants are issued a "watering fine" 
by the city and a paper copy of the local regulations. Their 
challenge is to revise the regulations by removing, modifying, 
or adding new rules, giving them an opportunity to share their 
thoughts on sustainability and incorporate them into 
applicable regulations. 
Questions based on the scenario: 
• 
What does it mean to waste water? 
• 
How can digital water meters reduce water use? 
• 
How should the administrative regulations be adapted 
when new water meters are introduced? 
3) Privacy 
This design fiction presents a scenario where detailed data 
from the digital water meters might be misused by the city. A 
household has been put in a COVID-19 quarantine but due to 
low water consumption, the city contacts the household by 
phone to check that the quarantine is being properly observed. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

  
 
Figure 2.  Sustainability design fiction scenario 
The participants receive a bill with a detailed overview of 
the household’s water consumption, broken down into days. 
They are tasked with discussing how this information may 
possibly be used / misused as illustrated in Figure 3. They can 
then delete, change, or add to the bill based on what they come 
up with. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Privacy design fiction scenario 
Questions based on the scenario: 
• 
How do you want your data to be handled and 
stored? 
• 
Who should have access to your data? 
• 
What information are you interested in? 
• 
How may your data be used or misused? 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The analysis of the sayings and doings of each group 
participating in the workshop, will inform the further 
development of participatory design fictions as a method with 
the potential to secure citizen involvement in the development 
of critical smart city infrastructures. Further, the analysis 
reveals insights into how this format gave the citizens support 
in identifying and discussing ethical concerns with future 
upgrades of CI’s. In the following, we will relate our findings 
according to how the provided design fictions secured 
participation and supported the discussion of ethical concerns. 
To be able to assess the degree of citizen participation we 
have looked closer at how the groups: came up with ideas, 
agreed on which ideas where worth promoting, and whether 
and how they came up with alternative visions regarding the 
use of digital water meters that diverged from the ones 
proposed by the scenarios. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Groups discussing scenarios for sustainable water usage 
A. Group One 
The group came up with few ideas and the expert 
contributed with most of the answers to the questions worked 
on. Two of the citizens, Per and Leif, offered some reflections, 
often on related but somewhat off topics that they were 
interested in (still concerning water usage). But every time 
they started discussing the scenarios from their viewpoints, 
they were broken off by the expert. The repeated breakdowns 
of the group dialogue led to a lack of engagement from Per 
and Leif after a while. Trine kept mostly quiet, but engaged a 
few times, mostly to ask questions. When the time came to 
prepare the summaries and agreeing on what to promote to the 
plenary session, the expert reiterated his initial answers and 
asked whether all agreed, answered by silence or small 
acknowledgments from the group. To come up with 
alternative visions regarding the use of digital water in the 
future, the citizens explored some initial ideas, but were 
quickly interrupted by the expert. The expert went so far as to 
undermine scenario three from the outset, saying that it was 
unrealistic due to current GDPR regulations. He changed his 
mind after the initial reaction, and tried to initiate and support 
further discussion, but then the group had lost interest and 
started looking at their watches. 
The group was not able to speculate alternative futures but 
was able to articulate ethical concerns during the workshop 
related to all three scenarios. Per and Leif seemed to be 
acutely aware of questions concerning privacy and wanted 
full control of the detailed data from the water meters. They 
wanted to be in the loop when leakage was discovered, 
receiving a private message (from the meter) and to then to 
get hold of a plumber themselves. Scenario three was 
therefore rejected by Per and Leif outright due to their privacy 
concerns. Trine, however, thought the detailed data capture 
was ok (as represented by the bill), and was less concerned by 
how the data could be misused. She asked the expert whether 
she was allowed to take this position. The most engaged 
discussion was about scenario two, when they considered how 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

water should be governed in times of scarcity. They couldn’t 
quite decide whether water should be turned off remotely by 
the city for households overusing water. They seemed to like 
the idea that overuse was punished fairly, but also indicated 
some discomfort with the surveillance needed to enforce this.   
B. Group Two 
All group members contributed to answering the 
questions given in the three scenarios and came up with ideas 
during the workshop. In general, the group was quick to 
address and discuss the questions asked for each scenario – 
leading to the expert taking initiative to leave the scenario and 
interview the group about water meters in general. When it 
came to agreeing, it was clear that the expert made the final 
decisions on what could be considered good answers to the 
questions, recognizable in how he summarized the group’s 
discussions in the plenary sessions. He presented the ideas he 
had come up with earlier in the discussions – seemingly to 
reach the other two groups with his reflections and insights. 
With one exception though, when it came to the idea that 
house owners should be given a more elaborate consent form 
or contract when installing water meters – for instance to give 
the city the rights to turn off the water when detecting a 
leakage or to give the local health provider access when 
needed. This suggestion is also an example of how they came 
up with alternative visions of future use of the water meters, 
than the ones proposed by the scenarios. Another example is 
how Anne didn’t want to install the new water meter because 
of fear of radiation (she didn’t have an electricity meter 
either). She gained little understanding from the group, and 
when suggesting this in the plenary session, the expert in 
group one explained the concern away. In general, the group 
didn’t speculate too much and kept close to the realities 
offered by the expert (being the project leader for the smart 
water project). 
As in group one the design fictions raised ethical 
considerations in the discussions among the group members. 
Anne was very clear that any unauthorized use of data from 
the water meters was misuse: 
 
If the head doctor in city had called me and said, where 
are you? You are not using water! Then I would be 
extremely pissed! That’s surveillance, that must become 
illegal. #Anne 
 
The rest of the group agreed. She also brought up several 
times that any data use should be made explicit in a written 
agreement between the city and the house owner. Further, 
how the relevant rules and regulations should be made 
accessible and understandable to all citizens. When it came to 
using water meters to monitor and restrict water use in times 
of scarcity, Anne and Kari were open to this use, and didn’t 
really discuss the privacy dilemma raised by this.  
C. Group Three 
When it came to coming up with ideas in the group, the 
expert provided the other participants with information 
related to the project, that she saw as important to know to be 
able to discuss the questions. She invited the other participants 
to share their opinions and ideas, something all the 
participants did. They listened to each other’s ideas and 
agreed on a common definition of what it meant to waste 
water: “If someone wouldn't use the water if they had to pay 
for it, then they are wasting water”. Even if the expert talked 
the most, the group reached agreement on what the answers 
to the questions should be. The citizens all participated 
equally, focusing on different aspects of the scenarios. 
Gunhild highlighted aspects related to costs. Lise focused on 
how she would like to get more support in the process and 
Ahmed saw a possibility for a fairer solution. The expert did 
a good job to summarize and present the groups opinions and 
ideas in the plenary sessions, not only her own. The group 
came up with several alternative down-to-earth visions of 
future use of the water meters. They thought that it was ok to 
use water for gardening, but that one should pay for the water. 
They wished for more support from the city resolving 
problems with e.g., water leakages. They suggested a support 
line and someone that can come home and discuss different 
solutions with them.  
The group discussed several ethical concerns raised by 
each of the three scenarios presented. During the water 
leakage scenario, Gunhild emphasized the importance of 
identifying the party responsible for fixing the leakage, 
exemplified by a previous dispute between the municipality 
and a homeowner. The group agreed that digital water meters 
should be made mandatory to ensure a fair use for all citizens. 
However, they recognized the need for clear regulations 
outlining ownership and servicing of the devices, as well as 
how data collected from them could be utilized in a 
transparent way by the municipality and other stakeholders. 
In addition, they advocated for diverse communication 
channels between citizens and the municipality such as email, 
website, mobile app and telephone to enable accessibility for 
all. 
D. All groups 
1) Securing participation 
a) Coming up with ideas  
How the groups generated and promoted ideas differed 
between them and we see the expert’s role understanding as 
an important factor to explain this. The expert in group three 
actively invited participants to come up with ideas. In 
contrast, the expert in group one decided which ideas were 
feasible and which were not. In general, most of the 
participants engaged in the discussions and were able to 
formulate opinions on the themes brought up by the design 
fictions. There were two participants, however, one in group 
one and one in group two, who mostly listened and did not 
speak much. 
b) Agreeing  
The experts understanding of his / her own role in the 
discussions to a large degree influenced the power dynamics 
in the group. The expert in group three summed up the group’s 
findings covering all contributions. This contrasted with how 
both Roger and Hans summed up their group’s discussion 
relating their own understanding of the topics at hand.  
c) Coming up with alternative visions  
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

All three groups came up with concrete suggestions for 
each design fiction scenario. The solutions were modest and 
not as radical as we might have hoped. Participants 
highlighted that they needed more guidance to understand the 
changes implied by upgrading the water infrastructure. 
Further, they suggested that they should be able to choose 
alternative services both for monitoring water and 
communication between them and the city. Finally, 
participants highlighted that is important to be transparent 
who owns and services the digital water meters and how their 
data is used by the city and possibly other stakeholders. 
2) Raising ethical concerns. 
The overarching ethical concern brought up in the 
discussions in all three groups, was how data from the new 
digital water meters trigger privacy concerns. It seems that all 
group members, including the experts, were acutely aware of 
privacy regulations (i.e., GDPR) and didn’t want to question 
these in general. When the groups discussed questions of 
security and sustainability, however, dilemmas pitting 
privacy regulations against conceived utility surfaced. The 
groups were willing to give consent to use data to take care of 
their properties and health on a case-by-case basis. Further, 
they considered loosening privacy concerns and lessening the 
need for informed consent to stop wasteful use of water in 
times of acute shortages. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The point of using Design Fictions as method when 
involving citizens in the project of installing digital water 
meters was to 1) make digital water meters and the 
infrastructure they are part of visible, relevant and provoking 
to the participants, 2) to encourage critical reflections and 
discussions where all stakeholders could take part and have 
their voices heard, 3) to envision alternate futures by working 
out how current policies and regulation should be updated to 
accommodate “smart” use of the opportunities the digital 
water meters embody and of course to mitigate negative 
consequences and lastly 4) to shed light on how participatory 
design fiction could raise ethical concerns among citizens 
experiencing them. We will now discuss whether the 
participatory design fiction method worked as expected and 
what we learned from applying the method for these 
purposes?  
First, we see how our application of the method made the 
digital water meters and the infrastructure they are part of 
visible, relevant, and somewhat provoking to the participants. 
It created a common ground for discussing the possible 
consequences of a not yet implemented smart city technology. 
The stories and materials provided seemed to both initiate and 
to some degree sustain discussions in all three groups. All 
three scenarios were taken up in discussions and when the 
groups had come to an end point on an issue, they came back 
to the task by looking at the provided materials. A possible 
takeaway from this is that it is important to use time on 
developing the scenarios beforehand, so they communicate 
well. We believe it is crucial for designers, wanting to use this 
method to heed the basics of storytelling as applied in 
journalism, to make the stories both relevant and provoking.  
Second, while the scenarios encouraged critical 
reflections and discussions where most of the participants 
took part, they didn’t provide enough support for equalizing 
power relations between citizens and experts in the workshop. 
In two of the three groups the citizens suggestions were to a 
large degree corrected or ignored by the expert in the group. 
Based on this finding, we believe the method should be 
updated with more rules when it comes to turn taking and 
more specific instructions for how the contributions should 
captured and summarized for each scenario. The many 
breakdowns in the budding speculative discussions between 
the citizens could have been avoided with clearer rules of 
engagement. 
Third, the proposed visions of alternative futures in the 
workshop were rather down to earth and close to what will 
most likely be implemented in the future. We believe this to 
be a direct consequence of how the experts performed their 
role in the workshop. All three were quick to provide facts 
from the project when the citizens started speculating. A 
possible takeaway from this is that we should have prepared 
the experts beforehand, to give them a better understanding of 
their role in the workshop. We should have asked them to play 
with the scenario a while longer, before providing the facts 
(with its many constraints), for the sake of provoking more 
lively discussions. One example is how they could have 
suggested the opportunities to regulate water consumption 
from installing smart water meters, that can’t be realized due 
to privacy regulation.  
Lastly, we found that participatory design fictions as 
applied in the smart water workshop, created a space for 
citizens to reflect and discuss their ethical concerns and have 
most likely raised their awareness of these issues further. 
Participatory Design (PD) has from the start taken an ethical 
stance, facilitating for such spaces [26], creating regular 
venues to discuss values [27]. Adding design fictions to the 
toolbox of PD gives PD practitioners more opportunities to 
make ethical dilemmas with future smart city technologies 
relevant and available to citizens. The best evidence from the 
workshop was how scenarios implying misuse of data from 
smart water meters, immediately triggered discussions of 
privacy concerns with the new capabilities offered by the 
proposed technology.    
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have explored participatory design 
fictions as a method to involve citizens in processes of 
digitalizing critical infrastructures. Based on a workshop to 
engage citizens in upgrading the water system with digital 
smart water meters in a mid-sized city in Norway, we find the 
method promising. It enabled the citizens to discuss multiple 
aspects of the suggested upgrade, concerning security, 
sustainability and privacy. We find that we need to strengthen 
the method further, however, by adding some more rules of 
engagement 
and 
by 
prepping 
participating 
experts 
beforehand. The main challenge is to move the discussions 
beyond the easily observable facts and political correctness 
and towards addressing alternative and maybe thought-
provoking visions of the future.      
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank everyone who helped organize 
and who participated in the workshop. A special thanks to 
Jens Petter Berget who helped us in facilitating the activity.      
REFERENCES 
[1] 
V. Albino, U. Berardi, and R. M. Dangelico, “Smart Cities: 
Definitions, Dimensions, Performance, and Initiatives”, Journal of 
Urban Technology, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 3–21, Jan. 2015, doi: 
10.1080/10630732.2014.942092. 
[2] 
D. Washburn et al., “Helping CIOs understand smart city initiatives”, 
Growth, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1–17, 2009. 
[3] 
T. Bratteteig, K. Bødker, Y. Dittrich, P. H. Mogensen, and J. 
Simonsen, “Methods: Organising principles and general guidelines 
for Participatory Design projects”, in Routledge International 
Handbook of Participatory Design, J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, 
Eds. London, UNITED KINGDOM: Taylor & Francis Group, 2012, 
pp. 117–145. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2021.   
[4] 
E. Ruiz Ben, “Methodologies for a Participatory Design of IoT to 
Deliver Sustainable Public Services in Smart Cities”, in Beyond 
Smart and Connected Governments: Sensors and the Internet of 
Things in the Public Sector, J. R. Gil-Garcia, T. A. Pardo, and M. 
Gasco-Hernandez, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 
2020, pp. 49–68. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-37464-8_3. 
[5] 
T. Bratteteig and I. Wagner, Disentangling Participation: Power and 
Decision-making 
in 
Participatory 
Design. 
Cham: 
Springer 
International Publishing, 2014. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-06163-4. 
[6] 
M. O’Rourke, “Protecting Our Critical Infrastructure”, Risk 
Management, vol. 64, no. 10, pp. 3–4, 2017. 
[7] 
C. Alcaraz and S. Zeadally, “Critical infrastructure protection: 
Requirements and challenges for the 21st century”, International 
Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection, vol. 8, pp. 53–66, Jan. 
2015, doi: 10.1016/j.ijcip.2014.12.002. 
[8] 
J. Moteff, C. Copeland, and J. Fischer, “Critical infrastructures: What 
makes an infrastructure critical?”, Library of Congress Washington 
DC Congressional Research Service, 2003. 
[9] 
J. Betts and S. Sezer, “Ethics and privacy in national security and 
critical infrastructure protection”, in 2014 IEEE International 
Symposium on Ethics in Science, Technology and Engineering, May 
2014, pp. 1–7. doi: 10.1109/ETHICS.2014.6893417. 
[10] K. Uhl, “The Freedom of Information Act Post-9/11: Balancing the 
Public’s Right to Know, Critical Infrastructure Protection, and 
Homeland Security”, American University Law Review, vol. 53, no. 
1, pp. 261-311, Jan. 2003 
[11] T. Bányai, P. Tamás, B. Illés, Ž. Stankevičiūtė, and Á. Bányai, 
“Optimization of Municipal Waste Collection Routing: Impact of 
Industry 4.0 Technologies on Environmental Awareness and 
Sustainability”, International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, vol. 16, no. 4, 634 , Jan. 2019, doi: 
10.3390/ijerph16040634. 
[12] T. Robertson and J. Simonsen, “Challenges and Opportunities in 
Contemporary Participatory Design”, Design Issues, vol. 28, no. 3, 
pp. 3–9, Jul. 2012, doi: 10.1162/DESI_a_00157. 
[13] F. Kensing and J. Greenbaum, “Heritage: Having a say”, in Routledge 
international handbook of participatory design, Routledge, 2013, pp. 
21–36. 
[14] E. Brandt, T. Binder, and E. B.-N. Sanders, Tools and techniques. 
Routledge Handbooks Online, 2012. 
[15] J. M. Carroll, “Scenarios and design cognition”, in Proceedings IEEE 
Joint International Conference on Requirements Engineering, Sep. 
2002, pp. 3–5. doi: 10.1109/ICRE.2002.1048498. 
[16] M. Muller and Q. V. Liao, “Exploring AI Ethics and Values through 
Participatory Design Fictions”, Human Computer Interaction 
Consortium, 2017. 
[17] S. Prost, E. Mattheiss, and M. Tscheligi, “From Awareness to 
Empowerment: Using Design Fiction to Explore Paths towards a 
Sustainable Energy Future”, in Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing, New York, NY, USA, Feb. 2015, pp. 1649–1658. doi: 
10.1145/2675133.2675281. 
[18] L. V. Nägele, M. Ryöppy, and D. Wilde, “PDFi: participatory design 
fiction with vulnerable users”, in Proceedings of the 10th Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, New York, NY, USA, 
Sep. 2018, pp. 819–831. doi: 10.1145/3240167.3240272. 
[19] L. Ventä-Olkkonen et al., “Nowhere to Now-here: Empowering 
Children to Reimagine Bully Prevention at Schools Using Critical 
Design Fiction: Exploring the Potential of Participatory, Empowering 
Design Fiction in Collaboration with Children”, in Designing 
Interactive Systems Conference 2021, New York, NY, USA, Jun. 
2021, pp. 734–748. doi: 10.1145/3461778.3462044. 
[20] S. Grand and M. Wiedmer, “Design Fiction: A Method Toolbox for 
Design Research in a Complex World”, DRS Biennial Conference 
Series, Jul. 2010 
[21] T. Markussen and E. Knutz, “The poetics of design fiction”, in 
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Designing 
Pleasurable Products and Interfaces, New York, NY, USA, Sep. 
2013, pp. 231–240. doi: 10.1145/2513506.2513531. 
[22] V. Braun and V. Clarke, Thematic analysis. American Psychological 
Association, 2012. 
[23] D. Kozlov, J. Veijalainen, and Y. Ali, “Security and privacy threats 
in IoT architectures.”, in BODYNETS, 2012, pp. 256–262. 
[24] W. Zhou, Y. Jia, A. Peng, Y. Zhang, and P. Liu, “The Effect of IoT 
New Features on Security and Privacy: New Threats, Existing 
Solutions, and Challenges Yet to Be Solved”, IEEE Internet of Things 
Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1606–1616, Apr. 2019, doi: 
10.1109/JIOT.2018.2847733. 
[25] J. S. Kumar and D. R. Patel, “A survey on internet of things: Security 
and privacy issues”, International Journal of Computer Applications, 
vol. 90, no. 11, pp. 20-26, 2014. 
[26] B. Carsten Stahl, “Participatory design as ethical practice – concepts, 
reality and conditions”, Journal of Information, Communication and 
Ethics in Society, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 10–13, Jan. 2014, doi: 
10.1108/JICES-11-2013-0044. 
[27] M. van der Velden, “Re-thinking participatory design: what can we 
learn from fairphone”, University of Oslo,  2014. 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

