Continous Learning Feedback 
Shaping Teaching through Realtime Feedback
Christian Grund Sørensen 
Center for Computer Mediated Epistemology 
Aalborg University 
Aalborg, Denmark 
cgs@km.dk 
 
 
Abstract — In most situations where teaching is involved, the 
need for learner feedback is of utmost importance. Rhetorical 
theory of communication (concepts of aptum and kairos) 
underscores the significance of understanding foreknowledge 
(Gadamer). Since foreknowledge is by nature assessed prior to 
the learning experience and observed learning outcomes are 
assessed after the experience, a temporal gap in assessment is 
obvious. The aim of this paper is to suggest a method for 
observing learner attitudes, interests and level of learning in 
realtime during the learning experience. This is exemplified 
through the use of the Conceptual Pond application to 
facilitate an insight for the educator into the process of 
learning and immersion of the learner. Two use cases are 
discussed in detail as well as the consequences for teaching. 
Keywords- education; assessment; Conceptual Pond; kairos; 
aptum; continous 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Educators at every level of education know that one of 
the crucial points in achieving sustainable learning is 
recognizing the scena (audience) of the teaching event. 
Regardless of whether the teaching methods are traditional 
teaching in class rooms, technology enhanced learning, 
blended learning, or standalone online learning, the question 
still applies: Who is the recipient of my transference of 
knowledge and invocation of reflection? The identification 
of the potential the learner is a key issue in the research on 
cognitive styles [1]. 
The answer to this question seems straightforward as it 
may be an ideal for every educator to be thus informed. 
Nevertheless, this initial knowledge is only the tip of the 
iceberg as there may be growing level of knowledge, as well 
as a change in interest and reflection during the course of the 
learning activity. In this way, a temporal component adds to 
the complexity of knowing and understanding the cognitive 
position from which the learner is prone to receive learning. 
The Greek philosopher Heraclitus of Ephesus illuminates 
this temporal complexity by his panta rhei argument, 
everything flows, identifying the fact that one cannot 
immerse in the same river twice. Immersing in it once again 
it is not exactly the same river – and perhaps the person 
descending in the water is not even the same person. 
It is therefore a great advantage for the educator to be 
able to monitor the progress of the learner in terms of 
knowledge throughout the learning process [2]. Sadly, this 
may often be difficult as traditional testing may disturb and 
interfere with the consistency of the planned learning 
process.  Another interesting question is what kind of data is 
in fact beneficial for the educator in the course of teaching?  
   The aim of this paper is to discuss these issues and suggest 
a way of gathering feedback from the learner throughout the 
temporal learning process. Such a gathering is exemplified 
through using The Conceptual Pond assessment application 
[3] as a tool to aid the teacher in making intermediary, 
intuitive assessments in the course of a learning experience. 
Two specific use cases are presented and discussed.  
At the same time it is obvious that the possibility for 
interim assessment in realtime, may influence the way in 
which teaching is prepared and performed, and what 
teaching aids may be helpful. Interactivity obviously is only 
of benefit to the learning experience if the schedule and/or 
content may in fact be adjusted according to the new 
knowledge of the educator. This will be discussed on the 
theoretical basis of the classic five canons of rhetoric [4]. 
Some important concepts and terms must be defined:  
 
 
Learning event or similar refers to a single session of 
learning or a short sequence leaving no temporal 
space for traditional assessment. 
 
Realtime assessment refers to the gathering of input 
with no notable delay (< 3 minutes or continuous). 
 
Teaching refers to any kind of educational practice 
involving a predefined timespan of learner attention. 
 
Feedback refers to any kind of input or expression 
conveying and exposing the interests and attitudes of 
the learner to the teacher. 
 
No distinction is made between learning / education 
or teacher / educator. 
 
     This paper is structured as follows: after the introduction 
(1)   important aspects of the learning situation are presented 
(II) using a framework of rhetorical aptum. Subsequently, the 
element of feedback is discussed (III) leading to an analysis 
of the leaning situation implementing kairos theory (IV). The 
continuous learning feedback application is described (V) 
and two use cases are presented (VI) leading to reflections on 
consequences for teaching (VII) and a closing section (VIII) 
with concluding remarks and suggestions for further study.        
 
325
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
SHAPING THE LEARNING SITUATION 
 
In the preparation phase of a learning event, multiple 
aspects are obviously taken into account by any educator. 
Referring to the classic aptum model (Figure 1.) for the 
appropriate formation of a communicative event may be 
illustrative in creating overview and suggesting terminology. 
In this model, the orator is the transmitter of a message, 
in casu the teacher. Scena is the audience. Situatio depicts 
the communicative situation. Res is the matter or content of 
the communicative act. Verba is the actual expression or 
eloquent wording of the message. Though this model 
originates in pre-digital history it is suggested as a helpful 
model as it contains basic elements in communication [5] 
[6]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The aptum model 
In the pentagram model, there are two relations relevant 
to this paper: first, it is the relation between orator and scena 
and, second, the relation between res and verba. In the 
classic rhetorical situation of the persuasive, political, or 
judicial speech, the five aspects are generally fixed at the 
beginning of the communicative act. The sequence of the 
speech requires this. On the other hand, a sudden change in 
the expression of the scena may at one time influence the 
orator into altering the relationship between res and verba 
reformulating 
and 
reshaping 
the 
speech. 
This 
interdependency between the aptum partes allow for a 
dynamic development in the communicative processes. 
Though rhetoric provides a helpful framework for the 
understanding of communicative processes, it is not a theory 
originally designed directly for learning purposes. Therefore, 
learning taxonomies are also an important part of 
understanding assessment and feedback [7].  
The general structure of these taxonomies pictures an 
increasing level of knowledge, engagement, and reflection. 
This progress must be verified, as suggested in the shape of 
Structure 
of 
Observed 
Learning 
Outcomes 
(SOLO 
taxonomy) [8] leading the learner on the path towards 
increasing complexity from the pre-structural level through 
unistructural and multistructural levels to the relational 
level, where ownership of the learning process is achieved 
and further leading to an extended abstract level.  
Though these steps may not be implemented fully in the 
paper, the progression of complexity, ownership and 
engagement is worth noting as goals for learning processes. 
 
III. 
FEEDBACK 
 
    Obviously, feedback has always been part of an 
educational process. In primary school, a teacher will most 
often ask for feedback from pupils in the form of raising 
their hands, selected pupils making a remark or in other 
ways making sure that the actual teaching makes sense for 
the recipients. In this broad understanding, the concept of 
interactivity in education has always been implemented. 
    Though this process of feedback, interactivity, or user 
input is unproblematic in a manageable physical learning 
environment, this is not the case in other contexts. In a 
learning scenario with 200 students the complexity of 
receiving traditional feedback from so many actors would 
create immense cognitive stress. At the same time, lectures 
would be prolonged indefinitely if each student should be 
allowed and encouraged to interact with the lecturer. 
     Since the reduction of complexity is necessary, 
approaches from the sustainable primary school example 
have often been implemented: The raising of hands or the 
comments from a small number of students that now 
represent a quite limited percentage of the students. At the 
same time, it may be questionable whether these students 
actually do represent the general interests and concerns of 
the collective of students. Psychological factors may 
discourage some students from raising issues in plenum and 
others may want to show off their understanding in order to 
impress the lecturer or others.   
     Another unwanted aspect of collecting feedback during a 
learning experience is the distraction caused by the process. 
Cognitive stress is added to the students, as well as the 
lecturer having to reflect on comments that may not be 
relevant to the subject per se and the factor of time and 
sequence is always in play.  
     For 
these 
reasons, 
assessment 
tools 
such 
as 
questionnaires are often implemented to create an informed 
overview of the challenges of the learning situation. This 
feedback may be of considerable value and relevance, yet it 
does not always contribute in time.  
 
IV. 
 A KAIROS APPROACH 
 
     Consistent with the implementation of rhetorical theory 
in the description of the learning situation some important 
issues are discussed here on the basis of rhetoric, in casu 
kairos. The concept of kairos designates three aspects of 
reaching an opportune situation for a specific task. The 
kairos triad consists of opportune time, the opportune 
location, and the opportune manner, as shown in figure 2: 
 
 
 
 
 
326
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Kairos triad 
     Implementing the kairos model on the discussion on 
feedback adds methodological overview. A sustainable use 
of gathering and processing of feedback should be 
consistent with all three parameters present in this model. 
     In a persuasive technology discourse, B.J. Fogg argues 
that “the dynamics underlying suggestion technology date 
back to a principle of persuasion called Kairos. Discussed 
by ancient Greek rhetoricians, kairos means finding the 
opportune moment to present your message.” [9]. In the use 
of 
a 
persuasive 
application 
for 
assessment, 
the 
implementation of rhetorical theory is thus not unheard of. 
A. The opportune time: 
 
Feedback should be collected and assessment made 
at a moment where this does not conflict or interfere 
with the primary teaching task.  
 
Furthermore, the collected data and the new insights 
should be available for the teacher at the opportune 
moment in the learning experience.  
 
The collection and processing should be completed 
in realtime. 
 
B. The opportune location: 
 
Feedback should be collected and processed in a 
way that does not require a physical absence from 
the original learning situation.  
 
Collecting feedback onsite should not disturb the 
overall concentration of the learning experience by 
disturbing the relevant learning scenarios. 
 
C. The opportune manner: 
Feedback should be collected and processed in such a 
way that:  
 
It is easily collected without increasing the cognitive 
load of the informer.  
 
It is easily handled and processed by the teacher.  
 
It allows a variety of expressions. 
 
It does not limit too strictly the freedom of the user 
to express opinions and interests not foreseen by the 
teacher. 
 
It supports anonymity as well as personal or group 
identification where this is relevant.  
 
It presents a relevant balance between detail and 
overview.  
 
It allows for storing, sharing and cross tabulation, 
where applicable.      
 
Making this kairos analysis the foundation for the 
development process supports the formulation of relevant 
criteria for a sustainable system for the collection of 
feedback.  
 
V. 
CONTINOUS FEEDBACK 
 
In coherence with the analysis above and the parameters 
important for the collection of feedback and the facilitation 
of suitable assessment, it is clear that the temporal factor is 
of 
definite 
importance. 
Approaching 
a 
pedagogical 
implementation of interactivity may be possible only in a 
realtime or near-realtime context.  
This may imply that the collection of feedback should not 
be understood as an isolated item in a sequential learning 
experience but rather as a underlying process, supporting the 
basic learning strategy. Thus, a system facilitating 
continuous feedback should be implemented. 
In the light of experiences with technology enhanced 
learning and TEL-systems (Technology Enhanced Learning), 
it appears evident that such a continuous feedback support 
system should be provided through implementing a suitable 
assessment system capable of meetings the general demands 
of the kairos analysis.  
Figure 3.  The Conceptual Pond – reduced in complexity 
In the case studies of this paper, an intuitive interface for 
assessment and collection of data The Conceptual Pond 
application has been used. The Conceptual Pond [10] [11] is 
a visual interface facilitating easy and intuitive collection of 
qualitative data. The user interface is quite simple and allows 
the user to select one or several words or phrases that 
resemble the intended expression of the user. If no suggested 
text is fitting, the users may add their own text. A purely 
visual representation through images is also supported. After 
selecting the relevant text, the user applies this text to a circle 
marking the distance from the center which corresponds to 
which the user finds this textual expression important.   
 
327
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
By doing so, the user easily supplies feedback, even on 
quite complex questions, as exemplified in Case Study 1. 
Once the qualitative data are collected through using the 
system, the collected data are instantly quantified into graphs 
creating an instant overview for the teacher. Using this 
system supports the desire for continuous feedback, as the 
user can always move or substitute the text with something 
else. Such changes are immediately reflected in the graphs 
available for the teacher in realtime. 
Though the overall argument of this paper is not tied to 
the implementation of any one system for interactive 
assessment (such as The Conceptual Pond), the facilities of 
the system is important as the system should satisfy all or 
most of the criteria listed in relation to the kairos analysis.  
Obviously, ease of use, user freedom, and instant teacher 
overview are important factors.  
Referring to the principles of the hermeneutic circle of 
Gadamer [12], it is obvious that the continuous feedback 
approach, in reality resembles the process of recognition as 
devised in this model. Issues important to the user in the 
beginning of the learning experience may lose importance or 
be transformed into new questions or issues of relevance. 
Through a continuous feedback approach both learner and 
teacher should benefit from the pedagogical potential of this. 
 
VI. 
USE CASES 
 
Two tests using The Conceptual Pond for advanced 
feedback are presented in this paper. In both cases, the focus 
has been on teenagers, but they are not part of the same 
group. They have not been chosen for the tests through any 
special selection process. 
 
A. Reflections on the movie The Word 
 
A group of 23 Danish teenagers from confirmation class 
(13-14 years old) viewed a selected scene from the play “The 
Word” by Danish playwright Kaj Munk (1962) in a well-
known 1955 movie adaptation of Carl Th. Dreyer. The test 
took place in 2012.  
Despite an antiquated visual language with remarkably 
slow dialogue and black/white aesthetics, the scene of the 
resurrection of a woman deceased in childbirth appeared 
quite moving for the teenagers. 
Immediately after the screening of the film and before 
proceeding with the scheduled program, all teenagers entered 
their immediate impression and thoughts to the assessment 
interface. In this way, feedback was secured in a very short 
time and answers were stored as well as quantified and 
available instantly for the teacher as a graph. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Graphic presentation 
      Completing the quite complex feedback process on 
computers was performed in an average of 105 seconds 
(variation 75 – 135 seconds). In a subsequent testing under 
similar conditions and a similar use case (2014) feedback 
was even more rapid using a touch device (iPad) reducing 
average feedback time to 95 seconds (variation 60 – 110 
seconds).  This observation suggests that the more tangible 
handling offers enhanced intuitiveness in interaction with the 
application and therefore greater speed. 
   The graph (figure 4) was available for the teacher 
immediately after the gathering of information, thus 
empowering him immediately to focus the teaching program 
in the direction of issues important to the learners.   
     From a pedagogical perspective, the feedback was rich for 
several reasons:  
 
All teenagers made a relevant contribution and they 
were heard equally. In ordinary teaching conditions 
in class, it would only be possible to hear the 
impressions of a selected number of students. Now, 
everyone did participate in a synchronous sharing of 
thoughts. 
 
Some of the results were surprising and provided a 
good foundation for designing the further teaching 
process. For example, the teenagers did not mind 
much that the movie was “old-fashioned” and the 
vivid scenes of a woman rising from the dead did not 
frighten them. “Prayer” and “hope” have scores 
twice as high as the quite relevant “unrealistic”, 
suggesting that the students did internalize the 
intended message of the author rather than reacting 
to the surface level of the play.  
 
The teenagers were able to compare their own 
reflections with the reflections of peers, which is an 
important persuasive factor, as suggested by Oinas-
Kukkonen and Harjumaa [13]. 
     
      In a subsequent inquiry, all teenagers preferred The 
Conceptual Pond to traditional aids for assessment such as 
questionnaires and multiple choice tests. Such assessment 
tools are regularly used in school, so the teenagers have a 
considerable familiarity using them.  
    At the same time, a group discussion was implemented in 
order to verify that the expressions codified in the data-set 
328
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

were representative of the expressions uttered in a group 
discussion. This was the case.  
 
B. Feedback at teaching on robots and ethics 
 
A group of 24 Danish teenagers from the municipal 
school of Nørager (13-14 years old) were taught on the 
subject of robots and ethics. The test took place in 2013. 
The Conceptual Pond was used twice during the actual 
teaching process, making the teenagers multitask in order to 
listen, reflect, and answer synchronously. For this reason, the 
time used for filling in the pond is not specified. It was done 
synchronously with teaching. 
The first question asked the students which one of the 
presented subjects was the most interesting to them. Not 
surprisingly, “dangerous robots” as well as “cyborgs” were 
the most interesting and “ethics” scored quite low. “Talking 
with a robot” was also quite low. In the course of teaching, 
the students were encouraged to interact with a chat-robot 
providing them with an initial experience of communicating 
meaningfully with an Artificial Intelligence-system [14]. 
After this unexpected experience, the subject “talking to a 
robot” advanced to being the second most interesting subject, 
almost tripling in popularity.    
     From a pedagogical perspective the feedback was rich for 
several reasons:  
 
 
The feedback allowed the teacher to focus on 
subjects 
relevant 
to 
the 
learner. 
Obviously, 
“dangerous robots” could not be the full content of 
the learning experience. But the sequence in which 
subjects were presented was influenced and 
“dangerous robots” often used as examples. 
 
Through the continuous feedback, the teacher was 
able to detect the growing fascination by “talk to a 
robot” end elaborate on this in the learning 
experience. If the initial expressions of interest had 
not been adjusted through continuous feedback, the 
teacher might have focused too narrowly on 
“dangerous robots” reducing the potential of 
teaching to fit the changing interests of the students. 
 
     Later in the same teaching session, the teenagers were 
challenged to sort different robots in the order in which they 
found them the scariest. The objective was to confirm or 
falsify the assumption that the Uncanny Valley observation 
of Masahiro Mori [15] also applies to Danish teenagers. 
     After filling out The Conceptual Pond the teenagers 
watched a video presenting the Uncanny Valley. Much to 
their surprise, the graph presenting their answers in detail did 
correspond exactly with the uncanny Valley argument.  
       From a pedagogical perspective, the feedback was rich 
as it revealed not only knowledge, but also interest and 
immersion and facilitated an enhanced level of reflection not 
typical of students at this level of education: 
 
 
The teenagers instantly understood themselves as 
part of a scientific experiment. In this way they came 
to value scientific tradition, suddenly realizing 
research was relevant. 
 
In contrast to a traditional test on paper that would 
require 
manual 
processing, 
the 
result 
was 
immediately available and presented visually on a 
big screen. The three aspects of kairos are thus 
implemented.  
 
The emotional impact of peer comparison in relation 
to the reception of robots may be expected to support 
the reflection on the themes presented in the 
teaching. The students were genuinely surprised 
realizing that they did indeed mirror the Uncanny 
Valley theory of Mori.  
 
     From these two quite different use cases, it may be 
derived with a substantial degree of credibility that 
continuous feedback is a strong persuasive factor and it does 
add extra possibilities, and, therefore, extra quality to 
traditional teaching.  
     No difficulties were detected through the tests except for 
the fact, that links to the online environment of The 
Conceptual Pond should be distributed in advance. Since 
students in Danish schools use a variety of devices from 
smartphones to iPad’s, to laptops, it is essential that the 
feedback system supports all platforms. This is one of the 
advantages of The Conceptual Pond in comparison to a 
number of TEL applications designed with a limitation to a  
specific platform. 
 
VII. CONSEQUENCES FOR TEACHING 
 
Implementing feedback in a rather radical way, as it is 
suggested and exemplified above, does pose some challenges 
to traditional teaching.  The content of teaching may mostly 
remain the same, but the sequence and context in which it is 
shared may be required to change. The kairos approach 
influences education in double movement: 
Continuous learning feedback, on one side, allows the 
educator to be informed about the position, knowledge, or 
attitude of the learner. On the other hand, it simultaneously 
offers the teacher the opportunity of sharing this information 
with the learner in a real-time environment. 
 Referring again to classical rhetoric the five canons for 
preparing a piece of communication, this model may act as a 
framework or example. The five canons consist of inventio 
(developing and refining arguments and other content), 
dispositio (arranging and organizing content), elocutio 
(stylistic choices and eloquence),  memoria ( memorizing), 
and actio (delivery). From a traditional point of view, this 
process is sequential. The preparation takes place in steps in 
the right order. Implementing continuous feedback and 
taking advantage of the possibilities may require a more 
liquid approach to the rhetorical situation (in casu teaching). 
The sequence prepared in dispositio may be challenged 
329
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

which may require the educator to focus more directly on 
inventio and eloqutio recognizing that the teaching prepared 
may in fact have to be changed at some level adjusting to the 
enhanced level of knowledge of the learners facilitated by 
structured  feedback. 
    
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
 
   In terms of theory, there is a substantial leap from classical 
rhetoric to the implementation of a continuous feedback 
system through a digital application, as is analysed and 
suggested in this paper.  Nevertheless, this leap is important 
as the implementation of continuous learning feedback 
appears to be promising in developing novel concepts for 
learning. 
   Though traditional methods for assessment and acquiring 
feedback 
such 
as 
written 
tests, 
oral 
consultation, 
questionnaires, and multiple choice tests may be helpful in a 
number of contexts, it is clear that at least two challenges 
remain. One challenge is the element of kairos: Acquiring 
the right knowledge at the right time – and even sharing it 
with the learner simultaneously. Another challenge is the 
observation that feedback may be more comprehensive than 
traditional assessment. An example could be the suggestions 
made [16], that in the field of e.g. cultural mediation the 
predominantly simplified nature of traditional assessment is 
inadequate for monitoring the complex experiences and 
reflections done by the learner. 
    Much research is left to be done in the field of using 
feedback in a digital system. The aspect of ownership to the 
educational process if the user is engaged more in reflecting 
and commenting openly should be explored deeply. The use 
of a familiar electronic device such as your own smartphone 
instead of potentially alienating white paper may also be of 
importance.   
     In this paper, some of the possible uses of such system 
have been described. There are many other use cases to 
explore and recognitions to be made from these, again 
adding to agile development process of continuous learning 
feedback. 
       
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Riding and S. Rayner, ”Cognitive Styles and Learning 
Strategies.”, London 2000. 
[2] B. Bloom, “Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, the 
classification of educational goals – Handbook I: Cognitive 
Domain,” New York, 1956.  
[3] C. Grund Sørensen and M. Grund Sørensen, “The Conceptual 
Pond – A Persuasive Tool for Quantifiable Qualitative 
Assessment” in K. Blashki and P. Isias, “Emerging Research 
and Trends in Interactivity and the Human - Computer 
Interface”, pp.449-469, IGI Global, 2013. 
[4] E.P.J. Corbett and R.J. Connors, “Classical Rhetoric for the 
Modern Student”, New York 1999. 
[5] P. Hasle.P. and A.K.K. Christensen, “Classical Rhetoric and a 
Limit to Persuasion,” Persuasive 2007, LNCS 4744, Springer, 
2007. 
[6] P. Hasle, “The Persuasive Expansion - Rhetoric, Information 
Architecture, and Conceptual Structure,” in ICCS 2006, 
Editors H. Schärfe, P. Hitzler, and P. Øhrstrøm, Springer, 
2006. 
[7] B. Bloom, “Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, the 
classification of educational goals – Handbook I: Cognitive 
Domain,” New York, 1956. 
[8] J. Biggs and C. Tang, “Teaching for Quality Learning at 
University,” (3.rd ed.), Buckingham, SRHE and Open 
University Press,  2007. 
[9] B.J. Fogg, “Persuasive Technology – Using Computers to 
Change what we Say and Do”, San Francisco, 2003, p.41 
[10] C. Grund Sørensen and M. Grund Sørensen, “The Conceptual 
Pond – A Persuasive Tool for Quantifiable Qualitative 
Assessment” in K. Blashki and P. Isias, “Emerging Research 
and Trends in Interactivity and the Human - Computer 
Interface”, pp.449-469, IGI Global, 2013. 
[11] C. Grund Sørensen, “Intuitive Surveying and Quantification 
of Qualitative Input through the Conceptual Pond”, in R. 
Behringer and G. Sinclair, “IWEPLET 2013”, pp. 135-142, 
2013.  
[12] H.G. Gadamer, “Truth and Method”, Bloomsbury Academic 
2004 
[13] H. Oinas-Kukkonen, H.and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive 
Systems Design: Key Issues, Process Model, and System 
Features”, in “ Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems 2009/24”,  pp. 485-500 2009. 
[14] Http:/www.alice.pandorabots.com/ 
[15] Y. Mori, “The Uncanny Valley”, Energy 7, pp.33-35, 1970. 
[16] E. Hooper-Greenhil,“Measuring Learning Outcomes in 
Museums, Archives and Libraries: The Learning Impact 
Research Project”, International Journal of Heritage Studies 
Vol. 10, Issue 2, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
330
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-325-4
ACHI 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

