Complex Emotions Expression and Recognition for Paranoid Personality Disorder
Mohamad Ab Saleh
Laboratoire de Recherche en Informatique Fondamentale et Appliqu´ees (LaRIFA) - Lebanese University, Lebanon
Email: mohamadabsaleh@st.ul.edu.lb
Abstract—This paper proposes a logical framework for the spec-
iﬁcation of some types of complex emotions related to Paranoid
Personality Disorder (PPD) disease. The complex emotions we
are targeting here are despair and spite. We propose a logic
that allows to describe some of the psychological personality
characteristics from the side view of emotion theory. It allows
to express some emotions existing in Ortony, Clore and Collins
theory (OCC theory) and Plutchik theories but yet formalized in
logic. The logical model, that we build, can express and recognize
the targeted complex emotions (i.e., despair, spite). This logical
model coupled with an inference engine can help diagnosing
whether a person is suffering from the emotional PPD disease.
Keywords–Emotion; Paranoid Personality Disorder; Logic; De-
spair; Spite.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Personality disorder diseases have gained increased impor-
tance in the society during the last years. These are common
diseases to the extent that epidemiological organizations esti-
mate that the percentage of such diseases among people living
in the community is between 5% and 13%, the percentage
increases to 30% and 40% for psychiatric outpatients and
the percentage becomes even higher for psychiatric inpatients,
with estimations between 40% to 50%. The percentage is
estimated to be the highest among prisoners, between 50-
78% [1].
This ﬁeld is psychologically broadly covered in the litera-
ture. Peay [2] tackled the subject of the relation between law
and such diseases. He submitted ﬁve key problems for the
law in order to deal with people suffering from such diseases.
Kemelgor et al. took the side of the workplace incivility and its
relation with such diseases. They suggest that narcissistic traits
are the modal descriptors for difﬁcult employee, regardless of
hierarchical role (boss, peer, subordinate) [3]. Wiederman et
al. investigate the relation between such diseases and sexuality.
They studied a group of people instead of individuals and tried
to explain the group speciﬁcations which can be recognized
by it. Their target was to shorten the treatment and understand
individuals by examining their generalization [4]. Hazelden
foundation published a study, related to addiction and its
relation with such diseases, where people addicted to alcohol
and drugs are suffering from co-occurring of the diseases [5].
Due to the lack of logic-based approaches related to
Paranoid Personality Disorder (PPD), we decide to build
a logical model that represents it, with emotional ﬂavour.
We propose a formalization of the psychological personality
characteristics for PPD diseases where each characteristic
is logically represented by its properties [6]. We focus on
particular psychological states that are emotional states. We
only consider the cognitive structure of emotion rather than
emotion as a complex psychological phenomenon including
cognitive and somatic aspects (i.e., feeling). The cognitive
structure is a compound construction of noetic situations that
is founded in someone mind when (he/she) is feeling some
type of emotions [7].
In Section 2, we introduce the Paranoid Personality Dis-
order disease phenomenon, its deﬁnition and its reasons. In
Section 3, a brief overview is given about emotion and how
it can be classiﬁed depending on Plutchik’s Theory. Complex
emotions are then exposed tackling one of the most famous
cognitive theory, which is the Ortony, Clore and Collins (OCC)
theory. Finally, we address the subject of the facial evidences
and its relation to emotions. In Section 4, we present our model
to express and to recognize PPD diseases. In Section 5, we
brieﬂy discuss a possible implementation of the logical model
allowing to decide whether an individual is suffering from such
diseases via recognizing the two complex emotions (despair,
spite). Section 6 concludes the paper.
II.
PERSONALITY DISORDER
Personality refers to individual differences in a collection of
characteristic patterns such as thinking, feeling and behaving or
characteristics that humans developed as they grow. Although
individuals suffering from a Personality Disorder (PD) have
problems in their relations with other people, they tend to
have a narrow minded view of the world and a compound
of signiﬁcant problems and limitations in relationships, social
encounters, work [8]. A patient suffering from the PPD disease
shares some common essential features such as: hold grudges
and feels easily rejected and that, except himself, other people
are sickening and suspicious [9].
In this paper, we use the work of Fawzi [10] related to
PPD disease. It is approximated to be the single academic
article published in Iraq that concludes its results from multi-
national prisoners and it is considered to be one of the rare
studies in the Middle East, especially that most of the studies in
these countries are theoretical and/or affected by political and
religious inﬂuences. An individual that suffers from the PPD
disease can be resumed as a person who [10]: possesses a sense
of despair that justiﬁes his aggression towards others, holds
spite against those who disagreed with him in opinion or belief,
is rigid in his cognitive approach as well as in dealing with
conﬂicts, extrapolates, from the usual events, hidden threats
and insults directed against him, and ﬁnally is preoccupied
with unjustiﬁed doubts about his friends.
III.
BASIC MATERIALS AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we expose brieﬂy some basic and complex
types of emotion, their relation with the cognitive theories
and facial evidences, then we present the motivation and the
objectives of our study.
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

A. Emotions
As Becheiraz et al. [11] say ”An emotion is an emotive
reaction of a person to a perception”. Basic emotions consist of
a relatively small number of prototypes, for example: sadness,
fear, etc. Basic emotions exist and can be identiﬁed easily.
Complex emotions are emotions that occur as a result of a
mixture or combinations of basic emotions [12]. When dealing
with basic emotions, we are directed towards the idea that
it happens automatically with a little cognitive processing.
Complex emotions such as despair and spite, require more
cognitive processing which reﬂects the agent’s interaction and
evaluation with some single event [13]. Plutchik [14] classiﬁed
emotions using a wheel to illustrate some of the rules that
shape the relationship among emotions. He identiﬁed eight
primary emotions (joy vs. sadness, trust vs. disgust, fear vs.
anger, anticipation vs. surprise). The wheel allows to blend
multiple emotions to produce more complicated ones such as
primary, secondary and tertiary dyads (i.e love is the blended
emotion of joy and trust) [15].
B. Cognitive Theories
The basic notion of cognitive theories is that emotions
are rational states that could be differentiated depending on
cognitive analysis or suggestion components [16]. Depending
on OCC Theory, emotions are triggered from the interac-
tion of events (desirable/undesirable), actions (commenda-
tion/reproached) and objects. Each of the resulting twenty two
emotions is a unique combination of these variables [17].
C. Facial Evidences
Ekman et al. [18] found some relationships between basic
emotions such as: happiness, surprise, fear, sadness and dis-
gust and evidences appearing on individuals faces affected by
such emotions. The observation focused on the following face
features: forehead, eyebrows, eyelids, cheeks, nose, lips and
chin. Basic emotions could be blended together to produce new
constructed facial evidences. However, when two emotions
are blended together, not all the facial evidences of the basic
emotions appear on the person’s face.
D. Motivation and objectives
Based on the OCC theory and psychology literature, several
studies tackle the subject of basic and complex emotions and
build logical models of emotions. Guiraud et al. [19] propose
a model that can recognize expressive speech acts, e.g., to
apologize, to thank, to reproach, etc., based on emotions such
as Rejoicing, Gratitude, Regret, etc. Lorini et al. [13] build
a model for reasoning about counter-factual emotions such
as regret, rejoicing, disappointment, elation. Steunebrink [17]
formalize a psychological model for the twenty two types
of emotions found in OCC theory such as love, hate, anger,
gratitude, etc. Bonnefon et al. [16] build a logical framework
for Trust-Related Emotions such as Joy/Distress, Hope/Fear,
Satisfaction/Disappointment, Fear-conﬁrmed/Relief and Grati-
tude/Anger. However, to our knowledge, none were concerned
to address the logical formalization of any of the PPD diseases
resulting emotions.
Moreover, we have chosen to illustrate the usefulness of our
model through the implementation of a PPD disease diagnosis
support system. This system is supplied with data related to the
patient’s knowledge such as his beliefs, goals, etc., and facial
evidences of the latter. The choice of facial characteristics was
guided by the richness of Ekman’s work on this issue which
provides a solid foundation on the relationship between basic
emotions and facial evidences. We have placed this work in
the context of the Plutchick’s theory to express and recognize
the facial evidences associated to complex emotions, if any.
Thereby, our system implements the logical formalization of
the two targeted complex emotions (i.e., despair and spite),
gets input (patient data), and helps diagnose PPD diseases.
IV.
LOGICAL FORMALISATION FOR PPD DISEASES
In the model we aim to build, we suppose that an agent
having a goal α or (¬α) is responsible to feel some emotions
towards that event (goal) [19].
Researchers used different types of logic to build models
that serve their aims. We will rely on dfSTIT (”decidable and
axiomatizable fragment of STIT”) logic in order to overcome
problems related to complex emotions representation. STIT
(”Seeing to it that”) logic [20] has emerged in the nineties as
a tool in formal philosophy and recently was used in computer
science thanks to its ease to express choices and possibilities
of agents and group of agents. The language of STIT logic
is built from a ﬁnite set of agents called AGT = {1, 2, ..., n}
and an inﬁnite set of propositional variables called ATM. The
well-formed formulas of STIT logic are:
α ::= p|¬α|α ∧ α|[J]α
where p ∈ ATM and J ⊆ AGT. Unfortunately the version of
STIT was recently proved to be undecidable and unaxiomati-
zable. Lorini et al. [13] proposed an extension to STIT, which
is named dfSTIT and proved it decidable and axiomatizable.
The dfSTIT was extended with knowledge modalities where
modiﬁcations were operated to the syntax and semantics of
STIT. This logic contains a vital chunk named STIT chunk,
which deals with an agent and groups of agents. This chunk
reﬂects the agent (group of agents) actions and concentrates on
the effects of these actions. It also has the ability to express the
conﬁrmation from the viewpoint of the agent and the group of
agents against an output. In Section IV-D, the STIT chunk will
play an important role in constructing a cognitive structure to
the spite emotion.
In the following, we give the syntax and semantics of our
PPD logic (PPDL) allowing to formalize despair and spite.
A. Syntax
The ingredients of the PPDL syntax are: a ﬁnite non-empty
set AGT = {a1, a2, ..., an} of agents, a ﬁnite non-empty set
EV NT = {ev1, ev2, ..., evk} of atomic events, a non-empty
set ATP = {m, n, ...} of atomic propositions. The PPDL
language is the set of formulas deﬁned as follows:
Sli,j ::= p|Sli,j ∧ Sli,j|¬Sli,j
Ω ::= [J]Sli,j|Ω ∧ Ω
α ::= p|Sli,j|Ω|¬α|α ∧ α|Beliα|Goaliα|PossiFα|
Hasiα| < φ > Ω
where
α
is
an
atomic
event
(goal),
p
ranges
over
ATP, J ranges over 2AGT \{φ}, (i, j) range over AGT.
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

The other Boolean classical constructions: ∧(conjunction),
∨(disjunction), ¬(negation), →(implication), ↔(equivalence),
⊥(contradiction), ⊤(tautology) are deﬁned in a standard way.
Operators can be deﬁned as unambiguous symbols that
represent a collection of truth functions. They are as follows:
1) Operator (Beliα): is used to represent a speciﬁc belief
of agent i about the truthfulness of some event α. However
this operator doesn’t forcibly refer to the truthfulness of event
in the real world. For example, ”agent i believes that he is
beautiful” but really he is not. This operator reads in the form
of ”agent i believes that α is true” [19].
2) Operator (Goaliα): is used to represent that a speciﬁc
agent i goal is α. An agent must have a goal because of a
standard compliance or it will deduce a goal from another
agent goal. As an example of the standard compliance: ”The
hunger of agent i will oblige him to search for food. The
hungry agent i forms a new goal represented by searching
for food”. The goal operator reads in a form ”agent i wants α
to be true” [19].
3) Operator (PossiFα): is used to represent that a speciﬁc
agent i thinks that α will be true in some possible world in the
future. In other words, agent i thinks that there is at least one
world, in which α will be true in all possible future worlds.
Basically the (Possiα) is an abbreviation of (¬Beli¬α) and
reads in a form ”agent i believes that there is a possibility in
the future that α will be true” or ”agent i doesn’t believe that
α will not be true” [16].
4) Operator (Hasiα): is used to represent that a speciﬁc
agent i has an event α. In other words, an event α is an
exclusive ownership of an agent i. No other agent in AGT
has the ownership of the event α. As an example if ”agent
i has a pen” then no other agent has the ownership of that
pen. So, agent i has an exclusive ownership of it. Has can be
deﬁned as below:
M, w |= Hasiα iff ∀v ∈ W, ∀i, j ∈ AGT,
i ̸= j → M, v |= Hasiα ∧ M, v |= ¬Hasjα.
5) Operator (< φ > Ω): is used to represent that ”an event
Ω is possibly True” [13].
6) Operator ([φ]Sli,j): Sli,j represents the same level
event, which means that two agents are at the same level in:
Science, Finance, Social Position, etc. This operator is used to
represent that ”an event Sli,j is necessarily true” [13].
7) Operator(< φ > [J]Sli,j): is a mixture of the two
preceding operators, which are the possibly and necessarily
operators. It represents ”agent j sees to it that Sli,j is true” or
”group J sees to it that Sli,j is true” [13]. The composition
[J]Sli,j is basically written in the form ¬[J]¬Sli,j and it is
abbreviated to the preceding form. The [J] type operator is
used to express the impression of J to an event. The J symbol
will refer to one agent depending on the action responsibility
that is related to that agent, while it is possible for the same
symbol to refer to a group of agents. An agent or group of
agents can express his/their opinion to the same level event
(true or false) through the chunk sees to it that(STIT). The
operator ([J]Sli,j) is used instead of (< φ > [J]Sli,j) to refer
to the expression ”sees to it that”. When the case to consider
is related to a group of agents in [J]Sli,j, J represents a group
of agents and Sli,j represents an event on which the group J
must give their opinion. In more detail, the composition [J]α
will refer to ”group J sees to it that α is true no matter what
the other agents in the set of agents except J to do”. If the
set J contains only one agent such as k, then the composition
[k]α will refer to ”agent k sees to it that α is true no matter
what the other agents in the set of agents except k do”.
Atoms: are tagging some states that share some speciﬁca-
tions (goodness, same level, etc.) for a speciﬁc agent [13]. In
our model we need the following atoms:
8) Atom(PSTViα): is used to represent that an event α is
a good thing to an agent i. We can say that this atom is used
for tagging a positive event to a speciﬁc agent. Basically the
(PSTViα) is an abbreviation of ([φ]Pstvi → α) and reads in
a form ”α is positive for agent i if and only if α is true in all
positive states” [13].
9) Atom(Sli,j): is used to represent that two agents i, j are
at the same level. The level (Sli,j) is an event which indicates
that i, j are in the same scientiﬁc, ﬁnance, social position, ...
levels. This atom is read in a form ”agent i and j are at the
same level”.
B. Semantics
M= (W,B,G,P,H,S,V) represent PPDL semantic where:
1) W: is a nonempty set of possible worlds or states.
2) B: AGT
→ 2W×W maps every agent i ∈ AGT to
serial, transitive, euclidean relation Bi over W. It represents
the semantic of the agent i belief chunk (Beli), which can
be expressed as a set Bi(w) = {v|(w, v) ∈ Bi}. This set
represents the worlds that an agent i thinks that it is possible at
world w. The seriality of Bi means that an agent i has all the
time harmonic beliefs, while the transitivity and euclideanity
of Bi means that good and bad beliefs of an agent are
introspective bound [19].
3) G: AGT → 2W×W maps every agent i ∈ AGT to a
serial relation Gi over W. It represents the semantic of the
agent i goal chunk (Goali), which can be expressed as a set
Gi(w) = {v|(w, v) ∈ Gi}. This set represents the worlds that
an agent i want, i.e., working towards achieving it. The seriality
of Gi means that an agent i must all the time have at least one
state that he is working to satisfy [19].
4) P: AGT
→ 2W×W maps every agent i ∈ AGT to
serial, transitive, euclidean relation Pi over W. It represents the
semantic of the agent i possibility chunk (Possi), expressed
as a set Pi(w) = {v|(w, v) ∈ Pi}. Since the chunk (Possi) is
an abbreviation of (¬Beli¬α), the set Pi will gain the same
relations: seriality, transitivity, euclideanity as in Bi [16].
5) H: AGT → 2W×W maps every agent i ∈ AGT to a
serial relation Hi over W. It represents the semantic of the
agent i has chunk (Hasi), which can be expressed as a set
Hi(w) = {v|(w, v) ∈ Hi} that represents the worlds where an
agent i has an ownership. The seriality of Hi means that an
agent i must all the time have at least one state that he/she has
the ownership.
6) S: 2AGT → 2W×W maps a set of agents J ∈ 2AGT to
equivalence relation SJ over W. It represents the semantic of
the ”sees to it that” chunk ([J]). In S the relation on W is a
function from W to 2W , such that for every J ∈ 2AGT , the
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

set can be expressed as SJ(w) = {v ∈ W|wSJv}. This set
represents the worlds that a set of agents J seeing to them that
an event is true. SJ is an equivalence relation over W such
that this set must satisfy the following bonds [13]:
•
SJ ⊆ Sφ;
•
SJ = ∩j∈JS{j};
•
∀w ∈ W, ∀(wj)j∈AGT ∈ Sφ(w)n, ∩j∈AGT S{j}(wj) ̸= φ;
•
SAGT = idW
where Sφ is the relation over all possible outcomes: if wSφv
then v is a possible outcome at the current world w.
7) V: ATM
→ 2W is a valuation function. This set
represents the worlds that an agent i wants/works to achieve.
C. A formalization of Disappointment Emotion: Despair
Despair is a complex emotion. This emotion type repre-
sents ”total loss of hope, which may be passive or may be
derive one to furious efforts” [21]. A person feeling with
despair will not tend to have any hope. He believes that there
is nothing he can do to change the situation that causes him
to feel despair [22]. Relating to the ﬁrst characteristic, Fawzi
says [10] about patients who suffer from the PPD disease, that
they are ”Possessed by a sense of despair, which paid them
to aggression on others”. Depending on Plutchik’s theory, the
despair is a secondary dyad, which is constructed from the
two basic emotions fear and sadness:
Despair = Fear + Sadness
(1)
Fear makes the agent displeased about the prospect of an
undesirable event [17]. Depending on the preceding deﬁnition,
it can be recognized that fear is constructed from two compo-
nents, which are: agent i does not desire an event α to be true,
and, in a speciﬁc time in the future, agent i believes that α
may be true. The ﬁrst component can be understood as, at this
moment, the agent i does not desire an event α to be true. This
understanding could be formalized by: Goali¬α. The second
component can be interpreted as the agent i believes that, in the
future, in some way or another, α will be true. Said otherwise,
agent i believes that α will be true in some possible moment in
the future: PossiFα where Fα means that somewhere, in the
future, α will be true . According to the preceding analysis,
the epistemic framework for fear can be built as [16]:
Deﬁnition 1 (Fear)
Feariα = Goali¬α ∧ PossiFα
(2)
Sadness is one of the basic emotions, and it is the result
of the person perception of the truthfulness of some event and
what he aims to do. In other words, an agent i will feel Joy if
he knows that some event α is true, agent i must believe that α
is true and agent i goal is α. Relating to sadness, if the agent i
realizes that α is true but his goal is ¬α then he feels sad about
the fact that α is true. According to the preceding analysis, the
epistemic framework for sadness can be built as [19]:
Deﬁnition 2 (Sadness)
Sadnessiα = Goali¬α ∧ Beliα
(3)
Depending on Plutchick’s deﬁnition of Despair and deﬁnitions
1 and 2, the cognitive structure that recognizes the despair is:
Deﬁnition 3 (Despair)
Despairiα = [Goali¬α∧PossiFα]∧[Goali¬α∧Beliα] (4)
The former description of Despair in equation (4) could be
minimized to be as we can see in equation (5) since the chunck
Beli means that agenti believes that α is always true. While
the chunck PossiFα means that agenti believes that, in the
future, α may or may not be true:
Despairiα = Goali¬α ∧ Beliα
(5)
Depending on equation (5), the two emotions, which are
despair and sadness, will represent the same emotion. This
is a contradiction since the despair emotion has a different
meaning and effect to the person than the sadness emotion. In
order to differentiate between them, we searched the literature
of psychology and found that Boeree [23] deﬁned the despair
as ”despair is sorrow arising from the idea of a past or future
object from which cause for doubting is removed. Despair
happens when fear overwhelms hope”. Johnson et al. [24]
claimed that the despair is a complex emotion and deﬁned it
as ”intense sadness and lack of hope as a result of inability
to achieve goals”. So the despair is hopeless while sadness is
close to Sorrow and can be hopeful. The despair will be:
Despair = Fear + Sadness + Hopeless
(6)
Hopeless indicates that there is no possibility in the future
to achieve agent i goal [23]. In other words, an agent i will
feel hopeless, when some event happened and that event is
the inverse of (his/her) goal and there are no possibility in the
future for agent i goal to be achieving.
Despairiα = [Goali¬α ∧ PossiFα] ∧ [Goali¬α ∧ Beliα]
∧ [Goali¬α ∧ ¬PossiF¬α]
(7)
Depending on equation (5), the equation (7) will be:
Despairiα = [Goali¬α ∧ Beliα] ∧ [Goali¬α ∧ ¬PossiF¬α]
which could be minimized to equation (8) by removing the
redundancy of the chunk Goali¬α:
Despairiα = [Beliα ∧ Goali¬α ∧ ¬PossiF¬α]
(8)
So equation (8) will represent the cognitive structure of the
Despair emotion.
Example 1.
An employee named Tom works in a famous company. He
knows somehow that he will be ﬁred from the job, represented
by BelT om(ﬁred). Tom’s aim is not to be ﬁred, represented by
GoalT om¬(ﬁred). Tom realizes that there is no possibility in
the future to be not ﬁred represented by ¬PossT omF¬(ﬁred).
Tom will feel despair as we can see below:
DespairT om(ﬁred) =
[BelT om(ﬁred) ∧ GoalT om¬(ﬁred) ∧ ¬PossT omF¬(ﬁred)]
In order to improve the accuracy of complex emotion de-
tection, we will cover some facial evidences related to such
detection. Facial evidences coupled to despair emotion factors
will be provided to the knowledge base of the system, allowing
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

to improve the decision process to be taken by the inference
engine. Equation 6 shows that despair is composed of three
different emotions: fear, sad and hopeless. The ﬁrst two are
basic emotions and have special facial evidences for each.
Unfortunately, this is not the case for the hopeless emotion.
The facial evidences for fear are: Eye Brows are raised and
drawn together, Upper Eye lid are raised and lower eyelid
is tensed, Lips are either tensed slightly and drawn back or
stretched and drawn back, Eyes are opened and tense, Mouth
opens, Forehead wrinkles drawn to the center while the facial
evidences for sad are: Inner corners of eyebrows are raised and
may be drawn together, Skin below the eyebrow is triangulated
with inner corner up, Upper lid inner corner is raised, Corners
of the lips are drawn or lip is trembling. When the fear and sad
are blended, not all the facial evidences for each are collected
together, instead some evidences of each appears. The blending
of fear and sad will produce the facial evidences: Inner corners
of eyebrows are raised and may be drawn together, Upper lid
inner corner is raised, Mouth opens by which it is regarded as
facial evidences for despair emotion [18].
D. A formalization of Resentment Emotion: Spite
The spite emotion has been neglected by psychologists in
their studies and research. The neglecting case of that emotion
type reached the degree that there is no single article published
on this topic in journals of psychology, social personality
or clinical psychology. The evolutionary biologists Marcus
et al.
[25] deﬁned spite as ”behaviors that have negative
consequences for both the actor and the recipient”. Spite is
a complex emotion and could be classiﬁed as an extreme
passive type of emotion. The agent who feels it oscillates
between harsh agent, sly agent, devastating agent, petty agent
and seemingly unharmed agent.
According to Florey [26], spite is a negative, harmful
feeling, which incites irrational actions. It arises when one
believes that someone else exists on an even status as one’s
self, but has something which one does not, and because of the
belief that both individuals are on the same level, one feels that
they are being wronged. The two individuals, however, do not
exist on the same level, and if they did, then the spiteful one
would have legitimate means of achieving the desired object,
and therefore, has no reason to feel spiteful”. Relating to the
second characteristic, Fawzi [10] said of a patient suffering
from PPD disease that the patient ”Holds spite against those
who disagreed with him in opinion or belief”. By using our
logic, we can build a formula to recognize the spite emotion:
Deﬁnition 4 (Spite)
Spitei,j (α, Sli,j) = Beli¬HasiPSTViα∧
BeliHasjPSTViα ∧ Beliα ∧ BeliSli,j ∧ ¬[J]Sli,j
(9)
So equation (9) will represent the cognitive structure of spite
emotion, where the ﬁrst chunk of it represents that agent i
will feel spite against agent j in the existence of two atomic
events α and Sli,j. The spite will be achieved under the
presence of several factors: agent i believes that he does not
have a positive (good) event, which is α, agent i believes that
agent j has a positive event, which is α, agent i believes that
α is true, agent i believes that he and agent j are at the same
level such as Sli,j is true, and the group of agents J sees to
it that the same level event Sli,j is false.
Example 2.
Consider two neighbours Joe and Max: Joe is an employee
in a small company with a simple salary while Max is
a sales manager in a big company with a huge salary.
Max bought an expensive new car and Joe knows it
somehow,
represented
by
BelJoe(car),
so
he
believes
that Max has the ownership of a positive event, which
is
represented
by
BelJoeHasMaxPSTVJoe(car),
but
Joe did not buy an expensive new car, represented by
BelJoe¬HasJoePSTVJoe(car). Joe believes that he and Max
are at the same level, represented by BelJoe(SlJoe,Max ).
The belief of Joe came from the view point that he and
Max are employees and did not take into consideration other
differences. The same level event means that agents Joe and
Max are of the same level in science degree, community
position, ﬁnancial position, etc. We assume having a group J
of persons, which are the friends of Joe and Max, represented
by the group (Tom, Tony, Ted). The composition [J]α can be
expressed depending on a form of group (Tom, Tony, Ted)
sees to it that an event Joe and Max are at the same level
is true, no matter what the other agents in the set of agents
except Tom, Tony, Ted do. In reality the group J, represented
by Tom, Tony, Ted did not see that Joe and Max are at the
same level. Joe will feel spite when the preceding events are
satisﬁed:
SpiteJoe,Max (car, SlJoe,Max ) = BelJoeHasMaxPSTVJoe(car)
∧ BelJoe¬HasJoePSTVJoe(car) ∧ BelJoe(car)∧
BelJoe(SlJoe,Max ) ∧ ¬[Tom,Tony,Ted]sees to it that(SlJoe,Max )
Unfortunately, there are no facial evidences relating to spite
since this type of emotions isn’t constructed from basic emo-
tions that we can blend.
V.
LOGICAL MODEL IMPLEMENTATION
The proposed system has the ability to differentiate the
despair and spite emotions, which are constructed from (Input,
Inference Engine, Knowledge Base and Output) as we can see
in Figure 1. The Input of the system is data ranging between
facial evidences and the factors of the targeted emotions of the
agent. The inference engine will compare the system input to
the knowledge base in order to differentiate the two targeted
complex emotions. Relating to despair emotion, the stored data
in the knowledge base are facial evidences and emotion factors
while the data for spite are only emotion ones. The system
output is to differentiate complex emotions such as despair
and spite. Depending on this differentiation, we can diagnose
if the agent suffers from PPD disease.
Figure 1. implementation system structure
As an example, consider two students Ed and Sam. Ed is
dismissed from the university. Ed’s friend Sam has a girlfriend.
Let us start by analyzing the event: Ed is dismissed from the
university. Ed knows somehow that he is dismissed from the
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

university, represented by BelEd(dismiss study). Ed’s goal
is not to be dismissed from his university, represented by
GoalEd¬(dismiss study). Ed realizes that there is no possibil-
ity in the future to be not dismissed from his university, which
is represented by ¬PossEdF¬(dismiss study). The system can
conclude that Ed feels despair when the preceding events are
satisﬁed as we can see below:
DespairEd(dismiss study) = BelEd(dismiss study)∧
GoalEd¬(dismiss study) ∧ ¬PossEdF¬(dismiss study)
When Ed face shows some evidences such as: inner corners
of eyebrows are raised, upper lid inner corner is raised, the
system cannot conclude that Ed feels despair since one of the
facial evidences (”Mouth opens”) is unavailable. Despite this
problem, the system enables to diagnose that the agent feels
despair from the existence of the emotion factors.
Now, let us consider the event: Ed’s friend Sam has a girlfriend.
Sam is an attractive person while Ed is not. Ed knows somehow
that Sam has the ownership of a positive event (having a
girlfriend), represented by BelEdHasSamPSTVEd(gf) but
Ed did not have a girlfriend, which is represented by
BelEd¬HasEdPSTVEd(gf). Ed knows that Sam has a girl-
friend, which is represented by BelEd(gf), which means that
Ed believes that an event of ”have a girlfriend” is true. Ed
believes that he and Sam are at the same level relating to
attractiveness, which is represented by BelEd(SlEd,Sam ). The
belief of Ed came from the view point that he and Sam
are beautiful and did not take into consideration the other
differences. We assume having a group J of persons who
know both Ed and Sam that is represented by the set (John,
Joe, Jack). The composition [J]α can be expressed in a form
”group (John, Joe, Jack) sees to it that an event (Ed and Sam
are at the same level) is true no matter what the other agents
in the set of agents except (John, Joe, Jack) do”. In reality the
group J did not see that Ed and Sam are at the same level,
which is represented by Ed and Sam are at the same level. The
system can conclude that Ed feels spite when the preceding
events are satisﬁed as we can see below:
SpiteEd,Sam (gf, SlEd,Sam ) = BelEdHasSamPSTVEd(gf)∧
BelEd¬HasEdPSTVEd(gf) ∧ BelEd(gf) ∧ BelEd(SlEd,Sam )
∧ ¬[John, Joe, Jack]seestoitthat(SlEd,Sam )
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a logic named PPDL that allows
us to formalize and to reason about two complex emotions that
are despair and spite. Unfortunately the OCC and Plutchik’s
Theories could not cover the emotional states of psychological
personality’s characteristics for the PPD disease. We overcome
this problem by going deep in the psychology literatures and
searching for discreet representation to reach to the uniﬁed for-
malization for the disease. Such formalization aims to capture
the logical structure underlying a chosen psychological model
of emotion; the resulting logical speciﬁcation of emotions can
then be used to reason about properties of emotions in a formal
manner, thus gaining more insight into the workings of human
emotions. By the uniﬁed formalization, we reach the goal of
representing and recognizing the PPD disease by building a
logical model with emotional ﬂavour.
REFERENCES
[1]
DH-Pathways, “Recognizing complexity: Commissioning guidance for
personality disorder services,” M. Health, 2009.
[2]
J. Peay, “Personality disorder and the law: Some awkward questions,”
Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology, vol. 18, no. 3, 2011, pp. 231–
244.
[3]
B. Kemelgor, L. Sussman, J. Kline, and J. Zurada, “Who are the dif-
ﬁcult employees? psychopathological attributions of their co-workers,”
Journal of Business & Economics Research (JBER), vol. 5, no. 10,
2007, pp. 47–62.
[4]
M. W. Wiederman and R. A. Sansone, “Borderline personality disorder
and sexuality,” The Family Journal, vol. 17, no. 3, 2009, pp. 277–282.
[5]
Hazelden-foundation, “Facts about addiction and personality disorder,”
http://dmh.mo.gov/docs/mentalillness/personalitydisorder.pdf, 2007.
[6]
S. Lindstr¨om and K. Segerberg, “Modal logic and philosophy,” Hand-
book of modal logic, vol. 3, 2007, pp. 1149–1214.
[7]
A. Ortony, G. L. Clore, and A. Collins, The cognitive structure of
emotions.
Cambridge university press, 1990.
[8]
Mental-Health, “Personality disorder,” National Mental Health Con-
sumer Self-Help Clearinghouse, 2015.
[9]
K. P. Stoddart, “Personality disorder,” Royal College of Psychiatrists,
2015.
[10]
J. Fawzi, “Terrorist and personal causes of terrorism from the standpoint
of academics and politicians and journalists and clerics convicted of
crimes and terrorism in iraq,” Ph.D. dissertation, Sulaymaniyah, Iraq,
2009.
[11]
P. Becheiraz and D. Thalmann, “A behavioral animation system for
autonomous actors personiﬁed by emotions,” in Proceedings of the 1998
Workshop on Embodied Conversational Characters, 1998.
[12]
R. Plutchik, “The nature of emotions human emotions have deep
evolutionary roots, a fact that may explain their complexity and provide
tools for clinical practice,” American Scientist, vol. 89, no. 4, 2001, pp.
344–350.
[13]
E. Lorini and F. Schwarzentruber, “A logic for reasoning about coun-
terfactual emotions,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 175, no. 3, 2011, pp.
814–847.
[14]
R. Plutchik, “Integration, differentiation, and derivatives of emotion,”
Evolution an Cognition, vol. 7, no. 2, 2001, pp. 114–125.
[15]
S. M. Mohammad and P. D. Turney, “Crowdsourcing a word–emotion
association lexicon,” Computational Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 3, 2013,
pp. 436–465.
[16]
J.-F. Bonnefon, D. Longin, and M.-H. Nguyen, “A logical framework
for trust-related emotions,” Electronic Communications of the EASST,
Formal Methods for Interactive Systems 2009, vol. 22, 2009, pp. 1–16.
[17]
B. Steunebrink et al., “The logical structure of emotions,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Netherlands, 2010.
[18]
P. Ekman and W. V. Friesen, Unmasking the face: A guide to recog-
nizing emotions from facial clues.
Ishk, 2003.
[19]
N. Guiraud, D. Longin, E. Lorini, S. Pesty, and J. Rivi`ere, “The face
of emotions: a logical formalization of expressive speech acts,” in
10th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems-Volume 3, 2011, pp. 1031–1038.
[20]
F. Schwarzentruber and C. Semmling, “Stit is dangerously undecidable.”
in ECAI, 2014, pp. 1093–1094.
[21]
R. A. Pecchenino, “The economic consequences of despair,” Maynooth
University, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[22]
J. Panksepp, “The neuro-evolutionary cusp between emotions and
cognitions: Implications for understanding consciousness and the emer-
gence of a uniﬁed mind science,” Consciousness & Emotion, vol. 1,
no. 1, 2000, pp. 15–54.
[23]
C. G. Boeree, “Personality theory: A biosocial approach,” 2009.
[24]
P. N. Johnson-Laird and K. Oatley, “The language of emotions: An
analysis of a semantic ﬁeld,” Cognition and emotion, vol. 3, no. 2,
1989, pp. 81–123.
[25]
D. K. Marcus, V. Zeigler-Hill, S. H. Mercer, and A. L. Norris, “The
psychology of spite and the measurement of spitefulness,” Psychological
assessment, vol. 26, no. 2, 2014, p. 563.
[26]
D. M. Florey, “The problem of spite,” Master’s thesis, Gettysburg
College, 2013.
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

