User Experience: Buzzword or New Paradigm? 
 
Dominique L. Scapin, Bernard Senach, Brigitte Trousse, and Marc Pallot 
INRIA Research Team AxIS 
Rocquencourt and Sophia-Antipolis, France 
{dominique.scapin, bernard.senach, brigitte.trousse, marc.pallot }@inria.fr 
 
Abstract - This paper explores User Experience, a rather novel 
and popular view on human-computer interaction, through an 
extensive review of the literature. After introducing its 
polysemous nature, this paper describes the origins of User 
Experience, its scope, components and various definitions. 
Then, User Experience methods are surveyed, distinguishing 
processes, frameworks, and specific methods. The conclusion 
identifies a set of issues about the needs for increased User 
Experience maturity. 
Keywords - User Experience, Usage, HCI, New Paradigm, 
Hedonic, Pragmatic, Methods. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
From the early days of ergonomics and HCI (Human-
Computer Interaction), user experience really meant user 
characteristics in terms of knowledge, skills, know-how, 
"savoir faire" through learning and practice. Usual 
distinctions were made between expert and novice, between 
domain expertise and computer expertise, etc. 
In recent years, the meaning of User Experience, also 
named by its acronym UX, has changed, particularly under 
the influence of consumer products and marketing strategies. 
In 2004, Philips modified its advertisement from "Let's make 
things better" to "Sense and Simplicity". In 2005, Apple used 
"Enjoy uncertainty" to advertise its iPod. In 2006, Nike 
started a "Joint Product eXperience" campaign. 
UX has become very popular in industry followed later 
on by several scientific communities. A growing number of 
networks, shared blogs, and wikis, have been initiated, 
mainly for computer industry professionals [1]. New 
educational opportunities are opening, as well as new UX-
related jobs: conferences employment boards, professional 
email lists, etc., show a large progression in job offers that 
include UX requirements [2], [3]. 
However, UX has several meanings, with a varying and 
complex coverage of topics and issues. What is really UX, 
where does it come from, what does it mean, is it really that 
new? It is the purpose of this paper to uncover the 
complexity and underlying mechanisms of UX, particularly 
from a conceptual and methodological point of view. 
This paper presents the UX origins, scope, components 
and various definitions. Then, UX methods are surveyed, 
distinguishing processes, frameworks, and specific methods. 
The conclusion identifies a set of issues about the needs 
towards increased UX maturity. 
 
II. 
UX ORIGINS 
A good and humorous start is to look at Tom Stewart’s 
(Chair of ISO TC 159/ SC4) company web site [4] (July 
2009): "The study of the relationship between people and 
technology has been called a variety of names over the years 
from computer ergonomics, human computer interaction and 
usability to, more recently, human-centred design and UX. 
The term user experience is now widely used, … Personally, 
I do not really care what this area is called … So I now use 
the term user experience to describe what I work on ... "  
Looking way back in terms of UX origin, an historical 
link can be established with [5]. This philosophical 
contribution about art contained already some of the UX 
pragmatic and holistic orientations of today. 
In HCI, with the view that UX may just be another label, 
the origins of UX can be dated quite early, towards the start 
of Human Factors, during World War II, sometimes even 
earlier [6]. In the 80’s-90’s UX can be related to the rise of 
UCD (user-centered design) [7]. However the job of UX 
architect was then very limited in scope. 
Indeed the question is: what is the difference between 
good old usability and UX, and what does it bring as new 
methods and results? This will be discussed in the definition 
Section IV, and in the methods Section V. 
One of the first papers looking at UX with a very wide 
view can be found in [8]. At the time, based on several 
philosophical views, the author identified two types of 
experiences in user–product interactions: a satisfying 
experience, which is a process–driven act that is performed 
in a successful manner, and a rich experience, which has a 
sense of immersive continuity and interaction, and may be 
made up of a series of satisfying experiences. 
Another line of thought regarding UX experience has 
been the "business view" [9], very much related to customer 
satisfaction and loyalty. A positive experience means a 
happy customer who returns again. Designers of software 
systems and web services have been digging deeply into how 
they might generate a positive UX. They are moving beyond 
anecdotes about excellent examples of UXs and are 
developing design principles 
To sum up, the concept of UX is wide due to a holistic 
(preferably satisfying) experience and to the business point 
of view, i.e., the selling of products. Both points of view 
mean also that, unlike classical ergonomics, it concerns 
usability (which partly includes satisfaction, see ISO 9241-
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Part 11) but a much stronger focus on non-work software, 
consumer products, and leisure applications. 
III. 
UX BACKGROUND AND COMMUNITIES 
What can at least be said about UX is that it corresponds 
definitely to the multi-disciplinary needs of industry [10]. 
Actually, a number of groups, communities and associations 
are listed in [11]. Some even talk about UX evangelism 
within organizations [12], where, at times, it is claimed that a 
well designed product should market itself, and that money 
is best spent on design and internal evangelism. However, 
collaboration 
between 
many 
different 
professional 
organizations might not be optimal [13]. 
Distinguishing circumstantial experience, long term 
experience, and co-experience, [14] identifies the issues and 
domains/ professions that concur to the various views of UX. 
To sum up on the issue is what does UX covers, and to 
which communities does it belong, our view is that, as we 
will see later in the definitions and methods, the claim that it 
should be holistic and time dependant will require a much 
wider definition of UX (in terms of scientific backgrounds), 
as well as some return to the basics (to incorporate UX 
through time), and more efforts in defining new methods 
(and more importantly coordination between methods), as 
the coverage and novelty of UX specific methods seem 
currently quite limited. 
To show roughly where UX work is, Table 1 provides a 
geographical assignment based on the authors and labs. 
found in our literature survey. 
TABLE I.  
 
Areas 
Countries 
Nb. Individual 
Contributors 
Nb. Research  
Teams 
USA 
58 
29 
 
North America 
- 60 individuals 
- from 30 labs 
Canada 
2 
1 
UK 
23 
14 
Netherlands 
15 
6 
Finland 
14 
6 
Germany 
12 
7 
Sweden 
7 
3 
Iceland 
2 
2 
Switzerland 
2 
2 
France 
2 
2 
Italy 
2 
7 
 
Europe 
- 82 individuals 
- from 53 labs 
Greece 
1 
3 
Australia 
3 
1 
Israel 
1 
1 
 
Others 
- 5 individuals 
- from 3 labs 
Algeria 
1 
1 
 
One can observe a large concentration of UX groups and 
labs in Northern Europe and the US, but very few from 
elsewhere, but they may have been overlooked. 
 
IV. 
UX DEFINITIONS 
To better characterize UX, it is useful to look at some of 
most cited definitions in the literature among the many 
currently available ones.  
A very official one comes from ISO: ISO 9241-210 
(2010) "person's perceptions and responses resulting from 
the use and/or anticipated use of a product, system or 
service" with explanatory notes saying " User experience 
includes all the users' emotions, beliefs, preferences, 
perceptions, 
physical 
and 
psychological 
responses, 
behaviours and accomplishments that occur before, during 
and after use." and " User experience is a consequence of 
brand 
image, 
presentation, 
functionality, 
system 
performance, interactive behaviour and assistive capabilities 
of the interactive system, the user's internal and physical 
state resulting from prior experiences, attitudes, skills and 
personality, and the context of use." and " Usability, when 
interpreted from the perspective of the users' personal goals, 
can include the kind of perceptual and emotional aspects 
typically associated with user experience. Usability criteria 
can be used to assess aspects of user experience.". 
Another definition comes from UPA [15], with acronym 
UE instead of UX: "Every aspect of the user's interaction 
with a product, service, or company that make up the user's 
perceptions of the whole.  User experience design as a 
discipline is concerned with all the elements that together 
make up that interface, including layout, visual design, text, 
brand, sound, and interaction. UE works to coordinate these 
elements to allow for the best possible interaction by users." 
For both UX and UE definitions, major criticisms 
concern its impreciseness and the wide gap between 
practitioners and academics in their understanding [16]. A 
widely accepted, shared understanding of UX is still lacking. 
While UX seems ubiquitous in industry, a closer look reveals 
that it is treated mainly as a synonym of usability and user-
centred-design. 
Academics, 
however, 
emphasize 
the 
differences between traditional usability and UX.  
UX is viewed as a consequence of a user’s internal state 
(predispositions, expectations, needs, motivation, mood, 
etc.), the characteristics of the designed system (e.g., 
complexity, purpose, usability, functionality, etc.) and the 
context (or the environment) within which the interaction 
occurs (e.g., organizational/social setting, meaningfulness of 
the activity, voluntariness of use, etc.). 
A survey [17] later showed that it was hard to gain a 
common agreement on the nature and scope of UX. However 
most respondents (275 researchers and practitioners from 
academia and industry) agree that UX is dynamic, context-
dependent, and subjective, that UX is something individual 
(instead of social) that emerges from interacting with a 
product, system, service or an object.  However, the issues of 
experiencing anticipated use and the object of UX are less 
consensual. 
To sum up, while the concept of UX magnifies the issue 
of a subjective view, which does not restrict itself (unlike 
usability) to satisfaction of use, but to a much wider view on 
basic human needs, including aspects that are usually more 
related 
to 
marketing, 
art, 
communications, 
and 
organizational psychology. 
While the focus is on issues such as perception, affects/ 
internal states, holistic, through time, it also does not just 
concern the product or service, but "interactions with the 
company", about the way it looks and is remembered [18]. 
In terms of scope, UX is obviously not restricted to work 
systems, as it concerns many subjective aspects beyond 
337
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

performance. However, UX can still apply in work systems, 
with the view that it can motivate people and improve work 
practices [19], or support extrinsically motivated experiences 
complementary to intrinsically motivated experiences [20]. 
V. 
UX METHODS 
After looking at scope and definitions, a number of 
questions arise: how UX is considered in the software 
process (including business oriented), what general UX 
design and evaluation frameworks are proposed, and what 
are some of the UX methods. 
A. Software Process and Business 
The software process, its lifecycle is usually an item that 
gets attention once the domain is mature enough, which 
might not be the case for UX yet. However a few 
heterogeneous contributions have arisen, from detailed 
methodology to simple case studies. 
For UX in the process, the challenge is there, as 
mentioned in [21]. The question is how industry and 
manufacturers manage to successfully get a UX idea into and 
through the development cycle? That is, to develop and sell 
it in the market within the right timeframe and with the right 
content. Proposals are made through UTUM (UIQ 
Technology Usability Metrics). 
The issue is weather or not a UX perspective changes the 
process: obviously yes if goals are to incorporate the issue of 
selling the right thing at the right time. This is illustrated in a 
study by [22] that describes the kind of UX measurements 
that are said to be useful in different parts of one particular 
organization. This email survey led to some distinctions 
between product pre-purchase, first use, and upgrade. 
Of course, one should also consider the variations due to 
the purpose of the product/service: knowledge, buying off 
the 
shelf, 
comparing, 
design, 
redesign, 
establishing 
conformance, etc. 
In terms of development process, using scrum, an agile 
programming methodology, a case study [23] led to a few 
recommendations 
about 
the 
workflow, 
roles 
and 
responsibilities of UX and cross-functional team in an hybrid 
agile environment. 
Concerning the links between UX and business, a case 
study [24] reported some experience (website, standards, 
training) in creating a UX culture, focusing on distributed 
design teams, and interactions with vendors and business 
processing outsourcing efforts. 
Other views of that nature can be found in [25] about 
organizational views specific to one company and in [26] 
about shared intelligence. 
While mainly on usability, another study [27] offers a 
view joining task impact and business impact. A similar 
distinction is made in [28] between Strategic usability 
measures (business) and Operational usability measures 
(user performance). 
B. UX design and evaluation frameworks 
The intent to separate design and evaluation studies 
seems unpractical as most studies do not make such 
distinctions, even though it seems there are more design 
aspects in UX studies than in usability studies. 
In [29], a theoretical design framework is introduced as 
"Product Ecology" and offers means of selecting relevant 
research methods. The methods are not really new 
(observation, log-files, diaries, group interactions, as well as 
participatory design, cultural probes, etc.) but include 
explicitly social aspects. 
In [30], a similar view stresses that experience goes 
beyond the artifact and actual use; it is a momentum and has 
a timeframe. It also points out that it is not possible to design 
an experience, but rather to design for experience. On the 
practical side, they report results on a television portal survey 
exploring motivation and expectations, findings and 
willingness to tell others, as well as emotions and 
attractiveness. 
In [31], the focus is on ways to encourage UX designer 
participation. It describes CodePlex, a community website 
that hosts open source projects. The main four design 
concepts on which the tool is built are: foster ways to build 
trust, provide opportunities for merit, tools to support 
crossover 
of 
work 
activities, 
and 
UX 
workspace 
commensurate with best practices. 
Other contributions, such as [32] propose basically to 
extend most usability methods selection criteria to UX. 
As for most new endeavors, new domains of 
investigation, many other proposals remain theoretical, or ad 
hoc, and rarely provide assessments from users, or clients. 
Also, they usually are in the form of opinions, rather that 
empirical evidence (in use, or re-use, or simply purchase). 
In addition, it is worth mentioning that some biases have 
been already identified. For instance, in [33], two 
experimental studies support the idea of a framing effect, 
showing that the same information can lead to different 
judgments and decisions according to whether it is presented 
in a positive or in a negative frame. In addition, as external 
sources 
of 
judgment 
may 
infer 
(reputation, 
recommendations), it seems useful to investigate further 
social networks in their usage. 
C. Specific UX methods 
This section gathers the contributions that deal explicitly 
with individual UX methods (i.e., not methodologies), with a 
few UX dimensions or methods comparisons. Also two areas 
that have inspired UX work are mentioned: software for 
games and children. 
 
1) Individual UX dimensions and methods:  
 
Concerning aesthetics measures, reference work can be 
found in [34], and [35]. Most measures are based on classical 
psychological 
or 
social 
methods, 
but 
include 
also 
physiological measurements, such as heart rate, galvanic skin 
response, pupilometry and eye tracking.  
 
Concerning emotions, work on measuring emotions can 
be found in [36], [37], [38]. However, the link between 
theory and practice is yet weak, as pointed out in [39], and it 
has the additional constraint to include the multidimensional 
nature of emotions (behavior, feelings), and it continuous 
nature, which implies lengthy and multiple measures.  
338
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Concerning UX recording/ observing, a system was 
built for the UX team at a major Internet company [40].  It 
simply states that the ability to watch high-definition study 
videos live from anywhere on the network led to a dramatic 
increase in the number of observers who directly experience 
their end users, but there are useful hints for recording and 
observation.  
Concerning Questionnaires, the literature is richer. For 
instance, a questionnaire in [41] contains nine items to 
measure the occurrence of three core human needs taken 
from Self-Determination Theory: autonomy, competence and 
relatedness. Many others do exist (many ad hoc, internal, not 
tested) that stimulated the need for selecting an appropriate 
scale for UX in [42]. The main difficulty seems to be the 
lack of explicit and transparent descriptions of psychometric 
scale development. Also, specific to the domain of emotions 
[43], a list of 10 emotion words, five positive and five 
negative was extracted from a cluster analysis of resulting 
data obtained in a research prompting users in an evaluation 
of 6 websites.  
Concerning Heuristics, an attempt was made in [44] to 
built and discuss how well heuristics covered the positive 
and negative service UX evaluation findings, and how the 
heuristics and the expert evaluation approach of UX should 
be developed further. As for usability heuristics, standard 
principles, or ergonomics criteria, it may need a while to be 
fully developed and assessed, together with the increased 
knowledge of UX and associated recommendations based on 
sound scientific grounds. 
 
2) Comparison of UX dimensions and methods:  
 
A comparison of pragmatic vs. hedonic in [45] showed 
that in a promotion focus (concern for safety and the 
avoidance of negative outcomes) participants rated an 
hedonic mp3-player as more appealing and chose it more 
frequently compared to individuals in a prevention focus 
(concern for personal growth and the attainment of positive 
outcomes). Reverse results, albeit not as strong, were found 
for the evaluation and choice of a pragmatic mp3-player. 
This supports the idea that the perceived quality of 
interactive 
products 
can 
be 
roughly 
divided 
into 
instrumental, 
task-related, 
pragmatic 
attributes 
(e.g., 
usefulness, usability) and non-instrumental, self-referential, 
hedonic attributes (e.g., novelty, beauty). Along the same 
lines, a study [46] showed again relationships between type 
of tasks and types of measures, i.e., more or less hedonic 
value depending on the task, confirming that pragmatic 
issues get high scores for a task-oriented software. 
 
3) Inspiring areas: UX in games and for children:  
 
Regarding digital games, a study [47] explored the 
variety of experiences (i.e., positive and negative) that are 
received from playing. The results suggested that UXs are 
versatile in nature but they consist of four major constructs: 
cognition, motivation, emotion and focused attention. It also 
pointed out the role of gender. From the methodological side, 
it suggests that current technologies are not advanced enough 
to reveal the vast and rich amount of details in experiences. 
This is a reason for the unavoidable need to still approach 
individuals’ experiences by using traditional methods such as 
interviews and questionnaires. Another study [48] reviews 
the different elements of the gaming experience and their 
relation to other concepts within HCI. One advice, focusing 
on ownership, is that normal applications should learn from 
games, i.e., to pay attention to what the user is trying to do, 
and help the user make the tool his own.  
Regarding children, a paper [49] showed how studying 
children's drawings can be an evaluation tool for capturing 
their experiences of different novel interfaces. Usability and 
UX factors: Fun (F), Goal Fit (GF) and Tangible Magic 
(TM) were included in the coding scheme. An interesting 
outcome is a correlation betweeen usability and UX. Another 
paper [50] in an experiment using a Smileyometer from a 
Fun Toolkit, supported the idea of a difference between 
expectations and actual experience with children. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In the market place, UX has become a major component 
particularly for new computer devices, mobiles and internet. 
The literature on UX is quite variable in its nature. Not 
all contributions gathered in our literature survey have been 
retained, the reasons being: vague statements, redundancies, 
magazine-like articles, even sometimes advertisement-like 
articles, and very few studies with empirical findings. 
One area in which there is a lot of debate is who owns the 
domain and how can it be promoted. This is a usual 
characteristic of multidisciplinary domains in the making. 
This is interesting as it offers lots of opportunities for 
collaborative research to shape up the future. 
An obvious need is some converging, non-polysemous, 
agreed upon definitions of UX that cover the various 
domains and territories that are involved. An effort to 
distinguish the concepts of quality in use, actual usability and 
user experience is proposed in [51].  
An even more important need if the improvement of UX 
processes, methods, and tools. Of course, a large part of 
existing usability, accessibility, and marketing methods can 
be applied, or rather should be applied with the view that UX 
encompasses all aspects of user interactions with products 
and services. Several contributions, in terms of research and 
practice, can be found in [52]. 
Some methods (e.g., questionnaires, interviews, etc.) 
need just extension to more subjective areas of emotions, 
branding, etc. However, the nature of UX being very 
subjective, context-, and time-dependant, not all current 
processes, methods, and tools apply well, and many areas of 
UX involvement are not covered, whether positive or 
negative. 
Even though, UX is still sometimes just viewed as an 
extension of usability, its future may really correspond to a 
paradigm evolution rather than simply a buzz word. The 
evolution is not drastic, but it adds complexity by 
considering more user areas than traditional usability. 
In addition, UX aims at all venues of everyday life, at 
products and services, not only at work situations. In all 
cases UX attempts to include both pragmatic and hedonic 
goals, viewing the user from many angles: political, social, 
339
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

marketing, art, as well as physiology, psychology, 
anthropology, etc. 
Indeed, UX lead to new keywords: from "ergonomics" to 
"marketing" and "art", from "safety, efficiency" to "pleasure, 
enjoyment, engagement", from "design" to "innovation", 
from "lab & field studies" to "living labs", from "user 
centered" to "co-design". 
The important issue is that for data gathering, it is 
changing as well: from speed, task goals achievement ratio, 
number of errors, etc., to perceived quality, goodness, 
engagement, seriousness/fun, etc. It is very important for 
well grounded UX future that the nature of data categories to 
gather is well defined, structured, and coordinated, together 
with improved methods. 
The last question is to better understand the relationship 
between UX and usage. This question, even though not 
specific to UX, is particularly important as UX involves 
time. This has to do with predictive vs. actual use. Our view 
is that a distinction should be made within UX between: 
• 
UX as a concept covering widely all the aspects 
described above (including cognitive perception and 
representation by the users). 
• 
UX as a result or state, predicted from theory or 
knowledge-based 
methods, 
or 
even 
actually 
measured at a specific time, in a particular context 
(for instance in an experiment). 
• 
UX as usage, i.e., the actual use as it can be 
monitored, surveyed, assessed. This corresponds to 
actual operations, actions and perceptions of the 
users through time (directly observable or not). 
This question will be debated within various domains and 
communities, including the emerging experiential research 
and innovation of Living Labs aimed at leading user 
communities towards group cognition and collective 
intelligence based on accumulated experience knowledge 
that 
enriches 
technology 
platforms. 
Indeed, 
today, 
users/citizens are rather considered as potential co-creators 
and experimenters that generate new ideas, play with them, 
feel, sense and interact within real scenarios and prototyped 
products/services [53], [54]. 
To end as started, on another humorous note: "Usability 
wants us to die rich. UX wants us to die happy" [55]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Helfer, B. "ACM SIGGRAPH user experience initiatives". In CHI 
'05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(Portland, OR, USA, April 02 - 07, 2005). CHI '05. ACM, New York, 
NY, 1085-1086. 
[2] 
http://twitter.com/ia_uxjobs  (Retrieved September 2011) 
[3] 
http://bx.businessweek.com/user-experience-ux/jobs/ 
(Retrieved 
September 2011) 
[4] 
http://www.system-concepts.com/articles/usability-
articles/2008/usability-or-user-experience-whats-the-difference.html  
(Retrieved september 2011) 
[5] 
J. Dewey. "Art as experience". New York: Capricorn Books, 1934. 
[6] 
W. Jastrzębowski "Rys ergonomji czyli nauki o pracy, opartej na 
prawdach poczerpniętych z Nauki Przyrody"  (The Outline of 
Ergonomics, i.e. Science of Work, Based on the Truths Taken from 
the Natural Science) (1857) 
[7] 
D. Norman, J. Miller, A. Henderson. "What You See, Some of What's 
in the Future, And How We Go About Doing It: HI at Apple 
Computer". Proc. of CHI 1995, Denver, Colorado, USA. 
[8] 
J. L. Forlizzi. "Designing for Experience: An Approach to Human-
centered Design". Master of Design in Interaction Design, 
Department of Design, College of Fine Arts, Carnegie Mellon 
University, May 1997. 
[9] 
P. Tobias and D. S. Spiegel. "Is Design the Preeminent Protagonist in 
User Experience?" Ubiquity 2009, May (May. 2009). 
[10] K. Instone, "User experience: an umbrella topic" In CHI '05 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Portland, OR, 
USA, April 02 - 07, 2005). CHI '05. ACM, New York, NY, 1087-
1088. 
[11] P. Sherman and W. Quesenbery, "Engineering the user experience: 
UX and the Usability Professionals' Association'. Interactions 12, 3 
(May. 2005), 38-40. 
[12] L. Kowalski, C. Thompson., T. Chi, D. Mc Cormick, O. Vasnaik, and 
P. Heller. "What would you do with a 1 million dollar user experience 
marketing budget?: internal vs. external user experience evangelism." 
In CHI '08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (Florence, Italy, April 05 - 10, 2008). CHI '08. ACM, New 
York, NY, 2249-2252. 
[13] R. I. Anderson. "Meeting the needs of the "user experience" 
professional". In CHI '05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (Portland, OR, USA, April 02 - 07, 2005). CHI 
'05. ACM, New York, NY, 1158-1159. 
[14] J. Forlizzi and K. Battarbee. Understanding experience in interactive 
systems. In Proc. of the 5th Conference on Designing interactive 
Systems: Processes, Practices, Methods, and Techniques (Cambridge, 
MA, USA, August 01 - 04, 2004). DIS '04. ACM, New York, NY, 
261-268. 
[15] http://www.usabilitybok.org/glossary (Retrieved September 2011) 
[16] M. Hassenzahl. "User experience (UX): towards an experiential 
perspective on product quality". In Proc. of the 20th international 
Conference of the Association Francophone D'interaction Homme-
Machine (Metz, France, September 02 - 05, 2008). IHM '08, vol. 339. 
ACM, New York, NY, 11-15. 
[17] E. C. Law, V. Roto, M. Hassenzahl, A. P. Vermeeren, and J. Kort, J. " 
Understanding, scoping and defining user experience: a survey 
approach". In Proc. of the 27th international Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA, April 04 - 09, 
2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, NY, 719-728. 
[18] F. Sampson. Brand UX. interactions 12, 4 (Jul. 2005), 10-11. 
[19] L. Norros, and P. Savioja. "Use Experience in Systems Usability 
Approach" In Proc. of the 5th COST294-MAUSE Open Workshop on 
Valid Useful User Experience Measurement (VUUM). Reykjavik, 
Island, (2008) pp. 45-48. 
[20] A. Lesage and T. Dorta, " Au-delà de l'utilisabilité: l'autotélie". In 
Proc. of the 20th international Conference of the Association 
Francophone 
D'interaction 
Homme-Machine 
(Metz, 
France, 
September 02 - 05, 2008). IHM '08, vol. 339. ACM, New York, NY, 
147-150. 
[21] M. Hellman, and K. Rönkkö, "Is User Experience Supported 
Effectively in Existing Software Development Processes? " In Proc. 
of COST294-MAUSE Workshop on Valid Useful User Experience 
Measurement (VUUM). Reykjavik, Island, (2008) pp. 32-37. 
[22] P. Ketola, and V. Roto, "Exploring User Experience Measurement 
Need"s. In Proc. of the 5th COST294-MAUSE Open Workshop on 
Valid Useful User Experience Measurement (VUUM). Reykjavik, 
Island, (2008)  pp. 23-26. 
[23] M. Budwig, S. Jeong, and K. Kelkar. "When user experience met 
agile: a case stud"y. In Proc. of the 27th international Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA, April 04 - 
09, 2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, NY, 3075-3084. 
[24] B. Leadley, H.  Pao, and S. Douglas. "Creating a user experience 
culture at a non-software company". In Proc. of the 2005 Conference 
on Designing For User Experience (San Francisco, California, 
340
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

November 03 - 05, 2005). Designing For User Experiences, vol. 135. 
AIGA: American Institute of Graphic Arts, New York, NY, 38. 
[25] D. Rosenberg. "Introducing the 360° View of UX Management". 
Interactions, interactions 14, 3 (May. 2007),, pp. 23-24. 
[26] J. Innes. "Defining the user experience function: innovation through 
organizational design". interactions 14, 3 (May. 2007), 36-37. 
[27] L. Gorlenko and P. Englefied. "Usability error classification: 
qualitative data analysis for UX practitioners". In CHI '06 Extended 
Abstracts (Montréal, Québec, Canada, April 22 - 27, 2006). CHI '06. 
ACM, New York, NY, 803-808. 
[28] T. Jokela. "A Two-Level Approach for Determining Measurable 
Usability Targets". In Proc. of the 5th COST294-MAUSE Open 
Workshop on Valid Useful User Experience Measurement (VUUM). 
Reykjavik, Island, (2008) pp. 56-59. 
[29] J. Forlizzi. The product ecology: Understanding social product use 
and supporting design culture. International Journal of Design, 2(1), 
11-20. (2007). 
[30] E. R. Oppelaar, E. Hennipman, and G. van der Veer. "Experience 
design for dummies". In Proc. of the 15th European Conference on 
Cognitive Ergonomics: the Ergonomics of Cool interaction (Funchal, 
Portugal, September 16 - 19, 2008). J. Abascal, I. Fajardo, and I. 
Oakley, Eds. ECCE '08, vol. 369. ACM, New York, NY, 1-8. 
[31] P. M. Bach, R. DeLine, and J. M. Carroll. "Designers wanted: 
participation and the user experience in open source software 
development". In Proc. of the 27th international Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA, April 04 - 
09, 2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, NY, 985-994. 
[32] N. Bevan. "Classifying and Selecting UX and Usability Measures". In 
Proc. COST294-MAUSE Workshop: Valid Useful User Experience 
Measurement (VUUM). Reykjavik, Island, (2008) pp. 13-18. 
[33] J. Hartmann, A. De Angeli, and A. Sutcliffe. Framing the user 
experience: information biases on website quality judgement. In 
Proceeding of the Twenty-Sixth Annual SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (Florence, Italy, April 05 - 10, 
2008). CHI '08. ACM, New York, NY, 855-864. 
[34] M. Hassenzahl, G. Lindgaard, and N. Tractinsky. "The study of visual 
aesthetics in human computer interaction", Proc. Dagstuhl Seminar 
08292, 10-13 July (2008), Dagstuhl, Germany. 
[35] J. Hartmann, A. Sutcliffe, and A. Angeli. "Towards a theory of user 
judgment of aesthetics and user interface quality." ACM Transactions 
on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 15, no. 4(2008) : 1-30. 
[36] R. Hazlett and J. Benedeck. "Measuring emotional valence to 
understand the user’s experience of software". International Journal 
of Human-Computer Studies, Vol. 65, 2007, pp. 306–314. 
[37] K. Isbister, K. Höök, J. Laaksolahti, and M. Sharp. "The sensual 
evaluation instrument: Developing transcultural self-report measure 
of affect". International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, Vol. 
65, 2007, pp. 315–328. 
[38] M. Isomursu, S. Tähti, S. Väinämö, and K. Kuutti. "Experimental 
evaluation of five methods for collecting emotions in field settings 
with mobile applications". International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, Vol. 65, 2007, pp. 404–418. 
[39] N. Gauducheau. "Mesurer les émotions de l'utilisateur: quels 
fondements 
pour 
une 
démarche 
d'évaluation 
des 
systèmes 
interactifs?". In Proc. of the 21st international Conference on 
Association Francophone D'interaction Homme-Machine (Grenoble, 
France, October 13 - 16, 2009). IHM '09. ACM, New York, 183-192. 
[40] M. LaRosa, D. Poole, and R. Schusteritsch. "Designing and deploying 
usetube, google's global user experience observation and recording 
system". In Proc. of the 27th international Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA, April 04 - 09, 
2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, NY, 2971-2986. 
[41] M. Hassenzahl, S. Diefenbach, and A. Saran, “Needs, affects, and 
interactive products – Facets of user experience.”. Interacting with 
Computers, 22 (5) pp. 353-362. 
[42] W. Green, G. Dunn, and J. Hoonhout, J. "Developing the Scale 
Adoption Framework for Evaluation". In Proc. of the 5th COST294-
MAUSE Open Workshop on Valid Useful User Experience 
Measurement (VUUM). Reykjavik, Island, (2008) pp. 49-55. 
[43] H. Petrie and C. Harrison. Measuring users' emotional reactions to 
websites. In Proc. of the 27th international Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA, USA, April 04 - 09, 
2009). CHI '09. ACM, New York, NY, 3847-3852. 
[44] Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, K. and M. Wäljas, "Developing an expert 
evaluation method for user eXperience of cross-platform web 
services". In Proc. of the 13th international Mindtrek Conference: 
Everyday Life in the Ubiquitous Era (Tampere, Finland, Sept. 30 – 
Oct. 02, 2009). MindTrek '09. ACM, New York, NY, 162-169. 
[45] M. Hassenzahl, M. Schöbel, and T. Trautmann, "How motivational 
orientation influences the evaluation and choice of hedonic and 
pragmatic interactive products: The role of regulatory focus". 
Interact. Comput. 20, 4-5 (Sep. 2008), 473-479. 
[46] J. Isleifsdottir and M. Larusdottir. "Measuring the User Experience of 
a Task Oriented Software". In Proc. of the 5th COST294-MAUSE 
Open Workshop on Valid Useful User Experience Measurement 
(VUUM). Reykjavik, Island, (2008) pp. 97-102. 
[47] . Komulainen, J. Takatalo, M. Lehtonen, and G. Nyman, G. 
"Psychologically structured approach to user experience in games". In 
Proc. of the 5th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer interaction: 
Building Bridges (Lund, Sweden, October 20 - 22, 2008). NordiCHI 
'08, vol. 358. ACM, New York, NY, 487-490. 
[48] E. H. Calvillo Gámez, P. Cairns, and A. L. Cox. "From the gaming 
experience to the wider user experience". In Proc. of the 2009 British 
Computer Society Conference on Human-Computer interaction 
(Cambridge, United Kingdom, September 01 - 05, 2009). British 
Computer Society Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. 
British Computer Society, Swinton, UK, 520-523. 
[49] D. Y. Xu, J. C. Read, G. Sim, B. McManus, and P. Qualter, P. 
"Children and 'smart' technologies: can children's experiences be 
interpreted and coded?". In Proc. of the 2009 British Computer 
Society Conference on Human-Computer interaction (Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, September 01 - 05, 2009). British Computer 
Society Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. British 
Computer Society, Swinton, UK, 224-231. 
[50] J. Read. "Is what you see what you get? Children, Technology and the 
Fun Toolkit". In Proc. of the 5th COST294-MAUSE Open Workshop 
on Valid Useful User Experience Measurement (VUUM). Reykjavik, 
Island, (2008) pp. 67-71. 
[51] P. Lew, L. Olsina,  and L. Zhang,  "Quality, Quality in Use, Actual 
Usability and User Experience as Key Drivers for Web Application 
Evaluation",  in Proc. ICWE, 2010, pp.218-232. 
[52] E. Law and P. Van Schaik. (Eds.) Special Issue Interactiong with 
Computers, (2010) Vol. 22, Issue 5, pp. 313-438. 
[53] http://www.ami-communities.eu/wiki/, http://www.openlivinglabs.eu/ 
(Retrieved September 2011) 
[54] M. Pallot, B. Trousse, B. Senach, and D. L. Scapin. "Living Lab 
research landscape: From user centred design and user experience 
towards user cocreation". In 1st. European Living Labs Summer 
School, Collaborative Innovation through Living Labs, Cité des 
Sciences, Paris, France, august 2010 
[55] M. Hassenzahl and V. Roto, V. "Being and Doing - A perspective on 
user experience and its measurement". Interfaces Magazine 72, 
British HCI Group. (2007) 
 
341
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-177-9
ACHI 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

