Tangible Technologies for the Development of Play Skills in Autistic Children 
 
Patrizia Marti 
Department of Social Political and 
Cognitive Science 
University of Siena 
Siena, Italy 
Department of Industrial Design 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
e-mail: patrizia.marti@unisi.it 
Luca Giacolini 
Department of Industrial Design 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
e-mail: l.giacolini@student.tue.nl 
Iolanda Iacono 
Department of Social Political and 
Cognitive Science 
University of Siena 
Siena, Italy 
e-mail: iolanda.iacono@unisi.it 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper we describe Game of Stimuli (GoS) an 
interactive tangible game for children and adolescents 
diagnosed with Autistic Spectrum Disorder. The system is 
designed to engage children in play scenarios addressing 
different stages of development from practice play to rule-
based play. The objective of the game is to maintain the 
attention on a given task while filtering irrelevant stimuli. The 
study was developed adopting a research-through-design 
approach, a design method that uses prototypes in the real 
context of use to generate new knowledge and future visions. 
The study exploited the modularity of GoS to adapt play 
activities to the current level of development of autistic 
children, and to appreciate if the tool could support them in 
mastering different stages of play of increasing complexity, 
from practice play (initial level of child development) to rule-
based play (a more advanced and skilled playful competence), 
in solitary and collaborative way. The paper concludes with a 
reflection on the knowledge gained from testing in the field. 
Reflection-in-action happened while prototyping solutions and 
it allowed us to reshape our design. Reflection-on-action 
occurred after the final prototype was completed. This level of 
reflection was achieved by reflecting back on the overall 
experience with therapists and parents, questioning our beliefs, 
decisions and obtained results.  
Playfulness, Autism, Tangible Interaction, Interactive Game, 
Stimuli, Requirements. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Play is an essential activity to develop cognitive, social 
and emotional competences in childhood. Through play, 
children learn to create and explore a world that they are able 
to handle. Growing up, they will be able to transfer the 
knowledge gained during play to the real world, and this will 
help them to understand and make sense of it. In play 
children learn and practice new behaviours and develop 
social skills [1]. In fact, cognitive processes involved in play 
activities are very similar to those involved in learning: 
motivation, meaning, repetition, self-regulation and abstract 
thinking [2]. Also the ability to read, to speak, to count 
depends on the child's ability to manipulate symbols, and this 
ability is typically developed in play [3]. For example, 
during play, a piece of wood may become a doll and a stick 
may become a horse: these are forms of symbolic play were 
imaginary objects are manipulated and embedded into a 
meaningful context. These forms of symbolic play contribute 
to the acquisition of cognitive as well as social skills.  
However, children who are prevented from playing, 
either due to cognitive, developmental or physical 
impairments, which affect their playing skills, experience a 
serious limitation in their learning potential. For this reason it 
is very important to develop tailored tools to encourage play 
in order to break down barriers for development, fostering 
individual development up the person’s potential. 
The paper addresses challenges related to play 
development in autistic children. Autism is a disorder 
spectrum characterized by a high variability of social skills 
and intellectual ability. Changes in symptom severity and 
adaptive functioning can differ significantly among children 
with autism spectrum disorder and this reduces the chances 
of designing of a unique solution that can satisfy very 
different needs and requirements. A further challenge is the 
difficulty of eliciting requirements for a so varied population 
with a paucity of skills necessary to engage in a meaningful 
way with the design team [4]. The impairments of the 
children may limit the degree to which they can collaborate 
or express themselves appropriately, and most of the 
communications have to be mediated by therapists or 
educators and therefore depend on their experience and 
interpretation of the problem. Successful methods for 
human-centred design in such a complex setting are 
relatively under-developed. 
For this reason we applied in the study a research-
through-design approach, defined by [5] as a “systematic 
enquiry conducted through the medium of practical action, 
calculated to generate or test new, or newly imported, 
information, ideas, forms or procedures and to generate 
communicable knowledge”. This kind of research is 
knowledge-directed. It generates new knowledge through 
testing and must be pursued through action in the real 
context of application, in all its complexity. 
Thus we extended the concept of user-centered design to 
encompass not just the designer-user direct relation, but 
taking in the ecology of the environment where we were 
working, in all its complexity and richness.   
II. 
RELATED WORK  
Cognitive and social development in autistic children 
have been investigated in different studies and a large 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

number of technological tools have been developed to 
support learning and play. These technologies include 
computer applications, robotics, mobile applications and 
interactive toys [6]-[9]. Recently, digital games on tablets 
and smartphones have been developed to facilitate social 
interaction amongst children with autism. For instance, 
Samsung designed the app “Look at me” [10], with the aim 
to facilitate eye contact, which is a difficult task for autistic 
subjects. Beside digital applications, an alternative paradigm 
is emerging that focuses on tangibility and embodiment in 
autism 
therapy. 
Touch 
can 
successfully 
mediate 
communication, and compensate the lack of eye contact or 
verbal language. Reference [11] observes that the lack of 
verbal skills and eye contact creates the need to explore 
tactile interaction as a means to communicate and minimize 
the detrimental effect of other modalities of communication. 
Through tactile interaction and exploration children can 
discover the world in social and physical terms.  
However, any intervention based on tactile interaction 
with autistic children has to be carefully designed. In fact, 
when people with Autistic Spectrum Disorders are affected 
in the tactile system, they may withdraw when touched and 
may overreact to the texture of objects, clothing or food. This 
may be the result of tactile misperception, which can lead to 
behavioural problems, irritability, withdrawal and isolation. 
Some sources of stimulation cause avoidance, other types of 
stimulation may have a calming effect. Some individuals 
demonstrate a preoccupation with certain tactile experiences 
and seek out such feedback on a frequent basis, e.g., insisting 
on touching smooth surfaces. Reference [12] recognized that 
tactile interaction, if tolerated by children with autism, might 
be a key vehicle of communication and interaction. They 
experimented with touch-based interaction with autistic 
children using KASPAR, a robot equipped with tactile 
sensors to engage the autistic child in bodily interactions. 
Reference [13] compared the therapeutic efficacy of a 
programmable toy called Topobo© in comparison with a 
LEGO© kit.. Playing with Topobo©, children with Autistic 
Spectrum Disorder increased their collaborative skills and 
associative play, reducing solitary play. Reference [14] 
evaluated Reactable, a  music-based tangible system, to help 
autistic children in the acquisition of social interaction 
abilities. The results of the study show that when playing 
with Reactable, children improved turn-taking skills.  
Our research focuses on play and development in autistic 
children. In the following, we briefly describe the features of 
the Autistic Spectrum Disorder and later we illustrate the 
research-through-design process leading to the development 
of GoS. The process includes testing intermediate prototypes  
in the field with six autistic adolescents and their therapists 
and educators. 
III. 
AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER 
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a lifelong disorder 
arising before the age of three, affecting mainly a male 
population. It is categorised as a pervasive developmental 
disorder (PDD) [15], although the scientific community 
agrees on defining autism as a “spectrum” [16]. The term 
implies a variety of skills and behaviours that might change 
along a continuum, from child to child and over time [15]. In 
fact, there is no unequivocal definition of autism related to 
the symptoms’ analysis: every subject fluctuates on the 
interval in between high-functioning (or Asperger) and low-
functioning, according to the level of social skills and 
intellectual ability. Children who fall into the low-
functioning category do not possess verbal communication 
and they show cognitive underdevelopment together with 
difficulties in reading facial expressions. Children who 
belong to the high-functioning category do not manifest 
significant delays in verbal communication and cognitive 
development. This variance leads to the fact that criteria for 
diagnosis still represent a debated topic. Reference [17] first 
defines autism as “Triad of Impairment”, stating that 
children with autism have problems in three different 
development areas: communication, cognitive and social 
interaction. Autistic subjects are not capable of filtering out 
the irrelevant interfering stimuli within the environment and 
therefore they process a significant amount of unnecessary 
information. This results in experiencing difficulties in 
sharing attention, adopting viewpoint of peers, taking turns 
in social interaction and decoding environmental stimuli. 
In relation to play, children with autism spectrum 
disorder in most cases prefer solitary play, and rarely engage 
in cooperative games. Of course, the level of play that they 
can reach is mostly related to the level of impairment and the 
complexity of the game itself. Low-functioning autistic 
children mostly prefer practice play and their interest is 
directed to the physical properties of the toy. High-
functioning autistic children are usually able to perform and 
engage in rule-based games where they can master cause and 
effect relations. 
Objective of this study is to design a game that can 
sustain play activities along different types, from practice to 
rule-based play, that appear at different stages of the child’s 
life. Each stage involves re-elaboration and adjustments of 
the competencies of the previous one. A major challenge of 
the study is to envision through GoS how to support different 
stages of play development in autistic children. 
IV. 
GAME OF STIMULI: A RESEARCH-THROUGH-DESIGN 
PROCESS 
The design process started with an extensive literature 
review on autism combined to an analysis of autistic children 
play abilities. We adopted the guidelines on play activities 
and disabilities as defined in the European project COST 
Action LUDI [18]. Four different categories of play where 
defined [19]: 
 
practice play (the toy can be manipulated to 
discover basic properties of objects and reality and 
how these are related to the child’s own movements 
and the environment); 
 
constructive play (the toy can be modified in 
appearance and interaction capabilities by adding 
modules to create new games that can exploit 
different interaction possibilities); 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
symbolic play (the toy can have a character, 
showing emotions and moods, and can participate 
to invented stories); 
 
rule-based play (the toy behaves in pre-defined 
ways activated by some specific action and stimuli 
initiated by the child, so that a game can be played 
with other children and play strategies can be 
developed by any player); 
This play developmental model should not be regarded as 
a unidirectional, waterfall model. It is rather a spiral showing 
the progression of the play types, their coexistence and their 
possible contaminations and reactivation.  
Following this model, we aimed at developing a game to 
determine the current level of development of autistic 
children, and to stimulate them exploring different stages of 
play, from practice play to rule-based play, both in solitary 
and collaborative mode. It must be noted that collaborative 
play is usually very challenging for autistic children.  
In parallel with the literature review, observation in the 
field and the study of clinical cases and therapeutic practices, 
different prototypes were developed and used to brainstorm 
with therapists and a neuropsychiatrist. Our research-
through-design approach generated a diversity of concepts 
that were continuously assessed by therapists and physicians. 
The design went through three layers of iterative cycles and 
layers of exploration, each one contributing to test 
hypotheses and to generate new research questions. The 
study was performed the Centre for Autism “Piccolo 
Principe”, and the Neuropsychiatry Department of the ASL7 
in Siena, Italy. 
 
A. First Prototype: a Chaos-generative Musical Interface 
The first step in the design process consisted in 
prototyping a musical instrument and exploiting the contrast 
between assonance and dissonance as positive or negative 
reinforcement feedback during the exercise. The interface 
(Figure 1) consisted of a 3X3 matrix where nine tokens were 
located. Three of them were red, three were white and three 
were black. At the beginning they were grouped in rows 
according their colour. The purpose of the game was to break 
the order of the tokens by moving them around the plate. 
When three tokens of the same colour happened to be in 
either the same row or same column, a disharmonic sound 
was generated, which we interpreted as a negative feedback. 
The more the order was broken, the more pleasant sounds 
were generated. 
This first prototype was submitted to the assessment of 
design professionals and a clinical expert in a participatory 
design workshop. From a design viewpoint, the shape and 
material of the glasses did not afford a compelling tactile 
experience; from a clinical viewpoint, the system proved to 
be weak because the negative feedback was not properly 
articulated to the user. In fact, different sensorial skills might 
lead to different interpretations of the sound feedback, and 
this could impair the overall functioning of the game. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Chaos-generative Musical Interface. 
 
B. Second Prototype: a Haptic Stimuli Generator 
The focus of the second iteration was played with self- 
generating stimuli, in opposition to the stimuli generated by 
the computer of the first prototype. We also further 
investigated tangible interaction modalities afforded by the 
system, exploring the opportunity of continuous interaction 
as opposed to the discrete interaction enabled by the plastic 
glasses of the first prototype. 
With the second prototype, we designed a tangible 
interface that mapped the pressure exerted on a simple 
keyboard to the visual output on a computer screen. This 
resulted in the building of three pressure sensors, which 
detected continuous input from the user. Any variation in the 
pressure resulted in a change in shape of the icons displayed 
on the screen display (Figure 2). Each sensor controlled one 
parameter associated to the icons (e.g. form, size, colour). 
The more force was applied to a sensor, the more the 
parameter varied the appearance of the icons creating chaotic 
patterns. For instance, in Figure 2, the first key (first pressure 
sensor) controlled the darkness of the pink circle while the 
second one controlled the dimension of the pink circle, and  
in  the  third  one,  the  flickering of the  entire image. When 
the configuration became overloading, the user could stop 
the animation by releasing the pressure. The user could 
create his own visual performance by exploring the concept 
of force associated to the tactile experience. 
A second participatory design workshop was organized 
to assess the new prototype. During the workshop, which 
again joined design and clinical expertise, it emerged that, 
despite the exploratory nature of the game, the playful 
dimension of the activity became lost. Ultimately, the 
objective of the game was unclear and after few minutes the 
player tended to lose interest in the activity itself. On the 
positive side, we realised that the continuous interaction 
created by mapping the pressure exerted on the keyboard 
along with its corresponding visual animation, became a 
promising future option. 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Figure 2.  The Haptic Stimuli Generator. 
 
C. Third Prototype: a Game of Stimuli 
During the third cycle of prototyping, we built up on the 
outcomes of the participatory design activity of the first two 
iterations. On the one hand, the chaotic musical instrument 
informed us on the potential of the tangible interaction but on 
the other hand, the continuity of interaction realised in the 
second prototype turned out to be an opportunity for future 
design. The final prototype is called Game of Stimuli – GoS. 
It is an interactive tangible game resulting from an 
incremental design process where we build up on the 
evaluation of previous iterations. Early prototypes included a 
chaotic musical instrument and a haptic stimuli generator. 
However, none of these prototypes raised the interest of 
therapists and educators who collaborated to the project. 
Even if tangibility was considered to be a winning feature of 
both prototypes, none of them could cover the high 
variability of play skills in the autism spectrum, from low to 
high functioning.  
For this reason we decided to develop a modular game of 
increasing complexity in the number of physical modules, 
the generated stimuli and in play scenarios ranging from 
practice play to rule-based play (Figure 3). The hardware 
consists of one core element where most of the electronic 
components are located. Next to it, the structure expands into 
a variable amount of modules, which can be attached to the 
main element. The materials used to build the modules 
varied along the prototyping process, from cardboard to 
plywood. The same happened for the buttons: their softness 
was changed many times to reach the ideal balance between 
malleability and robustness when pushed. 
Each module consists of a block with a push button on 
top of it. On the one hand, the button can detect the pressure 
exerted, while on the other one it can emit a light by means 
of a RGB LED.  
One additional block including a piezo speaker completes 
the set-up. It generates a rewarding sound as a positive 
reinforcement to correct actions. 
The system is currently composed of five modules, but 
there is no limit to the amount of modules that can be added. 
Each module contains a pressure sensor with two foils of 
conductive material separated by a semi-conductor. The 
values detected by the sensors are continuous and managed 
by an Arduino. On top of each sensor, a LilyPad Tri-Colour 
LED is located, which is operated by the same Arduino. 
Eventually, a silicon-like material covers the LED with a 
twofold purpose: first, it can amplify the amount of light 
emitted, and secondly, it makes the tactile interaction more 
compelling. In this sense, we were interested in testing on 
field the relevance of viscous material in empowering the 
continuous tactile interaction, as opposed to rigid buttons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  GoS system. 
 
V. 
PLAY SCENARIOS 
The play scenarios were categorised in three main 
groups: cause and effect, turn-taking and collaborative. Each 
scenario demanded a different level of engagement and 
interaction, from practice play, where children could explore 
the physical properties of the modules and their behaviour 
(e.g. properties of soft buttons, visual stimuli), to rule-based 
play, where the game was based on rules shared with the 
children at the beginning of the play session. The scenarios 
were designed in an increasing order of complexity. 
A. Scenario 1. Tactile Exploration 
The child is invited to play with four modules. At the 
initial stage, all the lights are turned off. The child is invited 
to press the buttons and see what might happen. The goal is 
to find where the blue light is located. The tactile interaction 
is used to stimulate the interest of the child to the game: the 
force applied to the button is mapped to the intensity of the 
light emitted. When the correct button is fully pressed, a 
rewarding sound is played. This scenario is mainly related 
to practice play. 
B. Scenario 2. Stimuli  Recognition  
The child is invited to press only the fixed blue light, 
which randomly moves in between the five modules. A 
successful action will trigger a positive sound. The exercise 
is designed so to have six increasing levels of difficulty. If 
in the first level of difficulty there is only one light popping 
up at a time, the next levels introduce more disturbances. 
These include additional blinking red and green lights. 
Children are asked to maintain the focus and attention on 
the task, despite the irrelevant stimuli which are 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

simultaneously presented. This scenario requires the 
mastering of practice play as well as rule-based play. 
C. Scenario 3. Cooperative Game   
The subject is invited to adopt a collaborative attitude 
with the playmate in hopes of accomplishing the game. The 
exercise is designed to have two levels of difficulty. In the 
first level, one blue light is presented simultaneously with 
two green lights. The subject is then asked to press a green 
button, and the partner is called to mimic with his own 
green button. When both manage to synchronise their 
actions, the blue light turns off and a rewarding sound is 
played. The lights then move randomly in between five 
modules. In the second level of difficulty, four green lights 
have to be pushed in order to turn the blue light off. This 
scenario is far more complex than the other two. It implies 
the understanding of rules and implies a social competence 
related to turn-taking and imitation with the playmate. 
VI. 
TESTING IN THE FIELD 
GoS was tested with six autistic children with the aim to 
test their stage of play development, and to engage them in 
play scenarios at different levels of complexity. Complexity 
could vary from different respects: number and type of 
stimuli, number of modules, play scenarios (practice or rule-
based), play modality (solitary or collaborative). 
As stated above, the study was conducted in the Centre 
for Autism “Piccolo Principe” in Siena, Italy, which 
accommodates children and adolescents for after-school 
activities. Six male children, ranging in age from ten to 
sixteen joined the study, together with their therapists and a 
neuro-psychiatrist. They were diagnosed with different 
levels of autism. Four children showed the typical traits of 
low-functioning autism, such as communication difficulties, 
cognitive deficits and motor skill impairments. In fact, they 
needed the constant presence of at least one therapist, to 
prevent stressful or dangerous situation. The other two 
subjects were twins and showed medium-functioning ASD. 
None of them had motor impairments. One of them had 
severe difficulties in social, communicative and cognitive 
areas. The verbalization was not always appropriate to the 
context, and the comprehension was only limited to simple 
statements. Attention level was generally low during the 
play activities and had to be stimulated by the therapist. 
Stereotyped behaviours were common. The other child had 
poor verbalization, but the comprehension was sufficiently 
developed. Furthermore, his logical and abstract thinking 
was underdeveloped. He showed stereotyped behaviours 
and socialization skills not adequate to the age.  
The activity took place in a period of one month, twice 
per week, for a total of 8 sessions. However, not all the 
children managed to participate in all sessions. The four 
low-functioning ASD children participated in 1-2 sessions 
(2 children followed 2 sessions, the remaining 2 children 
followed only 1 session). The 2 medium-functioning ASD 
subjects, instead, participated in all sessions. In 4 sessions 
they were invited to play together.  
The play sessions took place with one child at a time, 
because the presence of more people could be perceived as 
intrusive or represent an obstacle for social interaction. The 
same designer/experimenter conducted all sessions. If any 
problem occurred during the session, the therapist, who 
attended as non-participant observer, was allowed to 
intervene. Fortunately, this was not the case for any session. 
At the end of each session, the therapist was asked to take 
notes and fill in a questionnaire related to the behaviour of 
the child. The sessions were video-recorded. During the 
play sessions with children with low-functioning autism, the 
presence of a second therapist was necessary to support 
them in performing the games and in some cases contain 
their excitement (Figure 4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. A child with low-functioning autism performs the game with 
the support of the educational therapist.  
 
The setting was kept simple to avoid distractions. Each 
play session was structured in three parts:  
Welcome. The experimenter welcomed the subject, 
inviting him to sit. The therapist sat in a corner of the room, 
in a position that allowed her to observe the scene while not 
being visible by the child. 
Playing together. The experimenter introduced the three 
different play scenarios described above, which were played 
in sequence.  
Time to say Good Bye and See you next time. At the end 
of the session, the experimenter turned the system off and 
said goodbye. The therapist completed the questionnaire. 
The sessions were designed to last approximately thirty 
minutes, but they were subject to changes, according to the 
attention span of the children and response behaviour. 
VII. REFLECTION-IN-ACTION 
The reflective practice is fundamental in research-
through-design. Testing in context does not necessarily lead 
to a deep knowledge of the problem without a conscious 
look at emotions, serendipitous experiences, actions, and 
responses. For [20], professional knowledge in gained 
within action, at two levels. Reflection-in-action occurs 
during the activity as a manifestation of “theory in use”. It is 
a mix of knowing and doing that allows the professional to 
act and intervene on the scene. Reflection-on-action occurs 
after the activity has taken place and is used to learn from a 
repertoire of experiences, and to generate new knowledge 
and visions about future activities.   
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In our study, reflection-in-action was conducted during 
the evaluation sessions, by confronting the observation of 
the designer, the comments of the neuropsychiatrist, and the 
notes of the therapists who evaluated the following items:  
• Attention: the ability of the child to focus on the game, 
to swap from one stimulus to the next one and to call for 
attention with sharing the gaze or with gestures; 
• Mood: child's behaviour in terms of agitation, 
nervousness, aggressiveness, inappropriate verbalization 
and sadness;  
• Autonomy: the ability of the child to execute the 
activities without any prompt received by the experimenter 
as well as the level of proactivity during the play session;  
• Relationship with the experimenter: the ability of the 
child to establish a relationship with experimenter and the 
level of appreciation for the given task. 
Children with low-functioning autism maintained a level 
of attention on the game varying from 2 to 8 minutes. This 
testifies their difficulty with playing even the simplest 
scenarios. Three of them had to be physically contained by 
the therapist to limit their excitement. However, they were 
all able to engage in practice play. They enjoyed exploring 
the material qualities of the game, by experimenting with 
the soft buttons and showing interest in the visual stimuli of 
the changing lights. We noticed how fond they were of 
manipulating the objects. They were attracted by the soft 
material of the buttons, trying to stretch, bite and smell it. 
Less interest was shown towards the visual stimuli and the 
interactivity of the system. Even if none of them was 
autonomous in playing, one of them was able to fulfil the 
rule-based scenario through the use of verbal and physical 
prompt provided by the experimenter. This was a surprising 
achievement. The therapist knew that the child could do 
practice play, but she did not believe he could engage in a 
rule-based game. This result generated an extensive 
discussion about how to combine physical prompt in GoS.  
Children with medium level of autism maintained a level 
of attention in between 15 and 22 minutes, which the 
therapists defined as positive (Figure 5).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. A child with medium-functioning autism performs the game with 
the expert 
 
Furthermore, 
one 
child 
showed 
a 
significant 
improvement in the area of shared attention. He started to 
establish eye contact with the experimenter as a means to 
call for attention. Regarding their mood, the therapists 
reported that the play activities were pleasant for both of 
them. Only one of them established a collaborative 
relationship with the experimenter, showing interest in 
achieving something together. The child with verbal skills 
showed a significant progression with the cooperative 
games with the experimenter. The other child improved his 
performance in the cognitive tasks.  
Since they both were able to engage from practice to 
rule-based play, the complexity of the games was increased 
along the sessions, and they were asked to play together 
(Figure 6).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Figure 6. Children with medium-functioning autism playing together 
 
In the cooperative game session the children played 
together, whilst the experimenter observed the activity 
intervening from time to time. Especially during this session 
we noticed that the game became extremely competitive. 
The peer-to-peer activity stimulated each child to score 
higher than the playmate and the experimenter supported 
their engagement with verbal support. As a result, we 
positively noted that their attention spanned from 10 to 12 
minutes of collaborative gaming. Their performance, in 
terms of errors and time to complete the game, slightly 
improved over the four sessions. 
VIII. REFLECTION-ON-ACTION 
Testing GoS in the field, trying out different patterns of 
stimuli and play scenarios was a process of continuous 
learning.  
The system helped us to test the play skills of the 
children and challenge their potential to master the 
evolution from one stage of play to the following. Children 
diagnosed with low-functioning autism can generally 
engage in practice play, where free exploration and 
manipulation of the platform are at the core. If no external 
help is given, they rarely can progress toward the next types 
of play. Both physical prompt (e.g. showing the action to be 
performed through physical guidance) and verbal prompt 
(e.g. vocal guidance) are vital during the play session and 
should be integrated in the interaction design of the game.  
A customizable system like GoS allows for adaptability 
to different types of autism profiles. Quality and quantity of 
stimuli can be tailored to the child’s play skills. 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Modularity allows for tweaking the difficulty of a game. 
It is important that this feature is represented at hardware 
level (i.e., the number of modules to be used is custom) as 
well as software level (i.e., the various amount of stimuli 
that can be programmed).  
The material qualities of the game are fundamental in 
fostering exploration and interaction. In particular, qualities 
like being malleable, stretchable, soft and scented. The 
material properties of the buttons in GoS, their softness and 
flexibility afforded various types of manipulation additional 
to pressing. The buttons were caressed, squeezed, pinched. 
This explorative behaviour was solitary. It stopped when the 
game became collaborative. Children were able to move 
their attention from the material qualities, which at the 
beginning held almost all of their attention, to the interactive 
features of the system. 
The simplicity of the proposed games associated with 
the modularity of the system is definitively a winning 
aspect. The design of GoS enabled the generation of a wide 
range of interactions and a significant amount of play 
scenarios. A modular hardware and an easy-to-hack 
software allowed for tailoring the system to the different 
children’s skills. 
Furthermore, the therapist expressed the need for more 
independency, as until this moment it was necessary for the 
experimenter to manually load new lines of code every time 
the activity would pass on to the next one. For the future 
iteration we envisioned a tablet application that would allow 
the therapists to control the system without assistance 
(Figure 7). The application allows the configuration of the 
game by selecting the type of stimuli (e.g. colour and light 
patterns), play rules (e.g. turn taking) and play styles (e.g. 
individual vs collaborative game). Furthermore it records 
the progress of each subject, monitoring the development of 
individual play skills.  
 
 
 
Figure 7. The screen-based interface that would allow the therapist to load 
and configure new play scenarios, as well as to keep track on the progress 
of each subject. 
 
Testing in the field also revealed that the role of an adult 
supervisor is pivotal in creating a friendly, encouraging and 
inclusive atmosphere, and the use of a shared physical 
interactive toy can greatly facilitate the social exchange 
among them.  
A major contribution of the study is the design of play 
scenarios that are mapped to different stages of child 
development as well as to different properties and 
functionality of the system. Since improvements of play 
skills in autistic child are slow and demand constant 
monitoring, a game like GoS can support the therapists in 
evaluating any improvement in play skills. Furthermore, it 
allows the children to practice their skills and challenge 
them through small, recognisable, repetitive variations of 
increasing complexity of the games. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the children who 
participated to the study, their families, the educational 
therapist of the Centre for Autism “Piccolo Principe”, and 
the Neuropsychiatry Department of the ASL7 – Siena for 
their precious collaboration. We would also like to thank 
Michele Tittarelli and Matteo Sirizzotti for their help in the 
development of  GoS. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Bruner, “Nature and Uses of Immaturity”.  American 
Psychologist, vol. 27, no. 8, 1972, pp. 687-708. 
[2] L. E. Schulz, H. Standing, and E. B. Bonawitz, “Word, thought, 
and deed: The role of object labels in children's inductive 
inferences and exploratory play”. Developmental Psychology., 
vol. 44, 2008, pp. 1266-1276.  
[3] L. Vygotsky, “Play and its role in the Mental Development of the 
Child” Voprosy psikhologii (Translation by Mulholland 1966, N. 
6, 1993.  
[4] P. Marti and L. J. Bannon, “Exploring User-Centred Design in 
Practice: Some Caveats”- Knowledge, Technology & Policy”. 
Springer Netherlands, ISSN 0897-1986 (Print) 1874-6314 
(Online), vol. 22, no. 1,2009,  pp 7-15. 
[5] B.  Archer, “The nature of research”. Co-design , p 6-13, 1995. 
[6] B. Robins, K. Dautenhahn, R. te Boekhorst, and A. Billard, 
“Effects of repeated exposure to a humanoid robot on children 
with autism” in Designing a more inclusive world, S. Keates, J. 
Clarkson, P. Langdon, P. Robinson (eds). Springer, London, pp. 
225–236, 2004. 
[7] H. Lehmann, I. Iacono, B. Robins, P. Marti, and K. Dautenhahn, 
“Make it move”: playing cause and effect games with a robot 
companion for children with cognitive disabilities.  The 30th 
European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE 2011),  
pp. 105–112, ISBN: 978-1-4503-1029-1. 
[8] M. Coleman-Martin, K. Wolff Heller, D. Cihak, and K. Irvine, 
“Using computer-assisted instruction and the nonverbal reading 
approach to teach word identification”. Focus Autism Other Dev 
Disabl, 20(2). 80–90, 2005. 
[9] S. Parsons and P. Mitchell, “The potential of virtual reality in 
social skills training for people with autistic spectrum disorders”. 
J Intellect Disabil Res, vol. 46, 2002, pp 430–443. 
[10] “Look 
at 
me”. 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.samsung.look
atme [Retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[11] P. Caldwell, “Intensive Interaction: Using Body Language to 
Communicate”. Journal on Developmental Disabilities, vol.19, 
no. 1, 2013, pp. 33-39. 
[12] B. Robins and K. Dautenhahn, “Tactile Interactions with a 
Humanoid Robot - Novel Play Scenario Implementations with 
Children with Autism”. International Journal of Social Robotics 
(IJSR), vol. 6, no. 3, 2014, pp.397-415. 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[13] W. Farr, N. Yuill, and H. Raffle, “Social benefits of a tangible 
user interface for children with Autistic Spectrum Conditions. 
Autism”. International journal of research and practice, vol. 14, 
no. 3, 2010, pp 237-52. 
[14] L. Villafuerte, S. Markova, and S. Jorda, “Acquisition of social 
abilities through musical tangible user interface: children with 
autism spectrum condition and the reactable”. The ACM SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '12) 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
May 05-10, Austin, Texas, USA, ISBN: 978-1-4503-1016-1. 
[15]  World Health Organization. The ICD-10 classification of mental 
and behavioural disorders: Diagnostic criteria for research, 1993. 
[16] L. Wing and J. Gould, “Severe impairments of social interaction 
and associated abnormalities in children: Epidemiology and 
Classification”. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorder, 
vol. 9, 1979, pp. 11-29. 
[17] R. Jordan, “Autistic Spectrum Disorder Pratical Strategies for 
Teachers and Other Professional”. London and New York: 
Routledge, 1999. 
[18] http://ludi-network.eu [Retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[19] S. Besio, D. Bulgarelli, and V. Stancheva Popkostadinov,  
“LUDI Scientific Report of Working Group no. 1”. To be 
published as “The need of play for the sake of play”, in press. 
[20] D. Schön, “The Reflective Practitioner: How professionals think 
in action”. London: Temple Smith, 1983.  
 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

