Analysis of Personal Data Visualisation Reviews on Mobile Health
Apps
1st Yasmeen Anjeer Alshehhi
School of Information Technology
Deakin University
Burwood, Australia
yanjeeralshehhi@deakin.edu.au
2nd Mohamed Abdelrazek
School of Information Technology
Deakin University
Burwood, Australia
mohamed.abdelrazek@deakin.edu.au
3rd Alessio Bonti
School of Information Technology
Deakin University
Burwood, Australia
a.bonti@deakin.edu.au
Abstract—Mobile health apps give end-users tools to track
and improve their health and well-being. The amount of data
collected and managed by these apps grows massively over time,
emphasising the need for user-friendly mobile data visualisations
that make it easy for end-users to understand and make better
decisions on their health and well-being. However, there are no
clear guidelines or best practices for developing quality and
user-friendly mobile data visualisations. App reviews offer an
indirect anchor for researchers to examine how non-expert users
perceive and interact with data visualisations and identify the
key challenges and recommendations to develop mobile data
visualisations. This paper introduces an analysis of app reviews
on data visualisations reported on a data set of 217 mobile health
apps on the Google Play Store. We identified 8,406 comments
related to data visualisations. We then reviewed these comments
and labelled them as neutral (919 comments), negative (1,557
comments) and positive (5,930 comments). We then manually
clustered these comments into groups of concerning issues,
including missing functionality, wrong charts, look and feel,
etc. From analysing the user reviews, functional requirements
turned out to be the most common problem across these app
reviews, followed by the look and feel and then data problems.
A complete set of data visualisations seem to be the most well-
received capability of mobile health apps. We also introduce a
set of mobile data visualisation guidelines based on these user
reviews. We are currently working on an evaluation experiment
to measure the impact of these guidelines on the quality of the
produced mobile data visualisations.
Keywords—smartphones; mHealth tracking apps; user experi-
ence; data visualisation assessment
I. INTRODUCTION
The easy access to mobile devices made data visualisations
widely adopted by non-experts for several personal needs. For
example, tracking health data is one of the most common
personal tracking aspects [1] in which end-users use the pro-
vided data visualisation as a communication tool [2], decision-
making [3] and tracking tool [4]. Personal data visualisations
rely on mobile devices as the primary platform for user
interactions [5]. However, mobile data visualisations introduce
new display size, resolution, computing power, storage, and
interaction modality challenges. Consequently, the field of
visualisation interface design needs improvement to achieve
users’ satisfaction and cope with the challenges of the unique
environment [6].
Graphs, charts, and icons are the main components of health
tracking apps that help users track their goals, habits, and
achievements [5]. Commendable efforts have been conducted
in data visualisation related to diabetes, but apparent gaps in
designing and understanding visualised data in the personal
tracking apps are still present [7]. The main two reasons for
these gaps are the diversity of data visualisation audiences [8]
and the lack of generic guidelines that suit non-expert users
and mobile devices (smartphones). Furthermore, although re-
search studies have been comprehensive and continuously
evolving to provide better user experiences for mobile data
visualisation, users still report issues and challenges with their
data [6] [7]. Thus, there is a need to examine users’ perspec-
tives toward data visualisation in mobile apps and understand
the usage context to achieve better data visualisation on mobile
devices [5].
User surveys and app reviews are great tools to understand
user needs and challenges. User surveys are useful to answer
specific questions but usually are limited in terms of the
number of participants and generic instead of reflecting on
experience on a specific app. On the other hand, app re-
views are beneficial for understanding the common challenges
and gaps [14] across a range of apps, and a broad group
of audience/users [10]. App reviews have also been used
to source and inform app improvements and new features
[11], [12], [13]. Thus, this paper focuses on app reviews to
identify key challenges and problems that end-users face with
regard to mobile data visualisations for mHealth apps as our
specific application domain. The paper addresses the following
research questions:
• RQ1: What are the common visualisation tasks and charts
that have been adopted in mHealth apps?
• RQ2: What are the top data visualisation issues in health
tracking apps?
• RQ3: What are critical user concerns on mobile data
visualisations in mHealth apps?
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2
presents the related work and Section 3 presents the research
method. Section 4 presents the results and analysis. Section
5 presents the analysis discussion related to the found gaps
and introduces suggestions for better developing and designing
data visualisation in the mobile health (m-health) apps and
presents threats to validity. Finally, Section 6 concludes the
paper with a summary of the paper’s findings and discussions.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. RELATED WORK
This section presents reviews on the importance and pur-
poses of using app reviews. Then, it elaborates on the studies
related to self-tracking and mobile health apps. In conclusion,
examining users’ reviews of m-health apps regarding data
visualisation has not been studied yet.
A. User Reviews
Users feedback is currently applied to seek users’ opinions,
and satisfaction with a specific service or product [15]. For
example, the industrial sector applied this communication
method to evaluate the quality of products and services based
on user experiences to improve their services. The same
concept applied to app reviews in which users give either
positive or negative comments [15].
In 2008, Gebauer et al. [16] investigated the required factors
of 4 mobile devices from users’ point of view. These devices
included a cell phone, 2 PDAs, and an ultra-light laptop. The
data was collected from www.cnet.com, an online website that
allows users to write their technology-related comments. The
authors followed automated and non-automated processes to
evaluate 144 comments as a sample size. After evaluating
the results of each process, the authors decided that these
two methods had their advantages and disadvantage. How-
ever, they concluded their study that both processes are the
basis for continued analysis of highly dynamic technological
development and proved that user reviews aid in delivering
user requirements.
In 2014, Khalid. H [18] studied the impact of app reviews
on user preferences when selecting apps from the app store.
In addition, he investigated how to use app reviews to source
new features and issues that need to be addressed by the
development teams to achieve user satisfaction and solve
problems reported in the comments. The author investigated
the apple store’s user reviews by reviewing 6390 comments
across the most popular 20 apps. He collected the 1 and 2 stars
comments using a web crawler and applied an iterative process
to classify the comments. Finally, he classified the issues
into 3 groups, developer issues, strategic issues, and content
issues. He concluded his study that low rating comments
negatively impact the quality of the apps, which affects the
app’s popularity and revenue.
In 2018, Caldeira et al. [17] published a review of 32 mood
tracking apps and deeply analysed 1,000 reviews. One of
their primary findings was that data visualisation needed to be
varied to match multiple people’s preferences. As patient share
their mental state with health providers, the authors claimed
that the used data visualisation might be suitable for patients
or the general population but not for the health providers.
Thus, possible audiences of health data visualisation need to
be considered through developing m-health apps.
B. Self-tracking and mobile health apps
The widespread of mobile devices has helped increase the
number of end-users interested in tracking their data. These
include tracking sports activities, nutrition, health conditions,
memories tracking [21], mood tracking [22] and other tracking
activities. As a result, significant efforts have been made
mainly in 2 areas. The first is related to user interaction with
their data. The latter is related to developing and evaluating
apps that help users track health data.
We found that heroic efforts have been made to understand
quantified selfers and their interaction with tracking apps [23].
In this study, users have been requested to record videos
and answer 3 questions: “what you did”, “how you did it”,
and “what you learned” [23]. After analysing 52 videos, the
authors reported that health condition was the main tracked
data. However, they also stated that the presented data was
too much, making users give up tracking and analysing their
data. By answering the question “how you did it?” participants
reported a spreadsheet as the primary tool to analyse their data
and commercial hardware for data collection. However, users
wanted to have their tool. They also complained about the
complexity of reading their charts due to a lack of scientific
knowledge. Thus, developing simple m-health apps is needed
to serve this group of people to understand their data.
In 2018, Lee et al. [24] published a workshop proposal to
investigate mobile devices’ opportunities as data visualisation
platform. They named multiple apps that have been developed
for self-tracking. Examples of these apps are sleep tight which
visualises sleep patterns by showing sleep duration and quality.
Another application is ConCap which shows diabetes patients
their data over a timeline. Finally, OmniTrack included a
dashboard of charts presenting different data types that the app
collected. However, the authors claimed the lack of methods
to evaluate data visualisation on mobile apps.
These apps take us to a new mobile health app (m-health)
terminology. We found that research efforts have been made
in this area, focusing on providing a specific framework to
develop a well-defined contextual m-health app [25], and
another study focused on m-health designing based on cus-
tomers’ experiences [26]. In addition, further investigations in
the health area are related to providing a security framework
for m-health apps in terms of data analysis and visualisation
[26].
There is a noticeable development in mobile data visualisa-
tion apps. Nevertheless, a set of best practices to develop and
evaluate these mobile data visualisations has not been studied
yet [24], specifically in developing guidelines that include
targeted audiences, data visualisation components (charts, data
and tasks ), and smartphone capabilities.
III. RESEARCH METHOD
This section presents our process of extracting data visuali-
sation related reviews from the Google Play Store and assign-
ing these reviews to different clusters of issues related to data
visualisations. Figure 1 shows these processes highlighting the
sub-tasks in each step.
Step1:Query Google App Store for mHealth Apps: The
first step was to identify the relevant apps to consider in this
study. We decided to focus on apps on Google Play Store,
given that there are available APIs that we can use to get
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 1.
Apps and comments collecting, filtering and mapping process.
details about the apps on the store. These APIs expect to pass
in a list of keywords (here, we used “health tracking app” and
“health tracker apps”). Additionally, these APIs are limited to
only the top 250 apps per query. Although this sounds to be a
limited number of apps compared to the number of mHealth
apps on the Google App Store (hundreds of thousands),
we used these apps to represent the issues even on the top
apps under this category. Ideally, with the highest number of
downloads and higher potential for user feedback. We ran
the query twice and got 500 apps with some duplicates that
we removed and ended up with 217 unique mobile health
applications (mHealth) apps. The list of apps included step
tracker, food tracker, sleep tracker, fertility tracker, water
drinking tracker, sport and activity, mood tracker, pet training,
body measurement and weight loss tracker, pill reminder,
chronic diseases, blood pressure and heart rate tracker, baby
feeding tracker Stress and Anxiety. The query results are in
the following format:
App metadata: app ID, URL, icon, version, score
Step2: Query Google App Store for App Reviews:
The second step was to identify and filter the returned
comments. We had 2,750,000 app reviews for the 217 apps.
After removing duplicate and undefined rows, the remaining
rows have decreased to 10,601. First, we manually analysed
200 comments as sample (Tables II, III, IV and V example
comments) to identify the data visualisation related terms
(graph, chart, visual). Then, we filtered the reviews associated
with these visualisation terms (graph, chart, visual) and ended
with 8,406 rows (reviews) related to data visualisation in the
following format:
App review: rating, review, reviewer, user image, date,
score, reply text, reply date
Step3: Mapping App Reviews to Cluster of Common
Issues: The third step was mapping the reviews to a cluster of
common issues. We first separated reviews based on their star
ratings (minimising and organising the investigation process).
Then, two of the team manually reviewed the app review
and assigned two labels to each review: 1) sentiment label
(positive, negative and neutral) regardless of the review star
rating; and 2) common issue cluster/type. The number of
clusters (issues) grow organically as we go through the reviews
- i.e. every time we find a new type of concern, we created
a new cluster and revised the previous labels to make sure
there is no wrong labels or overlaps. The final list of reviews,
sentiment and cluster is available (here).
IV. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
This section presents the results and key findings of our
study mapped to the research questions in Section I (Intro-
duction).
A. RQ (1) What are the common visualisation tasks and charts
that have been adopted in these mHealth apps?
We analysed the screenshots included in the app description
looking for data visualisation screens. 93% of the returned
apps included data visualisations. We identified 12 common vi-
sualisation charts across these apps including: Waterfall, stock,
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

table, timeline, scatter, map, line chart, calendar, area chart, bar
chart, pie chart, maps and Iconography. The maximum number
of charts found in each app was 5.
Figure 2 summarises the percentage of each chart in the
total number of data visualisations we found in 203 apps that
included data visualisations. Based on the data collected, five
charts are the most commonly used in the top best apps: line
chart, area chart, pie chart, calendar, and bar chart.
Iconography was the most used visualisation type (found in
141 apps) as it was used in indicating statues using numbers
or texts with related symbols and colours. Line and bar charts
are the second most common visualisation type (83 apps).
Calendar as a visualisation type has been found in 32 apps.
It is mainly used to track mood, period, pregnancy, and
medication reminders. The map was used in 21 apps as data
visualisation to help users track their walking, running, and
cycling activities. It shows the number of steps and starting
and endpoint information. Another visualisation type found
is colours. They indicate high and low moods for monthly or
yearly tracking and create patterns and trends. Stock, waterfall,
and scatter plot visualisation types were the least (1 app).
Fourteen mHealth tracking apps in our dataset (7% of the
217 apps) did not include any charts. It was interesting to
find out that these apps were all rated either 1 or 2 stars.
Additionally, user reviews reflected these highlighting that
charts are essential to track their progress and goals. Four
apps had the maximum number of charts (5) (Anxiety Tracker
- Stress and Anxiety Log, Blood Pressure Diary, Heart Rate
Monitor, morePro), three are rated with more than four stars,
and one app is rated with 2.5, which turned to have other
issues. Therefore, this shows that including data visualisations
can lead to positive impact on app adoption and rating.
Figure 2.
The most adopted charts in 203 apps.
In terms of visualisation tasks, we used Saket et al. [19]
list of 10 essential data visualisation tasks including finding
Anomalies, finding clusters, finding correlations, derived val-
ues, characterise distributions, filter, order, range, min-max,
and retrieve value. In the apps in our dataset, developers
focused primarily on one primary task: tracking progress. The
purpose of this task varied based on the tracked activity. For
example, in weight loss apps, the main functions were to
track progress and achieve goals, and in mood tracking, the
primary process was to track mood and find a monthly mood
pattern. A comparison task was adopted in 2 apps (Fasting app
and K health — Telehealth app). All apps provided read-only
interactions with the data visualisations. However, app users
have requested to consider adding other data visualisation tasks
of these essential ten tasks:
• “..,but is terrible for comparing your results to previous
results, everyone wants to see how they progress on all
the fields.”
• “you can’t view plots from X date to Y date”
• “There is no continuity in calculation between months
(maybe other timespans as well when you zoom out or
in). If I weigh x at the end of a month, x-2 on the first
measurement of the next month and x-2.1 on the next
measurement, 2kg will be unaccounted for in the monthly
totals shown above the graph. That’s just useless.”
B. RQ (2) What are the Top Data Visualisation Issues?
We manually reviewed the comments reported by app
users to extract the common data visualisation issues. We
grouped issues based on the following categories: functional
requirement - related to user needs, data – related to data used
to create the visualisations, look and feel – related to usability
and types of charts, interactivity and device compatibility -
related to screen and platform related issues. For each category
we considered three attributes: completeness, correctness, and
consistency. After reviewing the app reviews, we ended up
having 18 issues, as shown in Table 1. Missing functional
requirements were the most frequent negative reviews. For
example, 50 % of the functional requirements issues are related
to missing some needed graphs such as weekly or monthly
charts, progress charts and charts to track aspects such as blood
pressure, heart pulse, and baby feeding. Other complaints were
about the functionality and display of the chart. Additionally,
there are four main issues related to data visualisation design
(look and feel):
• Chart scaling issues (40%)
• Graph styling (font size, chart ranges, and colours do not
indicate meaningful information, including grid lines in
the charts and axis titles)
• Interactivity
(scrolling,
zooming,
landscape,
choose
graphs options)
• The chart type is not appropriate (bar chart, pie chart and
bar chart)
Data is another primary aspect that users criticised. Data re-
lated issues included issues related to insufficient and incorrect
data presented in the graph. In contrast, there are more general
positive reviews than negative reviews that are related to users’
satisfaction, which includes “love this graph” and “like this
chart” without specifying any unique feature of the chart or
graph (single and app visualisation). The other aspect that
users rarely mention is device capabilities and adaptability
including: 1) being able to rotate the device to see the graph
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF APP REVIEWS’ ISSUES
Issues
Count
Percentage
1: Missing graphs and functionalities
948
34 %
2: Displaying the wrong charts
22
0.7%
3: Charts are mixed up
60
2%
4: Missing the chart type
224
8%
5: Chart scaling, layout and font size
404
14%
6: Zooming problem and graphs lines are mixed
128
4%
7: Missing graph information
202
7%
8: Not accurate info charts units
98
3%
9:Not showing information correctly
32
11%
10: Missing the ability of phone rotating
10
0.3%
11: Scale is not suiting screen size
4
0.1%
12: Different OS & different functionalities
36
1.2%
13: Two colour menus confusing
154
5.5%
14: Visualisation is meaningless
74
2.6%
15: Low quality of graphs charts
94
3.3%
16: Missing Tooltips
20
0.7%
17: Screen size problems
36
1.2%
18:No consistency in showing graphs
4
0.1%
in landscape mode and visualisation consistency between the
two operating systems, android and IOS; and 2) Chart fitting
with screen size.
C. RQ (3) What are critical user concerns on mobile data
visualisations in mHealth apps?
In this research question, we reviewed the comments of
the five best and worst apps to key issues that could affect
app rating, as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3 (left side) showed the top 5 apps: These are
non-free apps rated with more than 4.5 stars and had the
highest number of positive reviews related to data visualisation
compared with negative reviews. Functional requirement:
These 5 best apps were the highest-rated apps in terms of data
visualisation among 217 apps. However, there were still some
missing graphs that could be added according to the collected
comments (C) in table 2, such as weight blood pressure(C1 -
Table 2), A1C (a simple blood test that measures your average
blood sugar levels over the past three months) (C2 - Table 2)
[20], blood sugar results (C3 - Table 2). In contrast, users were
satisfied with the other functions provided in the app related to
data visualisation, such as charting entries (C4 - Table 2) and
(C5 - Table 2). Data: Users commented that they felt happy as
they could understand their progress through the charts: (C6
- Table 2), (C7 - Table 2) and (C8 - Table 2). Look and feel
styling and interactivity: are the most important aspects that
users’ mentioned in their positive reviews, such as (C9 - Table
2) comment. However, some users were not satisfied with the
colour selection (C10 - Table 2) platform and device: There
were no comments mentioned related to this dimension in any
of these apps.
Figure 3 (right side) shows the top 5 worst apps in terms
of the total number of negative reviews. As displayed, 2 apps
were in the best 5 apps due to the number of positive reviews,
and appeared in this graph as 5 of the worst apps (Blood
Glucose and Baby tracker). Withings health mate is the worst
app used to track various aspects such as weight, activities
and sport, sleep analysis and blood pressure. However, it
is a free app that has been downloaded by nearly 100,000
times. The 1- and 2-stars rating reviews were about look and
feel, presented data, and adaptability to devices’ screens. In
terms of look and feel, users complained that the trend line is
missed in the charts, so they cannot do any comparison tasks.
User comments related to this aspect are shown in Table 3.
The issues related to the adaptability of devices are about
the screen size, touch interaction and rotating devices to get
landscape mode (Table 4).
In terms of the lowest negative reviews, carb manager
is a non-free app downloaded by more than 103,000 users.
The biggest issue that users complained about was missing
functional requirements. Examples of these issues were blank
charts, and missing graphs are shown in Table 5.
V. DISCUSSION
This section discusses the findings and implications of de-
veloping and designing data visualisation for mHelath tracking
apps.
We found that mhealth tracking apps covered different
health aspects related to users’ interests, such as sports activi-
ties, diet activities, and health conditions monitoring. However,
the analysis revealed a lack of support for the data visualisation
component in these apps. By analysing the app reviews,
we found that users complained about issues related to data
visualisation components such as functional requirement, data
presented, chart styling, and suitability of the chart functions
with the smartphones.
Users raised multiple concerns about missing charts. For
example, some apps did not include charts like “map my fit-
ness”, “WhatsUp mental health app” and “pregnancy and baby
tracker”. Further issue related to missing charts, was about
charting the correlated data in one app, such as heart monitor-
ing and blood pressure. For example, “A chart shows the heart
beating, but no chart shows blood pressure”. Therefore, there
is a lack of complete and correct functional requirements.
Furthermore, users wrote negative reviews about the chart’s
interactivity and styling. Approximately 90% of the 217
apps provided read-only charts. In the app comments, users
complained about the difficulty of doing some tasks such as:
comparing between two variables, enlarging font size, setting
the preferred colour theme, getting details of the presented
data, and rotating the device to landscape mode to get a
detailed chart. This, in turn, leads to a sense of the incomplete
look and feels and interactivity.
The presented data was another issue that users repeated in
their reviews. Insufficient and uncomprehending data were the
two main reported issues. Thus, many users highlighted the
difficulty of making conclusions from the presented data as
the presented data is not detailed and included miss leading
labels. Device compatibility was a minor issue reported in
user reviews. However, all the issues reported occurred due
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Figure 3. Best and worst 5 mHealth apps according to data visualisation reviews.
TABLE II
EXAMPLES OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE USERS’ REVIEWS
C1: A lot of info you can put on here. It would be nice to see multiple graphs for weight blood pressure as well.
Even an option to send info as an attachment to emails for our doctors– negative
C2: As a glucose tracking log it is easy to use and the chart is handy.Would like a similar chart for A1C results. If it linked to my meter,
it would be awesome –negative
C3: An excellent app. Wish it graphically displayed blood pressure the way it does blood sugar but it’s still the best blood sugar app I’ve found –negative
C4: Charts and graphs your blood sugar and tracks–positive
C5: Does just what I needed it to Gives you the average and plots a graph so it shows your entries easily. Thanks – positive
C6: love it brilliant at visually showing me how I’ve been and can predict my moods even bought the full app – positive
C7: Being newly diabetic this app has been extremely helpful in keeping things logged. It’s also given me some comfort as I am able to see the effort
I put in as clear to read results through their graphs and whatnot. I would recommend this app to anyone.–positive
C8: Has helped me visualise and control my blood glucose levels –positive
C9: The easy-to-read graphs show when I am in the red or in the green and ultimately show my blood sugar trending down. –positive
C10: For the feeding graph the colours blend too much and hard to see the difference Another colour scheme would be favorable.–negative
TABLE III
NEGATIVE REVIEWS RELATED TO LOOK AND FEEL
C11: Used to be great, but in the newest version
the trend lines have all gone,
and individual points are no longer plotted on the graphs,
making it largely useless.
C12:..., Further issue is related to the graph size.
C13: Very hard to see weight trends and you have to zoom weigh
in on a finicky scale to see daily weights plotted.
C14: unfortunately now the scale used for the weight graph
is so huge that your weight line looks completely flat.
TABLE IV
NEGATIVE REVIEWS RELATED TO DEVICES ADAPTABILITY
C15: Weight graph scale is difficult
to read on a smart phone and their website
C16: charts not responding to the touch not able to expand charts
C17: Biggest frustration is there’s no landscape mode
Not useful looking at graphs in portrait.
to the device functionality limitation and not addressing the
features and limitations of the smartphones. Therefore, it is
required to reframe building m-health apps by focusing on
data visualisation components.
This paper introduces 3 recommendations for research
opportunities related to data visualisation in m-health apps.
Recommendations 1 and 2 are linked to each other. First, the
TABLE V
NEGATIVE REVIEWS RELATED TO FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENT
C18: I’ve used this app for a while and I’ve liked it but
lately the app keeps crashing. It’s not
saving my weights. Tells me that there’s “no chart available”.
C19: Carb tracking function works ok, but the weight chart is blank.
Also, there is no way to incorporate exercise into this program,
other than logging steps.
C20: When I try to see the graph of
my weight loss (by turning the phone sideways) it doesn’t show.
development and design process of m-health data visualisation
should be parallel process. All aspects identified in the dis-
cussion need to be considered when developing and designing
charts for m-health apps. A further recommendation is related
to the app review system, in which the authors highlighted the
need to include the data visualisation aspect of the reviewing
system.
Developing data visualisation: It is argued that data vi-
sualisation development needs special consideration due to
the unknown multi-users. For example, it needs to adopt a
complete set of functional requirements and data related to
users’ control and understanding of the graphs. That is, users
should control their entries and be able to chart their progress
easily. Further reviews associated with the functional needs are
related to the device compatibility. For example, the touch, tap
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

and rotating interaction are facilities provided by smartphone
manufacturers that enable users to navigate and control their
app screen easily.
Designing data visualisation: Data visualisation design has
been discussed widely in the academic and industrial sectors.
However, still, there are some limitations related to smartphone
design. These limitations are chart size, scale, colour adoption,
font size, data and interactivity.
Including data visualisation in the app review: Since app
review does not include chart evaluation in the app feedback,
it was not easy to find a protocol to classify the apps based
on data visualisation reviews. So, it is recommended to add
data visualisation feedback in the app review as it is a central
part of health tracking.
From threats to validity perspective, we have identified the
following limitations and threats:
• The apps considered in this paper were collected using
an existing Google Play Store search API where it could
only provide 250 apps through passing keywords and it
returns a random list of apps whose titles match the search
keywords. Thus, it is acknowledged that the considered
apps in this paper are only samples of mHealth apps, and
it does not reflect all of the available apps in the store.
• Some comments have been excluded as they were written
in another language rather than English.
• The research team randomly evaluated a sample of these
comments and solved the border cases.
• The research team used screenshots to extract the charts
and tasks. However, analysing apps’ screenshots and
descriptions might not be accurate.
Finally, this paper targeted Android health apps that limited
Android users’ results. iOS platform is acknowledged. So, an
extension to this paper have been planned to involve both
mobile device operating systems’ comments.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented a manual analysis and categorisation
of app reviews of data visualisations in 217 health tracking
apps. We identified 8,406 comments app reviews related to
data visualisations. Overall, the number of the positive reviews
was more than the number of negative reviews. However,
the negative comments raised concerns regarding the m-
health data visualisation aspect. The concerns included missing
visualisations, missing visualisation tasks, look and feel and
missing or incorrect data. Functional requirements and data
aspects were the top concerns reported by mHealth app users.
M-health app developers and data visualisation designers need
to consider these concerns. Especially the target audiences,
as mHealth apps are provided for all individuals who have
smartphone access. In the future, the authors plan to dig deeper
into user reviews across different mHealth apps, e.g., food
vs physical activity and chronic conditions. It would help
in identifying the differences between issues across different
health domains. We also plan to work on designing mHealth
data visualisation guidelines.
REFERENCES
[1] L.
Mamykina
et
al.,
“Personal
discovery
in
diabetes
self-
management:
discovering
cause
and
effect
using
self-monitoring
data,” Journal of Biomedical infromatics, vol. 76, pp.1–8, 2017,
doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2017.09.013
[2] S. G. Archambault, J. Helouvry, B. Strohl, and G. Williams, “Data
visualization as a communication tool,” Library Hi Tech News, vol. 2,
pp.1–9, April 2015, doi.org/10.1108/LHTN-10-2014-0098
[3] M. Aparicio and C. J. Costa, “Data visualization,” Communication
design quarterly review, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 7–11, November 2014,
doi.org/10.1145/2721882.2721883
[4] Choe, E.K., Dachselt, R., Isenberg, P. and Lee, B, “Mobile data
visualization (Dagstuhl seminar 19292).” Dagstuhl Reports (2019),
doi.org/10.4230/DagRep.9.7.78
[5] B. Lee, E. K. Choe, P. Isenberg, K. Marriott, and J. Stasko,
“Reaching broader audiences with data visualization,” IEEE Com-
puter Graphics and Applications, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 82–90, 2020,
doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2020.2968244
[6] J. Gu, S. Mackin, and Y. Zheng, “Making sense: An innovative
data visualization application utilized via mobile platform,” in 2018
IEEE 20th International Conference on High Performance Comput-
ing and Communications; IEEE 16th International Conference on
Smart City; IEEE 4th International Conference on Data Science
and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS). IEEE, pp. 1105–1109, 2018,
doi.org/10.1109/HPCC/SmartCity/DSS.2018.00184
[7] D. Katz, N. Dalton, S. Holland, A. O’kane, and B. A. Price, “Question-
ing the reflection paradigm for diabetes mobile apps,” in eHealth 360°,
Springer, pp. 315–326, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-49655-
9 39
[8] A. Jena et al., “The next billion users of visualization,” IEEE Com-
puter Graphics and Applications, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 8–16, 2021,
doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2020.3044071
[9] D. Huang et al., “Personal visualization and personal visual analytics,”
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 420–433, 2014, doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2014.2359887
[10] V. N. Inukollu, D. D. Keshamoni, T. Kang, and M. Inukollu, “Factors
influencing quality of mobile apps: Role of mobile app development life
cycle,” 2014, arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.4537
[11] D. Pagano and W. Maalej, “User feedback in the app store: An empirical
study,” in 2013 21st IEEE international requirements engineering confer-
ence (RE). IEEE, pp. 125–134, 2013, doi.org/10.1109/RE.2013.6636712
[12] A. Di Sorbo et al., “What would users change in my app? sum-
marizing app reviews for recommending software changes,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 24th ACM SIGSOFT International Sympo-
sium on Foundations of Software Engineering, pp. 499–510, 2016,
doi.org/10.1145/2950290.2950299
[13] C. Iacob and R. Harrison, “Retrieving and analyzing mobile apps
feature requests from online reviews,” in 2013 10th working confer-
ence on mining software repositories (MSR). IEEE, pp. 41–44, 2013,
doi.org/10.1109/MSR.2013.6624001
[14] E. Guzman and W. Maalej,“How do users like this feature? a fine
grained sentiment analysis of app reviews,” in IEEE 22nd international
requirements engineering conference (RE). IEEE, pp. 153–162, 2014
[15] L. Hoon, R. Vasa, J.-G. Schneider, and J. Grundy, “An analysis of
the mobile app review landscape: trends and implications,” Faculty of
Information and Communication Technologies, Swinburne University of
Technology, Tech. Rep, 2013
[16] J. Gebauer, Y. Tang, and C. Baimai, “User requirements of mobile
technology: results from a content analysis of user reviews,” Information
Systems and e-Business Management, vol. 6, pp. 361–384, 2008,
doi.org/10.1007/s10257-007-0074-9
[17] C. Caldeira et al., “Mobile apps for mood tracking: an analysis of
features and user reviews,” in AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings,
vol. 2017. American Medical Informatics Association, p. 495–504, 2017
[18] H. Khalid, “On the link between mobile app quality and user reviews,”
Master thesis, Queen’s University, 2014
[19] B. Saket, A. Endert, and C¸ . Demiralp, “Task-based effective-
ness of basic visualizations,” IEEE transactions on visualization
and
computer
graphics,
vol.
25,
no.
7,
pp.
2505–2512,
2018,
doi/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2829750
[20] “all
about
your
a1c,”
Available
at
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/managing/
managing-blood-
sugar/a1c.html [retrieved: September, 2021]
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[21] A. Thudt, D. Baur, S. Huron, and S. Carpendale, “Visual mementos:
Reflecting memories with personal data,” IEEE transactions on visu-
alization and computer graphics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 369–378, 2015,
doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2015.2467831
[22] M. van der Velden and M. M. Sommervold, “The koolo app,” Inter-
national Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 9, no. 3,4,
2016
[23] E. K. Choe, N. B. Lee, B. Lee, W. Pratt, and J. A. Kientz,
“Under- standing quantified-selfers’ practices in collecting and ex-
ploring personal data,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on human factors in computing systems, pp. 1143–1152, 2014,
doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372
[24] B. Lee et al., “Data visualization on mobile devices,” in Extended Ab-
stracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 1–8, 2018, doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3170631
[25] T. Broens, A. Van Halteren, M. Van Sinderen, and K. Wac, “Towards
an application framework for context-aware m-health applications,”
International Journal of Internet Protocol Technology, vol. 2, no. 2, pp.
109–116, 2007
[26] R. Schnall et al., “A user-centered model for designing consumer mobile
health (mHealth) applications (apps),” Journal of biomedical informatics,
vol. 60 , pp. 243–251, 2016, doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2016.02.002
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-982-9
ACHI 2022 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

