Identifying User Experience Elements for People with Disabilities 
Mingyu Lee, Sung H. Han, Hyun K. Kim, Hanul Bang  
Department of Industrial Management & Engineering 
POSTECH 
Pohang, Republic of Korea 
{mk3215s2, shan, emokubi, hanul89}@postech.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—This study aims to identify the elements of the user 
experience (UX) of mobile products and services for people 
with disabilities. Although many researchers have emphasized 
UX in designing new products and services, common 
understanding of UX for those with disabilities is absent. This 
study identified UX elements for people with disabilities by 
analyzing previous studies. A total of 45 articles from the 
literature were analyzed, and as a result, UX elements for 
people with disabilities were identified. The results can be used 
as criteria for developing new products/services or evaluating 
existing products/services.  
Keywords—User experience (UX); UX elements; Disabled 
people; Usability; Affect; User value. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
User experience (UX) refers to all of experiences 
resulting from interactions that a user has with a product or 
service [1][2]. With growing interest in UX in the field of 
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), many studies have been 
conducted in both industry and academia [3].  
However, existing studies of UX have rarely considered 
people with disabilities. People with disabilities have 
different abilities to sense external information, so their 
experience with products or services can be different from 
that of non-disabled people. Understanding the UX of people 
with disabilities should be a great help to the development of 
products and services. 
This study aimed to identify the UX elements of people 
with disabilities. We defined UX of people with disabilities 
as an experience that consists of aspects of interaction 
between the disabled and products/services which are 
influenced by assistive technologies. We investigated the 
elements based on the definition. This study analyzed 
relevant literatures on usability for people with disabilities 
and UX of general users, and identified the elements of UX 
for those with disabilities. During surveying the literatures, 
the specific types of disabilities were not considered to 
collect diverse literatures. Mobile devices have been 
regarded as important products for people with disabilities, 
so this study focused on the UX of mobile devices/services. 
Section 2 presents the existing studies on people with 
disabilities and their limitations. Section 3 explains how to 
derive the UX elements for people with disabilities in the 
study, and presents the results of UX elements. In Section 4, 
the study analyzes the differences between the UX elements 
for people with disabilities and that for general users. We 
present the characteristics of UX elements for people with 
disabilities. 
II. 
EXISTING STUDIES ON USABILITY  
FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES 
Many studies related to the design of products and 
services for people with disabilities have been conducted and 
suggested a variety of design concepts related to usability or 
accessibility. The concept of barrier-free design emerged in 
the 1950s. It aimed to remove obstacles in houses or 
buildings for those with physical disabilities [4]. Accessible 
design focuses on standardizing designs for people with 
physical limitations to maximize the number of potential 
users [5]. Universal design is the most recent concept and 
has as its goal designing products or environments usable by 
all people without any need for adaptation or specialized 
design [6]. Inclusive design is a similar concept to accessible 
design, and design for all is another term used to refer to 
universal design. 
Many studies suggested the concept related to people 
with disabilities, but they just focus on improving the 
usability of products and services for people with disabilities. 
Similar to non-disabled people, however, those with 
disabilities also experience user affect [7] and user value [8]. 
It is necessary to consider the comprehensive UX of those 
with disabilities, not only usability. This study attempted to 
identify the UX elements for people with disabilities through 
a literature review. 
III. 
IDENTIFICATION OF UX ELEMENTS 
 FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES 
First, we surveyed the literature using keywords related 
to UX for people with disabilities, such as assistive 
technology, accessible design, universal design, and 
universal usability. Various types of literature, including 
journals, conference proceedings, magazines, reports, and 
books, were considered (Table 1), and 34 articles were 
collected in the literature survey from Google Scholar and 
SCOPUS databases. UX elements for people with disabilities 
have not been identified before, so evaluation criteria of 
products/services for people with disabilities or design 
considerations for them were considered as the candidates of 
UX elements in the study. As a result, a total of 49 
candidates for the UX elements were identified, such as 
accessibility, perceivability, coequalness, and independence. 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
Second, we collected the UX elements for general users 
to get the insights for UX elements for people with 
disabilities. 11 journal papers and reports which state the UX 
elements for general users comprehensively were collected 
and 92 candidates for the UX elements were identified.  
Then, we integrated all of the candidates and removed 
candidates not appropriate to people with disabilities and 
mobile products or services based on three criteria; 
importance of elements, relevance to disabilities and mobile 
products/services, and relevance to the purpose of using a 
product/service. For example, translucency and durability 
were excluded. Those were important aspects of mobile 
devices to general users, but color and shape, which were 
essential characteristics of product to recognize a product, 
were much important than translucency to people with 
disabilities. Durability usually was not the purpose of using a 
mobile product or a service. 
Lastly, 
we 
grouped 
the 
elements 
with 
similar 
characteristics or meanings. Based on the existing UX 
studies, the UX elements were classified as usability, affect, 
and user value [9]. The UX of people with disabilities would 
also follow the same classification. Finally, the UX elements 
of people with disabilities and their definitions were 
identified as presented in Table 2.  
 
Journals 
­ 
Disability & Rehabilitation 
­ 
Technology and Disability 
­ 
American journal of physical medicine & rehabilitation 
­ 
Journal of Visual Impairment & Blindness 
­ 
International Journal of Design 
­ 
Design studies 
­ 
International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 
­ 
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 
Conferences 
­ 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI Conference) 
­ 
International Conference on Universal Access in Human-Computer 
Interaction 
­ 
Proceedings on the conference on Universal Usability 
­ 
The ERCIM Workshop on User Interfaces for all 
Books/Reports 
­ 
Design and Use of Assistive Technology 
­ 
Plenum Series in Rehabilitation and Health 
­ 
The universal access handbook 
­ 
Universal Access in Human Computer Interaction 
­ 
Design Council Report 
TABLE I.  
REPRESENTATIVE SOURCES OF THE SURVEY 
TABLE II.  
THE UX ELEMENTS OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES AND THEIR DEFINITIONS 
Elements 
Definitions 
Examples or similar concepts 
Usability 
Accessibility 
Degree to which a product or a service is enable the user to 
approach or operate 
Accessible size, Input assistance,  
Visibility, Audibility 
Effortlessness 
Ability of a product or a service to require no effort of the user to 
use it 
Efficiency, Effectiveness 
Flexibility 
Degree to which a product or a service can accommodate to 
changes in tasks or environments 
Adaptability, Interoperability 
Informativeness 
Degree to which the product is informational and giving all the 
necessary information to the user in a proper manner 
Comprehensiveness, Explicitness 
Learnability 
Degree to which a product or a service is enable the user to learn 
how to use it 
Memorability, Predictability, Consistency, 
Familiarity, Intuitiveness 
Simplicity 
Degree to which the way that a product or a service works looks 
simple and uncomplicated 
Modelessness 
User support 
Ability of a product or a service for the user to use it easily 
Helpfulness, Error prevention, Recovery, 
Feedback, Easy to installation 
User 
Value 
Attachment 
Ability for the user to have subjective value on a product or a 
service by giving special meanings to it 
Preciousness, Affection, Reminiscence 
Customer need 
Degree to which functions of a product or a service satisfy the 
user's functional needs 
Comfort, Convenience, Usefulness/Utility, 
Intelligence, Security, Trust 
Identity 
Ability for the user to percept the distinct personality of an 
individual by using a product or a service 
Self-esteem, Self-respect, Self-satisfaction 
Independence 
Ability for the user to have confidence to achieve something 
without any aid of somebody 
Self-determination, Autonomy 
Relaxation 
Feeling of being relaxed or pleased by interacting with a product 
or a service 
Pleasure, Fun, Enjoyment, Taking a rest 
Sociability 
Degree to which a product/service satisfies the users' desire that 
they want to interact with society as a member 
Social emotion, Social value, Social belonging, 
Relationship, Friendship 
Affect 
Sensory affect 
Primitive and direct images by interacting with a product or a 
service 
Shape, Color, Brightness, Sense of grip, Texture, 
Heaviness 
Descriptive affect 
Impressions of a product or a service that the users would 
describe based on their experience 
Delicacy, Simplicity, Rapidity, Rigidity 
Evaluative affect 
Attitudinal or judgmental images about a product or a service 
Attractiveness, Reliability,  
Comfort, Convenience 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

IV. 
DISCUSSION 
There are some differences between UX elements for 
general users and people with disabilities. With regard to 
usability, accessibility should be more emphasized for people 
with disabilities than for general users. People with 
disabilities tend to have an insufficient sensory or physical 
ability to use mobile phones or services, thus it is necessary 
to make mobile phones or services easy to use for them. In 
other words, accessibility is the prerequisite of usability. 
Accessibility has also been emphasized in studies on design, 
such as accessible, universal, and barrier-free design [10][11]. 
More diverse elements of user value were derived than 
those for general users.  Products or services with assistive 
technology enable people with disabilities to do daily 
activities, such as reading a book, taking a walk, and making 
a phone call to someone, which they cannot do in their daily 
life, and this fact led diversity of user value elements. 
Specifically, independence and identity are unique and major 
elements of user value, which are also main elements of 
quality of life [12][13]. There are few studies on the affect of 
people with disabilities while usability was widely 
considered for designing products or services. However, 
affect should not be overlooked in the design process in the 
sense that people with disabilities use more diverse sense 
organs than general people while getting information.  
This 
study 
composed 
the 
UX 
elements 
with 
consideration for various types of disability. However, the 
elements or importance of each element can differ according 
to types and severity of disability. For instance, a visually 
impaired person mostly feels affect from a sound, while a 
hearing impaired person mainly from a vision. Therefore, 
different UX elements according to types of disability should 
be considered before designing products or service with 
consideration of types of disability.  
The study conducted the literature survey systematically 
to define and identify UX elements for people with 
disabilities. To verify the UX elements that identified in the 
study, experiments or interviews with people with disabilities 
should be conducted in the future study. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This study analyzed the literature on disability and UX, 
and identified the elements of the UX of people with 
disabilities. Previous studies on designing products and 
services focused mainly on product and service usability, but 
this study suggested that user value and affect should be 
considered in the design stage. The UX elements for those 
with disabilities can be used as criteria for developing new 
products/services or evaluating existing products/services. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Basic Science Research 
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea 
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (No. 
2013R1A1A2013231) 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. M. Desmet and P. Hekkert, “Framework of product 
experience,” International Journal of Design, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 
57-66, 2007. 
[2] ISO CD 9241-210 Ergonomics of human-system interaction. 
Part 210: Human-centred design processfor interactive 
systems, ISO, 2008. 
[3] J. Park and S. H. Han, “Defining and Analyzing User Value 
of Smartphones”, Proceedings of Spring Conference of the 
Ergonomics Society of Korea 2012, 2012, pp. 312-315. 
[4] W. F. Preiser and K. H. Smith, Universal design handbook 2nd 
ed., McGraw Hill Professional, USA, 2010. 
[5] ISO/IEC Guide 71 Guidelines for standards developers to 
address the needs of older persons and persons with 
disabilities, CEN/CENELEC Guide 6, ISO, 2002. 
[6] The Center for Universal Design. Environments and products 
for 
all 
people. 
[Online]. 
Abilable 
from: 
http://www.ncsu.edu/ncsu/design/cud/about_ud/about_ud.htm 
2014.12.22 
[7] J. H. Park and H. Y. Ryoo, “Emotion of People with Visual 
Disability for Enhancing Web Accessibility,” Journal of 
Korean Emotion and Sensibility, Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 589-598, 
2008. 
[8] L. Demers, R. D. Wessels, and R. Weiss‐Lambrou, B. Ska, L. 
P. De Witte, “An international content validation of the 
Quebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with assistive 
Technology (QUEST),” Occupational Therapy International, 
Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 159-175, 1999. 
[9] J. Park, S. H. Han, H. K. Kim, Y. Cho, and W. Park, 
“Developing elements of user experience for mobile phones 
and 
services: 
survey, 
interview, 
and 
observation 
approaches,” Human 
Factors 
and 
Ergonomics 
in 
Manufacturing & Service Industries, Vol. 23, No. 4, pp. 279–
293, 2013. 
[10] G. Dewsbury and M. Edge, “Designing the Home to Meet the 
Needs of Tomorrow,” Open House International,  Vol. 26, No. 
2, pp. 33-42, 2001. 
[11] H. Petrie and N. Bevan, The evaluation of accessibility, 
usability and user experience, The universal access handbook, 
pp. 10-20, 2009. 
[12] M. Wehmeyer and M. Schwartz, “The relationship between 
self-determination and quality of life for adults with mental 
retardation,” Education and training in mental retardation and 
developmental disabilities, Vol. 33, pp. 3-12, 1998. 
[13] M. J. Scherer and L. A. Cushman, “Measuring subjective 
quality of life following spinal cord injury: a validation study 
of the assistive technology device predisposition assessment,” 
Disability & Rehabilitation, Vol. 23, No. 9, pp. 387-393, 2001. 
 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

