A Study on Circular-coil Characteristics for Displaying Non-contact  
Tactile Sensation based on Magnetic Field. 
Hyung-Sik Kim 
Department of Mechatronics Engineering 
School of ICT Convergence Engineering, College of 
Science & Technology, Konkuk University 
Chungju, Republic of Korea 
email: hskim98@kku.ac.kr 
Kyu-Beom Kim, Ji-Su Kim, Soon-Cheol Chung* 
Department of Biomedical Engineering 
School of ICT Convergence Engineering, College of 
Science & Technology, Konkuk University 
Chungju, Republic of Korea 
email: rlarbqja0507@kku.ac.kr; roseee517@kku.ac.kr; 
scchung@kku.ac.kr*
 
Abstract—In this study, characteristics of coil, which is an 
actuator 
of 
magnetic 
field-based 
non-contact 
tactile 
presentation technology, were simulated. To induce a sense of 
touch using a magnetic field without wearing any devices on 
hand, 
a 
high-power 
power 
supply 
device, 
a 
power 
semiconductor switch, and a coil for generating a magnetic 
field are required. Because of the high power used, the power 
supply and coil require a separate heat sink device. Therefore, 
a simulation study was conducted on the characteristics of coils 
in order not to use a heat dissipation device. Simulations were 
conducted for the strength and field pattern of the magnetic 
field for each experimental frequency, the density of the 
magnetic field, and the generated heat for the circular coil. 
From the results, the magnetic field density and distribution 
were the same at all frequencies. In the analysis of the change 
in magnetic field density according to the frequency, the 
difference in the density of the magnetic field calculated at 5 
Hz and 250 Hz was only about 2.03%. In the case of heat 
analysis, the time required to recover to the ambient 
temperature of 25 ℃ is less than 10 seconds in the case of 5 Hz 
condition, but the time required to return to the ambient 
temperature is more than 3.6 minutes at 250 Hz. Through this 
study, it was confirmed that a circular coil with a diameter of 
about 28 cm made of copper can operate for a long time 
without a cooling system under natural convection conditions. 
Keywords-Non-conctact tactile stimulator; Circular-coil; 
Magnetic field strength; Density; Heat, Heat-sink. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As IT technology develops, research for interaction 
between devices and humans is also being actively 
conducted [1]. These studies stimulate sight and hearing 
among the human senses and exchange information through 
the process of perception and cognition. Recently, studies to 
present tactile sensation for more realistic interaction are also 
being conducted. Until now, most of the devices for 
presenting the tactile sensation are of a contact type and 
mainly induce a sense of vibration [2]. An actuator to 
generate a sense of vibration mainly uses a motor. This is 
because it is easy to control the magnitude of vibration and 
the frequency of vibration using electric signals, and it is 
possible to manufacture in a small size and is inexpensive. 
However, in the tactile presentation method, the tactile 
sensation can be evoked only when the person and the device 
must maintain a contact state. In addition, even if the contact 
state is maintained, the shape of the tactile sensation caused 
by changing the area, size, and time of contact is not 
consistent. Therefore, a technique for presenting a sense of 
touch in a non-contact method is also being studied. 
Representatively, a method using focused-ultrasound and a 
method using compressed-air are being tried [3]. However, 
these methods always have additional noise, have a short 
stimulus 
presentation 
distance, 
and 
complicate 
the 
configuration of the control system.  
Recently, a method using a pulsed laser has also been 
introduced. This method has the advantage of a very long 
stimulus presentation distance, but the price of the laser 
system for tactile presentation is very expensive and requires 
a delicate setup using optics. Since the above three methods 
transmit energy for inducing a tactile sensation to the skin 
through space, it is impossible to transmit the tactile 
sensation when there is an object between the actuation 
source and the skin. Recently, a method using magnetic field 
induction has been developed [4]. Since this method uses an 
electromagnetic field, it has the advantage of presenting a 
sense of touch even when an arbitrary object exists.  
However, high power is required to generate a magnetic 
field. In addition, since high heat is generated in a coil that 
generates a magnetic field, an additional device for heat 
dissipation is required when a continuous tactile sensation is 
generated. The cooling system also has the disadvantage that 
it is generally large and requires separate operating power. 
Therefore, in this study, a study on the characteristics to 
minimize heat generation of the coil, which is an actuator for 
presenting a magnetic field-based tactile sensation, was 
conducted through simulation analysis. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Setting up the Simulation Environment for the 
Stimulation Coil 
The analysis of the coil was performed through 
theoretical analysis and simulation of the magnetic field 
distribution. ANSYS (ANSYS Inc., USA) was used for 
computer simulation. Analysis of magnetic field strength, 
pattern, and thermal analysis according to the amplitude and 
frequency of voltage input to the coil, and magnetic field and 
thermal analysis were performed under the pulse voltage 
input condition of 950 Volts. A coil is a wire wound in a 
circular shape. Since the strength H of the magnetic field by 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

the entire electric wire is the sum of the length of the minute 
current and the minute magnetic field, it can be expressed as 
a line integral as shown in Equation (1) below. 
 
                 (1) 
 
The voltage applied to the coil analysis was 950 Volts, 
the time was 130 μs, and the frequencies were 5, 10, 50, 100, 
200, and 250 Hz. The voltage used is converted into current 
(I) by the specific resistance of copper. The intensity of the 
magnetic field is adjusted by the magnitude of the current, 
and through this, the intensity of the tactile sensation can be 
controlled. Also, the number of turns of the coil is 
proportional to the intensity of the tactile sensation, but 
because the size increases, voltage, which is electrically easy 
to control, was used. The flow of simulation using ANSYS is 
shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Simulation procedure using ANSYS Workbench. 
B. Coil geometry 
The geometric shape of the coil was modeled as shown in 
Figure 2, the material was copper, and the number of turns 
was set to 28 according to the environment in which the coil 
would be applied. The physical properties of the copper were 
specific resistance 1.69×10-2 [Ω/m], wire length 3.8 [m], 
specific heat 0.0924 [Cal/g × ℃], and weight 800 [gram]. 
 
Figure 2. 2D and 3D shapes for coil simulation. 
III. 
RESULTS 
In the analysis of the change in magnetic field density 
according to the frequency, the difference in the density of 
the magnetic field calculated at a point 5 cm perpendicular to 
the plane of the coil was approximately 2.03 % at 5 Hz and 
250 Hz, and the change was small (Figure 3(a)). When 
power is applied to the wire, heat is generated by the 
resistance 
component 
of 
the 
wire. 
The 
maximum 
temperature varied with frequency in the coil used. In the 
case of 250 Hz, the maximum temperature was 57.2 ℃, and 
in the case of 5 Hz, the temperature rise was small at 24.2 ℃. 
As heat generation increases, the size of resistance decreases, 
so more energy must be discharged to generate a magnetic 
field of the same size. Therefore, since the efficiency is 
reduced, this must be considered when manufacturing the 
coil. In addition, at each maximum temperature, heatsink by 
natural convection fell to the initial temperature within 3.6 
minutes (Figure 3(b)). Since the pattern of the magnetic field 
according to the frequency is constant and the heat rise is not 
large, it means that the formation of the magnetic field for 
magnetic stimulation is constant even if the coil used is 
changed in the set frequency range (Figure 3(c) and (d). 
 
Figure 3. Simulation results for circular-coil. (a) Magnetic field density, (b) 
Heat dissipation profile, (c) Magnetic field map for 5 Hz and (d) 250 Hz. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the change in magnetic field pattern and 
temperature according to the application of pulsed power to 
the magnetic field generating coil was confirmed. The 
change in the density and field pattern of the magnetic field 
was small according to the frequency in the range of 5 to 250 
Hz. In the case of temperature, the maximum rose about 
33.1℃. It was confirmed that the coil of the proposed shape 
had a small difference between low frequency and high 
frequency, so that it was possible to induce a tactile sensation 
with constant strength and strength even when used for a 
long time. A large coil is used to induce a tactile sensation in 
the bare hand, but it is composed with an encloser made of 
wood or plastic, so it can be used for the purpose of inducing 
a tactile sensation with an invisible actuator. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a Mid-career Researcher Program 
Grant through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), 
funded by the Ministry of Education (MOE) (No. NRF-
2021R1A2C2009136). 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Iftene and D. Trandabăț, “Enhancing the Attractiveness of 
Learning through Augmented Reality,” Procedia. Comput. Sci. 
vol. 126, pp. 166-175, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.p 
rocs.2018.07.220. 
[2] T. Rose, C. S. Nam, and K. B. Chen, “Immersion of virtual 
reality for rehabilitation – Review,” Appl. Ergon. vol. 69, pp. 
153-161, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2018.01.009. 
[3] T. Hoshi, M. Takahashi, T. Iwamoto, and H. Shinoda, 
“Noncontact Tactile Display Based on Radiation Pressure of 
Airborne Ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Haptics. vol. 3, pp. 155-
165, 2010, https://doi.org/10.1109/TOH.2010.4. 
[4] H. S. Kim, et al., “Development of tactile actuator with non-
contact and trans-object characteristics using time-varying 
magnetic field,” Actuators, vol. 10, pp. 1-11, 2021, https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/act10060106. 
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-078-0
ACHI 2023 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

