Networked Visibility: The case of smart card ticket information  
 
Maja van der Velden, Alma Culén, Jo Herstad and Atif Abdelhakeem 
Department of Informatics, Group for Design of Information Systems 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
majava@ifi.uio.no, almira@ifi.uio.no, johe@uio.no, abdelhat@student.matnat.uio.no
 
 
Abstract—This paper concerns the replacement of paper 
tickets with smart card tickets for public transportation. By 
contrasting the visibility of ticket information to users of 
paper tickets and smart card tickets, this paper describes the 
move from local information on paper tickets to distributed 
information on smart cards. Using the concept of ‘networked 
visibility’, this paper argues that this move has resulted in less 
informed travelers and more informed providers. In order to 
restore the accessibility of ticket information to users, we 
present one possible solution, ARTick, a mobile phone smart 
card reader app. ARTick shows that smart cards can make 
complete ticket information visible to the user, whenever and 
wherever this information is needed.  
Keywords—Information Visibility; Networked Visibility, 
Smart Cards; Ticket Information; Mobile Phones  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A major research and development area for human-
computer interaction (HCI) over the last years has been to 
explore ways of interaction that emerge by embedding 
computing and networking technology in the everyday 
physical world in which we live.  This development goes by 
many names such as tangible interaction [6], ubiquitous 
computing [5] and embodied interaction [3].   Examples of 
this development are pen and paper with embedded 
computing technologies and transportation tickets with 
embedded computer chips with networking capabilities. 
When 
computing 
and 
network 
technologies 
are 
embedded in everyday objects, there are many ways “to 
capitalize on our familiarity, skill and experience in dealing 
with the everyday world around us” writes Dourish [2]. 
New values, new possibilities, but also new concerns may 
emerge from interaction between these familiar objects with 
and without embedded technology.  
This paper reports from a case in which paper-based 
tickets for public transportation are replaced by so-called 
contactless smart cards. A smart card is a credit card size 
plastic card containing a microchip with antenna for 
contactless communication with a card reader; see Fig. 1 for 
the card and Fig. 2 for readers. The computerized and 
networked smart card can hold different kinds of 
information: ticket information, monetary information (the 
amount of money put on the card), but also other 
information such as the ticket for a football match or the 
annual subscription to a museum.  
Our focus is on the visibility of information that is 
needed to use the smart card as a valid transportation ticket.  
 
Figure 1.  A  smart card used in public transportation in Norway. 
 
Figure 2.  Smart card readers. 
We identified three basic ticket information needs of 
public transportation users: the type of the ticket, the value 
of the ticket, and the duration of the ticket. There are other 
ticket information needs, such as the price of one trip, an 
overview or log of implemented trips, an overview of past 
travel expenses, etc., but they don’t add significantly to our 
argument. 
In design of information systems and usability studies, 
the visibility of information is related to the visibility of a 
system’s status. Being informed about a system’s status is 
one of the ways in which users receive feedback on a 
system’s use or performance. Studies of the visibility of 
information on smart cards have been implemented in 
several sectors, such as supply chain management, the 
automotive industry, and the healthcare sector [1, 10, 11, 
12]. We are not aware of visibility studies of ticketing 
systems in the public transportation sector although some 
other interesting and related issues have been reported in [7, 
8, 9]. Morgner et al.'s proposal [9] is of particular interest to 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

us, as the authors propose similar technologies in their 
design solution. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows:  in the next 
section we present our case, the move from a paper-based 
ticket to a computerized ticket.  In Section III we report on a 
small 
explorative 
study 
among 
randomly 
selected 
inhabitants of Oslo, conducted in order to get an indication if 
the visibility of smart card information influences users 
experience with the new system. In Section IV, we will use 
the concept of networked visibility, first introduced by 
Stalder [14], to discuss horizontal and vertical visibility of 
ticket information. In Section V we present ARTick as one 
possible solution for the visualization of smart card-based 
ticket information. In the last section, we present our 
conclusions and future work. 
II. 
FROM PAPER TICKETS TO SMART CARD TICKETS 
Moving from paper-based practices [13] or desktop-
based practices to practices where computing and 
communications technologies are embedded into everyday 
objects poses many challenges.  Dourish [2] states: “In this 
world, our primary experience of computation is not with a 
traditional desktop computer, but rather with a range of 
computationally-enhanced devices, pieces of paper, pens, 
walls, books, hammers etc.”  Rust and Kannan [12] 
consider this ubiquitous computation to be a fantastic 
opportunity to enhance customer experiences.  In the case 
of smart cards, all sort of information may be stored and 
used by service provider(s) in order to offer better one-to-
one services. We discuss how such embedded technology 
often offers much wider opportunities to providers than to 
customers. 
A. The visibility of information  
In our study of the smart card we focus on the visibility 
of public transportation ticket information. Our case is the 
‘Reisekortet’, the smart card ticket used in the public 
transportation system in Oslo, Norway. The system was first 
introduced in 2009, replacing the paper ticketing entirely. 
We are interested in the following questions: How are 
users of paper tickets able to find answers to their three basic 
ticket information needs: type of the ticket, value of the 
ticket and duration of the ticket (see Table 1) and how has 
this changed with the introduction of the smart card ticket? 
We will answer this question by looking into three 
actions the users engage in: purchasing the new ticket, 
using a valid ticket and having an expired ticket. 
 
B. Purchasing a ticket  
When a ticket is purchased, the three pieces of basic 
information (type of the ticket, value of the ticket and 
duration of the ticket) are given by the user to a sales person 
or are selected by the user on a vending machine or on the 
public 
transportation 
website. 
In 
addition, 
public 
transportation users have also the choice between a 
registered and an unregistered ticket. ‘Registered’ means 
that the name and date of birth of the user is registered with 
the public transportation provider. ‘Unregistered’ means that 
the user is anonymous and that the age of the user is 
unknown. All information given/selected by the user is 
registered on the ticket.  
TABLE I.  
BASIC TICKET INFORMATION NEEDS USERS OF   PUBLIC   
TRANSPORTATION HAVE 
Type of ticket 
 
The type of the ticket refers to the different kinds of 
tickets available. We can differentiate between types of 
tickets based on the number of trips and types of tickets 
based on the particular period they cover independent of 
the number of trips (day, week, month, and year). Other 
types are registered or unregistered (anonymous) 
tickets, and regular and discount tickets. 
 
• 
A popular paper ticket was the unregistered 8 trip-
ticket, the so-called flexi card, which was available 
as a regular ticket and a discount ticket. The flexi 
card could be used by more than one traveler at the 
same time. There is no smart card variation of this 
ticket. 
 
• 
A popular smart card ticket is the prepaid card, 
which can be topped up when needed. This ticket 
can only be used by one traveler at the time. There 
is no paper variation of this ticket. 
Value of ticket 
 
The type of ticket decides the monetary value of the 
ticket. In the case of the pre-paid fill-up ticket, the value 
of the ticket depends on how much money the user has 
put on the ticket. The monetary value of all tickets 
diminishes with use. A ticket has zero value when the 
duration of the ticket has expired or when the monetary 
value is below the price of a ticket. In the case of 
prepaid cards, any amount less than the value of a single 
ticket may be left on the card. Paper tickets did not have 
this characteristic. 
Duration of ticket 
 
The duration of the ticket is decided by the date and 
time stamp of a ticket and varies for the different ticket 
types. Registered monthly paper tickets were sent 
automatically by mail to the user before the monthly 
ticket expired. Registered smart cards can be 
automatically topped up (in case of a prepaid card) or 
extended (in case of the 30 days card). 
 
All this information is at all times visible on the paper 
ticket in the form of printed text (type, value, duration), the 
size of the ticket (type), the color of the ticket (type), and the 
shape of the ticket (type).  For example, the 8-trip ticket (see 
Fig. 3) was the only folded paper ticket. It had a pre-printed 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

text to indicate the value of the ticket (kr.180) and the word 
‘voksne’ (adults) to indicate that it was a regular ticket. The 
fact that it was a regular ticket was also indicated by its color 
combination.  
The printed text on a strip is a timestamp, indicating the 
time when the one-hour validity of the ticket ends. This 
timestamp is added to the ticket when a traveler enters a 
metro platform or a bus or tram and inserts the card in a 
ticket stamp machine (see Fig. 3).  
 
 
Figure 3.  A paper ticket (left) and a ticket stamp machine (right). 
The crucial difference between the paper ticket and the 
smart card ticket is that on the smart card ticket, information 
is distributed across several devices and places, but it is 
never visible on the ticket itself. The information can 
become visible in four different ways: via stationary ticket 
readers positioned at the entrances of stations and platforms 
of the metro and inside busses and trams, scanners handheld 
by human ticket controllers, smart card terminals at the point 
of purchase, and the Internet (only for registered smart card 
holders, Fig. 4). 
C. Using a Ticket  
When one is travelling, the value and duration of the 
ticket change. On the paper ticket this information is at all 
times visible, while travelers with a smart card need to use 
ticket readers to access this information on their card. The 
stationary readers are also used to validate a ticket and give 
information about the type of card, expiration date or 
remaining value of the card, and expiration time. This 
information is visible for two seconds at the time of 
validation. This is often too short. The user can wait 2 
minutes after validation to display the information again. 
The fact that the type of ticket is not visible without 
scanning it, presents the risk of traveling with a wrong card, 
e.g. a parent can use a child ticket without knowing it. 
When a traveler validates a ticket, the reader can provide 
the wrong information. For example, an 11-year-old girl, 
who travels alone on a tram to her dance school, uses her 
prepaid smart card twice a week. Incidentally, her mother 
accompanies her one-day and notices that the child pays the 
adult fee instead of the discounted fee for children. The 
child’s birthday was recorded at the time of the purchase of 
the smart card ticket and the card has been working well 
over a long period of time. The mother and the daughter 
walk into the public transportation service centre. The 
customer representative scans the card. All the trips, and the 
fees paid for them, appear on the screen. It becomes 
apparent that somehow the discount child’s smart card was 
read as a regular card. The customer representative counts 
the number of wrongly charged trips, fills a paper based 
refund form, and issues the overcharged amount of fees in 
cash.  
D. The Expired Ticket  
A paper ticket is expired when the timestamp on a ticket 
has expired. The user of a smart card will not be able to see 
if the ticket is still valid. The ticket has to be read (see 
above). If the ticket is a registered smart card, the validity of 
the ticket can also be checked by logging onto the public 
transportation system’s website. 
At the moment, travelers have no way of checking the 
validity of their smart card ticket when they leave their 
home or office unless they have a registered card and 
Internet access.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Accessing on the internet the information from the smart card. 
Smart card users taking the bus or tram find out if their 
ticket has expired or not by using a card reading located 
inside the bus or tram. Our observations with smart card 
readers located with the bus driver made clear that many 
travelers are surprised to find out that they have not enough 
funds on their card and that they were attempting to travel 
with an expired card (see Fig. 5).  
In those cases the travelers need to buy an expensive 
one-time paper ticket from the bus driver or they have to 
leave the bus. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Validating a smart card ticket on the bus. 
III. 
WHAT SMART CARD TICKET USERS SAY 
As users of the public transportation system in Oslo, the 
authors are familiar with the change in the visibility of ticket 
information since the introduction of the ticket smart card. 
We decided to ask other users what their experiences with 
the new smart card ticket were. We selected at random 20 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

people in Oslo to conduct quick, semi-structured interviews 
about their awareness of the information stored on their 
smart card ticket. Eight of the twenty people interviewed 
were interviewed at the public places, but away from 
transportation points, in order to get a feeling if they would 
remember how much money they had or when they used 
their smart ticket last. Three persons were monthly ticket 
users and knew the expiration date of their card precisely. 
They also knew when they used the transportation last, 
though this piece of information was not important for them. 
Two were using a prepaid card, which can be used for 
multiple trips as long as there are enough funds on it. They 
also felt that they had no problems keeping track of the 
amount of money left on their respective cards. A young 
student, using the same type of prepaid card said: “I never 
know, getting on the tram, if I actually have any money on 
the ticket. It is always a game of chance”. One person in this 
group was an out of town visitor who always buys a day 
ticket because “everything else is too complicated for me.” 
She continued to explain that it is hard to keep track of when 
she last used the transportation (tickets have 1 hour validity). 
As she was not in Oslo very often, she always had multiple 
tasks at different points of the city to accomplish. The day 
ticket then was the best option, also because the ticket could 
then be discarded, instead of taken care of for the future use. 
The last person we approached said that he has never used 
public transportation in Oslo. 
The remaining twelve persons were interviewed at a bus 
stop (four) and at a metro station (eight). Ten of them are 
monthly ticket users. Three persons from this group said that 
they remember with certainty when their ticket expires. One 
of them remarked that although she does remember, she 
wishes that she did not have to. Three said that they 
remember approximate expiration date. They scan the card 
when it comes close to the day they think the ticket will 
expire. Three said that they do not remember expiration date 
and have to check their ticket frequently. One older person 
said that she keeps the receipt from the sale of the card in 
her valet and looks at it occasionally, as the date of the 
purchase is printed on it. Two persons with prepaid cards 
said that they have problems remembering how much 
money they still have on their card. One of them in 
particular had difficulties as he is only an occasional user of 
the public transportation system and forgets how much 
money is left on the card between the trips. 
Thus, only about half of the people we talked to were 
entirely comfortable with the visibility aspect of the smart 
ticketing system. This number increases if those who do not 
mind scanning their card occasionally are included in the 
group that feels comfortable. However, 1/5 of this sample 
felt clearly uncomfortable with smart card information 
visibility. 
Although only 20 persons were interviewed, the results 
give an indication that information visibility of a smart card 
is a real issue. The user satisfaction with the smart card 
ticketing solution may be improved by offering a better 
visibility of ticketing information.  
IV. 
THE NETWORKED VISIBILITY OF TICKET 
INFORMATION 
The answer to a simple question “how much money is 
left on my smart card?” involves a variety of devices and 
places. Ticket information, once located on a piece of paper 
in the hand of the user, is now distributed and networked. 
Stalder [14] calls this networked visibility, which is “created 
by the capacity to record, store, transmit, access 
communication, action, and states generated through digital 
networks”. Stalder studies Web 2.0 and presents two types 
of visibility: horizontal visibility pertaining to information 
becoming visible to users and vertical visibility pertaining 
to what information the service providers can see. While 
users can manage their horizontal visibility, i.e. what 
information about themselves becomes visible to others, 
they have no control over the vertical visibility of their 
information. Service providers have access to the 
information of all users, but this visibility is one way, it is 
invisible to the users. 
Similar to Stalder, we can differentiate between the 
horizontal and vertical visibility of ticket information. We 
understand horizontal visibility as the visibility of ticket 
information to the user of the public transportation system. 
The paper ticket user has immediate horizontal visibility, at 
all times and places. The ticket information is directly 
visible on the paper ticket – when the ticket is in use, not in 
use, or expired. The smart card user’s horizontal visibility is 
limited to particular places: when the ticket is purchased, 
when it is read or scanned, or when it is checked on the web 
(only for registered cards). As we saw in the previous 
section, many travelers are insecure about the status of their 
smart card: they are not sure if the card is (still) valid. 
We understand vertical visibility as the visibility of the 
ticket 
information 
to 
the 
provider 
of 
the 
public 
transportation system. The provider has other ticket 
information needs than the user. The provider is interested 
in use information, such as the users’ frequency, time, and 
destination of travel, and what type of ticket they use. This 
information is the basis for organizing public transportation 
schedules, the frequency of departures, and the number of 
routes. The provider had only limited vertical visibility 
when the paper tickets were in use and therefore had to 
implement user surveys to get this information. With the 
introduction of the smart card, the provider has full access 
to ticket information. 
In our case, the networked visibility created by 
embedding computing and networking capabilities to a 
transportation ticket has decreased the horizontal visibility 
of the users and significantly increased the vertical visibility 
of the provider. The loss of horizontal visibility negatively 
affects a large number of travelers who are uncomfortable 
using their smart card. They can’t transfer their familiarity, 
skill, and experience in using the paper ticket to the smart 
card. 
The increase of the vertical visibility of the provider 
creates new concerns in terms of privacy as the 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

whereabouts of registered smart card users is recorded, 
stored, and transmitted. These data can be accessed or 
aggregated for uses not directly related to the public 
transportation system. As we saw above, an employee at a 
service point could access such data. On the other hand, the 
availability of these data made it possible for the mother to 
get a refund. This would have been impossible with a paper 
ticket. 
V. 
ARTICK: AUGMENTING THE SMART TICKET 
The design of the smart card ticket builds forth on some 
of the characteristics of the paper ticket: tickets need to be 
validated before use and the points of validation are at the 
same locations as the paper ticket. The main difference is 
the visibility of ticket information. On paper tickets, 
information was visible at all times and places because it 
was local information, it was locally stored on the paper 
ticket. Can we make this characteristic of the paper ticket 
available on the smart card ticket? 
In order to improve the user experience with smart 
tickets and offer local visibility of the ticketing information, 
we made a simple prototype: ARTick (Augmented Reality 
Ticket). ARTick turns any smart phone into a mobile smart 
card reader using NFC (Near Field Communication) 
standards, see also [9]. NFC is a short-range wireless 
technology, enabling one-way and two-way communication 
between smart phones or between smart phones and other 
wireless devices, in our case the contactless smart card [4]. 
On 
NFC-enabled 
mobile 
phones, 
the 
ARTick 
application uses NFC to read the information off the card. 
The application enables the user to check the type of ticket, 
the value and duration of the ticket, as well as the latest 
transactions. ARTick enables ticket information to be read 
in 2D and 3D, augmented using the camera as shown in 
Fig. 6, as well as audio for the visual impaired.  
Non-NFC-enabled smart phones use the camera to take 
an image of the card number on the back of the ticket smart 
card and use Optical Character Recognition (OCR). This 
card number corresponds with ticket information stored on 
the website of the public transportation provider. The same 
ticket information will now be available on NFC-enabled 
smart phone. The addition of audio is in particular 
interesting for users who have issues with their vision, 
whether it is related to sight challenges or various forms of 
dyslexia. ARTick follows universal design principles [15].  
ARTick enables the user to leave home with a valid smart 
card ticket; this may result in more confident and informed 
users of the public transportation system.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
New concerns emerged after the move from paper 
tickets to smart card tickets. Users couldn’t use their 
familiarity with the paper ticket in their use of the smart 
card ticket, because this familiarity was based on their 
immediate and continuous access to ticket information, type 
of ticket, value of ticket, and duration. The smart card ticket 
didn’t provide this type of access to the user. At the same 
time, the provider gained access to user and use 
information, creating new concerns about privacy.  
We have used the concepts of networked visibility and 
horizontal and vertical visibility to discuss the emergence of 
new concerns when computing and networking technology 
is embedded in a transportation ticket. These concepts were 
also used to explore solutions, such as how to restore the 
horizontal visibility of ticket information, the immediate 
and continuous ticket information to the users. ARTick, an 
app that turns a smart phone into a smart card reader, 
provides one possible solution to the problem. 
As to future work, we plan to study the effect of 
ARTick 
on 
user 
satisfaction 
with 
a 
smart 
card 
transportation system. Further, we wish to use the concept 
of networked visibility to study information accessibility in 
other systems using solutions similar to the smart card. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] B. A. Aubert and G. Hamel, “Adoption of smart cards in the 
medical sector:: the Canadian experience,” Social Science & 
Medicine, 53, ( 7), (2001),  879–894. 
[2] P. Dourish, What we talk about when we talk about context, 
Personal Ubiquitous Computing, 8, 1 (2004), 19–30. 
[3] P. Dourish, Where the action is; the foundations of embodied 
interaction. MIT press, Boston, MA, USA, 2001. 
[4] D. K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and 
Applications in Contactless Smart Cards, Radio Frequency 
Identification and Near-Field Communication, Third Edition. 
John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
[5] A. Greenfield, Everyware: The Dawning Age of Ubiquitous 
Computing.  Peachpit Press, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2006. 
[6] E. Hornecker. and J. Buur,  “Getting a grip on tangible 
interaction: a framework on physical space and social 
interaction”. Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human Factors in computing systems, CHI  ’06, ACM Press 
(2006), 437–446.  
[7] H. Iseki, A. Demisch, B. D. Taylor, and A. C. Yoh, 
“Evaluating the Costs and Benefits of Transit Smart Cards,” 
PATH Research Report, Aug. 2008. 
[8] N. Mallat, M. Rossi, V. K. Tuunainen, and A. Öörni, “An 
empirical investigation of mobile ticketing service adoption in 
public transportation,” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 57–65, Nov. 2006. 
[9] F. Morgner, D. Oepen, W. Muller, and J. P. Redlich, Mobile 
smart card reader using NFC-enabled smartphones” in A. U. 
Schmidt, G. Russello, I. Krontiris, and S. Lian, Eds., Security 
and Privacy in Mobile Information and Communication 
Systems, Springer 2012. 
[10] C. R. Plouffe, J. S. Hulland, and M. Vandenbosch, “Research 
Report: Richness Versus Parsimony in Modeling Technology 
Adoption Decisions--Understanding Merchant Adoption of a 
Smart Card-Based Payment System,” Information Systems 
Research, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 208–222, Jun. 2001. 
[11] F. Resatsch, U. Sandner, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, 
“Do Point of Sale RFID-Based Information Services Make a 
Difference? Analyzing Consumer Perceptions for Designing 
Smart Product Information Services in Retail Business,” 
Electron. Market., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 216–231, Aug. 2008.  
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

[12] R. T. Rust and P.K.  Kannan, “E-service: a new paradigm for 
business in the electronic environment”. Commun. ACM, 46, 
6 (2003), 36–42. 
[13] A.J. Sellen and , R. H. R Harper, The Myth of the Paperless 
Office. The MIT Press, 2001. 
[14] F. Stalder,  Politics of networked visibility, Acoustic Space, 
10, (2011), 13–19.  
[15] Universal design in Norway http://www.universal-design. 
environment.no/news/1063-norways-future-is-universal. Last 
accessed January 7, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  A 3D rendering of smart card ticket information using a NFC-enabled smart phone with ARTick. 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-250-9
ACHI 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

