Enhancing User Experience of Users with Disabilities  
Application to Open Educational Resources Websites 
 
Rosa Navarrete 
Departamento de Informática y 
Computación  
Escuela Politécnica Nacional 
Quito, Ecuador 
rosa.navarrete@epn.edu.ec 
Sergio Luján-Mora 
Department of Software and 
Computing System 
University of Alicante 
Alicante, Spain 
sergio.lujan@ua.es 
Myriam Peñafiel 
Departamento de Informática y 
Computación  
Escuela Politécnica Nacional 
Quito, Ecuador 
myriam.penafiel@epn.edu.ec 
 
Abstract— At present, User Experience (UX) is a recognized 
concept that appraises the quality of user interaction on 
websites. Despite the fact that users with disabilities face 
obstacles that hinder their experience in Web interaction, the 
UX concept has not been extended to include their specific 
requirements. This work proposes an empirical review of the 
aspects that impact on UX of users with disabilities, including 
not only the Usability and Information Architecture but also 
Accessibility issues.  The context of the application is related to 
Open Educational Resources (OER) websites due to their 
importance for opening learning opportunities to all people 
around the world. Although the UNESCO Paris Declaration on 
OER (2012) recognized that “everyone has the right to 
education,” people with disabilities are still excluded from full 
participation in OER-based learning because of design issues 
on OER websites. Further, we have considered the standards 
and best practices that should be applied to these aspects to 
recognize the problems that need to be addressed to improve 
the quality of the UX of users with disabilities, particularly in 
OER websites. The results of this work contribute to a better 
comprehension of UX from the perspective of users with 
disabilities in order to support the inclusive vision of the OER 
Initiative.   
Keywords— Open Educational Resources; OER; User 
Experience; UX; Web accessibility; Web usability; Information 
Architecture. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
statistics 
presented 
by 
the 
World 
Health 
Organization in the World Report on Disability (2011) [1] 
states that one billion people, about 15% of the world’s 
population, live with some form of disability. Further, 
according to the United Nations [2], the population of older 
adults will increase from 841 million (11.7%) in 2013 to 2 
billion (21.1%) in 2050. These data show the importance of 
this vulnerable group of population which, according to the 
United Nations, is still excluded from equitable access to 
educations, health, employment and social protection. 
Concerning the Web, users with visual and hearing 
impairments, restricted movement of the upper limbs, 
cognitive issues, and problems related to aging, face barriers 
when interacting on the websites [3]. These issues are related 
to the lack of accessibility considerations in Web design.  
On the other hand, at present, one of the bases for a 
quality Web design is the User Experience (UX). This is a 
broadly defined term that involves all the aspects that 
influence the interaction of a user with a website, including 
attainment of goals, and subjective aspects such as the 
satisfaction of non-instrumental (or hedonic) needs, and 
acquisition of positive feeling and well-being [4]. However, 
this concept has not spread to address the particular 
requirements of users with disabilities.  
In this work, we propose an empirical review of the 
supporting aspects that influence the quality of UX, such as 
Web 
usability 
and 
Information 
Architecture, 
and, 
considering the particular needs of users with disabilities, we 
include Web accessibility as an essential aspect of UX.  
In a complementary way, we propose standards and best 
practices for each aspect in order to define recommendations 
for improving UX quality of users with disabilities. This 
proposal does not consider a specific disability, but it 
presents recommendations related to some of the common 
disabilities. 
Furthermore, the UNESCO Paris Open Educational 
Resource Declaration (OER) (2012) [5] recognized the 
worldwide impact of OER usage and the need for inclusion 
of all society groups, in particular, people with disabilities. 
The term OER was coined by UNESCO (2002) [6] to refer 
to digital contents that support education and has been 
released under open license to be used and re-purposed by 
others. These digital contents are stored in repositories 
available through websites at a global level [7] and include 
full courses, course materials, textbooks, and any other tool 
used to support access to knowledge [8]. 
Some OER websites do not consider essential aspects of  
UX, such as Web accessibility [9][10], and supporting 
aspects, such as Web usability and Information Architecture  
[11]. Since users with disabilities need to interact with OER 
websites, it is relevant to review how these aspects affect 
their UX.  
Due to the importance of education as a fundamental 
right for all people, including people with disabilities, we 
have tackled the UX of users with disabilities in OER 
websites, because, the quality of UX for these users could 
encourage 
their 
inclusion 
in 
OER-based 
learning 
opportunities. As a demonstrative context of the aspects of 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

UX that need improvement, we are referring to a large-scale 
OER website. 
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II 
describes the concept of UX and the main aspects of UX to 
be addressed. Each of these aspects is presented in the next 
sections. Section III discusses the Web accessibility concept 
and the accessibility guidelines; Section IV presents Web 
usability issues and their impact on users with disabilities, 
Section V presents the basis of Information Architecture. 
Finally, Section VI presents the Conclusion and Future work. 
II. 
USER EXPERIENCE 
User Experience (UX) focuses on having a deep 
understanding of users, their needs and their limitations. This 
is a paramount consideration in relation to users with 
disabilities because they use the Web in a different way than 
other people.   
According to the results of a survey that considers the 
point of view of researchers and practitioners, there is an 
agreement that UX is dependent on the context of the 
website and the individual interaction on the website. It 
means that UX is particular for a user and his own goals on a 
website [12]. This agreement matches with the definition of 
UX in the standard ISO 9241-210:2010 Ergonomics of 
Human-System Interaction [13]: “A person's perceptions and 
responses resulting from the use and/or anticipated use of a 
product, system or service”. 
The different definitions of UX emphasize different 
aspects. For example, one of the precursors of this term 
states that UX implies all aspects of the users’ interactions 
within the website, considering their expectations about the 
attainment of their goals [14].  
Other authors complemented this definition pointing out 
that the concept of UX embraces efficiency, effectiveness, 
and task accomplishment satisfaction [15].  While other 
authors [4] proposed, a holistic approach of UX that includes 
subjective aspects, such as the feeling of control, the 
appreciation of the pleasant look of the website, and positive 
aspects such as happiness or engagement. Thereby, UX can 
be conceptualized in a holistic approach aiming for a balance 
between pragmatic aspects related to task fulfillment and 
other non-task related aspects (hedonic and aesthetic, 
enjoyment). 
There is not a shared understanding of the fields 
pertaining to UX. Different approaches from academics and 
practitioners highlight some different elements and aspects. 
The most common aspects are usability and Information 
Architecture.  
Garret [14] considers elements of UX, such as user 
needs, 
the 
functional 
specifications 
and 
content 
requirements, the interaction design, and Information 
Architecture that provide the basis for navigation design.  
In a similar way, Fenn and Hobbs [16] prioritize the 
importance of Information Architecture for UX. Roto [17] 
emphasizes the role of usability in three blocks that 
configure UX, the context, the system and the user.  
Nevertheless, the specific case of users with disabilities is 
not mentioned. Hobbs, Fenn, and Resmini [18], and 
Tokkonen and Saariluoma [19] agree in considering usability 
and the Information Architecture as the aspects implied in 
UX, in addition to other aspects, such as user, product and 
company, for a corporative vision of UX.   
Other authors [20] [21] use the concept of UX to guide 
the software development process. They also include 
considerations about usability and Information Architecture 
as part of the requirements definition.  
In the literature review we have not found a reference of 
Web accessibility as an aspect involved in UX. Hence, in this 
work, we propose to add Web accessibility as a key aspect of 
UX from the perspective of users with disabilities.  For this 
reason, the improvement of the three aspects: Web 
accessibility, Web usability and Information Architecture 
enables enhancing the UX for all users including user with 
disabilities.  
III. 
WEB ACCESSIBILITY 
Web accessibility is an inclusive practice and hence an 
essential aspect that needs to be addressed to ensure access 
and interaction with the website by people with disabilities. 
Web accessibility aims to remove barriers that prevent 
people with disabilities in participating equitably in Web 
activities [3]. 
The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 
[22], recognized as an International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) standard (ISO/IEC 4500) [23] in 2012, 
is the most spread reference standard that guides the 
accessible Web design.  
This standard is structured under four principles with 
guidelines associated to each one. 
1. Perceivable.  Enable users to perceive the 
information being presented. 
2. Operable. Enable users to operate the interface. 
3. Understandable. Enable users to understand the 
information as well as the operation of the user 
interface. 
4. Robust. Enable to maintain access with technologies 
advance. 
Each guideline has a set of verifiable success criteria that 
are not technology-specific. Each criterion is associated with 
a conformance level A, AA, AAA, which indicates its 
impact on accessibility. To ensure minimal conditions for 
accessibility the AA level of compliance is required.  
Web accessibility cannot be reliably ensured because it 
depends on the user and his context; i.e. the kind and degree 
of disability of the user and his expertise level in using 
assistive technology [24].  
However, accessibility can be improved if the website 
meets an accessibility standard. In this work, we propose the 
use of the method called “conformance review” to verify if 
an OER website meets WCAG 2.0 requirements. This 
method can identify a larger range of diverse accessibility 
problems than other methods [25].  
Further, it can be supported by the use of automated tools 
that reduce the time and effort of the compliance evaluation 
[26]. These tools are software applications or online services 
that check the success criteria that are machine-testable. 
Nevertheless, not all success criteria can be tested 
automatically, and some require the expert human judgment. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Further, these tools can produce false or misleading results, 
such as false-positives or failures in identifying issues [27].  
By way of illustration, we show the evaluation of OER 
Commons, a prestigious large-scale OER website, with two 
accessibility evaluation tools. The evaluation for both tools is 
configured to WCAG 2.0 level AA.  Figure 1 displays a 
fragment of the screenshot that highlights the accessibility 
review results with AChecker [28]. These results show zero 
(0) for Known Problems, Likely Problems, and Potential 
Problems.  
 
Figure 1.  OER Commons Accessibility evaluation with AChecker. 
On the contrary, Figure 2 displays a fragment of the 
screenshot that highlights the accessibility review results 
with TAW [29]. These results show 47 problems and 396 
warnings. The failures identified in this accessibility 
conformance review need to be solved to improve website 
accessibility. It is advisable to review the techniques that 
provide guidance to Web content authors on meeting the 
success criteria of WCAG 2.0 [30]. 
 
Figure 2.  OER Commons Accessibility evaluation with TAW. 
These are not necessarily contradictory results because 
each tool performs the accessibility review with different 
coverage, completeness, and correctness. Therefore, it is 
recommendable to use more than one tool to complement 
and compare the evaluation results, improving their 
accuracy.  There is a wide availability of these evaluation 
tools [31], but not all of them can verify the compliance with 
WCAG 2.0. 
IV. 
WEB USABILITY 
According to the standard ISO 9241-11: 1998 Guidance 
on Usability [32] usability is “The extent to which a product 
can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals 
with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified 
context of use”.  Therefore, Web usability refers to the ease 
of use of the website, besides, the effectiveness, efficiency 
and satisfaction of goal achievement [15]. Effectiveness 
means the reliability and completeness in the goal 
achievement. Efficiency represents the effort and the 
resources expended by the user in the goal achievement. 
Satisfaction refers to the extent to which the expectations of 
the user are met.  
Further, Web usability is closely related to Web 
accessibility; both have similar goals, and some guidelines 
overlap significantly [33]. Best practices of Web usability 
contribute to better UX of users with disabilities and without 
disabilities. Some general usability practices are also 
included in accessibility guidelines because they can be 
barriers for people with disabilities. For example, a good 
practice for usability is the operation of the interface without 
a mouse, and it is also an accessibility guideline that states 
that all functionality must be available from a keyboard. This 
condition is helpful for users with mobility impairment or 
blind who experience difficulties to operate a mouse.  
The standard, ISO 9241-151:2008 Ergonomics of 
human-system interaction -- Part 151: Guidance on World 
Wide Web user interfaces [32] provides a set of guidelines 
for usability.  It is important to verify if the website is 
compliant with these guidelines in its design to improve 
usability. Due to the lack of space, we only present a 
description of the main topics covered in each category and 
how these guidelines could affect the UX of users with 
disabilities in OER websites.  
The categories are presented as main and secondary 
according to the topics that they address and their impact on 
OER websites. Table I shows the main categories that impact 
the achievement of primary tasks, i.e. searching and 
retrieving of resources, and Table II presents secondary 
categories that are complementary to the achievement of the 
primary tasks.   
By way of example, we review the usability on OER 
Commons website. On this website, we found a menu for 
adjusting preferences that improve usability and hence the 
UX. Figure 3 highlights a design resource that allows the 
modification of visual presentation of the interface with these 
characteristics: Text and Display (text size, text style, line 
spacing, and color & contrast); Layout and Navigation (table 
of contents); Links (larger, bold, and underlined); and, Inputs 
(larger for buttons, drop-down menus, text fields). 
 
Figure 3.  OER Commons Learner Options to enhance usability.  
Another good practice of usability enables the user to 
know how many results were retrieved and customize the 
number of results per page, as we can see in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4.  OER Commons display search results per page. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE I 
ISO 9241-11 MAIN CATEGORIES OF USABILITY  
Category (ISO 9241-151:2008) 
Users' 
disability 
Impact on users with disabilities 
Home Page 
The content of the home page is focusing on users’ tasks; the major 
options are explicitly represented through navigation menus that are 
organized in a logic order in a task-oriented manner. All the core 
tasks are reachable from this page. 
Blindness 
Options to guide the main tasks (search or browse the resources) on 
the home page simplifies the amount of information that users who 
use a screen reader need to listen before to take a decision.  
Cognitive  
The clarity and pertinence of the information encourage the 
comprehension by users with cognitive disabilities. 
Task Orientation 
The number of screens for task completion has been minimized; there 
are minimal requirements of scrolling and clicking for task 
completion; the key tasks are easy to carry out; the metaphors and 
icons are understandable by users; the interface is easy to learn for 
novice users. 
Blindness 
These guidelines are valuable for blind users because it reduces the 
amount of information that they need to listen for task achievement.  
Low vision 
Users with low vision who use screen magnifiers do not lose the 
vision of all context because of the scrolling requirements. For 
example, a list of resources that need vertical scroll. 
Cognitive  
The use of common icons and metaphors and a simple interface 
encourage the comprehension by users with cognitive disabilities. 
Navigation  
The navigation is predictable and convenient to users’ goals; the 
navigation includes global and local navigation, wizard navigation, 
breadcrumbs, site map; the information that users are most likely to 
need is easy to reach from most pages; navigation tabs are located at 
the top of the page; the navigation system is broad and shallow (many 
items on a menu) rather than deep (many menu levels). The use of the 
keyboard is enabled to operate the navigation. 
Blindness 
A blind user needs to identify the structure of a menu. Many levels 
on a menu affect its comprehension. For example, the 
categorization of the resources should be available through a 
different mechanism than a menu. Also, breadcrumbs help blind 
users to know where they are and where they come from.  
Upper limbs 
impairment 
The use of the keyboard to operate navigation instead of the mouse 
is the alternative for users with movement restriction on upper 
limbs. 
Cognitive  
The simplest and logical presentation of menus enables better 
comprehension of the choices to users with cognitive disabilities. 
Information Architecture 
The categorization of content is visible and useful to users; the 
category labels accurately describe the information in the category; 
the content organization allows the grouping, filtering, and sorting of 
resources. 
All 
The categorization of the resources is a critical aspect of improving 
usability in OER websites. It implies a logical grouping of 
resources that facilitate their searching and retrieving. 
Search 
The search box and advanced search are clearly distinguishable on the 
home page; the search results page is helpful to the user, it shows how 
many results were retrieved, ranked by distinct parameters, and 
allows the user to configure the number of results per page. The 
advanced search allows the searching refinement based on 
simultaneous parameters; the search results page displays useful 
meta-information that include accessibility characteristics and format 
of the resource, the creator or provenance of the resource, the 
educational level, and creation date. 
All 
The primary goal in OER Websites is the search and retrieve of the 
resources, indeed the searching facilities support the effectiveness 
and efficiency in this objective. For example, if the search and 
search advanced features are located in the home page, the users 
can execute this tasks immediately. The searching refinement on 
simultaneous parameters enables the accuracy of the searching of 
the resources. 
Forms and Data entry 
The forms are designed so users can complete simple tasks by 
entering only essential information; the pull-down menus, radio 
buttons and check boxes are used in preference to text entry fields; 
the fields on forms contain default values when appropriate; the fields 
contain example or model answers to make the expected input 
evident; there is a clear distinction between required and optional 
fields; the forms allow users to navigate with keyboard and 
distinguish the field with focus; the labels are close to the data entry 
field and meaningful. 
Blindness 
The simplification in form entry helps to blind users to avoid errors. 
For example, the labels of the fields, and default values or example 
values, also the identification of optional or required. 
Low vision 
Because of the use of screen magnifier, the users with low vision 
need to distinguish the field with focus, and the labels of the fields. 
Upper limbs 
impairment 
The forms need to be operated with the keyboard instead of the 
mouse. 
Cognitive  
The context help in forms, such as default values or model answer 
as well as the labels for fields encourage the comprehension by 
people with cognitive disabilities.  
Nevertheless, on the same website, we found a usability 
failure in search results display.  
Figure 5 shows that, at the bottom of the search results 
display, only the option “Load more” appears; it is proven to 
be inefficient for several hundreds of results.  
The lack of pagination to display a list of resources is a 
usability failure because users cannot navigate inside the 
subsets of search results (pages) to select what they need.  
The list of hundreds of resources becomes a very long 
vertical scroll. This also impact on the comprehension of the 
results, because they are presented out of the context of the 
option to refine the search. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  OER Commons usability failure.. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

TABLE II 
ISO 9241-11 SECONDARY CATEGORIES OF USABILITY 
Category (ISO 9241-151:2008) 
Users' 
disability 
Impact on users with disabilities 
Trust and Credibility 
The content of the website denotes to be up-to-date and reliable; each 
page follows the pattern design of the website; there are no 
grammatical, spelling or typographic errors 
All 
Blindness 
Cognitive  
The absence of writing errors encourages the comprehension of 
users with cognitive disabilities and allows an accurate recognition 
of the word by the screen reader. 
Writing & Content quality 
The text is concise; the information is organized hierarchically; 
headings and subheadings are straightforward and descriptive; each 
page is clearly labelled with a meaningful title that makes sense to 
users; the links have descriptive titles and match the title of 
destination pages. 
All 
Blindness 
Cognitive  
The structure of the information helps to users who use screen 
reader and users with cognitive disabilities to understand the 
content.  
The precise description of the links is helpful to users to take the 
decision about where they can go on the website. 
Page layout & Visual design  
Each page has a layout consistent with the website style; the page 
does not need horizontal scrolling; the fonts are readable; the most 
frequently used topics, features and functions are placed in a 
highlighted position on all pages; the website has an attractive 
appearance. 
All 
Low vision 
Users with low vision who use screen magnifiers can lose the 
context vision if there is horizontal scrolling on the page. Also, they 
require 
readable 
fonts. 
All users with disabilities require that the most frequently used 
topics, such as search or browse of the resources are located in 
highlighted position on all pages. 
Help, Feedback & Error tolerance 
The website provides context-sensitive help and feedback about 
errors; the website uses appropriate selection methods (e.g., pull-
down menus) as an alternative to typing; pages load in five seconds 
or less; error messages are explicit about the nature of error and the 
next action; the user is warned about slow-loading pages. 
All 
The context-sensitive help is a usability characteristic that facilitate 
the interaction of all users including users with disabilities.  
V. INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE 
The Information Architecture in the context of Web 
environments is related to data storage and its structure [16].  
In this work, we have adopted the concept of Information 
Architecture by Morville & Rosenfeld [34] that defines it as 
the relationships between the website content and its 
functionality. 
Information 
Architecture 
involves 
the 
underlying organization, labeling, search, and navigation 
system within the website.  
In OER Websites, Information Architecture enables a 
comprehensive and integrated structure of information 
available about resources for their searching and retrieval.  
This is achieved through the use of classifications, 
taxonomies, and metadata that enables the classification and 
description of each resource.  
A key aspect of Information Architecture in OER 
websites is the metadata standards used to describe and 
categorize the resources. Some OER websites use a non-
standardized way to label the resources instead of the 
metadata standard 
This issue affects the ability to find resources; without a 
common system of identification, users cannot easily search 
the resources [11].  Indeed, users often cite this issue as a 
major stumbling block hindering their more widespread use 
of the resources [35]. 
The most important metadata standards that include 
accessibility and educational field descriptor are Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Learning Object 
Metadata (LOM) [36], and Learning Resource Metadata 
Initiative (LRMI) [37]. Not all metadata standards include 
these descriptors, therefore, they fail to identify resources for 
users with disabilities [38].  
Furthermore, there is a lack of agreement about metadata 
usage; while the main OER websites use a metadata 
standard, others describe resources using their own methods 
such as XML-based schemas or heterogeneous taxonomies 
[39].   
The 
main 
recommendation 
about 
Information 
Architecture to improve UX is the adoption of a metadata 
standard 
that 
enable 
meaningful 
categorization 
and 
classification of the resources in OER websites.   
This enables better navigation system and search system 
on these websites.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
Although the concept of UX has a broad view that 
implies subjective aspects inherent to users, in this work, we 
have focused on the aspects that are controlled by Web 
designers to improve the UX of users with disabilities.   
The context of the analysis has been the OER websites 
considering the searching and retrieving of resources as the 
primary users' goals. We have reviewed the extent of the 
application of standards and best practices related to Web 
accessibility, Web usability, and Information Architecture 
that positively impacts on UX of users with disabilities, but 
this benefit is also extended to all users. 
The outcomes of this review contribute to a better 
understanding of the challenges and barriers that users with 
disabilities face and that hinder them from taking advantage 
of this educational opportunity. Further, these outcomes can 
be used by Web designers and Web masters of the OER 
websites to make the corrective actions towards enhancing 
the UX for all users, including users with disabilities.  
In our future work, we are planning to address the UX 
depending on assistive technology and the type of disability. 
It is important to clarify that cognitive disabilities need a 
particular approach to the UX because of each user condition 
and require a joint effort with other areas such as medicine or 
psychology. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Finally, in this research, we have reviewed the UX on 
OER websites, but we have not explicitly included the UX of 
resources themselves, which require a more broad study that 
includes aspects related to pedagogical and didactic of the 
resource to be suitable for users with disabilities.    
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the PII-DICC-005-
2015. 
REFERENCES 
[1] World Health Organization, “World Report on Disability,” 2011. 
[Online]. Available: http://goo.gl/q88CuW. [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[2] United Nations, “World Population Ageing,” 2013. [Online]. 
Available: http://goo.gl/g3tU7U. [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[3] W3C, “Introduction to Web Accessibility,” 2005. [Online]. Available: 
http://goo.gl/013Vgd. [retrieved:  March, 2016]. 
[4] M. Hasssenzahl and N. Tractinsky, “User experience - a research 
agenda,” in Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 25, Taylor & 
Francis, 2006, pp. 91-97. 
[5] UNESCO, “World Open Educational Resources (OER) Congress,” 
2012. 
[6] UNESCO, “Forum on the Impact of Open Courseware for Higher 
Education in Developing Countries: Final report,” Paris, France, 
2002. 
[7] D. Atkins, J. Seely Brown, and A. L. Hammond, “A review of the 
Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: Achievements, 
Challenges and New Opportunities,” February 2007. [Online]. 
Available: http://goo.gl/GlJ3GQ. [retrieved:  March, 2016]. 
[8] T. Caswell, S. Henson, M. Jensen, and D. Wiley, “Open Educational 
Resources: Enabling Universal Education,” The International Review 
of Research in Open and Distance Learning, vol. 9, no. 1, 2008, pp.1-
11.  
[9] R. Navarrete and S. Luján-Mora, “Accessibility considerations in 
Learning Objects and Open Educational Resources,” Proc. 6th 
International Conference of Education, Research and Innovation 
(ICERI 2013), Nov. 2013, pp.521-530.  
[10] R. Navarrete and S. Luján-Mora, “Evaluating accessibility of Open 
Educational Resource website with a heuristic method,” Proc. 9th 
International Technology, Education and Development Conference 
(INTED 2015), Mar. 2015, pp.6402-6412.  
[11] R. Navarrete and S. Luján-Mora, “Evaluating findability of Open 
Educational Resources from the perspective of users with disabilities: 
A preliminary approach,” Proc. Second International Conference on 
eDemocracy & eGovernment (ICEDEG 2015), Apr. 2015, pp. 112-
119.  
[12] E. L.-C. Law, V. Roto, M. Hassenzahl, A. P. Vermeeren, and J. Kort, 
“Understanding, scoping and defining user experience: a survey 
approach,” Proc. Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems 
(CHI 
2009), 
2009, 
pp. 
719-728, 
doi: 
10.1145/1518701.1518813. 
[13] ISO, “ISO 9241-210:2010 Ergonomics of Human-System Interaction 
Part 210: Human-Centred Design for Interactive Systems,” 2010. 
[14] J. J. Garrett, The elements of User experience – User centered design 
for the Web, New Riders, 2002.  
[15] H. Petrie and N. Bevan, “The evaluation of accessibility, usability and 
user experience,” The Universal Access Handbook, CRC Press, 2009, 
doi: 10.1201/9781420064995-c20.  
[16] T. Fenn and J. Hobbs, “The Information Architecture of Meaning 
Making,” Reframing Information Architecture, Human-Computer 
Interaction Series, Springer , 2014, pp. 11-30, doi: 10.1007/978-3-
319-064925_2. 
[17] V. Roto, “User Experience Building Blocks,” The 2nd COST294-
MAUSE International Open Workshop, 2006, pp. 124-128.  
[18] J. Hobbs, T. Fenn, and A. Resmini, “Maturing a Practice,” Journal of 
Information Architecture, vol. 2, no. 1, 2010, pp. 37-54.  
[19] H. Tokkonen and P. Saariluoma, “How User Experience is 
Understood?,” Proc. Science and Information Conference (SAI), Oct. 
2013,  pp. 791-795.  
[20] A. Gasparini, “A Holistic Approach to User Experience in the 
Context of an Academic Library Interactive System,” Proc. 4th 
International Conference (DUXU 2015), Aug. 2015, pp.173-184. 
[21] M. Wincker, C. Bach and R. Bernhaupt, “Identifying User 
eXperiencing factors along the development process: A case study,” 
Proc. IW on the Interplay between User Experience Evaluation and 
Software Development (I-UxSED 2012), Oct. 2012, pp.37-42.  
[22] W3C, “Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0,” 2012. 
[Online]. Available: http://goo.gl/uS7DEZ. [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[23] ISO, 
“ISO/IEC 
40500:2012,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://goo.gl/Dhk6IW. [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[24] G. Brajnik, “Beyond Conformance: The Role of Accessibility 
Evaluation Methods,” in 2nd International Workshop on Web 
Usability and Accessibility, IWWUA08, Auckland - New Zealand, 
2008.  
[25] G. Brajnik, “A comparative test of web accessibility evaluation 
method,” Proc. 10th Int. ACM SIGACCESS Conference on 
Computers and Accessibility, ASSETS, 2008, pp. 113-120, doi: 
10.1145/1414471.1414494.  
[26] W3C, “Web Accessibility Evaluation Tools List,” 2014. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/tools/. [retrieved: March,  
2016]. 
[27] M. Vigo, J. Brown, and V. Conway, “Benchmarking web 
accessibility evaluation tools: measuring the harm of sole reliance on 
automated tests,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Cross-
Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibility, New York, USA, 
2013.  
[28] AChecker, “Web Accessibility Checker,” 2014. [Online]. Available: 
http://achecker.ca/checker/index.php/. [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[29] TAW, 
“TAW3 
Online,” 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.tawdis.net/ingles.html?lang=en/. 
[retrieved: 
March, 
2016]. 
[30] W3C, 
“Techniques 
for 
WCAG 
2.0,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://goo.gl/IpnCaI. [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[31] W3C, “Web Accessibility Evaluation Tools List,” 2014. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/tools/. [retrieved: March, 
2016]. 
[32] ISO, “ISO 9241-151:2008, Ergonomics of human-system interaction -
- Part 151: Guidance on World Wide Web user interfaces,” 15 05 
2008. [Online]. Available: http://goo.gl/uLD3Fc. [retrieved: March, 
2016]. 
[33] W3C, “Web Accessibility and Usability Working Together,” 2010. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/usable. 
[retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[34] P. Morville and L. Rosenfeld, Information Architecture for the World 
Wide Web, 3rd Edition ed., O'Reilly, 2006.  
[35] The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, “Open Educational 
Resources: Breaking the Lockbox on Education,” 2013. [Online]. 
Available: http://goo.gl/W8AovD. [retrieved:  March, 2016] 
[36] IEEE, “IEEE Standard for Learning Object Metadata,” 2009. 
[Online]. Available: https://goo.gl/V9kgUE. [retrieved: March, 2016] 
[37] LRMI, “Learning Resource Metadata Initiative,” 2014. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://dublincore.org/dcx/lrmi-terms/1.1/. 
[retrieved: 
March, 2016]  
[38] R. Navarrete and S. Luján-Mora, “Metadata in Open Educational 
Resources websites: a review from the perspective of disabled users’ 
requirements,” Proc. 6th International Conference on Education and 
New Learning Technologies (EDULEARN 2014) ,  Jul. 2014, 
pp.111-120 
[39] S. Dietze, S. Sanchez-Alonso, H. Ebner, H. Qing Yu , D. Giordano, I. 
Marenzi, and B. Pereira Nunes, “Interlinking educational resources 
and the web of data: A survey of challenges and approaches,” 
Emerald Program: electronic library and information systems, vol. 47, 
no. 1, 2013, pp. 60-91, doi: 10.1108/00330331211296312.  
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-468-8
ACHI 2016 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

