Workarounds in the Use of ERP System in SMEs 
A Case Study from Automotive Industry in Norway 
Shegaw A. Mengiste 
University of South-Eastern Norway: School of Business  
Department of Business, History and Social Sciences 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail:  sme@usn.no 
Viggo Holmstedt 
University of South-Eastern Norway: School of Business  
Department of Business, History and Social Sciences 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail: vh@usn.no 
 
 
Abstract— ERP systems constitute an important solution 
for most business enterprises. They are robust and 
effective in what they actually do, but can be hard to 
tweak for the special needs of Small and Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs). Alongside the professional use of 
Information technology (IT) through an ERP system, we 
therefore often find in-house solutions developed by 
creative 
or 
even 
ingenious 
individuals. 
Those 
workaround solutions become, however, usually non-
standard, silo-prone and less robust than configured 
standard systems usually are. Sometimes, an in-house 
system becomes too dependent on individuals continued 
workplace presence. Sometimes a workaround is 
obviously ineffective, as when an individual has to take 
notes manually from one system window, only to feed 
the notes into a form belonging to another system. We 
caught interest in the investigation of those kinds of 
imbalances of IT exploitation, and picked a SME in 
Norway to execute our research. 
Keywords-workarounds; 
ERP 
system; 
workarounds, 
Automotive industry; SME. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems, such as 
SAP are systems that automate and integrate business 
processes. There is a general consensus that investments in 
such systems can have a profound impact on improving work  
process flow [1], in improving access to integrated data 
across functional units, and  in better  transparency at 
enterprise level [2][3].  
There are differences in terms of what firms gained from 
such investments. While some firms achieved impressive 
benefits, others have had trouble in gaining the benefits and 
values they expected from their investment [4]. There also 
are studies that demonstrated ERP system implementation 
failures. For example, Alonini et al. [5] reported higher 
failure rates for ERP projects; Kwahk et al. [6]  stated 90% 
of ERP implementations are late or over budget, and the 
success rate of ERP systems implementation is only about 
33% [6][7].  
Other studies conducted on ERP implementation also 
identified 
distinguishing 
differences 
between 
large 
enterprises and small & medium enterprises (SMEs). As 
Zach [8] indicated, SMEs represent fundamentally different 
environmental context from large enterprises, with a number 
of distinctive characteristics such as: market orientation, 
culture, structure, and ownership type [9]. According to a 
study in Europe, SMEs constituted 98.8% of the almost 19 
million enterprises in the 27 EU countries’ non-financial 
business economy (Eurostat, 2008).  With the growing 
impact of SME in job creating and the associated social 
impact, ERP vendors are moving their attention to the SME 
market, and several SMEs are implementing ERP systems to 
leverage business performance [10].  However, despite the 
development of midrange and less complex ERP systems 
mainly intended for SMEs, ERP system implementation 
remains a challenge for many SMEs [11] [12] [44].  
SMEs have been challenged by constraints of limited 
resources, limited Information Systems (IS) knowledge, and 
lack of Information technology (IT) expertise in adapting, 
implementing and maintaining IT/IS systems in general and 
ERP systems in particular [13]. Due to such limitations, 
compared to bigger enterprises, SMEs might have greater 
difficulties in overcoming an ERP implementation failure 
[14][44]. Despite the need to study and analyze the post-
implementation impacts of ERP systems using different units 
of analysis, much of the existing ERP research focuses on 
the implementation process and gives insight on critical 
success factors for ERP implementation [15]. In particular, 
as Haddara et al. [16] indicated, extant research provides 
only scarce findings about the effect and characteristics of 
post-implementation of ERP systems in SMEs (e.g., 
[15][17]. More specifically, although there are calls for a 
deeper understanding of workarounds and their impacts in IS 
implementations [18], the issue of post-implementation 
workarounds for ERP systems has often been ignored by 
current literature. The term Workarounds can be defined as 
alternative procedures employed by users to accomplish a 
task in response to a misfit between computer-based and 
existing work processes [19]. As such, it is important to 
recognize the distinguishing characteristics of SMEs and 
consider how these influence the ERP implementation issues 
faced by SMEs operating in different contexts.  The 
deployment of ERP systems can bring about unintended 
consequences that can lead to resistance and workarounds by 
users [20]. When a new ERP system is implemented, users 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

may encounter hindrances in workflow caused by various 
factors including poor process design, complex system 
functionality, poor user interface, inadequate user training, 
and lack of proper user guides [15].   
In this study, we focus on workarounds because of a 
misfit between the new ERP system implemented and the 
new systems being used to support daily tasks and work 
processes in a medium sized automotive industry.  The study 
tries to address the existing gap in literature by examining a 
case study of a problematic ERP implementation, where 
users had to use the system nevertheless to perform their 
daily tasks. The study particularly tries to contribute to this 
research void by exploring both the intermediate and 
corporate impacts of a problematic ERP implementation in 
an automotive manufacturing plant in Norway. The end-
users in the different functional units (even at the executive 
level) of the plant were forced to use the system despite the 
many flaws and incompleteness they observed in their daily 
tasks.   
The paper is organized as follows: Section II gives a brief 
background about the company (Kongsberg Automotive), 
while section III presents the theoretical framework on 
workarounds and IS implementation. Section IV is about the 
research approach and method, while section V presents the 
findings. In section VI, we present the discussion and 
concluding remarks.  
II. 
COMPANY BACKGROUND 
KA is a global organization operating in different 
countries, and in Norway in different cities. This study 
addresses the experiences, challenges, and workarounds in 
implementing and using an ERP system in a plant situated 
in one of the cities of Norway.  
At the time of the interviews, KA had been using the SAP 
R/3 ERP system since 1996.  KA uses SAP to manage 
financial transactions, requirements planning, inbound and 
outbound logistics including stock piece registration, and 
management tasks.   
We approached the Hvittingfoss Plant at Kongsberg 
Automotive Company to conduct the present case study. 
The Hvittingfoss Plant is situated in Norway, while 
Kongsberg Automotive as a whole has thirty production 
facilities worldwide. They produce powertrain systems and 
chassis related products for both heavy and light duty 
commercial vehicles, and many related products. Kongsberg 
Automotive employs 10 000 workers in 18 countries. 
Annual revenues are roughly 1 billion EUR in 2018 
according to Q2 reports. The revenues have slightly but 
steadily risen during 2016 and 2017.  
The factory at Hvittingfoss produces gearshift- and clutch 
actuation systems, chassis roads and gearbox components 
and related products. Thus, the plant is a part of the business 
segment Powertrain & Chassis. They also have a driver 
control unit, and a distribution department situated in 
Raufoss. The factory hall is equipped with some robots and 
some manually operated units. The Hvittingfoss plant 
started up in 1976 and now employs around 140 people.   
III. 
THEORETICAL FRAME: WORKAROUNDS AND IS 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The notion of workarounds in the context of IS 
implementation has often been treated as a form of resistance 
from the end-users and a significant hindrance to system 
designers and developers in meeting the objectives of the 
system [21].  However, there is also literature that addresses 
workarounds from the perspective of accommodation to 
misfit [22], [23]. Gasser [23] posits that a misfit would 
typically exist because tasks can change in unforeseen but 
important ways when a new information system is 
introduced in organizations. Hence, users see workarounds 
as a response when a task is in particular not supported in the 
desired manner due to the misfit between computing and 
work processes, rather than a resistance to the new system. In 
this way, workarounds are performed with the intention to 
complete tasks, extend functionality, and evade designed 
limits that are embedded into the new system [19]. 
According to Gasser [23], such readjustment of work 
practices and tasks is often performed to accommodate the 
misfit and is classified into three types of strategies, i.e., 
Augmenting, Working around, and Fitting. Table I  provides 
a description of the three workaround strategies:  
TABLE I.  
STRATEGIES TO ADAPT MISFITS ADOPTED FROM [23] 
Strategy 
Definition 
Example 
 
 
Augmenting 
 
Undertaking 
additional 
work to make up for  the 
misfit 
Having to print and submit 
a form manually though 
online 
submission 
was 
already performed due to 
unreliability of the system 
 
 
Working 
around 
Intentionally 
using 
computing in ways for 
which 
it 
was 
not 
designed or avoiding its 
use and relying on an 
alternative 
means 
of 
accomplishing work 
Calling 
a 
purchasing 
officer to request purchase 
instead of entering request 
through system due to 
tedious process of filling 
up details 
 
 
Fitting 
The activity of changing 
computing or changing 
the structure of work to 
accommodate 
for 
the 
computing misfit 
Improving 
the 
user 
interface of the  system to 
address 
usability 
issues 
faced by users 
  
       The use of workarounds by end-users can also be 
conceptually linked to Orlikowski’s notion of ‘interpretive 
flexibility’ [24], which extends HCI aspects to the 
relationship between human, organization and technology. 
As such interpretive flexibility can be manifested and 
influenced by several attributes including: the characteristics 
of the material artefact (e.g., hardware and software), the 
characteristics of the human agents using it (e.g., 
experience, motivation), and the characteristics of the 
context where the technology is used (e.g., social relations, 
resource allocations, task assignments). 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

In this paper, we would like to use the concept of 
workaround to explore how end-users assign their own 
meanings and interpretation to the functions of the ERP 
system in response to the misfit and changes encountered 
between work processes and the new system implemented. 
The three types of strategies developed by [23] are also used 
as initial categories to identify the different accommodation 
misfits in our case study. In order to complement [23] 
strategies for accommodation of misfits, we used [25] 
perspective of workarounds based on IS evolution. They 
suggested that organizational routines and IT/IS constantly 
evolve and when there are shortcomings in existing IS, ad 
hoc adjustments (or workarounds) can occur in two 
dimensions, i.e., process or IT/IS. Such gradual changes to 
process and IT/IS are termed by McGann & Lyytinen [25] 
as process embellishment and IT modification respectively. 
Process embellishment is a stage in the IS evolution 
whereby current ineffective processes are improved through 
leveraging the routines supported by the system and are 
extended for use across the organization. Whereas, IT/IS 
modification refers to the change in IT systems where ad 
hoc IT improvisations are integrated into current systems to 
improve alignment with current processes [25]. 
IV. 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
This section presents the broader research approach and the 
specific data collection and analysis techniques applied to 
collect data relevant for the study.   
A. Interpretive case study 
As a research approach, we adopted an interpretive case 
study approach [26]. In interpretive studies, researchers try to 
understand phenomena by examining the meanings that 
participants assign to them, within particular social or 
organizational 
contexts 
[28][26][27]. 
Besides, 
the 
interpretive case study approach is appropriate because one 
can study IS in their natural setting, it allows answering 
‘how’ and ‘why’ questions, and it is also appropriate when 
few previous studies in the same area have been carried out 
[29].   Similarly, in this paper, we adopt the interpretive 
approach to collect rich data about the context where 
managers, engineers, and supervisors daily interact with an 
ERP system, to understand their choices and rationale for the 
actual use of the system, and how misfits in the ERP system 
and their interests addressed. In interpretive studies in 
Information Systems in particular, neither technologies nor 
human exert direct causal impact [30]. Rather, outcomes are 
results of the interplay of computing infrastructures, and 
objectives and preferences of different social groups [31]. 
B. Data Collection approach 
As Walsham [26] pointed out, the primary data sources 
in interpretive studies are interviews. The data collection for 
this research has been conducted through face-to-face semi-
structured interviews with employees in a medium-sized 
automotive company. Ten interviews with engineers, 
operation managers, and CEO carried out between February 
and March 2017 at the company’s premises. All interviews 
were voice recorded and transcribed. We took notes during 
the interview. The profile of the persons interviewed is 
presented in the following table.  
TABLE II.  
RESPONDENTS TO THE INTERVIEW 
classification 
# 
operational responsibility 
Plant manager 
1 
CEO 
Engineer 
3 
Various operations 
Supervisor 
6 
Foreman, hour registration 
The 
interviewees 
were 
asked 
some 
open-ended 
questions, but they were free to elaborate on their own 
thoughts and reflections whenever necessary. When there 
are digressions, the researchers (both are the authors of this 
paper) then adapted the questioning, in order to make the 
interviewees elaborate more on their views and ideas. 
C.  Data Analysis 
For data analysis, we configured assisting tools (AT) and 
NVivo software [38]. We used the AT for transcribing 
activities, the NVivo software for coding and classifying. 
NVivo is a specialized tool for qualitative research [32]. 
Only two interviewees did not consent to audio 
recording in English, so we had to rely on handwritten 
notes. Apart from those two, most data collection is from 
audio interviews in English. We will therefore discuss some 
HCI and similar aspects of AT supported audio transcription 
related to our contextual approach to the audio analysis.  
While transcribing audio was, both interesting and 
demanding, it is also resource consuming. Many researchers 
outsource the transcribing activities to professionals. Other 
researchers use Voice Recognition (VR) software [39], to 
keep better control over interpretations. In some practical 
investigation designs, researchers prefer to conduct the 
entire 
transcription 
process 
themselves, 
to 
perform 
interpretations based on their special knowledge and 
familiarity with the domain under investigation. To achieve 
the same level of control, while utilizing a more recent 
technology of VR, we developed ATs (assisting tools) to 
help us with the transcription. 
For the interviewing, we first used dedicated sound 
recorder equipment, then an iPhone. We found the sound 
quality to be equal in each setup, the phone being easier to 
operate in overall use.  We produced more than two hours of 
interviews of varying audio and speech quality. The quality 
varied mostly because we did not protect our environment 
against sudden irrelevant sounds that ruined potentially 
important fragments of the speech. The varying noisy 
environments in the plant is a contextual condition we 
should have considered. The variation in quality also 
pertained to execution of native English language. The most 
difficult to interpret and transcribe was surprisingly native 
English speech. The Norwegian interviewee’s English was 
deliberately spoken and therefore in fact the easier to 
interpret. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

To overcome some challenges and even make 
transcribing a little more interesting, we created artifacts of 
ATs to utilize the Google Speech API. We selected the API 
after having investigated several others, except older VRs. 
Google’s speech API builds upon AI/ML trained for quite 
many different languages as well as several English native 
and exported dialects.  
In practical use, we found that the API worked best if we 
fed it with chunks of speech of five to seven minutes 
duration at a time. We used the GoldWave software to 
section the recordings, and applied a numbering scheme to 
keep track of the chunks. After the automatic transcription, 
human audio perception and interpretation refined and 
edited the transcription into a satisfactory state. The editing 
process demanded high concentration and a considerable 
amount of time. Some parts of the audio were indeed 
difficult to interpret, and the process inferred interesting 
observations in terms of audio perception. You can interpret 
visual images very differently dependent of how you keep 
staring at them. We observed that speech fragments could 
behave likewise. Once we had edited a specific transcription 
fragment correctly, the correct perception of the same 
fragment became just as easy as it was incomprehensible 
before. The observation is very similar to the famous 
Yannie-Laurel phenomenon. A technological approach to 
the phenomenon suggests that shifts in pitch would infer 
different interpretations [41]. The phenomenon demanded 
an AT with HCI considerations, such as being easy to 
configure for re-listening and re-pitching of sound 
fragments.  
What we constructed was an AT for producing an 
automatic text suggestion for a chunk of speech, with 
controllers to play parts of the speech repeatedly (A-B 
playback) or from an A-position, and with symbols to mark 
audio positions directly in the transcription text under 
improvement. The AT had facilities for adjusting the A and 
B positions in very fine steps after initial settings, as well as 
each symbol’s audio positions. Text styling helped 
visualizing what parts of the text that was already good, and 
what parts remained incomprehensible, as well as yet 
unexplored text fragments. A pitch change tool operated A-
B sequences playback. Each of those facilities proved 
invaluable for refined interpretation. The method was to let 
some incomprehensible fragments rest for a while, and then 
revisit them repeatedly. The various facilities to revisit and 
repeat fragments actually helped us transfer many fragments 
from incomprehensible to good. 
The AT published xml-coded fragments continuously 
and unobtrusively, as well as comprehensive word and web 
content from the transcription text in progress. We used 
Altova XML Spy to construct useful and relevant XML 
schemas to support the system design. Likewise it was 
important to let the AT be able to switch between both 
interview files and chunks within the files. The AT even had 
to save the work in progress both risk-free and continuously. 
The importance of the unobtrusiveness stems from the need 
to avoid wearing out the human resource, and leave the 
greatest possible amount of capacity to the transcription, and 
audio perception capacity. It also stems from the need to 
maximize concentration on the interpretation, which is only 
possible when the tools don’t distract the interpreter. In 
short, the AT must keep the workflow intact. In the field of 
system development and fault detection tools, Fichman et al. 
[33] convey that any interruption generated by an automated 
tool forces a developer to context-switch away from her 
primary objective. Even very good tools remain unused if 
they disturb the workflow too much. [42].   
We constructed the domain AT in order to utilize the 
Google Speech API. The API reads the audio and deliver 
text. Google’s APIs also have pricing plans. Google offers a 
resource of around 300 days and an amount of money to use 
on Google APIs in general. We spent only a trifle amount of 
the money, and almost 100 days, development and AT 
testing included.  
The method for transcribing interviews shortly outlined 
here was not time saving. The reason is the parallel 
development of the AT and investigation of other relevant 
assisting technologies. Even if we primarily performed the 
development to better understand the content of the audio 
interviews, it quite naturally contributed to insight in several 
technical and perceptional fields, which we consider a 
collateral reward. 
The transcription and note composition phase produced 
three text files. Our method used NVivo, which is why we 
will mention a few example findings here. We let NVivo 
import the three files so we could begin the analysis. From 
NVivo we conducted the labelling and classification of 
findings in the interviews. Examples of main labels 
identified by NVivo are subsystems and ATs, user’s wishes 
and missing facilities statements, and labels like business 
processes and stock management statements. Categories of 
interviewees and various corporate departments are among 
main classifications from NVivo operations.  
V. 
CASE DESCRIPTION & ANALYSIS 
The section presents findings of our exploration on the 
workarounds in the customization, implementation and use 
of ERP systems in a medium sized automotive company in 
Norway. Our findings revealed that during the initial stage 
of customization and implementation, there was an effort by 
the vendor and the IT department at the head office of KA 
to address the local needs of the different functional units. 
One of the supervisors, who was there at the time of the 
system implementation, reported no resistance from the 
users on the new system. The challenge was complexity of 
the system to learn and master most of the functionalities in 
a short period.  He stated the following: 
“Everyone was willing to learn and use the new 
system. There was a good motivation from all staff 
members. The problem was the difficulty to learn 
too much in a short period of time.” 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

Despite the difficulty to learn the new system by most of 
the staff members, the management insisted that no matter 
how difficult to learn and no matter how long it took to 
learn, using the new system was set to be mandatory.   
According to the CEO, the motive for introducing SAP at 
KA was initially to achieve integration and manage all its 
operational activities. In our interview with the manager of 
the plant, we realized that there are several other 
applications that are also in use by different units of the 
company.  Some of them are the following:   a strategic 
planning tool that gives strategic information about 
customer's volumes projections over a period of time, a 
human resource (HR) system called Zalaris mainly used  for 
staff time registration, an automated invoice handling 
system, and a web portal to support aftermarket customers.  
A maintenance system is also used for different security and 
maintenance related tasks such as emergency lights, fire 
detection, diesel monitoring. 
One of the biggest challenges of ERP systems is their 
complexity and the rigidity of some of the modules to 
customize to local requirements.  In principle, ERP systems 
are customizable, but there are features that you can’t 
customize.  Those features are designed to be standard for 
some industries like pharmaceutical, retail. Asked about if 
the existing ERP system fits well to the needs and 
requirements of the plant, the plant manager stated the 
following: 
“SAP is a complex system! It's very, very complex.  
In most of the cases, we end up with something 
that's not really what we want, because we are tied 
to reusing SAP.   We have to do it the SAP way. If 
we want to do warehouse management in SAP it 
has to be done the SAP way, not our own way. That 
creates gaps in using the system to address some 
specific local needs at the plant. In our case, the 
system fails to support some of the operational 
tasks, and this forced us to use some additional 
applications like MS Excel to prepare production 
plan or in some cases do things manually like the 
time punching to   register how many hours 
employees work. ”  
When the company initially introduced the ERP system, 
the head office’s IT department selected, customized and 
implemented it in collaboration with the local SAP vendor. 
However, follow up support that emerge from local plants 
was not sufficient. As the plant manager noted: 
“IT is a centralized service; so I don't have an IT 
department here. I also do not know if there is any 
IT strategy at the company level. We requested on 
several instances about our needs and limitations 
of the SAP system to address our needs. ” 
 
In our interview, we have also noticed that there were 
some smaller applications developed on top of SAP over the 
years to address emerging local demands even without the 
knowledge of the head office of the IT department at the 
head office. We asked why it is difficult to integrate the 
applications to the ERP system and if they are worried about 
future silo systems running at different units without sharing 
data and process outputs. The manager gave the following 
answer: 
  “… In fact I informed the IT department at the 
head office about the problems we encounter on the 
existing systems and the new applications we are 
using. But, you know, at the end of the day either 
somebody needs to come and give me some support 
and fix these things for me, or I need to find 
someone else to do things. I do know that we have 
had a small application done for recording 
machine downtime, and measuring it. That was 
done by a guy in Drammen. It never was 
completed.  But it was sort of semi operational. » 
 
Asked about why they use MS Excel to analyze data 
generated by the SAP system, one of the engineers replied: 
 “When we produce parts, all our working hours 
from the production is filled in SAP interface. You 
can also register all parts produced in the SAP 
system. You can display that data in SAP.  But, you 
can't do anything with that data. You can't work 
with them.   You can't divide them on different 
lines, you can’t present them in graphs…» 
Another engineer also stated the following: 
 “Since we had the Excel system which is more 
useful to my tasks, I have never used SAP for data 
analysis or presentation. I have only used it in 
Excel. But, still SAP is needed to register the 
numbers which will give the figures for analysis.” 
We also have come across during our interviews that 
there are some processes and tasks that are still done 
manually. Registering the time sheet for non-permanent 
staff is still handled manually. Check-in (punching-in) 
system for regular employees is  done manually.  Lack of a 
planning system to project new part-time employees needed 
in the plant is also identified as one problem. Stock 
management for internal housekeeping and warehouse stock 
tracing are also not currently supported by the SAP system.  
Though all the parts coming to the plant are registered into 
SAP system mainly to communicate with the accounting 
department and finalize payment of invoices for the parts 
ordered.  After registration, the parts will be distributed to 
the two warehouses and they will be sorted manually. There 
is no system to trace those parts once they are dispatched to 
the warehouses and assembly lines.  Lack of stock trace 
system has been identified as one of the main problems by 
all the people we have interviewed. According to one of the 
operations supervisors, there are about 11000 different 
incoming parts that are currently in use by the plant. Once 
they arrived they will be shelved and the job of tracing parts 
when they are needed is currently done manually.  This is 
what the supervisor stated: 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 “…stock management is a disaster… this is the 
biggest problem for the department.  If customers 
make complaints about parts we have to manually 
search the item using part number on the shelf and 
get the details afterwards. This took too much 
resources, too much workload on staff doing it, and 
so many errors.” 
We asked why traceability is a problem and why it is 
difficult to use SAP to address this challenge.  The answer 
was simply: 
 “SAP doesn’t support it as there is no any module 
in SAP to support this task. While SAP was 
implemented this was not included as part of the 
requirements as there was no an issue of 
traceability at that time.”  
Stock management is also problematic and is not 
supported by the SAP system.  As one of the supervisors in 
this section noted the principle of FIFO can’t be applied 
mainly due to lack of a system that can help to identify 
which item is old and which item is new. The plant has a 
rule to use old batch before new batches, but it has become 
very difficult to apply this rule as it is problematic to sort 
manually which parts are new and which are old just by 
using their 6 digits part numbers. The supervisor concluded:  
 “We have to have a system that supports our 
internal housekeeping”   
Planning or projecting number of new part-time 
employees that are needed in the coming months is an 
important managerial duty of plant. To address this need, 
different departments are using MS Excel to project the 
different categories of people (with their skill and 
knowledge) at departmental and/or monthly basis. The 
estimation is made by breaking down the hours for the work 
or material to be produced divided by the weeks needed to 
produce the material(s). But, doing this task using MS Excel 
is problematic as error checks are time consuming. Manual 
data registering to Excel sheet is hard and error prone. It 
requires skills to configure Excel for planning and 
forecasting.  As the head of the logistics department stated: 
“we can not plan future jobs in SAP. We are 
currently using Excel by copying some data from 
the SAP system. This is a double work and at times 
cumbersome.” 
Human resource department also uses a different system 
for individual appraisal and performance management. The 
foremen use the Zalaris tool for hour registration and over-
time work registration. There is also the automatic invoice 
handling system Workflow in use.  
Integrating new demands to existing SAP system is a 
challenge. Demands could come from new requirements. It 
is difficult to integrate the new demands to the system that 
was implemented some 20 years ago. There are also SAP 
standards to respect. So, as some of the supervisors 
explained to us, it is now becoming a common practice that 
new customized applications are in use to address internal 
demands and requirements. This creates a silo system where 
different smaller applications are running at different units 
even without any integration and sharing of data. This will 
compromise the consistency and reliability of data generated 
by those units. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
What we have found to be true for the SME plant under 
study is that its IT activities apply to several of the strategies 
and references in our theoretical frame. Several findings 
support that fact. The plant is therefore likely to be in the 
same situation as many other SMEs globally, which makes 
us interested in identifying and solving problems with 
software misfits.  
When the management level first introduces a main ERP 
system like SAP in a location, we can appreciate corporate 
expectations to employees to learn and begin to use the 
system as soon as possible. Likewise, we can easily 
understand the social and profession related stress felt by 
each individual. Even if some of the misfits were present 
already at the implementation stage, they could easily be 
overlooked, and maybe deemed as improper to pinpoint 
since the management level has already completed the 
planning phase. 
We will therefore conclude that an implementation of 
ERP often starts out with misfits and missing tools. We also 
found evidence for the widening of the gap between services 
and needs as time passes. The evolution of the plant and 
even the enterprise as a whole go through several phases 
and changes over time. The customers, for instance, become 
increasingly aware of materials leading to health issues, 
which makes it important to store and retrieve information 
about specific stock details, not to mention the stock 
relocation itself. The missing possibilities to trace parts is a 
main theme in the findings, and therefore identifies a severe 
gap between enterprise implementation of SAP and the 
specific needs of the plant or the company at large.  
From our findings, we have evidence that there are SAP 
standards to respect. We must further consider how the long 
and solid almost 50 years of history influence the SAP core 
code and the SAP framework. The system was born in 
Germany around 1972; several years before the introduction 
and general use of object orientation as a method of system 
development. Much later, developers found object oriented 
code easy to maintain and reuse, at least in contrast to older 
types of code bases [34]. We argue that the SAP system 
implemented for KA in 1996 consisted of code core and 
frameworks that were hard to change. We further argue that 
the implementation still is hard to refurbish. This infers the 
assumption that SAP is hard to accommodate to fill demand 
gaps [35], and therefore forces other strategies. 
The strategies applied for filling the gap in our study 
were actually at least two of our three-fold Gasser adoption 
list [23].  The one we did not find was the Fitting Strategy. 
The Augmenting Strategy is relevant when the supervisors 
have to fill in hour registration manually. The supervisors 
and plant manager used the data in HR software, invoices 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

reference, and even to assess performance with key 
performance indicators. A KPI is to assess the time taken to 
produce standard components. Our findings reveal that both 
supervisors and plant manager deem hour registration as 
time waste in the form they practice it. It is obvious that 
several other services, like those just mentioned, would 
benefit from augmented integration in the core system, to 
reduce augmenting personnel strategy. The KPI just 
mentioned would demand data flow between standard, or 
historical, timing measures for the producing of parts and 
the actual hour registrations. 
The Working Around Strategy is, however, the dominant 
strategy in the SME under study. Individuals in the 
company needed several electronic services that were 
missing from SAP. Competent individuals then developed 
several ATs (assisting tools) which the plant manager 
referred to as query tools. The versatile Excel tool accepts 
data to the purpose of organizing, analyzing and graphing 
for use in for example periodic staff meetings. These tools 
are in several ways essential for executing important 
business processes.  
During the years after the implementation of SAP, 
purchasing officers have acquired several OTS workstation 
tools or web based systems. We found systems like Zalaris, 
Amigo, Mitrol, Workday and Workflow, all of which being 
part of important business processes. We also found 
specialized tools for detecting machine downtime, and tools 
that addressed prioritized wishes like registering of parts 
locations. Each of those systems have unique user 
interfaces, and seldom respect best practices or HCI 
principles. They therefore demand resources to learn, which 
after a while infers resistance to stop using, even if the 
headquarter eventually suggests better software. We do not 
argue that individuals would explicitly deny using new 
software, only that it is likely to disturb the individual’s 
existing workflow and routines. In some cases, temporary 
employees create system solutions for specific areas, like 
part-location registration. The importance of documentation 
and maintenance becomes critical once that individual 
leaves premises.  
A 
more problematic characteristic is that 
most 
workaround systems also usually create silos and duplicated 
information captured in varying data formats. Such data sets 
are sometimes hard to interchange or use in any other 
systems, at least without resource demanding modifications. 
We are also aware of the dangers of duplicated data sets that 
may differ over time, inferring risks to business processes in 
the organization. The risks are for example faulty decision 
base caused by erroneous data sets and wrong information. 
With workarounds like those mentioned here, suppliers of 
workaround systems should take extra care to observe 
possibilities of singular data origins, that is, avoiding 
duplication of data.  
From our findings, we also realized that the nature of task 
structure 
contributed 
to 
the 
post-implementation 
workarounds and shadow systems that are developed in 
response to the changes in work practices and the long-term 
implications of organizational processes. By task structure 
we are referring to the complexity of the task, the amount of 
discretion or autonomy allowed to perform the task [36], 
and the degree of interdependence among other groups to 
accomplish the task [37]. A good example from our case on 
task structure complexity related workaround is the check-in 
or punching-in system, which is currently performed 
manually.  This task structure is complex and very difficult 
to automate by using conventional ERP systems.  The 
company considered to let a device monitor the time 
tracking of part time employees.  There are automated time 
tracking systems in the market that KA can use to automate 
its time-tracking tasks. Such systems can offer real-time 
access to data, ensure efficiency, and provide the company 
and its employees an advanced and alternative solution to 
the existing manual time-tracking processes.  In our 
exploration, we observed that the strategies adopted by 
different groups to deal with the limits of the ERP system 
contributed for new workarounds and new shadow systems 
to the ERP system.  Integrating the new application to the 
old ERP system would require costly customization that is 
also the cause of all the new shadow systems developed 
over a period of 20 years.  
Our main contribution lies in providing empirical 
evidence and insights on post-implementation complexities 
and challenges of an ERP system, the workarounds carried 
out by users of the system, and the impact on the overall 
performance and efficiency of the organization. By doing 
so, we underscored the importance of workarounds in IS 
implementation to create viable organizational processes 
[43]; provide empirical evidence on the impact of 
workarounds in IS use; and  explore how workarounds are 
actually re-enacted by end users.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. C. Boudreau, & D. Robey, “Organizational transition to enterprise 
resource planning systems: theoretical choices for process research,” 
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 20th international 
conference on Information Systems. 
[2] P. Besson, & F. Rowe, “ERP project dynamics and enacted dialogue: 
perceived understanding, perceived leeway, and the nature of task-
related conflicts,” ACM SIGMIS Database: the DATABASE for 
Advances in Information Systems, 32(4), 47-66, 2001.  
[3] S. Newell, J. C. Huang, R. D. Galliers, & S. L. Pan,  “Implementing 
enterprise resource planning and knowledge management systems in 
tandem: fostering efficiency and innovation complementarity,” 
Information and Organization, 13(1), 25-52, 2003.  
[4] T. F. Gattiker,  & D. L. Goodhue,  “What happens after ERP 
implementation: understanding the impact of interdependence and 
differentiation on plant-level outcomes,” MIS quarterly, 559-585, 
2005.  
[5] D. Alonini, R. Dulmin, & V. Mininno, “Risk management in ERP 
project introduction: Review of the literature,” Information & 
Management, 44(6), 547-567, 2007. 
[6] K-Y. Kwahk,  & J-N. Lee, “The role of readiness for change in ERP 
implementation: Theoretical bases and empirical validation,” 
Information & Management, 45(7), 474-481, 2008. 
[7] Z. Zhang, M. KO. Lee, P, Huang, L, Zhang, x. Huang, “A framework 
of ERP systems implementation success in China: An empirical 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

study,” International journal of Production Economics, 98(1), 56-80, 
2005.  
[8] O. Zach, “ERP Implementation in small and Medium sized 
Enterprises,” Phd Disseration. University of Agder,  Faculty of 
Economics and Social Sciences,  Department of Information Systems, 
2012. 
[9] K. Y. Wong, & E. Aspinawall, “An empirical study of the important 
factors for knowledge-management adoption in the SME sector,” 
Journal of Knowledge management, 9(3), 64-82, 2005. 
[10] H. M. Beheshti, C. M. Beheshti, “Improving productivity and firm 
performance 
with 
enterprise 
resource 
planning,” 
Enterprise 
Information Systems, 4(4), 445-472, 2010. 
[11] R. Malhotra, & C. Temponi, “Critical decisions for ERP integration: 
Small business issues,” International Journal of Information 
Management, 30(1), 28-37, 2010. 
[12] D. L. Olsen, & J. Staley, “Case study of open-source enterprise 
resource planning implementation in a small business,” Enterprise 
Information Systems, 6(1), 79-94, 2012. 
[13] P. Poba-Nzaou, &  L. Raymond, “Managing ERP system risk in 
SMEs: a multiple case study,” Journal of Information Technology, 
26(3), 170-192, 2011.  
[14] I. Ignatiadis, &J.  Nandhakumar. “The effect of ERP system 
workarounds on organizational control: An interpretivist case study,” 
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 21(2), 2009. 
[15] E. Hustad, & D. H. Olsen,  “Critical Issues across the ERP Life Cycle 
in Small-and-MediumSized Enterprises: Experiences from a Multiple 
Case Study,”. Conference on ENTERprise Information Systems / 
ProjMAN 2013 - International Conference on Project MANagement / 
HCIST 2013 - International Conference on Health and Social Care 
Information Systems and Technologies. 
[16] M. Haddara, & O. Zach, “ERP systems in SMEs: A literature review, 
” 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 
IEEE, p. 1-10,  2011. 
[17] W. J. Orlikowski,  & J. Yates,  «ICT and organizational change: a 
commentary,” The journal of applied behavioral science, 42(1), 127-
134, 2006.  
[18] P. Koopman,  & R. R.  Hoffman, “Work-arounds, make-work, and 
kludges,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, 18(6), 70-75, 2003. 
[19] L. Lapointe, & S. Rivard, “A multilevel model of resistance to 
information technology implementation,” MIS Quarterly, 461-491, 
2005. 
[20] E. H. Ferneley, & P. Sobreperez, “Resist, comply or workaround? An 
examination of different facets of user engagement with information 
systems,” European Journal of information systems, 15(4), 345-356, 
2006.  
[21] J. Gasparas, & E. Monteiro, “Counteracting Forces in Implementation 
of Is-Enabled Global Business Processes,”. Paper presented at the 
17th European Conference on Information Systems, Verona, Italy, 
2009. 
[22] L. Gasser, “The integration of computing and routine work,”. ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 4(3), 205-225, 1986. 
[23] W. J. Orlikowski, “The duality of technology: Rethinking the concept 
of technology in organizations,” Organization science, 3(3), 398-427, 
1992.  
[24] S. T. McGann, & K. Lyytinen,   «The improvisation effect: a case 
study of user improvisation and its effects on information system 
evolution,” ICIS 2008 Proceedings, 209.  
[25] G. Walsham, “Interpretive case studies in IS research: nature and 
method,” European Journal of Information Systems, 4(2), 74-81, 
1995a 
[26] G. Walsham, “The emergence of interpretivism in IS research,”  
Information Systems Research, 6(4), 376-394, 1995b. 
[27] W. J. Orlikowski, & J. J. Baroudi, “Studying information technology 
in organizations: Research approaches and assumptions,” Information 
Systems Research, 2(1), 1-28, 1991. 
[28] I. Benbasat,  D. K. Goldstein, & M.  Mead, “The case research 
strategy in studies of information systems,” MIS quarterly, 369-386, 
1987.  
[29] S. Sahay, “Implementation of information technology: a time-space 
perspective,”  Organization studies, 18(2), 229-260, 1997.  
[30] M. L. Markus, & D. Robey, “Information Technology and 
Organizational Change: Causal Structure in Theory and Research,” 
Management Science, 34(5), 583-598, 1988.  
[31] E. Welsh, “Dealing with data: Using NVivo in the qualitative data 
analysis process,”  Paper presented at the Forum Qualitative 
Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 2002. 
[32] C. Sadowski, J.  Van Gogh, C.  Jaspan, E.  Söderberg,  & C. Winter, 
“Tricorder: Building a program analysis ecosystem,” Paper presented 
at the Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Software 
Engineering-Volume 1, 2015. 
[33] R. G. Fichman, & C. F. Kemerer, “Adoption of software engineering 
process innovations: The case of object orientation,”  MIT Sloan 
Management Review Magazine, 34, 7-7, 1993. 
[34] G. Gable,  & G. J. Stewart,  “SAP R/3 implementation issues for 
small to medium enterprises, ”.  AMCIS 1999 Proceedings, 779-781, 
1999. 
[35] J. R. Hackman, “Work redesign and motivation,” Professional 
Psychology, 11(3), 445-455. 1980.  
[36] D. Strong, O. Volkoff,  & M. J. Elmes, “ERP systems, task structure, 
and workarounds in organizations,”  AMCIS 2001 proceedings. 204.  
[37] P. Bazeley & K. Jackson, K. “Qualitative data analysis with 
NVivo,”Sage Publications Limited, 2013. 
[38] J. F. Anderson,  "Transcribing with Voice Recognition Software: A 
New Tool for Qualitative Researchers," Qualitative Health Research, 
8(5), 718-723. doi:10.1177/104973239800800511 
[39] J. Bailey, J. "First steps in qualitative data analysis: transcribing," 
Family Practice, 25(2), 127-131. doi:10.1093/fampra/cmn003. 
[40] R. Gutman, R. "Why Laurel Sounds Like Yanny," 2018.  
[41] L. Layman, L. Williams, L., & R. S. Amant, "Toward reducing fault 
fix time: Understanding developer behavior for the design of 
automated fault detection tools,"  Paper presented at the Empirical 
Software Engineering and Measurement, 2007. ESEM 2007.  
[42] European Commission (EC). Eurostat Regional Yearbook 2008. 
[43] C. Ciborra. “The Labyrinths of Information: Challenging the Wisdom 
of Systems, Oxford,” Oxford, Oxford University press, 2002. 
[44] X.,  Hongjiang et al.  “The Challenge of Implementing an ERP 
System in a Small and Medium Enterprise – A Teaching Case of ERP 
Project Management.” Scholarship and Professional Work - Business. 
213, 2011.   
 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

