Stress Detection of Human Using Heart Rate Variability Analysis Based on Low 
Cost Camera 
 
Tafsut Tagnithammou 
Gyrolift SAS / LISV, 
 University of Paris Saclay 
78180 Montigny le Bretonneux, Versailles, France 
Email : Tafsut.tagnithammou@gyrolift.fr 
Antoine Ferszterowski 
Gyrolift SAS 
78180 Montigny le Bretonneux, Versailles, France 
Email : antoine.fer@gyrolift.fr 
Lambert Trénoras 
Gyrolift SAS 
78180 Montigny le Bretonneux, Versailles, France 
Email: lambert.trenoras@gyrolift.fr 
 
 
Eric Monacelli  
LISV, Univ, Versailles Saint-Quentin-En-Yvelines, 
University of Paris Saclay 
78000, Versailles, France 
Email: eric.monacelli@uvsq.fr
 
 
Abstract— The article presents a non-contact solution to a 
stress detection. Computer human interfaces must be able to 
consider human’s emotions. Being able to detect a stressful 
situation has several applications: Secure and assist Computer 
-Human Interfaces, telemedicine, driving assistance. This 
capacity allows to detect the user’s state and improve the 
interface ‘s performance. We proposed a method based on a 
stress classification system with a sensor in contact and we 
compared with different classification methods based on 
sensors in contact. Our solution is based on a facial analysis 
obtained by image processing. 
Keywords-Vision; Stress; Photoplethysmography; Neural 
network; SVM; K-NN. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Stress is a physiological response to a disturbing 
situation. Stressful situations can compromise not only our 
quality of life, but also our health, our ability to control 
when we are in a human-machine loop, for example man-
vehicle interaction. The ability to detect a hazard is very 
important, but the human being is not able to objectively 
perceive physiological symptoms of this situation in real-
time. This ability would have a lot of applications: medical, 
security, driving assistance, etc, and especially in the field 
of interactive systems. For example, for a human to be able 
to safely interact with new technologies (with a man-
machine interface), it would mean to have the capability to 
detect his apprehension towards this new technology, or 
simply to be able to assist a novice use.  
Today, there are many tools for person’s stress detection. 
Two categories of devices can be distinguished: in-contact 
devices called invasive, and without-contact devices called 
non-invasive. Each solution may have advantages or 
disadvantages compared to others depending on the desired 
application. ElectroCardioGraphy (ECG), for example, is 
used for clinical applications; it measures the electrical 
activity of the heart to study its functioning. It can actually 
detect stress from variations in heart rate [1][2]. This 
method allows to calculate the statistical characteristics 
related to the intervals RR (the duration between two heart’s 
beats) and to be able to deduce the various behaviors related 
to the heart (precisely to the heart rate). This solution is not 
adapted for an embedded application given the cost 
constraints and the invasiveness of this system. Electrodes 
are placed on the body of the person using adhesive patches 
to make the necessary measurements. This in-contact 
instrumentation is a psychological barrier since the solution 
is causing irritation and discomfort. There are also other 
solutions as Galvanic Sensor Response (GSR), which is not 
the subject of the article, but it is used for the test. 
The purpose of this work is to show that it is possible to 
classify a person's stress from the physiological data 
captured by a low-cost camera. The main challenge of this 
solution is to have a sufficiently powerful system while 
considering the constraints related to the change of 
brightness of the environment especially for embedded 
applications and movements related to the system and the 
user.  
 
The article is organized in several parts: In Section 2, we 
present the different solutions around the estimation of heart 
rate and stress. In Section 3, we describe in more detail the 
chain of acquisition set up to estimate the stress of a person 
from a camera. In Section 4, we present the evaluation 
protocol and the different results obtained by classification 
methods to build a model and the comparison between these 
different methods. Finally, a conclusion summarizes current 
findings, limitations and future work.  
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

II. 
CONTEXT AND RELATED WORK 
 In recent years, several studies have been conducted on 
the use of cameras as a system for measuring cardiac 
activity to assess a person's stress. It is now possible to 
measure the fine colorimetric variations of the skin 
generated by the heartbeat, using a conventional camera. 
This process, already used by optical sensors in contact, is 
now exploitable using standard equipment such as the basic 
camera provided on laptops accessible to the public. 
Researchers as Poh [3], Takano [4] and Verkruysse [5] have 
shown that it is possible to estimate heart rate from a 
person’s face images.  More recently, more complex 
solutions have been developed, not only allowing a simple 
estimate of heart rate, but a much more thorough analysis of 
cardiac activity. This analysis is based on the Heart Rate 
Variability (HRV), which is the study of the time’s variation 
between the heart’s beats. We choose to study the HRV 
because the set of measurements that compose it provides 
relatively diverse information, both in terms of cardiac 
activity, breathing or even the autonomic nervous system. 
Works like those of  Bousefsaf [1], McDuff [6], Park [7] 
and Kaur [8] have shown that camera can be used to achieve 
a viable system of measurement of HRV to detect person’s 
stress. This is a big step forward compared to a simple 
estimate of the heart rate.  
Several reasons led us to choose this solution. It is a non-
invasive method which clearly increases the user’s comfort: 
the sensors in contact can generate discomfort, and even 
constitute a risk factor for medical applications. In addition, 
this solution does not require any tool to be developed, all 
computers are now equipped with a camera. For example, 
the camera used for our prototyping is a Pi camera [9]. 
Finally, the use of a camera allows us to perform other 
simultaneous processing such as example the detection of 
emotion from the facial expressions using the same images.   
 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The objective is to show that it is possible to estimate a 
person’s by classifying the physiological data from 
processed images of a low-cost camera that is accessible to 
everyone for various applications. The challenge of this 
choice of solution is the use of a low-definition camera that 
can present a loss in terms of performance. We propose a 
chain of acquisition (presented in Figure 1), which uses a 
camera to classify the physiological data to estimate the 
stress by ensuring comfort and a non-invasive solution. We 
also compared this solution with the results obtained with a 
PPG contact sensor (PhotoPlethysmoGraphic sensor) that 
allows us to estimate the heart rate and to study its 
variability to estimate the stress of a person. The first step in 
our work will therefore be to create a reliable system for 
measuring heart rate variability from a camera. From this 
measurement, we can extract parameters on the variability 
of the heart rate, which informs us about the stress of the 
person. The variation in time between heart beats represents 
the HRV, which offers many useful measures in the study of 
stress.  
 
 
 
            Figure 1.  General method 
 
The last step in our acquisition chain is the classification of 
stress indirectly through the classification of physiological 
data from processed images of a camera. 
 
A. PPG Signal Acquisition and Training 
 
 
          Figure 2. Principle of PhotoPléthysmoGraphy (PPG) 
 
PhotoPlethysmoGraphy (PPG) is an optical measurement 
technique that allows you to observe blood volume’s 
variation in a non-invasive way [10]. 
Figure 
2 
illustrates 
the 
principle 
of 
PhotoPléthysmoGraphie: 
the 
cardiac 
activity 
causes 
fluctuations in blood volume that result in fine variations in 
the light reflected by the skin, and more precisely in the 
blood capillaries. It is this fine variation that we will seek to 
measure.  
   
 
 
 
                     Figure 3. Description of the PPG concept [11] 
 
As we can see in Figure 3 [11], the acquisition of a PPG 
signal requires two optoelectronic components: a light 
emitter and a light receiver. Today, cameras have become 
full-fledged PPG sensors, with ambient light acting as the 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

light emitter, and the photosensitive cell matrix of the camera 
being the photodiode. 
 
 
 
 
(a)                                  (b) 
 
Figure 4. PPG signal formation from the regions of interest of the face 
 
To form the PPG signal (Figure 4a) from person’s face 
(Figure 4b), several steps were followed: 
• 
Face’s Detection: This step is very important. To have 
a responsive and robust system it must be fast. The 
result of the system depends on good detection. We 
used the OpenCv library given the low execution time 
compared to other algorithms. 
• 
Creation of Regions of Interest (ROIs) on Face: It is 
possible to define ROIs on the cheeks and the forehead 
(Figure 4b). This choice is to maximize the number of 
pixels belonging to the skin and obtain a PPG signal 
with minimum signal-to-noise ratio [12].  
• 
Chrominance Extraction *u: We choose to use the 
space L*u*v more precisely the chrominance *u. This 
component represents the colors between red and green: 
wavelength interval in which photoplethysmographic 
variations are better observable [13]. 
• 
Spatial Average: Once the chrominance is extracted, 
we calculate the pixels’ spatial of the ROIs. This 
average consists in summing all the pixels’ intensities 
different from 0 and divide by this number of pixels. A 
point of the PPG signal represents the spatial average of 
a single captured frame. 
• 
PPG Signal Formation: in order to have a raw PPG 
signal (Figure 4a), we do a normalization of the values 
obtained after the calculation of the spatial average as 
follows:  
 
     
     with   
 : number of signal’s points 
after spatial average,  et  : standard deviation and mean.  
 
A raw PPG signal is obtained at the output of the acquisition 
chain. We must filter it to make it more exploitable. 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Filtering 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Signal filtering chain 
 
Our algorithm of stress detection will be based on the 
study of the different peaks of the filtered PPG signal. The 
signal PPG is filtered in a sliding window of 30 seconds with 
a step of one second following the chain of Figure 5: 
• 
After removing the continuous component, we apply a 
Butterworth filter with cutoff frequencies set at 0.8 Hz 
and 3 Hz, which corresponds to the usual heart rate in 
humans 
• 
A Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) [14] is applied to 
determine the maximum heart rate, so we deduce the 
average heart rate. 
• 
Another selective bandpass filter is applied from the 
average heart rate since the first filter applied does not 
allow to study the variability of the heart rate, we 
applied this second filter more restrictive to define the 
cutoff frequencies of the heart. filtered. 
 
The objective of the filtering is to obtain a signal 
comprising distinct peaks that can be analyzed by a detection 
algorithm while avoiding "bad detection" as much as 
possible, since between each peak, there is a fixed amplitude 
and mean interval which eliminates any other spades that do 
not respect this constraint. Our algorithm of stress detection 
will be based on the study of the different peaks of our 
filtered PPG signal.  
In the manner of the R-peaks of an ECG, it is possible to 
use the peaks of the signal PPG, which are not R-peaks 
indicated in (Figure 6a), but the P-peaks indicated in (Figure 
6b) variability of the heart rate. The study of the variability 
of the heart rate via the PPG wave, is a reliable alternative 
and that leads to almost identical results to that of the ECG 
as shown [7]. 
 
 
              
 
 
       
  Figure 6. Analogy between R-R interval et P-P interval 
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

               
 
 
                                       Figure 7. Filtered PPG signal 
 
 
                        (a)                                            (b) 
 
Figure 8. Detection of PPG signal peaks and graphical representation of RR 
 
The filtering method used seems adequate: The filtered 
PPG signal obtained (Figure 7) with the detection of the 
peaks (Figure 8a) corresponds to the adequate rate validated 
by the measurements made by a PPG sensor in contact; on 
the other hand the filtering is carried out in a sliding window 
of 30 seconds with a step of one second in parallel with the 
other operations: detection of the face; PPG signal 
extraction. 
Once the R-R intervals of the filtered signal have been 
extracted and corrected, we have drawn the Tachogram 
(Figure 8b) which is the graphical representation of the R-R 
intervals. 
C. Heart Rate Variability and Stress 
Several studies show that heart rate variability is a 
marker of stress. The reference [15] shows that HRV of a 
person immediately drops in response to a stressful 
stimulus. This decrease is also observable in the case of 
chronic stress if we study the HRV over a longer period. 
The HRV presents a great informative value, it informs on 
the activity of the autonomic nervous system and more 
precisely on the balance between: The sympathetic system 
which helps to increase heart rate and the parasympathetic 
system which helps to decrease it. The reference [16] 
describes the autonomic nervous system which is the 
mechanism in charge of the regulation of stress, in the case 
of a stressful situation. Thus, an increase in sympathetic 
tone is observed together with a decrease in parasympathetic 
tone. Variations in sympathetic and parasympathetic tone 
can be seen in low frequencies and high frequencies, 
respectively. We will observe a decrease in high frequencies 
accompanied by an increase in low frequencies and 
therefore an increase in the ratio LF / HF in response to a 
stressful stimulus. We use the name Sympatho-Vagal 
Balance (BSV) to qualify this relation BF/HF. 
It is important to note that heart rate is not a stress 
marker when studied in isolation. This is the interest of the 
HRV which has a much more informative value since it is 
based on the study of the variation of the time between heart 
beats. It is also a risk marker for many pathologies. Several 
studies indicate that a decline in HRV is associated with the 
risk of cardiovascular and coronary heart disease, 
hypertension and heart failure [15]. We have seen that the 
HRV provides information on the activity of the autonomic 
nervous system, vagal tone, respiration and of course the 
activity of the heart and its ability to adapt. That's why it can 
be used as a stress marker [17]. There are no normal values 
for the quantities of the HRV. They are modulated by a lot 
of parameters, including age or physical condition so they 
are intrinsic to each person. We choose to use 4 parameters 
to build our stress estimation and classification model. 
There are multiple combinations of parameters used to 
classify stress in the literature. Our choice was Beats Per 
Minute (BPM), Root Square of the Successive Differences 
(RMSSD), BSV and the Standard Deviation of all the 
intervals beats (SDNN). These indicators are used in 
recurring ways for this type of study:  
• 
BPM: Number of beats per minute 
 
• 
RMSSD: root square of squared differences of 
successive RR intervals which also expresses high 
frequency variability mainly of parasympathetic 
origin, modulated by respiration.  
          
                          
           
• 
SDNN: standard deviation of intervals between 
beats            
                  
 
• 
BSV:   
                            
 
 
However, we have chosen to limit ourselves to these 4 
quantities to limit the number of input parameters of our 
classification model, which reduces the processing time and 
makes the system more responsive. 
In the case of a stressful reaction, several phenomena are 
observable:  
• 
An increased BSV: Increased sympathetic tone and 
decreased parasympathetic tone corresponding to a 
stressed state.  
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

• 
Decreased RMSSD and SDNN: During a stressful 
situation, the respiratory cycle is faster, which 
reduces the value of the R-R intervals. Since both 
RMSSD and SDNN are based on these ranges, 
their values are also reduced. 
• 
Increased BPM and instant heart rate 
D. Implementation of the Protocol and Creation of the 
Stress Classification Model 
Once our cardiac activity measurement system was 
defined, we began the creation of our stress classification 
model. Machine Learning tools are now the ones that lead to 
the best results in classification tasks through models that 
are used to predict qualitative variables like quantitative, 
data separation is more complex as data are separated into 
different groups in a more precise manner. The main 
constraint of this type of method lies in the need for 
relatively large amounts of data to build a robust 
"classification model". Since there is no publicly available 
database of measures of heart rate variability annotated as 
being in a stressed or unstressed state, we chose to create 
our own database. 
 
1) Test Protocol: Inducing Stress 
 
Our experimental protocol aims to collect cardiac activity 
data corresponding to stressed and unstressed states. The 
main difficulty is to succeed in inducing stress in a 
maximum of participants.  
Method: Comparison between GSR + in-Contact PPG 
sensors and image analysis  
Inclusion: After presenting the test protocol, each 
participant has given their consent to participate by signing 
a consent letter. 
Test: Our test consists of three stress phases separated by 
relaxation phases. The chosen protocol is to broadcast a 
video of 6 minutes including so-called relaxation phases, as 
well as stress phases (Figure 9). The 6 minutes are 
organized in alternating phases of 1 minute. During the 
relaxation phases, the videos broadcast are videos of 
soothing natures constitute the relaxing stimulus. The videos 
broadcast during the stress phases correspond to the Stroop 
test, presented in [18]. It is common to use the Stroop test as 
an inducer of mild stress, which is the stressful stimulus 
used by Bousefsaf [13].  
We chose to have participants fill out a 
questionnaire during the protocol, to measure their level of 
anxiety, in order to filter the data collected, and understand 
some results. Each participant had to complete the State 
Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) presented in [19] before 
starting the test. These psychological questionnaires also 
allow us to exclude some participants by correlating the 
GSR sensor data with the test results. 
 
 
 
                                  Figure 9. Stress induction test 
 
2) Database of Physiological Measurements 
 
We used data from the 15 participants. We initially had data 
from 21 participants. Participants 9 and 15 were excluded as 
they showed no evidence of physiological responses to the 
stressful stimulus. Finally, participants 7, 18, 19 and 22 
were excluded for material reasons (sensor that breaks off 
during the test, etc.). We used data from the remaining 15 
participants. 
As shown in Figure 10, we have for each participant a set of 
three sensors: 
 
 
   
                                           Figure 10. Test sensors 
 
The PPG and GSR sensor to build a stress estimation model, 
then we will compare this model with the model established 
with the PI camera solution. 
i. 
Detection Chain to Validate  
• 
The video of the participant's face: it validates our 
PPG signal acquisition chain from the video, by 
referring to the measurements of the PPG contact 
sensor. 
ii. Comparison Chain  
• 
Measurements of the GSR sensor in contact: This 
sensor provides information on sweating of the 
skin, during a stressful situation, a person is 
supposed to have a different sweating than during a 
rest phase. It allows to determine if there was stress 
or not and therefore to select the participants to 
include in the training data.   
• 
The measurements of the PhotoPlethymographic 
Sensor (PPG) in contact: allow to train our 
classification model. 
 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

iii. Validation of Learning Data   
Once we have these data, we excluded participants who 
did not show signs of a stressful reaction, for which the 
GSR sensor data was used. This sensor provides 
information on sweating of the skin. During a stressful 
situation, a person is supposed to have a different sweating 
than during a rest phase. Our test consists of three stress 
phases separated by relaxation phases, the signal returned by 
the sensor must have (Figure 11) three separate spades, in 
the case where the subject has stressed.  
 
           
 
 
Figure 11. Representation of selected signal portions 
 
The test consists of three stressful periods which implies 
that the participant should have three times a lower rate of 
sweating. The spectra that do not show pikes at the 
moments corresponding to the beginning of a stressing 
phase, therefore did not stress. It was therefore relatively 
easy to exclude the participants without any reaction, it was 
enough to visually grasp the data of the GSR sensor. 
IV. 
RESULTATS & DISCUSSION  
 
The method proceeds in two steps: 
A. Step 1: Comparison of Classification Methods 
This step consists in creating a reference classification 
model based on the physiological data of the participants 
coming from the PPG contact sensor. This classification 
model is used to validate the model created from the 
physiological data from the camera. 
 
i. 
Description of Methods  
In order to classify the data from the PPG contact sensor and 
annotate them, we compared three different methods. We 
want to generalize a classification of unknown samples from 
a learning database. We compare three methods of 
supervised learning; this choice is based on a bibliographic 
analysis: neural network; K-NN et SVM. These are the 
methods with the best results in terms of classification. The 
reference [18] used the KNN method and obtained a 
classification accuracy of 95%. Reference [19] tested the 
SVM and the KNN method and obtained better results with 
the SVM with an RBF core function, they reached the 85% 
accuracy. Reference [20] has shown that it is possible to 
classify measures of cardiac variability according to 4 levels 
of stress using an artificial neural network.  
Neural Network (Supervised learning method): an input 
layer with 4 neurons which are the 4 input parameters 
(SDNN, BSV, RMSSD, BPM); the next three layers are 
hidden (the number of hidden layers is defined according to 
the optimal percentage of precision obtained); the last layer 
composed of neurons corresponding to the two outputs 
(stressed state; non-stressed state) 
K-NN (Supervised learning method): is an algorithm based 
on training data that it stores in memory; it is a memory-
based algorithm. This method is therefore suitable for 
problems with a small database. In our case, we have a few 
thousand samples which allows us to use this method. 
SVM (Supervised learning method): This method is used 
for regression problems, as in our case, it can also be used 
for classification. It separates a dataset into two categories: 
using a hyperplane separator which is linear; or using a 
kernel function that is non-linear. 
 
ii. Database for Classification 
After acquisition of the test data, we have 1418 samples 
that have been split into two data sets.  
Training and Validation Data: 80% samples of 1134 were 
used for the training and validation of the model. 
Test Data: To test the model, it is necessary that the data 
were never injected into the model in order to evaluate the 
real performances of the model, 20% of the samples so 284 
were used for that. 
              
 
                                                (a) 
              
          
                                                (b) 
 
                                   Figure 12. Neural network method 
 
Amplitude 
Loss 
Accuracy 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 Figure 12 illustrates the performance of the model built 
using a neural network; the rate of loss of training and 
testing (Figure 13a); the training accuracy rate (Figure 13b).   
 
              
 
 
                                           (a)    
        
 
 
                                           (b) 
 
                                Figure 13. K-NN method 
 
Figure 13a illustrates a classification obtained 
using the K-NN method, the number of neighbors is chosen 
which minimizes the error on the test data. It suffices to 
increment this hyper-parameter in a loop (Figure 14b) to 
determine its optimal value by visual apprehension of the 
curve.        
 
                         (a)                                 (b) 
                                        Figure 14. SVM method 
 
Figure 14 illustrates the use of a linear SVM to classify our 
data (Figure 14b); and an SVM with a kernel function 
(Figure 14a).  
iii. Discussion:  
 
TABLE I.  PERFORMANCES OF THE THREE METHODS 
 
Algorithm 
Accuracy 
test 
– 
data learning 
Accuracy test on 
the second dataset 
Neural network 
89,1 % 
83,3 % 
K-NN 
97,6 % 
77,4 % 
SVM 
97,2 % 
75,2 % 
Table 1 summarizes the results obtained after the 
evaluation of the three classification methods. If we analyze 
the results: We note that the k-NN method is the one that 
presents the best classification results on the 284 samples 
from the learning dataset. The accuracy rate is 97.6% which 
is relatively high. However, this accuracy is not indicative 
of the performance of the algorithm under real conditions. 
In the test data set, measurements are almost identical to 
those of training, which explains why, with the k-NN 
method or with the SVM, it is possible to obtain such high 
results. That's why we have injected the second set of test 
data. This test database will allow us to really evaluate the 
performance of our models and compare them together.  
We note that the neural network method presents the 
best classification performance on this new dataset, with an 
accuracy of 83.3% against 77.4% for the k-NN algorithm 
and 75.2% for the SVM. We can deduce that the best 
solution available to us the neural network solution. In fact, 
it has the best capacity for generalization and therefore 
brings us good results in real conditions. 
B. Step 2: Comparison with the Non-Invasive Non-Contact 
model: camera 
The first step made it possible to obtain the physiological 
data of the participants coming from a PPG sensor in contact. 
This acquisition was synchronized recording a video of their 
face. Once the classification model of the data from the 
contact PPG sensor is done, we will be able to analyze the 
quality of the acquisition chain and test our classification 
model only from the camera’s data. 
We used three classification methods to classify the data 
obtained from the camera; SVM; Neural network and 
temporal averaging method.  
• 
Time Averaging: We made an estimate of the heart rate 
every second. The goal is to calculate the right heart rate 
estimated by choosing the one with the highest number 
of occurrences. In this method, the historical aspect 
(evolution over time) is considered to calculate the heart 
rate. 
 
TABLE II.   DATA CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE FROM THE 
CAMERA 
 
Algorithm  
Properly classified samples  
Neural network 
59,2 % 
Time averaging 
61,1 % 
SVM  
56,3 % 
 
Table 2 shows the results of the three methods used to 
classify the camera dataset; 56.3% of good classification is 
obtained using SVM, slightly more with neural network 
method 59.2% and 61.1% with temporal averaging.  
C. Error Calculation: Contact Model - Contactless Model 
We compared the classification results obtained from the 
camera with the classification results obtained from the PPG 
contact sensor.  
RMSSD 
BPM 
Neighbors number 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

We used two parameters for the comparison:  
- 
RMSE: Root Mean Square Error 
- 
Correlation: the Pearson correlation coefficient r 
used to study the intensity of the link that exists 
between the results obtained with the model of the 
PPG contact sensor and the data obtained with the 
model of the camera. 
 
a. 
Neural Network Method 
 
TABLE III.   COMPARISON OF THE NEURAL NETWORK METHOD 
 
 
RMSE 
Correlation  
BPM 
12,057 
0,37 *avec p-value <0.01 
RMSSD 
36,87 
0,06 
BSV 
0,65 
0,02 
SDNN 
28,11 
0,11 
 
b. Time Averaging Method 
 
TABLE IV.  COMPARISON OF THE TEMPORAL AVERAGING 
METHOD 
 
 
RMSE 
Correlation  
BPM 
12,24 
0,15 *avec p-value <0.01 
RMSSD 
33,4 
0,05 
BSV 
0,7 
0,04 
SDNN 
29,12 
0,09 
 
c. 
SVM Method: Injection of two second signal 
portions at the input of the model to predict the 
parameters of the HRV 
 
TABLE V.  COMPARISON OF THE SVM METHOD 
 
 
RMSE 
Correlation  
BPM 
9,61 
0,11 *avec p-value <0.01 
RMSSD 
43,5 
0,03 
BSV 
1,3 
0,06 
SDNN 
36,2 
0,04 
 
Discussion:  
The results presented in Table 3, Table 4 and Table 5 
correspond to the three main methods. The neural network 
method (Table 3) is relatively close to the temporal 
averaging method (Table 4). The filtering and signal 
processing algorithms used are strictly identical. The third 
method is relatively different (Table 5) since it does not 
require prior signal processing. The idea is simply to inject 
signal portions of 2 seconds into input of a classification 
model and the parameter to predict (BPM, RMSSD, etc.) 
from the sensor. The model will predict the parameter in 
question: the BPM, SDNN, RMSSD, BSV since the 
objective is to inject the raw signal from the camera without 
specific treatment (filtering) and to predict the heart rate with 
the associated HRV parameters. The most interesting results 
in terms of quadratic error are those obtained with the SVM 
method, however, the correlation rate is relatively low 
compared to the basic method, for BPM at least (Table 5).  
The two methods to be considered are those using 
temporal averaging and SVM since they present more 
promising results. The SVM could be used more judiciously 
than to predict the parameters directly at the output of the 
model. This is a solution that was recently developed [20].  
For the temporal averaging method, the histograms of 
the predictions show that the correct estimates are the most 
recurrent, however the algorithm implemented is not yet well 
adapted to perform a correct arbitration as to the correct 
estimate to be chosen when the signal is of poor quality in 
some areas of interest. One possible improvement would be 
to set up an algorithm to assign a coefficient to each estimate 
based on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the region of 
interest from which it is derived, which would be low in the 
case where the SNR is low and vice versa. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The objective of this work is to show that it is possible to 
classify the stress of a person from the physiological data 
captured by an accessible camera and embeddable. 
The developed method allowed us to compare different 
methods of classification but the use of the camera as a tool 
for measuring cardiac activity is still in its beginnings. 
To estimate the stress of a person using a sensor without 
contact: camera. First, we propose an acquisition chain in 
order to estimate the heart rate and calculate the parameters 
of the HRV that will be used as inputs for the stress 
classification model. We have put in place a test protocol to 
create our own database that will be used to create the stress 
classification model. Data acquired during this test are: 
sensor data in PPG contact synchronized with video 
recordings, and a GSR sensor.  
A classification model from the PPG sensor data was 
created using different supervised learning methods; the 
method that shows the best results is the neural network 
method. 
Then, we evaluated the performance of our acquisition 
chain with the camera by comparing the built classification 
model with the camera data. 
 There are many constraints brought by this tool, which 
today represent the main barrier to its use on embedded 
systems. The two main constraints are movements and light 
variations, constraints which are difficult to overcome even 
in laboratory conditions. Both are closely related since a 
movement will necessarily result in a change in the 
illumination of a person's face. These are two of these areas 
that we will strive to improve. Nevertheless, this solution is 
more accessible and especially embeddable since it is non-
invasive. We will try to minimize the impact of light 
variations on the accuracy of our measurements. Today, light 
variations are one of the main challenges in computer vision 
on embedded systems. Since computer vision and signal 
processing techniques have been evolving in recent years, 
particularly with the advent of machine-learning tools, it is 
certain that the measurement of cardiac activity via the 
extraction of the PPG signal by a camera will improve and 
one day, will become a recognized alternative measurement 
system. It can be imagined for many applications: driver 
assistance, telemedicine or biometrics.    
 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We wish to thank all the participant especially Fali Thamila 
and supervisors for their priceless help.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
C. Maaoui and F. Bousefsaf, “Automatic human stress 
detection based on webcam photoplethysmographic 
signals,” J. Mech. Med. Biol., vol. 13, pp. 1–13, 2015. 
[2] 
M. Alghatrif and J. Lindsay, “A brief review: history to 
understand fundamentals of electrocardiography,” J. 
Community Hosp. Intern. Med. Perspect., vol. 5, pp. 1–5, 
2012. 
[3] 
D. J. Mcduff, R. W. P. Non-, and C. Link, “Accessed 
Non-contact , automated cardiac pulse measurements 
using video imaging and blind source separation .,” vol. 
13, 2018. 
[4] 
C. Takano and Y. Ohta, “Heart rate measurement based 
on a time-lapse image,” Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 29, pp. 
853–857, 2006. 
[5] 
W. Verkruysse, L. O. Svaasand, and J. S. Nelson, 
“Remote plethysmographic imaging using ambient light 
.,” Opt. Soc. Am., vol. 16, no. 26, 2008. 
[6] 
D. Mcduff, S. Gontarek, and R. Picard, “Remote 
Measurement of Cognitive Stress via Heart Rate 
Variability,” pp. 3–6. 
[7] 
J. Park, “A Study on the Stress-Index Estimation Using 
Face Image,” pp. 45–47, 2016. 
[8] 
B. Kaur, S. Moses, M. Luthra, and V. N. Ikonomidou, 
“Remote Stress Detection using a Visible Spectrum 
Camera,” SPIE, pp. 1–13, 2015. 
[9]        https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/usage/camera 
 
[10] 
J. L. M. Id, M. X. Rocha, G. G. Vasconcelos, and J. E. V. 
Filho, 
“Advances 
in 
Photopletysmography 
Signal 
Analysis for Biomedical Applications,” sensors, pp. 1–26, 
2018. 
[11] 
M. A. Hassan et al., “Heart rate estimation using facial 
video : A review,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 
38, pp. 346–360, 2017. 
[12] 
S. Kumar, A. Prakash, and C. S.tucker, “Bounded Kalman 
filter method for motion- robust , non-contact heart rate 
estimation,” Biomed. Opt. Express, vol. 9, no. 2, 2018. 
[13] 
F. Bousefsaf, “Non-contact measurement of cardiac 
activity by analysis of the video flow from a digital 
camera extraction of physiological parameters and 
application to the estimation of stress,” University of 
Lorraine, 2014. 
[14] 
S. P. Singh, N. Rathee, H. Gupta, P. Zamboni, and A. V. 
Singh, “Contactless and Hassle Free Real Time Heart 
Rate Measurement with Facial Video,” J. Card. Crit. 
Care, pp. 24–29, 2017. 
[15] 
J. Marsac, “Variability of heart rate: a marker of 
cardiometabolic risk in public health,” Bull. académie 
Natl. médecine, vol. 197, pp. 175–186, 2013. 
[16] 
A. Ismail, “Interest of Heartbeat Variability as a Risk 
Marker,” university of law and health of LILLE 2, 2013. 
[17] 
H. Kim, E. Cheon, D. Bai, Y. H. Lee, and B. Koo, “Stress 
and Heart Rate Variability : A Meta-Analysis and Review 
of the Literature,” Korean Neuropsychiatr. Assoc., 2018. 
[18] 
F. Scarpina and S. Tagini, “The Stroop Color and Word 
Test,” Front. Psychol., vol. 8, no. April, pp. 1–8, 2017. 
[19] 
C. Jeunet, F. Lotte, and M. Christian, “Design and 
Validation of a Mental and Social Stress Induction 
Protocol Towards Load-invariant Physiology-based Stress 
Detection,” in International Conference on Physiological 
Computing Systems, 2014, pp. 98–106. 
[20] 
A. Osman, J. Turcot, and R. El Kaliouby, “Supervised 
Learning Approach to Remote Heart Rate Estimation 
from Facial Videos,” in IEEE International Conference 
and Workshops on Automatic Face and Gesture 
Recognition (FG), 2015, p. 6. 
 
 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-686-6
ACHI 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

