 
Exploring Facets of Playability: the Differences between PC and Tablet Gaming
Uttam Kokil  
College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Marietta, GA 30060, USA 
ukokil@kennesaw.edu 
José Luis González Sánchez  
LIVE Research Group  
University of Granada 
E-18071 Granada, Spain 
joseluisgs@ugr.es
 
 
Abstract–With the advent of mobile devices, game consoles and 
computers as gaming platforms, the gaming industry is 
growing at exponential rates. Players are now accessing the 
latest video game entertainment in more than one digital 
medium thus expanding a player’s game time and making 
video games the number one leisure choice. If one of the goals 
of the player is to derive a quality of experience that highlights 
enjoyment, it is important to understand the relationship 
between player experience and pleasurable game play, not just 
in terms of game play, but also, with respect to the gaming 
platform. This study aims to examine the difference in player 
experience when playing a video game on a tablet versus a 
personal computer. By triangulating physiological data of 
emotional responses using galvanic skin response, heart rate, 
and subjective-feelings data of facets of player experience, this 
paper aims to determine whether player experience is affected 
by two different kinds of gaming input controls, a computer 
keyboard with mouse, and a tablet touchscreen. Data will be 
analyzed and reported in future work. This paper provides an 
overview of the literature survey and methodology.  
Keywords – Tablet gaming; player experience; gaming 
platforms; physiological evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Game designers are constantly challenged to build more 
sophisticated interactive gaming environments to keep up 
with players’ increasing demand. An interactive player 
experience provides the user with a hedonic pursuit of stress 
relief, cognitive challenges and enjoyment [1]. This 
interactivity allows the players to experience the narrative at 
their own pace and as such contributes to immersive features 
in the gaming environment. The gaming platform affects 
interactivity as the controller connects the player with the 
gameplay [2]. Facets of Playability are used to measure and 
evaluate the interaction experiences between the game and 
the player [21]. Player experience is a consequence of the 
interaction experiences. Flow state is an important factor for 
a player to attain optimal player experience. Player 
experience can be positive or negative, that correlates with 
the user’s perceived enjoyment of the gaming experience. 
Lazarro’s four Fun Keys are examples of how experience has 
become a new area of economic development in game 
development [3]. According to Ermi et al. [4], game play 
experience can be defined, as a mix of “player’s sensations, 
thoughts, feelings, actions and meaning-making in a game 
play setting.” This sets a ground for player experience by 
providing entertainment, escape, competition and challenge. 
As each aspect directly relates to the user, the type of game 
that a user chooses to interact with is an important factor in 
the area of player experience [5]. Marchland et al. [6] state 
that although consoles are considered the preferred gaming 
platform, mobile gaming is having a larger impact on the 
overall market putting the burden on mobile game 
developers to perform. PC games are still popular. They 
advocate the need for more research in the domain of gaming 
platforms. Csikszentmihalyi’s [20] approach of Flow has 
helped game researchers develop new insights of player 
experience, as it will provide more clarity on areas of 
immersion and flow.  The rest of this paper is organized as 
follows: Section II is dedicated to the literature reviews of 
related works. Section III describes the aims of the 
experiment. Section IV addresses the methodology approach. 
Section V has to do with the analysis of the results. The 
acknowledgement and conclusions wrap up the article. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEWS  
According to Ritterfeld et al. [7] “play is not a random 
activity selected to overcome boredom, but rather a rational 
choice.” Individuals, therefore, make choices in how they 
relate to video game products based on the narrative, and 
interactivity. Players have an opportunity to choose their 
unique experiences by selecting a particular game to play for 
maximum pleasure [8]. The game designer creates a digital 
environment that allows players to immerse themselves 
within the gaming environment, provides opportunities for 
agency by allowing the gamers to choose their experiences, 
and transforms the players by allowing the sensations of 
becoming 
different 
people 
or 
objects 
[9]. 
These 
transformational experiences specifically do not provide a 
holistic framework for defining player experience (PX). 
According to Kidd [3], people are compelled to use 
technology for three reasons: utility, symbolism and 
experience. People want a gadget that serves a purpose, 
looks good, and engages the user’s attention. His study 
examined which characteristics of “technology-mediated 
experience” would captivate the user. By observing the 
behavior of children and adults at an interactive exhibit and 
following up with focus groups, the study concluded that 
compelling technological experience requires the following 
dimensions: social engagement, sensation/drama, and self-
expression/challenge. Social engagement carried the least 
weight, while self-expression and challenge were the most 
compelling. Participants wanted an experience that tested 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
their mental/physical skills, allowed for creative expression, 
was tactile, and allowed for escape from the ordinary. The 
researcher concluded that a meaningful experience is 
grounded within the user and not within the technology. 
Finally, the experience of the user was individualized, and 
relied on both intrinsic and extrinsic cues for optimal 
satisfaction. Attributes from this study coincide with findings 
from Sweetser et al. [10] game flow model, describing how a 
player’s enjoyment relates to game flow. Game flow criteria 
associated with core elements related to a positive player 
experience can be used to find issues and predict the 
popularity of the game; however, the model also “serves as a 
starting point for academics and game developers to 
understand enjoyment in games and to conduct further 
research into understanding, evaluating and designing 
enjoyable games.” By including elements of concentration, 
challenges, player skill, clear goals, control, feedback, social 
interaction and immersion, game designers can predict a 
game’s success. In order to validate these criteria, Sweetser 
et al. [10] evaluated two real time strategy games that 
represented a poorly rated and highly rated game. The game 
evaluation concluded that the higher rated games met more 
of the Game Flow Model criteria than the poorer rated video 
games. Challenge, as a core element of player experience, 
requires the game to be both intrinsically motivating, and 
goal orientated for a user to feel pleasure. Abuhamdeh et al 
[1] performed two separate studies to validate this claim. 
Study 1 observed the relationship between the perceived 
challenge, skills and the level of enjoyment, while Study 2 
examined the strength of these relationships. The first study 
found that there was a relationship between challenge and 
level of enjoyment; however, a user’s perception of his/her 
skill did not influence the level of enjoyment. Study 2 
verified that challenge was a strong indicator of enjoyment 
for intrinsically motivated, goal directed activities. Trept et 
al. [11] agree that there is a strong relationship between 
enjoyment, and game challenge. Their study revealed that a 
user’s subjective experience of enjoyment relies on both 
experiential and psychological aspects related to the player’s 
sense of accomplishment, self-efficacy, and the challenges 
associated with game play. Malke et al. [12] examined 
human computer interaction through the assumptions that a 
user’s experience influences their assessment of the system 
and components that interact with each other in distinct 
ways, which make up the user’s experience. The Component 
User Experience model has the user completing a specific 
task within a specific context and time. These interactions 
can be influenced by either instrumental or non-instrumental 
systems that produce an emotional response within the user 
that directly influences the appraisal system. The results 
indicate the user’s overall judgment of the experience. The 
perceptions related to instrumental systems relate directly to 
system ease of use, functionality, while non-instrumental 
systems include perceptions associated with the visual 
aesthetics, the look and feel of the gaming platform, haptic 
and symbolic quality.  
Takatalo et al. [8] further the definition of system 
assessment with a holistic model that includes both the 
experiential and psychological aspect of enjoyable gameplay. 
They argue that player experience involves not only game 
flow, but also, presence and involvement. The idea behind 
the Presence-Involvement-Flow Framework (PIFF2) is that 
“players must invest time, effort and attention into a game in 
order to get any relevant experience from it.” Takatalo et al. 
[20] explain that player experience can be measured using 
dependent variables such as presence, involvement, cognitive 
evaluation, and emotional outcomes.  
Interest in the game, and the importance of the 
experience both work to establish a cognitive connection, 
which garners the meaning and relevance of that experience 
for the individual. Involvement therefore measures the 
quality of the relationship between the game and the gamer. 
This involvement can manifest through the game 
narrative and the emotions of the user when playing the 
game. Tavinor [13] explains that there is a causal connection 
between fiction and emotional response. Players willingly 
enter a world of fantasy in which they interpret appropriate 
actions and reactions to the perceived stimuli presented on 
screen. Van Aart et al. [14] take a different approach to 
emotional interactivity by studying the areas of boredom and 
curiosity. By designing game play through emotional cues, 
players are better able to navigate the gaming environment. 
User’s emotions are used to make decisions, enhance 
cognitive skills, and maintain memory. Boredom can be 
defined as both a lack and an overload of stimuli. This 
boredom can be intensive, collative, and affective in nature. 
Players are drawn toward emotional, exciting experiences 
and draw away from experiences associated with waiting. 
The duration, commonness, and user expectation of the 
waiting experience can deter a user’s overall perspective of 
the game play. While boredom stagnate a user’s cognitive 
experience, curiosity pushes one to explore, take risks, and 
motivate. A zone of curiosity is required to maintain 
alertness in the game play environment. Emotions are 
invoked through the images shown on the screen, the sound 
track, and the challenges presented to the user. As such, the 
element of involvement does not work alone, but in tandem 
with a feeling of presence. 
Browne et al. [15] found that touch screens fell behind in 
speed and performance when comparing three different 
multi-touch game interfaces on an iPod Touch. This multi-
touch interface “offers user interface capabilities beyond 
physical buttons such as accelerometers and touch screens 
capable of recognizing the movements of multiple fingers.” 
Mobile games required a configurable touch interface that 
had pre-specified criteria such as diagonal direction touch 
gestures for game play that related directly to the virtual 
properties of the game narrative. Participants chose an 
accelerometer console most frequently in the experiment 
because it allowed for best performance. 
Gleeson et al. [16] found the same results when they 
compared the effectiveness of the touch screen over the use 
of a mouse and keyboard as a tool to interact with 
information systems. The mouse performed better in terms of 
movement time for small-targeted areas. Where the target is 
medium or large sized, the touch screen interface performed 
at an equivalent rate. A mouse has a minimal error rate 
compared to touch screen and higher interactive accuracy 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
rate. Moreover, it is believed that touch screens cause 
physical wrist and finger fatigue [16].  
III. 
AIMS  
The aim of this study is to conduct a comparative study 
and examine playability in two game environments, using a 
PC and a touch screen tablet. A game interface acts as a 
bridge between the gaming system, and player’s experience. 
This bridge provides a lens through which the player can 
assimilate the rules and pacing of the game narrative; hence, 
it becomes important to look at the differences between 
mouse and click, and touch experience.  
IV. 
METHODOLOGY  
The overall goal of this study was to determine the overall 
effect a gaming platform has on player experience. In order 
to provide both a subjective and objective approach to the 
research, Mandryk et al. [17] suggest using “subjective 
reporting through questionnaires, and interviews because 
they are generalizable.” Mandryk explains that, subjective 
data collection that has both quantitative and qualitative 
results data provide a more robust experimental design; 
however, the subjective data provide only partial results as 
they lack certain patterns [18]. Physiological data collection 
is therefore required to validate the player experience. 
A total of 14 participants were recruited from a Midwest 
university in the USA to play the strategy digital game 
“Plants vs. Zombies” on a PC (Windows) and OSX tablet 
(iPad4 retina) respectively for the purpose of data collection. 
Two instruments were used during the pre-test session such 
as demographic survey, mood questionnaire, while in the 
post-test session the following instruments were used to 
measure the dependent variables: Self Assessment Manikin  
to measure emotional responses [23], Facets of Playability to 
evaluate components of player experience [21] and Game 
Enjoyment Questionnaire (FUGA) to measure game 
enjoyment 
[22]. 
In 
addition 
to 
subjective-feelings 
questionnaires, we collected objective data to evaluate 
emotional reactions of valence using pulse rates while 
arousal was captured using electrodermal activity (EDA). 
The independent variables were screen size, mode of 
interaction, screen resolution, and products. First we ran a 
pilot study to verify the following items: instructions were 
clear and comprehensible; tools and game stimuli for 
capturing relevant data were in working conditions; selected 
questions of the validated questionnaires that were relevant 
to the research questions of this study. The sample frame 
chosen were between 18-35 years old. This accounts for 32% 
of digital game players in the USA [19]. The sampling and 
recruitment were conducted by network and convenience 
methods. The design of the study was within-subjects 
ANOVA test whereby the same participants took part in two 
different experimental conditions, playing the same game in 
a PC and a tablet environment.  
When the participants arrived in the lab, the researchers 
went through the research protocols before they could sign 
the consent form. Biopac Systems electrodes were placed on 
each subject’s second and middle finger of the non-dominant 
hand to record EDA, and onto the middle finger of the other 
hand to record pulse. Prior to starting the game, baseline 
pulse and EDA were recorded for the first 5 minutes and, 
thereafter, both physiological data were captured during 
gameplay. After 10 minutes of gameplay, the participant was 
instructed to fill a self-report questionnaire to record his/her 
emotional responses (SAM) and another questionnaire to 
self-report their challenges and skills at a given point. The 
participant also filled the PIFF2, GEQ, and Facets of 
Playability questionnaires at the end of game play. 
Playability is a property that characterizes player experience 
in games [21]. After that, each participant took a rest for 5 
minutes before switching to the other game platform. The 
same procedure of data collection was followed while 
playing the game on the other platform. The disadvantages 
of this design were (i) order effects and (ii) practice effects 
(iii) fatigue effects. Order effects refer to the actual order the 
treatment is administered. In fact, participants were assigned 
randomly to the tablet and PC game to counterbalance the 
order effect. Similarly, to avoid any practice and fatigue 
effects, participants were instructed to take a break in 
between each treatment. 
V. 
ANALYSIS 
A preliminary analysis of the Facets of Playability 
questionnaire was performed. Paired t-tests were conducted 
to compare the mean values of the five components that 
characterize player experience (Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1.  Player Experience results based on Facets of Playability 
Figure 1 shows that the mean values for intrinsic, 
mechanical, interactive, artistic, and intrapersonal playability 
were greater when the players used a tablet device as 
compared to a PC. A hypothesis testing was conducted such 
that the null hypothesis Ho: µd =	  0 (difference of the means 
is equal to zero); the alternative hypothesis, Ho: µd ≠	   0	  
(difference of the means is not equal to zero).	  The results of 
the paired t-tests conclude that they were not statistically 
significant. We report the following probability-value for 
each component: intrinsic (p-value 0.770 > standard alpha 
level of 0.05); mechanical (p-value 0.168> alpha level 0.05); 
artistic (p-value 1.00 > alpha level 0.05); interactive (p-value 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

 
0.393 > alpha level 0.05); intrapersonal (p-value 0.371 > 
alpha level 0.05). Since the p-value is greater than our 
standard alpha level 0.05, we fail to reject the null 
hypothesis. The preliminary results reveal that there is a 
positive trend towards an optimal player experience using a 
tablet but based on statistical analysis, that trend fails to 
reach statistical significance. This implies that observed 
mean differences may still be reasonably attributed to chance 
rather than to the type of platform used. This is because we 
have fairly small effect sizes and few data points. We only 
had data for 14 individuals. In order to be able to detect at 
least a medium effect size of the type of platform used and 
how it affected players’ experiences, we should have had 
data from at least 34 participants according to G-power 
analysis. The analysis of physiological data and other self-
report questionnaires are currently underway. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
The results of this preliminary study suggest that Tablet 
games provide better user experiences in the facets of 
intrinsic, mechanical, interactive, artistic, and intrapersonal 
playability. We can note that Mechanical playability was 
more pronounced in the Tablet environment as compared to 
the PC. Considering practical significance, it is clear that the 
mode of interaction, i.e., the touch screen, brings a different 
kind of user experience that is not achieved with the other 
game platforms. Mobile games are the new consoles 
offering portable experiences. Users have the flexibility to 
play games on their tablets from virtually any location at 
any time. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Abuhamdeh and M. Csikszentmihalyi, “The importance of 
challenge for the enjoyment of intrinsically motivated, goal-
directed activities,” on Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, vol. 38, (3), 2012. 
[2] M. Wysocki, Ctrl-Alt-Play Essays on Control in Video 
Gaming. Jefferson, NC: McFarland Publisher, 2013. 
[3] A. Kidd, “Technology experiences:What makes them 
compelling?” Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Bristol, UK, 
2002. 
[4] L. Ermi and F. Mayra, “Fundamental Components of the 
Gameplay Experience: Analysing Immersion.” DiGRA 
Changing Views - Worlds in Play, 2005. 
[5] R. Koster, Theory of Fun for game Design. Sebastopol, CA: 
Paraglyph Press, 2005. 
[6] A. Marchand and T. Hennig-Thurau, “Value Creation in the 
Video Game Industry:   
Industry Economics, Consumer Benefits, and Research 
Opportunities,” on The Journal of Interactive Marketing, 27, 
pp.141-157, 2013. 
[7] U. Ritterfeld and R. Weber, “Video Games for Entertainment 
and Education,” in P. Vorderer & J. Bryant (Eds.), Playing 
Video Games-Motives, Responses, and Consequences. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, Inc., pp. 399-413, 2006.  
[8] J. Takatalo, J. Jyrki, J. Kaistinen, and G. Nyman, “User 
Experience in Digital Games,” in I. Pavlidis (Ed.), Human 
Computer Interactions. Croatia: In Tech. [Online] 
http://www.intechopen.com/books/human_computer_interacti
on/user_experience_in_digital_games 
[9] C. Fencott, M. Lockyer, J. Clay, and P. Massey, Game 
Invaders: the theory and understanding of video games. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2012. 
[10] P. Sweetser and P. Wyeth, “GameFlow: A model for 
evaluating player enjoyment in games,” in Computers in 
Entertainment 
- 
Theoretical 
and 
Practical 
Computer 
Applications in Entertainment, vol. 3 (3), 2005. 
[11] S Trepte, L Reinecke, “The Pleasures of success: Game-
related efﬁcacy experiences as a mediator between player 
performance and game enjoyment,” in Cyberpsychology, 
Behavior, and Social Networking, vol. 11 (9), 2011. 
[12] S. Mahlke, and M. Thuring, “Studying antecedents of 
emotional experiences in interactive contexts,” on B. Begole 
(Ed),  The SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, 2007, pp. 915 - 918.  
[13] G. Tavinor, “Video games, fiction, emotion,” in The 2nd 
Australasian conference on Interactive entertainment Sydey: 
Creativity and Cognition Studios Press, 2005, pp. 201-207. 
[14] J. van Aart, B. Salem, C. Bartneck, J. Hu, and M. Rauterber, 
“Designing for experience: Arousing boredom to evoke pre-
defined user behaviour.” The sixth Design and Emotion 
Conference. Hong Kong, 2008. 
[15] K. Browne, and C. Anand, “An empirical evaluation of user 
interfaces for a mobile video game,” in Entertainment 
Computing, pp. 1-14, 2011. 
[16] M. Gleeson, N. Stanger, and E. Ferguson, “Design strategies 
for GUI items with touch screen based information systems,” 
ISSN 1172-6062, 2004. [Online]. Avaliable from: 
http://otago.ourarchive.ac.nz/bitstream/handle/10523/994/dp2
004-02.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y 
[17] R. L. Mandryk and S. Atkins, “A fuzzy physiological 
approach 
for 
continuously 
modeling 
emotion 
during 
interaction with play technologies,” in International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 65 (4),  April 2007, pp. 329-
347. 
[18] R. Mandryk, “Evaluating affective computing environments 
using physiological measures,” in Proceedings of CHI’05 
Workshop on Evaluating Affective Interfaces-Innovative 
Approaches, Portland, Oregon, pp. 1-4. 
[19] “Game Player Data, Entertainment Software Association,” 
[Online]. Avaliable from:  Retrieved on Oct 26, 2014. 
http://www.theesa.com/facts/salesandgenre.asp 
[20] J. Takatalo, “Psychologically-Based and Content-Oriented 
Experience 
in 
Entertainment 
Virtual 
Environments,” 
(Doctoral dissertation), 2011, University of Helsinki, Finland. 
[21] J. González Sánchez, F.L. Gutiérrez Vela, F. Montero 
Simarro, and N. Padilla-Zea, "Playability: analysing user 
experience 
in 
video 
games," Behaviour 
& Information 
Technology, vol. 31 (10), pp.1033–1054, Aug 2012. 
[22] W. IJsselsteijn, K. Poels, and Y.A.W De Kort, “The Game 
Experience Questionnaire: Development of a self-report 
measure to assess player experiences of digital games,” 
Eindhoven: TU Eindhoven. FUGA Deliverable D3.3. 
Technical Report, 2008. 
[23] N.M. Bradley and P. Lang, “Measuring emotion: the self-
assessment Manikin and the Semantic Differential,” in 
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 
vol. 1, pp. 49-59, 1994. 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-382-7
ACHI 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions

