Using Different Gestural-Input Methods for Personal and Public Touchscreen 
Devices 
 
Jiyoung Kang  
Graduate School of Culture Technology 
KAIST 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: lov2jung@gmail.com 
Jung-Hee Ryu 
Graduate School of Culture Technology 
KAIST 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: ryu@kgsm.kaist.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract— User interfaces for personal communication devices 
or public devices are a flourishing research area. This article 
begins with a brief history of the current user interfaces of 
personal communication devices and public devices. Key 
factors in introducing different types of interfaces for different 
types of devices are presented, including their experiment 
methodology. Important factors to consider are identified and 
elaborated, such as focus of attention, text-related symbols 
versus 
simple 
linear 
symbols, 
novice 
versus 
expert 
performance, stressful versus stressless process, and the speed-
accuracy trade-off. 
Keywords- User interface; personal device; public device; 
text-related symbol; simple linear symbol 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Today, most input systems for user interfaces of personal 
or public devices ask users to input commands using a 
mouse or a keyboard with lots of toolbar buttons or menu 
items, or long addresses for selection. This clumsy type of 
user interface is inconvenient for small-screen devices such 
as PDAs, as it has no room to accommodate so many menu 
items and toolbars. Also, it is very time-consuming to type 
long addresses. 
As such, user interfaces of different devices have 
changed in the past 50 years. To this day, many handy 
mobile devices use touchscreens. Computers and public 
kiosks are also starting to introduce touchscreen interfaces. 
Due to this, traditional input systems such as keyboards and 
mouse devices are being replaced with touch-based input 
systems. Ironically, this touch-based input system mimics the 
interaction of users with pen and paper, to which most 
persons are used from an early age. This system enables the 
users to interact with devices in efficient and natural ways 
[1]. Furthermore, even computer-unskilled persons can use 
their fingers efficiently with such devices. This makes touch-
based interfaces suitable for a wide range of users and 
situations for which limited traditional manners of 
interaction could pose serious problems. 
For this developed interface, a user-centered design 
approach is suggested. Although many devices are starting to 
use touch-based interfaces, there are no suitable interfaces 
for different purposes. For small-screen devices such as 
mobile touch phones and PDAs, which depend fully on pen- 
or finger-based user interfaces, traditional menu-selection or 
button-clicking interfaces or interfaces that require typing of 
long website addresses are inconvenient and useless with 
respect to fast and natural inputting. Even public kiosks in 
libraries or museums that use touch-based interfaces are 
encountering the same problems.  
To avoid this problem, two types of gestural-input 
methods are suggested for devices with different purposes. 
Gesture based interfaces provide a new way for us to interact 
with devices, but also require us to make new decisions 
about which gestures we decide are usable and appropriate 
[2]. These decisions are based on the social and public 
settings where these devices are used on a daily basis. 
II. BACKGROUND 
Several methods are currently commonly used on mobile 
devices with touch-based input systems. Two of these 
methods are gestural-input systems. They use alphabet-
related text inputs and simple linear symbol inputs, 
respectively. In the alphabet-related text input method, a user 
inputs the first letter of a website name or program. For 
example, a user can input „g‟ to connect to the Google 
website or „w‟ to open a Microsoft Word program. A user 
can also go to the next page of the website by merely 
drawing a line from the left to the right. This is an advanced 
input model that saves time by making it unnecessary to type 
the full website addresses or to click many icons to open a 
program. This convenient input system is featured in some 
handy programs such as Sensiva. This program was 
originally designed for mouse movement. 
 
Figure 1. Sensiva 
While the alphabet-related text input system is popular 
with some users, a more advanced input model is focused on 
in this paper, the simple linear symbol input method, which 
125
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

is famous for small devices such as touch mobile phones 
(e.g., iPhone, Galaxy S). In the simple linear symbol input 
system, a user simply draws a single line in different ways to 
control the input.  
These two sets of symbol inputs have their own strengths 
and weaknesses. For the alphabet-related text input user, if 
the user understands the logic behind the relationship 
between the initials and the symbols, s/he will find it very 
easy to infer other symbols that have not yet been studied. In 
some cases, however, it is more time-consuming and 
difficult to draw complicated symbols than simple linear 
symbols. On the other hand, even if it takes a shorter time to 
draw simple linear symbols, such input system would be 
more difficult for a user who could not infer any without 
adequate practice. 
There have been similar researches for gestural-input 
systems, but they didn‟t concentrate to touchscreen devices 
or user‟s purpose. Gestural input is an interesting starting 
point when investigating the social factors of multimodal 
interface acceptance [3]. 
III. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
A. Sketch-based User Interface 
The sketch-based user interface was designed to improve 
clumsy and inconvenient user interfaces. In this interface, a 
user inputs composite graphic objects using the sketch-based 
user interface. With the sketches of a few constituent 
primitive shapes of the user-intended graphic object, the 
candidate graphic objects in the shape database are guessed 
and displayed in a ranked list according to their partial 
structural similarity to what the user has drawn. The user can 
then choose the right shape from the list and replace the 
sketch strokes with the exact graphic object with proper 
parameters, such as position, size, and angle. This user 
interface is natural for graphic inputs and is especially 
suitable for schematic designs [4]. 
B. Calligraphic Interface 
CaliEdit is an application that is under development as a 
year-long undergraduate project at IST. It combines 
calligraphic interfaces with a traditional text editor. It allows 
users to manipulate text by directly drawing over it symbols 
that represent the most common editing tasks. It recognizes 
several common symbols that users draw on paper to 
represent their desired changes to the text, and effects those 
changes. The task analysis phase, with the help of 
questionnaires, identifies the most common symbols for the 
most common test correction tasks. The editor itself uses the 
CALI shape and gesture recognizer, ported to PalmOS, to 
help recognize those symbols [5]. 
C. Unipad 
Unipad is a stylus-based text entry technique. It combines 
single-stroke text inputs with language-based acceleration 
techniques, including word completion, suffix completion, 
and frequent word prompting. In a study with 10 participants, 
entry rates averaged 11.6 wpm with 0.9% errors after two 
hours of practice. In follow-on sessions to establish the 
expert potential, four users entered “The quick brown fox” 
phrase repeatedly for four blocks of 15 minutes each. 
Average rates on the last block ranged from 17.1 to 35.1 
wpm, and peak rates reached 48 wpm [6]. 
D. Touchscreens for Public Kiosks 
To cater to a wide range of experiences with general 
public systems, it is important that little or no user 
experience is assumed for inputting in the system. 
Touchscreens provide a way of presenting keys or touch 
areas that can be changed for individual outputs [7].  
Several years ago, the British public was less familiar 
with the concept of touchscreens and was less confident in 
using them than keyboards. Today, British users are more 
familiar with touchscreens. In the mentioned PD Web study 
(Maguire, 1997), 38 users were asked to rate how easy they 
found the use of touchscreens [8]. The answers follow. 
TABLE 1 EASE OF USE OF TOUCHSCREENS 
Ease of Use of Buttons and Commands 
Very 
easy 
Easy 
Medium 
Difficult 
Very 
difficult 
23 
11 
2 
2 
2 
As the results show, the large majority found 
touchscreens either „easy‟ or „very easy‟ to use. 
Touchscreens are therefore a flexible solution to inputting 
via kiosks. 
IV. 
CUSTOMIZED SYMBOLS 
In this experiment, symbols were created using Sensiva. 
The first set of symbols was for Test 1, and consisted of 
initials of programs or websites. Sensiva only works with 
one continuous line, so first letters of programs and websites 
were chosen and designed for to be drawn in one line. The 
second set of symbols was for Test 2, and consisted of 
simple linear symbols that could be drawn very easily and 
quickly. Those input symbols had their own outputs. Test 1 
and Test 2 had their own method of symbols. Some of the 
symbols existed in the program, but most of the symbols 
were newly created for the tests. 
126
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
Figure 2. Symbols for the Tests 
Ten different outputs were selected through the research 
for the tests. The ten sites that users most commonly used 
from their own systems (in English) were chosen. For each 
output, all the Test 1 symbols related to their initial letters 
were customized. For the Test 2 symbols, the simplest linear 
symbols were chosen for comparison. For Test 1, the 
participants easily guessed the other symbols after they 
understood the simple logic behind the meaning of the 
symbols. This is because all the symbols were related to their 
programs and sites‟ first letters. The Test 2 symbols, 
however, had no relationship to the outputs. 
V.  
MEASUREMENT OF EFFICIENCY 
To decide which set of symbols was suitable to different 
devices, a comparative study of the two methods was 
performed. This study consisted of an in-depth comparison 
of the two input methods to choose the most suitable 
interface for different purposes. There were 100 participants 
in the experiments, 10 for each age group. 52 percent of 
them were clerks who are familiar with computers. 25 
percent were students. The last 33 percent of participants 
were housewives and self-employed. Among them 43 
percent answered they own their touch screen devices such 
as laptops or mobile phones and 25 percent answered they 
are familiar with touch pad or screens and rests have rare 
experiences to the touch screen devices. 
A. Choice of Platform 
For the smooth use of the two sketch-based interfaces, a 
touchpad that was actually working was needed for the input 
system. A laptop computer with a built-in touchpad was used 
(Apple Macbook). To make the inputs actually work, the 
program Sensiva (Symbol Commander Software) was used, 
as it could customize the symbols for the experiments. To 
measure the time of use of the symbols, a digital camera took 
moving pictures of the process. 
B. Stress Measurement 
The study focused on the amount of stress that occurred 
when the users were using the two sets of symbols. 
According to a study by researchers from the New York 
Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, work-
related stress causes only a temporary rise in blood pressure 
[9]. Thus, to measure the amount of stress, the instant change 
in blood pressure during the experiment was regarded as the 
amount of stress from the process. An OMRON automatic 
digital sphygmomanometer was used for the measurement. 
First, the normal heartbeat of each participant was measured 
before the test. During the test, the second set of blood 
pressure changes was compared with the first set. 
C. Time Measurement 
The study also focused on the amount of time that was 
spent in using the symbols. From the recorded video, the 
time consumed while using the symbols was measured. This 
process had two steps. One was the analogy on the brain 
process time, and the other was the time that was spent for 
drawing the symbols. To distinguish between these two steps, 
the total time was divided into the recognition time and the 
drawing time. 
1) 
Recognition Time 
This is time in which the participants first read the given 
questions and started to think of what the correct symbols for 
them were. The participants needed a certain amount of time 
to think before they started to draw the symbols. This time 
can vary according to each person‟s ability to memorize or 
recall symbols. 
2) 
Drawing Time 
After the participants realized the correct symbols, they 
needed time to draw them on the touchpad. This time can 
vary according to each participant‟s ability to handle the 
touchpad. 
3) 
Accuracy 
To measure the accuracy of both sets of symbols, the 
correct answers were counted among the 10 given test 
subjects for both sets of symbols during the whole study 
period. If the participants drew similar symbols but the 
output did not work, it was considered a wrong answer. Only 
cases when the output worked correctly were counted as 
right answers. 
4) 
Period of Study 
To survey the changes in the test results, the participants 
were made to undergo three tests in four weeks. The first test 
127
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

(Trial a) was given to each group of participants who 
memorized for 10 minutes the alphabet-related text input 
symbols. The second test (Trial b) was given after three days 
of studying the symbols for at least 10 minutes each day. The 
third test (Trial c) was given a week after the first test, and 
the participants were asked to study the symbols everyday 
for at least 10 minutes a day. Simple linear input symbols 
(Test 2) were tested in exactly the same way as was the first 
set.  
After one month, with no obligation to study the symbols, 
participants tested one more time how much they remember 
the symbols. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
Test 1 (alphabet-related text input symbols) and Test 2 
(simple linear input symbols) showed typical results for each 
section (i.e., stress, speed, accuracy, and study efficiency). 
These results showed which method is efficient for different 
devices. Average 1 means the average of Test 1, and 
Average 2 means the average of Test 2. 
A. Heartbeat Changes 
The beats per minute (bpm) in each test changed with 
time, especially in Test 2 (simple linear symbols), in which 
the average bpm decreased at a high speed. Test 1 also had a 
low diminution rate throughout the test. Finally, for Trial c 
(one week of study), Test 2 had a much lower bpm rate than 
Test 1.  
For both sets of symbols, the users‟ heartbeat rates were 
close to their normal bpm (before the tests). In Trial a (the 
10-minute study), Test 2‟s bpm had a +9.38 score against the 
normal bpm, slightly higher than Test 1‟s +8.30 score. This 
means that right after the 10-minute study, the users 
experienced much stress in the tests for both sets of symbols. 
The simple linear symbols that required more memorization 
time and effort were slightly more stressful. 
After three days and seven days, however, the bpm 
scores dropped gradually. The Test 2 scores were obviously 
much lower in Trial 2 and Trial 3. This means the 
participants found it more comfortable to use the simple 
linear symbols after much practice and memorization. 
   On the other hand, when the participants used the 
alphabetical symbols, their bpm did not change. This is 
because the initial symbols are easy to guess, so users have 
no problem using them. 
TABLE 2 CHANGES IN THE BPM IN TEST 1, TEST 2 
Bpm 
Normal 
Trial a 
Trial b 
Trial c 
Average 1 
(Test 1) 
79.18 
87.48 
87.3 
86.16 
Average 2 
(Test 2) 
76.66 
86.04 
83.9 
80.88 
 
Figure 4. Comparison of the bpm Changes in Tests 1 and 2 
The results of Tests 1 and 2 showed that once the 
participants became used to the symbols, they became less 
stressed than in the first trial (the 10-minute study). Also, the 
users were more comfortable with the simple linear symbols 
than the alphabetical symbols if they already knew the 
symbols well and have become used to them. 
B. Bpm Variation 
The decline of the bpm to the normal bpm also showed a 
noticeable decline in bpm variations. Test 1 had a flat 
average decline, but Test 2 had a noticeably steep falling line. 
Due to this, in Trial c, Test 2 had less bpm variations than 
Test 1. The former results also showed that in Test 2, when 
the participants were using the simple linear symbols, they 
were less stressed than in Test 1. They became more stressed 
when they analogized the symbols than when they just drew 
simple symbols unconsciously after studying them. 
TABLE 3 VARIATIONS IN THE BPM 
Variation (%) 
Trial a 
Trial b 
Trial c 
Average 1 
10.64 
10.40 
8.94 
Average 2 
12.55 
9.70 
5.67 
C. Recognition Time 
While the participants were solving the given questions, 
the time they consumed was divided into two. The first 
period, defined as the “recognition time,” was when the 
participants read the problem and memorized the symbols. 
The results of the two tests showed that the recognition time 
gradually decreased due to the time of study. 
TABLE 4 AMOUNT OF RECOGNITION TIME 
Recognition (sec) 
Trial a 
Trial b 
Trial c 
Average 1 
2.25 
2.13 
1.98 
Average 2 
3.72 
3.29 
2.39 
1) Drawing Time 
The second period was the time when the symbols were 
drawn. The results also showed that the more the participants 
studied the symbols, the more became familiar with them. 
The participants were gradually able to draw the symbols 
more easily and quickly. The Test 2 symbols, which were 
128
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

less complicated, took up a shorter time than the Test 1 
symbols. 
TABLE 5 AMOUNT OF TIME FOR DRAWING 
Drawing (sec) 
Trial a 
Trial b 
Trial c 
Average 1 
2.28 
2.13 
2.01 
Average 2 
1.56 
1.36 
1.25 
2) The Total Time 
To sum up, the recognition time and the drawing time 
were added to come up with the total time. It was found that 
the total time had the same aspect as the recognition time and 
the drawing time. The length of both time periods gradually 
decreased in the two tests. This means that the participants 
adjusted to both methods when they were studying for days, 
and that this helped reduce their study time.  
One thing that is exceptional is that the total time in Test 
2 caught up with the total time in Test 1 after one week of 
study (Trial c). In Trial a, Test 2 took a longer time than Test 
1; but in Trial c, Test 2 took less time than Test 1. This 
means that once the participants became used to the simple 
linear symbols, they learned them faster than the alphabetical 
symbols. 
TABLE 6 THE TOTAL TIME TAKEN FOR THE TESTS 
Total Time (sec) 
Trial a 
Trial b 
Trial c 
Average 1 
4.528 
4.262 
3.984 
Average 2 
5.288 
4.654 
3.513 
D. Correct Answer Changes 
The participants‟ answers to the 10 questions in each test 
improved with time. They got more correct answers when 
they studied the symbols for a week than for 10 minutes. In 
Test 1, the average number of correct answers (CA) was 
much higher than in Test 2 in the first trial (Trial a).  
After a week of study, however, Test 2 saw a marked 
90% increase in CA, which almost caught up with Test 1. 
This implies that if the participants studied the simple linear 
symbols much longer, they would have gotten more correct 
answers than they did with the alphabet-related symbols. 
TABLE 7 CHANGES IN NUMBERS OF CORRECT ANSWERS 
Correct Answers (%) 
Trial a 
Trial b 
Trial c 
Average 1 
88.20 
91.40 
93.20 
Average 2 
60.60 
76.60 
90.60 
 
Figure 6. Changes in Numbers of Correct Answers 
E. Experts vs. Novices 
The participants‟ 43 percents owns their personal touch 
screen devices like laptops and mobile devices and they 
answered they are very familiar to those devices. And rests 
are barely use touch screens devices or have little 
experiences. Due to this fact, we divided participants to two 
groups. 43 percents who have many experiences to experts, 
and the others to novices. Interestingly the results show 
experts was noticeably superior for every experiments at the 
first trial but soon novices get to the similar point after one 
week. This shows that novices who were not familiar to the 
touch devices can be experts within few weeks after 
sufficient experiences. 
TABLE 8 BPM COMPARISON OF EXPERTS AND NOVICS 
BPM 
Trial a 
Trial b 
Trial c 
Experts 
85.4 
84.2 
83.7 
Novices 
87.4 
85.1 
84.5 
 
Figure 7. Bpm Comparison of Experts and Novices 
TABLE 9 TIME COMPARISON OF EXPERTS AND NOVICES 
Total Time (sec) 
Trial a 
Trial b 
Trial c 
Experts 
4.125 
4.024 
3.872 
Novices 
5.52 
4.484 
3.925 
129
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

 
Figure 8. Time Comparison of Experts and Novices 
TABLE 10 CORRECT ANSWER COMPARISON OF EXPERTS AND 
NOVICES 
Correct 
Answer (%) 
Trial a 
Trial b 
Trial c 
Experts 
85.00 
88.50 
92.70 
Novices 
72.00 
74.60 
89.30 
 
 
Figure 9. Correct Answer Comparison of Experts and Novices 
F. Final Test 
After the three experiments, participants have one month 
break from the study. Then we give the last test. The result 
show that even the simple linear symbols became superior at 
the third trial, it comes to the start again without continuous 
study of symbols. Without steady use of those symbols most 
participants barely remember the use of linear symbols. The 
result show the averages of after one month correct answer 
become almost the same level to the first trial. On the other 
hand, experts group has significant result that they recognize 
linear symbols better then the novices. Through this, we can 
suggest that experienced touchscreen devices users can 
memorize both symbols more easily and remember longer. 
TABLE 11 CHANGES IN NUMBERS OF CORRECT ANSWERS AFTER 
ONE MONTH 
Correct Answers 
(%) 
Trial a 
One 
month 
Average 1 
88.20 
87.60 
Average 2 
60.60 
65.78 
TABLE 12 NUMBERS OF CORRECT ANSWERS FOR EXPERTS AND 
NOVICES AFTER ONE MONTH 
Correct Answers 
(%) 
Experts 
Novices 
Average 1 
92.38 
84.20 
Average 2 
79.27 
68.32 
 
VII. 
DICUSSION 
The results showed the changes in the stress by heartbeat, 
speed, and accuracy with the time of study. These three 
elements all improved in time. Test 2 (simple linear 
symbols) especially saw a marked improvement in all the 
three tests. The stresses and the total time consumed 
remarkably decreased. The accuracy also increased step by 
step. The alphabetical symbols seemed more efficient in the 
first trial (after a 10-minute study) because the participants 
were able to guess the symbols without memorizing them. 
The more they learn the Test 2 symbols, however, the more 
efficient they became with such symbols than with the 
alphabetical symbols. Through their repeated study of the 
symbols, they were able to memorize the Test 2 symbols, 
after which the said symbols became easier to use. The 
experts who are familiar to the touchscreen devices get more 
correct answers, take shorter time and get less stress at first. 
However, novices get nearly equivalent scores after one 
week of study. At the last experiment, novices remembered 
both symbols less than experts. 
VIII. 
DICUSSION 
Two methods of improving gestural-input symbol 
interfaces for different devices were presented in this paper. 
As the results showed, the two types of symbols have their 
own strengths and weaknesses. The alphabet-related symbols, 
which are initials of programs or site names, are easy to learn 
and guess in the case of new users who are not familiar with 
them. In Trial 1, even though the participants studied the 
symbols for only 10 minutes, they got a high rate of accuracy. 
After continuously studying the simple linear symbols, 
however, the participants became faster and more efficient 
with them. They became less stressed after they became used 
to the simple symbols. Participants who are experts to the 
touch screen devices get much higher scores for accuracy 
and need shorter time and little stress. Also, they remember 
symbols longer than novices. 
Due to this, different gestural input methods for different 
devices are presented.  We provide a new way to interact 
with touch screen devices upon the users‟ usability and 
appropriation. 
For personal and small devices such as mobile phones, 
PDAs, and PMPs (Portable Media Players), simple linear 
symbols can be more practical and efficient. Users are 
always carrying these devices and spend much time using 
them. These are very intimate devices. This means that users 
can spare sufficient time to study the symbols these devices 
use. Once they become used to the simple symbols, they 
become very efficient with them.  
130
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

On the other hand, for public devices such as information 
kiosks in transportation stations or museum guide devices, 
alphabet-related symbols will be more efficient. Those 
devices have to be easy to use for both novices and experts. 
Once the users know the initial logic, they can easily and 
readily use any device. 
At present, it is assumed that all users have certain 
abilities to study the symbols. In future works, this work may 
be extended by dividing users into specific ages and sexes 
for a usability test, to see how their abilities will change. A 
re-customization of the symbols is also planned for their 
optimum usability. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Masui, Toshiyuki, “An Efficient Text Input Method for Pen-based 
Computers,” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 328-335, April 18-23, 1998, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.  
[2] 
Rico, J., Brewster, S. Gestures all around us, “User differences in 
social acceptability perceptions of gesture based interfaces,” In Proc. 
MobileHCI'09, ACM Press, pp. 1-2, 2009. 
[3] 
Julie Rico, “Evaluating the social acceptability of multimodal mobile 
interactions,” CHI 2010, April 10-15, 2010, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 
[4] 
MacKenzie, I. S.; Chen, J.; and Oniszczak, “A. Unipad: Single-stroke 
Text Entry with Language-based Acceleration,” In Proceedings of the 
4th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Systems, 2006. 
[5] 
Pedro Miguel,Coelho Gonçalo,França Faria,Av. Rovisco Pais,Daniel 
Gonçalves and Joaquim A Jorge, “Using Sketches to Edit Electronic 
Documents.” Scientific Literature Digital Library and Search. 
2007.USA. 
[6] 
Liu Wenyin, Xiangyu Jin and Zhengxing Sun. “Sketch-Based User 
Interface for Inputting Graphic Objects on Small Screen Devices,” 
Graphics Recognition Algorithms and Applications Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Volume 2390/2002, pp. 67-80, 2002. 
[7] 
May, A. J, “Development of Genetic User Requirements for 
Interactive Public Information Systems,” Master of Science thesis in 
Ergonomics, Faculty of Science, University College, London, 1993. 
[8] 
Maguire, M. C, “A Review of User Interface Design Guidelines for 
Public Information Kiosk Systems,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, Elms Grove, Loughborough, Leics, LE11 1RG 
1RG, UK, 1999. 
[9] 
Mann, Samuel J, “Job Stress and Blood Pressure: A Critical Appraisal 
of Reported Studies,” Current Hypertension Reviews. Vol. 2, pp. 127-
138, 2006. 
131
ACHI 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-117-5

